AN EXPOSITION OF THE CREED: OR, AN EXPLANATION OF THE ARTICLES OF OUR
CHRISTIAN FAITH.

Delivered in many afternoon Sermons, by that Reverend and worthy Divine,
Master John Smith, late Preacher of the Word at Clavering in Essex, and
sometime Fellow of Saint John's College in Oxford.

Now published for the benefit and behoof of all good Christians, together
with an exact Table of all the chiefest Doctrines and Uses throughout the whole
Book.

Uprightness has boldness.

HEB. 11. 6. But without Faith, it is impossible to please Him, for he that
comes unto God, must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek Him. AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Robert
Allot, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the black Bear in
Paul's Churchyard. 1632.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND NOBLE LORD, EDWARD LORD MOVNTAGVE OF BOVGHTON.
Right Honorable,
THere has been both in former Ages of the Church, and also in these latter
times, that zealous desire and endeavor in many worthy Divines to advance true
Religion, and to benefit the church of God, that they have not only by their
assiduous preaching in their life time won many souls to God, but also have
left diverse monuments in writing, whereby they being dead, do yet speak: and
the holy Doctrine by them taught is transmitted and propagated to posterity
after them. Amongst whom Mr. John Smith, late Minister of Clavering in the
County of Essex, a man much reverenced for his Religion, Learning, Humility,
and Holiness of life whilst he lived; whose memory is also very precious with
good men since his departure out of this life: besides his indefatigable pains
which he took in dispensing faithfully the Word of life, did leave behind him
certain Treatises in writing, which in the judgment of some godly men were
like to prove profitable to the Church, but because they were left by him not
perfectly digested into order, as having no intention to present them to the
public view (such was his Modesty and Humility;) therefore some of his
friends at the entreaty of me and my wife, the Relict of the said M. John
Smith her former dear husband (having direction from us) have taken great
pains to gather them together, to make them ready for the light, which their
industry, as it was very acceptable to us, so we were very desirous that the
fruit thereof might redound unto many, and therefore did cause commit them to
the Press, knowing that any good the more it is communicated, the better it
is. And this Treatise containing the Sum of Faith, being (as it were) a
Christians freehold, for which he ought to contend ^ anquam pro aris and
focis. We thought it not unworthy to present unto your Honorable Patronage
being an Orphan deprived of its own Father, hoping that by your Honors
countenance and approbation, it shall the better be accepted of all true
hearted Christians, and I was the more imboldned hereunto, because of your
Honors zeal to true Religion, Reverence the Word of God, Love and bounty to
the faithful and deserving Preachers thereof, Goodness toward all men,
Justice and Equity in the Commonwealths affairs, and great Care of the good
of your Country which is not only experimentally known to me (who am by many
special Interests obliged to your Honor) but also to all other in these parts
who are so happy as to have continual proof thereof. And though this poor
Posthume is permitted to venture abroad naked (as it were) without those rich
Robes, Ornaments, and quotations wherewith the Father (if he had lived) might
plentifully have enriched it. Yet I most humbly crave your Noble Protection for
it, and favorable censure of both the Work and Publisher: so shall your
Lordships Noble favor herein yet further bind me,

Your Honors truly devoted and much obliged, ANTHONY PALMER.

To the Christian Reader.
IT is availeable for the better entertainment of this work to know something
concerning the Author, concerning the work it self, and concerning the
Argument: for the Author, my acquaintance with him was especially toward the
declining part of his years; at what time (as they speak of the Sun toward
setting) the light and influence which comes from worthy men is most mild and
comfortable. The gifts of men then (perhaps) are not so flourishing as in their
younger time; but yet more mature, and what comes from them is better
digested. In the prime of his years he was trained up in S. John's College in
Oxford, being there fellow of the House; and for Piety and Parts esteemed
highly in the University, of those that excelled in both. Afterward he grew to
that note, that he was chosen to read the lecture in Paul's, succeeding therein
that great l^^ned man, Doctor Andrews, late Lord Bishop of Winchester, which
he discharged, not only to the satisfaction, but to the applause of the most
judicious and learned hearers, witnessed by their frequency and attention. Not
long after he was removed to a pastoral charge in Clavering in Essex, where
being fixed till his death, he shined as a star in his proper sphere.

This good man's aim was, to convey himself by all manner of ways into the
heart, which made him willingly heard of all sorts; for witty things only, as
they are spoken to the brain, so they rest in the brain, and sink no deeper:
but the heart (which vain and obnoxious men love not to be touched) that is
the mark a faithful teacher aims to hit. But because the way to come to the
heart, is often to pass through the fancy, therefore this godly man studied by
lively representations, to help men's faith by the fancy. It was our Savior
Christ's manner of teaching, to express heavenly things in an earthly manner.
And it was the study of the wise man Solomon (becoming a Preacher) to find
out Pleasant words, Eccles. 12. 10.
or words of delight: but when all pains is taken by the man of God, people
will relish what is spoken, according as their taste is. It falls out here as
it does in a garden, wherein some walk for present delight, some carry flowers
away with them to refresh them for a time, some as Bees gather honey which they
feed on long afterward; some spider-like come to suck that which may feed
that malignant and venomous disposition that they bring with them. There cannot
be a better Character of a man, than to observe what he relisheth most in
hearing: for as men are, so they taste, so they judge, so they speak: Ezekiel
(besides Prophetical gifts fit for so high a calling) had no doubt a
delightful manner of expression of himself, whereupon the wickeder sort of
Jews (engaged in sinful courses) came to hear him, Eze. 33. 32.
but as a Musician to please their ears, neglecting the authority of his
Person, and the weight of his message, its no wonder therefore if in these
days people stick in the bark and neglect the pith, though sometimes it
falls out with some as with Augustine hearing Ambrose, whilst they bite at
the bait of some pleasing notions, they are at the same time catched with the
Spirits hook.

He was skillful in the original languages, and thereupon an excellent
Textman, well read in writers that were of note, in the several ages of the
Church, which made him a well-furnished and able Divine, his judgment was
clear, and his conscience tender; and which helped him most, he brought to the
great work of the ministry an holy and gracious heart, which raised and
carried him to aims above himself and the world. In his conversing he was
modest, fruitful, wise, and winning: in his expressions witty, and graceful,
in so much that he has left a fresh and a sweet remembrance of him, until
this day. Toward his end her grow more spiritual, setting light by all things
here below, and only waited (as his expression was) for the coming of the
Comforter: at length (his work being finished) breathing out his life, Revel.
22. 20.
with that wish of the spouse, Yea, come Lord Jesus. Thus much I thought not
unfit to be made known of the Man.

Now for the Work it self it must be considered by the learned Reader, that
these things were spoken though to a People high-raisd in knowledge, and more
refined than ordinary by his teaching; yet to the People; not with a purpose
that they should come to the view and censure of the learned. But though they
were delivered to the peop^^^* yet are they not so popular, but (if my love to
the man and the Work deceive me not) they will have the best Reader, either
more learned, or more holy or both. It must therefore be remembered, for the
more favorable acceptance of this Work, that these Sermons were taken by one
of his Parish, a man though pious and of good parts, yet not skillful in the
learned languages, and therefore it must needs be, that many apt and acute
sentences of the Fathers (by which this learned man did use to beautify and
strengthen the Points he delivered) are fallen to the ground and lost, for
lack of skill to take up. But howsoever much of the spirits be lost, yet
here you have the corpse and bulk of the discourse, and not without some life
and vigor, wherein this is peculiar in his manner of handling, that he has
chosen fit texts of Scripture, to ground his exposition of every article upon.

Now for the Argument it self the Creed, I think it fit to premise something,
because it has been omitted by the Author, or at least not gathered with the
rest. The Creed is of middle authority, between divine and humane, and called
the Apostles Creed, not only for consanguintty with the Apostles Doctrine, but
because it is taken out of the Apostles writings, and therefore of greatest
authority next the Scriptures. It is nothing else but A summary comprehension
of the counsel and work of God concerning our supernatural condition here
and hereafter. The Doctrine of Salvation is spread through the Scriptures, as
spirits in the Arteries and blood in the veins, as the soul in the body. And
here (for easier carriage) the most necessary Points are gathered together, as
so many pearls or precious stones, that we might have a ready use of them upon
all occasions: being as it were a little Bible or Testament, that Christians of
all ranks (as suited for all conditions) may bear about with them every where
without any trouble. In every Article there is both a shallow and a depth,
milk for babes and meat for strong men. Though there be no growth in regard of
fundamental Principles (which have been alike in all ages of the Church) yet
there has and will be a proficiencie, in regard of conclusions drawn out of
those Principles. The necessities of every Christian, and the springing up of
unsound opinions in the Church will continually enforce diligence and care in
the further explication and application of these fundamental truths.

It will not therefore be amiss to set down a few Directions for the more
clear understanding of the Creed, and for the better making use of it. And
first, for the understanding of it. It has the Name of Creed, 1
or Belief, from the act exercised about it, to show that it does not only
contain Doctrine to be believed, but that that doctrine will do us no good,
unless by mingling it with our Faith we make it our Belief, therefore both
the Act and the Object are employed in one word Belief. Secondly, from the
Execution in creation and incarnation we must arise to Gods decree, nothing
done in time, which was not decreed before all times, Act. 15. 18.
known unto the Lord are all his works, from the beginning of the world. 3
Thirdly, we must arise from one Principal Benefit to all that follow and
accompany it, as in forgiveness of sins, follow righteousness, Peace, and
Joy; the Spirit of Sanctification, Christian liberty, etc. though the Articles
be nakedly propounded, yet are we to believe all the fruits and privileges. So
to Gods creating of heaven and earth, we must join his Providence in upholding
and ruling all things in both. Fourthly, in the Consequent we are to
understand all th^^ went before by way of Cause or Preparation, 4
as in the Crucifying of Christ; his preceding Agony, and the Cause of it, Our
sins, and the love of God and Christ in those sufferings, 5
etc. Fifthly, though we are to believe Circumstances as well as the thing it
self yet not with the same necessity of Faith: as it is more necessary to
believe that Christ was crucified, than that it was under Pontius Pilate:
though when any Circumstance is revealed, we ought to believe it, and to have a
preparation of mind to believe whatsoever shall be revealed: yet in the maine
points this preparation of mind is not sufficient, but there must be a
present and an expressed faith. We must know that as in the Law he that
breaks one Commandment breaks all, 6
because all come from the same authority, so in the grounds of faith he that
denies one in the true sense of it, Fides non eligit objectum.
denies all, for both Law and Faith are copulatives, the singling out of any
thing it contrary to the obedience of faith.

For Particular and daily use, we must know^ First, that every Article
requires a particular faith, not only in regard of the Person believing, but
likewise in regard of the application of the Article believed: or else the Dev
^^ might say the Creed, for he believes there is a Creator, and that there is a
Remission of sins, etc. but because he has no share in it, it inrageth him
the more. Our adversaries are great enemies to particular faith, and think we
coin a thirteenth Article, when we enforce particular assurance, because (say
they) particular men are not named in the Scripture, and what is not in
Scripture cannot be a matter of faith. But there is a Double Faith, a Faith
which is the Doctrine we do believe, and Faith which is the grace whereby we
believe; and this Faith is matter of Experience wrought in our hearts by the
Spirit of God. It is sufficient that that faith which we do believe is
contained in the Scriptures. Now whereas they object that we make it a
thirteenth Article, their fourteenth Apostle adds to these twelve many more
articles of faith, Bulla Pii quarti.
which he inforceth to be believed, with the same necessity of faith as these
twelve; neither has he only entered upon Christ's prerogative in minting new
articles of faith, but likewise they have usurped over all Christian Churches
by adding Roman to the Catholic Church in the Creed. A bold imposture.

But for special faith, the maine office of the Holy Spirit is, In opening
general Truths, to reveal our particular interest in those Truths, and to
breed special Faith whereby we make them our own, 1 Cor. 2. 11, 12.
because the Spirit of God reveals the mind of God to every particular
Christian; for as the things believed are truths above nature, so the Grace of
faith whereby we believe, is a grace above Nature, and created as a
supernatural eye in the Soul, to see supernatural truths.

Secondly, 2
Where sacred truths are truly apprehended, there the Spirit works an
impression in the soul suitable to the things believed: every Article has a
power in it which the Spirit does imprint upon the Soul. The Belief of God to
be the Father Almighty, breeds an impression of dependence, reverence, and
comfort. The Belief and knowledge of Christ crucified, is a crucifying
knowledge. The true knowledge and faith in Christ rising, is a raising
knowledge; the knowledge of the Abasement of Christ, is an abasing knowledge,
because faith sees it self one with Christ in both states. We cannot truly
believe what Christ has wrought for us, but at the same time the Spirit of
Christ works something in us.

Thirdly, 3
it is convenient for the giving of due honor to every person to consider of
the work appropriated to every one: all come from the Father; all are exactly
performed by the Son in our nature for the Redemption of those that the Father
has given Him. The Gathering out of the world of that blessed society (which
we call the Church) into an holy Communion and the Sanctifying of it, and
Sealing unto it all the privileges believed; as Forgiveness of sins,
Resurrection of the body, and Life everlasting, etc. proceed from the Holy
Ghost.

Fourthly, 4
it has pleased the great God to enter into a Treaty and covenant of agreement
with us his poor creatures, the articles of which agreement are here
comprised. God for his part undertakes to convey all that concerns our
happiness, upon our receiving of them, by believing on him. Every one in
particular that recites these articles (from a spirit of faith) makes good this
condition, and this is that answer of a good conscience, 1 Pet. 3.
which Peter speaks of, whereby being demanded what our faith is; every one in
particular answers to every Article, I believe; I not only understand and
conceive it, but assent unto it in my judgment as true, and consent to it in
my will as good, and build my comfort upon it as good too me: this act of
Belief carries the whole soul with it.

Fifthly, 5
though it is we that answer, yet the power by which we answer, is no less
than that, whereby God created the world, and raised Christ from the dead. The
answer is ours, but the power and strength is Gods whereby we answer, who
performs both his part and ours too in the covenant. It is a higher matter to
believe, than the common sort think it. For this answer of Faith to these
truths as it is caused by the power of Gods Spirit, so is it powerful to
answer all temptations of Satan, all seducements of the world, all terrors of
conscience from the wrath of God and the curse of the Law, it sets the soul
as upon a rock above all.

Sixthly, 6
these Articles are a touchstone at hand to try all opinions by, (for crooked
things are discernded by bringing them to the rule) what directly or by
immediate and near consequence opposes these, is to be rejected as contrary
to the platform of wholesome doctrine. That one monster of opinions, of the
bread turned into the body of Christ by transubstantiation, overthrowes at once
four Articles of the Creed; The incarnation of Christ, Ascension, Sitting at
the Right hand of God, and coming to judgment: for if Christ's body be so often
made of a piece of bread, being in so many places at once here upon earth, how
can all these Articles be true?

Again, 7
seventhly, these grounds of Faith have likewise a special influence in
direction and encouragement unto all Christian duties: A holy life is but the
infusion of holy truths: Augustine says well, non been vivitur, ubi been de
Deo non creditur: men of an ill belief, cannot be of a good life, whereupon the
Apostles method is, to build their exhortations to Christian duties upon the
grounds of Christian Faith. But we must remember, that as faith yields a good
life and conscience: so a conscience is the vessel to preserve the Doctrine of
Faith, else a shipwreck of faith will follow. If there be a delighting in
unrighteousness, there will not be a love of the truth, and if we love not the
truth, then there will be a preparedness to believe any lie; and that by Go^
just judgment, 2 These. 2. 12.

Eighthly, 8
as these fundamental truths yield strength to the whole frame of a Christian
life: So they are so many springs and wels of consolation for Gods people to
draw-from: whereupon that good Prince George Anhalt, (whom Luthers time became
a Preacher of the Gospel) intending to comfort his brother Prince John,
raises his comfort from the last three Articles, Remission of sins,
Resurrection of the body, and Life Everlasting: which as they have their
strength from the former Articles are able to raise any drooping spirit, and
therefore in the greatest agonies, it is the readiest way to suck comfort from
these benefits: But I omit other things, intending only to say something by
way of Preface. And thus Good Reader, I commend this work unto thee, and both
it and thee to Gods blessing.

Thine in the Lord, R. SIBBS.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE CREED.
SERMON I.
ROMANS 3. 28. Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by Faith, without
the deeds of the Law.
AS the Children of Israel having sojourned long enough in Horeb, were by Gods
speaking to Moses commanded to remove thence, and go further off, Deuteronomy. 6. So
(in some sort) I may say we having in our ordinary course gone through diverse
necessary points of Religion; as the Lords Prayer, Repentance, etc. must now go
on further to speak of the Doctrine of Faith, a large and great Field full of
knowledge and exceeding comfort; wherefore I shall have so much the more need
to be help^ on by your prayers, as my weakness and inhabilitie is unfit for so
great a Task. Heretofore I have showed you, that under two conditions only,
the Lord has promised Life and Salvation, Repentance and Faith; which two
conditions are the lowest rate he has set life at. Having therefore spent much
time in the Doctrine of Repentance, our course now is to speak of the Doctrine
of Faith; for howsoever it be that Repentance is a necessary Grace, without
which we cannot be saved; yet notwithstanding all the Repentance in the world
cannot save us, although we should weep our eyes out, unless we have Faith.
some think that if they repent and mourn for their sins only, they shall
be saved; but the truth is, we cannot be saved without Faith. For,

First, though Repentance may drive a man to seek to be saved, as the aching
and pricking of a sore, may drive a man to the Physician or Surgeon; so
sorrow and grief may drive us to seek to Christ, there to show our wounds:
but if we stay there, and apply not the remedies, we have no help; for it is
not Repentance that does save us, but the blood of Christ: As it is 1 John 1.
7. where he shows that The blood of Christ cleanses us from all our sins,
and C^loss. 1. 14. In Him we have Redemption through his blood, that is, the
forgiveness of sins. Therefore when the Lord, Zechar. 12. 10. promises, to
power upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the
Spirit of grace and compassion; that they should mourn for their sins. In the
next Chapter he promises, that He would open unto them a fountain for sin and
uncleanness; to wit, the blood of Christ: and therefore, besides a fountain
of our tears for sin, there must be a fountain of the blood of Christ, to
wash and cleanse us from our sins: not Repentance only, but there withal
Faith also.

Secondly, because it is said, without Faith we cannot please God, Heb. 11. 6.
therefore Repentance without Faith, suffices not: for Faith in Christ is that
which makes a man acceptable before God; for which cause in the matters of
Faith, nothing contents a Christian but Christ only; in which case the Apostle
flings away all, accounting all but dirt and dung in regard of Christ, Phil. 3.
8. Therefore, though a man be sorry for his sins, yet he has need of Faith
also to believe the promises and pardon of them. As when a Rebel flies into
another land, where he is taken and sent home in a ship, Simile.
in which case the ship which brings him home can do no more; but there must
be some means besides, to bring him in favor with the king to have a pardon:
So when we rebel against God by sinning, we run away from him, Repentance is
the ship to bring us home again, which can do no more, therefore there must
be another means to reconcile us, which is Faith in the Son of God.

Thirdly, our Repentance is unperfect, and therefore must be grounded on some
perfect thing ( as the Schoolmen say) Every unperfect thing must be grounded
on something that is perfect: So our Repentance being unperfect, must be
grounded on Christ apprehended by Faith, one of them will not serve. Simile.
As a bird which has two wings to fly with, take away one of them, well may
the bird flutter and beat upon the ground, but she cannot fly: So Faith and
Repentance are the two wings of a Christian, whereof take away one, and they
fall to the ground. Now in the Doctrine of Faith diverse things are to be
observed.

1. What the use of Faith is in the life of a Christian. 2. How many kinds of
Faith there be. 3. The nature of true Faith. 4. The Degrees of Faith. 5. The
effects and fruits of Faith. 6. The extention and right object of Faith.
The first is, the use of Faith in the life of a Christian; for who will take
care for a thing, till he knows the use of it. If a man tell us that such a
herb, or such a stone is good, the next question is, but to what use serves
it, what is it good for? So when we hear of Faith, this question may arise,
to what Use serves my Faith? For when men know the use of it, this makes them
seek for it. Now there be four uses of Faith in the life of a Christian, too
many know one use to make of their faith, and that is to swear by it, but God
has not given us our faith to swear by it, but to other uses.

1. To justify us in the sight of God. 2. To sanctify us in this world. 3. To
live by it. 4. To dye in Faith, that when our friends and the world leave us,
then our faith may uphold us.
The first use of faith is, 1
that it does justify us in the sight of God; for if we be detected by sin,
Use of Faith.
and found infinitely guilty, we have a discharge by faith, for if the devil
accuse us, or our conscience condemn us, then faith, that acquitteth us, and
justifies us in Gods sight as Romans 3. 28. There may be many graces, but none
of them can justify us, but faith only; for Love is a work of the Law, and so
is Patience, and many other graces, but faith it is that justifies us, Romans 3.
28. Therefore, says he, we conclude that a man is not justified by the works
of the Law, but by faith only. Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified by faith,
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: and Galatians 1. 15.
says he, We which are Jews by nature and not sinners of the Gentiles,
knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ: and that for two reasons.

First, The first Reason why Faith alone Justifies.
because it lets all go, in the matters of salvation, and brings Christ as the
full price of our redemption to the Father; for when the devil does accuse us,
and we are found guilty and condemned, then faith runs to the Cross of
Christ, into the grave, and through the dens of death, and brings Christ with
his head crowned, his back whipped, his sides wounded, his hands and feet
peirced: and then a Christian is bold to stand up, and say, O Lord, I have
sinned against thee, but behold, here is my Redeemer and Savior, he has
answered thee whatsoever thou could require, let his pains be my ease, his
shame my glory, and his death my life, etc. A man arrested for a great debt, he
being in the Bailiffes hands ready to be carried and thrown into the Jail,
perhaps has a little Boy standing by, who straight way runs to his friends,
and tells them that his father is in the Bailiffes hands, and ready to be
thrown into the Jail, and so brings his friends, who come with a great bag
of money; power it down, and so discharge the debt, that the man goes free:
even so, when we be arrested with the judgments of God like Bailiffes, and
likely to be thrown into Hell, faith is like the little Boy which runs to
our friend Jesus Christ, who then comes, and paies our debt, pacifies the
conscience, and we go free.

Secondly, The second Reason why Faith alone justifies. Gal. 3. 17. Ephe^. 3.
17.
because it makes us one with Christ as we see in the Galathians, and in the
Epistle to the Ephesians; we are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, and
therefore being one with him, all the holy virtues that be in him are made
ours, the obedience of Christ, his patience, his love, his meekness, his
goodness, his holiness, and whatsoever is in him we partake of it. As we see
in experience, if a man be married to a woman, whatsoever he has he
communicates to his wife, for if he be rich, she cannot be poor, if he be
noble, she cannot be base; for look what the man has he communicates to his
wife: even so being made one with Christ by faith, look what good things
Christ has, that he communicates to us; his Righteousness, his Holiness,
etc. Look what he has, we cannot want. If a man should commit treason,
against the king, be condemned for it, adjudged and sentence given that he
should have his hand cut off, or his eyes pulled out: if he had this cunning
that he could make his hand or his eye to be the eye of the kings son, he
should not have his hand cut off, nor lose his eye, because it then were the
eye or hand of the kings son: even so this is the skill and cunning of faith,
it makes us members and parts of Christ the son of God, and therefore if we
be but the least bone in the body of Christ, God will not cast us away, we
shall not perish for his sons sake. So that faith does not save us, by reason
it is a more holy quality than other graces, or for the worthiness of it above
others, but because it makes us one with Christ: as if a man had a stone in a
ring that could heal many diseases, we say it is the ring, but indeed it is
not the ring but the stone in the ring that cures them; and even so it is said,
faith saves us, but not by the own virtue, but because it lays hold on
Christ, and makes us one with him.

The second use of faith is, The second use of Faith.
to sanctify us in this world; for it does not only justify us, and take
away the guilt of sin, but also sanctifies us in this world, and takes away
the corruption of sin. So we see it is said Act. 15. Their hearts were
purified by faith: and Galatians, 5. 6. that Faith works by Love.

There be two works of faith: First, Two works of Faith.
it works in heaven, for when we have sinned and grieved God, and are smitten
in conscience for it, accused and condemned, 1
then faith works in Heaven by tendering and offering up Jesus Christ to God
for our Redemption, and satisfaction of his justice: 2
Secondly, faith works in earth by stirring up sanctified and holy motions.
Now two ways it may stir up good motions: First, by the meditation of the
death of Christ. Secondly, by combination or conjunction with Christ.

First, by meditation; for faith does carry us to the cross of Christ, there
to behold the great pains that He has suffered for us, how his body was
racked and tormented for us: and to this end Faith makes us consider these
three things:

1. The cause of his death. 2. The end of his death. 3. The manner of his
death.
First, 1
to consider the cause of his death, that it was nothing in himself, but it
was our sins, Consideration.
and transgressions, that caused his body to be whipped, his face to be
buffeted, his hands to be peirced, his feet to be nailed, his Head to be
crowned, his sides to be launced with a speate: So that our sins are the
cause of the death of Christ, and of all the grievous things that he suffered,
as it is in three and fiftieth chapter of Esaias, and the fifth verse: But he was
wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
And 1 Peter 2. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree,
that we being delivered from sin should live in righteousness, by whose
stripes we are healed: and therefore seeing our sins caused this cruel
death, and grievous pain to be upon Christ, to do the like to our sins, to
go to the cross of Christ, to take them down, to crucify them, to hang them
up, to take the spear out of Christ's side, How to deal with sin.
to thrust it into the side of sin, as in the Revelation, we may see a voice
came to the Church concerning bloody Babylon, Reward her as she has rewarded
you: so does this voice come to a Christian concerning sin, reward it, as
that has rewarded Christ, that would not let Christ to be at rest, till it had
killed him: even so we should not let sin be at rest till we have killed, it
says Augustine, If one should kill thy father or thy mother, would thou
entertain him into thine house, would thou let him feed at thy table, nay
thou would hate him, and spit at him; nay, (says he) sin has not killed
thy father and mother, but it has killed Christ thy Savior and Redeemer:
what, says he, will thou then entertain sin? will thou let it sleep in
thy bosom, will thou feed it? Nay, (says he) hate it, defy it, and spit at
it, as at a Toade.

The second thing we are to consider, 2
is the end of Christ's death: now all the pains that Christ suffered,
Consideration.
it was to abolish sin, so we see Heb. 9. 26. But now in the end of the
world has he appeared once to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. 1
Ioh. 3. 8. For this purpose appeared the Son of God, that he might loose the
work of the devil: And therefore seeing the death of Christ was to abolish
sin, if we live in it, we make all the pains of Christ's sufferings and his
death of none effect; wherein judge you what an injury and wrong is offered to
Christ: the Prophet complains Esai. 49. 4. That He labored and spent his
strength in vain, and for nothing; such a complaint may Christ take up against
us, on the cross. For this cause was I sent of my Father into the world to
abolish sin; and for this cause was I enclosed ninth months in the dark
womb of the Virgin; and for this cause was I borne in a stable, and laid in a
manger; for this cause was I thirty three years laboring among you; for this
cause did I dye a cursed death on the corsse: all this was to abolish sin,
and therefore if men live in sin still, it may seem to them Christ has
spent all his labor and strength in vain, nay, he may say he has spent his
blood, even all his blood, even five streams of blood that came from him, and
all this in vain to them. It is said, Esai. 53. 11. of Christ, he shall see
of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied; and therefore, if men be
brought to God, if they live a holy life, if they be conscionable in their
wa^^s, and careful to please God in their courses; then this will satisfy
Christ; But if we live in our sins, in our profaneness, in our lusts
still, then it shall grieve Him that ever he was borne into the world, sweat
in the garden, died, and shed his blood on the Cross for us.

Thirdly, The third Consideration.
we are to consider of the manner of his death, that it was in the greatest
extremity that might be, so Paul, says Philip, 2. 8. He humbled himself, and
became obedient to that cursed death on the cross, and so in Esai. 5 3. 12. it
is said, He has powered out his soul unto death, etc. Now the greatest
extremity that Christ suffered may make us consider of two things: First, the
greatness of our sins. And secondly, the greatness of Gods mercy.

First, 1
we may consider the greatness of our sins, that when we have sinned
against God; The greatness of our sins.
nothing will bring us into favor again, but it must cost blood, and the
blood of the Son of God, therefore howsoever men make but a light matter of
sin, yet when we have sinned all the powers of Heaven, and earth cannot bring
us into favor again, all the Angels in heaven cannot do it, nor all the
blood of the Saints, but it must be the blood of the Son of God that must
do it, if the king should make a law, that if a man told a lie, or sour an
oath, or committed a sin, he should lose a drop of his blood, how afraid
would he be of sinning? Now when we sin, although it does not cost us blood,
yet it cost the blood of the Son of God; and therefore we should be afraid
to sin, lest we be more wastfull of the blood of Christ, than of our own.

Secondly, 2
we are to consider of the greatness of Gods mercy, that when we had
sinned, The greatness of Gods Mercy.
he would send his own Son to die for us, as 1 John 4. 10. Herein is Love,
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a
reconciliation for our sins: and so in Romans 5. 8. But God sets out his
love toward us, seeing that whiles we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us, and
therefore seeing God has so loved us, that he was content to part with his
Son for us, let us never stick to part with our sins and lusts to serve
him: but we see it otherwise, that God does not stick to part with his son
to die for us, and yet we stick to part from our sins to serve him.

The second way that faith does stir up holy motions, The second way. How
Faith stirs up holy motions.
is, because it does combine and knit us unto Christ, so it is by combination,
by being made one with Christ, for as from the head does flow into the rest of
the members life, even so Christ does extend unto us his graces and virtues. In
the second of the Kings we see, that when the dead body of the Prophet did
touch the dead body of the man, 2 King. 13. 21.
life came into him; much more if we went down into the grave of Christ, and
touched him, we shall live being joined with the living body of Christ, who
has gloriously and triumphantly overcome death, hell, and the devil. We see
in experience that if a man would have water flow into his field, he will make
a trench and dig into the ground, till he comes at the fountain, and then the
fountain will flow water into the field; even so if men would have the graces
of Christ to be distilled into them, let them never be at rest, till they have
joined themselves to Jesus Christ, and then he will distill all his graces and
virtues into them; so faith never leaves us, till it brings us unto Christ.

Now the use of this point is, that seeing we are sanctified in this world by
faith, as we find other uses thereof, so we should labor to find this use and
benefit of it: and therefore whereas men think that some are too precise and
too strict, it is a sure thing, that unless we be sanctified in this world, we
cannot be justified before God, and yet do not look to be sanctified before
men. And therefore search thy self, oh man or woman, I pray thee, art thou
brought to the hatred of sin? Or is it weakened in thee? Do thou labor to
lead an holy life in the sight of men here? Then thou art justified in the
sight of God: but if thou live in sin, and make no conscience in thy ways,
but live loosely, never then look to be justified in the sight of God. It is
a good observation, that a learned man has out of the eighth of the Romans of
the golden chain, (says he,) There be four Linkes of it, two he has in his
own hands, and two he has put out to us, to lay hold on: the two linkes that
he has in his hands, are Predestination, and Glorification, the first and the
last linkes; and the two middle he has left for us to lay hold on, Vocation,
and Justification: and therefore do thou oh man, cast out thy hands, and lay
hold on these two linkes that thou may be called and justified, that so thou
may be glorified in the world to come. This is comfortable, that God has
left these two linkes for every man, whereby he may be drawn up to Heaven.
The third use of faith is that which Paul speaks of here, Romans 1. 17. The
just man shall live by his faith; so a man must not only be justified by faith
in the sight of God, and sanctified in this world, Gal. 2. 20.
but he must live by his faith, as Paul says, Thus I live, yet not I now, but
Christ lives in me, and in that I now live in the flesh, I live by Faith in
the Son of God, who has loved me and gave Himself for me. A man may live
the life of nature without faith, he may buy and sell, and do the works of
his calling, he may eat and drink, etc. But he cannot live the life of grace
without faith, the greatest part of men care not to live in faith, but they
desire to die in faith. They would die a comfortable death, like Balaam that
would desire to die the death of the righteous, but care not to live so strict
a life, therefore if men do not care to live in faith, they cannot die in
faith, for this is the true use of faith to live by it, Habak. 2. 2.
so the prophet Habakuk says, the just shall live by his faith: a man that
has lived by it, he shall die in faith also, Heb. 11. 39. it is said, all
those dyed in Faith, because as they had lived in faith, so they died in faith
too, therefore if we will die in faith, we must labor to live in faith, and
then faith will not fail us, when we come to die. Now that we may live in
faith, two things are to be required:

1. All that we do, we must do in Faith. 1
2. All that we suffer, 2
we must suffer in Faith, we must still look to the promises, when we do any
thing, or suffer any thing.
Now that we must do all that we do in Faith, 1
we have these two Scriptures. The first is, All things must be done in Faith.
Romans 14. 23. For he that eats is condemned, if he eat, because he eats
not of Faith, and whatsoever is not of Faith is sin; so then if we do any
thing and has not a warrant for it, we cannot do it of Faith, and if it be
not of Faith, it is sin. So we read Heb. 11. 6. But without Faith it is
impossible to please God: so then, if we have not Faith we cannot please God,
and therefore all that we do we must do in Faith. It is the opinion of the
world, that some of our actions we should do in Faith but not all; but a man
must do all his actions in faith, because he is not at his own disposing, but
at the Lords, and therefore we are to be ruled and governed by him, and not to
do as we think good. The Lawyers have a saying, For our masters, and not for
our selves; all must be at the masters disposing, and not of the servants: even
so we are the servants, and He is the Lord, and therefore we must be at his
disposing, and not at our own; and therefore Heb. 11. All the holy men are
commended, because all that they did, was in faith: so it is said of Noah, that
by faith being warned of God, he went and made the Arc; and so for this Rahab,
and Jacob, and all the holy men there are recorded. All which examples are to
teach us that that which we do, we should do in faith.

How must we do all in faith? Quest. How to do all our actions in Faith.


I answer in the faith of these three things:

First, in the Faith of reconciliation, that we are persuaded that God is our
Father by the means of Christ, 1
and whereas he was our enemy, Answ.
that now he is our friend, and loves us, as notwithstanding all our labors
and pains we shall be blessed one day, so we see it is said Job. 14. 14. If a
man die shall he live again? all the dates of my appointed time will I wait
until my change shall be, and Psalm. 27. 10. says David, Though my father and
my mother forsake me, yet the Lord will gather me up. So 1 John 3. 2. Dearly
beloved, now are we the sons of God, but it does not appear what we shall
be: there was two kinds of labor, which the children of Israel endured; the
labors of Egypt, and the labors of the desert, the labors of Egypt was penal
labor, which tended to no profit; but the labor of the desert, was fruitful
labor, it tended to Canaan: and even so all the labors of the wicked, are
like the labors of Egypt, a penal labor, no fruit, or benefit comes by it,
but the labors of the godly are like the labors of the desert: which tends to
heaven. The true Christian sustaineth himself with this comfort, although he
labor and take pains, and endure much trouble, yet that one day he shall sit
down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven: a number of
people labor and take great pains, and have but little comfort by it, because
it is not done in faith of our reconciliation to be persuaded that God is our
friend and father by means of Jesus Christ, and loves us; and therefore if we
would have comfort in our labors and pains, we must do them in the faith of
our reconcilement.

Secondly, 2
that we do, we must do out of a ground of Faith, which is the word of God,
Means to do all in Faith.
where there is no word we must not do it, we must have a ground for all our
actions out of the word of God, a warrant, a command from God, as Psalm. 119. 4
When David did understand that God had commanded to keep his commandments
diligently; Oh, says he, that my heart were directed to keep thy statutes.
Deuter. chapter 12. verse 32. says Moses, That whatsoever I command you, take
heed ye do it, thou shall put nothing there-to, Esai. 8. 20.
nor take ought therefrom. And so likewise the prophet Esaias says, To the Law
and to the Testimony; there is the Rule of a Christian, to directall his
actions by: when a ship goes to sea the Mariner sets his Card and his
Compass how to direct him; when he has done so, howsoever the skies may
lowre, and the winds blow he is not afraid, he has his rule and directions
to sail by: even so a Christian must do, when he does any thing, he must set
his Compass, he must have a ground from Gods word for the doing of it, and
when he has done so, howsoever the skies lowre, and the wind blow,
howsoever things seem to make against him, yet he is safe because he has a
Rule and a direction to walk by: for howsoever a man may do good things, that
are good in themselves, as the labors of our callings, and releeving of the
poor, clothing of the naked, feeding of the hungry, and such like; if he
do it not of Faith, if he have not a ground and command from God, the Lord
does not accept it, we must do it as a part of our duty commanded from God,
and then two Comforts do ensue:

The first is, Two comforts of doing things in Faith.
that God does like and allow, and is well pleased with it, because we have his
word and warrant for the doing of it; a Christian, this is his comfort, 1
when he does any thing that he knows that God is well pleased with it, when
he has a warrant and command from Gods word, then he is sure that he shall
please God, then he may say as the Angel said in Ezekiel. the 9. that had the
writers Inkhorne by his side, I have done as thou have commanded me.

The second is, 2
that seeing we do that which God has commanded us, that God will sustain
and assist us in the same by his power; as we read Matthew. 28. 19. our Savior
Christ sends his disciples, to teach all nations, baptizing them and teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever he had commanded, and lo (says he) I
am with you unto the end of the world: so in Exodus 3. 12. says the Lord to
Moses, I will be with thee; I will be with thy mouth to assist thee, and to
direct thee, and so likewise in Esai. 41. 10. Says God, Fear not for I am
with thee, be not afraid for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee and help
thee: and will sustain thee with the right hand of my Righteousness: and
therefore it is a comfort to a Christian, that if he has a command or warrant
from God for the doing of his actions, that he shall have the power of God to
assist and sustain him.

The uses hereof be two.

First, Use 1.
that seeing we must have a word, and warrant from God for the doing of any
thing: whatsoever we doubt of we must not do, for if we doubt, we cannot do
it in Faith, because Faith expels doubting. So we see Romans 14. 23. For he
that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he eats not of Faith: For
whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. And therefore if thy conscience be
doubtful for the doing of any thing, do it not till thy conscience be
resolved, for if thou do, thou do sin: do thou doubt whether thou
may do such a thing, or such a thing on the Sabbath day? do it not until
thou be resolved: so likewise art thou in doubt, whether thou may borrow
money at interest? do it not until thou be resolved: and so likewise of any
thing we doubt of. It is the boldness of many, that although they doubt of
the doing of a thing, yet they will do it, because others do it; well let
them remember, that all we do must be in faith, for if it be not, it is sin
in us.

The second use is, Use 2.
that seeing whatsoever we do, we should have a ground out of Gods word for
it, whatsoever we cannot have a ground for, we cannot do it in faith, and if
we do it not in faith, it is sin to us. There be many things we cannot do
in faith, we cannot put our money to usury in faith, because we have the word
of God against it, Psalm. 15. And so when men be sick likewise, to go out for
help to witches, we cannot do it in faith, because we have the word of God
against it: and so likewise if a man be in want or necessity to seek to
releeve himself by unlawful means, he has no warrant for it, and therefore
he must not do it, yea whatsoever a man cannot do in faith, he must not do
it, there be thousands of this kind, that we cannot do in faith, and if we
do it not in faith, we cannot please God, nor assure our selves that God is
pleased with us; and so we cannot die in faith, because we have not lived in
faith, or will not live by it.

Thirdly, The third meant to do all in Faith.
we must do it out of a persuasion that God will bless us, and give us such
success, as he in his wisdom sees meet, as his promise is Psalm. 1. 3.
Whatsoever he does it shall prosper: and Romans 8. 28. Also we know that all
things work together for the best unto them that love God: even these
accidents that seem to work clean contrary; by the secret hand of God, they
shall all turn to our good. As we see in a clock there be some wheels that
turn the clean contrary way, yet all serve to one end to make the clock go:
even so it is with them that love and fear God, although there be some things
that work one way, and some another, yet by the secret hand of God they are
turned to the best for them that love him. This is a great comfort that we
have such a promise, that a man may assure himself, that even such things as
may seem to turn to his hurt, by the wisdom of God and by a secret hand
they are all turned to the best for his people, and therefore when we have done
any good duty, or any thing that he has commanded us, although we do not see
such success to follow as we desire, yet we should commit it to the Lord,
and persuade our selves, that he will give such a blessings, as shall be fit
for us. There be two cares that men trouble themselves with: How they may do
a thing; and when they have done it, they take care how and what success will
follow it. Now the first care that every one must take how to do the duties of
his calling is, that which God requires: but the second care, that we must
commit to God, what success he will give to it. We see an hundred men in a
ship; they are all at the masters disposition, some of them he appoints to
the maste, some to be at the stern, some to the fore-decke, some to the
anchor, and all tends to the bringing home of the ship in safety, and to the
good of them all: even so the Lord has the disposing of us, and turns all our
labors to our good. And therefore when we have done the first, the second we
must commit to the Lord. But oh, we see men so far from doing things in
Faith; that they do it in no hope of a blessing, for let a man give
admonitions and exhortations and good counsel: as I pray you hear and receive
the Sacraments, and such like; we are far enough from doing it in Faith,
when we do it not in hope of a blessing, therefore we must do the first,
and commit the blessing to God. The next thing is, how we should suffer in
Faith; of which there are two kinds:

1. Spiritual Desertion. 2. Worldly Crosses.
Spiritual Desertions are, How to Suffer all in Faith.
when he takes away the comfortable feeling of his favor, the power of grace,
or the measure of feeling of it: this kind is the greatest and heaviest, to
feel God departed from a man more than worldly crosses, losses, or any
affliction that we feel outwardly. Now in both these, Faith must sustain and
uphold us, the lust he must live by his Faith.

In spiritual Desertions Faith upholds us, The first means how Faith upholds
us in desertion.
by three ways: First, that although we feel not the comfortable feeling of
Gods favor, yet we are all one with Christ, because we stand not in our own
apprehension, but Christ does apprehend us, as it is Phil. 3. 12. Not as though
I had already attained to it, either were already perfect, but I follow, if
that I may apprehend, that for whose sake also I am apprehended of Christ
Jesus. And therefore howsoever we let go our hold through weakness, and
frailty; yet Christ does not let go his. Even as a mother takes a Child by
the hand, when howsoever the Child let go his hold, yet the mother does not
let go hers: so howsoever we may let go our hold through weakness or
frailty, yet Christ does not let go his: and therefore we see it is said in
Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 5.
we are kept by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation. Therefore it is
the power of God that does keep us. So Psalm. 94. 18. (says he) When I said,
my foot slipped: thy mercy, O Lord, held me up. Even so being one with Christ,
Gods mercy it is that upholdeth us. Trees that seem to be dead in Winter, yet
because there is life and sap in the root, in the spring they do recover. Even
so although a man may seem to be dead in his own feeling, yet because there
is life in the root, life in Christ, we shall recover again.

The second action that Faith does sustain us by in spiritual desertions is:
The second means how faith upholds us in desertion.
that although we feel not the comfortable feeling of Gods favor, yet it
shows us that this forsaking is but for a time, as it is said, Esai. 54. 8.
For a little while have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I
gather thee, for a moment in mine anger, I hide my face from thee for a season,
but with ever lasting mercy I have had compassion on thee, says the Lord, thy
Redeemer. And therefore although we feel not the Love of God at the present,
yet Faith must uphold us, and we must persuade our selves it is but for a
little time. And so likewise, Psalm. 55. 22. it is said, He will not suffer the
righteous to fall for ever. Howsoever they may fall, yet they shall rise
again. And Mic. 7. 8. The Church does sustain her self by this, Rejoice not
against me, O mine enemy: although I fall, yet I shall rise again. If a man
fall into a swoond that he neither breathe nor pant: yet bring him to the fire,
and chafe him, put a little Aquavitae into his mouth, and he will recover
again, if there be any life in him: even so, if a man fall into a spiritual
swoond that he neither breathe nor pant; yet if he be brought to the use of
good means, as prayer, preaching, and the Sacraments; if there be the life of
grace in him, he will recover again. This we see in David, and Peter, that
when Nathan came to David, and told him of his fault, he straightway recovered:
and so Peter, that had but a look of Christ, recovered. If a man cast mud into
a fountain, it will in time work it self clear. So in Ioh. 4. 14. A
Christian is compared to a fountain, in which although there be mud cast, yet
it will work it self clear.

The third action whereby faith sustaineth us in spiritual desertions, The
third means how Faith upholds in Desertions.
is, that al is for their good that God is departed from them. For Ioh. 16. it
is said, It is expedient for you, that I go away from you. So the absence of
Christ from the Church is for their good, that they may the more long for him,
when he is departed, earnestly seek after him, and set the greater price upon
him, when they have him. If a man have poisoned himself a Physician cannot
help him, but by giving him some rank poison; even so the Lord lets us fall
into some great sin to expel some other sins. And therefore as Christ
said, Ioh. 11. of Lazarus his sickness, That it was not unto Death, but for
the glory of God. So we may say of all the falls of Gods people, that there
falls are not unto death, but for the glory of God.

Now for worldly crosses faith sustaineth four ways: In worldly cresses Faith
supports sour ways.
First, it persuades us that all the judgments of God, that fall upon us are
just, and that he does us no wrong thereby: therefore that we must quiet our
selves yielding to the good will of God; So we see the Church does in Micah 7.
9. I will bear the wrath of the Lord because I have sinned against him. So
Ier. 10. says he, It is my sorrow and I must bear it: As though he should
say, it is mine own sin, I may thank mine own self for it, it is my
sorrow, and I will bear it. The good Thief, Luke 23. 41. confesses, We are
indeed justly punished here, for we receive things worthy for that we have
done. And therefore let us never murmur nor grieve at it, we are here
righteously, these things be justly come upon us. Thus Faith makes us to quiet
our selves in looking at the good will of God.

The second way whereby Faith sustaineth us in worldly crosses is, The second
way how Faith sustaineth in crosses.
that it makes us shut up our eyes, and wholly to rely upon God. So David in
the Psalm. 73. 26. My flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my
heart and my portion for ever. So Psalm. 119. 49, 50. Remember thy promise made
unto thy servant wherein thou have made me to hope. It is my comfort in my
trouble, for thy promises have quickened me. And so likewise Job says, Job 13.
15.
Though he kill me, yet I will trust in him. Faith, it makes believe one
contrary in another, that although we die, and rot, yet we shall live, and we
shall live again, and rise again: though God does seem to be our enemy, yet
Faith does persuade us that he is our friend: and although we be miserable,
yet that we are blessed and happy: thus Faith makes us believe one contrary
in another.

Thirdly, Faith does hereby sustain us in worldly crosses, because it assures
us that God is present with us in all our troubles, in our sickness, about our
beds, in our graves, and in the jail. Even as God was with Moses in the bush,
and with the three children in the fiery sornace; so God is with all his
servants in all their troubles and afflictions. The want of this consideration,
that God was not present with Saul, made his affliction the greater, 1 Samuel 28
1^.
says he, The Philistims made war against me, and God is departed from me:
therefore when Faith shall assure us, that in all our troubles and afflictions
God is present with us, this is a mighty means to sustain and uphold us. So
says David, Psalm 23. 4. Yea, though I should walk through the valley and
shadow of Death, yet I will fear none ill; thy rod, thy staff, they comfort
me: and Romans 8. 31. If God be with us, says he, who can be against us? When
old Jacob was sent for into Egypt, as we may see Genesis 46. 3. The Lord spoke in
a vision to Jacob, and said, Fear not Jacob to go down into Egypt, for I
will go with thee: Even so when the Lord shall say to us, fear not to go
into the grave, for I will be with you, or into the dens of death, or into
the jail, or into any other trouble whatsoever, seeing he will be present to
sustain and to uphold us, we ought to do it cheerfully.

Fourthly, Four means whereby Faith supports us in Afflictions.
Faith does sustain us in worldly crosses, with this consideration, and
comfort: that when all temporal things fail, yet we shall be made partakers
of spiritual and heavenly things. Thus we see Job did sustain himself, when
all temporal things failed him, when he had lost his children, his goods and
all, then he comfort himself in this, Job 19. 25.
I know that my Redeemer lives. And although after my skin worms destroy
this body, yet shall I see God in my flesh, etc. So David in the person of
Christ in Psalm. 16. 9. Howsoever they deprived him of these temporal things,
and killed him, yet says he comfortably, My heart is glad, and my tongue
rejoices, my flesh also shall rest in hope; for thou will not leave my soul
in grave, neither will thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. And Psalm.
27. 13. I should have fainted, but that I believed to see the goodness of God,
in the land of the living; and therefore, howsoever temporal things fail us,
yet Faith persuades us of most happy and heavenly things.

The use is, that if a man have Faith, he must labor to live by his Faith; a
number have says, and yet do not labor to live in faith, and therefore, have
thou faith, labor to live in faith; all that thou do, do in faith; and all
which thou suffer, suffer in faith.

The fourth use of faith in the life of a Christian is, 4
to die in Faith, for as I have showed you before, a man can never look to die
thus, except he live by his faith, Use of Faith in our lifetime.
for when a man has lived by it here in this world, then he is sure to die in
faith, and so be saved by it, at the day of judgment: therefore this is a good
comfort for us, that when all shall leave us, when we shall part with our
goods, our friends, and with this world, then we shall be saved by our faith:
when others shall desire the hills and mountains to fall upon them, then our
faith will be a cup of comfort for us. Let a man have houses and lands, goods
and cattle, silver and gold, and plate, and all the rich jewels that may be;
when death comes, all is gone, he must part from all, and then what comfort
can he have of them? when death seazes upon him, and hell is ready to swallow
him up. But if a man have lived in faith, and died in faith, this will be a
comfort unto him, that he shall also be saved by his faith, that he shall
see the heavenly vision, as Stephan saw heaven opened, and Christ standing at
the right hand of God. I have showed you before, that if a man lie upon his
deathbed, and make his will, he gives some of his goods to one, and some to
another, and so leaves himself nothing; now if he has not faith to comfort
him, what a pitiful case is this man in; he is a miserable man and thrice
miserable if he has not faith, whatsoever the party is, whether he be King or
Lord.

Now four ways we must die in faith, Four ways to dye in Faith.
as we may see in Heb. 11. 13. First, 1
they did acknowledge they were but strangers, and pilgrims, and had but a
little time to tarry here; that heaven was their home; so all the holy men have
done before us, David, Psalm. 39. 12. For I am a stranger and sojourner, as were
all my fathers: And so in the 1 Pet. 2. 11. he exhorts, Dearly beloved, I
beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight
against the soul. And therefore seeing we are strangers, and pilgrims here,
we should be contented to leave the world, when God would have us: it is a
pitiful thing to see that men hang on the world, as if they were borne to
continne here for ever.

Secondly, The second way to dye in Faith.
the holy people of God that died in faith did see the promises of God afar
off, and did thankefully rejoice in them: it is a Metaphor taken from men when
they be at sea, one goes up the mast to see if he can see the sea shore, if
he can spy it, it makes his heart leap in his belly; even so when we lie on
our deathbeds, if we can get upon the mast of faith, and see the shore of
heaven and happiness; this will make us to rejoice. So we see Stephan saw at
the time of his death heaven opened, Acts 7. 56.
and Christ standing at the right hand of God to help him, and receive him.
And so also Jacob, when he went to Syria, when he took a stone, and laid it at
his head, and slept in the open fields, he saw a heavenly vision, a ladder
reared up to heaven, and the Angels ascending, and descending by it: so this
will be a great comfort to us, when we lie on our deathbeds, Genesis 28. 1.
and shall see such heavenly visions, a ladder reared up to heaven, where the
Angels of God ascend and descend, ready to receive our souls, and to carry
them up to heaven. Genesis 2. We see the Cherubins were set to keep paradise,
that a man should not come in there, but now it is comfortable that they shall
be ready to receive our souls, and carry them to heaven.

Thirdly, if we die in faith, we must seek for a heavenly country; it makes us
to let all go, and to seek for heaven: so we see the Thief upon the cross,
hanging in pains and torments, he lets all go, and laboreth for the saving of
his soul, Lord, says he, remember me when thou come into thy kingdom: So
likewise the Apostle Philip. 3. 8. says, I have counted all things loss, and
do judge them to be dung, that I might win Christ. If a man should lie
floating on the Sea ready to be drowned, if one should cast out a planke to
save him, that man would be ready to let all go, and to lay hold on the
planke to save himself: even so we are all floating in the sea of this world,
and God has as it were thrown a planke out unto us, which are ready to be
drowned, which is his Son Jesus Christ: Therefore at the hour of death we
should be ready to let all go, and to lay hold on him.

Fourthly, The fourth way to die in Faith.
to die in faith, we must seek death in life, and make a way through the dens
of death to life: put a hound upon a sent, and although we see nothing, yet the
hound will follow the sent; and even so put faith upon a sent of Christ,
although we see him not, yet faith will follow and pursue, till it come at
Christ, and so lay hold on him.

The uses are first, Use 1.
that we labor above all things to get faith, whatsoever it cost us; seeing
we are justified before God and sanctified in this world, we must live in
faith, and we must die in faith; therefore above all things labor to get faith.
If a man go to the market, if he hear there is a commodity, that he can make
some great advantage by, he will have it whatsoever it cost him; so seeing we
hear there is such great advantage to be made of faith, let us labor above
all things to get it, whatsoever the price be, or whatsoever it cost.

The second use is, Use 2.
that seeing we have such use of our faith here in this life, that we nourish
it by prayer and meditations, and by all the good means. If a man did hang out
of an high Tower, out of the top of it by a cord, or thread, and were like to
fall into a pit of fire, how afraid would that man be of every hand, that
should come to break this thread or cord? even so faith is the thread or cord
we hang by, over the pit of hell, how afraid then should we be of every hand,
or any thing that should break the thread and cord of faith?

SERMON. II.
1 TIMOTHY 1. 5. Now the end of the Commandment is love, out of a pure heart, and
of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.
HAving spoken of the utility of Faith, and of the great use thereof in the
life of a Christian, first, that a man is justified by it, before God;
secondly, that he is thereby sanctified in this world; thirdly, that he must
live by his faith; and fourthly, that he must die in faith: we raised from
hence two points of exhortation; the first was, that we labor to get faith,
whatsoever it cost us, because we are justified by it, before God, and
sanctified by it in this world. If a man go to market, and he hear he may
have good advantage by buying of such and such commodities, he will not stick
at it, whatsoever it cost, or whatsoever the price be. And even so seeing faith
does bring us such advantage, let us not stick at the price of it, whatsoever
it cost us, our pleasures, our ease, or much labor. The second point of
exhortation was, that we labor to keep, and to nourish it by all means: now
because there be diverse faiths, and lest the devil should deceive us, with a
dead faith, as the mother was with the dead child, instead of her living,
therefore we will speak of the diverse kinds thereof. For as we must labor
for it, so we must look it be the true faith: if a king should have a
servant, and should send him into his Treasury, and he should bid him take
silver and gold, or what jewels he would have, and whatsoever he wants, the
servant would surely look he had the key, and the right key too, or else he
might turn and turn, and never the better: so when God does offer such rich
treasures in the Gospel, then the next thing is, we must look to it, that we
must have a right key, that is true faith, or else we may turn and turn, and
never the better: and therefore that we be not deceived, we are to consider
generally, there be four kinds of faith:

1. Historical faith. 2. Temporary faith. 3. Miraculous faith. 4. True saving
faith.
First, 1
Historical faith is, Historical Faith what.
when a man believes the history of the Bible to be true, without application
of it; that is, cannot apply the word of God, to the comforting of his
conscience, to the directing of his life, nor to the humbling of himself. This
has no grace in it, it is no work of God, but it arises from the light of
nature; for as we believe other stories, so also we may believe this, and
assentunto it, and therefore no grace of God. James 2. the devils have this
kind of faith, they believe the Scriptures, that there is a God, and therefore
tremble: now he does not so, because he is illuminated by Gods Spirit; but by
the light of nature, by this he knows it, and therefore a man may have this
faith, and not true faith. Here we are to note a strange malice of the devil,
that he would keep from men, that which he believes himself, for he
believes that there is a God, and believes the word of God to be true, Note.
and that there is a hell to torment; and yet many men believe not this, they
do not believe there is a God, or that there is a hell, or that the Scriptures
be true, and therefore they come short of the faith of the devil, have no
grace, and therefore it cannot be true faith. A man may believe there is a God,
that he is a just God, that the word of God is true, that there is pardon for
sins, rewards for the Godly, punishments for the wicked, and yet this is not
the true faith, for it fails in two things: first, is fails in the true
resolved grounds of faith; for as the Schoolmen say, True faith never rests
till it come at his resolved ground, to rest on God, for (as they say) faith
does not believe the resurrection of the body, because Peter or Paul wrote, and
the rest of the holy men, but true faith does believe it, because God spoke it;
so that true faith rests on God, as the last ground. So 2 Peter 1. 21. says
he, For the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men
spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost: so these holy men did not write the
Scriptures in their own name, but they wrote them as the Penmen and
Secretaries of Almighty God; and therefore we are not to rest in them, because
they wrote them but because God spoke them, and it is his will, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
and all Scripture is given by inspiration of God: Tertullian has a saying,
and that is this, That the Kings and Princes of this world, when they would
have their Laws known to men, they send it by Shreeves to proclaim and make
it known to them: so (says he) the Prophets and Apostles be as it were the
Shreeves and Officers of Almighty God, to make Gods Laws known unto men. And
as another learned man says, namely Augustine, That it is true that Christ did
write the Scriptures, but not in his own Person, for he is the head, but the
Prophets and Apostles did write them as the very parts of Christ, the very
hands of Christ, or the fingers of Christ to write the Scriptures, for
whatsoever Christ would have written to his people concerning his will, he has
wrote by his Prophets and Apostles. Ezekiel. 9. 8. Christ is there described to
have an Inckhorne of a writer, at his reins, Christ had his Inckhorne at his
back to write his last will, and testament to his people, when he turned his
back upon them, even when he was departed. And therefore we see that true
faith in the last resolution stays on God, it does not rest on the Scriptures,
because Peter and Paul, and the rest of the holy men of God spoke it, but
because God has taught it. Therefore here we may consider the ground of an
historical faith, generally to believe the Scriptures, and the Reason why men
believe the Bible, and in their common speech talk of it, is, because they
never heard otherwise since they were borne, but that the Scriptures were true.
So that it does not arise from the true ground.

The second thing that historical faith does fail in, The second defect of
Historical Faith.
is, because it wants particular application of the word of God, it does assent
to it that it is true, but it goes no further, it believes there is a God, but
not believe he is a God to him, it believes there is pardon of sins, but not
that his sins be pardoned, and that God is just, but not to him. This is a
maine defect in this Faith, it does not apply the word of God: in the body
there be two sorts of veins, some of them be sucking and drawing the meat
into the stomach to concoct, the other carrying the strength of it, into every
part of a man: so true faith like to these sucking veins, carries the word
down into a man's heart, and applies it unto him. In the Gospel when Christ
spoke to his Disciples, generally that one of them should betray him;
straightway they said every one, Is it I, Master? Is it I? And so true faith
does apply the word particularly to themselves: historical faith does not so,
but is like the Apothecaries boy, that gathered herbs and simples for other
men's diseases, and not for his own: even so many men gather good things out of
the word, and others have the benefit of it, and they have none; all their
comfort hangs on this, to talk and speak of the judgments of God, and of the
good things that be in Him; but it goes no further, it does not apply home the
word, and therefore it is another kind of faith, that we must look and
labor for.

The second kind is, Temporary faith, this kind goes further than the first
did. Secondly Temporary Faith. The first Cause.
For it does not only assent to the word of God, that it is true, but does
particularly apply it in part, and there is also some unsoundnesse left behind
it: this kind of faith is spoken of in Matthew 13. 20. it is said to be the
stony ground that brings forth fruit for a time, all is not well with them, for
they do not continue, they go away. This is the common faith of the world, to
hear the word of God, to apply it in some part, so far as it goes with
them; but if it cross them, then it fails, and is carried away with the sway
of corruption in them, that as the weeds eat out the heart of the corn, so
corruption eats out the heart of their says. Now it is called Temporary
faith, etc.

1. Because it arises from Temporary causes. 2. Because it is but of
Temporary continuance.
The temporary causes are three: first, because that men have a desire to get
knowledge above the rest, and to keep Table-talke, and to put down others,
when they be in company. The second is, to keep credit with the world, they
would not be counted odd men, and to be pointed at; this is the reason why
Simon Magus Act. 8. believed, became a great man in the world, because he would
not be pointed at, or counted an odd man. The third cause is worldly ease and
benefit; there is somewhat to be gotten by it, or some are afraid that if
they do not so as others do, they shall be brought in danger of the Law. As
John 6. 26. the people followed Christ, but it was to be fed of him; and in
Numbers we see the hope of liberty and the privileges that the Israelites
had, made other to join with them: So likewise Hester 8. 17. Many of the
people of the land became Jews, for the fear of the Jews fell upon them: but
we must have a better ground than this, if ever we will be saved or blessed
of God, and saved at the day of judgment.

Secondly, it is called temporary faith, because it is but of temporary
continuance, The second Cause.
for a time, it is stony and hard at the bottom, it does not hold, because it
has no root, it wants a root of judgment, and root of affection.

First, it wants a root of judgment, because they believe as others do, and
never heard otherwise; they do not believe it, because God has taught, and
revealed it, therefore they are in danger to fall away; but if they believed
it, because God has spoken it, and it is his will, it is not all the world
that could bear them over in it. This we see in the Primitive Church, and in
Queen Mary's days, that the great Doctors and Scholars could not over-beare
them, although they were but poor men, because they were rooted in judgment;
therefore if men will hold out unto the end, they must labor to have this
root in judgment, Psalm. 85. The prophet David says, I will hearken what God
says. I will not hearken what the world, my corruptions, nor what men say, but
I will hearken what God says.

Secondly, in regard of affection; a man must love the word, esteem it, and
set a high price upon it, or else he may well have a root of judgment, but
no root of affection, and there will be no continuance: and therefore do
thou love it, and regard it? be ready to apply it to thy self, joy in it as
the chiefest treasure, and count it as the greatest blessing, and be contented
to part, and to let all go in regard of it.

Thirdly, Thirdly, Miraculous Faith.
Miraculous Faith is a persuasion that God will use some men for some excellent
work, to work some miraculous thing: this kind of Faith was in Judas, and
many such others, that Christ will say unto at the last day, Depart from me
ye workers of iniquity. As, what is it to cast out the devil? and not to
cast out a man's own sins? what is it to cleanse a Leper and yet cannot cleanse
our selves from our corruptions? to raise the dead, and thou to lie still in
thy sins? to give sight to the blind, and thou not see the good things of
God? to open the ears of the deaf, and thou will not have thine ears open to
hear the good things of God? And therefore, if thou have justifying Faith to
cast out thy sins and corruptions, thou have a more excellent gift than to
work miracles, to raise the dead, to cleanse the soul Leper, to give sight to
the blind, to make the dumb to speak, the lame to go, the deaf to hear,
for thou shall go to heaven when they they shall go to hell. We see Luke 10.
17. etc. When Christ had sent out his Disciples to cast out devils, at their
return, they came again rejoicing, and told him, that the spirits were
subdued through his name, they rejoiced, but our Savior bids them not to
rejoice at this, but rejoice that their names were written in heaven. And
therefore if thou have by true faith cast out thy sins, if thou can cast up
thine eyes of faith to heaven, and there behold and see thy name written, this
shall be greater comfort to thee than the casting out devils.

The fourth kind of says is, Fourthly, Iu^fying and Saving Faith.
true Justifying, and saving faith; all is nothing without this faith in
Christ; this it is that must justify and sanctify fie us; which faith is an
assent to the whole word of God, to make use of it to ourselves, and a
particular application of the promises of God made untous in Christ, wherein we
stand persuaded of our reconciliation in the blood of Christ.

Now there be three things required in this justifying and saving faith. Three
things required in Justifying Faith.
First, there must be an assent to the whole word of God, for it does not
believe God in one point, 1
and not in another, but it believes the whole word of God. The schoolmen
say, a true believer maks no choice what point he will believe, if God has
revealed them, he will believe them all; it is said, 2 Cor. 10. 5. Casting
down the imaginations, and every high thing that is exalted against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience
of Christ: it does so bring under and captivate his wits, that whatsoever
Christ speaks, it will believe. The common faith of the world is not so; for
they believe God in one thing, and not in another, they believe God in his
promises, and not in his threatenings, in his mercy, but not in his judgment,
they believe God in one commandment, and not in another; therefore this is not
the true faith that the Scripture speaks of, for all the parts of true faith
be so joined and knit together, that if we take away one, we destroy all:
even as it is in a stone wall, take away one part, and the rest falls; and even
so, take away one part of true faith, and ye destroy all: and as one crack in
a bell spoils the sound of a bell; even so, one part of our faith being taken
away destroys our faith: To this effect, Gal. 1. 6. The Apostle says, I
marvel ye are so soon turned to another Gospel: they missing one point of
faith, he shows they destroyed all.

If any man object and say, Object.
How can that be, that a man failing in one point of faith, should fail in
all? We see Abraham believed God in one thing and not in another.

I answer, Answ.
we are to consider two things. First, what he believed, and what he believed
not; all points be not of one consequence, some be of greater moment, and some
of less: for as Aquinas says, some points be the grounds of faith, and those
be of greatest weight and moment, and there be some that be in relation to
others; so many things in the story of the Bible be most directed to faith, as
grounds, and some be in relation to others to help and further it: now Abraham
doubted not of any maine point of faith, but he doubts of the less, he
believes God for saving of his soul, that God for Christ's sake would save
that, but he doubts of this, that God would not give him a child, so he
doubts not of the maine matter, but of the lesser: a man may believe God in the
maine, believe God for the saving of his soul, and doubt of the lesser, this
does not destroy true faith. Even as a man coming to a shelfe where be a
number of dishes, a man may take away one and the rest may stand, but if he
take away the shelfe all the dishes fall down: even so it is in faith, take
away one point which is in relation to another, all the rest will stand, but
take away that which is the ground and bears up all of them, and then all the
rest fall. Now the causes of this defect are:

First, The first Defect.
because they believe it not; not out of any distrussfulnesse of God, Psalm.
7^. ^19. 2 Kings 7. 2.
as the children of Israel said in the Psalm. Can God prepare a table? etc. And
as the Prince we read of in the second book of the Kings that doubted of the
power of God: but it arises for want of light, that they do not see it to be
so, or because they have not been as yet taught it out of the word of God.

The second defect is, The second Defect.
for want of strength, for although he sees it to be a truth, yet he cannot
believe it, but is carried away with the sway and swinge of Nature against his
judgment, that he is faint to strive and struggle against it. This is the
maine difference between the people of God, and the world, for although they
believe not some particular thing, yet they strive to believe; even as the man
in the Gospel said, Lord I believe, help my unbeleefe. But the world does not
so, for they doubt and do not believe many particular things, and yet they do
not strive against their unbeleefe; and therefore, if we do not find it so in
ourselves, that there is not a striving to believe, it is no true faith, for
true faith does believe God in the maine matters; it does believe that God will
give them Christ, and yet many times they doubt of health; it believes Christ
will give them heaven, and through weakness doubts that God will not give them
seasonable weather, and yet there is a striving to believe all.

The second thing that we are to observe in saving faith is, The second thing
in sanctifying Faith. Job 5. 7.
That it makes use unto it self of the word of God, and not in general, but
it applies every promise of God, made for our good. As Eliphas says to Job,
take this, and take to thy self; so true faith, believe this, and believe it
for thy self; so that it does not believe in general, but it makes use and
applies every promise of God made home, and to say with David, I have respect
unto all thy Commandments. Herein true faith differs from the faith of the
world, whosoever believes the word of God in general, and yet cannot apply it
to themselves, may be compared to the Apothecary which gives others Physic,
but does not take it himself, whereas true faith applies the promises of God
for its own good; this is a justifying faith.

The third thing in true saving faith is, that as it applies all the promises
of God to it self, The third thing in sanctifying Faith.
so espicially it applies and takes hold of the great promises made unto us in
Christ, wherein we stand persuaded of our redemption by the blood of Christ.
Even as a man being carried away in a great stream, looks up, and espying a
great tree hang over him, takes hold of it, and saves himself from drowning:
so when a man is carried away in the stream of corruption, and looks up, by
the eye of faith he espieth Christ, like a tree, hang over him, takes hold of
him, and by this means, he saves himself, when thousands of others perish.
It is true indeed that true faith looks to the whole word of God: it
believes the threatenings, and the promises of God, as in Heb. 11. That by the
same faith that Noah believed God for the saving of his soul, by the same he
believed God for the saving of his body by an Arc; and so likewise Abraham,
by the same faith he believed that God would give him heaven, by the same
faith he believed that God would keep him in a strange country: so Moses by
the same faith that he believed that God would preserve him from hell, by the
sanie faith he believed that God would preserve him from the wrath of Pharaoh.
Yet in the matters of our salvation, true faith looks at Christ only, and at
the promises made unto us in him: even as the people of Israel that were stung
with the fiery serpents, with the same eye wherewith they looked on Moses,
Aaron, on the people, and on their tents, with the same eye they looked on the
brazen serpent, which was it that ho^pe them: so it is in true says; it looks
to all the promises of God made unto us, and yet in the matters of salvation,
it must be the great promise made unto us in Christ that must save us, which
true faith looks at.

All the hope we have of heaven hangs on faith; and lest we should be deceived
of our faith, and so deceived of heaven, I will give you seven true notes and
marks of faith, whereby we may discern true faith, Seven trials of true
Faith. The first.
from the faith of the world: which are these that follow:

The first sign of true faith, whereby we may discern it from the faith of
the world is, By the efficient cause, which is preaching. For thence it
arises, so it is preaching that works faith in us: so we see in Romans 10.
Faith comes by hearing the Word of God preached, it does not arise of
nothing, but comes of preaching; therefore it is called Semen, the seed of the
Word, that even as plants and herbs come of seeds, so of the preaching of the
Word comes faith; but the faith of the world, that does not arise of the
preaching of the Word, but of the speech of people, and by a report they have
heard of ever since they can remember, who never heard otherwise, and therefore
this is not the true faith. Wherefore every one should look how he comes by
his faith, and by what means; if it comes not by preaching, it cannot be true
faith. Now if preaching be the means to get true faith in us, let us labor to
have it, because it is the means to work true faith; for how can we have it,
if we want the means; if we have not seed, we can have no corn, and he
that steals away a handful of our feed, does us more hurt than he that
steals much more out of our barn: so if we have no preaching, which is the
means, we can have no faith: and he that takes away preaching does us more
hurt, than to take any thing else from us.

The second sign or mark of true faith, The second trial of true Faith.
whereby we may discern it from the faith of the world is, That it begins in
weakness. Even like a child that is weak at the first, and afterward it
grows stronger and stronger through the nourishment it takes; so our faith is
weak at the first; and by the use of good means it grows stronger and
stronger. Judges. 6. we see how weak Gideons faith was at the first; and so
the disciples of Christ, their faith was so weak at the first, that Christ did
reprove them for it. Note.
Now the faith of the world, that does not begin in weakness, but it is as
strong the first day, as it is many years after: there is no doubting of Gods
mercy; they leap into the full assurance of faith at the first; and therefore
this cannot be true faith, for this begins in weakness, and after by
little and little it comes to the full assurance of faith. Even as a man that
climbes up to the top of a tree, he catches hold first on the lower boughs,
and so by little and little he winds himself into the Tree, till at last he
comes at the top; so we come not to the full assurance of faith at first, but
we must wind our selves into it, by prayer, meditation, conference, and such
like duties, till we come unto the full assurance thereof. It is the bold
presumption of the world, that they think they shall be saved, as soon as
they look into Religion, when as it comes only by the use of good means many
a day together.

The third point whereby we may discern true faith from the faith of the
world, The third trial of true Faith.
That it grows, although it begins in weakness, yet it grows by the use of
the good means that it was gotten by, as by preaching of the Word, prayer, and
such like good means: as the Apostle shows 1 These. 2. 13. For this cause also
thank we God without ceasing, that when ye received the Word of God, ye
received it not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the Word of God, which
works in you which believe. The graces of God are compared to a little seed,
and not to a stone, for that stands at a stay: Now true faith grows, by the
use of good means: so we see, 1 Pet. 2. 1. As newborn babes desire the
sincere milk of the word that ye may grow thereby. The faith of the world does
not grow, but keeps at a stay, and does not increase by the preaching of Gods
word, and prayer, and by the use of good means, therefore it cannot be true
faith; if a man has a little child, and they feed it and give it meat, and
the child grows not thereby, but stands at a stay they may say it is a
changeling, but this is not always true. It is observed to be a judgment of
God to restrain the blessing of food; although it be not always true in
this, yet it is true in our faith, if it keep at a stay, and do not grow,
when there is good means, it is no true faith, no better than a changeling.

The fourth point whereby we may discern of true faith from the faith of the
world is, The fourth trial of true Faith.
By the qualities of the person in whom it is found, for it is not found, but
in a heart bruised and broken with sin, as Acts 2. they were pricked in their
hearts; and in Acts 16. the Iayler there trembled; so that true faith is
always in a heart broken and bruised for sin. Now in the faith of the world
there is no compunction nor sorrow for sin, they never mourn nor grieve for
it, therefore because it is not found in a heart bruised and broken, it cannot
be true faith, they be as merry at the first, as at the last day. If a
Physician should tell us that such a herb would help us against all
Infections whatsoever, but it always grows in a watery place, and he should
tell us that there is another herb like that in color, stalk, leaf, smell,
and in blossom, but it grows on a rock, or on a stone wall; if we should
find such an herb on a rock, or on a stone wall, we could not say it were
that which would preserve us against the infection, because it grows not in a
watery place: even so the heavenly Physician has told us that true saving
faith does always grow in a heart that is broken and bruised for sin, in a
watery conscience, and therefore if we find one like it in in all things, and
find it on a rock, or on a stone wall; if we find it in an impenitent and hard
heart, and a heart never touched for sin, this is not the true faith. We
read that Mary Magdalen brought a box of costly ointment to Christ, and broke
her box, and powered it our, which Christ did accept of; all other ointments
are best in a whole box, but this ointment of faith Christ does not accept,
but in a broken box, in a heart broken for sin, and because the world has
not their faith in a broken box, in an heart broken for sin, therefore
Christ does not accept of it.

The fifth point whereby we may discern true faith from the faith of the
world is, The fifth trial of true Faith.
by the opposition that is made against it in all true believers. The corrupt
nature of man is ready to oppose against it, so that we shall have much ado to
hold our faith, and to keep it. By experience every man may find this in
himself, that even when temptations cease, he shall have much ado to hold
and keep his faith, therefore in the Revelation it is said, Hold fast that
which thou have, and let no man take away thy crown. And in I^de, Strive for
the maintenance of faith, once given to the Saints. Let a man attend to
preaching, prayer, and the use of good means, yet he shall have much ado to
hold his faith, but it is an easy matter to hold the faith of the world, there
is no opposition made against it, and therefore it is not the true and saving
faith. One opposition against true faith is sin, for this always weakens
faith in a true believer; so in Psalm 51. We see David's faith was weakened by
the reason of his sins, Cast me not away from thy presence; and so likewise
Job 13. 26. his faith staggered by the means of his sins, says he, Thou
writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the Iuiquities of
my youth. But the faith of the world is not weakened by sin, for although
they commit never so many sins and grievous, yet their faith is not weakened,
but it is as strong as ever it was, and as confident in God; and therefore this
faith is not true faith.

The sixth point whereby we may discern true faith from the faith of the
world, The sixth trial of true Faith.
is, by the power of faith; for whatsoever they suffer or endure, they be
contented with it, and labor to quiet themselves with the good will of God.
This we see in Job, Though thou killest me, yet will I trust in thee: And so
the good Thief, L^k. 23. We are indeed righteously here, for we receive
things worthy of that we have done: so they never murmur, nor grudge at it,
but quiet themselves with the good will of God. Now there is no such matter in
the faith of the world, for let trouble come, and they be at their wits end,
they have no comfort in God, nor in Christ, and therefore it is no true faith.
The Philosophers tell us, how we should know true gold from that which the
Alchymists make, although it cannot be discerned by the color, touch, or by
the weight, yet take it in extremity, and it will comfort the heart, it is
cordial: but counterfeit gold will not: And even so we may discern of true
faith, from the faith of the world, for in extremity it is cordial, it will
comfort the heart.

The seventh sign whereby we may discern true faith from the faith of the
world is, The seventh trial of true Faith,
by the companions of faith, and holy train that does attend it: and they be
five. By five Companions.
First, Joy unspeakable and glorious, that God has given us faith whereby we
may be saved, The first Companion of true Faith.
and that he will respect us; never was any child so glad of his fathers
lands, and livings, and of that his father did bequeath him, as they are glad,
that God has bequeathed Christ, life and eternal happiness unto them: so we
see Paul, Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which has blessed us with all blessings in heavenly things. And 1
Peter 1. 3. Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance immortal,
undefiled. etc.

The 2. companion in the train of faith is, The second Companion of true Faith.
Holy admiration and admiring and wondering at the kindness and mercy of God,
that has refused others and chosen us, that he has made of us that were
slaves, servants; of servants, sons; of sons, heirs, and heirs with his
son Christ, Ioh. 14. As Judas says there, What is the cause that thou
show thy self to us, and not unto the world. Even so we may admire and
wonder at the kindness, and mercy of God, why he should show himself unto
us, and pass by others that be better than we.

The third companion in the train of faith is, The third Companion of true
Faith.
Exceeding love to God. Seeing he has done so much for us, we cannot do too
much for him, and therefore we must be ready to do his will in all things that
he commands.

The fourth companion in the train of faith is Forsaking of the world; and to
lay all down at the feet of Christ, The fourth Companion of true Faith.
and to be contented that he should dispose of our health, and of our goods,
and of our lives, and to say with David here am I, do as it pleases thee;
dispose of my health and of my goods, and of my life, I am contented with it.

The fifth companion in the train of faith is, A desire to have a more near
conjunction with Christ in heaven, The fifth Companton of true Faith.
whereby men are contented to leave all behind, and to go with him, and much
more will it be when we shall live with him, for ever and ever: and therefore
the Apostle desires to be with him, Phil. 3.
saying, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: but the faith of the
world has not such companions, and such a train to attend it. If a Lady comes
to a poor man's house, how shall we know whether she be there still, and see
her not? we may know it by her train, and those that attend her; although we
see her not, yet if we see her train, it is certain she is there still: and
even so a man may know whether there be faith in his heart or no, although he
cannot see it; if there be the companions and train of faith, then it is
certain that there is faith still. Therefore every man should try and examine
himself by these signs, whether he has true faith or no, that he may not
be deceived, for we all shall die at the time appointed, either sooner or
later, and if we have it not, we are like to perish for ever; for we must
stand before God, and the devil and our consciences will be ready to accuse
us for our sins, and then if we have not Faith to stand by us, and to pull
out a bag of the merits of Christ for us, a pardon sealed with his blood, we
shall surely be condemned at that day.

The uses are four, seeing true Faith is accompanied with such a train, Four
uses.
and with such companions.

First, to rejoice in God. Secondly, to admire at the mercy of God. Thirdly, to
love God. Fourthly, to forsake the world. Fifthly, to desire a more near
conjunction with God.

Now the Faith of the world has not this train nor abundance, and therefore
let us take heed that we be not deceived with a false Faith, instead of the
true Faith. If a man were to pass into another country, and he should put
his whole estate into a ship, even all that ever he has; if he should epsy
a leake in the ship, how afraid would he be to adventure his goods: this
were but to hazard goods; but if a man has a fault in his Faith, he does not
adventure his goods, and hazard them, but he does hazard his soul. And
therefore take heed thou be not deceived with a false Faith; a poor man may
dwell in his house all Summer, and may think he is as well as they that dwell
in a better house, but when Winter comes, and it raines into his house in
twenty places, so as he cannot be at rest in it, then he sees his error: so
a man thinks himself as well that has but a counterfeit, as he that has a
true Faith; all the summer time of his life, but when the winter, death, and
the judgment day comes, then he shall see his error: and therefore let us
labor that we may have true Faith whiles we live here, lest we be
condemned then.

Now the next thing we are to handle by order and Three degrees of Faith.
course is the degrees of Faith. There is not only one measure and degree, but
there be diverse degrees of it, the two Cherubines in the temple were all of
one size and measure, but there be diverse degrees thereof according to the
several growths of Faith: 1 2 3
now there are three degrees of it: first, Weak Faith. Secondly, strong Faith.
Thirdly, full assurance of Faith. So the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 2. 12. shows the three
degrees of it, according to the three ages of men, by babes, young men, and by
old men; by babes weak Faith, by young men strong Faith, by old men the full
assurance of Faith. Now weak Faith is accompanied with much wandering and
doubting, and yet there must be in it an apprehension of the promise made unto
us in Christ; but it is so accompanied with wandering and doubting, that
sometimes it cannot tell whether it do or no: even like the smoking flax
that lies smoking and paddering, that it cannot be discerned whether there
be any fire or no, but by the smoking: so there may be such weak
apprehension of the promises of God made unto us in Christ, that we can hardly
discern whether there be any Faith or no.

I, Object. Sol.
but there is weakness in all, even in the strongest.

I answer, there is great difference between a strong man weakened by
sickness, and the weakness of a child, so there is a great difference
between the Faith of a strong Christian weakened by sin, and the weakness
of Faith in a new beginner, First, weak Faith in judgment.
a child in religion: and of this weakness there be two reasons: first,
weakness of judgment: Secondly, weakness of apprehension. First, weakness
in judgment: so we see the disciples of Christ, how weak their judgment was
in regard of knowledge, that they did not believe one of the articles of Faith,
they did not believe the resurrection of the dead; the Evangelist Mark shows,
and so likewise in John 4. how weak the Faith of the Samaritane in regard of
her knowledge: and so of Rahab, her faith was weak in judgment, for she had
heard of the wonders that were done in Egypt, and had a desire to be joined to
the people of God; and this is the weak Faith that is here spoken of,
weakness of Faith in apprehension.
Romans 14. 10. The second is weakness in apprehension of the promises of God,
that it is not able to apply Christ unto it self, one would do it, but he
cannot, he believes there is a pardon for his sins, if he could apply
Christ, and yet he cannot do it: so we see John 20. what a long time it was
ere Thomas could apply Christ to him, and say, he was his Lord and his God: so
it is long ere a Christian can apply the promises of Christ unto himself. Now
this is weak Faith, and this weakness of Faith is in all believers, begins
in weakness, and therefore none ought to be discouraged, although they cannot
apply Christ to themselves, because weakness of Faith is in all; and if thou
be stronger in Faith than thy brother, do not exclude or discourage him, but
labor by all means to nourish, and to strengthen it: so the Apostle says,
him that is weak in the Faith, receive unto thee: and so likewise Zecharie 4.
10. For who has despised the day of small things? and therefore if it be but
the smallest and the least that may be, labor to nourish and increase it: the
reason is, because the least measure of true Faith is able to save us, for if a
man has but as much true Faith as a grain of mustard seed, it is able to
work wonders, to remove mountains, as we see, Luke 17. We see in experience,
that the hand of a little child is able to lay hold of a bag of gold, when
the father gives it, indeed the hand of a strong man is able to take it out of
the hand of the father, but yet the hand of a child can lay hold of it: Even so
weak Faith may lay hold of the promises of God, as well as strong faith,
although it does not so strongly apply Christ: as Number. 21 when the people were
bitten with the fiery serpents, there was a brazen serpent set upon a pole,
that so many as being bitten looked upon it, should be healed, which did not
only help the strongest, but the weakest sighted also, if they were able but to
cast up their eyes to it; and not only so, but those that lay on their sick
beds in the tents, if they were able but to espy him at a little chinke or
crevise, they were healed. So not only they that have the strongest Faith are
saved, but even those that have but a weak also, yea although they lie on
their deathbeds, yet if they can but epsy Christ by the eye of Faith at a
little chinke or crevise, they shall be saved. But how may we know weak
Faith, from no Faith? I answer, it may be known four ways:

First, Four trialls of weak from no Faith.
When it is attended with good desires. That a man has a desire to believe, to
repent, to do the will of God, but cannot, as David says, I desire to do thy
will, O God, although I cannot; so we see weak Faith is attended with good
desires, therefore where there be not these good desires, there is not weak
Faith, but no Faith. I, but are there not good desires in some that have not
true Faith? Quest. Sol.
I answer, Balaam he had good desires, he desired to die the death of the
righteous, so then there be desires in both, but the desires of weak Faith
have these three properties: first, they be earnest and servent: secondly,
constant and settled: thirdly, actual and lively. First, Three trialls of a
right desire.
they be earnest, they cannot be at rest, till they have the thing they
desire. Even as a child that is hungry, nothing will content him, 1
till he have meat, give him this and that thing, yet will he not be quiet
till he has food; so it is with a Christian, nothing will content him till
he has Christ, and the pardon of his sins, and assurance of his salvation,
he cannot be at rest.

The second property is, 2
That they be constant and settled desires. They give not over, till they have
the things they desire: many have desires but they be floating and unsettled;
they give over before they have the thing that they desire: where there are
such desires, there is not weak Faith, but no Faith.

The third property is, 3
That they be lively and actual; they be contented to take any pains and
labor, for to have the things that they desire. In the Proverbes it is said,
The sluggard he lusts, and yet he has not: what wants he? he has
desires, but he is loath to take any pains or labor, to come by that which he
desires, and therefore he goes without. But the desires of a Christian be
lively, will put them upon any pains and labor, they will not stick at any
thing so that they may have the things that they desire.

The second sign whereby we may know that we have weak Faith from no Faith
is, The second trial of weak Faith.
That it works according to the measure of weakness: as Matt. 8. when the
Disciples were in the ship, and in danger of drowning, they go to Christ, and
cry unto him, Help, Master we perish: Christ does not reprove them, because
they had no Faith, but because they had but little Faith, it was but weak, and
yet this weak Faith did work in them, and drove them to Christ to cry to him
for help; this was true Faith though weak: so if we cry to Christ in
extremity, and seek to him for help, there is true Faith, but when men seek
to witches, (as Saul did) and sorcerers for help, there is not weak Faith,
but no Faith.

The third thing whereby we may know weak Faith from no Faith is, The third
trial of weak Faith.
That it does desire to increase, and to get strength by the use of good
means. Even as a tree being set into the ground, it sends down its roots,
and spreads them this way and that way to get strength and nourishment unto it
self, that it may grow: so weak Faith, it does desire to increase by all good
means, by prayer, preaching, the use of the Sacraments, reading, and such like
things. So we see the Disciples came to Christ, and say, Lord, increase our
Faith. And the man in the Gospel, I believe, Lord help my unbeleefe: So we
see weak Faith, that desires to increase, and therefore if we do not desire
to increase our Faith, there is not weak Faith, but no Faith.

The fourth thing whereby we may know weak Faith from no Faith is, The fourth
trial of weak Faith.
That it is ready to lay hold upon every little help even as the vine is ready
to catch hold of every post, and every wall, and every stick, and sprig with
her, and winds about it, to rest upon it: even so true Faith lays hold on
every little help, and every little word: as John 2. It was but a little word,
and a sour word, that Christ spoke to Marie, Woman, my hour is not yet come;
and yet the Faith of Marie laid hold upon it, for she did believe that he had
his hour, for she says after to the the servants, whatsoever he bids you
do, that do ye. And so in Matthew. 15. It was but a word that Christ spoke to
the woman of Canaan, and a sour word it was too, It is not lawful to take the
childrens bread, and to give it unto dogs, and yet her Faith laid hold of it:
and therefore what shall we say of the Faith of the world? Do they profit by
the means God gives them? has not God sent his mercies and his judgments
amongst us? we have preaching and teaching, and yet we do not lay hold of
it, profit by it, be not brought to walk conscionablie before God: shall we
say, there is weak Faith in us? Nay there is no Faith, for weak Faith will
grow and increase, and lay hold upon every little means of help.

SERMON. III.
ROMANS 1. 17. For thereby is the righteousness of God revealed from Faith to
Faith.
AS it was in the Temple, so it is in Faith, in it there was certain steps and
stairs, whereby as men ascended higher and higher, the nearer they came to the
presence of God; so there be certain steps and stairs in Faith, that the
higher we mount therein, the nearer we come to Gods presence, and a view of
his love in Christ: even as a man ascending up some steep high hill. The first
step he sees somewhat, when he is higher he sees more, but when he is at the
top of the hill, then he sees the whole Country round about him, flatnesse,
length, breadth, Latitude both of Sea and Land. So when we have weak Faith,
we see somewhat, when strong Faith, we see more; but when we come to the full
assurance of Faith, to the top of the hill as it were, then we see the length
and breadth of Gods love in Christ.

Having spoken of weak Faith, and how it may be discerned, we are now come
in the next place to speak of strong Faith; which is another degree of Faith:
but first by your patience, I desire to show you some trialls and marks how a
man shall discover his weakness of Faith: for every man that would know this
weakness must do these two things; he must labor

1. To find it out. 2. To help it as soon as may be.
First, The first trial of weak Faith.
one shall find and know weakness of Faith in himself, when he doubts of
the favor of God, that he cannot rejoice, nor have his heart made glad with
it, and stands in doubt of his own salvation: this does show weakness of
Faith, as Peter, Mat. 14. 30. When he saw the wind arise, he was afraid of
drowning; which did show weakness of Faith in him: so James 1. 6. says he,
But let him ask in Faith, and waver not: so then if a man ask any thing at
Gods hand, and stands in doubt of it, here is weak Faith.

The second thing whereby we may know weak Faith in our selves is, The second
trial of it.
when we trust God for one thing, and not for another; when we trust God for
the saving of our souls, but not for the feeding and clothing of our bodies,
and of the saving of them. So Abraham he believed God in one thing and doubted
in another, he believed God for the saving of his soul, but doubted of a
child, as we see, Genesis 15. And Matthew. 8. the disciples were afraid that their
bodies should perish: and therefore when we trust God for one thing, and will
not for another: this does show weakness of Faith in us; or if we trust him
in one trouble, and when another is coming faint, this is weakness of Faith.

The third thing whereby we may know weakness of Faith in our selves is, The
third trial of it.
When we are comfortable to our selves in time of peace, but faint hearted in
the time of trouble: as it is, Proverbs 24. 10. If thou faint in the day of
adversity, thy strength is but small. If a man come to a tree and shake it with
his finger, this way and that way, it does show that the tree is not well
rooted: even so when the least trouble that comes, unjoynts, vexes, and shakes
us on every side: it shows that we are not well rooted and grounded in Faith.

The fourth thing whereby we may discern weakness of says in our selves is,
The fourth trial of it.
When we believe God can help us, but it must be by such and such means; So
Iarus believed Christ would help his daughter, but it must be by touching and
laying on his hands, as we see, Matthew. 5. this was weak faith to believe that
Christ can help, but it must be by such and such means. And so in John 6.
The disciples believed that Christ could feed five thousand, but they must have
two hundred penny worth of bread for to do it withal: So likewise, Moses
believed that God could give him water enough for the children of Israel, but
not out of a rock, but it must be out of the river, this then is weakness of
faith, to believe that God can help us, but it must be by such and such
means.

The fifth thing whereby we may know weakness of faith is, The fifth trial of
it.
By the effects of faith, when they be weak in us; as in the book of Judges
we see how Sampson did know he was grown weak, and that his strength was
departed from him, it was by the weakness of his actions, not being able to
resist the Philistimes as formerly; so may we know weakness of faith in our
selves, when we be weak in our actions, in our prayers, and in the
performance of other holy duties, therefore howsoever men talk of strong
faith, if they be weak in the performance of holy duties, and are not strong
to stand against the temptations of the devil and to resist them, it is but
weak faith.

The use of this is, Use 1.
that if we find weak faith in our selves, we must take account of it, labor
to be humbled for it, and to say with David Psalm. 6. I am weak, but Lord,
help my weakness: and as the man in the Gospel said, Lord I believe, but
help thou mine unbeleefe, Lord, I have weakness of faith, but Lord, help
this weakness of faith in me.

The second use is, Use 2.
that if we find weakness of faith in our selves, we should labor to
strengthen it by the use of good means, by prayer, reading, preaching, and by
such like means. We know if a poor man dwell in a rotten house, if the wind
arise, he will get props and shoares to underprop it, that so he may keep it
from falling: so seeing we dwell in rotten houses, if the winds of temptations
arise, we should labor to prop up our faith by the use of good means, by
preaching, prayer, the use of the Sacraments, and such like, that so we may
be able to stand in the time of temptation; for (as we have heard before)
faith is compared to a seed and not to a stone, because a seed will grow to be
a tree, but a stone grows not: and therefore if we use good means, and do not
grow by it, it is to be suspected, it is not weak, but no faith; for where
true faith is, although it be weak, yet it grows to be stronger by the use
of good means: strong faith never doubts of salvation, and the pardon of
sins; unless it be in the time of temptation, and does assure it self of
salvation, and of the pardon of sins by a sylogisticall reason, the ground
whereof is laid in the word of God, thus it may be framed, Argument.
God has said in his word, that whosoever repents and believes shall
undoubtedly be saved; this is the great ground and maxim whereon strong faith
does stay it self, which is built on the word of God: then the true believing
heart, says, Lord, but I upon the search of my conscience do find that I do
truly repent and believe; and then the conclusion arises, therefore I shall
undoubtedly and certainly be saved.

The papists say, that we cannot be assured of the padon of our sins and of
the salvation of our souls here in this life, but I would have them to answer
me these two reasons; the first is, That whatsoever God has spoken in his
word, 1
we are bound to believe it under the conduct and certainty of faith; but God
has said in his word, that whosoever repents and believes, is bound by the
certainty of his word, and of his faith to believe his salvation, and the
pardon of his sins.

The second is, That whatsoever we are bound to pray for, that we are bound to
believe, 2
but we are bound to pray for the pardon of our sins, and for our salvation,
as we may see in the fifth petition of the Lords Prayer, therefore we are
bound to believe it. Now strong faith is not so strong, but that it may be
shrewdly shaken in the time of temptation, as David's faith was, he says, I am
cast out of thy presence; and so Peter was shaken for the time, and yet Christ
had prayed that his faith might not fail him; therefore we see that strong
faith may be shaken, and weakened, of which there be these occasions or
reasons.

First, Four Reasons why our Faith is shaken.
Because we have given way to some sin, and have not been watchful to keep
the doors of our hearts shut against it but given way unto it; this will
weaken strong faith: a man that is strong may catch a cold or a surfeit, 1
and be made so weak, that he cannot be able to go with a staff; so a man
may catch a cold, that is, he may commit some sin, that he may make his
faith so weak, that he shall not be able to stir or feel any comfort, in
respect of his offense that he has done.

Secondly, By the neglecting of the use of good means, as preaching, prayer,
reading, 2
and such like, so it may become weak, Mark. 3. we read, there was a man that
had a withered hand, the reason whereof was, because there were obstructions in
the veins, that it could not carry down nourishment to that hand which
withered; so when there be obstructions that do hinder us, that we cannot draw
down nourishment to our hearts by the use of good means, our faith will be
weakened, our assurance withered and dry.

Thirdly, 3
The malice of the devil, for he will do as the Philistimes did with
Sampson, knowing his strength lay in his hair, they cut it off, and he became
weak; so the devil does, knowing that all the strength of a Christian lies
in his faith, therefore he labors to weaken it, as much as may be.

Fourthly, 4
The wise providence of God to humble us, to make us take the faster hold; for
all that the Lord does is but to settle us, that we should be the deeper
rooted. As a man when he goes to plant a tree, when he has set into the
ground, and put earth about it, he does shake the tree this way and that way,
as if he would overthrow and pull it up, yet all is but to settle it that it
may stand the faster: so the Lord does when he has planted a man, he does as
it were pull at him, and shake him, as if he would pull him up, and yet the
Lord does it but to settle, and ground him, that he should stand the faster,
and to make him the more constant, and therefore the people of God have no
cause to be discouraged with the dealing of God.

Now come we to speak of strong faith which does ordinarily assure a man of
salvation, and of the pardon of sins, unless it be in the time of
temptation: if therefore any man would know how he comes to this assurance, and
what the ground is, that strong faith gathers this assurance upon: Quest.
I answer, that it gathers it from the merits and dignity of the death of
Christ, Sol.
for Christ and the Cross were our pledge and pawn; look what we should
have suffered, that Christ has suffered for us in our place, and in our room,
when all our sins were imputed to him; therefore Christ's sufferings were as
much in acceptance with God, as if we should have suffered our selves, so
that we are thereby discharged and acquitted. Now from this ground strong
faith does draw assurance of Salvation, and of the pardon of sins by looking
back into the merits of Christ's death: Indeed, if we look into our selves,
and our sins; we can assure our selves of nothing but death, hell, and
damnation, but if we look into the merit and dignity of the death of Christ,
then faith assures us of Salvation and pardon of sins.

The Papists say, Object.
that a man cannot have assurance of the pardon of sins, and assurance of
Salvation here in this life, for this opens a window (say they) to all
disorder and looseness of living.

But I answer, that there be two kinds of assurance; the first absolute, the
second conditional: Sol. Two sorts of assurance of Salvation.
first, absolute assurance, That whatsoever a man does, or howsoever a man
lives, yet he shall be saved; faith does not assure a man of Salvation, if he
live in his sins, and do what he list or think good, nay, he is like to
perish if he do so, and he seals up his damnation; and therefore it is not
absolute assurance that we have by faith. Conditional assurance is that which
the Gospel teaches, that if we repent for our sins, lay hold on Christ by
faith, if we believe, then we may assure our selves that we shall be saved; but
if we have no care to repent, to believe, nor to walk with God in newness of
life, then we cannot be saved. Therefore if men say they are sure of
Salvation, they must look that they have a right ground: If a man should
demand of some to know how they should be saved; and they answer, because we
have not committed many sins; others, because we have done no harm to any
body, or because we hear the word of God: All this were nothing, till one can
ground himself on these two conditions, to repent and believe; and so to make
a logical discourse of Assurance to himself from this ground that God has
said in his word, that whosoever repents and believes shall be saved; but I
upon the search of my Conscience do find that I have repented and do
believe, therefore I shall be saved: until a man (I say) can make this
discourse, he cannot be assured of his Salvation, but when men have the
assurance of Salvation from this ground, and can make such a discourse unto
themselves, it is not all the devils in hell that can pluck away this
assurance from them. This is a goodly comfort, that a man can assure himself
that he shall be saved, and that he is beloved of God, howsoever he be poor,
ficke, afflicted and troubled here in this life, yet he can be persuaded that
one day he shall fit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of
heaven, and death must be the gate to let us in.

If a man should go a long and tedious journey, and in the way should meet
with many inconveniences, yet if he knew he should be kindly entertained at
his journies end, this would comfort him; so we all are walking as it were a
long journey here in the wilderness of this world, where although we meet with
many discomforts, and troubles, yet let us comfort our selves with this, that
one day it will be blessed and happy with us, when we come at home, at our
journies end, then Christ will gird himself and serve us, and all the holy
Patriarchs and Prophets will be ready to entertain us. This is it that may
comfort us; so Job was comforted in the time of his trouble, Job 19. 23. I
know, says he, that my Redeemer lives; and howsoever I have trouble here, yet
one day I shall see God: so David, Psalm. 27. 13. I should have fainted, but
that I believed to see the goodness of God in the land of the living. I should
have fainted, but that for the hope of heaven, and of glory which upheld me: so
Romans 8. 36. where the Apostle says, that the people of God were killed, and as
sheep appointed to the slaughter, says he, yet in all these things, we are
more than Conquerors; for all these troubles they rejoiced and hoped in God
exceedingly: So he burst out into this speech in a holy triumph, and says
there, I am persuaded that neither death, nor life; nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, can separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Now strong faith you see is not so
strong, but that in time of temptation it may be shrewdly shaken; for as a
strong man may catch a cold, and by dis-dieting make himself that he cannot be
able to walk with a staff: so a man may, as it were, catch a cold, and
dis-diet himself by his sins, make himself weak. So David was confident in
one part, Psalm. 31. 14. But I trusted in the Lord; I said, thou art my God; and
in another place of the same Psalm, he says, I am cast out of thy sight: so
Job in one place was confident in peace, and rejoicing in God, yet Chapter 17.
he cries out, Where is my hope? for though I hope, yet the grave shall be my
house, and I will make my bed in the dark: I shall say unto Corruption, thou
art my father, and to the worm, thou art my mother and my sister: where is now
my hope? So we see strong faith is not so strong but that it may be shrewdly
shaken, as ye have heard.

Now some man may say, Object.
If a man may lose the feeling and comfort of his assurance of Salvation, in
the time of temptation, what Comfort in this case can he have?

I answer, Answ. Four co^sorts in want of feeling assurance of salvation. The
first.
a man may have comfort, considering these four things: First, That there is
always a seed and a root of faith left: though he may feel the loss of
the comfortable assurance, yet there is the Sanctity, and effects of faith
still, there is an hatred of sin, a love of goodness, a desire of the
presence of God, and of his love and favor, which may be his comfort. We read
Acts 20. 10. that Eutichus fell out of a window, and was taken up dead, but
Paul went down, and fell upon him, and embracing him, said, Trouble not your
selves, for his life is in him: so we may say of all the falls of Gods people,
There is life in them; This may be their comfort, that in all their falls,
there is a seed of faith, there is the sanctity of faith still remaining in
them, this must be their stay and comfort in all their spiritual afflictions,
and desertions whatsoever.

The second is, The second comfort.
that although they lose the feeling of Gods favor, yet it is not perpetual,
but for a short time: So it is said, Psalm. 55. He will not suffer the
righteous to fall for ever, and Psalm. 94. 18. When I said, my foot slippeth,
thy mercy, O Lord, held and stayed me up: Trees in a great wind are shaken,
and beat this way and that way, as if they would break, but if the winds go
down and there be a calm, they come to their former estate again; so it is
in faith, in the time, of temptation we may be shaken, and carried this way and
that way, but when the temptation is at an end, we come unto our former estate
again, and to as comfortable apprehension of the Love of God, and of his favor
as before. so Zech. 10. 6. the Lord promised the same powerful grace to his
people, after their falls as before, for says he, And I will strengthen the
house of Judah, and I will preserve the house of Joseph, and I will bring them
again; for I pity them, and they shall be as though I had not cast them off,
for I am the Lord their God, and will hear them. And therefore seeing it is
not perpetual, but for a little time this may comfort them, and glad their
hearts.

The third is, The third comfort.
The wise providence of God, who disposes all things to the good of his
servants. A man ye know when he plants a tree, he casts moulds about it, pulls
and shakes it this way and that way, and yet it is but to settle the tree; so
the Lord does when he plants a man, he pulls him this way and that way, and all
is but to settle him, that he may be the better rooted and grounded; as it is
Romans 8. 28. All things work together for the good of those that love God:
Therefore let a man love God, and then all things shall work together for his
good. There be strange works of God, and some that seem to be against men,
and yet by a secret hand of God, they are all carried and work together for
the good of them that love him: As ye see in a Clock, there be some wheels
turn one way, and some another way, and yet all tend to one end to make the
Clock go well; so sometimes God sends a man adversity, and sometimes
prosperity, sometimes he deals one way with us, sometimes another, and yet all
is but to draw us nearer unto him in holiness and obedience.

The fourth thing that may comfort them is, The fourth Comfort.
that they cannot be at quiet or at rest till they have returned to the Lord
again; still there is a thirsting of the heart after God, and they cannot be
at rest till they be returned again: so we see David, Psalm. 119. ver. ult.
says, I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost, oh seek me; for I have
not forgotten thy Commandments; as a lost sheep cannot be at rest, but he
runs here and there, he cries to the shepherd, and is not at rest and
quiet till he be returned home unto the sheepfold; so the people of God, when
they have gone astray, cannot be at rest till they have run here and there,
and cried to the sheepherd, they can never be at quiet till they be returned
home unto God; therefore so long as a man cannot be at quiet in his false and
sins, but that there is a thirsting of the heart after God, and he takes no
rest till he be returned, Note.
this may give him comfort: We see in nature, that if the shipmans needle be
touched with the Loadstone, it cannot be at rest, nor at quiet till it look
upon the North Pole, if it be hindered with any little thing, it stands
trembling and shaking, as if it were discontented; so if a man's heart be
touched and set a fire with faith in Christ, it does always gather to Christ,
and if it be hindered by any means, it is not at rest, but it is discontented,
until it come home to him: When a man is in danger of drowning he will fling
out his arms, and catch hold of every straw to save himself; so we should
do, when we perceive our selves to be in danger of hell, we should fling out
our arms abroad, and catch hold of Christ, and so save our selves.

Now if any man should ask how he should recover again, Quest.
when he is in this estate: Sol.
I answer, first, he must repent him of his sins, and turn to God. 1
Secondly, he must cry to God for his former falling; so we see David did, 2
Psalm. 51. says he, Restore me to the joy of thy Salvation, and Psalm. 4. Lord
lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. 3
Thirdly, strive against the infidelity of thy own heart, as David did, Psalm.
42. says he, Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou thus
disquieted within me? wait still on God. 4
Fourthly, to strengthen our faith from the former mercies and kindness of
God, as Romans 11. 29. The graces and gifts of God are without Repentance: And in
another place, Those whom the Lord loves, he loves unto the end; and
therefore if ever thou can approve to thine own heart, that God has loved
thee, he will love thee still unto the end.

The third step and degree of faith is, 3
The full assurance of faith; when a man is at this top and degree, Full
assurance of Faith.
he is as it were at the top of the hill, for as you know that a man being at
the top of an hill he may see the whole country round about him, the latitude
and length of it, both by sea and land; even so when a man comes at this step
and degree of faith, he shall see the latitude and length of Gods love in
Christ, heaven open, and Christ ready to receive him, the holy Apostles ready
to carry his soul into heaven, as Lazarus was, and all the Saints and Martyrs
ready to entertain him. Now this Metaphor is taken from a ship at sea, that
has sea room enough, being past rocks and sands, and so out of danger
saileth safely unto his appointed place: even so when a man is come to the full
assurance of faith, he is past all danger, he saileth safely toward God, and
joyfully even until he come to heaven. This is the most joyful and blessed
estate that any man can have, or be in here in this life; but this is not the
case of many, for a man comes to this by degrees, and it is a long while ere he
can attain unto it, and many do not feel it until the time of their death.

Now having spoken of the degrees of faith, we will in the next place speak of
the Effects and Fruits of faith; Gal. 5. 6.
for as the Apostle says, Faith works by love; it is not idle in a man nor
lies still, but shows it self by good effects, and fruits, for there is
nothing in the world can save a man, no outward thing, neither circumcision,
nor uncircumcision, but only faith, which works by love: In a Clock when the
great wheel stirs, all the little ones will stir, because they do depend
upon it; so faith is the great wheel in the life of a Christian, that if it be
stirred, it will move all the rest of the wheels, all the rest of our graces.
It is said James 2. Show me thy faith: For many will talk and say they have
faith, but if you have faith, Oh thou man or woman, show me thy faith, make
declaration of it, for if thou can not show me thy faith by good effects and
fruits, it is to be suspected, that it is not true faith: If one lay a little
straw on the ashes, if there be any live-coles, they will catch hold on the
straw; so if there be faith in us, it will show it self by the fruits and
effects: Mat. 9. 2. it is said, that Christ saw the faith of the sick man, and
of those that brought him; why, could Christ see their faith? could he see into
their hearts? Yes: but he saw also their faith, because it did show it self
by the effects and fruits; wherefore if you have not a faith attended with good
fruits and good effects, it is not true faith. It is a good observation of a
learned man, says he, A man that goes upon a ladder to serve a Mason, he must
have two hands, one to hold by, and another to give up Mortar, and Brick, and
such like; so, says he, a Christian must have two hands, he must have the
hand of faith to lay hold on Christ, to save himself, and he must have the
hand of charity to give out things to his brethren: So we see the faith of a
Christian must be attended with good effects and fruits, as ye have heard.

Now the fruits and effects of faith are many, but I cannot stand to show you
them all; and therefore I will only point at the chief, which the Apostle
Paul does aim at, Hebrews 11.

First, Effects of true. Faith.
that faith makes a man offer a better sacrifice to God than others; this is
showed by the example of Abel and Caine; the Apostle tells us that his was
greater than Caines: 1
Genesis 4. 1. it is said, that Abel did offer of the first fruits of his sheep,
and of the fat of them, and Caine of the worst; they did both offer sacrifice,
what was that then that made the difference? the Apostle tells us that faith
made the difference, for Abel believed that God had pardoned his sins, that
God would save him and bless him, and bestow upon him all things needful in
this life, and heaven and happiness in the life to come, and therefore he
thought nothing too good to offer unto God; but Caine he had not faith, he did
not believe that God would save him and bless him, he had no hope of heaven,
nor no hope of the pardon of his sins, he did not believe that God did love
him, and therefore he thought any thing good enough for God. So it is still,
faith does make a man offer a better sacrifice, and a greater than others; for
when men believe that God has pardoned their sins, that they shall be saved,
enjoy heaven and happiness, be blessed in this life, and in the life to come,
then they think all the service that they do is too little to such a God that
has loved and bestowed such blessings upon them, they satisfy others, yet
they cannot satisfy themselves, because God will infinitely acquit them; if
they had a thousand bodies and souls, all were too little to do service unto
him. David says in the 1 Chro^. 22. 14. Now behold, according to my poverty
have I prepared for the house of the Lord, an hundred thousand talents of gold,
and a thousand thousand talents of silver, and of brass, and iron passing
weight, for it is in abundance; I have also prepared timber and stones: here we
see that David did account all this as nothing in regard of God. So Matthew. 26.
Mary Magdalen brought a costly box of ointment, she broke her box, and powered
forth her ointment on Christ, she thought nothing too good or too dear for
him: thus much Christ instructs us in the Gospel, that when we have done all
we can, yet we are unprofitable servants.

It is a good saying of S. Bernard; says he, it is an infinite debt that we
owe unto God for our redemption; if all the lives of the sons of Adam were in
one man, and all the virtues and good things that were in all the Patriarchs
and Prophets, and all the holy men, yet all were nothing to do service unto
him; yea says he, for mine own part, I have but two farthings to pay the
Lord withal, Bernards two farthings.
and they be farthings of the least size and measure, my body and my soul;
nay indeed, says he, I have but one farthing, and that is, my good heart, and
my good will: thus faith makes a man offer a better sacrifice than others,
because the men of this world do not believe that their sins be pardoned,
and have not hope of heaven, they think a little will serve to please God, a
little prayer, repentance, and a little care; this does show that it is not
true faith, for if a man have true faith, he cannot pray enough, be careful
enough, take too much pains, all will be too little that he does in the
service of God.

The second effect of faith is, The second effect of true Faith.
that it makes a man exceeding careful to please God, and to walk with him:
as is showed in the example of Henoch, of whom it is reported, Genesis 5. 24. that
he pleased God in his courses, for he believed that he should lose nothing,
but be well rewarded for it, it was not in vain to walk with God, to please
him, and praise him: so it is still, if a man believe that God is a rewarder of
all them that seek unto him, they will let all go, and desire to please God
in their courses; this was that made David say, Psalm. 119. Teach me thy way,
and I shall walk in it: and Psalm. 56. 13. For thou have delivered my soul
from death, and ^lso my feet from falling, that I may walk before God in the
light of the living: Micha 4. 5. For all people will walk every one in the
name of his God, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever
and ever: therefore if men be not careful to walk with God, to leave their
corrupt courses, they have no faith. And because every man will be ready to
catch hold on this, and to say they walk with God: (then I answer) If thou
walk with God, thou must leave some marks and prints behind; so if we
walk with God, we must leave behind us marks and prints: we read 2 King. 7.
15. That when the Israelites went after the Syrians unto Jordan, lo all the
way was full of clothes and vessels, which the Syrians had cast behind them:
so if we walk with God, all the way that we go, shall leave marks behind us
of patience, of faith, of holiness of life, till we come at Jordan, viz. till
we come to die; where men have not walked with God, there is not any prints or
marks left behind them.

The third effect and fruit of faith is, The third effect of true Faith.
That it will let all go in the matters of this life, and provide for saving
of thy soul: this is set forth unto us, by the example of Noah, Genesis 6. that
builded an Arc for the saving of himself, and his household, when others were
busy about their pleasures, sports, and following their worldly profits, he
applied himself to make an Arc; what was the reason of it? because he had the
faith of these two things:

1 That God would bring a flood. 2 That he would save him by this means, by
the Arc.
First, 1
he did believe that God would send a flood for the drowning of the world; for
as there was a time of mercy, a time that God did patiently forbear them; so
he did believe that there would be a time of judgment when the Lord would
punish the wicked and the ungodly.

Secondly, 2
he was persuaded that when others did perish, he should be saved, nor by
carrying him above the clouds, nor by enclosing him in the waters, or to make
him walk in the dry land, as the children of Israel did; but he did believe
that God would save him in the Arc, so a Christian must be persuaded and
settled in the assurance of these two things: first, that God will send a flood
of destruction, a flood of fire upon the world, and that as there is a time of
mercy, so also there will be a time, and a day of judgment, a time to call
them to an account for all their sins. Secondly, we must be persuaded, that
there is no other means to be saved but only by Jesus Christ; and when a man
is settled in the faith of this, it will make him let go all, and lay hold on
Christ, that he may be saved in the day of judgment. The Apostle says, Phil.
3 8. He accounts all things but to be dung and dross, that he may be found
in Christ; as if he should say, Let the world go, take it with all the
pleasures and profits, I account it but dung and dross that I may win
Christ, and be found in him. So Acts 26. 7. he says, Whereunto our twelve
tribes, instantly serving God day and night, hope to come to the resurrection,
and so stand with joy and comfort before God. So if once this be settled in our
hearts, that there is no other means to be saved, but only by Christ, then a
man will be contented to let all go, and lay hold on Him, that so he may be
saved and stand with joy and comfort before God: Genesis 19.
we see in Genesis, that when Lot went out of Sodom, the Angels did haste him,
that he might not look back again to his pleasures, and profits, and goods,
that he had left behind him; what was the reason of it? that seeing God had
given him the means of saving of himself, he would apply himself to it;
where there is not this affection, it comes not into ones heart nor his
thoughts all his life long, to consider how he shall be saved, and be contented
to let all go, and apply himself to the means.

The fourth effect is, 4
to obey the calling of God whatsoever it cost: this is showed unto us in
Abraham's example, Effect of true Faith.
when the Lord called him out of his country, and from his kindred, he did not
hang upon them, but he lost all, and obeyed Gods Commandment: so if a man has
faith in God, call him to any service or duty, call him out of his sins, or
call him out of the world, he will be contented to let all go, and obey God,
whatsoever it cost him, and what troubles soever he endures. So we see
Matthew, when Christ called him, left all his profits, and followed him; and so
in Matthew 4. when Christ called his other disciples, they left their fishes,
nets, and followed him: so if there be faith in us, we will obey God whatsoever
it cost us; therefore when men will not come out of their sins, but stick in
them still, there is not this effect of true faith in them, howsoever the
devil may persuade them to have it.

The fifth effect of true faith is, 5
That it will make us live like Pilgrims herein this world: Effect of true
Faith.
to dwell in our houses like strangers ready to depart, and leave all, as the
Patriarchs did, who accounted themselves as Pilgrims, and strangers here, and
heaven to be their home, this is a great work of faith. Now in four respects
we must live like strangers, and Pilgrims here in this world.

First, In four respects we are Pilgrims here.
a Pilgrim has not his heart (as you know) settled upon the kingdoms and
countries that he passes through, but his mind is set at home; and if he
comes where men be dancing, 1
and taking their pleasure, he does not attend it, his mind is of his
journey; if he come where men be at play, either in fencing or any other
sporting, he does not mind it, but his desire is bent only on his journey: so
we should be like Pilgrims and strangers, in this respect, our hearts should
not be set on the kingdoms and countries we pass through, they must not be
set on this world: If a man come where pleasures be, he must not have his
heart entangled with them, or attend on them, he must not mind them, but his
bent must be set on his journey, and his home. I have showed you heretofore a
pretty story of a man traveling to Jerusalem the holy city, who as he
traveled, came to a city where he saw mustering of men, trayning of
soldiers, and running of horses, and he being delighted therewith, thought to
have tarried there, but this came into his mind, this is not the holy land,
nor the holy city; so away he went: Then he came to another city, and there he
law dancing, and sporting, and many delights, and he had thought to have
tarried there, till this came into his thought, this is not the holy land, nor
the holy city, and so he departed thence; then he came to another city, where
he saw goodly houses, fine women, good cheer, where he thought to have
tarried, but he remembered this was not the holy land, nor holy city: so a
Christian must do, when he comes at the pleasures and profits of this life,
his heart must not be entangled with them, but this must come into his mind,
that this is not the holy land, nor the holy city that we look for.

The second respect is, to please the Lord of the country especially, and the
Lord of the soil, 2
that he is to pass through, that so he may be at peace: so it must be our
care to please the Lord of the soil and country, that we pass through; and
seeing God is the Lord of the Earth, it must be our care to please him, that
so we may with peace pass through this earth to heaven, lest we be arrested
and stayed in our journey.

The third respect is, that a Pilgrim is ever hasting, what company soever he
comes in, 3
he is still gathering home, whatsoever he does, his mind is of home: so we
should be like Pilgrims in this respect, that what company soever we come
into, or whatsoever we do, our mind should still be gathering home; as in the
Philip. 1. 23. the Apostle Paul desires to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ: Job 14. 14. says, All the days of my appointed time, I will wait
till my change shall be.

The fourth respect is, that a Pilgrim has no care but this one, to have so
much food, 4
as may serve him in his journey, till he come at home, that so he do not
starve: so seeing we are strangers and Pilgrims here in this world, this must
teach us to be careful to get so much food, knowledge, faith, as may serve us
till we come at home, be brought to heaven and happiness; there is much talk
of faith, and many think that they have it, but when God shall bring us down
to the waters, as Gideon did his men, we shall find but a few to have true
faith, if we try our selves by these effects.

SERMON. IIII.
IOH. 14. 1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me.
WE see in nature, that rivers run, till at length they run into the Sea:
Even so we have run upon many points of Faith, till now we are come into an
Ocean Sea of Faith: The great Object thereof God in Trinity of Persons
considered. We have spoken

of the of Faith.
1. Utility 2. Kinds 3. Nature 4. Degrees 5. Effects
And now lastly we come to the 6. Extention and Object of it.

The Object of Faith in the largest measure, is to believe the whole Word of
God, and not to deny any point of it; But the Object of saving faith, and of
our holy Religion is comprised in the Articles of our Creed: The sum whereof
is first to believe in God, distinguished into three Persons; Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost; and that this God has gathered a Church, or a Company of
people out of this world, on whom he will bestow his graces here in this world,
and glory in the life to come: this is the sum of the faith, that we are
justified and saved by. And if any deny, but one Article of this faith, he
does, as it were, raze the foundation, deny the Faith, and destroy it: in a
house, a man may pluck down a sparre, or pluck a lath off, and the house may
stand, but if they take away a maine pillar, or raze down the foundation, the
house will fall: so it is in faith, a man may deny some points of Faith, which
be not the foundations of Religion, but if he do deny any of these articles
that are comprised in the Creed, any that are the grounds, he denies all; as it
is said of some that they destroyed and denied the faith, when indeed they
denied but one point of it.

The first point is, To believe in God. Now God is to be considered two ways:

1. Absolute in himself. 2. By Relation to us.
Five things we are to believe concerning God, as he is absolute in himself.

1. That there is a God. 2. That there is but one God. 3. The true God. 4. Our
God. 5. That we shall be the better for him.
And therefore we put (our selves, our souls and bodies, and them that
appertain unto us) our trust and confidence in him. 1
First, That there is a God.
we believe that there is a God, for although we do not see him, or feel
him, yet we believe it through the light of nature, and the light of the
spirit: This is the foundation of all Religion, which foundation if it be once
laid, that there is a God, then the heart of man will be ready to begin and
to look after Relgion, and I do not doubt, but that if a man come once to
this, to believe there is God, then it is an easy matter to bring him to this,
that this God must be served, feared, and honored: Note.
I do not insist in this, because I doubt or think that any doubt of this,
whether there be any God or no, but because there be some remains and
remnants of blindness and ignorance in us, the devil also having his
temptations; but I do in this, as men that have planted young trees, they
shake the trees, and tread the moulds down to settle the tree: so I do as it
were tread down the moulds and settle the tree, even you the more in this
point that there is a God. Which we may prove by these five things:

1. By the works of God. 2. By the place where he is. 3. By the nature of the
Creatures. 4. By our conscience. 5. By our experience.
First, 1
by the works of God, Romans 1. For the invisible things of him; his eternal
power and Godhead, The works of God prove a Deity.
are seen by the creation of the world; so the works of God declare there is
a God. Now the works of God are of two sorts: 1. The works of Creation. 2.
The works of Government.

First, 1
the works of Creation show there is a God; the Creatures could not make it,
The works of Creation.
the birds and beasts could not, nor man could not, for, then the part should
make the whole; nor it made not it self, but it was God that made it. If a man
should come into a strange Country, and see a number of goodly houses, and yet
see no man there, he would not say that the birds and beasts built them, but he
would think that it was some greater power (that of men) that built it: so
when we see this goodly frame of heaven and earth, shall we say that the birds
and beasts did make it, or man? Nay, it was some greater power, even that of
God. Origin says, that if we should ask the Creatures who made them, they, if
they could speak, would tell us, that God made them, and framed them: If
(says he) we should ask the heavens, who made them, they would say God; If
the earth, who made it, it would say, God made me, and framed me; and so all
the Creatures in the world, if they could speak, would tell us that God made
them.

Now as the works of the Creatures show that there is a God, 2
so does the works of government show it in the excellent wisdom appearing
to carry all things in their natures, and operations, to their ends: The works
of Government.
For if God should not uphold them, they would run to Confusion; therefore
that every Creature continues in his nature, operation, and is carried to his
end, this does show there is a God. If a man should look on a Clock, and see
the turning of the wheels, the striking of the hammer, the hanging of the
plummets, he would say there were some Clockemaker, that did make, order and
govern it: so when we look on the Creatures, and see every thing in his
nature, and in his course, we must say that there is some Divine power that
does it; which is God: If one should be one the top of an hill, and from thence
see an army of men in companies, bands, ranckes, and squadrons, with their
faces bent one way, turning and marching forward, he would think there were
some great captain there, that did order and govern them; so when we look
upon the Army of the Creatures, and see them in their ranckes, armies and
orders, we must say there is some divine power that orders all, which is God.

Secondly, 2
the place of God does show there is a God: every place is in regard of
something contained in the place, The place of God.
and there is no place but it is replenished, and there is nothing but has
respect to something contained in the place; as a Chair being set in some
room it is for some to sit in, so no place is void; If we look into the sea,
that is filled and replenished with fishes, the fields with beasts, the air
with birds, hell with devils, then heaven cannot be void; for if all places be
made in respect of something, and be replenished, then it is impossible heaven
should be void. If a man should come into a strange country, and see a number
of goodly houses, and one should exceed all the rest, for fine building, being
greater and beautifuller than all the other, he would say, sure the Lord of the
Country dwells in that house: so when we shall look on the houses of all
the Creatures, and see one house exceed all the rest in beauty and splendor,
who would not say surely this is Gods house; the Lords house of the country?
If one should bring out an Atheist, and ask him whose house is this, and show
him the Sea, he would say it were the fishes; and if one should show him the
earth, and ask him whose house that were, he would say the worms; if one show
him the fields, and ask him whose house that were, he would say the beasts; If
one should show him the sky, and ask him whose house that were above the
Sun, the Moon, and the Stars (the heavens) he must needs be convinced that
it were Gods, so then the very place where God is may show us there is a God.

Thirdly, 3
we may prove there is God; by the nature of the Creatures, and that two
ways: By the Nature of the Creatures.


1 By their Motion. 2 By their Multitude.
First, 1
by their Motion, for there is nothing moved, but it must be moved by
something; Motion.
for as the Philosophers say, There is nothing moved, but it is by some
unmovable thing: As for example these inferior bodies upon the earth are
altered and moved by the air and other elements, and the elements by the
influence and motion of the Sun, Moon, and other heavenly bodies, and these
Planets are moved by the highest Orb, or Sphere of al, called Primum mobile,
the first moover: now if one should ask, who mooveth that? an Atheist must
needs confess that it is God; so then the very mooving of things does show
there is a God.

Secondly, 2
Multitudes come from unites: as many rivers come from one sea, Multitudes.
leaves from one stalk, veins in the body from one liver, arteries from one
heart, many sinews from one brain, and innumerable beams from one Sun; so
all multitude of things and creatures come from one unity, which is God;
therefore the multitude of creatures does show there is God.

Fourthly, 4
we may prove there is a God by our own conscience; for conscience carries
its eyes directly unto God, By Conscience.
it regards not man, nor looks to his law, but directly looks to God, so
that conscience is, a mere respect unto God; which although it may be
corrupted, yet it cannot be extinguished, for every man has a witness in his
own bosom, that there is a God. Hence we gather, no man can be an absolute
Atheist in regard of judgment; indeed in regard of affection he may be for a
little season, yet he cannot be quite ignorant that there is a God, as long as
there is conscience in him: this is a great matter that God has given us
conscience so that we cannot lose him, he has set it up as a light to direct
us to him, and to show that there is a God.

The fifth thing whereby we may prove there is a God, 5
is, By our own experience: By our own Experience.
for the more we have served God and obeyed him, the more we have found his
blessing to be upon us; and the more we have sinned against God, and
disobeyed his word, the more we have found the hand of God against us, to
punish and afflict us; therefore although we had not a Bible to tell us there
were a God, yet our own experience does say that there is a God, finding his
hand against us, when we sin against him; and his blessings upon us, when we
serve and obey him. So Esai. 43. 12. it is said, I have declared, and I have
saved, and I have showed when there was no strange God among you, and therefore
you are my witnesses, says the Lord, that I am God. Thus our own experience
may tell us that there is a God.

The use of this is, Use 1.
first, that seeing there is a God, then fie upon the Atheists that say there
is no God: he that says there is no God, that man is the wickedest sinner in
the world, for a thief takes away but our goods, a perjured person our lands,
a murderer our lives, but an Atheist takes away God from us: Ioh. 20. when
Mary came to the sepulcher, and found not Christ there, she wept, and said,
They have taken away my Lord, and I cannot tell where they have laid him; as if
she should have said, they have taken away my Lord, in whom all my comfort and
all my hope was laid up: so we may say of the Atheists, they have taken away
God from us, in whom all our comfort and hope is laid up; therefore an Atheist
is the most wicked creature that is, because he takes away God from us. By the
law of the land, if a man be condemned by twelve men, he must die the death,
but worthily may he die, that is not only condemned of twelve men, but of
twelve thousand creatures. If a man doubt there is a God, let him step but one
step out of this life, and he shall feel there is a God; Chrysostom says,
if thou do not believe there is a God, what do thou O man in the house of
God? (says he) pay thine hire, and get thee out of his house, tread not on
his ground, feed not of his creatures, but get thee another place.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing there is a God, why do a number of men live as if there were no God at
all? men cry out of the Atheists that say there is no God, and thou say there
is a God, and yet do not serve and obey him: here is the difference betwixt
thee and him; thou art an Atheist in practice, and he is an Atheist in
judgment, so although thou do acknowledge in judgment there is a God; yet
in thy practice thou do deny him. The Apostle Paul says, Tit. 1. 16. They
profess that they know God, but by their works they deny him, being
abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing their is a God, it is a sure thing that every man should look after
God, and labor to serve and worship him, to give him that glory which is due,
for he is the fountain of all our comfort. It was the condemnation of the
world, Romans 1. when men knew there was a God, yet did not worship and give him
that glory which was due unto him: so this is the condemnation of the world
still, that when men know there is a God, they do not worship him, and give
him that glory which is due. If a man dwell in the Kings house, and yet will
not come at the kings Leetes to do him service, he shall be turned out of
the kings house and service* so if we dwell here as in Gods house, he being
our Landlord, if we do not perform our service and duty to him, giving him
his due, it were just with God to turn us out of his house and home. We see
the creatures obey God, and do that they were made for, even those that have
not that sense, reason, or knowledge that we have, being guided by the
instinct of nature only, whereas we, having knowledge, sense, and faith, do
not obey God, and give him that honor that is his due, but neglect and despise
him from day to day. It is a laudable custom among us, that before we begin
the harvest, we begin in the Temple, and that for two causes:

1. To acknowledge the Sovereignty of God. 2. That we may show we desire to
enjoy these blessings, but with his love and leave.
Esai. 38. 12. The life of man is compared to a Weavers Warpe, which the beam
winds up, and so is filled, which if they do not fill, it is found full of
flawes, bancks, bracks and gauls, when it is cut off: so our life is the
warpe, and every day is as the beam to wind up somewhat of the life we live.
Wherefore every day we must be doing somewhat to fill our warpe, lest when
we be cut off, we should not be found filled, but full of bracks, gauls,
and flawes. Now to help you this way, we have spent a great deal of time in
the doctrine of faith and repentance, which be the fillings of our lives,
therefore let us not pass a day without renewing of repentance and faith.

Secondly, 2
we believe that there is but one God: as it is, Deuteronomy. 4. 39. Understand
therefore and consider in thine heart, That there is but one God.
that the Lord is God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath; there is
none other; And 1 Cor. 8. 4. We know that an Idol is nothing in the world,
and that there is no other God but one. So 1 Timothy 2. 5. For there is one God,
and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus: thus we see there
is but one God. The heathen had a number of Gods, the Romans had great Gods and
little Gods, the Grecians had heavenly Gods and earthly Gods; Gods for the sea,
and Gods for the land; but we believe there is but one God. Athanasius has a
pretty saying, an instrument that has many strings, take many men to strike
the strings, and they have no order, consent, or sweet harmony between, but
take a man that has cunning and skill to strike upon the strings, then there
appears a sweet order, consent and harmony; so, says he, this world and the
creatures be as it were an instrument with a number of strings, take men to
strike upon the strings of the creatures, then there is no order, nor consent
amongst them; but let one God strike upon the strings of the creatures, and
then there is a sweet consent and agreement between them. Now if a man should
say, why is there not more Gods than one? This were a frivolous question, we
acknowledge diverse persons, and but one God in substance, essence and power:
we read, 1 Ioh. 5. 7. There be three that bear record in heaven, the Father,
the Word and the holy Ghost: and these three are one. A good Divine does thus
illustrate it: water is but one thing in nature, and yet has diverse beings, as
it is in the fountain, as it runs into the river; and as it is conveied home
to the house in pipes, payles, or buckets: so the three persons are one in
nature, and essence, but it is in the Father, as the Fountain; in Christ, as
the River; in the holy Ghost, as a pipe or a payle, to convey, and bring it
into our hearts. So it is in a diverse manner, but all one in essence,
substance, nature and power.

The uses are, Vsesi.
first, seeing there is but one God, we must take heed we make not many Gods,
that we make not a God of our pleasures, of our goods, of our bellies, or of
our sins: as the Apostle complains, Phil. 3. 19. Whose belly is their God,
and whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things.

I, Object.
but some man may say, is there any man so bad, to make his pleasure, his
belly, his sins, and his goods, his god?

I answer, Sol.
it may be proved by these two Evidences: First, whatsoever he loves above
God, 1
that he makes his god, but it is evident that many a man loves his pleasures
more than God, Evidence.
or his goods, or his belly, or his sins, and therefore he makes them his
gods. If a man should set a Child between two men, let them both call the
child, and look which the child loves, unto him will the child run: so
let a man be set between God and his pleasures, God and his money, God and his
sins, which now a man runs unto, that he loves best: so it is evident that
men make these things their god.

Secondly, The seemd evidence.
whatsoever a man takes most pains for, that he makes his god. But it is
evident that men take more pains about their pleasures, and money, than they
do about God, and therefore they do make that their god. Chrysostom says,
Ask not thy tongue, whether thou love God or no, or take more pains about
thy pleasures, money, belly or thy sins, than for him: But ask thy life and
conversation, and that will tell thee, that thou love thy pleasures more than
thy God: therefore he that says, he loves God, and yet loves his pleasure
more than God, he lies: hereby we must take heed that we do not set our
profits, and our pleasures in the room of God.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing there is but One God, we must labor to be one as he is One; For Gods
labor is to bring all the decayed Creatures to be one, as he is One; It is
the Devil that brought in division, and set man against God, and one man
against another, but God labors to bring all to one: though we cannot be all
one in substance, yet let us labor to be one in affection; as it is said, Act.
4. 32.
that the number of them that believed were of one heart and of one mind, so we
must labor to be of one heart, and of one mind, Ephesians. 4. 5. It is said,
There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and Father of all: so Mal.
2. 10. It is said, Have we not all one Father? has not one God made us? why
do we transgress every one against his brother, and break the covenant of
our Father? Therefore seeing God is one, we must labor to be one as he is one,
Ezekiel. 37. we read how the Prophet saw a number of bones lie scattered here and
there, but when once the Word of God came amongst them, they ran bone to his
bone, sinews grew upon them, and flesh on the sinews: so howsoever we be
scattered in our affections, yet if the Word of God come amongst us, we be one
as God is one, straight way we run together, and be made one, though not in
substance, one, yet in affection, heart and mind.

The fourth use is, Use 4.
that seeing God is one, therefore there is but one means of life and
salvation; as Romans 3. 30. For it is one God who shall justify the Circumcision
by Faith, and the uncircumcision through faith. There is but one means,
whereby he gathers all men unto him, so that the best and holiest men that
ever were, are saved by the same means, that the meanest and poorest are, and
the greatest sinner is saved by. It is an opinion of some, that they shall be
saved in what Religion soever they profess, but this cannot be, because there
is but one means of the saving of all men. There was but one Tree of life, one
Door in the Arc, one high Priest, one Mediator between God and man, and
therefore there is but one way to life and salvation: if we be out of that way,
we are in the way to damnation. Therefore we must do as a man in a journey, O
Sir (says he) I am in a way, but whither does this way lead, if he be told it
leads to the kings court, where he shall have great favor showed, or to a
garden of pleasure, or a place of Comfort, then he will go on cheerfully; but
if he be told that it leads to a prison, a dungeon, or to a place of torment,
he will stay and go no further: so should we say, O sir, we are in a way, but
whither does it lead? If to heaven, to Gods favor, to joy and comfort
unspeakeable, then we may with comfort go on; but if we be told, that the way
we walk in, leads to hell, destruction, and to torment, we should make a
stand, and go no further, therefore seeing there is but one way to life, every
one should labor to walk in that way.

Thirdly, 3
we profess that we believe he is a true God; True, first in regard of his
Nature: He is a true God in regard of his Nature.
secondly, in regard of his properties.

First, he is a true God in regard of his Nature, for he is of a spiritual and
no bodily substance; 1
there is no extention of his parts, he does not consist of parts, as we do,
but he is of a spiritual substance, as Ioh. 4. 24. God is a Spirit.

Secondly, 2
he is infinite in time, and in place, there is no bounds nor limitations of
him, he cannot be comprehended; as it is Psalm. 145. 3. Great is the Lord, and
most worthy to be praised, and his greatness is incomprehensible; so that his
wisdom, power, justice, and mercy no man can comprehend.

Thirdly, 3
he is the fountain of all good things, so that whatsoever good things the
Creature has, it is from God; For by him we live, move, and have our being,
and breathing, as it is in Acts 17. 28. God does give a being to us; he has a
being of himself, and therefore he has no need of us, he is not the better
for our prayers, nor the service we do him, but we be the better for it; and
therefore every one when he conceives of God, must see he has a right
apprehension of him, he must so conceive him, as he has revealed himself in
his Word, or else he sets up an idol of his own in his heart. The heathen
did deride Christians, asking them where their God was, and bidding them show
their God, for they could show theirs in such a Church, and such a place. Says
the Christian, I cannot show thee my God, for he is a Spirit, and cannot be
seen, and therefore he is the true God; yours may be seen, therefore he is
not the true God; but (says he) if you would see my God, get you the eyes of
faith, and I will show you my God. Men that have weak eyes, get them eyes of a
Crystal glass, and then they see a number of things, that they could not see
before: so, when we cannot see God, we should get Crystal eyes, the eyes of
Faith, and then we shall see that we never saw before. A number of people in
the world cannot see God in the fields, in their public meetings, in their
houses, but let them get the eyes of Faith, and they shall see him very
comfortably.

Secondly, God is true in his Properties.
as we believe God to be true in Nature, so we believe God to be true in his
Properties; He is a powerful, a wise, a just, a merciful, a loving God. And
therefore if we believe that God is powerful, why then do we not trust in
him? If he be wise, why be we not guided, and governed by him? If he be
just, why do we not believe him in his promises? And why are we not afraid
of offending him? If he be merciful, why should we despair? But a number of
men take away the power of God, SERMON. V.
for (as the children of Israel in the wilderness, said, Can God prepare a
table for us?) so they say, Can God help us in sickness? Can he help us in
affliction? so likewise they presume to sin, and so take away the justice of
God, for though he brings his judgments to light every day, yet they will not
learn to fear, and be ashamed. And so they soothe themselves as the Prophet
complains, That every one that does evil, is good in the sight of God, or he
delights in them, or say where is the God of Judgment? so they take away
wisdom and mercy from him, as was showed out of Jeremy. But a Christian must
believe the properties of God, that he is powerful, therefore to trust and
rely upon him; Just, therefore to believe his promises; wise, therefore to be
guided by him. We may see a worthy example hereof in Hezekiah, 2 King. 19. 15.
When Senacherib went against Jerusalem, he told them that he had destroyed
such and such places, and countries, and their goods; and shall thou be
delivered? Then Hezekiah came before the Lord, told it him, spread the writing
before him, and prayed to the Lord.

Thirdly, Fourthly, that God is our God.
we believe that God is our God by the means of Christ; this is the maine
point of all, not to believe God in general only, but to bring him home to
our selves, and to be persuaded that he is our God: so the holy people (as Esaias
shows) said, This is our God, we have waited on him, and he will save us. If
he be our God, that then whatsoever is in him, as his power, wisdom, mercy,
justice, love, and goodness, it does appertain to us, we shall have the
benefit; this faith is a comfort, and that which God respects; Thomas could
have no comfort of his Faith, till he could say, My Lord and my God; and
Christ, when he would comfort his Disciples at his departure, says, Go tell
my brethren, I ascend to my God, Ioh. 20. 27.
and your God, to my Father, and your Father: so if once a man come to this,
that he can persuade himself that God is his God by the means of Christ; this
will comfort, and give him more peace, than the world can yield.

The use is, that seeing God is our God, therefore we should respect and love
him, and be desirous to please him in our courses: Mich. 4. 5. For all people
will walk every one in the name of his God, but we will walk in the Name of
the Lord our God for ever and ever: therefore as we do profess that God is
our God, we must labor to please him in all our courses, be loath to do any
thing that may displease him: It was the speech of Delilah to Sampson, Simile.
Judges 16. 15. How can thou say, thou love me, when thy heart is not with
me? so how can we say, that we love God when our courses show to the contrary:
it is a pitiful thing to see how men do not regard God, they do so toil
themselves with their labors, that so soon as they be set in the Church they
are fallen fast asleep; men profess they believe God is their God, and yet
do not respect nor serve him. In the 1 Samuel 9. mention is made of Samuels
feast unto the people, where one special dish given before unto the Cook is
brought forth, it was a shoulder set up only for the king, that none but he
should have it; Simile.
in like manner it should be our wisdom so to spend our strength about the
world in the week time, ARTIC. I.
that we reserve a part for the Lords Sabbath, to do him service with.

Hitherto God has been considered as he is in himself; now we come to
speak what God is in relation: and there is a twofold relation of God:

1. To the Trinity. 2. To the Creatures.
First, God stands in relation to the three Persons, for I believe in God,
stands in relation to the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. Here are
four points of Faith to be believed:

1. That there is a distinction of Persons in the Godhead. 2. That there is a
divine Person called the Father. 3. That he is the Father of Christ. 4. That he
is our Father by the means of Christ.
First, we believe that there is a distinction of Persons; for though there be
but one in Substance, Essence and Power, yet there be three distinct persons
subsisting in one Godhead, as 1 John 5. 7. There be three that bear record in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one; and
so Matthew. 28. in the charge that Christ gave his Disciples, when he sent them
out to preach in the Name of the Father, the Son and Holy Ghost: and
elsewhere the Scripture does teach distinction of Persons, as Ioh. 5. 30. I can
do nothing of my self, as I hear, I judge, and my judgment is just, because
I seek not mine own will, but the will of my Father that sent me: so John 14.
26. But the Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
Name, he shall teach you all things. So then we see plainly that the Father
is a distinct person from the Son, and the Son a distinct person from the
Father, and the Holy Ghost a distinct person from the Father and the Son.
There is a difference between the Faith of a Christian, and a Turk; the one
believes in one God, distinct in three persons, the other in one God, without
distinction of persons.

Now there be two grounds that overthrow this opinion of the Turks: first, it
is a rule in Divinity, that whatsoever as God reveals himself to be, The
first ground to prove a Trinity of Persons.
so we must believe he is; but God has revealed himself to be one God, and
three Persons, therefore so we must believe; for no man can dive into the
bottom of God, to know what he is, but he must reveal himself to us; so Ioh.
1. 18. No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son of the
Father, he has revealed him: and 1 Timoth. 6. 16. says the Apostle (speaking
of God) Who only has immortality, and dwells in the light that no man can
attain to, whom never man saw, neither can see, unto whom be honor and glory
everlasting, Amen. And therefore as a man going into the Sea, in danger, or to
swim, so far as his Cork will carry him up, so far he may go safely,
but if this fail to carry him up, he makes a stand and ventures no further: in
like manner, so far as our Cork will carry us up, so far we may walk
safely, so far as we have warrant out of Gods Word; but if we have no warrant
out of Gods Word, let us make a stand and go no further: therefore as God has
revealed himself, so we must believe; but he has revealed himself to be one
God, and three distinct Persons, and so we must believe.

The second ground is, The second ground for Distinction of Persons.
that it is not possible to redeem man without distinction of Persons; for God
the Father being offended with man for sin, there must be a second Person
for a Mediator between God and man, to reconcile them, and to make them one
again, which must be the Son; and there must be a third to apply this to
the heart of man, that is, the holy Ghost; therefore it is not possible that
the redemption of man should be wrought without the distinction of Persons.
The Turks demand of the Christians, what good they have to believe in God
distinct in three persons, more than they have in God without distinction of
Persons? If they should demand of me, I would make them this answer, thus, That
we could not have our redemption, but by the distinction of persons; for when
men were out of favor with God; they must have a thing of infinite value, and
of greater price than all the souls and bodies of men are worth, to satisfy
for them, and to apply it; and therefore this benefit we have by believing the
distinction of persons, more than the Turks have.

Secondly, Secondly, that the Father is a distinct Person.
that there is a divine Person called the Father: there be three divine
Persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; now they are not divided as
three men, to say, here is one, here is another, and there is another, but they
are distinguished; as three candles being light in a room, we cannot say,
here is the light of one candle, and here is the light of another, Simile.
their light cannot be divided one from another, and yet there be three
distinct lights; even so there be three distinct Persons, the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, and yet we may not divide them, and say, here is the
Father, or here is the Son, or here is the holy Ghost, apart one from the
other: for as of water, wine, and Rosa-solis being put into one glass (three
distinct things) we cannot say, Simile.
this is the water, and this is the wine, and this is the Rosa-solis, but where
one is, there is the other; so there be three divine Persons, but we cannot
say, here is one, and there is another, but where one is, there is all: and
therefore let us go no further than our cork will bear us up; if our cork
will not bear us up, let us make a stand, let us go no further than we have
warrant out of the word of God.

In that he is called a Father, it is because he is a fountain to the rest.
Ioh. 3. 35. The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his
hands: and Ioh. 5. 30. I seek not mine own will, but the will of my Father
that sent me: and Ioh. 28. Ye know me, and whence I come, yet I am not come of
my self, but he that sent me is true, whom ye know not; But I know him, for
I am of him, and he has sent me: and in the Heb. 1. 3. he says, Who being
the brightness of his glory, and the engraven form of his person. So then we
see that God the Father is a divine person distinct from the Son, and the
holy Ghost; he is called a Father, because he is a fountain to all the rest,
and that he is so, it arises of the infinite goodness that is in God.

There is a question amongst Divines how he communicats his goodness to the
rest of the Persons. Quest. Sol.
The answer is, that the more goodness there is in God, the more he
communicates his goodness. Now there is no creature capable to receive the
goodness that is in God, Simile.
for the creatures have goodness indeed, but it is but as a drop, in respect
of the goodness that he does infuse to the divine persons; and therefore he
does infuse his goodness to the rest of the divine persons, even as a
fountain of water when it is full, Simile.
it sends and gives it out again; so the Father gives out his goodness to the
rest of the divine Persons. This is a deep point to dive into, and therefore a
man must do in divinity, as a man does going into a river, as long as he
feels the ground with his feet, so far he may wade safely, but if he feel
no ground, it is good to make a stay and go no further: in like manner, so
long as we may wade in Divinity, and feel the ground with our feet, we may
safely go on so far as there is a warrant out of the word, but if this be
wanting, it is good to make a stand, and venture no farther. Use.
The use is, that seeing God contains not himself, but communicates his
goodness, let us labor to have communion with him, and then he will
communicate his goodness, as to the three Persons, so to us, in proportion. As
Psalm. 145. 3. Great is the Lord, and most worthy to be praised and his greatness
is incomprehensible, the Lord is great in goodness, and gives and powers it out
to others; therefore David says, Psalm. 37. It is a good thing for me to cleave
unto God. Simile.
If a great man in a Kingdom should give out his goodness, and be
beneficial, all men would seek for his service, but if he were a niggard, no
man would seek to him: so seeing God gives out his goodness, all men should
seek to have communion with him.

The third point is, Thirdly, God is the Father of Christ.
that he is the Father of Christ: so it is said, Romans 15. 6. That ye with one
mind, and with one mouth may praise God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ; And 1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, etc. The point is plain, I shall not need to prove it any more: we
will make use of it.

The first is, Use 1.
that seeing he is the Father of Christ, whatsoever Christ has done in the
great matters of our redemption, God will approve and accept of: as Ioh. 3. 35.
The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hands; and
therefore seeing it is his Son who has reconciled us, he will approve and
accept of it; seeing he has paid the price for us, we shall be acquitted
and discharged before God, and so go free.

Secondly, Use 2.
that none can be fitter to be the Mediator than Christ, Ioh. 11. 42. Jesus
says, I thank thee, Oh Father, because thou have heard me; I know thou
hear me always, but because of the people that stand by I said it, that
they may believe that thou have sent me. And therefore because he is the
Son of God, he is the more fitter to be the Mediator. Matthew. 21. 37. It is
said, therefore it may be they will reverence my Son: In the law we see
whenever the high Priest was to appear before God, he was to have the names
of the twelve Tribes in his breast plate, and on his shoulders engraven in
stones for a continual remembrance before the Lord; Simile. Exodus 29. 6.
so Christ is our high Priest, and he carries all the names of the elect, and
presents them before God for a continual remembrance.

SERMON V.
COLOS. 1. 12, 13. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to
be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in light. Who has delivered us
from the power of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of his dear
Son.
WElbeloved, in this Scripture and the like, is set down the ground of the
first part of our Christian profession; wherein (as I told you) there be four
points of Faith to be believed:

1. That there is a distinction of Persons in the Godhead. 2. That there is a
Divine Person called the Father. 3. That he is the Father of Christ: of these
three we have spoken. 4. That he is our Father by the means of Christ: which
now we are to handle.
By Faith we are made one with Christ, By Faith in Christ we are adopted.
and being one with Him, God is our Father by the means of him. This is
comfort to a Christian when he knows God is his Father, we read John 20.
17. when Christ was to depart from his Disciples, says he to Mary, Go tell my
brethren, that I ascend to my Father and to your Father, to my God and your
God; so Gal. 4. 6. He has sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts,
whereby ye cry, Abba, Father. This is a great Comfort and Blessing that we may
call God our Father boldly, which we have by the means of Christ; all the
Angels in heaven could not do or procure it, no not for the poorest or meanest
man: But Christ has procured it, and by no other means but by his death and
bloodshed. Indeed naturally we may say as Job, Job 17. 14.
that Corruption is our father, and the worms our mother: so naturally an
earthly man may say, Sinful is our father, the devil naturally is our father;
but yet by Adoption we are the sons and daughters of Almighty God, the heirs
of heaven: Therefore as it is written in the 1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be God even
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy,
has begotten us again to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead; to an Inheritance immortal, and undefiled, etc. so also we may
say, Blessed be God, that by the means of Jesus Christ is become our father; O
blessed be God our Father, that he has begotten us to the hope of heaven.
Yea, there is no man can look up comfortably to call God Father, but by the
means of Christ.

The use of this is twofold: Use First, since God is our Father we must labor
to please him in all things.
for Instruction and Comfort.

First, matter of Instruction, that seeing God is our Father, we must labor
to please, to respect, and obey him, in all our courses and actions: And
therefore as Christ says of himself, that he was not come to do his own
will, but the will of his heavenly Father: so we must say, Lord, I am not come
to do my own will, but to do the will of my heavenly Father. We see in
Nature, Simile.
let a child be between his father and a stranger, let the stranger bid him
to do any thing, and he will not regard it, but let his father command him,
and straightway he will do it: so if God be a stranger unto us, then we will
not regard or obey him; But if he be our Father, then we will be ready to obey
him in all things that he commands us. Ierem. 35. 5. we see it there
related, that there were pots full of wine, and cups set before the Rechabites;
And I said unto them, Drink wine: but they said, We will drink no wine, for
Ionadab the son of Rechab our father commanded us, saying, Ye shall drink no
wine: so a Christian man should say, when he is tempted to sin, to lie or to
swear, to deceive or to commit uncleanness, O I dare not do it, for God my
heavenly Father has forbidden it. I dare not swear, or profane the Sabbath
day, I dare not deceive, commit uncleanness, for God my heavenly Father has
forbidden me: and therefore if God be our Father, we must respect and obey him.
It is a great sin and corruption that men do profess God to be their
Father, and yet they will not obey him, but do the quite contrary: God has
commanded we should sanctify the Sabbath, but we profane it; that we should
love our enemies, and we scant love our friends; that we should speak with
great reverence of his Name; yet we take it in vain; and so of many others,
the Lord complains of such, Ierem. 3. 14. Did thou not still cry unto me,
thou art my Father, and the guide of my youth? as if he should say, Ye call me
Father indeed, but ye do not use me like a Father, ye do not obey me, and
walk in my ways: If I be your Father, use me like a Father, respect me, obey
me: so Esaias 1. 2. the Lord says, I have nourished and brought up children, but
behold rebellious children: And therefore seeing we profess God to be our
Father, we must obey him, and regard him as a Father.

Secondly, Secondly, If God be our Father, we must labor to be as like him as
may be.
seeing God is our Father, we must labor to be like him, as much as may be;
for a Child desires to be like the Father, and therefore seeing we profess
to be the Children of God, let us labor to be like him in all holiness and
uprightness: So the Apostle exhorts Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. Be ye therefore followers of
God as dear children: so 1 Pet. 1. 14. As obedient children, not fashioning
your selves unto the former lusts of your ignorance. But as he which has
called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation. If we his
Children, Three things to be like God in.
we must be like him in three things:

First, we must be like unto God in doing good unto all men, within the
compass of our ability; 1
therefore Matthew. 5. 45. our Savior shows how we should be like our
heavenly Father, In doing good to all.
He makes the Sun to shine upon the evil and the good, and sends rain
on the just and unjust; so our goodness should be extended to all men.

Secondly, 2
we must be like God in forgiving the injuries and wrongs that be done unto
us; In forgiving wrong and injuries.
As Col. 3. 21. Now therefore (as the elect of God, holy and beloved) put on
tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering,
forbearing and forgiving one another; If any man have a quarrel to another,
even as Christ forgave you, even so do ye.

Thirdly, 3
we must be like him in holiness of life; As 1 Pet. 1. 17. If ye call him
Father, In holiness of life.
which without respect of persons judges according to every man's works, pass
the time of your dwelling here in fear; and be ye holy, for he is holy. We
see how wicked men imitate the steps of their fathers, they will be like them;
and therefore it is said of Abia, 1 King. 15. 3. That he walked in all the
sins of his father, as he had done before him; So those wicked people, Ier.
44. 17. say they, Even as our Fathers have done before us, so will we do.
Here we see how ready these were to follow the ways of their wicked fathers,
then how ready should we be therefore to be like our heavenly Father? God is
merciful, and we be unmercifull; ready to forgive us the injuries and wrongs
that we do to him, and we backward to forgive the injuries and wrongs that
our brethren do to us; he is holy, and we be unholy; and therefore I
marvel, that we do not blush to call God Father, and yet walk in the steps
of the devil; God is holy, and thou art profane; God is merciful, and thou
art cruel. This is the second instruction.

The third is, that seeing God is our Father, therefore we must trust in him, 3
and rely on him as a Father, we must labor to moderate the cares of this
life, To moderate the cares of this life.
because we have one God to take care for us: Matthew. 6. 25. our Savior says,
Be not careful what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for the
body what ye shall put on, etc. and verse 32. he gives a reason, why we
should take no care; for your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all
these things; and out of his Fatherly care will make a supply of them by such
good means as he has appointed: therefore we must wholly rely, and trust on
him. If we see a young man eager of the world, carking, caring, scraping, and
gathering together riches: men may say, this man has no Father to provide for
him. So if we see men scraping, gathering, carking, and caring for the things
of this life, surely we may fear, God is not his Father, for if he were he
would rest upon him. Chrysostom says, if a man were going to a feast, would
he take care for meat? if one were at a fountain, would he take care for
water? God of his Fatherly care will provide a table for us, and as a rich
fountain will make a supply of all our wants, therefore we have no cause to
carke or care, for the things of this life: let this be thy comfort, that if
God be our Father, he will provide for thee, This therefore condemns the
scrapers and misers of this world, that care not by what means they can get
it, or by what bad course they have it; and therefore they do not rest on God
as a Father. It is true indeed, there is a provident care to be had for the
things of this life, but this same carking and distrustful care is that which
the Scriptures condemn.

The fourth is, that all the chastisements that come upon us, we take as from
the hand of a loving Father, 4
and patiently bear them: so we see, All our chastisements then come from the
hand of a loving Father.
Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumb and said nothing, because it was thy doing. So 1 Samuel
3. 18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: And Luke 22. 2.
Father, if thou will take away this cup from me; nevertheless not my will,
but thy will be done. So every cross and affliction we should take as a cup
tempered and reached out by the hand of a loving Father, and therefore we
should patiently bear it. We see in experience, if a stranger beat a child,
the child will murmur at it, but if a Father correct it, it will patiently
bear that, so if God be a stranger to us, then we will murmur at his
corrections, but if God be our Father, then we will patiently bear his loving
chastisements.

The fifth instruction hence is, 5
that seeing God is our Father we should be content to part with any thing we
have to give unto Christ: We should part with any thing to give unto Christ.
we read in the story of Samson, that when his Father and Mother was going to
the wedding, he went aside to look on the carcass of the Lion which he had
killed, Judge. 14.
where he found a swarm of bees and honey, whereof he did eat, and gave to
his Father and Mother; so we should do, going to the heavenly wedding, we
should give such good things as we have, seeing we cannot give them to Christ's
own person, let us give them to his needy members, and Christ will accept it
as done unto himself; as Mat. 25. 45. For So Much, says he, as ye have done it
unto one of these little ones, ye have done it unto me. Seeing God is our
Father, therefore all Christians are our brothers, and we should love them for
our Fathers sake. So Mal. 2. 10. Have we not all one Father? and has not one
God made us? why do we transgress every one against his brother, and break
the covenant of our God and Father? therefore seeing God is the Father of us
all, we must love them, and regard them: so Ioh. 8. 42. If God were your
Father, says Christ, then ye would love me; so we may say, if God were your
Father, then ye would love Christians, but because ye hate and despise them,
therefore it is evident that God is not your Father.

The second thing that was observed, Use 2. Comfort. First, our dignity to be
the Sons of God.
was matter of comfort: first, that seeing God is our Father, therefore we are
called to a greater dignity and honor than this world can afford us, for it is
the greatest preferment in the world to be called the Sons of God; and
therefore 1 Ioh. 3. 1. he brings it in with an ecce, Behold, what love the
Father has showed on us, that we should be called his Sons: and therefore
David to this purpose says, 1 Samuel 18. 23. Seems it a light thing unto you
to be the Son in law to a King. Now then if it be such a matter to be Son
in law to a King, what an honor is it to be Son to the King of Kings, to God?
if we consider we be but dust and sinful, and the children of the devil:
therefore as David says, 1 Samuel 18. 18. Who am I? and what is my life, and the
family of my Father in Israel, that I should be Son in law to the King? So
we may say, Lord, what am I, or what is my Fathers house, that this honor
should be put upon me, to be called thy Son? And therefore whatsoever our
estate be here in this world, it is a great comfort to us to be one of the
Sons of God, the greatest dignity that this world can afford. I showed you
lately, that it is the greatest goodness and mercy of God to put honor upon
his servants, that even Kings are glad of this favor; and howsoever men cannot
away with such now, but despise and contemn them, yet one day, at the day of
judgment, or of their death, to have honor with the meanest of Gods people,
they would be glad, if they could have but a look: and therefore it is a
greater comfort to be one of Gods sons and daughters, than to have all this
world.

The second comfort is, that seeing God is our Father, therefore he will be a
Father to us, Secondly, That God will be a Father to us.
as 2 Cor. 6. 18. I will be a Father unto you: and not in name, but a Father
in deed to us, he will perform the duty of a Father; there is no Father in
time of need will do more for his child, than God will do for us, nor no
Father so ready to help his child as we shall have help of God. Psalm. 103.
13. As a Father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on
them that fear him: and Esai. 63. 16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though
Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not, yet thou O Lord art our
Father, and our Redeemer; and therefore great is the comfort that we shall
find, seeing he is our Father: it is a comfort in the time of mutation of
friends, when they leave, and forsake, and cast us off, yet we may say with
comfort, Lord, I thank thee, thou art my Father, thou will not leave me nor
cast me off, but stand by me when the world will forsake me, and my worldly
friends.

The third is, Thirdly, that God will give us a heavenly inheritance.
that seeing God is our Father, he will give us an heavenly inheritance: a
father will not die, and leave his child nothing, if he be able; so God will
not be a Father, and leave us nothing, but he will bequeath unto us an heavenly
inheritance; so our Savior says Luke, 12. 23. Fear not little flock, for it
is your Fathers will to give you a kingdom. So also, Heb. 11. 16. Wherefore
God is not ashamed to be called their God; for he has prepared for them a
City: God would have us men be ashamed to call him father, if he had nothing to
give us, but seeing he has prepared for us a City, he is not ashamed to be
called our Father; therefore seeing he has provided such a heavenly
inheritance, it is a comfort to us: art thou a poor man, and have thou little
to live on? or art thou a younger brother, and have thou no inheritance? labor
to have God thy Father, and although thou be a mean man here, yet thou shall
be great in heaven, Christ shall be thy brother, and heaven shall be thine
inheritance.

The fourth is, Fourthly, All Gods chastisements shall turn to the best.
that seeing God is our Father, all his chastisements shall turn to our good:
so Heb. 12. 6. the Apostle says, For whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and
he scourges every son he receives. If a father correct his child, it is
for his good, and amendment, or at leastwise he would have us to think so; in
like manner as we would have others to think of us, when we are correcting of
our children, that we do it for their good, Simile.
let us be persuaded, and think so of God, that it shall turn to our good. If
a friend should temper a potion, and give us it into our hands to drink,
although it should work furiously upon us, yet we would think that it shall
turn to our good: so seeing God is our friend, and our father, though our
afflictions work strongly upon us yet we must be persuaded, that it shall
turn to our good. We heard in the morning out of the story of Abraham, that
Abimelich the King sought to Abraham to make a league with him, at that time,
when he was a great heaviness for the loss of Ismael; for Hagar and Ismael
were cast out of his doors. The Doctrine from hence was, That the Lord never
sends extraordinary crosses, and troubles, but he sends his servants
extraordinary comfort: Simile.
and this arises of his fatherly care toward us: if a Father gives to his
child a sour cup, or a bitter cup, he will secretly convey into his hand a
peace of sugar to allay the bitterness and sowrenesse; so the Lord does, when
he gives us a bitter cup to drink, he conveyeth into our hearts secretly,
Mercy in the ^iddest of wrath.
as it were, a piece of sugar, some comfort to allay the bitterness of it.
Chrysostom says, There were no man able to sail at Sea, if there were no
havens, and shores, and harbors for ships to lie in, Simile.
in the time of tempest, so, says he, it were not possible for a Christian to
pass this earth through, if God should not give him comfort in the time of his
trouble.

The fifth comfort is, 5
that seeing God is our Father, we may with comfort at the day of death lay
down our souls and bodies into his hands; so we see Christ does Luke. 23.
46. And Jesus cried with a loud voice, Father into thy hands I commend my
spirit: this must teach us when we come to die, to commit our spirits into the
hands of God. It is the disposition of a child, if he has any Jewel in the
time of danger, to run and put it into his father hands, where he thinks it
a thousand times safer than in his own: so we should do, seeing we have but
one jewel, our souls, in the time of danger we should run to God, and
commit it into his hands, and think it a thousand times more safe than in our
own keeping. Now having spoken of the Person of the Father, the next in order
and course is, to speak of his Attributes, which are two, mentioned in this
place.

1. That he is Almighty. 2. That he is the maker of Heaven and Earth.
First, Why God is said to be Almighty.
that he is Almighty: Now God is said to be Almighty because he has power in
himself, to do whatsoever he will, Psalm. 111. 3. But our God is in heaven,
and does whatsoever he will: and Psalm. 135. 6. Whatsoever pleases the Lord,
that did he in heaven, and in earth, and in the sea: so also Ephesians. 3. 20.
Unto him therefore that is able to do abundantly, above all that we can ask
or think, according to the power that works in us, be praise and Glory.
Philip. 3. 21. says the Apostle, Who shall change our vile body, that it may
be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he
is able to subdue all things to himself.

Here a question may be moved, Quest.
why we are taught to believe that God is almighty, seeing the mind of man is
finite, and it is not able to conceive of an infinite thing, such as is the
power of God?

I answer, Ans.
as a man may stand on the sea shore, and look on the sea, where, though he
be not able to see the length and breadth of it, yet he may see it is a goodly,
Simile.
sp^tious, and a large thing; so howsoever we are not able to conceive the
greatness of God, and his Almightinesse, to see the largeness of him; yet
apprehending of him as we may, we shall see him to be great, yea the further
we go, the greater we shall see him to be; though we be not able to see his
length, and depth, yet we may perceive the Almightinesse of him: as if a man
come to a mountain which he is not able to comprehend in his arms, Simile.
yet he is able to apprehend it, and to lay hold on it with his hands: so
howsoever we are not able to comprehend the Almightinesse of God, yet we may
apprehend it, and lay hold on it.

Now God is said to be Almighty, God is said to be Almighty four ways.
First, because he is able to do whatsoever he will.
four ways: first, because he is able to do whatsoever he will, his power
is as large as his will, as Esai. 46. 10. My counsel shall stand, and I will
do whatsoever I will; and Numb. 23. 19. God is not as man that he should lie,
nor as the son of man that he should repent: has he said it, and shall he
not do it? has he spoken it, and shall he not accomplish it? So we see God
has power to do whatsoever he wills: many times we will a thing, and we
have no power to do it, but whatsoever the Lord wills, he has power to do
it; his power is as large as his will. And therefore as the Leper said to
Christ in Matthew. 8. 2. If thou will, thou can make me clean; so we may say
in our pains, Lord, if thou will, thou can give me ease in my pains; Lord,
if thou will, thou can give me health in sickness; prosperity in adversity,
and in the times of my distress, comfort.

Secondly, Secondly, because he is able to do whatsoever in Nature is
possible.
God is said to be Almighty, because he is able to do whatsoever in Nature
is possible to be done: if there be any power that can do any thing for us,
God is able to do it; as Matthew. 3. 9. It is said, God is able of these stones
to raise up children unto Abraham: and 2 Cor. 9. 8. God is able to make all
grace to abound ^^wards you, that ye having always sufficiently in all things,
may abound in every good work; therefore if there be any thing possible in
Nature to be done, God has power to do it; much more if we want any thing,
God by his power can make a supply of it, if we desire any thing God can help
us, we need seek no further, he has power in himself to help us. In the
second book of the Kings 1. 6. Is it not (says El^as to the King) because
there is no God in Israel, that thou sendest to Baalzebub the God of Ekron?
therefore thou shall not come down from thy bed, but thou shall die: ^o we
may say to them that seek to witches and wizards for help; is it not because
there is no power in God to help thee, that thou usest such base untoward
shifts to bring enterprises to pass? Therefore seeing there is power in God,
to do any thing that is possible in Nature to be done, why do we not seek
to him in our wants? why do we not rely upon his power?

Thirdly, Thirdly, because the whole fullness of Power is in God.
God is said to be Almighty, because the whole fullness of power is in God. In
the creatures there is but part of power, yea in the most noblest creatures
that be, but in God is all power: so we ^ee fire can warm us, but it cannot
feed us, because there is but a part of power; meat can feed us, but it
cannot help us against diseases; so likewise Physic cannot help us when
death comes, the reason is, because there is but a part of power in these.
Now in God is the whole power, therefore God can make supply unto us
whatsoever our wants be. Therefore it is the madness of the world to trust to
their money, to their goods, to their worldly friends, in which things there is
but a part of power, the whole fullness being in God: what is there but he
has? what do we want, but he can supply it? And therefore let us all go and
rely on the fullness of power that is in God.

Fourthly, God is said to be Almighty, because all the power of the creatures
is in God, Fourthly, because all the power of the creatures is in God.
or from him, for by him we live, move, and have our being and breathing; And
therefore that a man goes, stirs, moves, or does any thing: he has this
power from God: So Paul, Acts 17. 28. For in him we live and move and have our
being. The Philosophers say, that the second cause cannot work, but by the
power of the first cause; As in a clock, if there be a stand in the great
wheels, there must needs be a stand in the little ones also, Simile.
because these do depend on the great wheels; so if there be a stand in God,
there must needs be a stand in the creatures, because they all depend on him,
for all the power we have to stand and move, is from God: therefore when we
sin against Him, we turn the same power we have from God, against him. The
Apostle Paul says, Shall we take the members of Christ, and make them the
members of a Harlot? God forbid; so we may say, shall we take the power we
have from God, Simile.
and turn it against him? God forbid, it is an heavy thing so to do.
Therefore seeing all the power of the creatures is from God, there is no enemy
that can lift up a hand or a foot against us to do us hurt, None can hurt us
but by power from God given.
but from the power they have from God: As our Savior says to Herod, Ioh. 19.
11. Thou could have no pwoer at all against me, except it were given thee
from above. And it is said, Revel. 9. 14. Loose the four Angels which are
bound in the great river Euphrates. And the four Angels were loosed. Thus we
may see that all adversary powers are not able to stir, or moove against us,
but by the power they have from God. If one should see a Lion or a Bear
chained, and in the hand of his father, he would not be afraid of them; so
seeing there be a number of wicked spirits in vilde men that be like Lions,
Simile.
and Bears, yet are they chained, and in the hands of our father, we need not
be afraid of them, for they have no power to do us any hurt, but by the power
they have from God.

But some man may say, and object, is there power in God to do any thing?
Object.
There be some things that God cannot do, How then is God Almighty? As Tit.
1. 2. It is said, that God cannot lie; nor he cannot deny himself: And 2 Timothy
2. 13. He is faithful and cannot deny himself: so also, God cannot dye. Here
then we may see that there be some things that God cannot do.

I answer, Ans.
indeed, God cannot do these things, for these things imply weakness, and not
power: for why do men deny themselves? or why do men lie? What thing? God
cannot do, because they imply weakness in one.
because of weakness: or why do men die, and have no power to withstand it?
if God should do those things, he should destroy his own nature; for it is
against the nature of God to lie, or to deny himself; SER. VI.
God cannot do any thing, that implies weakness, God cannot do any thing,
that destroys his own nature.

Secondly, Secondly, God cannot make the Creature God.
God cannot make the Creature God, because the Creature is not capable of it,
it being a finite thing, with bounds and limits, therefore not capable of an
infiniteness: now the want of power in this case, is not in God, but the
defect is in the Creature; as let a man take four pottles of wine, Simile.
and put it into a pottle glass, the glass is not able to receive it; the
defect here is not in the power of man, but in the glass, for he was as able
to power out all of it as one drop, but the glass could not receive it.
Again, God cannot do any thing that implies contradiction, Thirdly, God
cannot do any thing which i plyeth Contradiction.
as to cause a thing to be, and not to be, as the Sun to shine, and not to
shine, all at one time: or a body to be in a place and not to be, or to be in
diverse places at one time.

The uses are, for Instruction, and Comfort. The first Instruction is, that
seeing God is Almighty, Use 1.
all men must stoop and bow before him, in the consideration of his great
power; Men must stoop and bow before him.
as Esa. 25. 3. Therefore shall the mighty people give glory unto thee, the city
of the strong nations shall fear thee. Ier. 10. 7. Who would not fear thee, O
King of nations? For to thee appertains the dominion, for among all the wise
men of the Gentiles, and in all their kingdoms, there is none like unto thee.
So Psalm. 95. 6. Come let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord
our Maker: therefore the great power that is in God must humble us, bring us
low, and make us fall down before him.

Secondly, Secondly, to labor to make him our friend and be in his favor.
that seeing God is Almighty, labor to make him thy friend, and to be in his
favor, for nothing is almighty in this world but God: we see how men labor
to be in favor with Noblemen, thinking thereby to procure some great matter
to themselves; but there is none greater than God, therefore labor to have his
favor. This is that a Christian desires above all the things in this world: so
David, Psalm. 4. 6. Lord, says he, lift thou up the light of thy countenance
upon us, and that shall make my heart more glad than they that have their corn
and wine and oil increased: So Psalm. 80. 19. Turn us, O Lord God of hosts,
cause thy face to shine upon us, and we shall be safe. In which Psalm, it is
thrice repeated, as the only desire of a Christian.

Thirdly, Thirdly, above all things sin not against him.
that seeing God is Almighty, therefore above all things take heed we do not
sin against, and offend him, for all the creatures are not able to do the
thousand part of that hurt that God can do unto thee: why then are men
commonly so afraid of great men, and of the hurt they can do to them? our
Savior tells them, whom to fear, Luke 12. 4. says he, Fear not him that can
kill the body, and after that is able to do no more; but fear him that is
able to destroy both Soul and body, and to cast them into hell fire; him we
ought to fear; therefore the power that is in God should make us afraid to
offend him. We see Job says, Gods judgments were fearful to me, and I
could not be delivered from his highness; so we see the consideration of the
power that was in God, made Job stand in awe of him: a number of men never
stand in awe of God, are never afraid of his great power, Job 31. 23.
indeed they fear an earthly power, are afraid of breaking the Princes laws,
and the commandments of men; but O that men could be afraid of the great
power that is in God, who is able to destroy both soul and body.

Fourthly, seeing God is Almighty, therefore in all extremities we are to rest
and rely on the power that is in him; Fourthly, in all extremities trust in
him.
for howsoever men run here and there for help, yet no man is able to help
but he. A Christian must believe that God is able to help by means, as Noah
was saved in a wooden Arc, and Moses in an Arc of reed; so likewise we must
believe that God is able to help us without means, against means, or beyond
means, and above the means: so as with the Apostle Paul we may say, Romans 8.
38.
If God be on our side, who can be against us?

Now the next thing observed was comfort. Use 2.
First, that seeing God is Almighty, therefore our Salvation is in the hands of
God; if it were in our own, First, that our salvation is in his hand.
we might lose it, but seeing it is in Gods keeping, it is safe, as 1 Pet. 1.
5. it is said, We are kept by the power of God. In the time of man's innocence
Adam had the keeping of his own Salvation, it was in his own hands, and he
lost it; but now it is in Gods keeping, and therefore we are sure we shall not
lose it, seeing his power is Almighty.

Secondly, Secondly, we shall be safe under his protection.
that seeing God is Almighty, therefore we shall be safe under his
protection; so David says, Psalm. 27. 1. The Lord is my light, and my
Salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? And Psalm. 23. 4. Yea, though I should walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, yet I will fear none evil, for thou art my
God, and thou art with me. If God be our friend we need not to care who is
our foe, for Gods power is Almighty.

Thirdly, Thirdly, that all his promises shall be fulfilled in due time.
that seeing Gods power is Almighty, therefore all his promises shall be
fulfilled in due time: so Genesis 21. 1. Now the Lord visited Sarah, as he had
said: and the Lord did unto her according as he had promised. And Genesis 18. 14.
says the Angel, shall any thing be hard unto the Lord? therefore seeing all
Gods promises shall be performed in due time, and nothing is hard for him,
comfort thy self therein; for have thou a promise that God will raise thee out
of the grave to glory and happiness, or have thou any other promise, it is
most sure, it shall be fulfilled in the due time by God.

Fourthly, that seeing God is Almighty, Fourthly, that he is powerful to
destroy our adversaries.
therefore we shall not need to doubt or fear, but that he is able to destroy
our adversaries power, whosoever shall rise against him or us; Rev. 18. 8.
Therefore shall her plagues come one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and
she shall be burn with fire, for strong is the Lord our God which shall
condemn her.

SERMON VI.
ACT. 14. 15. That ye should turn from these vanities, unto the living God,
which made Heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things that are therein.
COncerning the Almightinesse of God (which is His first Attribute) we have
already spoken: now we come to the second, which is Maker of Heaven and earth.
I will directly fall upon the point without any repetition: only remember we
that the more power there is in God, The more power there is in God, the more
should be our comfort. Simile.
the more is our true comfort; for when a man knows that all the power that is
in God is for his good, then the more there is in God, the more is his comfort.
As if a man should see a great deal of armor laid up in the hands of his
friend, he might think it were the better for him, he shall be the safer by
it, but if he see a great deal in the hands of his enemy, this may strike a
terror into him; so if we can find that God is our Father and our friend,
then the more power there is in God, the more is our comfort, but if God be our
enemy, and displeased with us for our sins, then our terror is the greater,
because he is so much the more powerful to destroy and bring us to nothing:
therefore let us labor to make God our friend and father, and then the more
power there is in God, the more will be our comfort.

Now we come to speak of the second Attribute, that he is the Maker of heaven
and Earth: in this there be diverse particulars to be observed:

1. Who made heaven and earth? And that was God. 2. What he made? Heaven and
earth, and all things in them. 3. How he made them, or with what Instrument?
With his Word. 4. Of what he made the world? Of nothing. 5. In what estate he
made the world? In a good estate. 6. In what time he made it? In six days,
whereas he might have made it in a moment, or in six hours, but for singular
cause he was six days a making the world. 7. In what order he made Heaven and
Earth at first? The Heaven for man to rest in, and Earth for man to labor in.
8. To what end he made it? To convey his glory, and his goodness to his
creatures.
First, First, God made heaven and earth.
who made Heaven and Earth? It was God; no man, nor Angel made it, nor it made
not it self, but God made it: Genesis, 1. 1. In the beginning God created
Heaven and; Earth and so Paul says in this place that I have read unto you; I
preach unto you, that ye should turn from these vain idols unto the living
God, that made heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and all things that in them are:
so Heb. 3. 4. For every house is builded by some man, but he that has builded
all things is God: so then the point is cleared, none can deny it. Now let us
come to make use of it.

First, Use 1.
seeing God made the world, and it was not made by man, nor Angel, Since God
made the world, he is to be praised for the comforts in the same.
neither did it make it self, but God made it, therefore if there be any
comfort or any delight to be found in any creature, God is the Author of it,
and to be thanked for it; for we cannot make a stick nor a straw, a feather,
an ear of corn, nor a stalk of grass: therefore seeing God has made a
number of good things for our comfort and benefit, God is to be thanked for
it. If a man should set up an house for a poor man to dwell in, Simile.
so often as he looks on the house, he thinks of the good will of him that
set up the house; so God has set up heaven (as it were) to cover us, earth to
bear us, sea and land to feed us: therefore so often as we look on any of
these, we are to be thankful. So David Psalm. 8. 1. O Lord how excellent is thy
name in all the world? Who have set thy glory above the heavans: and verse 4.
What is man, that thou art so mindful of him? and the son of man that thou
visitest him? So David's affections were swallowed up in the consideration of it.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing God made heaven and earth, take heed we do not displease him, Not to
displease him who made all, since he is able to destroy all.
for he that made all, is able to destroy all. As it is Genesis 6. 7. And the
Lord said, I will destroy from the earth the man whom I have created, from man
to beast, and to the fowls of the heaven, and to the creeping things;
therefore seeing he made all, take heed we do not sin against him,
remembering what is said, Esai. 51. 12. I, even I am he that comfort you:
who art thou that thou should fear a mortal man, and the son of man, who
shall be made as grass? and forgettest the Lord thy maker, etc. We see men
are afraid of men to displease them; but we ought to be much more afraid of
the power of God, who is able to destroy all: if a man should hang from the top
of an high tower by a twine thread, and in such manner, Simile.
as if he that held him, should let it go, he would dash him all to pieces,
how afraid would he be to offend him? and how glad to please him? So we all
hang as it were, out of an high tower by the thread of our life, God holds the
thread, who if he should forgo his hold, we fall and dash to nothing;
therefore how afraid should we be to offend or to displease him with our
sins, and careful to please him in all our courses? if men had grace to
consider this, they would not live in known sins as they do.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing he made all, he is able to dispose of all, at his own will and
pleasure, for the workman is able and may dispose of his own work; we are
the workmanship of God, and therefore we should be content with his
disposing whatsoever it be, Since God did make all, he is able to dispose all
at his own pleasure.
sickness or health, prosperity or adversity. Esaias, 45. 9. it is written, Woe
be to him that striveth with his maker; let the potsheard with the potsheards
of the earth. Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What make thou,
etc? and therefore we should labor to be content with Gods disposing,
whatsoever it be, he made all, he may dispose of all, as it best pleases him.

The second point is, The second point God made heaven and earth.
What he made? he made the heaven and the earth; the heavens, where God and his
Angels be, and the lower world, where sinful men and women are; he made
visible and invisible things, and whatsoever is within the compass of heaven
and earth: So says Paul, Act. 14. 15. I preach unto you, that you should turn
from your vain Idols to the living God, who made heaven and earth, the sea,
and all that therein is, and so it is written John 1. 3. All things were made
by it, and without it was nothing made, that was made.

The use of this is, seeing God made all things, take heed we do not injury
and wrong God with them: Use 1.
says Paul, Shall I take the members of Christ, and make them the members of
an harlot? Since God made all, not to wrong God with them.
God forbid: so say you, shall we take the Creatures that God has made, and
abuse them, and so wrong God? God forbid. This provokes God to vengeance as it
is Hoseah 2. 9. Therefore will I return, and take away my Corn in the time
thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and will recover my flax and wool
lent to her to recover her shame: therefore if we abuse Gods blessings and
turn them to the dishonor of his name, he will take them from us.

Secondly, seeing God made all things, therefore we should acknowledge them as
the gifts of God, Use 2.
put into our hands by the Lord, and to receive them as from his hands. Simile.
The rivers receive their waters from the sea by secret passages, and again
run into the sea, and so carry it back again thither: in like manner as we
receive all from the hands of God, so we should return all to him again by
public thankfulness for them; as Paul says in this place, that we should
turn from these vain idols to the living God, that made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that therein is: because he made them, therefore we should go
back again in the consideration of it, and return thanks to him.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing God made all things we should not look upon his works, without great
consideration of them; as his works of mercy or judgment: If a workman make
an excellent work, it is a great indignity, Simile.
and injury offered to the workman to pass by it, slight it, not to look on
it or regard it: so seeing the Lord has hanged as it were, the chamber of this
world with many goodly works of his mercy, and judgments, it is a great
injury and indignity offered unto God for men to pass by them, and never to
look upon them: so God complains Psalm. 28. 5. Because they regard not the
works of the Lord, nor the operations of his hands, therefore he shall break
them down, and not build them up; so it is a great sin to pass by his
wondrous works, and not to look upon them, and consider of them.

The third point is, The third point, how God made all.
how he made them? By no instrument: but by his word: as Psalm. 33. 6. By the
word of the Lord were the heavens, and all the host of them by the breath of
his mouth. The third point how God made all.
Now we are not to think it was a vocal word of God, but it was his
commandment: Psalm. 33. 9. For he spoke, and it was done, he commanded and it
stood, or was created. So Psalm. 148. 5. He commanded and they were created.
Solomon, when he builded the Temple, had thousands of workmen to do it, but
God when he made the world, made it with his word: therefore we may see the
excellent power of the word of God, that let him but speak and there is a new
heaven, and an earth, and a sea, and sky, and beasts, and birds for the use of
man: Use 1.
Therefore the Centurion says well, Matthew 8. Do but speak the word, and
thy servant shall be whole. So we must learn to acknowledge the excellent
power of the word of God, that if he say to sickness, depart; it shall
depart, if to health, come, it shall come, look what God speaks shall be
done; as it is said in the Psalm, he sent out his word, and healed them.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing God made the world, with a word, we may wonder at our untowardnesse,
that there is never a creature save man, but does yield to the Word of God: the
Lord has spoken ten words in his Law, nay many more in the gospel unto us,
and yet what ado is there, an almighty power must join with the word to bring
a sinner to repentance: therefore we may wonder at our untowardnesse that the
creatures yield to the word of God, and yet sinful man cannot submit to a
thousand words of God, to bring him to repentance.

The fourth point is, The fourth point what he made all of.
what he made the world of? and that was of nothing. Hebrews 11. 3. Through
faith we understand that the world was made by the Word of God; so that the
things we see were made of things that did not appear. Philosophers say, of
nothing nothing can he made: It is true in Nature, but not in regard of Gods
power: In Nature indeed there is no Artificer that can make any thing, unless
he has matter to make it of; as a Smith cannot work without Iron, and a Mason
must have stone, and a Carpenter must have timber: but God is able to make all
things of nothing.

The use is, first, Use 1.
that seeing God did make the world of nothing, he is able to make a man
somewhat when he is nothing; he is able to give grace where there is none, to
create faith where there is no faith, and to work repentance where there is
none: so says Paul, 2 Cor. 4. 6. For God who commanded the light to shine out
of darkness, has shined into our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. And therefore if God be able
to make the world of nothing, he is able to make a man something, that is
nothing in himself.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing God is able to make the world of nothing, he is able when we are
nothing in our worldly estates to raise us up of nothing, and to make us great
men in the world, so faith Hanna 1 Samuel 2. 6, 7. The Lord kills and makes
alive, bringing down to the grave and raising up: the Lord makes poor, and
makes rich; brings low, and exalieth: he raises the poor out of the dust,
and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill to set them amongst Princes.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing God made the world of nothing, so let us know the world would dissolve
and come to nothing again, if God should not uphold it; for naturally all
things dissolve into that they were made of, as a man made of dust, so
naturally turns and comes to dust again; so Ice being made of water, it
turns to water again, and Snow being made of rain, it dissolves to it
again: Simile.
so the world being made of nothing, would come to nothing, if God should not
uphold it. Therefore how much are we bound to God for every hours continuance
of this world: which Heb. 1. 3. is said, to be upheld by his mighty power and
word.

Fourthly, seeing he made the world of nothing, we may see the means of our
beginning, Use 4.
that it was of nothing; and therefore howsoever some swell with greatness of
their Ancestors, and of their Nobility, yet we see the meannesse of our
beginning, we came of nothing: therefore this may serve to humble us, how
great soever we be; Abraham he confessed he was but dust, this did humble him,
and were know the dust was made of nothing; which should serve to humble us, in
that all our greatness came of nothing.

The fifth point is, Fifthly in what estate God made the world.
^ what estate God made this world in? in exceeding good estate, Genesis 1. 25.
therefore if there be any creature that is not good, or has any defect in it,
we are to thank our selves, and our own sins; as we see in a clock, Simile.
if there be any alteration or stop in the little wheels, it is because there
was first a stop in the great wheels, for the little ones do depend on the
greater wheel, so that if there be a stand in that, there is a stand in the
little wheels: in like manner if there be any defect in the creatures, or if
there be any that be not good, it is because there is a defect, and a failing
in us, for man is as the great wheel of the Clock, therefore if he be out
of order, no marvel though the creatures be so also.

Hence we may learn, that if there be any which be not good, or have defect in
them, we may thank our selves and our sins for it: thus much the very
Heathen could tell Jonas, that because there was a disorder in the creatures, a
great tempest causing the Sea to rage, they thought there was somewhat amiss
amongst them, therefore they cast lots to see for whose cause it was. Use 1.
And this shall be the first use, that seeing God made all good, if there be
any defect in the creatures, we may thank our selves, and our sins.

Secondly, Use 2.
Seeing God made all the creatures good, we must take heed we do not abuse,
and turn them to evil ends; for God made apparel to cover our shame, and to
keep us warm, therefore we must take heed we do not use it to pride; He
made our meat to feed us, and nourish us, we must take heed that we abuse
it not to gluttony and drunkenness; and so of the rest. If a servant should be
allowed a candle to do his business by, Simile.
and should therewith go and set the house on fire, this were not the masters
sin, but the servants, he shall answer for it, for his master gave him a
candle to do his business by, and not to set his house on fire: so (...) we
abuse the creatures of God, and turn them to wrong ends, the fault is not in
God that gave them, but it is our fault and we shall answer for it.

Thirdly, seeing God made all the world good, we should wish to reduce them to
their former state; Use 3.
which seeing we cannot do, we should labor to bring our selves to our
former estate and goodness again. And should therefore apply our selves to
the use of good means, as preaching, prayer, reading of the word, meditation,
the use of the Sacraments and the like. If a man should make an Image or
picture, and it should be defaced, Simile.
the eyes plucked out, or the face deformed, or wanting a hand, or a part of
it, if the picture had life and reason, whether would it go to be renewed, but
to him that made it? so seeing sin has defaced us, whither should we go to
be renewed, but to him that made us? As David makes his request, Psalm. 119. 73.
Thine hands have made me, and fashioned me, give me understanding that I may
learn thy commandments: even so should we, if we feel any defects or wants
in our selves, go to God, and desire him to restore us again; so that
although we cannot reduce the creatures to their former estate, yet we must
labor to restore our selves again.

Sixthly, In what time the Lord made heaven and earth? he could have made it
in a moment, Sixthly, in what time God made all.
in six hours: but he was six days in making it. Here we may see the
great power of God, that he was able to do that in six days, that all the
powers of heaven and earth are not able to do in six thousand years, nay,
not at all: it is a long time since the world was made, and yet all the
creatures in the world could not make such an heaven and earth in all this
time, we can do nothing without time, although we be willing to do for our
friend, yet we will say, I pray you give me time, I must have time to do it
in: Solomon was thirteen years in building the Temple, and the Jews were
forty years; but God made the world in six days. Men must have time for all
things; so we see Moses was a long time in delivering the people out of Egypt,
and Joshua was seven years in placing of them: and Daniel must have time to
interpret the dream, Dan. 2. 16.
but Gods power is not tied to any time, he is able at an instant to help us,
and therefore we must take heed we do not tie the power of God unto time:
Matthew. 19. 20. The woman that had a bloody issue, did but touch the hemme of
Christ's garment, and was made whole; and Luke 5. 13. He did but touch the
Leper, and he was made clean, and Mat. 8. when his Disciples were at the sea,
in great distress, when the winds blew, and the ship was in danger of sinking,
and drowning, Christ did but speak a word, and there was a great calm: such a
change the Lord can make still, that if there be any danger upon our persons,
or in our estates, he is able to remove it, and to make a great calm, in a
moment: therefore we are not to tie Gods power to any time, he can do great
matters in a short time.

God made the world, and all things in it, in six days, but he was thirty
three years in redeeming of us; therefore the work of our redemption is a
greater work than the work of our creation. So S. Ambrose says, O Lord, I am
more beholding to thee, for that thou have redeemed me by thy blood of thy
Son, when I was lost by sin, than I am, for that thou have created me by
the hand of thy power. Therefore it is a pitiful thing, that neither the
work of our creation, nor the work of our redemption can moove us; the Lord
may say to us, as he did to the children of Israel in Esai. 5. 4. What is it
that I can do more for my vineyard, that I have not done? so the Lord may say
to us, what could I have done more for you? I have created you, and made you
reasonable creatures, and when ye were lost by sin, I have redeemed you; I
was content to be borne of a Virgin to be laid in a manger, to shead my
blood, and to dye for you: what could I have done more for you? We read Genesis
30. 16. Leah said unto Jacob, Come in unto me, for I have bought: thee, and
have paid for thee with my sons mandrakes; such a claim and challenge the
Lord may lay to us, Come unto me, live, and abide with me, for I have bought
you, and paid for you; I have not only bought you with mandrakes, but I have
bought you with mine own blood: The Lord was but six days in making the
world, but he was thirty three years in redeeming of it; hence this Question.

But why was the Lord six days in making of this world? Quest.
he could have made it in a moment, in six hours:

I answer, Sol.
it was to determine the time of man's labor, that seeing God did labor six
days together before he rested, and then rested the seventh day;so we should
labor six days, 1
and rest the seventh day; as Leviticus 23. 3. Six days shall work be done,
but the seventh day is the sabbath of rest. Again, he was six days to show
the ordinary course of Gods labor, that, God brings not things together at
once, but by little and little:even as a man when he fills a bottle or
vessel, 2
first he fills it to the quarterne, and then to the half, and then unto
the top,; so it is in the work of grace, it is not perfect at an instant,
Simile.
but in time it shall be perfect; for as the Lord was six days in making of
the world, and filling it; even so the Lord is many days in furnishing the
soul of man with graces, though grace be but weak at first in us, yet it
shall be perfect in time; therefore the graces of God are compared to a seed
that is but little at the first, Simile.
and not to a stone, for a stone grows not; but a seed albeit it be little
at the beginning, yet it will grow greater. No man therefore ought to be
discouraged at small beginnings of grace, for although they be little at
first, yet they shall be perfect in time. And although things depend on the
power of nature, yet they do much more depend on the power of God: for before
the Lord made the Sun, and Moon, and the stars, he made the trees to bud,
and herbs to grow; where nature was wanting, his power was assistant; Psalm.
78. 19. say the children of Israel, Can God prepare a table in the wilderness?
they looked not to the power of God: so likewise of Moses who was a good man,
Numb. 20. 11. it is said, He stroke the rock twice; he looked to the power
of nature, but the power of God is beyond the power of nature: when the power
of nature fails, yet the power of God is able to do anything: and therefore
we see Abraham believed God, when the power of nature failed, Romans 4. He
considered not the deadness of his own body, which was almost an hundred
years old, nor the deadnes of Sarahs womb; neither doubted he of the promise of
God through unbeleefe, but was strengthened in the faith, and gave glory to
God, being fully assured, that he that had promised, was able to perform it;
so thou that art a Christian, never doubt but that God is able to raise thee
out of thy sins, or out of the grave, and to give thee life; for things depend
not so much on the power of nature, but much more on the power of God.

Seventhly, Seventhly, in what order all things were made.
the order, first he made the heavens and then the earth: as we see, Genesis 1.
And therefore where God begins his work first, there a Christian must
begin his care to seek for heaven; our Savior says, Matthew. 6. 33. First,
seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all other things shall
be ministered unto you: so that where God begins his work, there a Christian
must begin his care, to make heaven sure to himself, which when he has
done, he may the better look for these earthly things: it is a corruption
that men seek for these earthly things first, and never seek for heavenly till
they be sick or come to dye.

Secondly, Quest.
in the order that God made the world, we may observe that God made all the
creatures before he made man, he was the last; some man may say, sol.
Why was He the last that was made? I answer, there be three reasons of it.

1. It was to honor man. 2. To teach him. 3. To further him in the best
things.
First, Reason 1.
it was to honor man, for it was a great honor to man, that God did not bring
him into a bare and naked world, but that he had first furnished it with all
things needful for man's use and delight. Simile.
Even as a king when he is purposed to go to a town, or place, his provision
goes before, all is furnished, and made ready before he comes, which makes
for the honor of the King: so God had made all for man's use, and had furnished
the world with them, before he made man. This serves for the honor of man, and
therefore seeing God has honored man, let us labor to honor him again.

Secondly, Reason 2.
to teach man, that he was not the maker of them; for if all the creatures
were made before man was made, he being the last, and there found them all
before, this is a plain evidence that man made them not: and therefore if
there be any creature that is comfortable or delightful to us, God is to be
thanked and praised for it, not our selves.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
to further man in the best things, for the Lord provided all things for the
use of man to delight him, that he might take the more time to provide for
heavenly things; for the richer a man is, and the more plentiful the Lord has
provided for Him, the better heart and encouragement he may take to look
after the things of eternal life, and the greater vantage he has in the
worship and service of God. Therefore when as God does give a man riches, and
furnish him with all things needful for his life, he should not misspend
them, neither in wantonness or profaneness, in swilling or drinking, and
such like; but he should take the more time for things of eternal life, as Deu.
10. 12. And now O Israel, SER. VII.
what does the Lord require at thy hands, but to fear the Lord thy God, and to
walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve him, with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul? when they had filled their barnes and houses with corn
and other fruits of the earth (says the Lord) And now Israel, what does the
Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear him, and to walk in all his ways?
so when God has filled our barnes with corn, and has made a supply of things
needful, then the Lord looks we should love, fear and serve him; for if we
will not serve the Lord for his blessings, we shall serve our enemies in want:
so we see in Deuteronomy. 28. 47. Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with
joyfulnesse, and with a good heart, for the abundance of all things; Therefore
thou shall serve thine enemies which the Lord thy God shall send upon thee in
hunger, and in thirst and in nakedness, etc.

Eighthly, Eighthly, all was made for man's benefit.
the end, why God made this world, and all things: It was for man's good, and
man's benefit. It was to do good to mankind that God made Heaven and earth, the
Sun, Moon and stars, that he made all the creatures. And whereas God was
most blessed in himself, before there was a Heaven or earth, and needed not to
have been grieved with our sins; yet notwithstanding He was not content to
be blessed in himself, and to keep it, but he would communicate his
goodness and his blessedness to his creatures, and draw man into communion
with him: and therefore we should be ashamed to grieve God with our sins,
seeing he powers out his goodness, and his blessings unto us daily.

SERMON. VII.
MATTHEW. 1. 21. And thou shall call his Name, Jesus, etc.
THe faith of a Christian, Simile.
is like the Fishes in a pond, that as long as there is water in it, so long
they tarry, but if the water go out of the Pond, then the Fishes go with it:
so is the faith of a Christian, God the Father he is the fountain of the
Deity, therefore as long as the Deity remained in the Fountain; so long our
faith was there, but when the Deity did flow into the Person of the Son,
then our faith goes with it; and whithersoever the Deity goes, thither goes
the faith of a Christian. Now the faith that we have in the Son of God, is
to be considered three ways:

1. In his Titles. ARTIC. II.
2. In his Incarnation. 3. In his twofold Estate; of 1. Humiliation. 2.
Exaltation.

Concerning his Titles we believe,

1. That he is Jesus. 2. That he is Christ. 3. That he is the only Son. 4.
That he is our Lord, according as the Angel says here in this place, And thou
shall call his name Jesus.
Now in the faith we have in this title Jesus, there be three things employed:

1. That he is a Savior. 2. That in the matter of our Salvation there is no
other Jesus but this Jesus. 3. That as he is Jesus, so he is our Jesus: and
will save us in the day of death and Judgment.
First, First, He is Jesus.
Jesus as the Angel tells us, and as we all know, it signifies A Savior; we
believe that Jesus is a Savior, and will save us at the day of death, and at
the day of judgment: As Matthew. 18. For the Son of man is come to save that
which was lost: And 1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a true saying, says the Apostle, and
by all means worthy to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners, etc. So Ioh. 4. 14. And we have seen, and do testify that the
Father sent his Son to be the Savior of the world. So that if he be the
true Savior of the world, all that will be saved, must seek to be saved by
him, for God saves not, but by the means which he himself has appointed;
therefore we must seek to that. It is a rule in Divinity, That such means as
God has appointed for the saving of us, Simile.
such we must apply our selves to; as God appointed an Arc for saving of
Noab and his family from drowning, so that all that would be saved must fly
to the Arc: so likewise if any were stung with the fiery serpents, he had
appointed a brazen serpent, that if any, bitten with the fiery serpent, looked
up, they should be helped; and if any were stung, and did not look up, and
cast up their eyes there on the brazen serpent, they were not helped: Even so
God has appointed Jesus to be the means of salvation, therefore all that
will be saved, must seek to Jesus to be saved. Ioh. 1. 37. John as soon as
he pointed at Jesus, and said, Behold the Lamb of God: the two Disciples left
all and followed him: Simile.
so we should do, when we hear it is Jesus that must save us, at the day of
death and judgment, we should be contented to leave all pleasures, Use 1.
and profits, and our sins, and whatsoever is dear to us, to be saved by
Jesus. But it is a pitiful thing that men desire to be saved at the day of
judgment, and after death to be blessed, and yet never seek to Christ:
Christ complains of this in Ioh. 5. 40. But ye will not come unto me, that
ye might have life. As if he should say, ye desire to be blessed, and to be
saved, but ye will not come to me, to have life, and to be saved. It is the
sin of the world, that they intend matters of pleasure, and profit, and never
seek to Christ to be saved; if a strange Surgeon, or Physician should come
into the country, if we conceive him to be good, Simile.
or hear he is, O how men will seek to him, that they may be helped of their
disease, or of their wounds, but here is the fault, that men do not seek to
Jesus, who is able to bring light out of darkness, health out of sickness,
life out of death.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing Jesus is the Savior, therefore we must bring our wives, and children,
our servants, friends and them we wish well, to Christ Jesus to be saved.
Mark. 2. 3. There was a man sick of the Palsy, who because he was not able
to come himself, was brought by four men, and presented before Christ, and so
was healed; so we should do, present our children and friends at the feet of
Christ by prayer, and them we wish well to, that he may save and bless them,
As Mark. 10. 14. They brought little children to him, that he might touch
them: A learned man says well, he is the Savior of little children,
therefore we must bring them, to Christ, and present them by prayer to him,
that he may save and bless them.

Thirdly, seeing Jesus is the Savior, it shows naturally, we are all lost in
our selves, Use 3.
under the curse of God, and out of the estate of Salvation, and therefore must
seek to Christ to be saved, as Matthew. 18. 11. The Son of man is come to
seek, and to save that which is lost: as a lost sheep is not at rest, Simile.
but runs here and there and cries to the shepherd, and is not at rest till
he be in the fould again: so we should do, we should cry to the
shepherd, and never be at rest, till we be brought home to God again.

In the words of the Angel we may observe three things:

1. Whom he shall save; his own people. 2. By what means; not by strong hand,
or fighting for them, but by dying and suffering for them. 3. From what he
shall save them; from their sins.
First, First, whom he shall save.
whom he shall save: he shall save his own people; so that if we be not the
people of Christ, we cannot be saved. A number of men think that seeing all
be sinners, and Christ dyed for sinners, therefore all shall be saved; but
this is an error in the world, for he shall save none but his own people: and
therefore if we will be saved, we must labor to be the people of Christ,
obedient to his commandments, to live under his government, and to be guided
and governed by him in all our actions; for if we be not gathered home unto
him, obey him, and live under his government, we are none of his people, and
then we cannot look to be saved. It is said, Psalm. 18. 27. He will save the
humble, and will cast down the proud. Now who be the humble people, even such
as be brought low upon the consideration of their sins, and sit under the
burden of them at the feet of Christ, these be the people that shall be saved.

Secondly, Secondly, bo^ Christ saves his people.
how he shall save them, not by strong hand, nor by fighting for them, but by
suffering for them; as it is said, Ioh. 1. Behold the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world: even as the lamb in the Law, typified the taking
away of sin, so Jesus took away our sin. In the Law when they brought a
Lamb to offer, Simile.
the man made confession of his sins on the head of the Lamb, and put them
upon the Lamb, the Lamb was killed, and the man went free: so all our sins
was laid on Christ, He was killed, and we go free, Jesus saves us, by
giving his life for us: as Matthew. 20. 28. His pattern is proposed unto us,
Even as the Son of man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his
life for the ransom of many; so 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare our
sins in his body on the tree, that we being delivered from sin should live
in righteousness, by whose stripes we are healed. Jesus did save us, by giving
his soul and body as a ransom for us, our sins were put upon him, he took
our room and place, and so stood as a malefactor before God, arraigned and
condemned for us, and suffered the torment that we should have suffered: thus
did Jesus save us, by interposing and giving himself to pay for us whatsoever
God would require at our hands, and therefore as Rebekkah said to her son
Jacob, Genesis 27. 12. (when he was loath to go to his father, to steal the
blessing) On me, my son, be the curse; if there be any blessing, or benefit
to be found, on thee be the blessing, but on me the curse; so Christ says to
his people, if there be any blessing, or if there be any good, or benefit, on
you be the blessing, on you be the good, and benefit, but on me (my people) be
the curse. Thus Christ takes the sour, and leaves us the sweet, this is the
royal exchange we make with Christ. When Onesimus was run away from his
Master Philemon, and had stolen away things from him; being converted, Saint
Paul sent him home again with a letter, as we see Philemon 18. and says, If
he has done thee any wrong, or any injury, set it upon my score, I will pay
thee, I Paul have written it with my own hand: so Jesus does to us; we be
all run away from God, have done injury, and wrong to him, Christ meets with
us, and sends us back again with a Letter in our hands to this effect;
Christ's letter to the Father.
Father, if they have done thee any wrong or injury, do not require it at
their hands, but put it on my cross, put it on my score, I will answer thee,
I Jesus have not written it with ink and paper, but with my own Blood.
Therefore seeing he has saved us by dying for us, let us take heed we do
not despise this great salvation which Jesus has wrought for us; Esaias, 53. 11.
it is said, he shall see the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied;
Christ has labored and traveled for us, and it cost him sore labor too, now
he has not labored for our meat, money; nor our goods, but he has labored
for our souls to bring us to repentance, to faith, and unto God; therefore if
we be brought to repentance, if to faith, if to God, this will satisfy
Christ, this will rejoice him, but if he cannot see the travel of his soul,
then it will repent and grieve him, that ever he swet in the garden, dyed on
the cross for us; therefore let Christ see the travel of his soul, and this
will satisfy Jesus: and thus Christ saved us not by strong hand, by fighting
for us, but by suffering and dying for us.

Thirdly, from what he saved us; He saved us from our sins: It is a sweet
thing to be saved from sickness, from fire and water, from the sword, but it
is a greater matter to be saved from our sins, than to be saved from sword,
fire and water; for we may be saved from these things, and yet our souls may
perish, therefore the greatest matter is, to be saved from our sins, which
howsoever we do not see it now, yet one day we shall; for one of these days
we shall dye (we know not how soon) and then we shall see what a great
matter it is to be saved from our sins; and at the day of judgment when the
heavens shall melt with fire, and the earth shall be dissolved, and heaven
open above us, and hell underneath us, and the devil ready to accuse us. Then
we shall see what a great blessing the pardon of sins is: from other things
therebee diverse ways and means to save us, but to save us from our sins
there is but one means, and that is the blood of Christ, therefore howsoever
we are thankful to God for other deliverances, yet above all, let us be
thankful that God has saved us from our sins, for he is a blessed man that
is thus saved from his sins, whatsoever his estate be in this world. So Psalm.
32. 1. Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered: he that is saved from his sins is a blessed and a happy man.

There be two dangerous things in sin, Guilt of Sin what.
the Guilt of sin, and the Power of sin, both these we are saved from: the
Guilt of sin is the binding of a man over to answer for it at the judgment
seat of God; and the Power of sin is the ruling and raging of sin in a
man. Now both these Christ saves us from, from the Guilt of sin, and the
Power of sin, for he saves no man from the Guilt of sin, but in some
measure he saves him from the Power of sin: it is true indeed that therebee
sins and weaknesses in the people of God, and will be so long as we carry
frail flesh about us (for we are regenerated but in part) therefore if there
be a striving against sin, Trial.
if there be a hatred, a loathing, and a distasting of them, then we are in
some measure saved from the Power of sin, and from the Guilt thereof; but if
we do not find this striving against it, this hatred and loathing of it,
then we are not saved as yet from the Power of sin, nor the Guilt thereof.
How shall a man know that lies in the jayle, Simile.
whether his friend has procured a pardon from the king or no; if the Iaylor
come and knock off the manacles on his hands, and the chains off his feet, by
this he shall know his friend has procured a pardon for him; but if this
party lie in the jayle still, bound in his fetters and chains, then it shows
there is no pardon come. So we may know when Christ has procured a pardon for
us or not, if we feel the chains and fetters of sin to be taken off from
us, a hatred, and loathing of them, a striving against them, it is a good
sign, but if we find our selves fast bound in our sins, and continue in
them, then as yet we cannot assure our selves they be pardoned.

The second thing that is employed in the title Jesus, Secondly, that there is
no Jesus but our Jesus.
is; That there is no other Jesus but this Jesus in the matters of salvation
and redemption, for there is no salvation to be found, but only in him: as
Act. 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other, for among men there is
given no other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved. In the time of
the Law there were diverse Saviors, as we may see, Iud. 2. 16. it is said,
that the Lord raised up Judges to deliver, or to save them, out of their
oppressors hands; but all these Saviors were but petty Saviors in regard of
Jesus, for they could not save their bodies, or their goods, but Jesus saves
our souls: as Psalm. 33. 18. Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that
fear him, and upon them that trust in his mercy to deliver their souls from
death, 1
and to preserve them in famine.

Secondly, these Saviors can but save us from tyrants and worldly misery; 2
but Jesus saves us from hell, the devil, and damnation. As Luke 1. 74. That
we being delivered from the hands of our enemies should serve him without fear
all the days of our life.

Thirdly, 3
they could but save them for a time, for when they were dead, straight way
they were oppressed again; but Christ has wrought eternal redemption for us:
so it is said, Heb. 5. 9. And being consecrated he was made the Author of
eternal Salvation, unto all them that obey him.

Fourthly, 4
these Saviors can save but for one age, they could not save them that were
before them, nor them that come after them; but Jesus saves men in all ages
from the beginning of the world, to the latter end of it.

Fifthly, 5
although they saved others, yet they could not save themselves, as Joshua was
discomfited when he went to Aye: and Sampson had his eyes plucked out:
therefore all these Saviors were but petty Saviors in respect of Jesus, and
beside Jesus there is no Savior in the matters of salvation and redemption.

The use is, Use 1.
first, that seeing there is no Jesus can save us, but this Jesus, we may see
the horriblenesse of our sins, and the grievousnesse of them, for when we
have sinned, no Angel could save us, no Saint nor all the powers in heaven or
earth, but it must cast the blood of the Son of God, it must be he that must
make atonement for us; therefore (as Augustine says) O man, by the greatness
of the price that was paid for thee, thou may consider the greatness of thy
sins, for it was not a small matter that made God to kill his own Son; and
therefore by the greatness of the price, consider the greatness of thy sins.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing there is no Jesus can save us but this Jesus, we should be careful to
avoid every sin, and to decline from it; for when we have sinned, there is
no power in heaven and earth whereby we can be saved, but it must cost the
blood of Christ. If a man should for every lie he told, Simile.
or every sin committed, lose but a drop of his own blood, how afraid would
he be of sinning? Now there is never a sin that we do commit but it has
cost blood, either it will cost our blood, or the blood of the Son of God,
and therefore how afraid should we be of sinning against God, lest we should
be more lavish of the blood of Christ, than we would be of our own.

Thirdly, 3
we believe, that as he is Jesus in general, so he will be our Jesus, and
will save us at the day of death and judgment. This is our comfort when we
are persuaded that Jesus is not only a Savior to others, Thirdly, that he
will be our Jesus.
but he is a Savior to us. Thomas could have no true comfort, till he could
say, My God, and my Lord; and this it was that comforted Job, I know my
Redeemer lives, etc. This also was a comfort to David, (says he) I should
have fainted, Job 19.
but that I believed to see the goodness of God in the Land of the living:
here then is the comfort of a Christian, when he can apply and appropriate
Christ to himself. Simile.
A man can have but little comfort of a house or land when he is showed it,
unless it be his own: so we can have but little comfort by Christ, unless
we can say, that Christ is as truly ours, as this house or land we enjoy is
ours; and as truly may a Christian say, that all Christ's merits is his, as a
man may say his coat on his back is his.

But how shall we come to know that Christ is ours? Quest.
I answer, Sol.
if we be his people, if we be contented to be guided and governed by him, if
we will obey his voice, then we be his people; but if we will not be gathered
home unto him, to live under his government, be guided by him and obey his
voice, we are none of his, neither can we rightly apply him to our comfort.

The second thing we believe of Jesus is, The second Branch is, that Jesus i^
that Christ.
that this Jesus that was the Son of Mary, Act. 2. 36.
and borne at Bethlem is the Christ; as Peter shows, Therefore let all the
house of Israel for a surely know, that God has made him both Lord and Christ:
this is also the confession the Disciples made of him, Ioh. 6. 69. And we
believe and know that thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God: and
Act. 9. 22. But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews
that dwelt at Damascus, proving that this was the Christ: and so the Angels,
proclaim him, Luke 2. 10. Be not afraid, says the Angel unto them, for
behold, I bring you tidings of great joy that shall be to all people, That is,
That unto you this day is borne in the city of David a Savior which is Christ
the Lord: so the Angel proclaimed that Jesus was the Son of Mary, and borne
at Bethlem: the devils also confess him to be Christ, Luke 4 41. so then there
can be no question of this, but that Jesus is the Christ. Now Christ is a
Greek word, and does signify Anointed, as Psalm. 103. 15. Touch not mine
Anointed, etc. Anointed is as much as to say, Christ: Now (...) is the same in
the Old, as (...) is in the new Testament; as Ioh. 1. 41. We have found the
Messiah, which is by interpretation, the Christ; and the Samaritans make this
confession of him, Ioh. 4 42. For we have heard him our selves, and know that
this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world: so that Christ is the
Savior of the world, and the Anointed, and the Messiah, he that was set apart
for the great work of redemption. From hence that Christ is the Messiah or the
Anointed, five things are to be considered:

1. What is meant by Anointing. 2. With what he was Anointed. 3. By whom he was
Anointed. 4. To what he was Anointed. 5. What benefit we have by his Anointing.
First, what is meant by Anointing. In the Law were three things implied in
Anointing: First, what is meant by Anointing.


1. That the Party Anointed was designated or appointed to that work or
calling by God. 2. A declaration that God had enabled him with graces to
discharge or execute fitly that work or calling that was assigned him. 3. That
the Party anointed was made grateful and acceptable to the people.
This we may see in the anointing of Solomon in Mount Sion: first, that he was
assigned and appointed by God; secondly, that he was declared to be made fit
for that calling that he was appointed to; thirdly, he was made grateful and
acceptable to the people: so it was in the anointing of Christ;

1. That he was designated and appointed by God for the great work of
Redemption. 2. A declaration that God had enabled him to the work with gifts
fit to discharge this calling. 3. That he was made grateful and acceptable to
the Church and all them that had to deal with him.
First, as the party anointed in the Law was thereby appointed for the work;
First, Assignation to the work of Redemption.
so Christ was designed unto the great work of Redemption, and saving of man;
he did not intrude and thrust himself into this calling, but he was appointed
of God unto it: so Heb. 5. 4. And no man takes this honor unto himself, but
he that is called of God, as was Aaron: so likewise Christ took not this
honor to be high Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this
day begat I thee, gave it him: so that Christ did not intrude, and thrust
himself upon it, but it was God that put him upon the business, and appointed
him for the work of redemption. Christ says of himself, Ioh. 7. 28. Yet am I
not come of my self, but he that sent me is true whom ye know not. And so
Peter, Let all the house of Israel know of a surety, Act. 2. 36.
that God has made him both Lord and Christ. Now what may this teach us, that
Christ would not enter upon so needful a business, and so great a work, as
the saving of men's souls, that he would not intrude or thrust himself upon
it, till he was assigned and appointed of God.

This therefore must teach us, Use 1.
that we should not intrude or thrust our selves upon any business, or upon
any calling, till it be assigned or appointed of God unto us. This is the
reason in the Scripture, why the holy men are so careful to approve their
calling; as Exodus 3. 15. And God spoke further unto Moses, Thus shall thou say
unto the Children of Israel; The Lord God of your Fathers, the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaak, the God of Jacob has sent me unto you: so David confesses,
Psalm. 18. 43. Thou have made me the head of the Gentiles: so Ier. 17. 16. But I
have not thrust in my self for a Pastor after thee: and Amos 7. 14. Then
answered Amos and said unto Amaziah, I was no Prophet, neither was I a Prophets
son, but I was an heardman, and gathered wild figgs, and the Lord took me,
as I followed the flock, and the Lord said unto me, Go prophecy unto my
people Israel. Thus we see that we should not attempt or thrust our selves
upon any business or calling, till we be assigned or appointed of God to it:
we read Luke 12. 14. when the man came to Christ to have divided his
Inheritance, Man, says he, who made me a judge and a divider? we see that
Christ would not intrude himself into that he was not assigned to. What shall
we say then to them that are ready to thrust themselves upon every matter like
Peter, John 21. 22. When Christ had told him, what should befall him, Peter
says to Christ, What shall this man do? Christ's answer is, What is that to
thee? Look to thine own business, and look to thy own calling: so when we
are busy about other men's callings or matters, and intrude into them, not
having any calling from God, Christ's reproof may well be applied, what is that
to thee? meddle with thy own business, Simile.
and calling. A river as long as it keeps within his own banks runs
clear; but if it swell and flow over the banks, it gathers a great deal of
soil, and baggage: so as long as a man keeps within his bounds, and banks,
all is well, but if he once break over, then he gathers a great deal of
corruption; therefore men must have wisdom not to intrude or meddle with a
business, till they have a calling from God, seeing Christ would not take a
needful work upon him, till he was appointed of God unto it.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing God appointed and assigned unto Christ this office of Redeeming and
saving us, and that he is well pleased with him, therefore we should so accept
of him, and receive him: as Psalm. 2. 12. Kiss the Son lest he be angry; as
if he should say, be ready to entertain, and to take him as the Lord of your
life: the reason whereof is given before, verse 6. Because he has set him as
King upon Sion his holy mountain, therefore we must kiss him, and seek to
have his favor, and to receive him as the Lord of our life. We read Ioh. 1.
11. it was the sin of the Jews that Christ came amongst his own, and his
own received him not; if they had been strangers, and had not known him to
be Christ, then the matter had been the less, but when they knew him (yet did
not receive him,) this made their sin the greater; so if we be strangers to
him, and know him not to be the Christ, our sins are the less, if we do not
receive him and entertain him; but if we know him, that God has made him
Christ, then our sins are so much the greater. When Peter had proclaimed him to
be Christ unto the Jews, Act. 2. 37.
straight way they were pricked in their hearts, and were ready to receive him:
O that this might work the like affection in us, that when we hear that God
has made him Christ, and the Lord of life, that we might be pricked in our
hearts, and be contented to let all go, to lay hold of him.

Secondly, The second work of Anointing was, to show sufficiency for the
work.
this anointing was to be done upon the People to show that he so chosen, was
furnished with all gifts and graces fit to discharge the calling and work he
was assigned unto. For as I have showed, in the Law Anointing was an outward
sign, that the party Anointed was gifted and graced, and had indowments of God
given him fit to discharge the calling and work he was assigned unto; so the
Scripture speaks of Christ, that he was Anointed, he had the gifts and graces
of the Spirit powered upon him, he was not a weak one, but he was enabled of
God for the work of redemption. In Esaias, it is said, the people make me no
prince, nor I can be no helper, I have no bread in my house, nor clothing; but
Christ cannot say so, for God has fitted him with gifts and graces to do the
work he has assigned him unto. Of Christ it is said, Psalm. 89. 19. Thou
speak then in a vision unto thine holy One, and saidest, I have laid help
upon one that is mighty; so then, it is not laid upon one that is a weak man,
to faint under the burden, but one that is mighty, able to go through with
that he is appointed; and therefore as mighty Sampson rose at midnight, Judge.
16. 3.
and carried away the gates of Gaza unto the top of an high mountain; so this
Christ the mighty one has risen from death and carried away the gates of hell,
and of death, and is ascended into Heaven: by reason whereof Heb. 7. 25. It is
said, He is able perfectly to save them, that came unto God by him, seeing he
lives ever to make intercession for them: therefore we come not to a weak
man, as the other high Priests were, but to a mighty One. This is a comfort
unto a Christian that God has furnished him with gifts and graces, and has
enabled him to go through this great work of redemption, therefore he will
not leave it in the middle, but will go through with the great work assigned
him: it was the comfort of the Leper, Matthew. 8. when he came to Christ, that if
Christ would, he could make him clean: so it is the comfort of a Christian
when he knows there is power in Christ to help him, that Christ the Lord, if
he will, can make him clean and save him.

Thirdly, The third use of Anointing, was acceptance of all he dealt with.
by his anointing the party was made grateful, and acceptable to all that had
to deal with him, as in the Law the Priests and Prophets and Kings, such as
were anointed, drew all to them (whom they had to do withal) in delight of
their persons and their sweet anointments that was powered upon them; so the
anointing of Christ, and the sweet graces of the Spirit powered without measure
on him, does draw all that have to deal with him, to delight in him. His
Person was first acceptable to God; secondly, to the Church.

First, he was acceptable to God; as Ephesians. 5. 2. it is said, And has given
himself for us to be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor
to God. When our sins were upon him, they made a strong and stinking smell in
the nostrils of God, the sins we live in, and be guilty of; therefore if it
were not for this same sweet ointment that is powered out on him, (the graces
of his Spirit,) our sins would make us odious, and hateful in the sight of
God, such a strange and stinking smell our sins have. Now as the Person of
Christ was made delightful and acceptable to God, so he was acceptable to the
Church: as Cantic. 1. 2. it is said, Because of the savor of thy good
ointments, thy Name is as a precious ointment powered forth, therefore do the
virgins love thee; all that be virgins, that have chaste souls: so Psalm. 45. 8.
All thy garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia, therefore Kings daughters
stand at thy right hand, and the honorable women, the gallant people of the
world, are drawn by the sweetness of his clothes. But it is a pitiful thing
to see the world does not delight light in the presence of Christ, and are not
drawn unto him: the reason is, because they do not smell the sweet ointment
that was powered out upon Christ, they smell a sweetness in their pleasures,
profits, and in their sins, but they do not smell the sweet ointment powered
out on Christ; and therefore they do not seek to him, and delight in him. We
see in the Gospel that the people flocked, thronged, and followed after Christ
three days journey together, what was the reason of it? because they had
tasted of the Spirit, and had smelt of this same sweet ointment, which made
them leave all and follow him: so the graces that were powered upon him, made
him delightful to all that had to deal with him, to God, and to the Church.

The second maine thing is, Secondly, with what he was anointed.
with what he was anointed: in the Law they were anointed with material oil;
As 1 Samuel 10. Samuel powered out an horn of oil on Saul but Christ was not
anointed with material oil, but with the holy Ghost, with the gifts of the
Spirit, of which the oil was but a shadow; as Esai. 61. 1. The Spirit of the
Lord is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me; therefore the anointing of
Christ is not by pouring out material oil on him, but by pouring out the
gifts and graces of the Spirit upon him; Psalm. 45. 7. it is said, that God had
Anointed him with the oil of gladness above his follows.

Now the reason why these graces are compared to oil is, The Graces of the
Spirit comparted to Oil. First, Oil softens.
because oil will soften, and make a thing supple; for take a little oil and
anoint any one part, and it will make that part lithy and nimble; or take a
little oil, and put it into a lock, and it will make it nimble to stir this
way, and that way: so if once a little of this oil be powered into our hearts,
it will make us quick and nimble which before were slow and dull in the
service of God; this is one reason why it is compared to oil. Of Sampson Judge.
14. it is said, that the Spirit of God came upon him, and then he was able to
do great matters; and Acts. 2. when the holy Ghost came down upon the
disciples in cloven tongues, then they were able to speak to Gods glory; 1 Samuel 19. 23.
and when the Spirit of God came upon Saul he would prophecy: so then we see
the Spirit of God will make a man fit and nimble for any service that God does
call unto; many men complain they be heavy hearted, and dull in the service of
God, and they cannot pray, let them get but a little of this oil, and it will
make them fit for any service and duty that God requires.

Secondly, it is called the Oil of gladness, because it makes every man glad
that has it, Secondly, Oil makes cheerful.
for let a man have but a drop of this Oil and it will make him glad, more to
rejoice than all things else: The worldly man delights in his profits, the
wanton in his pleasure, but if we have but a drop of this oil, it will make us
rejoice in the love and favor of God. Psalm. 4. 6, 7. David says, Lord lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, this shall glad our hearts more,
than they of their great increase of corn, and wine and oil: so if we get
but a little of this oil, the graces of his Spirit it will make us glad. Act.
8. 37. The Eunuch had but a little of this oil, and he went away rejoicing:
the city of Samaria had but a little of this oil, and they received the word
with great joy. There be a number complain they cannot be merry, they have joy
in nothing; the reason is, because they want this oil; therefore let us fling
away our sins and corruptions, labor to repent of them and get of this oil,
that makes every man glad, which made Paul and Silas sing at midnight in a
dungeon, Act. 16. 25.
and the three Children rejoice in the fiery furnace, and Peter sleep in his
chains: what was the reason of this? because they had got a little of this
oil of gla^nesse. Therefore no marvel though men cannot be merry if they want
this oil, for if they have it, it will make them rise at midnight to sing
Psalms, and will make them sleep sweetly in the time of trouble. Therefore it
is our comfort whatsoever Christ has done in the work of redemption, God will
accept of it.

The third point is, Thirdly, with what he was Anointed.
who it was that did anoint him: It was God; as Psalm. 45. God, even thy God,
has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows: so Peter,
Act. 2. 36. Let all the house of Israel know for a surety, that God has made
him Lord and Christ: In the Law we see one man anointed another, as Moses
anointed Aaron; Samuel anointed Saul, and Elias anointed Elisha: but it was God
that did Anoint Christ. Of this there be three Uses:

First, Use 1.
seeing God has anointed him, he is the Lords Anointed, therefore we must take
heed we do no injury and wrong to Christ; as Psalm. 105. 15. Touch not mine
Anointed, etc. if he be Gods Anointed take heed we do not wrong him. Why may
a man do wrong, and injury to Christ? I answer with Paul, Heb. 10. He that
sins willingly, there is no repentance for him, but a fearful looking for
of judgment. If men sin and will not repent, but live in them without
repentance, and commit sins against their knowledge wittingly and willingly,
grieving God, trampling and treading under foot the blood of the son of God
in the dust, and making it of none effect.

Secondly, that seeing he is Gods Anointed take heed we do no injury or wrong
to Christ in his members; Use 2.
for a man doing wrong to a Christian may do wrong to Christ in his members:
it is Saint Paul's doctrine, 1 Cor. 8. 12. When ye sin so against the
brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing God has anointed him, therefore we must anoint him, our hands must
follow the hands of God: we see in the Gospel, the woman got a box of costly
ointment, and did power it on Christ as he sat at the Table: so we must do,
get a box of ointment, and power it out on Christ, and so anoint him.

Bernard shows there be three sorts of ointment. 1
First, to anoint the feet of Christ, as the woman that we read of Luke 7. 46.
so a Christian must begin at the feet of Christ first. And with what must he
anoint him? first, with the oil of contrition, grief and sorrow for his
sins, to sit down at the feet of Christ, and to lament and mourn for them;
there is no ointment that is bought at the Apothecaries shop so sweet to us,
as this oil of contrition is to Christ.

Secondly, we must anoint the head of Christ; as the woman we read of Matthew.
26. 7. And with what? with the oil of devotion, with the best duty and
service we can do unto him: if we know any thing that will please God best,
that we should do.

Thirdly, we should anoint the body of Christ, as Joseph of Aramathea did, 3
he bought a great deal of sweet spices to anoint the body of Christ; and so
we must do: but with what should we anoint the body of Christ? with the oil of
compassion, and if there be any of the members of Christ that stand at need, we
should be ready to show compassion on them, our hands must follow the hands of
God, as he anointed Christ so must we.

Fourthly, to what end he was anointed. We all know he was anointed to be a
Prophet, Fourthly, to what end Christ was anointed.
a Priest, and a King: now there were three sorts of men anointed in the Law:
first, Prophets, as Elias anointed Elisha to be a Prophet in his room, ^
Kings 19. 16. secondly, Priests were anointed as Aaron, and Eleazer his son:
thirdly, Kings were anointed as Saul, and David, 1 Samuel 10. In the time of the
Law, two of these offices fell out to be in one man, as Melchisedech was a
Priest and a King; and David was a Prophet and a King; Jeremy was a Priest and
a Prophet; but all these offices were not in any one man until Christ came: in
whom these were fulfilled, the other anointings were but Types and shadows, he
was the substance; Christ was anointed to all these offices; He was a Prophet,
to teach us his Fathers will; a Priest, to make atonement for us, and
intercession; A King, to reign over us, to defend and protect us.

First, First, Christ is a Prophet.
he is a Prophet, to declare the will of God; Christ has declared the will of
God to his people, and therefore he is a Prophet; so says Peter, Act. 3. 22.
that Moses said to the Fathers, the Lord your God shall raise up unto you a
Prophet, even of your Brethren, like unto me; ye shall hear him in all things
whatsoever he shall say unto you: so says the woman of Samaria, Sir, I
perceive thou art a Prophet, etc. John 4.
All other Prophets did teach but part of Gods will, but he has revealed his
whole will, and therefore Christ is the great Prophet of the Church; as Luke.
7. 16. when they saw Christ had raised up that man that was dead, they
glorified God and said, a great Prophet is raised up among us, and God has
visited his people. It is said, Matthew. 4. 16. The people that sat in
darkness saw great light, and to them that sat in the region and shadow of
death, light is risen up; all the Prophets that were before him, were as little
lights to him, he was the great light that made all things. If a man set up a
candle, it will give light in one room, set up a torch and it will give a
greater light, Simile.
but what are all these lights to the light of the Sun? so all the Prophets
that were before Christ, were but all little lights to this, and pointed to
Christ, he was the great light that made all things manifest.

The use is, Use.
that seeing Christ is the great Prophet of the Church, therefore we must
hear him: Ast. 3. 23. Saint Peter says, That every person which shall not
hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed out from among the people; therefore he
that does despise, and will not hear him speaking unto us, that person shall
be cut off and destroyed. So Heb. 2. 21. For if the word spoken by Angels was
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense
of reward, how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, etc. And
therefore seeing he is the great Prophet of the Church, we must hear and
regard him. I showed you in the morning, it was a sweet thought in God, Matthew.
21. 38. when he had sent his servants the prophets, they beat them and killed
them, and stoned them, at last he sent his son, It may be, says he, they
will reverence him; it was a sweet thought in God, that not withstanding they
had done all to his servants they could, that God would send his Son,
therefore seeing he has sent him, we must hear him, unless we will perish.
But how can we hear Christ, he is in heaven? I answer, two ways Christ
reaches his Church here:

1. By His Word. Christ teaches by the Word and Sacraments.
2. By the Sacraments.
First, He teaches his Church by his Word; for the Word is nothing else but
the very voice of Christ; and therefore when we read the Word, we ought to
reverence it as the voice of Christ speaking to us.

Secondly, he teaches his Church by the mystery of the Sacraments, which when
they speak to us in his name, it is the voice of Christ: so 1 Pet. 3. 19. By
the which Spirit he went and preached to the spirits that were in prison, etc.
Christ did not preach unto them in his own Person but by man: so Ephesians. 2. 17.
it is said, that Christ came and preached peace to them afar off, and to them
that were near. Now Christ did not preach to the Gentiles in his own Person,
but by the Ministry of his servants, therefore as often as his servants come
to us in his name with his word in their mouths, it is Christ that teaches us,
and then, so often as we hear, we hear the voice of Christ; as the Church
says in the Can. 5. 2. It is the voice of my beloved. The greatest part of the
world do not believe this, Cantic. 5. 2.
they are not persuaded when the minister speaks unto them from the word of
God, that it is the voice of Christ, therefore they condemn it and do not
regard it, but when we know that Christ speaks unto us by the Ministry of
his Word, or by his servants, we should say as Samuel said, Speak Lord, for
thy servant hears; so Psalm. 85. David says, I will harken what God says,
for he speaks peace to his people: let the world speak of their pleasures,
profits, and talk what they will of me, I will hark what God says; so a
Christian must do, whatsoever the world talk and speak, yet he must hark
what Christ speaks unto him.

Secondly, he was Anointed to be a Priest, as Psalm. 110. 4. Thou art a Priest
for ever after the order of Melchizedech: Secondly, Christ was a Priest.
so Heb. 7. 26. For such an high priest it become us to have which is holy,
harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, made higher than the heavens. Of
his Priestly office there be two parts:

1. To reconcile and make us at one with God. 2. To make intercession for us.
In the Law when a man had sinned, he brought an offering to the Priest,
Simile.
the Priest must offer for him, and so make reconciliation between God and
him; so when we have sinned against God, it must be Christ that must reconcile
us and make us at one again with God. But there is a great difference between
Christ's sacrifice, and the Priests; for the Priests in the Law made an
atonement with the blood of beasts: but Christ makes an atonement with his own
blood; there was never a Priest in the Law that would shed his blood for the
best of the people, but Christ has shed his blood for the meanest of his
servants, and therefore we have great cause to esteem of the Priesthood of
Christ, for all the joy we have in God, and hope of heaven hangs on him; for
when a man has sinned against God, there is no man dare stand before God, till
Christ has engaged himself, answered God, and made him at one with him: when
a man has sinned against God, all the Angels cannot make Atonement for him,
nor all the powers in heaven and earth, all the gold in Ophir c^^^ot redeem a
soul, but it must be Christ with his own blood that m^^t make reconciliation
with God for us: therefore we are highly to esteem of the Priesthood of
Christ, for all other comforts and joy depend on it.

The second Priestly duty is, that he makes intercession for us, being entered
into the heavens, within the clouds to appear before God, and to make
intercession for us; so we see Heb. 1. 25. Wherefore he is able perfectly to
save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession
for them: so Heb. 9. 24. for Christ is not entered into places that are made
with hands, which are similitudes of the true sanctuary, but is entered into the
heavens to appear now in the sight of God for us; there be two bloods that
cry unto God, the blood of the Martyrs, and the blood of Christ; the blood of
the Martyrs cries for to be revenged, but the blood of Christ cries for mercy;
it cries not only from the cross for mercy, but it cries now as freshly
within the throne, and the veil, as ever it did; he makes request for us, and
as Austen says, he makes request after this manner; Good Lord, grant mercy to
them, Father forgive them, I have bought them with my blood, they be my poor
servants. Therefore here is a comfort to us, when we cannot pray as we ought,
nor we have none that can help us, this is the comfort that we Christians may
have, that Christ is ascended to heaven, and makes intercession for us.

The use is, that seeing we have such a benefit by the high priesthood of
Christ, it should make us hold fast our profession: this is the use that Paul
makes, says he, Seeing then we have a great high Priest which is carri^^ into
heaven, even Jesus the Son of God; Let us hold fast our profession; Let us
therefore go boldly to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and
find grace to help in the time of need: therefore let us not doubt but that
we shall be saved. Indeed, if the matter lay in us then we might doubt of
it, but seeing Christ has undertaken it, we must not doubt, unless we will
be so profane to think that Christ will fail us. I, but what may a man do
that Christ may undertake the matter for him? Simile.
he must do as a man that goes to a Lawyer* he tells him his case, and he
prays the Lawyer to undertake the matter for him; so a Christian must do,
he must go to Christ, and make his case known to him, and pray him to
undertake the matter, and so commit it unto him, and then Christ will not fail
him.

SERMON. VIII.
HEBREWS 1. 8, 9. But unto the son He says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever
and ever, a Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy kingdom. Thou have
loved Righteousness and hated iniquity, therefore God even thy God has
Anointed thee with the Oil of gladness above thy fellows.
IN the Anointing of Christ, there were five things offered to our
consideration: first, what is meant by the anointing: secondly, with what he
was anointed: thirdly, what it was that did anoint him: fourthly, to what he
was anointed: fifthly, what benefit we have by his anointing: He was Anointed
to be a Prophet, a Priest, and a King. How Christ is the Prophet of the
Church, and how he is the Priest has been showed already; it remains now to
show you how he is a King, for it is nothing to admit him to be the Prophet,
or to be our Priest unless we admit him to be our King.

Now that he is the King of the Church can no doubt; for Psalm. 2. it is said, I
have set my King upon the holy hill of Sion, and Zech. 9. he says, O Daughter
of Jerusalem, behold thy King comes unto thee, etc. And Luke 1. 32. the
Angel says, He shall be great, and shall be called the son of the Sost
High; and the Lord shall give unto him the throne of his father David, and he
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom shall be
none end. so we may see it is plain that Christ was a King, indeed Christ did
refuse to be a King Ioh. 6. 15. because they would have made him a temporal
king, there he departed into a Mountain: but when he was before Pilate Ioh.
18. 38^ Pilate asked him, if he were a King; Christ tells him, For this
cause was I borne, and for this cause came I into the World, that I should
bear witness to the truth. Now there be four Kingly duties that Christ does
exercise toward his Church:

First, The four Kingly Duties of Christ.
He does gather and draw Subjects to himself by his Word and Spirit: it is
not with the Kingdom of Christ, as with the kingdoms of the world; 1
for first, they be constituted and gathered, and then they have a king set
over them: as we see in David, his kingdom was constituted before he was
king; but Christ has not a Subject in his Kingdom but he must draw him, for
there is no man that is born a subject of his kingdom; but he must draw him out
of another kingdom, out of the kingdom of the devil, to make him a subject
in his kingdom; so we have it, Who has delivered us from the power of
darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear son: Col.
1. 13.
we see that Christ must draw us out of another kingdom to make us subjects in
his Kingdom; Job. 10. 16. Other sheep have I also which are not of this fold,
them also must I bring. This is a piece of his Kingly care, to draw aliens and
strangers unto himself to make them subjects in his Kingdom: Simile.
we see in experience, if a goodly Kingdom be set up, and great privileges
belong unto it, men wilseeke to be subjects of it: and yet Christ has set up a
kingdom and there are few that seek to be subjects of it; notwithstanding
all the kingdoms in this world are not like to it, in regard of the glory and
excellency and of the goodly privileges that do belong to it: yet what ado
has Christ to make men his subjects? he is someitmes drawing of a man twenty
or thirty years ere he can make him a subject of his Kingdom. Here we are to
consider the infinite goodness of God to us, that when we were under the
kingdom of the devil, at ods and war with him, yea even when we were at
defiance with him, then he was not contented till he had drawn us home to
himself to be made subjects in his Kingdom; here we may wonder and admire at
his goodness, that when men were at war and at defiance with him, he
laboreth then to draw them unto repentance: as Ezekiel. 16. 6. When I passed by
thee and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto thee when thou wast
in thy blood, Thou shall live; even when we be in our sins the Lord shows
compassion unto us. Act. 12. 7. When Peter was in prison and asleep in his
chains, the Angel of the Lord came and smote him on the side and bad him
arise; and the chains fell off from his hands: as the Angel brought him out
of prison, into the City, and threw the Iron bolts from him; so the Lord does
to us, we lie in our sins asleep, he comes and strikes us in our
consciences, not on our sides, brings us through the Iron gate (places of
danger) and never rests till he have brought us into the City to make us
subjects to his kingdom, that were formerly ever subjects to the devils
kingdom.

The second Kingly duty of Christ is, The second Kingly Duty.
That he governs his people by just and equal Laws: Psalm. 45. 6. he says,
Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever, the Scepter of thy kingdom is a
Scepter of righteousness; Thou love righteousness and hate wickedness,
etc. And Esai. 7. The increase of his government and peace shall have no end,
he shall sit upon the throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order and to
establish it with judgment, and with justice from henceforth and for evermore.
so Christ is our King to govern us by just and equal Laws, this is the
Kingly office of Christ; therefore every one that will be a subject to Christ's
Kingdom must be ruled and governed by his Laws: we see men can be contented
to be subjects to his Kingdom, etc. yet they will not be governed and guided
by his Laws, for they will swear though Christ says, Swear not all: he has
made a Law that we should not lie; yet men will lie; he commanded that men
should not profane the Sabbath and many will profane it; but every one that
is a subject to Christ's Kingdom must live by the Laws of Christ; it is a
great fault that men profess themselves to be Christians and yet will not be
ruled by his Laws. Ioh. 19. 7. The Jews said, they had a Law, and by that Law
Christ ought to dye; Indeed it was a Law of their own making, for there is no
Law of God to put an innocent and harmless man to death, but it was a Law of
their own; so we make a Law to our selves that men may swear or lie, and
whatsoever become of our neighbors, look to our selves, but it is of our own
devising, it is no Law of God: the old Soldiers bowed the knee to Christ,
Matthew. 27. 26.
and yet they spit in his face, they set a crown of thorns on his head and
put a reed into his hand; so it is with the world still, though they call him
their father and king, yet they will not be ruled by him, but even as it were
spit in his face, and set a crown of thorns on his head; this is that which
the world cannot away with nor brook, that he should be their king to govern
and guide them, they can be contented he should dye for them to save them, but
cannot endure that Christ should rule or reign over them. Luke 19. as soon as
Christ came amongst them they said, We will not have this man to reign over
us; so Psalm. 2. Let us break their bonds and cast away their cords; they
cannot abide to be tied to Christ, to be tied to prayer, and to holy duties,
this is such a bond, and such a tie unto them, they cannot endure it.

The third kingly duty is, that he turns whole administrations to the good of
the Church. The third Kingly Duty.
Aristotle shows the difference between a king and a Tyrant, the King he
reigns for the good of his people; the Tyrant for the good of himself: now it
is not for Christ's good, that he governs and reigns, but it is for the good of
his Church: the eleventh of Esaias is nothing but a declaration of the great good
that shall come by his government; so Psalm. 72. 12. He shall deliver the poor
when he cries, the needy also and him that has no helper; he shall be
merciful unto the poor and needy, and shall preserve the souls of the poor;
it tends to the good of the Church, the whole administration of Christ: we see
many times things go contrary to the Church, but here is the comfort, as long
as Christ is the King of it, all shall turn to the good thereof. We see in a
clock that some wheels turn cross, Simile.
and contrary, and yet all to one end to make the clock go; so there be many
things that fall out contrary and cross unto us, which yet by the secret hand
of God are turned to the good of the Church. Matthew. 8. 23. there is a strange
administration showed, Christ gets his Disciples to Sea, and when they were in
the Ship the winds arose, the waves beat into the Ship, they were like to be
drowned, and Christ was asleep; but when they came to Christ and did awake
him, he rebuked the waves and the Sea, and there was a great calm; so Christ
does as it were set his people on a Sea, where the winds and the Sea rage and
take on, Christ all this while being asleep, but when he awakes he drives away
all danger from them; this is the strange administration of Christ's Kingdom:
therefore let every man labor to be a subject thereof, and then fall what will
fall, come what will come, SER. VIII
it shall all turn to their good.

The fourth Kingly duty Christ exercises to his Church is, The fourth Kingly
Duty.
That he defends and fights for them; so we see, Psalm. 45. 3. Gird thy sword
upon thy thigh, O most mighty: and Revel. 19. Christ is there described riding
on a horse with his garments dipped in blood and armed ready to fight for his
Church and to defend it. Of this we have two uses.

First, Use 1.
a comfort to the godly, that when they be at peace and rest, Christ is
warring and fighting for them; and when they be weeping for their sins,
Christ is a fighting for them; as Moses says, Exodus 14. Stand still and behold
the Salvation of the Lord, for he fights for you: For as a subject fights
for his country and his Prince; so Christ fights for us, and says to the
faithful, Be contented, stand still, I my self fight for you.

Secondly, Use 2.
a terror to the wicked, for if a man be an enemy against Christ, he fights
against him with all his power, and labors to destroy him; the Egyptians
could say, Let us flee from the face of Israel, for the Lord fights for them.
O that the men of this world would say after that manner, Christ's fights
against us, let us fly, we cannot prevail, he will destroy us. Let us
therefore labor to make friends with him: Iehu, (2 King. 10. 1, 2.) sent
letters to Samaria, to this effect, Ye have your masters sons, ye have with
you both charets and horses, and a defenced city; consider therefore which of
your Masters sons is best and most meet, and set him on his fathers throne
to fight for your Masters house: But they were exceedingly afraid and said,
behold, Two kings could not stand against him, yea all the powers that rose up
against him he has destroyed; therefore how shall we stand? so I say, how
shall we subsist, if we fight against Christ? we see in Joshua, when he had
conquered the kings, he brings them out, and causes his soldiers and servants
to set their feet on the necks of the kings; so Christ will not rest till he
has subdued all his enemies and destroyed them. It is written Psalm. 110. 1.
The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies
thy footestoole; which when he has subdued, he will soon like Joshua call
out his soldiers and his servants, and bid them set their feet on the necks
of their enemies: therefore, let us desire to be subjects to his kingdom.

The fifth point is, The fruit and benefit of Christ's Anointing.
the fruit and benefit that we have by his Anointing: and that is twofold;
first, we participate of the graces of Christ: as Act. 11. 26. The Disciples
were called first Christians: what is that? Anointed people; they take their
name from Christ, for by the means of Christ, they were anointed; for he was
not anointed for himself, as a private man, but as a head for us all; for as
the ointment that was powered on the head of Aaron, did not rest there, but
ran down on his beard and garments throughout, Psalm. 133. 2. so the ointment
that was powered on the head of Christ, did not rest on him as the head, but it
ran down to the meanest of the creatures or members: therefore there is not
the least member that is in Christ but partakes of his anointing. Let us labor
then to be in Christ and we shall see a derivation of the graces of Christ in
us: Simile.
let a man set a glass under a Still, and it will receive the water, drop by
drop as the Still gives it forth, which though it be not full presently, yet
in time it will: so let us get into Christ, and he will distill all his graces
by drops into us, although we be not full presently, yet in time we shall:
this is the first benefit we have by the Anointing of Christ.

Secondly, we are partakers of the dignity of his Person; for he draws all
his members into the same dignity with him, all they participate of his
dignity: for as he was a King, a Priest and a Prophet, so he makes his people
Kings, and Priests, and Prophets, he makes them kings, not temporary kings; for
as Christ says of himself, that his kingdom is not of this world; so a
Christians kingdom is not in this world: how then are they said to be kings?
To rule and to reign over their own lusts and sins; Quest. Sol.
as Revel. 1. 6. And has made us Kings and Priests to God. This is a Kingly
power when a man has his heart at command, so as his affections, lusts and
sins bear not sway in him, but can command them; such a one is a king, when
he that goes in silks and velvets, is a vassal and a slave to sin.

Now we come to speak of the third title; that is, that Christ is the Son of
God. Wherein there is two branches of our faith:

We believe that
1. Jesus is the Son of God. 2. He is the Only Son of God.
First, The third title is, that Jesus is the Son of God.
we believe he is the Son of God: Psalm. 2. 7. it is said, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee: and Ioh. 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life; so Gal. 4. 4. But when the fullness of time
was come, God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, etc. so it is clear by the
Scripture, Simile.
that Christ is the Son of God. And if he be the Son of God, then he
communicates of the same substance and nature, that God the Father is of: as
we see in the course of nature, the substance the Father is of, the same he
communicates to his son; the same nature and substance that is in the father,
is in the son; therefore if we will look upon God the Father, we must
look upon Christ: says Jesus unto Philip, Ioh. 149.
Have I been so long time with you, and have not thou known me? he that has
seen me, has seen my Father: therefore if we would see God, let us look on
Christ; for the same nature and substance that is in God the Father, Simile.
is in the Son. If a man hold a glass in his hand; and set it against the
Sun, and then look in it, he shall as truly see the body of the Sun, as
if he looked on the Sun; so it is with us, desiring to see the reflection of
God, if we look on Christ, we shall as truly see God, as if we looked on God
Himself; for the same nature that is in the Father, is in the Son. Now what
be the consequents of this? If the same nature be in Christ that is in God,
then Christ must be God, for who can deny but that the same nature that is in
God the Father, the same must needs be in the Son? Augustine says, that the
son must needs be a man, seeing the father is a man, for the same nature that
is in the father, he communicates to his son; so then the Son of God,
seeing he is of the same nature and substance with the Father, he must needs
be God, equal with the Father: hence the inference is true, that Christ is
God. But because the Arrians be somewhat busy in these days, who rob Christ
of his Godhead, therefore I will prove unto you by four arguments that Christ
is God:

First, Four Arguments that Christ is God.
the same names are given to Christ that are given to God, and are attributed
in such a manner, as never was to any but to God. Ioh. 20. 28. Thomas says,
Thou art my God and my Lord: and Romans 9. 5. the Apostle says, Of whom Christ
came, who is God over all blessed for evermore, Amen: and Ioh. 11. 3. This is
life eternal, 1
that they know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ: so Tit. 2. 13. Looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory
of that mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. He was not called God by
appellation, as Moses was called Aarons God, because he was in the room of
God to execute justice and judgment; but he is called God in such a peculiar
manner, as never none was, but God: therefore Christ is true God:

The second Argument is, Arg. 2.
that the eternal properties of God are attributed unto him; now this is one
of the eternal properties of God, to be eternal, before all beginnings;
which is attributed to Christ, Proverb. 8. 22. The Lord has possessed me in
the beginning of his ways; I was before his works of old, I was set up from
everlasting, from the beginning, and before the earth; when there were no
depths, was I begotten: so Christ was eternal. Ioh. 8. 58. Before Abraham was,
I am. I, say the Arrians, in figure and type, he was before Abraham: but the
text means really; Christ was not in figure and type, but in truth and in
deed. Another property is, the Omnipotency of God; and this is ascribed unto
Christ; therefore he is God: As Philip. 3. 21. it is said, Who shall change our
vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his Glorious body, according to
the working, whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.
Against this the Arrians oppose and say, he had it by donation after his
resurrection: but I say, Christ had it eternally, before his resurrection, as
Matthew. 11. All things are given me of my Father. Thirdly, it is the property of
God to be present in all places; but Christ is present in all places, therefore
he is God. Now that Christ is present in all places, It may appear by this in
the Gospel, where it is said, Where two or three be gathered together in my
name I am in the midst of them, and Matthew. 1. 28. I am with you even unto the
end of the world. Against this the Arrians object and say, Christ is present in
grace, but not a real presence: to which I answer, that Christ is realy
present with his people, as Revel. 1. He was in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks.

The third argument is, Arg. 3.
that the proper works that are attributed to God, are also attributed to
Christ: as the work of creation, Col. 1. 16. For by him were all things made:
so Ioh. 1. 3. All things were made by him, and without him was nothing made,
which was made. Against this the Arrians except, it is not the work of
creation and making the world which is there spoken of, but the work of
renouation, or making of his Church: but look into Ioh. 1. 10. and you shall
see it is the work of creation, and not of renovation: For it is said, That
the world was made by him and the world knew him not; that is, the wicked of
the world: therefore we may see it is not the renovation of the Church which
is there spoken of; so Col. 1. 16. For all things were made by him, whether they
be visible or invisible; there the Apostle speaks of the making of Angels;
therefore it cannot be of the work of renovation, for renovation is proper to
men, for none is renovated but such as fell away, but the elect Angels fell not
away, and therefore needed not renovation; so then it must be the work of
creation. Again, salvation is a work that is proper to none but God, but
salvation here spoken of, is a proper work of Christ; therefore he is God:
so he speaks in Esai. 43. 11. Besides me there is none other savior: so
likewise it is a property of God only to search the reins, but this property
belongs to Christ, and therefore he is God: so it is said in the Revelation,
And all the Churches shall know that I am he, which searches the reins and
heart.

The fourth argument is, that the same honor which is given to God, the same
is given to Christ. Arg. 4.
Now there be three honors due to God, all given to Christ:

1. Adoration. 2. Invocation. 3. Faith.
Adoration, as Heb. 1. 6. When he brings his first begotten into the world, he
says, Act. 7. 59.
And let all the Angels worship him. Invocation, as by Stephen, who called on
God, and said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit: so of Saul, Act. 9. 14. it is
said, that he bound all that called on the name of the Lord. Faith, as John
14. 1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me, to which purpose is that Act. 17.
3. Therefore we may see by these arguments that Christ is God, and to take
heed of this brutish opinion of the Arrians. Now what be the consequents of
this? that he was not a bare man, but he was God also, who did redeem us.

There be diverse reasons why he only should redeem us. Why Christ only must
Redeem us.
First, because he that did redeem us must bear the burden of all the sins due
to al men, that has been, and shall be; now there was none that could do
this, because the wrath of God was infinite, 1
save Christ Jesus; for let the wrath of God come upon the Angels, they are not
able to bear nor stand under the burden of it, but it will press down, and
sink them as low as Hell. 2
Secondly, he that should redeem us, must pay a price Incomparable, better and
more worth than the bodies and souls of all men, that ever were; now there was
none that could do this but God, and therefore, he must be God, 3
who redeemed us. Thirdly, he that should redeem us, must put on all our
sins; even all the sins that had been committed, and shall be from the
beginning of the world, to the latter end, and apparel himself with them: but
there is no man, no Angel able to do this, and to stand before God, unless
there be infinite goodness in him, to countervaile the justice of God;
therefore it must be God that must do it.

The second branch is, Secondly, Christ is the Only Son of God.
that we do believe, he is the only Son of God; not by creation as the
Angels spoken of Job 1. 6. nor by adoption and grace as men, Ioh. 1. but by
communicating his nature and essence to him; Now this does commend the
goodness, and mercy of God to us, that when we had sinned against him and had
no way to redeem our selves, he having but one Son and his only begotten
Son, yet gave him to dye for us, so to redeem us.

The uses are* Use 1.
first, seeing Christ is the only Son of God, let us labor to become one with
him, and then we shall also be the sons of God: as Ioh. 1. 12. But as many as
received him to them he gave power to be the sons of God: and Gal. 3. 26. For
ye are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus: I know there is never a
one here present, but could be contented to be the son of God; let us then
labor to be with Christ, by faith, and so we shall become the sons of God;
for he draws all his members into the same dignity with him. David accounted
it a great matter to be the son in law to a king; so Moses, to be a son to
Pharaohs daughter, howsoever he refused it afterward. Now, if it be such a
great matter to be son in law to an earthly king, much more is it to be a
son to God: therefore what a comfort is this, to such poor people, that are
one with Christ, by faith, howsoever they be hated and despised, at the hands
of wicked men, 1 Ioh. 3. 1. he brings it in with an ecce, Behold, what love
the Father has showed to us that we should be called the sons of God? All
the world does not know what a great blessing it is to be the sons unto God;
we see how great men will talk of their nobility and of their great descent,
but alas, what is all this, if we be not the sons of God? therefore think
this with thy self, I am a great man in the world, and come of a noble blood,
and a great descent, but what is this unto me, unless I be the son of God?
And therefore let us labor to be one with Christ, and then as Christ was
raised from the dead, so he will raise us up together with him, and we shall
be found the sons of God.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing Christ is the only Son of God, we may see the horriblenesse of our
sins and the greatness of them, that when we had sinned, all the creatures
in heaven and earth could not do it, but it must be the Son of God, he must
come down, take our nature upon him, and dye for us. Augustine says, O man by
the great price that was paid for thee thou may consider the greatness of
thy sins, that they cost the blood of Christ, Simile.
the Son of God. If a man should commit an offense, and all the nobles should
kneel on their knees before the king for him, and could not get release, but
that it must be the kings son only that must do it, he must shed his
blood, take the place of a malefactor, be arraigned, condemned and executed in
his room; all men would conceive that this was a horrible fact that must be
the cause of this: this is our case, when we had sinned, all the heavenly
powers could not bring us into favor again, but it must be the Son of God,
he must take our room and place, be arraigned, condemned and executed for
us: therefore sin is no small matter neither must we esteem of our sins
slightly; but consider with our selves, that great are our sins, that has
brought this on Christ.

Thirdly, Use 3.
we should hear his voice: it is the charge the God gives, Matthew. 3. 17. This
is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him; and therefore it is a
great sin to despise the voice of Christ, in the ministry of his Word: Saint
Paul shows what a great sin it is, Heb. 1. 1.
says he, God spoke by the Prophets at sundry times and in diverse manners, but
now he has spoken in these last times by his Son; and therefore in the
second Chapter he exhorts us, To take heed of it, that we do not let it
slip; for if the word spoken by Angels, was steadfast, and every transgression
and disobedience receives a just recompense of reward; How shall we escape, if
we neglect so great salvation? Therefore seeing Christ is become a Prophet of
the Church, let us take heed we do not despise his Word, or voice. It was a
holy thought in God, when the Church of the Jews had killed the Prophets,
beaten and despised them, I will send my Son, it may be they will reverence
him; it was a sweet thought in God to do so. And therefore let us take, heed,
we do not despise the voice of Christ. Ioh. 5. 28. it is said, The dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God; even the dead cinders and ashes of men
that have been rotting in the graves many thousand years, they shall startle
and stir at the voice of the Son of God, speaking unto them but once; and
therefore how shall this condemn us, that Christ has spoken so many times,
and yet we do not once stir or move at it which are living men, to go
about our business? therefore this shall condemn us, that the dead cinders of
men that have lien in their graves many a year shall startle and move, at one
voice of Christ, and yet we do not at a thousand of his voices.

Fourthly, Use 4.
seeing Christ is the only Son of God, we must take heed we do not despise
him; Psalm. 2. it is said, Kiss the Son lest he be angry: O labor to kiss
him, seek his favor, do not grieve him; woe be to him that shall lift up his
hand against him to grieve him; 1 Cor. 8. 12. Says the Apostle, Now when ye
sin so against the brethren and wound their weak consciences, ye sin
against Christ: therefore we must take heed we do not sin against our
brethren, and so sin against Christ; for the sins of us Christians more
grieve Christ than the sins of the world; because we profess he is our Lord
and Master, and will be ruled and governed by him and be his servants:
therefore in this case when a man sins against him, it is more than the sin
of a stranger or an alien. We see in the Scripture how Christ complains, One
of you shall betray me, but we be to him that does it; and when Judas came to
betray him, he says, To what end art thou come, art thou come to betray me? As
if he had said, Why thou art a disciple of mine, thou professest that thou art
my servant, and that I am thy Lord and Master, and do thou come to betray
me? so Ioh. 1. it is said, He came amongst his own, but his own received him
not: if he had come amongst strangers and aliens, and had been so used by them
the matter had been the less; but seeing he came amongst his own, and they
received him not, this it was that did grieve Christ the more: so Hosea 4. 12.
God complains, My people ask counsel of their stocks, and their staff
declares unto them. Wells beloved, let us take this to heart; when a profane
man lives in his sins impenitent, what does Christ, he does not so
complain of them. But when a Christian shall live in sin, uncleanesse,
maliciousness, or deceit, this it is that grieveth Christ, and makes him to
complain.

Fifthly, Use 5.
seeing Christ is the only Son of God, we must show the greater measure of
thankfulness to him; for who can sufficiently speak of his goodness, that
he being the only Son of God, and God over all, would abase himself, to
take our nature upon him, and dye for us? We have heard of the love of Rebecca
to her son Jacob, when she gave him counsel to go to his father to get the
blessing, he was afraid his father would have felt and handled him, and so in
stead of a blessing, he might have procured a curse: Simile.
but she bids him not to fear it, On me be the curse, my son; if there be
any comfort, on thee be the blessing, but on me be the curse: Such and far
greater is the Love of Christ to us; he says, On me be the curse my people;
but if there be any good or any blessing, or comfort to be had by my
sufferings or pains, on you be the blessing: therefore seeing Christ has made
such a change with us, who can render sufficient thankfulness to him for it;
Nehem. 11. we see, the people blessed those that would dwell at Jerusalem,
because it was a dangerous place; Simile.
Now if this people thanked them that would dwell with them, hazard and venture
their lives; O how thankful ought we to be unto Christ who has given his
life for us? and therefore how are we bound in all love and thankfulness to
him? The late powder treason that was in the year of our Lord, 1605. the
delivery from it, is a fruit and benefit we have by Christ; and therefore it
was carefully and religiously provided of our Magistrates, to set apart a day
to give thanks in, a service to be performed for it; for he has not only
delivered our souls, but also our bodies from the jaws of hell.

Now I come to speak of His dominion, which is the second thing in the dignity
of His Person: our Lord, wherein two things are to be considered:

1. That he is the Lord of the World. 2. That he is our Lord.
First, First, Lord of all the world.
he is the Lord of the whole world, and has all kingdoms at his command;
Luke 1. 33. And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his
kingdom there shall be no end: so Act. 2. 3. Let the house of Israel say and
know, that God has made him both Lord and Christ. Now Christ is the Lord of
the world in two regards.

First, First, having all Power under Him.
in regard of the Sovereignty that is in himself, he has all power under him
to dispose of at his will and pleasure, as Matthew. 11. 27. All things are given
me of my father, both the possession and the disposition of them; and Act 2.
Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet; so Luke 10. 17. And the
seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subdued to
us through thy name. All things are subject to him, he is the great Lord of the
world:

Secondly, Secondly, having all things serving Him.
he is the Lord of this world in regard of service, for all things do serve
him whatsoever: Psalm. 119. 91. They continue to this daily by thine ordinances;
for all thy servants; therefore seeing there is nothing but does service to
him, he is the Lord of this world.

Now there is a double service: a service which the godly, and a service which
the wicked perform; there is a voluntary service which the godly perform, and
unvoluntary, which the wicked perform: as the Axe in the hand of the hewer,
does service voluntary, Simile.
so do the wicked, when they do any service to God, they do it by
constraint, unwillingly: all things does service unto God, either willingly or
by constraint, for we cannot stir a foot or a hand or do any thing but it
is by the appointment of God. It is a good saying of Augustine, Now grant Lord,
says he, that we may do the good service; for whether we be willing or not
willing we shall serve thee, thy providence and hidden will; if we serve thee
unwillingly, then we serve thee like slaves, but grant Lord, that we may serve
thee willingly and voluntarily, as thy children ought to serve thee, and thine
own people. And thus Christ is the Lord of the world.

The use is, Use 1.
first, seeing Christ is the Lord of the world, it shall be well with the
Church and the members thereof; and as Christ is the Lord, so he will order
every thing to the good of them, in Psalm. 96. 10. it is said, The Lord
reigns, surely the earth shall be stable, and not moved; he shall judge the
people in righteousness. And therefore seeing Christ reigns let every man
and woman rejoice and be glad; it shall be well with Christ's servants as long
as Christ is their Lord, for the devil cannot take a pin from their sleeves,
nor a leaf from a tree, nor touch a pigge in thy yard, without Christ permit
him: it was a comfort to Joseph's brethren to hear he was the Lord of Egypt; so
it is a comfort to a Christian to know that Christ our elder brother, is Lord
of the world.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing Christ is the Lord of the world, we must take heed we do not resist
him, for seeing he is a Lord so powerful, it is in vain to resist him; Psalm.
110. 2. it is written, Be thou ruler in the midst of thine enemies; therefore
let us take heed we do not resist, or strive against him, lest we be
overmatched: we read 2 King. 10. 3. Iehu said to the Samaritans, Consider
therefore which of your Masters sons be best and most fit and meet; set him
on his fathers throne, and fight for your masters house: but they were
exceedingly afraid; and said, Behold, two kings could not stand before him; how
then shall we stand? so we may say, two kings could not stand against him, nay
all the powers that rose up against him, could not stand before him, how then
shall I be able to stand? And therefore every one should submit himself unto
him.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing Christ is the Lord, we must be contented that Christ dispose of us and
of our estates, whether it be by sickness or health, death or life,
prosperity or adversity: he is the Lord, he may dispose of us, therefore we
must learn to be contented with his good pleasure: so David, Psalm. 39. 9. I
was dumb and said nothing, because thou did it; so Eli 2 Samuel 3. 18. It is
the Lord, let him do with me as it pleases him best, or good in his own
eyes: we find Matthew. 21. when Christ sent for the Ass to Jerusalem, he says,
If any one ask you what ye do with him, tell him, The Lord has need of
him, and he will let him go: so if the Lord need any thing for his honor,
or for the good of our brethren, we should be content to let it go, it is his
own, no body must check or grudge against him, none must control him.

Fourthly, Use 4.
seeing Christ is the Lord, it shows that all the powers in the world stand
under a greater government and power; therefore we must take heed we do no
injury or wrong to any, for there is no power so great but he stands under a
greater power: so Col. 4. 1. the Apostle exhorts them, Ye masters do to your
servants that which is just, and equal, knowing ye have a Master in Heaven:
and Job says, I durst not do so and so, because Gods judgments were
fearful to me, and I could not be delivered.

Secondly, Secondly, that He is our Lord.
we believe He is our Lord: He is a Lord indeed to all the world; but we
must believe he is our Lord; we can have no true comfort till we can lay hold
on Christ, and say as Thomas said, My Lord, and my God. Origin has a pretty
saying, What am I the better (says he) to know that Christ possesses the
city or the country, unless he possess my heart and my soul, and set up his
Laws, and subdue my flesh? so we may say, what am I the better to know Christ
has subdued the world, and yet has not subdued my heart, and set up his Laws
therein, and subdued my flesh: therefore as we believe in general, he is our
Lord, so we must believe in particular he is my Lord: Now four ways Christ
may be said to be the Lord of the Church:

1. By right of Creation; 2. By right of redemption; Four ways Christ is Lord
of the Church.
3. By right of donation, or free gift; 4. By voluntary service.
First, First, by Creation.
Christ is our Lord, by right of Creation; for it is he that has made us and
not we our selves, Psalm. 100. 3. therefore seeing he has made us, we must do
him service; If we had made our selves, we might have served our selves; but
seeing Christ made us, we must serve him, he is our Lord.

Secondly, Secondly, by Redemption.
he is our Lord by right of Redemption; so Zachary in his song, Luke 1. 68.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people: he has redeemed us with his precious blood, therefore he is our Lord
by right of Redemption. And as one says, he has not only bought us with his
money, but he has bought us with his own blood, etc. Therefore we are his
servants, he is our Lord.

Thirdly, Thirdly, by free gift.
he is our Lord by free gift; because we are given of God to him: as Psalm. 2.
8. says God, Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine
Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possessions.

Fourthly, Fourthly, by voluntary service.
he is a Lord by voluntary service; Paul, when he was converted Acts. 9.
says, Lord, what would thou have me to do? he was ready to do any service
that Christ required: so are other Converts, at least in resolution and desire.
The uses are Three:

First, Use 1.
seeing Christ is our Lord, we must live in obedience to him; servants must be
obedient to their masters; and therefore (as the Samaritans said) to Iehu, King
10. We are thy servants; so we should to Christ, We are thy servants, thou
have made us of nothing, thou have redeemed us, when we were lost by our sins,
we will therefore do whatsoever thou command us. It is a fearful thing, and a
high sin when men profess themselves to be servants to Christ, to take him
for their Lord, and yet live in no obedience unto him, but in uncleanesse,
profaneness, and in known sins still; for if Christ be our Lord, let us
live in obedience.

Secondly, Use 2. Simile.
seeing Christ is our Lord, where his presence is, we must labor to be; we
see that servants will be with their master, where he is thither will they
flock; even so, where we know there is a presence of Christ, thither we must
flock: Ioh. 21. 7. the Disciples that were a fishing, came swimming over to
Christ, when they heard where Christ was, and left all; so when we know there
is a presence of Christ, in the house of preaching, we must leave all and go
thither: Mark. 1. 33. when Christ was in Peter's house, all the city flocked,
and thronged about the door, Simile.
because Christ's presence was there; and yet it was but a poorefisher man's
cabin: so, when we hear there is a presence of Christ, or know it in the
place of preaching, we must flock, and throng thither, whatsoever the place,
and howsoever mean it be.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing Christ is our Lord, know that we must give up our accounts to him, as
servants must give up theirs to their masters; therefore we must not labor to
please men, but we must please Christ; for he is our Lord, we must give up our
accounts to him. If we should give up our accounts to men, to kings, or to
great men, we should seek to please them: as 2 Cor. 5. 9. 10. Wherefore we
labor, that both dwelling at home, and remooving from home, we may be
acceptable to him; for we shall all appear before the Judgment seat of
Christ, etc. therefore we must labor to approve our selves to him. Simile.
Saint Augustine says, servants will labor to please their masters, whom if
they can please they care not whether it please others or no; so we should
labor to please Christ, and care not though all the world were displeased with
us so he be pleased, for we must not give an account to the world, but to him.
If a man hold his lands and livings from any man, he will be afraid to
displease him, or to fell a tree off his ground, lest he make a forfeiture of
his coppihold; so seeing we hold all from God we must take heed, we do not
make forfeiture, and displease him, lest he turn us out of all.

Fourthly, Use 4.
seeing Christ is our Lord, it was not a servant, that died for us, but it was
the Lord; If it had been a servant, that had died, we had been bound in duty
and in love to him; But seeing it was Christ, our Lord, that died, how are we
bound in love and duty unto him? John 13. when Christwashed his Disciples
feet, Peter says, inadmiration, Lord, will thou wash my seete? so we may
say, Lord will thou shead thy blood for me, what shall I render unto thee, or
what duty shall I perform unto thee, for so many surpassing mercies?

Fifthly, Use 5.
seeing Christ is our Lord we must be careful to render our souls, etc.
back again unto him, in as good estate as he gave them to us: Simile.
If a man borrow any thing, it is a shame it he carry it not home again in as
good estate as he had it; so seeing we have received our souls from him, and
they are but borrowed, we must take heed we do not mar them by our sins,
and so return them worse home, than we had them, we see in experience, if a
man should send his servant to the Indies to fetch gold, give him a ship to
fill, Simile.
and be at great costs and charges twenty or thirty years together, and when
the servant comes there, he does not gather in gold and pearls, into his ship,
but gravel and sand, muck and moulde, if this servant comes home, will his
master take it well? may he not look for a cold welcome home? so (as it
were,) the Lord has sent us to the Indies, for gold and pearls, with a ship,
and is at great cost with us, many a year together; Now the ship is our soul,
and the graces of his spirit, are the gold and pearls, the world is the
Indies, and here we may have the same gold, the graces of his Spirit; if
therefore we do not fill our ships, with gold, and pearls, but with gravel
and sand, muck and mould, God will not take it well at our hands, we may look
for a cold welcome home, when we come to deliver our ship again.

Sixthly, Use 6.
seeing Christ is our Lord, we must leave all and be ready to depart this life,
when Christ will have us; for servants be at the command of their masters;
Simile.
if a master send his servant to trade and to traffic beyond the Sea, as long
as his master will have him to traffic and trade, so long he must, but when
his master will have him to come home, and leave all, he must then be ready to
do so: so seeing we be servants to God, and he sends us to traffic and
trade, as long as he will have us stay here, we must be contented, but when he
will have us leave all, and come home, we should be ready to do so.

Seventhly, Use 7.
seeing Christ is our Lord, then believe of all men Christians are the most
happy; all the glory of this life, is not comparable to that which the Lord
presents upon a Christian, as Canticles 5. when the Church was making such
inquiry after Christ, there is a question demanded; What is thy beloved more
than another beloved, that we may seek Him with thee? all the happiness of
this world, is not like to it: first, because Christ is their Protector, other
protectors drop away, they dye, and so leave us; but Christ is with us
continually. Secondly, because Christ has the bread of sufficiency; as Luke
15. says the prodigal son; How many hired servants has my father, who have
bread enough, and I dye for hunger? And therefore this is a comfort to them,
that when other starve for hunger they have bread enough; enough of all
comforts and contentments. Thirdly, in regard of their reward, other kings and
Lords give mean things to their servants, and reserve the chiefest to
themselves; but Christ he bestows great things upon his servants, and makes
them partakers of the same glory with himself: therefore Paul says, Thanks
be to our God which has given us victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ; when
things be at the worst; then Christ will bring them unto victory, and
therefore it must be our care to be servants unto him.

SERMON IX.
PHILIP. 2. 7. But made Himself of no Reputation, and took upon Him the form
of a Servant: and was made in the likeness of men.
TWo ways Christ is described to us in the Creed;

1. By His Properties, or Titles 2. By His twofold estate.
The Titles are four in number, whereof two of them show His Offices; two of
them His Dignity: Of His Offices, and Dignity we have already spoken; and now
in order are come to speak of His twofold estate;

1. Of His Hamiliation. 2. Of His Exaltation.
In his estate of Humiliation there be diverse steps and degrees; Even as a
king when he comes from his Royal throne, comes down step by step til he
come at the last or lowest step; Simile.
so the Son of God coming down from His Royal throne, to the estate of
Humiliation, descended by certain steps and degrees, till he came at the
lowest step: as the Apostle shows in this place; that he took upon him the
nature of man; was like a servant, and humbled himself to the death for us;
and so came to the lowest step of Humiliation.

The first degree of His Humiliation was, The first Degree of Christ's
Humiliation.
that he became a man for us; for howsoever we think of the dignity of
Christ, yet it was a great abasement for the son of God, to take upon him the
nature of man: what would we think, if a king should for the good of his
subjects, be made a toad or a frog, Simile.
or the meanest creature, this were a great abasement: but it is a greater
matter for the son of God to take our nature upon him, for between the
meanest of the creatures and the king there is not so great disproportion; it
is all one hand that made them, they were all made of one matter, of the earth;
and when they are turned to the earth again, there is no difference between
them: but there is no proportion between the son of God, and the nature of
man, for the Philosophers could say, There is no proportion between an
infinite thing and a finite; therefore it was a greater matter, that God would
take our nature upon him, than a king to become the meanest creature, for the
good of his subjects. We read 1 King. 8. 27. But will God indeed dwell on the
earth? SER. IX.
Behold, the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee, etc. If Solomon did admire
and wonder, that God would dwell in the Temple which was all glorious as the
wit of man could devise, how then may we admire and wonder, that God would
dwell in man's frail and weak nature, when it was fallen into disgrace? if he
had taken our nature upon him, when our first parents stood in their innocence,
when all the Creatures did service to them, then it had not been so great a
matter. But when man's nature was in disgrace, had sinned against God, and was
bound over to the devil, it was a great abasing to the son of God: Simile.
If a man should take a noblemans colors and cloth, as long as a nobleman is
in favor with the king, it were no disgrace to him; but if a man should take
his colors or cloth when he is proclaimed to be a Traitor, this were a great
disgrace to him; so when man's nature was in favor with God, then it was not
such a disgrace; but for Christ to take it when it had sinned against God, and
when it was so deformed, was a great humiliation. The Use is twofold.

First, Use 1.
seeing the son of God was contented to be humbled for us to the estate of a
servant, how should we be contented to be humbled and to stoop to any service
and duty, to become nothing to our selves to do him service? The Apostle,
Phil. 4. 12. says, I have learned in all estates to be contented; how to want
and how to abound: In all things I am instructed, etc. and David, Psalm. 22. 6.
I am a worm and no man, etc. David saw the Son of God should be abased and
humbled, hence he humbles himself: therefore seeing Christ was contented to
be humbled for us, we should be humbled for him. It is our sin that we
cannot abide to be humbled or to stoop to any condition of humility. Now if
Christ was contented to be a servant for us, we must be contented to be poor
for his sake, to stoop to any estate he appoints for us.

Secondly, Use 2.
that seeing the Son of God was humbled for us, we must be contented to be
humbled one for another, which our Savior teaches us, John 13. 14. If your
Lord and Master wash your feet, how ought you to wash one another feet? so
Philip. 2. 5. Let the same mind be in you, that was in Christ: why what was
that? Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with
God, yet he took upon him the form of a servant, and was made like a man, and
humbled himself to the death of the Cross. Simile.
Those that keep sweet wines, must keep them in deep Cellars; and low
vaults, or else they will lose their good taste, and relish: so if we would
keep the good graces of God in our hearts, we must keep them in a broken
heart, and humble spirit, for if we be highminded, then our graces will lose
their good taste and relish. And therefore we must lay them in humble hearts,
low in our own conceit, as Christ humbled himself for us, so we should humble
our selves one for another.

Now in the first degree of Christ's Humiliation, in the taking of the nature of
man upon him, we observe,

1. How far forth he took man's nature upon him. 2. The reasons why he was
man. 3. The special ends, why he took our nature upon him. 4. The manner of
it.
First, First, How far Christ took man's nature. The first conclusion.
how far he took man's nature upon him: This is laid down in two conclusions:

First, that he took the nature of man wholly upon him, not a part of man's
nature; but the whole nature of man; both a body and a soul: He took a body
to him, as Col. 1. 21, 22. And you that were sometime alienated, and enemies in
your mind by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled, in the body of his
flesh, through death, to present you holy, and unblameable, and unreproveable
in his sight: so 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare our sins, in his own
body on the tree, that we being dead to sins, should live unto
righteousness, by whose stripes we are healed. Hence we see, it is out of
question, he had a body: so also it is most certain He had a soul, as he
said Matthew. 26. 38. My soul is heavy unto death; And in another place, My
soul is troubled within me. so that he had the whole nature of man, a body and
a soul. The Fathers argue well against the heretics in those days; If Christ
had taken but one part of man's nature, then he could have redeemed but one
part. And therefore Irenaeus says well, He gave his body for our bodies, and
his soul for our souls: and Athanasius, It was unpossible that if he had
taken but one part, he could have redeemed us. He had therefore a body to
redeem our bodies, and a soul to redeem our souls, so that he had the whole
nature of man.

The second conclusion is, The second conclusion.
that he had (not only the whole nature of man but) the infirmities of man,
the fraileties and weakness of our nature: so we read, that he was hungry,
thirsty, weary, etc. Here we may wonder at the kindness, mercy, and
compassion of Christ, that he would not take the best only but the worst
things, even our weaknesses and infirmities; men can be contented to take the
honor of Christ, but are loath to take his shame: This must teach us therefore,
that we should not be contented, to take the best things only for Christ, but
even the worst things also for his sake.

Now we must understand (with a distinction) how Christ took our infirmities,
first, there be infirmities that be sinful; and secondly, that be unblameable
passions: Christ took not the first sort of infirmities, but the latter; of
which there be two sorts:

1. Some that be common to all men. 2. Some that be personal.
Now Christ took not our sinful infirmities upon him, for the sanctity of
his nature does exclude them; Simile.
as water being dropped or powered on hot coals, it does drink up the water;
so the sanctity of his nature does exclude sin, for he could not take our
sinful infirmities: as 1 Pet. 2. 22. it is said, Who did not sin, neither
was there guilt found in his mouth, etc. Now penal infirmities, and such as
are void of sin he took; whereof there be two sorts:

First, some that he common to all the sons of Adam; as to be hungry,
thirsty, naked, cold, hot, and such like: secondly, there be personal
infirmities, which arise upon particular causes, as to have diverse diseases:
now he took not these infirmities upon him: for he took not any man's person
upon him; but the nature of man; yea, he took them that be common to the
whole nature of man. Quest.
And why did he take upon him these infirmities? for three causes, as the
Schoolmen say.

First, sol.
for satisfaction sake: that he might satisfy for our sins: for he that must
satisfy for them, 1
must take the whole punishment for sin; therefore he took our infirmities
upon him: as we see in Matthew. 8. 17. He took our infirmities upon him, and
bare our sicknesses.

Secondly, 2
to strengthen faith in the incarnation; that we might know he was a perfect
man because he was subject to all our infirmities, to eat, sleep, be weary
and such like: for if he had not taken these infirmities, was might have
doubted, whether he had been man or no; therefore he took our infirmities
upon him, that we might believe he was a man, touching his Incarnation.

Thirdly, for our example; that as he was subject to hunger, thirst and
nakedness, 3
so we should be contented with it also; for 1 Pet. 2. 21. it is written,
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his
steps, etc. Now besides these three reasons of the Schoolmen, there is another
reason, Heb. 2. 17. why he took our infirmities upon him (there the Apostle
says) Wherefore in all things it became him to be made like unto his
brethren, 4
that he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest in things concerning
God: this was the reason why he took our infirmities upon him, that he might
be the more compassionate toward us. Let a man come to one that is on his sick
bed; if he has had the same disease, he will be more compassionate, and
pitiful, than twenty others: so seeing Christ took our infirmities, he will
have the more compassion toward us, therefore as the Apostle says, Heb. 4.
14. Seeing then we have not such an high priest which cannot be touched with
the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things tempted in like sort, yet
without sin; let us therefore go boldly to the throne of grace, etc.

Now the next thing that was observed, Secondly, why Christ was made man.
were the reasons, why he was made man; and that in three respects:

First, 1
for necessities sake; for he must have something to offer, as the price of
sin: so Heb. 8. 4. For he were not a Priest if he were on the earth, seeing
there are priests, that according to the Law offer gifts; therefore he that
does redeem us, and bring us unto Gods favor, must have something to offer to
God, as a price for sin, but the Godhead could not be offered, for that
cannot dye, and therefore of necessity, He must be man.

Secondly, 2
in regard of the equity of it; for the same nature that had offended, must be
punished; because it could not stand with Justice, to punish sin in another
nature, which had not offended, therefore of necessity he must be man: for the
same nature that had sinned, must be punished.

Thirdly, 3
in regard of the fitness; for he that is the Mediator, and does reconcile God
and man together, must be God to deal with God, and man to deal with man. The
Philosophers say, that to bring two extremes together, it must be done by
middle things: so Christ must be between both, the must be God, to deal with
God, and man to deal with man: so that he must be man, in regard of the
fitness of it; He must be God also, Thirdly, the ends why Christ took man's
nature.
a fit Vmpire to lay his hand upon both.

Thirdly, the special ends why he must take man's nature upon him; are five in
number:

First, 1
to redeem man; for in the same nature the devil had destroyed man, in the
same nature must he destroy the work of the devil; so Heb. 2. 14. For as much
then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself, took
part of the same, that he might destroy him that had the power of death, that
is, the devil; and deliver them who for fear of death were all their life
time subject to bondage. It is a pretty saying of the council of Ephesus; even
as a cunning workman, does not only great matters in gold, silver, and
precious stones, Simile.
but can also take a piece of clay, and make such a piece of work that may
make the world to wonder at it; so this cunning workman Christ is not only
able to the do great works in gold and precious stones, in his Godhead; but
even in a piece of clay, with man's nature, he can destroy the works of the
devil.

Secondly, 2
to restore the lost Image of God in man; for Adam had lost it by his sin,
and therefore he took man's nature to bring it to the former estate again.
Says Athanasius, if a picture be defaced, and has lost its former beauty,
Simile.
there is no way to restore it again, but to get the party that the picture
was first drawn by, to renew it: so, says he, when man had defaced the Image
of God in him, there was no way to have it restored again, but by bringing
Christ into the world, from whence this nature of man was drawn upon him.

Thirdly, 3
to advance man's nature, which was so disgraced by sin; for man's nature was
hateful to God, even as a toade is to us; therefore seeing man's nature was in
disgrace with God, he took our nature to advance it again. Simile.
If a town or a city be in disgrace with the king, if he come again into it,
abide and rest in it, thereby it is advanced again; so when man's nature was in
disgrace, by the reason of sin, Christ came into man's nature, and this did
advance it again.

Fourthly, 4
to make man's Nature dreadful to the devil; for Christ having overcome the
devil in Man's nature, this made his Nature terrible to him: even as a fish
when he is nibling at the bait, and spieth the bare hook, Simile.
is afraid to meddle with the bait after; or as a man putting his hand into a
hole, if he pull out a toade, will be afraid to put his hand in again; so the
devil having been overcome by man's nature is afraid of it again; not because
he thinks he shall meet with Christ, for he knows he is in heaven, but
because he knows he shall meet, or is afraid that he shall meet with the
power of Christ.

Fifthly, that his incarnation might be as a glass, wherein we may see the
infinite Goodness, 5
justice, wisdom, and power of God. First, we may see the infinite goodness
of God, that when we were lost by sin, there was no way to recover us but he
must send His own son to dye for us. Secondly, we may see the infinite
justice of God, that He would not let sin be unpunished, but would punish it
though in his Son. Thirdly, the infinite wisdom of God, to devise a way and
a means to save man, when all the heavenly powers stood at a stand. Fourthly,
the infinite power of God, in making that punishment temporal that was
eternal; and man, which was as low as the earth, to make higher than the
heavens: we be contented to look into a glass, to see the goodly and gay
things in it; therefore we should be desirous to look into this glass,
wherein we may see the goodness, the Justice, the wisdom and power of God,
in the Incarnation of Christ.

The fourth thing observed was, Fourthly, the manner how he took flesh.
the manner how to took flesh; expressed two ways:

In His
1 Conception. 2 Birth.
In his Conception, we observe three things:

1. Of what he was Conceived. 2. By what power he was Conceived. 3. What ado
there was about his Conception.
For the first, First, of what he was Conceived.
he was conceived of the flesh of the Virgin; so it was not made of nothing,
nor of the earth, raised out of that, as Adam was, nor did he bring his flesh
from heaven; but it was made of the flesh of the Virgin: as Gal. 4. 4. But when
the fullness of time was come, God Sent his son made of a Woman, and made
under the Law, etc. so Luke 1. 31. says the Angel, For lo, thou shall
conceive in thy womb, and bear a Son; and verse. 35. That holy thing which
shall be borne of thee (that is, of thy substance, and of thy flesh, so the
Greek word is) shall be called the Son of God. The Anabaptists hold, that
Christ brought his flesh from heaven: Simile.
and that as water passes through a conduite pipe, so Christ passed through
the Virgin Mary: but we Christians believe, that Christ was conceived and made
of the flesh of the Virgin; because if he had brought it from heaven, or took
other strange flesh, then it had not been fit to redeem us; for by order of
divine justice, the same nature that had sinned must suffer and be punished;
but it was man that had sinned, therefore it must be man that must be
punished; which is the reason why he must take his flesh of the Virgin Mary.
The consideration hereof may cause us to think of a further point: that is, as
Christ was conceived in the womb of the Virgin; so he must be conceived
spiritually in the heart of a Christian: as Paul, Gal. 4. 19. My little
children, of whom I travel in birth again, till Christ be formed in you; as
if he should say, this I labor for, that Christ may be conceived in your
hearts: therefore Chrysostom says well, What am I the better to know that
Christ is conceived of the flesh of the Virgin, unless I know he is conceived
in my heart and soul, for we can have no comfort in the day of death and
judgment, unless he be conceived in our hearts. But how shall we know that
he is conceived in our hearts? even as a mother knows that she is with child
by the stirring or moving of the child; so we may know when Christ is
conceived in our hearts; by the stirring or moving of Christ. And therefore we
must get these two things:

First, we must get the seed of Christ in us, for there is a certain seed
that will breed Christ: Simile.
a man that will have good plants and trees in his garden, must get seeds and
plants, to plant therein and water them from day to day: so if we would have
Christ conceived in our hearts, we must get of that seed; for there is a
certain seed that will breed Christ; which is the Word of God: therefore let
us get this into our hearts, and water it from day to day, by the use of good
means, and it will breed Christ. This is the first way.

The second is, 2
we must have faith to retain him, or else he will slip away from us; and as
Mary conceived Christ by faith (for as soon as the Angel told her, she
believed, and straightway she conceived Christ) so we must conceive Christ by
faith in believing the Word of God: therefore has God made promise to thee that
he will not leave thee nor forsake thee, that he will give an issue out of
temptation, that he will save thee at the day of judgment or at the day of
death, that he will bless thee, in the use of good means, lay hold on these
promises; and this is the way to conceive Christ. Ephe. 3. 17. it is said, that
Christ dwells in our hearts by faith: let us get faith and this will make Christ
to stir and moove in us.

Secondly, Secondly, by what power He was conceived.
by what power he was conceived; by the power of the holy Ghost, for it was
not any power of nature that conceived Christ; but the power of the holy Ghost:
so we see Luke 1. 35. And the Angel answered, and said unto her, The holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most high shall overshadow
thee: so Matthew. 1. 20. For that which is conceived of her, is of the holy
Ghost; so it was by the power of the holy Ghost that Christ was conceived, not
by any power of nature. Many have a great deal of the power of nature in them,
and yet Christ can never be conceived in them unless the power of the holy
Ghost come upon them: therefore 1 Cor. 12. 3. it is said, That no man can say
that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, wherefore if men stand merely
in the strength of nature they can never have Christ conceived in them, but it
must be by the power of the holy Ghost.

But how was Christ conceived by the holy Ghost? Three ways: Quest. Sol.
first, the Godhead did sanctify that part of the flesh of the Virgin, that
Christ was made of, 1
that is, How Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost. Simile.
he did sever it and purify it, from corruption and from sin. As a cunning
Artificer does draw away all the dross from the gold, so the holy Ghost, did
purify and sanctify that part of the flesh of the Virgin, that Christ was
made of.

Secondly, 2
he did fashion and frame that part of the flesh of the Virgin, that he had
fanctified, and made it a fit house and Temple for his Godhead to dwell in.

Thirdly, 3
he did unite and knit the humane nature to his Divine Person, and so made one
person of both: what may this teach us? That as the holy Ghost did fanctifie
that part of the Virgin which Christ was made of, and did fashion and frame it
to be a fit Temple of God to dwell in, so it must be the holy Ghost, that must
sanctify our flesh, and make us fit temples for God to dwell in, or else we
shall be no better than sties and stables, for a habitation to the devil:
therefore we must pray God that the holy Ghost may come upon us, and make us
fit temples for his Spirit to dwell in: for (as I showed you in the morning)
one spark of the Spirit of God, is able to destroy a whole heap and lump of
corruption. Simile.
Bring a man to a house full of powder, there is matter enough to do a great
deal of mischief, to blow up many cities and towns, but bring but a little
spark of fire and put to it, and it is all gone with a blast: so there is
power enough in the devil, in our corruption, and nature, to do a great deal
of mischief. I, but bring to it a little spark of the holy Ghost, and it will
bring all the power of nature to nothing: therefore let us heartily pray to God
we may have a little of the power of the Spirit given which is able to bring
our corrupt nature to nothing, and so much the rather let us pray for this,
because the judgments of God, be heavy upon the land, and upon our
neighbors; in which case if the Lord do not sanctify our flesh, it is like
he will destroy us: therefore let us pray to God that we may have a little of
the Spirit of God, to destroy our corruptions. But why was Christ conceived by
the holy Ghost? That he might be pure and without sin; for all that are
conceived by ordinary generation, are sinful; as David, Psalm. 51. 5. I was
conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity: so Job, We are all corrupted; and
who can bring a pure thing out of a corrupt fountain? why then was not Christ
conceived ordinarily, as the sons of Adam are, but by the holy Ghost? It was
that he might be pure and holy. Christ was the first that purified man's
nature; for sin and it were so joined together, that none could take man's
nature, but he must take his sin; now Christ he has parted man's nature and
sin; and all that be in Christ shall feel this parting power of Christ, to
part man's nature and sin: these are so combined together, as we daily see,
that reprove a man of any sin, he will presently answer, it is my nature; I
pray you bear with we, I can do no otherwise; I cannot leave it. Now if we
be in Christ, we shall feel this dividing power, to part man's nature and
sin. So says Paul, Roman. 7. 19. The good thing that I would do that do I
not, and the evil thing that I would not do, that do I: so then it is no
more I, but sin that dwells in me: so sin was one thing, and man's nature
was another thing. Therefore we must pray to God that we may have this
parting power of Christ, that howsoever we keep the nature of man, yet that
sin may be parted from us: and this was the reason why Christ was conceived
by the holy Ghost. Now there is one thing, that may be objected against this:

How could Christ be free from sin, Object.
seeing he took man's nature upon him, and was according to his humanity in
the loins of Adam; for Romans 5. it is said of Adam, In whom all have sinned:
and Hebrew. 7. that Levi also who received tithes, paid tithes in Abraham: For
he was yet in the loins of his father when Melchizedech met him: so that
which Abraham did, that Levi did being in his loins; thus Christ being in his
humane nature in the loins of Adam, how could he be free from sin?

To this I answer; Sol.
that if he had been conceived and made by the power of nature, he could not
be without sin; but he was conceived by the power of the holy Ghost, and so
made by it for the power of nature could not have brought forth Christ. As we
see in nature, that the Substance of a chair of State was in the tree, Simile.
and yet the Tree could not bring forth such a chair of State fit for the king
to sit in, though it should grow a thousand years; but it must be made and
fashioned out by the skill and cunning of the Workman, for it could never grow
to be one, but is made one out of a tree, by the workman: so though Christ
were in the loins of Adam, yet nature could never be able to bring forth
Christ, but it must be by the power of the holy Ghost.

Thirdly, what ado there was at Christ's conception; as (we know) Joseph could
not sleep; Mary she must be called in question, for her honesty; and the
Angel must come down from heaven to quiet all: so it is still, if Christ be
conceived in the heart of a man, all the country must hear, and ring of it, he
must be table-talke, and they say, he is melancholy or mad; there is such ado
about it: yea, there was never more ado at the conception of Christ in the
womb of the Virgin, than there is at the conception of Christ in the heart of
a Christian. Examples we have Act. 2. when the Spirit of God came upon the
Disciples: (who were but poor fishermen) in fiery tongues, how did the people
wonder and admire at it? some said, They were drunk, some mad: so it is still,
Christ cannot be conceived in the heart of a Christian, but the world runs
in a rout together: and some say, the party is mad, some melancholy, and some
one thing and some another. And thus much for the conception of Christ.

Now we come to speak of his birth: wherein observe these five things:

1. Of whom he was borne. First, of whom Christ is borne.
2. The time when. 3. The place where. 4. The manner of his birth. 5. The
manifestation of it.
First, of whom he was borne: He was borne of the Virgin Mary, as it is in the
profession of our Christian faith, and Matthew. 1. 23. Hence two things are to be
observed:

1. That Christ's was borne of a Virgin. 2. That He was borne of the Virgin
Mary.
First, Three reasons why Christ was borne of a Virgin. Reason 1.
He was borne of a Virgin. Of which there may be given three reasons: first,
that he might be freed of the guilt of sin, which comes by the course of
nature: for all that are borne according to the course of nature are sinful,
therefore Christ was borne of a Virgin, not by the course of nature: all that
were in the loins of Adam, as he sinned, so did they; as we may see in another
case, Heb. 7. Levi paid tithes to Melchisedech, when he was in the loins of
Abraham, so that which Abraham did, Levi did, being in his loins: in like
manner Paul (speaking of Adam) says, In whom all have sinned, Romans 5. 12.
therefore all that were in the loins of Adam, as he sinned, so did they. But
Christ, that he might take man's nature upon him, and be freed from sin, was
borne of a Virgin: as Augustine says, he took man's nature without sin,
that the purity of his birth might sanctify the impurity of our birth, for we
are conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity: so David says, Psalm. 51. now
we are sanctified from the impurity of our birth, by the birth of Christ.

Secondly, Reason 2.
to fulfill the prophesies made of him; as Esai. 7. 14. Behold, a Virgin shall
conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Emanuel, etc. So Genesis 3.
15. God promises, that The seed of the Woman shall break the head of the
serpent; therefore when there was such a seed of a Woman that came without the
help of man, it appeared this was the party that God had assigned for the
breaking of the serpents head, and this is the note or mark that God has
given, whereby the Messiah the Savior of the world might be known. This was
not only the love of God, to send Christ into the world to save us, but to set
visible marks and notes upon him, that so we might know him: we read Genesis 4.
15. The Lord set a mark upon Caine: and Exodus 12. the door posts were
sprinkled with the blood of the Pascall Lamb, that so the Augell of
destruction might pass over them; so also in Ezekiel, those were marked, which
did mourn for the sins of the people, that they might not be destroyed, but
preserved: in like manner God has set a visible mark upon Christ that he
might be discerned; therefore seeing God has set visible marks and notes upon
Him, that we may know him, we must so receive, and so accept of Him.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
that the strangeness of his birth, might awaken and stir up the world, to
look for strange things by his life; which was the reason, why some of the
holy people had such strange births, as Isaac, Iaakob, Moses, Samuel, Sampson,
and John Baptist, that the strangeness of their birth, might awake he world
and stir them up to look for extraordinary matters in their lives; so Christ
had a rare birth, that he might awaken and stir up the world, to look for
strange things by his life: as at the Shepherds relation (when they had
published the things that they had seen by the Child,) the people wondered;
so we should wonder at the rareness of his birth, for there be strange
things in the birth of Christ; that he must be sent to earth, to bring us to
Heaven; that He who was uncorruptible, must be made corruptible, to make us
uncorruptible; that he must be made the Son of a Woman, that we might be made
the sons of God. The Uses shall be two:

First, Use 1.
for instruction; seeing Christ, was borne of a Virgin without the help of
man, therefore that which is impossible by the course of nature, is possible by
the power of God: it was impossible by the power of nature, that ever Christ
should be borne of the Virgin without the help of man, but it was possible to
God. We see in Sarah, it was impossible in nature that she should bear a
child, in her old age, when her womb was dead, and yet it was possible by the
power of God: so Moses when he struck the rock with his staff, that it
gushed water, one would have thought rather that it would have given out fire,
but that which was impossible to be effected by nature, was possible by the
power of God: so likewise we read 2 King. 7. when there was a dearth in
Samaria, Elisha prophesied of a great plenty, which one Prince (who did hear
it) was so far from believing that he said, it was impossible it should be,
although the windows of heaven should be opened; indeed to nature it was, but
not to God. Now this must be the rest and stay of a Christian in other hard
cases; in nature it is a thing impossible, that ever one that is dead and
rotten should rise again, but it is possible by the power of God: so art thou
weak, though it be impossible for a weak and frail man to withstand the
temptations of the devil; yet know the power of God is able to make thee
strong to overcome the devil; remember therefore the power of God in all his
promises: have thou a promise that if thou do repent and believe, thou shall
be saved, that he will lay no more upon thee, than thou art able to bear;
that he will raise up thy body at the last day? Consider that which is
impossible to nature, is possible to the power of God; (as the Apostle says)
He is able to make all grace abound in us.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing Christ was borne of a Virgin, so he must be spiritually borne in our
hearts and consciences; for I have showed you before, as Christ must be
spiritually conceived in the heart of a Christian, so also he must be borne;
for it is nothing to know that Christ was conceived in the womb of the Virgin,
and to be borne of her, unless thou know also Christ to be spiritually
conceived, and borne in thy heart: therefore as Augustine says, What shall it
profit me to know, that Christ is come in the flesh, that he was conceived in
the womb of the Virgin, and borne of her, unless I know Christ to be
conceived in my flesh, and borne in my heart and soul? so that it is not
enough to have Christ conceived in our hearts, unless he be borne and
brought forth in us; there be a number that (as it were) conceive Christ, that
have good motions and good desires, but they do not bring them forth, Christ
is not borne in them: and therefore they die; But we must labor to bring him
forth in our lives, and in our actions. We read of a wonder in Heaven Revel.
12. 1. the Church is described to be traveling in pain to bring forth Christ;
so every Christian must travel, be in pain, and bring Him forth in his life
and in his actions: we must go to Bethlem with the shepherds to find
Christ, and when we have found him, we must take him and make our hearts the
cradle or cratch to lay Christ in, and say as the Apostle Paul says, The life
that I now live in the flesh I live by faith of the Son of God.

The next thing is, that he was borne of the Virgin Mary; wherein two things
are to be considered:

1. Of what stock she came. 2. What was her estate.
First, First, what stock the Virgin Mary came of.
for her stock; she came of the stock and lineage of David, as Matthew. 1. 20.
In Luke 2. 4. it is said, That Joseph also went up from Galilee a city of
Nazareth unto Judea, unto the city of David which is called Bethlem, because he
was of the house and Lineage of David: Joseph and Mary both sprang from hence:
Matthew he sets down, how Joseph came of the race and line of David; Saint
Luke shows how Mary came of David, and both to this end, to show that Christ,
is the Son of David, according to the flesh, and therefore the true Messiah
and Savior of the world, for the true Messiah was to come of the house and
line of David: this we must believe, and confess him to be the true Messiah
and Savior: as the blind men in the Gospel, when he heard that Christ
passed by, cried out and said, O Son of David, have mercy upon us; so we
should cry out to him and say, O Jesus the Son of David have mercy upon us.

Secondly, Secondly, her estate*
for her estate; She was but a poor maid matched to a Carpenter; who would
have thought but that Christ would have made choice of some great Queen or
noble personage, but he (we see) was borne of this poor and mean Virgin. Now
if any doubt of this, whether they were a poor couple or no, let them look
Luke 2. and there they shall see that they brought for their offering, a pair
of Turtle doves, and two young pigeons, for Levit. 12. 8. these were the
offerings of the poor.

Now, Four reasons why Christ was borne of such mean Parentage.
what was the reason, that Christ was so poorly borne? I answer, there be
four reasons of it.

First, that by the meanness of his birth, he might sanctify the meanest of
our births; The first Reason of Christ's low birth.
therefore no man ought to despise any Christian for the meanness of his birth,
for if he do, it is like he will despise Christ: It is said, Psalm. 113. He
raises the needy out of the dust, and lifts up the poor out of the dunghill
that he may set him with Princes: so Psalm. 78. 70. He chose David his servant,
and took him from the sheepefold, even from the Ewes great with young brought
he him, that he might feed Jacob his people, and Israel his Inheritance.

Secondly, Reason 2.
to pull down the pride of this world, for a number do so swell with their
greatness as if they were little gods, Christ he was borne thus meanly to
pull down their pride, in that (as he was man) the Son of a poor Carpenter
shall be their Judge: many an one thinks that he can do any thing with his
money, but money cannot redeem a soul, therefore Christ has done more for us
by his poverty than all the bags of money and riches of this world could have
done.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
to teach us contentment in the estate that God shall assign us unto; for
there is no man so poor, but Christ was as poor, therefore we should be
contented with what we have. Art thou a Gentleman, and do thou want living?
a Scholar wanting employment? art thou an Artificer and a good workman,
wanting work? remember that Christ by the meanness of his low estate has
sanctified this estate to thee, who being obedient here to his father and
content with his estate for a little time, was after advanced to glory; so, if
we be obedient to God, and contented with the estate that God does assign us,
we shall afterward be advanced to glory with Him for ever.

Fourthly, Reason 4.
the more to esteem the greatness of Gods love, that he did not only give
Christ for us, but gave him in such a poor estate, that the Angels did wonder
and admire at it, Reason 4.
that Christ was laid in a cratch; therefore as the Lord says, Esai. 5. 5.
What could I have done more for my Vineyard that I have not done, etc? So what
could God have done more for us? Suppose God should come down and take a man
here by the hand, and should carry him into the garden, there show him Christ
lying grovelling on the ground, sweating drops of blood for him; thence carry
him into the judgment hall of Pilate, there show him Christ crowned with a
crown of thorns, his face buffeted, his body whipped; afterward carry him to
mount Calvary, and show him Christ hanging upon the cross in pains, and
torments, with his back whipped, his face buffeted, his side pierced, his
hands nailed: And there Christ should say to him, all this have I undergone for
thy sake, and yet thou art but my servant, and my bad servant too; I was
contented to be borne in a stable, laid in a manger, swadled in clouts,
arraigned, condemned, before Pilate, to be crucified on the cross, sweat
drops of blood in the garden; consider with thy self, how I have done all this
for thee and for thy sake, and yet thou art not contented to do any thing for
me, O thou most ungrateful man or woman, but rather delightest to vex and
grieve me with thy sins. The Papists take occasion in their fancies,
exceedingly to extol the Virgin Mary, calling her the Queen of Heaven, and
setting her throne, above the throne of Christ; we do not doubt but that she
was a virtuous woman in her time, and is now at rest with God, and was more
blessed for bearing of Christ, in her heart, than in her womb; she was not
blessed because she did bear Christ only, but rather for believing in him:
for so we read Luke 11. 27. There was a certain woman in the company, lifted
up her voice, and said to Christ, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the
paps that gave thee suck: but he said, yea rather blessed are they which hear
the word of God and keep it: Thus Augustine says, that she was more blessed,
for receiving the faith of Christ, than for receiving the flesh of Christ in
her womb: and Epiphanius upon the second of John, where Christ said to her,
Woman, what have I to do with thee? says, lest any should think too highly of
her, he says, Woman what have I to do with thee? He set her in the common
rank and order with other women; for Christ by the spirit of prophecy did
foresee what would come to pass afterward. And the Virgin Mary in her song
says, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit does rejoice in God my
Savior: Therefore it is clear the Virgin Mary was more blessed, for believing
in Christ, than for bearing of Him.

SERMON. X.
GALATH. 4. 4, 5. But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth His
Son made of a Woman, made under the Law, To Redeem them that were under the
Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons.
IF it were possible for a man to have a glass, SERMON. X.
wherein he might see the face of his absent friend, though he did delight to
look therein, yet when his friend should come, would he not fling away the
glass to look on his friend? such a glass is the Gospel, which by my poor
means is held out to you this day. Therefore in the absence of our friend
Christ set your selves I pray you, to behold Him in this glass, until his
coming.

The second thing we are to handle in the birth of Christ, is the time; two
ways set forth in the Scripture:

1. Generally. 2. Particularly.
Generally, in this place; When the fullness of time was come, that is, the set
time that God had appointed, then Christ was borne; Now three things are
employed touching this Time:

1. That there is a fullness of time, for the accomplishment of Gods promises.
2. That this fullness of time is still a coming. 3. When the fullness of time
is come, then God will perform his promises.
First, First, there is a fullness of time to fulfill Gods promises.
there is a fullness of time, for the accomplishment of Gods promises; so it is
said of Christ, that he died in due time, Romans 5. 6. so the Angel says to
Zachary, Luke 1. 20. Behold, thou shall be dumb, and not able to speak,
until the day that these things shall be performed, because thou beleevest not
my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season. So that there is a time for
the fulfilling of every promise of God. Of which observe two Uses:

First, Use 1.
for comfort, that seeing there is a fullness of time for the accomplishment of
all Gods promises; though we have it not to day, or to morrow, this year, or
the next, yet there is a fullness of time; so David shows, Psalm. 102. 13. Thou
shall arise and have mercy upon Sion, for the time to favor her, yea the set
time is come: this is a stay and a comfort to a Christian, that there is a
fullness of time for the accomplishment of Gods promises.

Secondly, Use 2.
that seeing there is a fullness of time for the accomplishment of Gods
promises, we should be contented to tarry that time, be it sooner or later: so
Habak. 2. 3. The vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall
speak and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it, because it shall surely
come, it will not tarry: therefore seeing there is a fullness of time to come
we must with patience be contented to wait that time. It is the madness of
the world, not to tarry the time that God has set them, but they must have it
straight; yea many a time Gods people be overtaken with it, as good Moses,
Exodus 5. 23. For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy Name, he has vexed
this people more, and yet thou have not delivered thy people at all; he
thought much to tarry a little time. But seeing there is a fullness of time,
every one should be contented to tarry till it come: Ioh. 2. 4. says Christ to
Mary, Woman, my time is not yet come, she had an hour, and Christ had an
hour, her hour was as soon as there was want; but Christ's was, when there was
sensible feeling of the want.

Secondly, Secondly, the fullness of time is coming.
this fullness of time is still coming; so Paul says here, when the fullness
of time was come, it draws nearer: and nearer as a man that is a far off,
Simile.
every step he takes he draws nearer and nearer home; so the^fulnesse of time
is coming; it stays not in the day, nor in the night, but approaches nearer
and nearer; as it is Dan. 7. 22. so Paul says, Heb. 10. 25. But let us exhort
one another so much the more, because ye see the day draws near. This is a
great comfort, that the longer we live here in this world, the nearer we are
to the accomplishment of Gods promises, and as every day does wind up the
thread of this life, so we come so much nearer to our salvation, and the
comforts and blessings which he has prepared for us; as Romans 13. 11. the
Apostle says, For now is our salvation nearer than when we believed: so in
the Gospel it is said by our Savior, When you see these things, lift up your
heads for your redemption draws near: and Psalm. 37. 13. it is said, the
wicked man sees his day coming toward him; that is, the day of judgment,
when he shall be called to an account for all his sins, and be punished for
them: as this must needs be a terror to a wicked man, to consider every day,
this day is coming toward him; so also it cannot choose but be a great
contentation and comfort to the godly to consider that the day of salvation is
drawing near to them, the time when they shall be put in possession of heaven
and happiness.

Thirdly, Thirdly, God sent his Son in the fullness of time.
When the fullness of time was come, then God sent his Son made of a woman:
this must teach us that we should never look for the accomplishment of Gods
promises till the fullness of time. There was great expectation and looking for
Christ, but he came not till the fullness of time* so we may expect and look
for comfort, ease, and for health, but we cannot have it till the fullness of
time: we see Revel. 6. 10, 11. The souls of those that lie under the Altar,
crying, Lord how long, thou that art holy, and just, and true; do thou not
judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? And there was
answer made them; They must rest for a season, till the fullness of time:
Exodus 12. 41. the people groaned a long time under their burden and could not
be delivered; but when the fullness of time came, then the very same day, they
were delivered; in the four hundred and thirty year the self same day: so
likewise Psalm. 105. 19. many means, it may be, was made for Joseph's
deliverance, yet it could not be until the time that his word came, and then
it is said, the king sent and loosed him; so howsoever we may seek for
comfort and ease, desire health, yet we shall not have it, till the fullness of
time come; therefore as Iaakob said to Laban when his time was expired, Give me
my wife, for I have served my time; so a Christian may say unto God, Give me
that which thou have promised me, for the time is come. Particularly the time
is described two ways:

1. In the days of Herod the king; Matthew. 2. 2. When Augustus caused all the
world to be taxed, Luke 2.
First, The first particular time when Herod was king.
Christ was borne when Herod was king: why does the Evangelist note this unto
us? first, to show that Christ's kingdom is not of this world, for Christ was
borne when there was another king; he was borne a King, for the Wisemen made
inquiry, Where He is that is borne King of the Jews. And in another place when
he was before Pilate, he asked him, Whether he were a king; and he said, for
this cause was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, etc. But it
was of another kingdom, a spiritual kingdom, not of a temporary. And what
may this teach us? that we are not to look for a worldly and a temporal
kingdom, but for a spiritual; therefore when a Christian is under the cross,
he may say, My kingdom is not of this world; I look not for a temporary
kingdom, but for a kingdom above the clouds, a kingdom of glory and
happiness.

Secondly, Christ was borne at the lowest ebb of the Jewish estate.
Christ was borne when the estate of the Jews kingdom was at the lowest ebb;
for Iaakob prophesied Genesis 49. 10. That the Scepter should not depart from
Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, till Shil^ came; that is, when a
stranger was king, when as the estate of the Jews was at the worst. This may
teach us, that the time, when Christ comes in the presence of his power and
goodness, is when things be at the worst: so Ioh. 11. when did Christ come?
when Lazarus was dead four days and did stink, then He came: so likewise
when the Disciples were at sea, in danger of drowning, and had labored all
night, then did Christ come to them, in the fourth watch toward morning: so
still Christ comes when things be at the worst with us. It is not a time for
Christ to come till Herod be king, till things be at the worst, and when we
have little hope; as soon as we are touched with Gods hand we would have ease
and help, but Christ's time is not till we be past help, when things be at
the worst; as John. 2. Christ's time was not till all the wine was spent, then
it was a time for him to show his power.

The second particular time set down, The second particular time.
Luke 2. was, when Augustus Caesar caused the whole world to be taxed: which
was first to fulfill a prophecy, The first cause.
Dan. 2. 44. it was foretold, that God would set up another kingdom in the
days of the Roman kings, that should batter, break and destroy all those
kings, which kingdom should stand for ever: therefore howsoever we be subjects
of another kingdom, and citizens of other cities, yet let us labor to be
citizens of this city, and subjects of this kingdom, because this shall
batter down all other kingdoms, and shall stand for ever. The Thief on the
cross he desired to be a subject of this kingdom, saying, Lord remember me
when thou come into thy kingdom; so let us pray to God, to make us subjects
of this kingdom, since this shall stand when all other kingdoms shall fall.

Secondly, The second cause.
it was to show that Christ for our sakes, came under the tax, and not only
the money tax, but to be taxed in his soul, to have the fear full wrath and
displeasure of God powered upon him, and to die for our sins; as Esai. 53. The
chastisements of our peace were upon him. Simile.
As Genesis 22. 6. Abraham took the wood of the Ass, and laid it on the
shoulders of his son: so we were the Asses that were burdened; God was he,
that took it off of us, and laid it on the shoulders of his Son not only the
money tax, but the tax of Gods wrath and displeasure. And therefore if Christ
were taxed for us, let us be contented to be taxed for him; we think it a
great matter to be taxed in our names, or goods, yet this is not that by a
thousand parts which Christ suffered for us.

The third thing is, Thirdly, the place of Christ's birth.
the place where Christ was borne; in Bethlem, so says the Evangelist. It was
not in the Royal city of the kingdom, Jerusalem, but in a poor town, a
place of no great respect; neither was he borne in the bravest house, but in
an Inn; and not in the best room thereof, but in a stable.

But why was Christ thus basely borne, Quest.
seeing the best place had been too base for him to be borne in, if we consider
the dignity of his person?

I answer; Sol.
first, to show the guilt of our sins which was upon him; Reason 1.
for he was no sooner come into the world, but our sins caught hold on him,
and stopped him of his glory, and turned him into a stable: Genesis, Simile.
4. sin is compared unto a cursed Dog, that lies at the door, that a man
goes no sooner out, but he is ready to fly upon him and rende out his throat;
so we see, that Christ was no sooner come into the world, but our sins
caught hold on him, and turned him into a stable: therefore hence we may see
our guiltiness to be such, that we are not worthy of the meanest place we
live in.

Secondly, Reason 2.
to procure a better place for us to be borne in; he was laid in a manger,
that we might be laid in our soft beds. It is the wantonness of the world, to
despise him, because he was poor: but Christ came poor into the world, to
make us rich: to which purpose Saint Bernard says well, Lord, (says he) I am
more beholding to thee, for thy poverty in redeeming me, than for all the
riches of thy power in creating me.

Thirdly, that we should be contented with any estate, that God should
assign unto us; Reason 3.
let us look on the estate of Christ, he was contented to be borne in a
stable; laid in a cratch: O that the world would think of their sins, how
that by reason of them they are not worthy of the meanest place they live in!
and yet we murmr and grudge against it, though our estates be better than his
was; He was contented with his estate, but we are not with our estates: it is
our sin, repent we for it.

Fourthly, Fourthly, the manner of Christ's birth.
the manner of Christ's birth: and that is to be considered three ways: first,
after the common manner we be borne; for when things be extraordinary, then
the holy Ghost does set them down in extraordinary terms, and when they be
common and ordinary, then he does use ordinary terms to express himself by.
Now in this place where the holy Ghost speaks of the birth of Christ, he does
use no extraordinary but the same terms, that is used in the birth of other of
the holy men of God; as of John Baptist, and the rest: therefore Christ was
borne, after the common and ordinary manner as we be borne. Indeed the
conception of Christ was miraculous and extraordinary; therefore they say, that
Christ did pass from his Mother and came through her, without opening her
womb; but this is a mere fancy of theirs, the Scripture is against it; for
Luke 2. 23. Every manchilde that first opens the womb, shall beholy unto the
Lord; therefore we see the birth of Christ was ordinary; and as other children
pass away from their mothers, so did he: the Fathers are plain for this, as
Tertullian says, this is the womb, for whose sake it is said, that every one
that opens the womb shall be holy to the Lord: and Saint Jerome, the law of
first opening the womb shall be holy to the Lord, does most especially belong
to Christ, yet ordinarily to others.

The Papists object against this, Object. Ans.
and say, How could His mother be a virgin, if Christ were borne after the same
manner as others are? I answer, that the Scripture is plain, that she was
not only a Virgin when Christ was conceived, but so when Christ was borne; as
Esai. 7. A Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son; so she was a Virgin at
his birth; yea the Schoolmen say, that the breaking and opening of her womb
did not take away her virginity: Hence we conclude that Christ was borne after
the ordinary manner we be.

The Use is: Use 1.
first, to see the strange humility of Christ, that he would be borne as we
are, and come into the world as we come, which this place is not fit to
describe: but the next child that comes into the world, and that you are at
the birth of, you may consider it, with this short meditation; Thus was Christ
borne in this weak manner, and stepped thus low for my salvation, and
therefore how justly shall I perish, if I despise this great mercy. Peter he
did wonder at the humility of Christ, Ioh. 13. that he would stoop so low, as to
wash his Disciples feet but how may we wonder at his strange humility that he
would be borne, as we are? therefore we may upon this consideration break
forth, and say; O blessed Lord, what am I that thou would be borne thus for
my sake, that thou would stoop so low for me! How should I respect and
regard thee?

The second use is, Use 2.
seeing Christ was contented to stoop to the infirmities of thy birth, thou
should be content to be borne spiritually: I, but to be borne of the Spirit
is tedious: why consider with thy self, was Christ contented to be borne of a
Virgin, thou may be contented to be borne of the Spirit: He suffered;
prayed in the garden, died on the cross for thee, was contented to be borne
of the Virgin, thou mai'st well be contented then to be borne of the Spirit.

Secondly, Secondly, he was borne meanly.
he was borne meanly, in the poorest manner that might be; and as we may see
in this place, there was no body to give him help, no light shining, nor
Angel appearing, no fine things to put him in; but he was swadled in clouts
and rags. This was a strange humiliation of Christ; to be borne so basely, that
all the Angels might admire and wonder at it, and be confounded to think of
the baseness of Christ's birth; which has made our adversaries devise strange
stories to grace the birth of Christ with, they say in the Gospel of Saint
James, (which is a false Gospel) that when Christ was borne, the whole course
of nature was stayed, that the birds that were flying in the air, could not
stir but hung there; the goats that went to drink, could not move their
lips; a shepherd putting forth his hook to catch his sheep it hung in the
air, and the like fopperies; for the world was not then able to consider, why
Christ was so poorly borne. Another tale they devised, to grace the birth of
Christ, was this: that when Joseph went for the midwife, Christ was borne in
the mean time, at which time there was such a light, as they might see as well
at midnight, as at noone day: but this could not be, for there was no light
shining in the room, no Angel, none to give him help. The world cannot
conceive it, but there be diverse reasons of it.

First, Four Reasons of Christ's mean Birth.
to show the infinite goodness and love of Christ thus to stoop so low, to be
so basely borne, to save me and thee: it was a strange love that he would be
borne, as we are, and so creep along with us, to grow as we grow, live as we
live, 1
and stoop to all the infirmities of our nature; yea even to dye and to lie in
the grave with us, that so we might apply our sinful bodies to his holy body,
our impure flesh to his pure flesh, that so he might quicken and give us life.
David, when he considered the work of creation, Psalm. 8. 4. burst out into
this speech, Lord what is man that thou art so mindful of him, etc. much more
may we say, (admiring the work of our Redemption) not only what is man? But
what a good Lord is this that he would be contented to stoop so low, to be so
basely borne for my salvation: which made holy Bernard say, so much the more
baser thou art borne, the more dear thou art to my soul, and to my heart in
this regard.

Secondly, 2
to show what a great matter it is to redeem us, and how we are to make much
of that Salvation, that Christ would be so basely borne to purchase for us.
Therefore seeing Christ was pleased to come thus into the world, to save us,
how should we be contented to be abased now, to stand before God with comfort
at the day of judgment? as Paul, Phil. 3. 8. Yea doubtless I count all things
but lost for the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I
suffered the loss of all things; and judge them to be but dung and dr^sse,
that I might win Christ, and might be found in him: so Ignatius when he
should suffer, Lord, says he, I care for nothing, whether for things visible,
or invisible, for the tearing my flesh, or the losing of my members, or for all
the devils can devise against me, so that I may be made any thing to be saved.
As a cunning workman takes a piece of clay to make a goodly jmage; Simile.
he tempers the clay, changes it into twenty shapes and fashions before he
makes the image: so the Lord (this cunning workman) does when he would make
the picture of Christ in us; he does as it were temper and change us into
twenty shapes, before he makes his beautiful Image in us: therefore we
should be contented to be disposed at the good will of God, to change us into
any shape, sickness, poverty, want, or disgrace, and be made any thing to be
saved.

Thirdly, 3
to show that the greatness of our sins took hold on him; for he was no
sooner come into the world, but our sins were upon him and put all this
baseness and meannesse upon him. Therefore do thou wonder thou art a
profane man or an Adulterer, or a drunkard, or a Swearer, that God brings
poverty upon thee, blindness, lamenesse, or an evil name; why look upon
Christ, and we shall see that the guilt of our sins, being upon him, brought
all this baseness and meanness upon him.

Fourthly, 4
that the meanness and hardness of Christ's estate, might sanctify the poverty
and hardness of our estates: for he was dear and precious in the sight of
God, notwithstanding this abasement, therefore do thou labor to be a child
of God, and then thou shall be dear and precious in the sight of God: now
though this cannot be by nature, yet labor to be one by Adoption, and grace,
and then God will accept thee, though thou be never so mean, and basely
accounted of here. Chrysostom compares a good man, Simile.
to a piece of gold, that if we take it, trample it, and tread it in the dirt,
yet the gold is never the worse; so (says he) let the world trample and tread
upon a good man, he is not the worse; he loses none of his goodness: and
these be the reasons in regard of God, why Christ was thus basely borne.

Now the reason in regard of the world (the Evangelists do show) was, because
there was no room in the Inn: this was strange, was there no room for Christ
in the Inn? was there never a chamber, nor a corner of a room for him to be
borne in? There was room I warrant you for swaggerers and drunkards, for
dicers and carders, for profane persons, but there was no room for Christ to
be borne in, these had taken up all the rooms, so as Christ must be turned
to be borne in a stable. And I would to God it were not the sin of the world
still, that they have room in their houses for others, but no room for
Christ: at this time, let us look into the houses of Gentlemen, and great men,
they have room enough for swaggerers and swearers, dicers and carders, and
mummers, but no room for Christ, Religion, prayer, or for the Bible; but
Christ thy redeemer is as it were turned into the stable: I beseech God, that
no such accusation may be laid to us; at the day of judgment: therefore
whosoever thou be, that keep a room to entertain thy friend, be sure
thou keep a room in thy house to entertain Christ, even his poor members to
entertain Religion, prayer and all other Christian duties; The Shunamite is
commended in the 2 King. 4. 10. for keeping a chamber for the man of God, even
this shall be thy commendations, that thou keep a room in thy house to
entertain Christ's members, but if thou can not keep thus a chamber in thy
house, yet keep a little room or corner in thy heart for Christ: we see a
number of men, have room in their hearts, for every vile sin, and lust, but
no room for Christ; whatsoever we do let us not turn out Christ, and let
him have a room to seek; but rather let us turn out our sins, that so
Christ may dwell with us; and that we may dwell with him eternally.

The last thing observed in the birth of Christ was, the manifestation thereof:
for seeing Christ was so obscurely borne, in a stable, laid in a cratch, we may
wonder how the world came to know it: it was manifested three ways:

1. By the Angels to the shepherds. 2. By a Star to the Wisemen. 3. By a
secret motion of the Spirit to Simeon and Anna in the Temple.
In the first manifestation of Christ to the shepherds we observe two things:

1. The manifestation it self. 2. The effects of it.
In the manifestation we may observe six things:

1. To whom Christ was made manifest: To the shepherds. 2. What disposition
they were in upon their calling: watching their flocks. 3. By whom; by an
Angel, when the Priests were silent in the Temple. 4. The time when; The very
same night. 5. The manner of it: By bringing a special message. 6. The speech
of the Angel.
First, First, unto whom Christ was manifested.
to whom Christ was made manifest, not to the great men of the world, nor to
the priests contemners of grace, but unto poor Shepherds: one would have
thought he would first have manifested himself to kings and Queens, and to
the great men of the land, and not unto poor shepherds. Of which there be
three Reasons:

First, Three Reasons why Christ was first known to the meaner sort.
because it was one of the parts of the degrees of Christ's Humiliation, that
he had not the great men of the world to grace him at his birth, but only
poor shepherds; yea, this is a great stumbling block still, because poor
men receive the Gospel, it hinders many a man from receiving the truth or
embracing Religion: but let no man be offended at it, it was so when Christ
came into the world. The Pharisees ask the question, Have any of the Rulers, or
of the Pharisees beeleved on him? those that be learned? it is but a company
of poor men: and 1 Cor. 1. 26. says the Apostle, For ye see your calling
brethren how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble are called: But God has chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise, etc. therefroe labor to be one of Christ's Disciples, and he
will not despise thee, although thou be poor and mean.

Secondly, 2
to show that there is no condition, or estate so bad that can hinder a man
from Christ, whatsoever it be tradseman, shepherd, or how mean soever, he
will not despise thee for thy meandness: some would think, that such great
things should be engrossed, for the great men of this world; as we see that the
best things be gathered up all the country over, Simile.
and engrossed for kings, and Queens: and because the best thing of all is
Christ, therefore, that kings and Queens should have had the chief ineterst
in him, and the poor have gone without, but we may see that no mean condition
can hinder a man from Christ; but the poor man has as great a part in him, as
the rich. We read Genesis 2. 9. The tree of life stood in the midst of the
garden of Paradise, that it might equally impart it self to all sorts and
conditions of men; and so Revel. 22. 2. In the Heavenly Jerusalem, there is a
tree of life said to be in the midst of the street, equally to impart it
self to all sorts poor and rich: therefore this may be a comfort, that no
mean condition, or estate, does hinder a man from Christ. There be many poor
people will not come at Church because they have not good apparel; it is good
indeed that there be, as much decency in this as may be, that men and women,
when they come to the house of God, should come as comely and handsomely as
they can; but if men have not decent and comely apparel to come in, let them
not refrain from coming to the Church, because they want apparel to come:
but let them look to the heart and conscience, and then Jesus will be a Jesus
to them.

Thirdly, 3
to show that he must be the poor man's portion; the rich man has his portion
in goods and in lands, but the poor man's portion is in Christ: so Iam. 2. 5.
Has not God chosen the poor of the world, that they should be rich in faith,
and heirs of the kingdom which he promised to them that love him? and
therefore this may be a great comfort to a poor man although he has not a
great deal of goods and lands for his portion, yet he may say, I thank God,
that Christ is my portion, his birth, cradle, cratch, life, death, passion, and
his merits are mine, this it was that made Jeremy to rejoice in his trouble,
Lamen. 3. 24. The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in
him; and so Psalm. 16. 5. says David, The Lord is the portion of mine
Inheritance: therefore thou that art a poor man, and have but a little goods
or lands, labor to make Christ thy portion, take him home into thy heart,
apply him by faith, and then thou have an excellent portion: if a man fall into
the hands of his enemies, or of thieves, who rob him and take away his goods,
yet if he have a Jewel of great price lest about him, he may say, Lord, I
thank thee, though they have taken away my money and goods, Simile.
yet they have left me may Jewel: so, howsoever the world may take away from a
man his goods, peace, or his good name; yet a Christian may have comfort and
say, Lord, I thank thee, that I have still my Jewel, they have not taken away
Christ from me.

If any object and say, Object. Sol. Simile.
is Christ the poor man's portion only, does not he belong to the rich also?
To this I answer, that the grace of the Gospel is like to a Vine, that runs
low first, at the bottom of the tree, and by little and little winds and
twists it self up, till it gets to the top: so at first, the grace of the
Gospel, began low, it did as it were creep along on the ground, with poor
men, and after it did wind and twist up, till it came at the top, and so did
wind within Scepters and crowns of kings, which is the highest step, that it
can come to in this world.

Secondly, Secondly, in what disposition the shepherds were found.
in what disposition they were found, the text says, they were keeping their
flocks; not Idle in their houses, nor asleep in their beds, but attending
their flocks, in their callings. Here we may see what a good thing it is for a
man to be upon his calling: If we look into the Bible we shall see all the
goodly apparitions that appeared, were when they were upon their callings; when
was it, that Iaakob saw in a vision Angels ascending and descending, when he
was in his journey upon his calling? so Moses Exodus 2. when did the Lord
appear unto him; as he was keeping his flock? Judge. 6. 11.
and so the Angel did appear to Gedeon when he was a threshing wheat in his
calling: so the Lord took David, from following the sheep great with young:
And when were the Disciples called? was it not when they were a fishing in
their calling, not when they were idle? which may show us, what an excellent
thing it is for a man to be upon his calling, to perform the duties of it: if
there be any blessing stirring, or any good thing, for the Angel of God to
impart, he shall be sure to have his part in it at that time: so says our
Savior, Blessed is that servant, who when his Master shall come, Calvin.
Dominus cum venit, inveniet melbar antem.
shall be found well doing; and it was a good saying that a learned man had,
when his friends told him, he studied too much, says he; What would ye have
the Lord come and find me Idle?

Thirdly, Thirdly, by whom Christ's Birth was manifested.
by whom the birth of Christ, was made manifest: by the Angels; when the
Priests were silent in the Temple, the Angels were not, they could not keep
it: here we may see, how ready the Angels are, to do any service to Christ,
there is not an Angel nor an Archangell, but is ready to do service to him;
therefore much more should men be ready to serve and obey Him. But it is
otherwise with us; for we be ready to do service to sin, and to our lusts,
rather than unto Christ. Matthew. 21. when Jesus rode to Jerusalem upon an Ass;
some strowed garments in the way, some did cut down boughs, and branches,
crying Hosanna; there was not a child, playing in the streets, but was ready
to do service unto Christ: in like manner let us stir up and quicken our
selves to do in the service of Christ, and not, as we were wont, give our
selves wholly to sin, to the deceitful lusts and vain pleasures of this world.

Fourthly, Fourthly, the time of the manifestation.
the time when Christ's birth was made manifest: the same night; an Angel came
post from heaven, to make it known: it was the love of God, that he would not
hold it till day, any long time, but presently he makes it known. We read Genesis
18. of Gods love to his servants, says the Lord, Shall I hide from Abraham
that thing which I do, etc? For I know him that he will command his children
and his household after Him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, etc. God
would not conceal any thing from his servant Abraham; so it was his love, that
he would not conceal the birth of Christ, but make it known, the same night.
Therefore seeing God made have to send this message, we should make have to
receive it, as soon as may be: seek him, and not rest, till we have found
him; and as the Shepherds went out to Bethlem, to see Christ; so let us go
forth to see him, although he be not at Bethlem, yet in his word, there we may
see Christ, borne in a stable, laid in a cratch, praying in the mount, sweating
in the garden, crowned with a crown of thorns, bleeding on the cross,
hanging in pains and torments, and gloriously sitting on his throne, and as
old Simeon took Christ in his arms and embraced him, so let us take him, and
lay hold on him, by the hand of Faith; and bring him into our hearts, so as we
may say with Paul, Gal. 20. 2. The life which I now live in the flesh I live by
the faith of the Son of God, etc. so never part with Christ, till the day of
death; for no man can have comfort although he should see Christ borne in the
stable, laid in the cratch, sitting in the lap of his mother, praying in the
mount, bleeding on the cross, sitting gloriously on his throne, unless he
can apply Christ, and make him his own by faith.

Fifthly, the manner of the manifestation of his birth, by a special message;
where two things are to be considered:

1. That the Angel moves attention. 2. The message it self.
Now the Angel moves attention two ways:

1. By remooving that which should hinder attention. 2. By quickening up the
affections, in this word; Behold.
First, of the message it self; which was, that the Angels did bring them
tidings of great Joy.

1. It was tidings of joy. 2. Of great joy. 3. Not to one people, nor to one
nation, but to all people.
And therefore seeing there is such an excellent message come, we should
attend it. Here we may observe, what is the greatest joy that is, that Christ
is borne into the world; this is the joy of us Christians, to know that Christ
is come into the world to save penitent and poor sinners, he will hear us in
our troubles, releeve us when we be poor, give us health when we be sick;
will be all in all unto us: O let us then labor to joy in Christ, for there is
no true joy but in him; therefore howsoever the covetous man's joy is in his
goods, the fleshly man's in his pleasures, the usurers in his money; yet let the
Christian more joy in Christ, than in any thing: and let every man labor to
get him, make him sure, and then he shall joy in life, in death, in sickness,
health, plenty and adversity.

SERMON XI.
LVKE 2. 15. And it came to pass, as the Angels were gone away from them into
Heaven, the shepherds said one to another, Let us go now, even unto Bethlem,
and see this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord has made known unto
us.
OF the manifestation of Christ's birth, we spoke the last day, only one thing
more there is to be added, which is the Specification of the Angels speech:
they do not only say, that Christ is borne, but by way of appropriation, that
Christ is borne to you; you be the men, the parties that Christ was borne for.
A man shall never have any true comfort, to know that Christ is borne, unless
he can apply, and appropriate Him to himself, bring himself within this
compass, that Christ was borne for him; to say, that Christ's birth is his, His
passion, His pains, His life, His death is his; then he may have comfort: for
all our joy is by applying and making Christ our own, to appropriate His
death, life, pains and passions to us; then we may have comfort, then we may
rejoice: therefore every one must labor to apply Christ unto himself, and to
know that he is one of them, for whom Christ was borne. Esai. 9. 6. it is said,
To us a Child is borne, to us a Son is given, etc. for though Christ be
borne to others, we can have no comfort by it, until we know that he was borne
for us, and as it is said, Zech. 9. 9. Behold, thy king comes to thee: so
till we say, my king comes to me, we can have no joy of him; so John 20.
Thomas had been a long time a Disciple of Christ, and yet had but little
comfort by it, till he came to say, My Lord, and my God: In like manner one
may hear a long time, and yet have no joy in Christ, feel little comfort,
till he can make particular application of Him. Therefore every one should
labor to apply Christ unto himself that he may have joy and comfort, when he
can bring his heart within compass of those the Angels speak of, SER. XI.
Christ is borne to you, you be the parties, you be the men and women that
Christ is borne for.

The second thing we observe is, The effects it wrought in the shepherds; which
are four in number.

The first is, The first effect.
that they said one to another; let us go then unto Bethlem, and see this
thing that is come to pass, which the Lord has showed unto us. Here we see
the shepherds do exhort and stir up one another, to go and see this thing
which was come to pass; and it must teach us to exhort and stir upone
another to good things, and take them to ourselves, laboring to make others
the better for them, as upon any occasion to say to one another, Wife, or
children, or servants, or neighbors, come, let us go to the preaching of the
Word where we shall have Christ to our comfort. Simile.
It is the manner of the stream, to carry away all movealbe things, but if
they be rooted, then it does not stir them, Mich. 4. 1. the people of God
are said to flow, because they carry men to Christ; when men be settled and
rooted in their sins then they stand still, but if they be capable of good
things then they are carried to Christ; and therefore Heb. 3. 13. we are
commanded to exhort one another daily, while it is called to day; and Heb. 10.
25. it is said, But let us exhort one another, so much the more because the day
draws near: so likewise in Esaias it is said, And many people shall go and
say, Come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God
of Jacob. It is one of the graces of God that he will bestow on his people,
that they shall be helpers to stir up one another to good duties, to faith,
repentance, patience and the like: we see how ready the men of this world be,
to incite up one another to sin, as Genesis 11. 4. say the wicked builders, Go
to, let us build a tower, whose top shall reach to heaven; in Esaias the
drunkards stir up one another; and Ierem. 18. 18. Then said they, Come, let
us devise devises against Jeremiah; for the law shall not perish from the
priests, nor counsel from the wise, nor the Word from the Prophet: Come and
let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his
words: so also Proverb. 1. 11. the thieves say, Come, let us lay wait for
blood; cast in thy lot amongst us, and we will all have one purse. O how this
may shame us, that they be more ready to carry one another to hell and
damnation, than we to draw one another to life and salvation? Simile.
we see if one wheel of a clock be stirred it will stir all the rest; so
it should be with us, if one be stirred to goodness, he should stir others
to it, as these shepherds did as soon as the Angels were departed from them:
this must teach us not to let good motions die, but as soon as we understand
them, we must be ready to set them aworke. Of which there be two reasons:

First, Reason 1.
because in time the devil will be very laborious to quench them; as Matthew.
13. when the good man had sown good seed in his field, the envious man did
sow tares; so when there is any good motions in us, the devil will labor to
hinder them: therefore as soon as may be we should labor to set them aworke.

Secondly, Reason 2.
because the first motions are the swiftest and the strongest; as the Apostle
says to the Galatians, ye did run well, what did let you, at the first? so
thou did run well, the first motions were swiftest; therefore seeing they
are swiftest and strongest, we must not let them die, but labor to set them a
work.

But what did they exhort one another unto? to go to Bethlem: and why to
Bethlem? because Christ was borne there. Bethlem was one of the smallest
towns, yet because he was borne there, thither they went. We have out Bethlem
as well as they, the place of preaching, of prayer, and the place where the
Sacraments are administered, this is Bethlem, this is the place where Christ was
borne: therefore howsoever the place is mean, whither we may go, yet thither
must we go, howsoever others go to other cities and great places yet we must
go to Bethlem. Mark. 1. 33. All the city was gathered together at the door of
Peter's mothers house, and yet it was but a mean place, only a fishermans
cottage; nevertheless because there was a healing power of Christ, thither
they went and resorted: therefore howsoever the place be mean, if Christ may
be found there, thither let us go; when others go to places of disorder, of
pleasure, of gaming, to places of drinking and swilling, let us go to Bethlem,
to places of preaching, prayer, where we shall not only see Christ, lying in
the cratch, as the shepherds did, but even in heaven gloriously sitting on his
throne as blessed Stephen saw him. But why did they go to Bethlem? the text
says, to see the things that the Lord would show them: this may teach us, when
we have knowledge, to make use of it, to the bettering of us in our life and
conversation; many have knowledge, but they be not bettered by it, whereof the
Lord complains Esai. 42. 20. Seeing many things, but keep them not: and
therefore when God does give a man knowledge, and he be not bettered by it, and
in his life made more careful to please God, how justly may this lie upon a
man's conscience at the day of death?

The second effect was, The second effect made have.
They come in have. for all this do you consider how many lets they had to
hinder them: first, the dark night might have hindered them: secondly, their
flocks were in danger, subject to be devoured of wild beasts, there being no
body to look to them: thirdly, there was no body that knew of it but they:
fourthly, when they were entered into the city there was no body could tell them
of Christ; and yet their faith made them break through all these lets. Which
may teach us, that true faith will break through all lets; there is never a
man that hears me this day, but he shall meet with lets, yet we must not
be dishartned but strive to break through all; as Mark. 2. 4. when they
brought the man that was sick of the palsy, they brake through the rooffe,
and let him down to Christ; so true faith will break through a thousand lets:
we see in nature, Simile.
that a spring will break through an heap of stones, or a rock; so if there
be a spring of grace in us, we shall break through all lets unto Christ:
therefore it must be our wisdom to break through profits and pleasures, and
whatsoever is dear unto us, to come to Christ. But why did they come in have?
to teach us that men can never make too much have to come to Christ. It is a
great error in the world, that men may make too much have to repent, to
believe, etc, Ioh. 11. 29. when Lazarus was dead and Christ was come to the
grave, as soon as Mary heard that, she arose in have, and came unto Him: so
Ioh. 21. the Disciples being a fishing, when Peter heard it was the Lord, he
leaped over the Boat to come to Christ.

The third effect was, The third effect, they published all.
that, They published all things abroad that they had seen and heard of Christ;
they did not keep it, but they did make Christ known to the world. Which may
teach us when we know any good thing, that we should labor to make it known
to others that they might see Jesus, and he blessed by him: as Ioh. 1. 41.
says Andrew, we have found the Messiah, which is by Interpretation, the
Christ; so John 4. when the woman of Samaria had talked with Christ, she went
into the city and told all those things she had heard and seen; so Matthew. 28.
when the Angels had showed Mary that Christ was risen, she told the Disciples:
in like manner when we know any thing, we should tell it to others to draw
them to Christ. Simile.
As in a shipwreck when some be got to the shore, or to the haven, they get
into the tops of trees, to hang out lights, that so others might be directed
into the haven or harbor; so we should do, when it pleases God to draw any
of us home to Christ, we should by all means labor to draw others, and to
bring them home to the haven or harbor, to bring them home to Christ. And what
did this work? why did the common sort wonder and marvel at it, yet let all
go? because they were not enlightened; but of good Mary it is said, she did
ponder all those things in her heart: when men hear of the great and glorious
things in the Gospel they wonder and marvel at them, as the people did Act.
2. 6. Now when this was noised abroad the multitude came together, and were
astonished, because every man did hear them speak in his own language: and
they were all amazed, and marvelled, saying one to another, Behold, are not all
these which speak Galileans? and so let the matter dye. But good Mary, with
the people of God, ponder these things in their hearts: therefore howsoever
others do wonder and are moved for a time only, yet we should gather them home
to our hearts, and ponder them in our souls, that so we may have comfort by
them in life and death.

The fourth effect was, The fourth effect, they returned to their callings.
that they did return again to their callings, and to their flocks: they did
not give over their callings when they had seen Christ, but they did return
again. But with what caution did they return again? the text says, praising
and lauding God, for all that they had seen and heard. This must teach us,
that when we go to the place of Gods worship and see Jesus, we must return
again to our callings, but with this caution, praising and lauding God, that
he has made his birth known unto us, his life, his death, his pains and his
passions; and we have our parts in them, when yet he has passed by many kings
and queens, and great gentlemen of this world; and has looked upon us, that
be but poor husbandmen, and tradesmen, therefore let us praise God for it:
and although we go again to our labors, yet let us never forget this little
Jesus; the light that shone about them did vanish and they saw it no more, but
the inward joy, that tarried within in their inner houses, their hearts, and
was a comfort to them in sickness, and troubles, and at their deaths: so we
cannot hear these glorious things: nor have Sermons every day, yet let us get
Christ home to our houses, and into our hearts, then we shall have comfort in
all our troubles, and at the time of death: then whenever thou shall shut up
thine eyes in this world, thou shall open them in Gods kingdom. And therefore
I pray God we may so shut our eyes up in this world, that so we may open them
in the light of his blessed kingdom.

One would wonder seeing Christ was so obscurely borne, how his Birth should
break out into the world, and be known? There were three ways of it:

1. By the Angels to the Shepherds; of this spoken already. 2. By a star to
the Wisemen. 3. By a secret motion of the Spirit to Simeon and Anna.
In the manifestation of Christ to the Wisemen, we observe two things:

1. The inquiry they made for Christ. 2. The effects of their inquiry.
In the inquiry for Christ observe:

1. The persons that made inquiry: The Wisemen. 2. The place from whence they
came: Out of the East. 3. The place whither they went: To Jerusalem. 4. The
end: To seek Christ. 5. The cause that moved them: It was a Star.
First, the persons that made inquiry; the Wisemen, or (as the Original has
it) the Magi, that is, learned wisemen, men of great learning and knowledge,
the shepherds were poor and simple men, and the Magi great learned rich men,
as it may appear by their gifts they offered to Christ.

Of which there are two reasons why Christ appeared to the Shepherds, Two
Reasons of Christ's manifestation.
and the to Wisemen; first, to show that the grace of the Gospel appertains
equally to poor men, as well as rich, it draws all sorts of men to it:
Reason 1.
even as the Vine that begins low at the bottom of the tree, Simile.
but at last does creep up upon the tree, till it does wind and twist it
self up to the top of it; so the Gospel began at poor fishermen, below, but
it did creep up by little and little till it did wind it self within the
Scepters and crowns of Kings, which is the highest step it can come unto in
this world; it did draw the poor shepherds out of the field, and the Wisemen
out of the East.

Secondly, Reason 2.
to show that the great learned, and rich men of the world have as much need
of Christ, as the poor; for there is not one way for the saving of the poor,
and another for the rich, one of saving the high, and another the low, one way
to save Princes and another subjects; but they be all saved one way, by Christ;
and therefore as well the poor Shepherds came out of the fields to seek
Christ; as the Wisemen out of the East: and for that end to such David
addresseth his speech, Psalm. 2. Be wise now, O ye kings, and be learned, ye
judges of the Earth; labor to lay hold on Christ, and to embrace him in the
arms of faith: therefore whatsoever thy estate be, poor or rich, seek after
Christ; labor to lay hold on him, or else thou art like to perish, there is
but one way to save thee, whatsoever thou be. In Leviticus, we read that in
case of redemption, the rich should not add any thing, nor the poor take
away, but there should be all one price for rich and poor; so it is in the
case of spiritual Redemption, there is not a higher price for the rich, and a
lower for the poor, but only one price for all: Christ is the price of our
redemption; therefore every man must lay hold on him for salvation. Judge. 10.
4. when the people were in distress, and cried unto the Lord, this answer was
made them, Go and cry unto your gods whom ye have served, etc. so the Lord may
say to us, in the time of trouble, at the day of our death, or at the day of
judgment, Go and cry unto your gods whom ye have served, see if they can
help you, your pleasure and your profits, your wealth and your lusts, whom ye
have served: therefore whatsoever our estates be let us labor to lay hold on
Christ, and look to be saved by none but by him.

Secondly, Secondly, the place whence they came.
The place from whence they came, it is said from the East; they took many a
weary step to see Christ: they came out of a far country; the shepherds
out of the field: Of which there be two reasons, why they came so far to see
Christ:

First, Two reasons why the wisemen came so far to Christ.
to show that the people afar off should be gathered to Christ, as Esai. 60.
34. this was foretold; And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings at
the brightness of thy rising. Lift up thine eyes round about, and see, 1
all they gather themselves together, they come to thee: thy sons shall come
from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy ^ide. So Matthew. 8. 11. And
I say unto you, that many shall come from the east and from the west, and shall
sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Iaakob, in the kingdom of Heaven: Ephesians. 2.
17. It is said, and came and preached peace unto you, which were afar off,
and to them that were near. So the Jews were not only gathered by the grace
of the Gospel, bur the Gentiles also, such as were afar off: therefore we
are to be thankful to God for this, for there was a time when there was a
partition wall between the Jews and the Gentiles: but now by the blood of
Christ, the partition wall is broken down.

Secondly, 2
to teach us, that no labor is too much, or pains too great, to come by
Christ; though it cost us many a weary journey, and many a weary step, if we
can attain Christ, let us not think much of it: We see the Wisemen came many
a weary step from a far country to see Christ; they thought no pains too
great, no labor too much. To this purpose our Savior says, Luke 11. 31.
The Queen of the South shall rise up in judgment with his generation and
shall condemn it; For she came from the uttermost parts of the earth, to
hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold, a greater than Solomon is here;
therefore we must not think it much to come out of our houses to see Christ:
though the market be a good way off, Simile.
yet we go thither to make provision for the body, much more should we be
contented to come out of our houses; to go to the places of Gods worship and
service, to make provision for our souls: The Wisemen came out of the East to
see Christ, much more should we come out of our houses. Object. sol.
If you could show us Christ, we should be willing to come. Yes, that I can,
and more gloriously than ever the Wisemen beheld him; and though not with the
bodily eye, yet we show you Christ in the face of the Gospel, to the eyes of
your soul, not only lying in the cradle, praying on the mount, bleeding in
the garden, dying on the cross, but now gloriously sitting in Heaven on his
throne. If one come into a room where there be goodly pictures, Simile.
if there be curtains drawn over them, ye cannot see them; but let one come
and pull aside the curtain, then ye may see the rich pictures; so there be
goodly pictures and representations of Christ in the face of the Gospel, but
there is a veil or curtain, that hangs before them; remoove the veil, let
the curtain be plucked away, and then ye shall see these excellencies of
Christ: and if the Wisemen came to Bethlem from a far country to see Christ,
much more should we come out of our houses to see Him in the face of the
Gospel.

Thirdly, Thirdly, the place whither they went.
the place whither they went: They came to Iersualem; not guided by a star,
but led by their own reason, for they thought, that seeing Jerusalem was the
royal city of the kingdom, and the seat of kings, there they should be sure
to hear of Christ's birth. They followed humane reason, and not the star,
therefore they did not find him at Jerusalem until they came to Bethlem; so
long as they followed the star, so long they did well, but when they left the
direction of it, and followed their own reason, they did amiss: so look how
long we follow the directions of the Word, so long we do well, but if once we
leave that, to follow our own carnal reason, then we do amiss, for we
cannot find Christ by following that: therefore as the blind man follows his
guide through brambles and briars, Simile.
over hills and dales, because his own eyes being shut up, he trusted to the
eyes of his guide; so we must follow Gods directions, and then we shall find
Christ, but if we follow our own reason, we shall never find him.

Fourthly, Fourthly, the end of their journey.
the end why they came out of their own country; to seek Christ: as it was
the providence of God to stir up these Wisemen that so the Jews might also be
provoked to seek for him; for when they did see these Wisemen came so far,
and take such pains to seek Christ, it might much more have provoked them to
seek Him, seeing he was amongst them: so it is now the providence of God, to
stir up such strangers to seek to this place where the Gospel is preached,
that so we may be the more provoked to seek Christ; for if strangers take
such pains to come to hear, much more should we; especially now, when it is
amongst us, because we have not only a little inkling of Christ's birth, but
we know the time of it, and we can talk of it; therefore let us labor to
seek Christ, let the worldly man seek after his profits, the covetous after
his goods, the fleshly man after his pleasures, the usurer after his money yet
let us seek after Christ. Matthew. 28. 5. says the Angel to the Women, I know
that ye seek Jesus which was crucified; so it is a good thing, when the very
looks and behavior of men do testify that they look and seek for Christ;
not for any worldly matter but for Him only.

Now there be three reasons that should move us to seek for Christ. Three
motione or reasons to seek Christ.
First, because Christ seeks us, Luke 19. 10. The Son of man is come (says
he) to seek, 1
and to save that which is lost. Is the Lord come to save us? Then we again
must labor to seek him: we see if a sheep be lost, the shepherd does not
only seek it, Simile.
but it in some measure does again seek the shepherd, for it does bleate,
and is not at rest, till it be in the fold again: so seeing we be like lost
sheep, we must seek Christ and never be at rest, till we be in his fold;
David, Psalm. 119. ult. says, I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek thy
servant; for I do not forget thy commandments.

Secondly, 2
because of the precious and rich graces, that be in Christ: as Col. 1. 19.
says the Apostle, For it pleases the Father, that in him should all fullness
dwell: so that there is not any grace we need but it is to be found in him;
he is the common treasury of the Church, as Cantic. 6. 1. when the Church had
commended Christ, and had showed forth his excellency, straightway the
daughters of Jerusalem, demand, Whither is thy welbeloved gone? O thou fairest
among Women, whither is thy welbeloved turned aside? that we may seek him with
thee: so when we hear of the excellency that is in Christ, the rich graces
that be in him, this should make us inquire and seek after him.

Thirdly, 3
because he gives us salvation, therefore there is great reason why we should
seek to him, that we may enjoy eternal life, and salvation by him. If a man
have a hundred acres of land given him, the first inquiry that he makes, is,
where it lies, which when he knows, then he labors to come to see it;
Simile.
so must we do, God has given us salvation, when we know where it lies,
(and it lies in Jesus Christ) then we must seek for Him, and so make Him sure
to our selves.

Fifthly, Fifthly, what moved the Wisemen to seek Christ.
What moved the Wisemen to seek to Christ; it was but the sight of the star;
we would think that it was some great matter, should have moved them to come
out of their country, and take such a great journey upon them: The shepherds
were moved by the Angel, Simeon and Anna by a vision in the Temple, 4
but there was no Angel to moove the Wisemen, no vision, no light shining, but
the apparition of a star. Which should teach us, to take hold on every little
means which may bring us to Christ; Simile.
it is the nature of the Vine, to catch hold on every little stick, twig and
post, to advance it self by; so must we, like the Vine, catch hold on every
little means, to bring us to Christ: the Wisemen had but one star, and we
have a number of bright ones, shining about us; the Bible is a star, and
every faithful Pastor is a star, and yet these cannot bring us to Christ.
The Wisemen saw Christ in the cradle, we see him working of miracles, changing
water into wine, raising of the dead cleansing of the lepers, giving sight to
the blind, restoring of the lame, giving health to the sick. We have seen
his star in the east, say the Wisemen; thus they sought Christ, when the
star vanished away; they sought him, not only when they had a star to
direct them, but when the star was gone, and out of sight: which may teach us
a further point of consideration, not only hold on in the profession of the
Gospel, and to seek Christ, as long as all things go well with us, having
our guides, but also when we have lost them. There is a corruption in the
world, that as long as men have stars to guide them they can keep within
compass; but if they have lost their star, then they give over, they will
seek no further; as we read in Josh. 24. 31. Israel served the Lord, all the
days of Joshua, and all the days of the Elders, etc. But when Joshua was
gone, then they fell to their sins. Hence we may learn, Use 1.
not only to seek Christ, and be religious, whilst our good pastors are
amongst us, but when they be gone and taken from us. Now, the effect of their
inquiry is twofold:

1. In Herod, and the Jews. 2. In the Wisemen.
First, In Herod and the Jews; this was a strange thing, that any man should
be troubled at the birth of Christ, 1
which should be the joy of the whole world: the Angels sung praises to God
for it, the Shepherds rejoiced, and the Wisemen sought Christ; Abraham desired
to see his day and rejoiced; and yet Herod was troubled at his birth: even so
it is still, with wicked and vile men, with the Herod's of this world, they be
grieved to see religion flourish, the Gospel to take rooting amongst us: to
whom is this a trouble? to Herod, to drunkards, to covetous persons, to vile
livers; but good people be glad to see the Gospel promoted, religion to thrive
amongst them: and therefore consider with thy self, O man, art thou troubled,
at the sight of Christ? can thou not away to have religion to flourish? then
have thou a naughty heart, Herod's heart, and Herod's affections.

But why was Herod thus troubled? Quest.
there is no man the worse for Christ, but a great many the better for him, why
then should Herod be troubled? sol.
I answer, he was an Usurper, and an intruder into the kingdom, he had a bad
conscience, this was that that troubled him; so, if we come by things
fraudulently, and badly, Christ coming will be a trouble to us, when he shall
come with joy to others it will be to us terrible: We see in Matthew the devils
inquire of Christ, Art thou come to torment us, before our time? the presence
of Christ was a torment to the devils; so if thou have a bad conscience, his
coming and presence will be a trouble to thee, when others shall receive
comfort by it, it will be a terror to thee.

What was the reason the Jews were troubled at the birth of Christ? we see
Herod had a bad conscience, this troubled him; but why were they troubled? he
was their Savior and redeemer Zech. 9. 9. it is said, Rejoice greatly O
Daughter of Sion, shout O Daughter of Jerusalem: Behold, thy King comes unto
thee, etc. I answer, they thought that Christ would not come into his
kingdom, but it would cost much hardship, there would be much trouble about
it; therefore rather than they would lose their worldly ^ase, or peace, they
would lose Christ. This is the sin of the world still, that if the Gospel
hinder their worldly ease, SER. XII
or peace, they had rather lose Christ, and the Gospel, than lose their ease
and peace: so John 11. 47. the Jews holding a council together how to kill
Christ, because they were afraid they should lose their worldly ease, say they,
If we follow this man, the Romans will come, and take away our kingdom and our
nation: so that we may see, they had rather lose Christ, than lose their
worldly ease and peace: Of which sin let us by their example and ruin learn
to shun and beware of the like practice, which has justly brought so
long-lasting misery upon them.

SERMON. XII.
MATTHEW 2^. 7, 8, 9. Then Herod, when he had privily called the Wisemen,
inquired of them diligently what time the Star appeared. And he sent them to
Bethlehem and said, Go and search diligently for the young Child, and when ye
have found Him, bring me word again that I may come and worship Him also.
When they had heard the King they departed, etc.
THe next thing, that I should show you is, how Herod made way out of his
trouble; for of his trouble you have lately heard.

First, he calls the Scribes and Pharisees together to know the place where
he should be borne; secondly, he inquired of the Wisemen, the place and time
when he should be borne; thirdly, when he knew the place and time when Christ
should be borne, he thought to have killed him, so to ease himself and make
way out of all his trouble; but the Lord kept him from touching his person. so
the wicked and vile men of the world, when they be in trouble, make way out of
it by bad means, wicked devises coozening and such like.

The second thing observed was, the effects of the inquiry in the Wisemen,
wherein three things are to be observed:

1. The endeavor of the Wisemen. 2. The blessing of God, upon their endeavor.
3. With what affection they received it.
First, the endeavor of the Wisemen; when they could not find Christ at
Jerusalem, they set themselves upon good advice to seek him elsewhere, they
departed from thence, though, there were two things that might have hindered
them:

1. Their bad success. 2. The bad example they saw.
The first thing that might have hindered them, Two discouragements of the
wisemen in seeking Christ.
was, the bad success they had of their journey; for they thought surely to
have heard of him at Jerusalem, but there was no speech of him, yet for all
that they departed from thence, 1
set themselves with good advice to seek Christ: which may teach us, howsoever
we find a bad success on our holy labors, at the first, Observe.
yet to go on, although we cannot find mortification for our sins, and such
a blessing upon our holy labors, as we desire, yet let us go on, and set our
selves upon good courses, still to wait on God, till he give us good success:
so we see the Church does Psalm. 123. 2. Behold, as the eyes of servants look
unto the hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of
her mistress, so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy on
us: She resolves, although thou do not this day, nor the next, nor the next,
yet we will wait on thee, till thou show mercy: in like manner we are
exhorted, Gal. 6. 9. Let us not be weary of well doing, for in due time we
shall reap, if we faint not. Therefore the bad success we may have, must not
hinder us, for Cantic. 3. 1. when the Church had lost Christ, She sought him
in her bed by night, where when She could not find him, she gets her out, into
the lanes and streets, she inquires of the watchmen; and although She meets
with many discouragements, yet She never gives over until She find Christ,
and make him sure to her self: so must we do, if we do not find good
success on our holy labors, nor find Christ at first, let us never give
over, till we have found him, and so make him sure. It is the impatience of the
world, that if they cannot find a blessing upon them at first, they will seek
no farther; and it was the fault of the Jews, Hag. 1. when they went to build
the Temple and were hindered, having no good success in their labors, they
gave over; but it was their sin, they were reprooved for it: so David in the
1 Chronicles. 13. when he would have brought the Ark of God, to his city, the
Lord was angry with Vzzah, and killed him: therefore David was afraid to bring
the Ark of God, to his own city; but it was his fault, and a great
weakness: therefore it must be our care, although God do not answer us
according as we desire, yet to go on still and never give over, until we
have found his blessing upon us; Genesis 26. 19. It is said that Isaaks servants
dug in the vale, and found a fountain of living water; it may be they
dug a fadome and found none, it may be two fadome, it may be three, it may
be six, and yet found no water, but they dug still; at the last they found
a fountain of living water: so we may seek comfort, and it may be we shall
not find it, this day, nor the next day, yet let us not give over, but go on
still for at last we shall find a fountain of comfort.

Secondly, that which might have hindered them; was, the bad example they saw:
for the Scribes and Pharisees were learned men, skillful in the Law of God; and
yet not one of them turned a foot to seek Christ, nor were moved; and yet
for all this these Wisemen departed away to seek Christ: which may teach us,
not to rest on the bad example of any man, let him be what he will, for though
they seek not Christ, nor stir one foot to find him: yet let us go on to
find Christ. We read Mark. 5. 18. the man out of whom the devil was cast,
when others desired him to depart the country, he desired to tarry with him
still; he would not be moved with the bad example of others: so, if thou be
one out of whom Christ has cast out a devil, cast out thy sins, thou will
not be moved with the bad example of others; it was Ioshuas resolution,
howsoever others did, yet he and his household would serve the Lord; so Mich.
4. 5. it is said, For all people will walk, every one in the name of his god,
and we will walk in the Name of the Lord our God, Simile.
for ever and for ever. I have showed you heretofore, when a flood comes, it
will carry away straw and light stuff, loose timber, moveable things; but if
they be rooted, then they stand; so, bad example is like to a stream, it
carries away all loose and moveable things before it, but if men be rooted in
grace, then they shall stand, when others are floating in the stream of evil
company; therefore if men will perish let them perish, labor thou to be rooted
in Grace, and then thou shall stand when others are carried away.

Now from whence did the Wisemen depart; from Jerusalem: which Jerusalem was a
great royal city of the kingdom, the glory of the country, yet they departed
from thence, because Christ was not there, which must teach us that let the
place be what it will, if Christ be not there, it is no place for us to rest
in. I have showed you what was Isaacks complaint, Father, Simile.
says he, here is fire, and wood, but where is the Lamb? so when men
remoove from one town to another and find there are good grounds, sweet
waters, and other good commodities, yet let them ask where is the Lamb? where
is the preaching of the Word? so when a servant comes to a house, he may say
here is a good master, and a good mistress, and good meat; but where is the
Lamb? where is prayer, religion, reading of the Scriptures, and such like?
therefore as the Wisemen from Jerusalem (when they found not Christ) departed;
so we should depart from such places, where we cannot find Him, or religious
duties performed.

The second thing was, the blessing of God upon their endeavors: they saw the
star and it was before them, and directed them to the house where the Child
was:

1. They saw the Star. 2. It was that which they saw in the East. 3. It went
before them. 4. It went before them till it came to the very house, where the
Child was.
As soon as they were departed, and had put themselves upon good means when
there was not a man to tell them, nor one that stirred out to seek Christ, God
sent the star to direct them, to the place where He was: which may teach us,
that if we endeavor, and set our selves upon good courses, we shall find Gods
blessing upon us: we see Exodus 13. when the Children of Israel put themselves
upon their journey, the Lord sent them a cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by
night, to conduct and guide them to the land of Canaan: so Act. 8. 28, 29. The
Eunuch was reading the Scriptures, when Philip was sent to expound the meaning
of it to him; he put himself upon a good course, and the Lord did bless him
in it: the Scripture is plentiful for this, Mark. 16. women were desirous to
see what was become of Christ; they set themselves on a good course, but they
took care and were troubled about this, who should roll away the stone, and
behold, an Angel came and was sent to roll it away: thus we see, how ready
the Lord is to bless our good intentions, and therefore let us set our selves
upon good endeavors, and God will send a pillar or a star to direct us.

Thirdly, with what affection they received it: they rejoiced exceedingly; and
that for two causes:

1. For the appearing of the Star. 2 For the standing of the Star.
First, 1
for the appearing of the Star; that there was a means to guide and direct
them to Christ, whereas otherwise they might have wandered up and down, and
not have found him; for they might have gone to Bethlehem, and when they were
there, it may be not have found him; therefore they rejoiced, for the appearing
of the Star, and were glad, that there was a means to direct them. Which
should teach us that we should rejoice and be glad when we see any star to
direct us to Christ: now the Scripture is a star, and the faithful Ministers
be Stars, therefore when we see the Bible and good Preachers, we should
be glad, and rejoice, and bless God, that he has sent these Stars, to
direct us to Christ; And as Esaias says, they shall bless the messengers of
peace.

Secondly, 2
they were glad for the standing of the Star, because they knew that Christ
was there; for though they had spent a great deal of money, and many a weary
step in a long journey, yet they were exceedingly glad that they had found
Christ, notwithstanding al their pains and cost. so many poor souls are glad
after a long search for Christ, to find him, and feel the power of his grace
in their hearts; having a long time sought him in prayer, being truly humbled
for their sins, if once they feel the power of his grace in their hearts, it
makes them rejoice exceedingly, they think all their labor well bestowed this
way: as John 20. we see how Mary stood by the sepulcher, weeping when she had
lost Christ, but when he came to her, and she had found Him, she rejoiced
exceedingly, saying, Rabboni, O Master; as if she should say, Simile.
O master, I am glad that I have found thee. As Mariners when they have been
at Sea tossed up and down in a storm, if once they come where they see the
shore, or land, it makes them leap for joy: so it is with a Christian, when he
is tossed up and down, if once he can but see the shore, I mean the assurance
of his salvation, if he (can by faith) spy Heaven, this will make him to
rejoice exceedingly, and lay fast hold on him, so Cantic. 3. 4. when the Church
had lost Christ, she seeks and having found him, she catches fast hold on
him, and would not let him go. Now for their behavior having found Christ.

First, 1
they did worship him; which must teach us, that we must not despise Christ for
his poverty, for though they found Him in a poor estate, having no court nor
train to attend him, yet they did not despise his poverty, no more must we,
for his poverty is our riches, his shame our glory, his abasement our
exaltation, his death our life: and as no man is to despise Christ for his
poverty, so no man should be offended at he meandness of any Christian, let
their estate and condition be what it will, if the Spirit of Christ and the
graces of God, be in them we ought to regard and honor them.

Secondly, 2
they did not only worship Christ, but they did offer to him; they did impart
their wealth, offer their treasures, Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh: so this must
teach us not only to worship Christ; but we must be contented to part with our
wealth to give unto him: as the Woman in the Gospel, brought her box of
ointment, powered it upon Christ, (...) contented to part with it; so must we be
contented to part with (...) wealth to the members of Christ; it is a great
corruption that many a man can be contented to worship Christ, but cannot
endure to part with any goods, wealth, or to open their treasures to Christ:
but we must not only worship him, but also offer to him, and be contented to
part with our wealth for his sake.

I, Object. Sol.
but some man may say, that he would be contented to offer to Christ, but he
has no gold, no frankincense to offer. I answer thee, though thou have no
gold to offer, yet thou have thy sins, and a soul and body to offer: first,
thou have thy sins, kill, and crucify them, and thy vile lusts, offer them
to God; this will be an acceptable sacrifice to God. The Jews did offer their
cattle for sacrifices, but offer thou thy sins; slay them and it will be
pleasing to God. Secondly, although thou have no gold to offer, yet thou have a
body and soul to offer to Gods service; as Roman. 12. 1. I beseech you
brethren, by the mercy of God, that you present your bodies a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable unto God: therefore all our members wherewith we have served
sin we should now turn them to the service of God; Romans 6. 13.
so the Apostle says, as you have given your members as weapons of
unrighteousness to serve sin; so now give your members as weapons of
righteousness to serve God.

Thirdly, the Wisemen were warned of God in a dream; that when they had seen
Christ, 3
they should not return and go back to Herod again: so we have the same
charge still; that when we have seen Christ, we should not return again to
Herod, that is, to our vile lusts again. There is a strange ceremony in the
Law spoken of Ezech. 46. 9. that when the people went into the Temple at one
door, they were commanded to go out at the other door; if they went in at
the South, they must go out at the North door, and if they came in at the
North, they must go out at the South door; the meaning whereof is this, that
they must not go out as they came in, but they must be altered and changed;
if they came covetous persons, they must go away liberal; if swearers, they
must go away sober and reverent speakers; if unchaste persons, they must depart
chaste; if bad livers, they might go away good; and so they must be altered and
changed, from their sins, to the contrary virtues, in like manner let us do
when we come to the ministry of the Word: and then we shall be blessed both
in life and death. Hitherto we have heard, how the birth of Christ was made
manifest, seeing He was so obscurely borne: and that first by Angels to the
Shepherds; secondly, to the Wisemen by a star; adding in the third place,
how Jerusalem was affected with the brute and fame of it. Now when Christ was
five weeks old, his parents brought him into the temple, to do for him
according to the law, then Simeon came into the Temple by a motion of the
Spirit, and took him into his arms and embraced him; and thus it was made
more manifest, at Jerusalem. In this manifestation of the birth of Christ to
Simeon we are to observe three things:

1. The specification of the Person. 2. The manner. 3. The effects.
In the specification of the person we are to observe three things;

First, his Name he was called Simeon, which was a name famous amongst the
Jews; and therefore so much the fitter was he to make Christ known in
Jerusalem.

Secondly, the place he dwelt in; it was at Jerusalem; he was not a stranger,
but one that dwelt amongst them.

Thirdly, his quality and virtues: and they are three:

1. He was a just man: 2. A devout religious man. 3. That he waited for the
consolation of Israel.
First, for his Name, it was Simeon, famous amongst the people of Jerusalem,
and therefore the more fit was he for the manifestation of Christ amongst them
in his time.

Secondly, the place where he dwelt, at Jerusalem; he was not a stranger
unknown amongst them, but such an one as dwelt amongst them, and was of great
account with them: therefore the more fitter to make Christ known unto them.
Here we may see the wise dispensation of God, to appoint one so fit for it: for
if he had appointed the Shepherds to have done it, they might have been
despised, because they were poor men; if the Wisemen should have done it,
because they were strangers, they would not have been believed; therefore the
Lord makes choice of a man amongst them, one that was not a stranger but a
dweller in Jerusalem for home examples are most fit to moove: and therefore the
Apostle Paul to Titus because he would add weight to his speech, says, One of
your own Poets says so. Hence we are to consider the goodness of God to us,
that has not only sent strangers to incite and to stir us up; but home
examples to moove and provoke us: as John 4. the Woman of Samaria that talked
with Christ she reported the matter to the men of the city, and many of them
believed, because of the Woman's words, and so to the Romans, the Apostle
shows, that their zeal provoked many; so our Savior lays it, as a heavy
burden on the Scribes and Pharisees, that they were not moved to repentance by
the home examples they daily saw. Simile.
One says well, that home examples are like to little forkes, and stays, that
bear up the young plants, till they get ripeness: Heb. 11. the whole world
was condemned by Noah's example, in that he made an Arc, for the saving of
himself and his family, and yet they were not moved thereby; so the
painfulness of one, shall condemn the idleness of another; the good life of
one, shall condemn the ignorance or bad life of another; therefore it is good
to profit by the home examples that be amongst us.

Thirdly, First, He was man.
his qualities and virtues; which are three: first, he is said be a just man,
not a contentious man or a bad liver, but an innocent and a just man; a good
dealer in the world: this is the first title that is given, him which should
teach us, that if ever we desire to see Christ, and depart in peace, we must
labor to be just men, and good dealers in the world. This is much commended in
the Scriptures Genesis 6. Noah is said to be a just man in his generation; and Job
1. God says to the devil, Have thou not considered my servant Job, that there
is none like him in the earth; a perfect and an upright man, fearing God, and
eschewing evil: so Psalm. 37. 37. says David, Mark the upright man, and
behold the just, for the end of that man is peace. In 1 Samuel 12. 3. when Samuel
came to resign his office he stands out to clear himself to the people,
and says, Whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I
defranded? whom have I oppressed? or of whom have I received any bribe, to
blind mine eyes withal? so when a man can stand out at the day of his death,
and clear himself, as Samuel did, and say, O Lord, I thank thee that I have
not been a deceiver, or an unjust dealer in the world, but I have dealt justly
and uprightly; this may be a comfort to him, at the day of his death: therefore
it is a good thing to be a just dealer.

Secondly, Secondly, a Devout man. Luke 2. 25.
it is said, he was a devout man, as it is in the new Translation, the Greek
word is (...) a religious man, such a one as feared God: so we must put both
these together, he was a just man, and a religious man; for it is nothing to be
religious, unless one be just, nor nothing to be just, unless one be
religious: therefore if thou be religious, labor to be just also, if thou
be a just man labor also to be religious; for a man must so look to his
duties to God, as that he do not neglect his service to men; and so look to
men, as that he do not neglect his duty to God. It is a corruption in the
world, that if a man be a good and a just dealer in the world he cares not for
religion, if he be religious, he cares not for good dealing: therefore, art
thou a just man? make conscience of religious duties, for howsoever thou
mai'st stand before man, and be in account with him, yet thou shall not be
able to stand before God; and art thou a religious man? labor thou also to be
a just man; a good dealer, lest this lie on thy conscience at the day of thy
death, for no unjust man shall inherit the kingdom of God.

Thirdly, Thirdly, he waited for the Consolation of Israel.
he waited for the consolation of Israel; which implies two things: first,
that he had laid up all his hope, joy, comfort, and consolation in Christ;
which must likewise teach us, to lay up all our hope and comfort in Christ; as
Phil. 3. the Apostle says, Christ was to him both in life and in death
advantage; and our Savior says, Ioh. 8. 56. Your father Abraham rejoiced to
see my day; and he saw it, and was glad: so also John 20. the Disciples said to
Thomas, We have seen the Lord; and Mary she had laid up all her joy and
comfort in Christ. Many now adays lay up their comfort in their friends, some
in their goods and lands, or in their money: but a Christian must lay up all
his joy and comfort in Christ, and then one day he shall be happy with him:
let a man lay up his comfort in any thing but in Christ, howsoever it may stand
by him in the time of peace, yet it will fail him in the time of trouble,
howsoever it stand by him in life, yet it will fail him in the time of death;
but if we can lay up our comfort, joy and hope in Christ, then Christ will
look upon us with a sweet and comfortable face at his coming.

Secondly, 2
he looked every day for the time of Christ's coming; so should we do: but
there is a difference, he looked for his first coming in the flesh, we must
look for his second coming; Romans 8. 22. it is said, the whole creation
groaneth, waiting for the coming of Christ; much more should we because we,
shall have especially the fruit and benefit by it. Judges 5. The mother of
Sisera, looked out of a window, and cried, why is his chariot so long a
coming? why tarry the wheels of his chariots? So when we look out of our
doors or windows we should long for Christ's coming, and say, when will he
come? and when will he appear? thus we should wait for Christ's coming.

The second point is, The manner how this manifestation was, by a vision, or as
the Greek word (...) signifies, by divine inspiration: Christ was made
manifest to the shepherds, by an Angel; to the Wisemen, by a star, and to
Simeon, by a Vision: Of which there are two parts.

First, 1
that he should not dye, till he had seen Christ: He was an old man, and like
to drop into his grave every day, and yet he had a revelation given him, that
he should not dye, till he had seen Christ: so we should pray to God, that we
may have the same grace, whether we be young or old, that we may not dye till
we have seen Christ, by the eyes of our faith; for we have more cause to do
so, than Simeon, for if he had never seen Christ, with the eyes of his body,
he might have been blessed, though he had wanted this comfort; but if we do
not see him before we dye, we are like to perish; therefore we have much more
cause, to desire, and pray God, that we may see Christ before we dye, before we
be down in the dust, and sleep our long sleep: says old Iaakob (when his
son Joseph sent for him) I will go and see my Son Joseph before I dye, so
a Christian should say, I will go and see Christ before I dye.

The second part of the vision was, that he must go into the Temple, because
Christ was to be found there; before Christ came there he was in the towns;
why did not Simeon go out to meet him in the streets? or why did not he go
to Bethlehem to see Christ, as the shepherds did? There be two reasons of it:

First, that Christ might be the more famously known: secondly, to teach us
that if we will see Christ we must come into the Temple, to the place of
preaching and prayer: for the Gospel (as I have showed you) is a glass,
wherein (if we look) we shall see Christ and all his graces; even as Simeon
did come by a motion of the Spirit; so if we would come to see Christ, in the
Temple, we must come by a motion of the Spirit and of grace: many come to the
Temple, but how come they? by a motion of their friends, or some other thing
that mooveth them; but let us come by a motion of the Spirit, and then we shall
see Christ to our comfort.

Thirdly, Thirdly, the effects of Simeons manifestation of Christ.
the effects of the manifestation; and they are threefold: first, as soon as
he was come into the Temple, he laid hold on Christ. Simeon was an old man, and
had much ado to scramble thither, and yet he was not contented to look upon
Christ, 1
and see him in the arms of Joseph and in the lap of Mary, but he gets him
into his own arms, embraces him, and blesses God, that he lived to see these
happy days; so must we do, not content our selves to see Christ in the arms
of Joseph, in the lap of Mary, in the arms of the Preachers, or of other good
Christians; but we must labor to have him in our own arms, the arms of our
faith: for though we may see Christ in the arms of our teachers, yet for all
this we may perish: and therefore so much the rather ought we to receive and
get him into our arms and apply him into our hearts, because he comes to
present himself to thee and to me; therefore if we do not receive him, we
shall be guilty of his blood. Simile.
If we should be in a room, and a child should cry to come unto us, would
we neglect the child, would not we cast away that which we had in our hands,
and take the child into our own arms? I do not say, if it were the child
of a king, we would do so, but if it were the child of an honest poor man:
and therefore much more should we receive the Child Christ; beloved, this
Chide Christ does in a sort cry to come unto us, and says as it were thus, O
good people, receive me into your hearts, receive me into your souls, I do
not desire it for my own sake, but you shall be the better for it; therefore O
good people, why do ye not receive me? if we do not, we are like to perish,
and we shall be guilty of his blood; and therefore this is our duty when Christ
does offer himself unto us, we should be ready to receive him: so old Simeon
did; for it is nothing to see him unless we get him in our arms by our faith
and embrace him; therefore why do we not fling away all things that do hinder
us, and receive him into our hearts, and lay hold on him which is life and
salvation offered to us?

The second was, that when he had seen Christ, he praises God for it; that
although he had seen a great deal of trouble, and felt a great deal of
sorrow, yet that he lived to see those happy days, wherein he might see
Christ: so, howsoever we have lived to see a great deal of trouble and sorrow,
yet we should praise God, that he has let us live to see Christ in the face
of the Gospel; therefore we have great cause to praise God, that he has let
us live till this time to repent us of our sins, to get faith in Christ:
howsoever we have had a great deal of sorrow and trouble in this world, yet
the comfort is that we have repented of our sins, and lived to make heaven
and happiness sure unto us: Matthew. 13. 16. says our Savior; But blessed be
your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear; as if he should say, O
blessed be God, for this happy time wherein we live, to see that we see, and
to hear that which we hear: so John 20. when the Disciples had seen Christ,
they told Thomas of it, They were glad that after a great deal of trouble,
they had seen Christ at last: so it is said, Act. 8. 39. the Eunuch went away
rejoicing, when Christ was made known to him: therefore whatsoever we have
been before, yet if we can repent of our sins, get Christ into our hearts
by faith; we have great cause to praise and to thank God, that we have lived
to see these days: have thou been a swearer, or a drunkard, or a bad liver,
and repented of thy sins? lay hold on Christ, thou have great cause to praise
God, and to thank him, that he has let thee live to see these happy days.

The third effect was, 3
that he did utter these speeches, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in
peace, etc. Now this saying of Simeon was the first song in the new Testament,
that was sung in the Temple: wherein four things may be observed.

1. His willingness, and profession to dye. 2. What account he made of death.
3. In what disposition, he does desire to dye. 4. The Reason why he was willing
to dye.
The first is, a profession of his willingness to dye; Now Lord, I am willing
to dye, 1
I am well contented to depart in peace, for I have seen enough, I have seen
the Savior and redeemer of the world; I have embraced him in my arms, and
therefore I am willing to dye now. So when we have seen Christ, we should be
willing to dye, for we have seen enough for our salvation; as long as God
would have us live, we should be willing to live, and when he would have us
dye, we should be willing to depart: we see if a master send his servant to
trade, and traffic beyond sea, Simile.
so long as his master will have him to trade and traffic, so long he will
trade, but when his master will have him come home, he will pack up all and
come away: so, as long as God will have us trade and traffic here, we should
be content, but when he will have us pack up all, and come home, we should
be contented to do so. In the Gospel we find that Christ fled from death and
danger, when God would have him fly; but when the time of his death came, he
went out to meet it; so likewise Moses, he could have been contented to
pass over Jordan, but when God told him that he should not, but he must go
and dye in the mount Nebo, he went as willingly up as any man goes to a feast
or banquet: therefore it is a pitiful thing, to see how men do hang upon the
world, at that time, when God would have them dye.

Secondly, 2
what account he made of death: men make much ado about it, are afraid of it;
but Simeon accounts it, but a departing out of this one room into another, a
departing from men to God, from earth to heaven, from mortality to immortality;
therefore we may see what account we should make of it. The Philosophers say
that death is the most terrible thing that may be, because they think it is an
utter destruction of nature: but Simeon accounts of it as of a remooving or
departure from one place to another; therefore he is not afraid of it, but
embraces it, as a door or gate to pass from earth to heaven, from men to
God, from mortality to immortality; and this is the account that all men should
make of death. Genesis 15. 15. says the Lord to Abraham, but thou shall go to thy
fathers in peace, and shall be buried in a good old age; so that death is
nothing but a going to the holy men, those that have died in faith before; and
Christ accounts of it, Ioh. 17. 13. but as a going to God, to the blessed
Angels, and holy Spirits departed: so also Paul, in one of his epistles,
Nevertheless we are bold and love rather to remoove out of this body, and to
dwell with the Lord. Simile.
Ahasuerus, Hester 2. 13, 14. had two houses for his women; one was the house
of sweet perfumes and odors, that they might be there a certain time to be
perfumed and then they were brought to the kings house; so the king of Heaven
has two houses, (as it were) one of preparation, here in this world; the other
of fruition, hereafter in Heaven, therefore we must live here a certain time,
and be perfumed with the graces of Gods spirit, ere we be taken to the second
house, a place of glory and happiness to live with God for ever.

Thirdly, 3
in what estate he would die in; he would dye the servant of God: so let us
labor to dye in this estate, servants to God, for if we dye thus, we pass
from men to God, from earth to heaven, from an estate of misery, to a place of
happiness and joy; but if we dye the servants of sin, then we go not to
God, but to the devil and the damned; therefore let us labor to be the
servants of God, to dye in his favor, to be members of Christ, and then when
our souls part from our bodies, they shall go to God. Deuteronomy. 34. 5. it is
said, So Moses the servant of the Lord died: it is the greatest credit that may
be to dye the servant of God, although we dye not worth one penny, yet we
shall be happy and blessed: Heb. 11. it is said, that all these died in faith;
they died not all of a lingering sickness, nor in their beds, but they died all
in faith; this was their honor and glory, that they died believers; so this is
the honor and glory of a man, when he dies in faith, the servant of God,
repentant for his sins: therefore whatsoever thy death be, and wheresoever
the place thereof be, yet if thou dye Gods servant, if thou dye repentant for
thy sins, if thou dye in faith, thou art a happy man; there be many
contented to dye, but if they dye not Gods servants thy might better a thousand
times desire life.

Secondly, 2
he did desire to dye in peace: now let thy servant depart in peace. Simeon
desired to dye, but how? in peace of conscience, in the feeling of Gods favor;
there be a number desire to dye in the world, but let them take with them this
example; let them labor to dye in the peace of a good Conscience, in the
feeling of Gods favor, in the pardon and forgiveness of their sins. O it is
a fearful thing when a man dies in his sins, as our Savior says to the
Jews, Ye shall dye in your sins: this was a fearful sentence and an heavy
judgment that befell the hard-hearted Jews; and I pray God it may be a
warning unto us to make us beware how we incur the like, that so we may
provide and labor to die in peae, and in the feeling of Gods favor, in faith
and repentance for our sins; and then we shall be happy men and blessed.

The fourth thing was, 4
the reason why he did desire to dye, when he had seen Christ, for mine eyes
(says he) has seen thy salvation. I have seen Christ the Savior and
Redeemer of Mankind, and have embraced him in mine arms, now Lord let thy
servant depart in peace; he had not always this affection in him to desire to
dye, but when he had seen Christ, and embraced him in his arms, then he had
lived long enough, then he was willing to dye. Which should teach us to know
when we should be willing to dye, we have no reason to desire death till we
have seen Christ, and laid hold on him by faith, and then when we have done
so, we have lived long enough: therefore we must remember that the especial
end, why God does let us live here, is not to eat and drink, to seek our
profits, pleasures and ease, but to get Christ, to make heaven and happiness
sure unto us, to repent us of our sins. A number think they live to no other
end, but to eat and drink, to seek their pleasures and profits, but to see
Christ and to lay hold upon him they think not of; therefore as the blind man
desired Christ to open his eyes; Simile.
so we should desire Christ to open the eyes of our mind that we may see him
by the eyes of our faith: if then this be the end, why he does let us live,
then it is not to eat and drink only, to buy and sell, to pass away our
days in joy and delight, but to repent in, to lay hold on Christ, which if we
do then we shall be blessed in it.

SERMON XIII. SER. XIII.

1 PET. 1. 18, 19. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not Redeemed with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received
by tradition from your fathers: But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
lamb without blemish, and without spot.
HAving spoken of the birth of Christ; now we come to speak of His
sufferings; for this is the next point in our Christian faith. But here a
question may be demanded, Quest.
why there is mention made of his sufferings, and none of his miracles, seeing
it was the miracles that moved the world? these they did wonder and admire at,
but they despised him for his sufferings, as Esai. 53. 2. For he shall grow up
before him as a branch, and as a root out of a dry ground, he has neither
form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we
should desire him: he is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief, we hid our faces as it were from him; he was despised
and we esteemed him not: so Luke 24. 21. the two Disciples that went to Emmaus
thought that Christ should have been an earthly king, We trusted that it had
been he that should have redeemed Israel; and now his sufferings does dash
all: thus Christ was despised for his sufferings.

To this we answer two things: Sol.
first, although his Miracles were more admirable, yet his sufferings were more
profitable; for it is by his sufferings that we are said: Esai. 53. 5. But
he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our infirmities, the
chastisements of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed:
and 1 Pet. 1. 24. (says he) Who in his own self bare our sins in his body
on the tree, that we being delivered from sin, should live in righteousness,
by whose stripes we are healed: so then we are saved, notby Christ's walking on
the water, the raising up of the dead, clensing the Lepers, casting out of
devils, but His sweating in the garden, bleeding on the cross, dying for us:
so it is Christ's sufferings his dying and bleeding on the cross for us, that
saves us.

Secondly, ARTI. III.
his Miracles were profitable chiefly to the people of that age and time he
lived in, but his sufferings are profitable to all the succeeding ages, that be
to come; for to this day, we have the fruit and benefit of them: therefore
although we do not see Christ, raising the dead, clensing the Lepers, casting
out of devils, healing us with a touch of his finger, yet to this day, the
sufferings of Christ and his death are sufficient to redeem and to save our
souls: therefore let us not only kiss the Son of God in the cradle, as
Simeon did (although it be a good thing so to do) but let us go to the cross
and kiss him there; yea let us go further into the high Priests hall, and
kiss him there; and say, Lord thy shame is my glory, thy pains are my ease,
and thy death is my life.

Now in the sufferings of Christ, we may observe these six things:

1. The necessity thereof. 2. Who it was that suffered: 3. For whom he
suffered: 4. To what end: 5. By whom he suffered: 6. What he suffered:
First, First, the necessity of Christ's Sufferings.
the necessity of his sufferings; one would have thought it had been
sufficient, if he had but come into the world, took our nature upon him, and
have spoken, although he had not suffered for us, but there was a necessity
laid upon him, that he must suffer: Mark. 8. 31. it is said, the Son of man
must suffer many things; so necessity is laid upon him: now there is a twofold
necessity of Christ's sufferings.

First, 1
Necessitas precii, aenecessity of paying the price for man's ransom, because
we have sinned against God; Necessitas Precii.
therefore we must suffer or Christ must suffer for us, by order of divine
justice: that as we have sinned, so we should be punished and suffer for it, in
our selves or in another, that is, Christ: for it is the nature of justice to
bring things to an equality, as much as may be; therefore inasmuch as we have
done things contrary to Gods will; so we should suffer things contrary to our
own will, at the hand of God: hence grew the necessity of paying the price of
man's redemption, for we must suffer or Christ must suffer: but Christ he
suffered on earth, that we should not suffer in hell; he suffered a death
temporal, that we might not suffer a death eternal; he suffered at the hands
of men, that we might not at the hands of God; he hanged on the cross, that
we might not hang in hell: as Ioh. 18. 8. When Christ was taken of the
soldiers; Jesus asked them whom they sought, They said, Jesus of Nazareth;
Jesus said unto them, I am he; if therefore ye seek me let these go free: so
he says to God the father, O touch them not, do them no harm, take me, let
them go free, I am contented to suffer, Simile.
and to bear whatsoever they should have borne, and to be punished for them:
in Philemon, when Onesimus had robbed his master, having come away from him,
whom Paul sent home again to his master, with a letter to this effect to
receive him, if, says he, he has done thee any hurt, or owe thee any thing,
set it upon my skore, and put it upon my accounts; I Paul have written it, with
my own hand: so we are all run away from God, Christ he spies us and brings
us home again to God, (as it were) with a letter in our hands, to this effect;
Father, if they have done thee any wrong, or ought thee any thing, set it on my
skore, I will answer, I Jesus, I have not written it with ink and paper, but I
have written it with my own blood, so there was a necessity of paying the
price of man's redemption, that Christ must suffer.

Secondly, 2
it was Necessitas exempli, necessity of example, that Christ must suffer
because he could not enter into his glory, Necessitas exempli.
but he must first suffer; as Luke 24. 26. Ought not Christ to have suffered
these things, and to enter into his glory? so likewise Heb. 2. 10. For it
became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing
many sons to glory, that he should consecrate the Captain of their
salvation, through sufferings: and as the Captain of our salvation was
consecrated through affliction, so we should be conformable to him, to suffer
before we enter into glory. Act. 14. 22. the Apostle Paul exhorts them to
continue in the faith, assuring that we must through many afflictions, enter
into the kingdom of Heaven: And 2 Timothy 2. 12. If we suffer with him, we shall
also reign with him; If we deny him here, he also will deny us hereafter:
therefore that we may reign with him, we must be contented to suffer with
him; for no man can enter into glory, but he must first suffer. We read of two
Disciples that came unto Christ, who desired the one to sit at his right hand,
the other at his left; they dreamed of an earthly kingdom, of the great honor
and glory they should have had by Christ; but he says to them, Can ye drink
of the same cup that I must drink of, and be baptized with the baptism that
I am baptized: as if he should say, you dream of earthly honors and glory
that ye should have by me, but can ye drink of the cup, that I shall
drink, and can you be baptized with the baptism that I shall be baptized
with? so then it was necessity of example that made Christ to suffer, that as
he suffered before he entered into glory, so we should first suffer before we
come into glory.

Secondly, Secondly, who it was that suffered.
Who it was that suffered? It was Christ, (as the Text says) the just for the
unjust: Now every one knows that Christ was God, so it was not a naked and
bare man that suffered, but it was God; S. Peter presses the Jews, Act. 3. 15.
Ye have crucified the Lord of life; so it was God that suffered, not in the
divine nature, for that was not possible, that could not suffer, but it was the
divine Person; It was not a naked and a bare man that did suffer, but it was
God. Now if any should ask me, who it was that suffered? I would answer him,
it was God. If he should ask me, in what nature? I would answer him, in his
humane, not in the divine nature, for that could not suffer; it was God that
suffered in the flesh, as Act. 20. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves,
and to all the flock, whereof the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed
the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood; so 1 Pet. 4. 1.
For as much them as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind, etc. So then it was God that suffered in the
flesh, not in the divine nature. Of which there be three Uses:

First, seeing it was God that suffered, and not a bare man; this may give us
comfort, Use 1.
that our salvation stands good and firm before God, and that his sufferings
are more than sufficient to redeem us, seeing it was more that God should
suffer, than if all the creatures or men in the world should have suffered; for
it is a less matter that all the creatures should be confounded and brought to
nothing, than that God the Creator should have suffered but one hour. Simile.
We see in nature that a wound at the heart, although it be but with a little
pin, is more dangerous than a great cut in the thigh, arm, or any other place;
so it is a greater matter, that Christ should have suffered, than if all the
creatures should have suffered: So that the sufferings of Christ, are more than
sufficient to redeem us; for it is the dignity of the person that gives a
merit and efficacy to the sufferings: by this that has been said, is made
manifest, that no man need doubt but that the sufferings of Christ is more
worth than all the bodies and souls of men in the world. Quest.
But here may a question be moved, how the death of Christ which was but
temporary, should be sufficient to redeemeus, Sol.
seeing we should have suffered eternally? I answer, it was the dignity of his
person, that gave power and efficacy to it, for it was more that God should
suffer even a little, than if all the men of the world had suffered for ever.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing it was God that suffered, this does show the grievousnesse of our
sins, that when we have sinned, we have done that which all the powers in
heaven and in earth cannot satisfy, neither Angels nor Archangels, but it must
be the blood of the Son of God: says Augustine, O man, do but consider by
the greatness of the price, the greatness of thy sins: we see, what a
slight matter we make of sin, when we have sworn an oath, or told alye, yet
when we have done so, we have done that that all the Angels in heaven cannot
make expiation and satisfaction for, but only the Son of God must do it,
and that with his own blood; therefore do not thou sell that for a toy or a
trifle, that cost so great price.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing it was God that suffered, we must not think much that we suffer for
our sins; for if God would have spared any, he would have spared his own Son
one would think, but he would not spare him, though there was no inherent or
real sin in him, but a shadow only, and the imputation of sin upon him:
therefore how shall he spare us that have sin inherent and real in us? we
think much when our teeth or back ache, or any other part of us, whereas we
deserve to be pained in all our parts: if God suffered, we must not think much
to suffer for our sins; for in man's reason, if he would have spared any, he
would have spared his own Son: Matthew. 20. (says our Savior) They will
reverence my Son: And Luke 23. 34. he says, If they do this to the green
tree, Simile.
what will they do to the dry tree? He was a green tree full of goodness and
full of grace; we be but dry trees, no goodness nor no grace in us: If he
suffered such things, what shall become of us? So Romans 11. 21. For if God
spared not the natural branches, take heed also lest he spare not thee:
Therefore if Christ suffered, we must not think much to suffer.

Thirdly, For whom he suffered: Saint Peter says, the just for the unjust: And
Romans 5. 8. the Apostle says, Thirdly, for whom be suffered.
But God commends his love to us, seeing that whilst we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us: So then Christ died for us in our place and room. The Uses
are:

First, Use 1.
seeing Christ suffered in our room and place, therefore this must teach us,
that whatsoever befell Christ at his sufferings, the same might justly have
fallen upon us: for Christ he took the guilt of our sins upon him, suffered
in our room and place; therefore, whatsoever befell him, the same should have
befallen us: as he was arraigned and condemned at Pilates bar, so we should
have been before Gods tribunal; as he was condemned of Pilate, so we should
have been condemned of God; as he was accused of the Jews, so we should have
been by the Devil; as he was carried out of the City, to the place of
execution, so we should have been carried to hell; as he was hanged on the
Cross, so we should have been tormented in hell for ever: as darkness was
over his face, so we should have had our faces overwhelmed with darkness for
ever. Alas, we think much to suffer a little pain in our heads, backs, or
teeth, etc. but what is this to that which Christ suffered for us; we have our
houses to rest in, but it is said, that the Son of man has not a place to
rest his head in; He died in the fields, we have our soft beds; he amongst his
enemies, we amongst our friends; Christ was a hungry and thirsted, we have our
tables filled; he was in want, and we have plenty: therefore consider with thy
self what great things befell Christ, the same should have befallen thee;
whatsoever extremity in soul or in body came to him, the same (nay, worse,
had not he redeemed thee) would have vexed thee.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing Christ suffered in our room and place: this therefore should teach us
to accuse our selves, because we be the cause of Christ's sufferings; for it is
our sins that caused a crown of thorns to be set on his head, that nailed
him to the cross, that thrust the spear into his sides, and did crucify him.
So Esa. 53. 16. it is said, That the chastisements of our peace was upon him,
and with his stripes we are healed. Therefore, as Genesis 35. 18. Rachel named her
son Ben-oni, the son of her sorrow, because he was borne with the death of
his mother; so Christ may call us ^^nnes of his sorrow, because we be all borne
with his death. There be many that complain of the soldiers, of Pilate, of
Judas, and of the Jews, but we ought rather to complain of our selves, our
sins, and the vile life we live in: therefore let us do, as Joseph of
Arimathea did go to the cross of Christ, as he pulled the spickes out of his
hands and his feet, so should we in a spiritual manner, go to the cross of
Christ, look upon his body, and say, O blessed Lord, this is the head that my
sins have crowned with a crown of thorns, these be the hands that my sins
have pierced, these be the feet that my sins have nailed, this is the face
which my sins caused to be spit upon, this is the back which I caused to be
whipped, and these be the sides that I caused to be wounded with a spear: thus
we should complain of our selves, and weep day and night, in that we were the
cause of his death. If a man be found dead, there is inquiry made in the
country how this man came by his death: So now that Christ is found dead on
the cross, Simile.
we must make inquiry how Christ came to his death, upon the inquiry we shall
find that we be the crucifiers of him, not the Jews only, but my sins and
thy sins; for as a learned man says, there be two crucifiers, There be
invisible and visible crucifiers; the visible crucifiers are the Jews; the
invisible are the people of all ages: Wherefore, seeing our sins have brought
Christ to his death, Simile.
we should the more hate and detest them. Augustine says, If a man should kill
father or mother, would we let him lie in our bosoms, set him at our table,
let him be in our houses? No, we would hate, abhor, and never abide him; why
man (says he) thy sins have not killed thy father and thy mother only, but
thy Lord and Master, one that has done more for thee, than all the world
besides: wherefore then will thou let sin lie in thy bosom, will thou
nourish it and entertain it still? nay, rather hate, detest, and spit at it.

Fourthly, Fourthly, the and why Christ suffered.
The end why Christ suffered, was either general, to bring us home to God; or
particular, to reconcile us to him, and to abolish sin.

The General end was, The general end of his death.
to bring us to God, that we might have communion and fellowship with him, for
all our happiness consists in this bringing us to God; and all our misery in
this, that we be strangers from him, for by the reason of our sins we have no
communion with him: as Adam was cast out of Paradise, so we be all cast from
the presence of God; and as he ran away from Gods presence, hid himself, and
could not abide it; so we are all run away from God, we cannot abide his
presence nor stand before God, nor speak unto him; but Christ has suffered to
this end, to bring us unto him, and has appeased his anger so, that now he
does look after us, and we may be bold to go to him, and speak to him in
prayer. Here we may observe three things:

First, 1
that we be strangers from God, and dare not come into his presence, but are
abashed to stand before him, or speak unto him, before Christ has carried and
presented us to him: As in Genesis 47. 2. when Jacob was come into Egypt to see
Joseph, he presented five of his brethren with his father Jacob to King
Pharaoh, because he was a stranger: so seeing we be strangers from God, who did
not know us, the true Joseph does present us unto him.

I, Object.
but does not God know us? Does he not know the creatures that he has made?
This is a heavy thing that God should not know us.

To this I answer, that sin has put upon us such a fearful ugly face and so
deformed, Sol.
that God does not acknowledge us to be the creatures he made at first;
therefore the true Joseph does bring us to God, and present us in his blood,
saying, O Father accept of them, these be they for whose sake I was nine
months in the dark womb of the Virgin, borne in a stable, laid in a manger;
these be they for whose sakes I died that same cursed death on the cross;
Father, for my sake accept them, and let my pains be their ease, my shame
their glory, my death their life, and my condemnation their absolution: so that
it is Christ that brings us home unto God, which is the general end of his
sufferings: In Ephesians. 2. 12. it is said, Remember, that at that time ye were
without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world:
but now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were afar off, are made nigh to
him, by the blood of Christ: so it is the great price; that Christ has paid
for us, that brings us into favor with God, even his most precious blood.

Secondly, 2
herein we may see, the mavelous love of Christ, that he would bring us home
to God, and into favor again, and that not with a word speaking, but by dying
and suffering for us: it had been a great love of Christ, if he had but spoke
for us, although he had done no more, but what a great love was this; to suffer
such great things, that it cost him his life and blood, he was not at rest
till he had wrought our redemption; as Luke 12. 15. says he, But I have a
Baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightned till it be accomplished?
And he did it not by speaking for us, but he did it by dying and suffering for
us; Exodus 32. 32. says Moses, pleading for the people, Yet now if thou will
forgive their sin, thy mercy shall appear, But if not, blot me, I pray thee,
out of thy book which thou have written: So says Christ, Father spare thy
people, or else wipe me out of the land of the living, let my life go for
theirs, spare them and take me; Heb. 9. 12.
Psalm. 40. 6, 7. we see that it is not the blood of calves and of goats, and
beasts, that can redeem us, but Christ knew it must be a more precious blood
that must do it; and therefore does he offer his own blood, and says, take
my life and my blood, and let my people go free. Hence we may see the
marvelous love of Christ, that he did not redeem us by speaking, but by
suffering and dying for us, therefore seeing he loved us, we should be content
to love again, and to do any thing that he requires of us. Saint Andrew when
he was charged of the Gentiles, that he did not love their gods, he made this
answer, Let me see if your gods can make me such a heaven and earth, and do
so much for me, as my God has done, then I will love your gods; but if they
cannot, then they are not to be respected, nor regarded: so we may say to our
vile lusts and to our sins, if ye can do so much for me as Christ has done,
then I will bestow my love upon you, but if you cannot, then you are not to be
regarded, nor respected; He shall have my heart, that has done these great
things for me.

Thirdly, 3
seeing Christ has suffered to bring us to God, we must take heed, we do
not defeat him of his labor; which we do, if we hang still in our sins:
Deuteronomy. 24. 15. The Lord accounts the retaining and keeping of the laborers
hire, Simile.
a great and grievous sin, even a crying sin; let us consider this, that
Christ has labored for us, not for our meat nor money, but to bring us to
God, to repentance, and to heaven; but if we hang still in our sins, and do
not repent us of them, nor be brought home to God, we defeat him and will not
let him have for his labor what he has traveled for; as it is said, Esai.
5. 31. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied;
Christ has traveled, but to what end? to bring us to God, to Repentance, to
faith in Christ, to make us conscionable in our courses, this will satisfy
him; but if men be not brought home unto God, if they do not repent, walk
conscionably in their courses, it will grieve Christ, that ever he prayed in
the mount, sweat in the garden, died on the cross: therefore seeing the end
why Christ suffered is, to bring us to God, let us not disappoint him of it.
Thus much for the general end. Now the particular end is twofold.

1. The particular end of his death. First to reconcile us.
To reconcile unto God. 2. To abolish sin.
First, to reconcile us to God, and to make us at one with him; so 1 Pet. 2.
24. Who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being
delivered from sin, should live in righteousness, by whose stripes we are
healed; and Ioh. 1. 14. Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the world: even as the Lamb in the Law took away sin, so does Christ, for
in the Law when a lamb was to be offered, Simile.
for the sins of the people, they came and laid their hands upon the head
thereof, confessed their sins, and so they were put upon the lamb, which was
killed, and the man went free; so Christ does take away our sins, which are
laid upon him, he is killed and we go free: therefore when the devil shall
stand up at the day of judgment, to accuse us, and say we have sinned against
God, we must not deny the matter; for then we are cast, and God may justly
condemn us; Plead against Satan.
but we must say, it is true indeed Satan, I have sinned against God, I have
done thus and thus against Him, but I have had the Law for it, I have answered
it: and although not in my self, yet in Christ, for he suffered and was killed
for me, and has borne whatsoever God could require at my hands, therefore
seeing Christ has satisfied, thou can not require any thing at my hands:
there is a rule in law, that if a debt be paid, they cannot require payment
thereof again, therefore if we can prove payment of it by Christ, it cannot be
required of us again.

Secondly, Secondly, to abolish sin.
Christ died to abolish Sin; for he did not only die to reconcile us to God,
and bear that which we should have borne, but also to abolish and destroy
Sin; therefore seeing Christ died to abolish it, we must take heed we do
not strengthen sin, for if we nourish it, it will make all the death of
Christ and his blood void to us: when Joshua destroyed Jericho, Cursed (says
he) be the man before the Lord, that rises up and builds this City, etc.
Josh. 6. 26. So seeing Christ has suffered to abolish sin, cursed shall that
man or that woman be that builds it up again; therefore we have great
cause to weaken sin, and to decline it, seeing he had not suffered any thing
but for it: As 1 Samuel 25. 21. when David sent to Nabal, a messenger, and he
returned a churlish answer again; says David, Surely in vain have I kept all
that this fellow has in the wilderness, etc. so may Christ say, if we live
still in our sins, and strengthen them, in vain have I suffered for them, in
vain have I prayed, and died on the cross, and therefore if we live in our
sins, we make his death of none effect unto us.

Again, seeing Christ died to abolish sin, we must make this the end of our
sufferings; for that which was Christ's end must be the end of our sufferings;
therefore, do thou suffer sickness, loss of thy goods, or other
afflictions? Let this be the end of thy sufferings to abolish sin.
Afflictions are called Crosses, Simile.
because (as we know) that crosses are to crucify and kill men; so every
affliction must be as a cross to crucify and to kill sin, our vile
affections, and the immoderate lusts of our flesh; many a man is contented to
suffer afflictions, but to what end? to abolish sin as Christ did? no, but
for some by-respect of his own; we may not do so, for if we would have
comfort in our sufferings, that which was Christ's end in his, must be ours also.

Fifthly, Fifthly, of whom Christ suffered.
Of whom he suffered, of God and of man: this is a lesson for our learning, not
only to suffer at the hands of God, but also at the hands of men, because this
is part of our conformity with Christ: Ordinarily the people of God, when they
do suffer of God, do not suffer of men; and when they suffer of men, do not
suffer of God; but if it fall out so, that we do suffer both at the hands of
God and men, we should be quiet and contented with the good will of God, and
say as Eli did, It is the Lord, let him do as it pleases him. It is the
corruption of the world that they can be contented to suffer at the hands of
God, but they cannot abide to suffer of men, they are impatient when it is so:
and what men must we suffer of? the unjust, the wicked men: many can be
contented to suffer at the hands of good men; as David says, Let the righteous
smite me, Lord; but we must be contented to suffer of the unjust men, for
Christ did not only suffer at the hands of God, but also of wicked men.

Now the sixth thing is, Sixthly, what Christ suffered,
What he suffered; and here we have a double suffering, for he suffered things,

1. From God. 2. From Men.
The things he suffered from God were two:

First, the cup of Malediction, or of Gods curse, tempered by our sins, of
which he drunk in the Garden.

Secondly, Desertions on the Cross, the hiding of Gods favorable countenance
from him, wherein observe:

1. How it wrought three afflictions in him. 2. His carriage in that estate. 3.
The effects of it.
Secondly, what he suffered from men; in which four things:

1. Apprehension. 2. Arraignement. 3. Condemnation. 4. Execution.
The first thing is, the cup of Malediction, which our sins tempered for him:
now see we what this bitter cup of Gods wrath, which Christ did drink, wrought
in him: and here we may consider these three Afflictions:

First, 1
Fear: it is said, He began to be afraid; which was no ordinary or common
fear, Affliction the curse of our sins wrought in Christ.
but a dreadful horrible fear, such a fear as Moses had, for which it is
said of him, Act. 7. 32. That he trembled, and durst not behold: And such as
David had, when he said, Psalm. 119. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee,
and I am afraid of thy judgments: so it was not an ordinary fear, but an
horrible and a dreadful fear. At other times he was so full of holy courage,
and of an undaunted Spirit, that his Disciples wondered at it; for when they
told him that the Jews did lie in wait to destroy him, he did not fear it;
yet now he was horribly afraid; what was the reason of it? There were two
things that made Christ so to fear:

First, Two causes of Christ's Fear.
because he was to stand before God in judgment, clothed and apparelled with
our sins: If he might have stood before God in his own righteousness, then
there had been no cause of fear; 1
but because he was to stand before him clothed with our sins, this made him
afraid.

Secondly, 2
He was afraid of death, which was near at hand: Now he was not afraid of
death, as it was a dissolution of nature, a separation of the soul from the
body; but as it was joined with the curse of God: But let us consider these two
causes of his fear a little better, and we shall find good matter of
instruction in them.

First, 1
he was afraid to stand before God in judgment, clothed and apparelled with
our sins: Causes of Fear.
this was a strange thing, that he which was the Son of God, and the
brightness of the glory of God, should now be afraid to stand before God. Now
if he were afraid, how much more may we be to stand before God in judgment, to
come before him in prayer, to appear in his holy presence? If the Son of God
was afraid, then much more may we: Indeed, if we have repented for our sins,
carried them over unto Christ, and do believe in him, then we may boldly stand
before God in judgment, and come before him in prayer, and approach into his
holy presence; when we may say as David does, Psalm. 26. Prove me, O Lord, and
try my ways; but if we have not repented of our sins, nor carried them unto
the shoulders of Christ, if we do not believe in him, then we have just cause
to be afraid. Genesis 3. When Adam had committed but one sin, he was afraid to
come before God in judgment, and therefore hid himself. If Adam was so afraid
when he had committed but one sin, Simile.
how much more should we be to come before him, having committed many great and
grievous sins? therefore howsoever we may carry away the matter closely, and
be quiet in our consciences for a time, yet if God should but bring his
judgments upon us, or death, so that we come to appear before God, then we
shall quake and tremble; as Dan. 5. we see Belshazzar did, who whilst he was
making himself merry, Simile.
drinking and abusing the holy vessels of God, and the handwriting did but
appear on the wall, quaked exceedingly, so that his countenance was changed,
his thoughts troubled, the joints of his loins were loosed, his knees smote
one against another: Even so, howsoever the wicked may be at peace and quiet a
little while, yet if God set up a throne of judgment, then they will quake and
be afraid to come before him: In the Revelation we may see how the brave
fellows and gallant lads of this world, and the great captains, howsoever
they could carry away the matter, and be at quiet for a little time; when God
sets up a tribunal seat to judge them, they run into caves and dens, and
desire the hills and mountains to fall upon them, to hide them from the
presence of God: So howsoever we may be at quiet for a time, if we have not
repented for our sins; If God come to judge us, we shall quake and tremble,
and desire the hills and mountains to fall upon us, and to hide us from the
presence of God.

Secondly, 2
Christ was afraid of death* which was near at hand; So Heb. 5. 7. Christ is
said, Cause of Christ's Fear.
in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplications,
with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death: It
appears he was afraid of death, in that he prayed against it. I, but was
Christ afraid of death? we see that in the Revelation many of the Saints of God
loved not their lives, but did willingly embrace death: And Act. 20. the
Apostle Paul was not only ready to be bound for the name of God, but to die
for it: And therefore we see many of the people of God were not afraid of
death how then was Christ afraid of it? I answer, that death may be considered
two ways:

1. As it is a dissolution of nature, and a separation of the soul from the
body. 2. As it is joined with the curse and wrath of God.
Now Christ was not afraid of death, as it was a separation of the soul from
the body, but as it was joined with the wrath and curse of God: thus as it is
a curse, every man has cause to be afraid of it, but if it be joined with the
favor and love of God, then we have no cause of fear: John 8. Christ's
threatens the Jews that they should die in their sins; Oh it is a fearful
thing when men die in their sins, under the wrath and curse of God
unrepentant for them! There is a great cause why such should be afraid of
death; a number of people there be that are contented to die, and yet they are
covetous persons, vile livers, swearers and drunkards; but I tell thee, if thou
have not repented for thy sins, have not carried them unto Christ, and applied
his righteousness unto thee, thou have great cause to be afraid of death: Pull
the sting out of the serpent, Simile
and thou may put him into thy bosom, but if thou let his sting alone, be
will sting thee: So death has a sting, as 1 Cor. 15. 55. which is sin;
therefore let this sting be taken away, and then we have no cause to be afraid
of death: But Revel. 20. 14. Death is said to go before, and Hell to follow
after, so that Hell is the tail of Death; and therefore we have good cause to
be afraid thereof. Bernard says, If thou have put away all shame, which
appertains to so noble a a creature as thou art, if thou feel no sorrow, as
carnal men do not, yet cast not away fear, which is found in every beast;
We offer to load an Ass, Simile.
yet he cares not for it, though we weary him out, because he is an Ass, but
if thou would thrust him into the fire, or into a ditch, he would avoid it as
much as he could, for that he loves life, and fears death: fear thou
then, and be not more insensible than a beast; fear death, fear judgment,
fear hell.

The second Affliction that wrought in Christ, 2
was heaviness and sorrow; and this not a common, Affliction of Christ.
or an ordinary, but a dreadful sorrow. Now what was the cause that Christ was
thus sorrowful? I answer, there were three causes of it:

First, 1
because he saw the face of God discomfortably to look upon him, which was
wont to shine upon him with an amiable and loving countenance; he that was wont
to look so sweetly upon him, Three causes of Christ's Sorrow.
now to see him as an angry Judge, and not as a loving Father: This was it that
made him sorrowful and heavy: The Scribes and Pharisees looked upon him
angerly, yet he was never moved at it; but when he sees Gods angry
countenance toward him, this did more touch him, than all the bodily pains
that he felt, for he never complained of the spickes and nails that were
thrust into his hands and feet, nor of his whipping or buffetting, but when he
saw Gods angry countenance bent toward him, this made him complain on the
Cross, My God, why have thou forsaken me? Of which we have two Uses:

First, Use 1.
To prise the favor of God above all things, and to joy in it, howsoever men
be displeased with us, to make little account of our ease, pleasure, and
profits; but to prise the love of God above all things, and to say with David,
Psalm. 63. 3. Because thy loving kindness is better than life, my lips shall
praise thee: And Psalm. 4. 6. Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance
upon us.

Secondly, To mourn for the loss of Gods favor more than for the loss of
worldly friends, or for the loss of worldly goods or jewels: thus we see
Christ did, he was sorrowful to see the angry countenance of God toward him:
Exodus 33. 4. we see when the Lord had told the people that an Angel should
conduct them, but he would no more go before them, because they were a
stiffenecked people, they were dejected, and no man put on his best raiment;
Simile.
then Moses said, If thy presence go not, carry us not hence: So a Christian
man must say, when he is going out of his door, Lord, carry me not from this
place, unless thy holy presence go with me; for if God be not with us, we
have just cause to be sorrowful and heavy: it is a pitiful thing that men
can weep and sorrow for the loss of a wife, or a child, or of some worldly
goods, but cannot weep for the loss of Gods favor; Judge. 18. 24. we see how
Michah did weep for the loss of a false god; when the soldiers had taken
away his gods, he runs crying after them; and when they asked him why he
cried, says he, Ye have taken away my gods, and now what have I more? If
Michah thus wept for the loss of his false gods, how much more should we weep
for the loss of the true God? And therefore men have great cause to weep when
they have driven away God from them by their sins.

The second cause of Christ's sorrow, 2
was, To make expiation and satisfaction for our sins: because all sins are
done and committed with delight, therefore there must be sorrow and heaviness,
to make expiation and satisfaction for them; for it is a ruled case, That, as
we do commit sin with delight, so there should be sorrow to make
satisfaction for it: therefore we are called often to weep and to mourn for
our sins; the greatness whereof we may see, by the greatness of the sorrow
that was in Christ; therefore we must grieve and sorrow for our sins,
proportionably as Christ has grieved and sorrowed for us; seeing whatsoever we
should have suffered, he suffered for us.

Thirdly, His sorrow was, to leave us him for an example, that as he sorrowed
for sin; so unless we repent we shall sorrow and weep too. Christ sorrowed
and wept for other men's sins; then we have cause to sorrow and weep for our
own sins, to grieve thoroughly for them; as Hosea 9. 1. says the Lord,
Simile.
Rejoice not O Israel, for joy as other people, for thou have go a whoring
from thy God: So if we have sinned against God, there Is little cause why we
should rejoice, therefore, what must we do? we must go into the Garden with
Christ, weep along after him, fall down flat upon the ground before God, and
never be at rest, till we have assurance to our souls that all our sins
are pardoned; for shall Christ sorrow for our sins, and we never be moved? We
see 2 Samuel 11. when Vria came to David, he bids him go down to his house and
wash his feet, yet he would not, but slept at the door of the Kings Palace;
then it was told David, who demanded of him, why he went not down to his
wife, Simile.
his answer was, The Arc, and Israel, and Judah abide in Tents, and my Lord
Ioab is in the field; shall I then go into my house to eat and drink? etc. So
we must say, My Lord Jesus is in the Garden, weeping, sorrowing, sweating,
bleeding, and grovelling on the ground for my sins; and shall I live then in
delight? Nay, I will sorrow and weep for them, for sin will cost sorrow,
either here, or in hell; therefore, better it were to weep for them here in
earth, when we may have comfort and hope, than to weep for them in hell, where
we shall never have comfort; for sin is like to a leg that is out of
joint, Simile.
that cannot be set without great grief and sorrow.

The third Affliction; 3
that which was wrought in Christ, was astonishment or an amazedness,
Affliction of Christ.
Matthew. 26. 38. the Greek word does signify, that he was in a great
perplexity, that he knew not whither to go, nor what to say, nor how to wind
out himself, such an astonishment there was, and such amazedness in the holy
soul of Christ; what was the reason of it? because the curse of God was to
come upon him for our sins. Oh think of this! this was that which did so
amaze and perplex him; therefore if he was thus troubled and perplexed to
think of the curse of God which he was to undergo, what shall become of us,
what perplexity and amazement shall we be in when we shall stand before God,
we shall hardly know what to do, or where to wind or turn our selves, but
we shall desire the hills and mountains to fall upon us, and to cover us from
the presence of God, and from his angry countenance: And therefore let every
man be afraid to live in his sins without repentance, and never let him look
for hope of ease, unless he do repent and turn to God; here we have twenty
tricks to put off the Law, and to shift that, but when we shall stand before
God, we shall have no shifts to excuse the matter.

SERMON. XIV.
MATTHEW 20. 17. And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve Disciples
apart in the way, and said unto them: Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the
Son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief Priests, and unto the Scribes,
and they shall condemn him to death. And shall deliver him unto the Gentiles
to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify him, and the third day he shall rise
again.
THe point now in hand is the Behavior or Carriage of Chirst in his
Afflictions, set out two ways:

1. By his Prostration on the ground. 2. By his Prayer.
First, by his Prostration; Luke says, he kneeled down, but the other, that
he fell down flat upon the ground on his face: this is a strange thing, that
Christ fell down on the ground not able to bear our sins, whereas, Hebr. 1.
1. He is able to bear up heaven and earth with his mighty Word: And yet the
heavy burden of our sins pressed him down to the ground: Many a man makes
a slight matter of sin, but it is the heaviest burden that may be; for all
other burdens Christian patience can bear, as blindness, sickness, loss of
goods, or such like, but the burden of sin makes the stoutest man to stoop;
as Psalm. 38. 4. For my iniquities are gone over my head, as an heavy burden,
they are too heavy for me: So also, Psalm. 40. 12. David complains thus, For
innumerable troubles have compassed me, my sins have taken such hold on me,
that I am not able to look up. Now we have three Uses:

First, Use 1.
seeing that sin is such a burden, that Christ is not able to bear it, we
should be afraid to deal with it; and therefore before we meddle with sin,
Simile.
we should do as Porters do, that are to carry a burden, they will first
peyse it, and feel whither they be able to bear it, and if they be not, it
shall not come on their backs: so before we meddle with sin, we should
peyse and feel the burden of it, and since it is such an intolerable burt
hen: we would take heed how we meddle with it.

Secondly, SER. XIV.
seeing sin is such a heavy burden, that it made Christ to fall upon the
ground; Use 2.
not being able to stand under the burden of it, we must take heed we do
not add to the burden of Christ: now by every sin we commit, we do add to
this burden, and when we see Christ lying under the burden of our sins
what do we? do we seek to ease him of his burden? No, we commit one sin
to day, and another to morrow; and so we add from time to time, to make more
heavy the burden that Christ bare for us; for there is great difference
between the sins that the Heathen commit, and those of a Christian, for the
sins of Christians they be upon the back of Christ, but the sins that the
Heathen commit, they rest upon themselves. Exodus 23. the Lord says, that if a
man sees his enemies Ass under a burden, he is commanded to help him up:
now if we be bound to show mercy to a beast, much more to Christ, therefore we
must take heed that we do not add to the burden of Christ.

Thirdly, seeing Christ was burdened with our sins we must feel the burden
of them too: it is a mavelous thing, Use 3.
that we never feel the burden of them, nor be not touched for them: Of which
there be three Reasons:

First, Two reasons why sin seems so light.
because sin is in suo loco, in the place of sin; for as the Philosophers
say, No Element is heavy or burdensome in his own place: as in the Sea, 1
let a man be in the bottom of it; although he has the whole Sea on his
back, Simile.
yet he feels it not; but let him take up a bucket full out of the Sea, out
of his place, and then he shall feel how heavy it is: so we do not feel the
weight of sin in us, because this place is the place of sin, but let a man
be taken out of this life, let him be brought before Gods judgment bar, and
then we shall feel the weight and burden of sin.

Secondly, 2
because of the deadness, and insensibility of our conscience, Ephesians. 2. 1.
(says the Apostle) Ye who were dead in trespasses and sins: we know if a
man be dead, Simile.
we may tumble a house down upon him, and he will not feel it; so because we
be dead in sins and trespasses, this is the reason, why we cannot feel the
burden of sin in us, although it be a great weight and burden.

Thirdly, 3
because we look upon the face and not upon the tail of sin; upon the
pleasures and delights of it, but not upon the tail thereof, that is, to the
punishment which shall follow: the pleasures of sin may be compared to the
streams of Jordan, a pleasant stream, wherein the fish took great delight,
Simile.
play, leap, skip, and friske; but at last it carries them into the dead Sea,
and so are killed; so men delight themselves as it were with the streams of
Jordan, the pleasures and delights of sin, but it carries them into the dead
sea, to hell and destruction: therefore because men look on the face of sin,
and not on the tail thereof, this is the Reason why they feel it not.

The second thing that was observed, was, the carriage of Christ in Prayer;
wherein we are to consider two things:

1. What He prayed for. 2. The limitation of his prayer.
First, First, what Christ Prayed for.
what he prayed for: that this cup might pass from him: we are not to think,
that this cup was a material cup, but the cup of Gods wrath which he was to
drink, and which our sins had tempered; that cup that David speaks of
Psalm. Simile.
75. 8. every sin is like a drop of poison, put into this cup for Christ to
drink; if a child should go into a garden, and gather rue, Simile.
wormwood, and a number of bitter things; and temper a cup with them, and give
them to his father to drink, this child might be condemned at every bodies
hands; so we may be censured in that we temper a cup, not for our father to
drink, but for Christ our Savior and Redeemer; the Jews gave him gall and
vinegar to drink, but we give him a cup tempered with our sins, more bitter
than gall: therefore we must pray to God to forgive us and remember that when
we sin, we are tempering a cup for Christ to drink; and as Christ prayed,
that God would take away the cup from him, so must we, for if it be not taken
away from us; we are like to drink it our selves.

The second thing observed in his prayer is, Secondly, the limitation of his
Prayer.
the limitation of it, Father, not as I will, but as thou will: He had a
desire indeed that the cup might pass away from him, but with this
limitation; if it were the will of God, for if it had passed from him, it had
come to thee, and to me. Now as Christ prayed with limitation, so must we do;
when we see any cross or affliction is ready to light on us, we may pray to
God against it, but it must be with limitation if it be his good will;
therefore this does check the world that whatsoever they pray for, they must
have it, without any limitation at Gods hands or else they are impatient.

Thirdly, Thirdly, the effects of Christ's Afflictions.
we have to consider the wonderful, mavelous and strange effect that it
wrought: which was that the pressure and burden of our sins caused Christ to
sweat, not an ordinary sweat as we do, but to sweat blood, and that not
thin but thick and congealed blood; besides it was not in a sparing manner,
but in such abundance, that it came through his garments, and left the marks
and prints behind upon the ground: such was the weight and burden of our
sins, that it made him to sweat on this manner as we have heard; and that not
when he was in the warm house, but in the garden, cold air, on cold ground,
and in such a cold time, as Peter was glad to creep to the fire to warm him.
All this does show the strangeness of this effect; which made some think it
could not be true, but we may see that all the ancient Fathers of the Church
read it so, ever from the Apostles time, as Irenaeus, and Athanasius, and
diverse others, as also it agrees with the love of Christ toward us; and
therefore seeing it has been thus read of all the ancient Fathers in the
Church, and is agreeable to the love that Christ shows to us, we are to make
no doubt of it. In the sweating of Christ observe four things:

1. Who was the procuring cause of it. 2. The carriage of Christ in it. 3. The
manner of it. 4. The end.
First, First, the procuring Cause.
what was the procuring cause; it was His Agony: (Agony does signify in
Greek, a combat, or a conflict) now this same conflict which Christ had, was
not with any earthly power, but with God; and this was the cause of his
sweating: before Christ had a combat with fear and sorrow in the garden; he
had wrestled with the devil, being tempted by him, and with the Priests in the
temple; now he is come to combat and have a conflict with God. Which may teach
us, that if we live in our sins, and do not repent of them, and put them off
to Christ, we shall have an agony too; for we shall not only have the devil,
and an evil and bad conscience to combat with, but we shall have God
himself to fight against us: Sin
as Revel. 2. 16. Repent or else I will come against thee shortly, and will
fight against thee, with the sword of my mouth; so that if men do not repent,
they shall not only have the devil, and an evil conscience, to combat and
conflict with, but God himself: and this is the sorest combat that can be, to
have Him to fight against them; it is a great matter for one to have a combat
with the devil, and for a poor man to have a combat with a great power; but
a far greater matter, to have a conflict with God. We see that a Christian
had need of a great deal of faith, wisdom and patience; for he has not
only his sins and the devil to conflict with, but God to fight against him;
therefore we had need to take Paul's counsel, Ephesians. 6. To take to us the
whole Armor of God, to be armed in every part, for (says he) we wrestle not
against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, etc. a
Christian has not to do with weak and frail men only, but with the devil,
yea and many times with the Lord himself, who does combat with us: therefore
that we may stand at that hour how ought we to be armed, and to have the
gifts of the Spirit?

The second thing observed was, Secondly, the carriage of Christ.
the carriage of Christ in this estate; it is said, he prayed the more
earnestly: the more he felt himself pressed and burdened with our sins,
the more earnestly he prayed. Which may teach us that the sorer our
temptations, and the greater our conflicts be, the stronger must be our
endeavor to resist them, the more earnest our prayer; we must strengthen our
faith, and renew our repentance, that so we may stand in the temptation. Simile.
I have showed you heretofore that little Bees in a storm or tempest, catch up
little stones in their claws, to balance themselves against the wind and
storm, that so they be not carried away with storm or tempest; so Christians
must do, when there is a tempest up, get little stones, as it were, in our
claws, get faith and repentance renewed, pray the more earnestly, that so we
be not carried away with the temptation, and overcome with the conflict: many a
Christian complains, that he is troubled with evil motions, that he cannot
rest, nor be at quiet; and some complain of the deadness of their hearts,
and insensiblenesse of them; now in this case what must be done? the sorer the
temptation is, the greater must be the endeavor to resist it; therefore we
should be the more earnest with God in prayer; and apply our selves to the use
of good means, that so we may not be carried away with the temptation: if a
tree begin to dye at the top, Simile.
the way to help it is not to pick away the moulds from the roots, for this
is the way to kill it quite, but to lay fresh moulds to the roots: so if a
Christian begin to droope, the way to recover him is not to withdraw himself
from the means, but to apply himself to it, to pray, read, meditate, hear
the word preached, and to receive the Sacraments. 2 King. 8. 29.
When Iehoram was wounded of the Assyrians, he turned into Iezreel to be
healed of his wounds: so a Christian must do, when he feels himself to be
wounded, in his love, faith, care, or in his patience, what must he do, but
return to the use of good means, to be healed again in his love, and in his
patience, and in his grace.

Thirdly, First, He did sweat.
the manner of his sweat: and this is declared in these five circumstances:
first, it is said that he did sweat; the Philosophers say, that all sweating
arises from too much labor or pain, for nature being pressed above her
strength does cause sweating; therefore so long as a man does not exceed the
power and ability of his nature, he does not sweat, but when he is pressed
above his strength that makes him sweat. Genesis 3. says the Lord to Adam, Thou
shall eat thy bread in the sweat of thy face: why did not Adam labor before
this? Yes, but the labor which he had before, was a delightful, not a
painful or penal labor; so Christ being pressed with the burden of our
snnes, and the weight of them, this made Him to sweat, Christ could have borne
the heaviness of the earth on his back without sweating, but our sins did
so press and burden Him, and the weight thereof was so heavy that it made him
to sweat. It is a wondrous thing, that Christ should thus sweat under the
burden of our sins, and we go away and feel nothing; well, sin will
either cost sweating here, or in hell, better it were to sweat for them here,
where we may have an end of sweating, than in hell where there will be no end.

Secondly, Secondly, blood.
He did sweat blood; Philosophers say, that a man may not only sweat water but
blood; as a man being stung with a serpent: but Christ did sweat blood, when
there was no hand to touch him, nothing but the serpent of our sins to sting
Him.

The use is, Use 1.
for our example; that if Christ did sweat blood for our sins, then our
consciences should bleed, in the consideration of them: I have showed you
heretofore, that if a man be slain, bring the party that killed the dead man
into the place where he is, Simile.
and his wounds will bleed afresh again; now we be the men that have slain
Christ, therefore when we come to the Lords table, there is the remembrance of
the dead body of Christ; therefore although Christ's body do not bleed, yet
when we come there again, let our souls and consciences bleed, in the
consideration that our sins caused Christ to sweat blood; Psalm. 119. says
David, Mine eyes gushed out with rivers of tears, because men kept not thy
Laws; now if David did weep for other men's sins, how ought we to weep for
our own?

Secondly, in that Christ did sweat blood, it sets forth the infinite love of
God to us, Use 2.
that he thought nothing too dear to redeem us with: The Devil could say,
Job 2. 40. Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life;
but Christ was content to part with his life, to sweat out his heart-bloud and
his life-bloud to do us good; therefore let us not think much to do any
thing that he commands us.

Thirdly, 3
that he did not sweat thin blood, but it was thick blood; Physicians say,
Thick blood.
that in some extremity, a man may sweat blood, but it is thin blood; as a
man being put to a fearful death in Paris, the fear and horror of it made
the man to cast forth thin blood: All that a man suffers, is for his own
sins, but the punishment that Christ suffered, was for the sins of all:
Heb. 12. 1.
therefore, as Saint Paul advises, Let us cast away everything that presses
down, and the sin that hangs so fast on, etc. Physicians say, there be some
things, which if a man take, they will soake into the flesh, and that they
cannot be voided without sweating; so sin soakes into our flesh, that it
cannot be voided, but Christ must sweat blood to drive it out; Job 15. 16.
and yet man drinks in sin and iniquity like water, as Job speaks; which
may teach us, that it is a hard matter to reconcile and to bring a man into
favor with God; there is no man able to do it, no not the holiest man that
is, as David speaks, Psalm. 49. 8. None of them can by any means redeem his
brother, nor give God a ransom for him, for the redemption of their soul is
precious. Christ must not sweat water, but blood, and thick blood, even
cloders of blood for it, as I showed you in the morning; all the blood of the
Martyrs, and of the holy men are not able to free us of our sin, if it should
be gathered all together in a basin; but it must cost Christ his life and his
blood, to reconcile and bring us into favor again; therefore we see it is not
a small, but a great matter to reconcile and free us from the least sin.

Fourthly, 4
It ran through his garments; Esaias 63. the Prophet wonders at Christ, It ran
through his garments.
that he returns from the passion of his sufferings with his garments died in
blood, saying Who is this that comes from Edom, with died garments from
Bosrah. Now as the garments of Christ were died in blood, so our consciences
must be washed and dipped in his blood, or else we are not accepted of God:
Revel. 7. 13. there is an answer made to a question; one of the Elders asked,
Who are these which are arrayed in white long Robes? Answer was made; These are
they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their long Robes, and
made them white in the blood of the Lamb: Simile.
So we must wash our Robes in the blood of Christ, and then we shall be
glorious and beautiful in his sight; we read, Exodus 12. when they killed the
Paschall lamb, they took the blood thereof and sprinkled it on the
doore-posts, Simile.
that when the Angel of destruction should come and find the same on the
doore-posts, he might pass over them: So if we can get but a few drops of the
blood of Christ into our hearts, and besprinkle them, the Angel of destruction
will pass by us.

Fifthly, 5
It ran down to the ground, in a plentiful manner, so that if one had come
many hours after, It ran on the ground.
he might have found the marks and prints of his blood, that one who had come
after might have said, Lo, here is the place where Jesus Christ, my blessed
Savior and Redeemer, was humbled for my sins; where he being in an agony,
did sweat blood, here be the marks and prints of it: All this is to give us
example, that as he left the marks and prints of his humility, we should also
leave marks and prints of our repentance and places of our prayer, that a man
may say, when he sees the place again, here I did repent my sins, here I
prayed to God, and in such a place I was humbled: thus we must labor to leave
marks and footings of our obedience in our houses, gardens, and places where
we be; Simile.
as Acts 9. when Dorcas was dead, her friends showed the garments that she had
made for the poor; thus she left marks and prints behind her: so the woman in
the Gospel, she brought a box of Ointment, and powered it on the head of
Christ; therefore Christ tells her, Wheresoever this Gospel is preached, that
she has done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her. A number live in the
world, but where is the marks and prints of their goodness, faith,
repentance? The Jews said of the Centurion, that he did build them a
Synagogue: Thus he left a print of charity behind him. There be a number that
leave marks and prints behind them, but what are they? of drunkenness,
profaneness, disorder, of contention in setting men together by the ears: it
is said of the Devil, Simile.
that he leaves a stink behind him; so it may be said of his servants, that
they leave a stink and a bad savor behind them; but we must not leave such
behind us, ours must be marks and prints of wisdom, and grace, of love,
patience, and such like.

The second thing that Christ suffered from God was Desertion, The second thing
Christ suffered from God on the Cross.
or a forsaking on the Cross; which was such a grief as made him bitterly
complain; all the other things he suffered with silence and patience, but
this made him cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? He never
complained when they crucified him, whipped him, set a crown of thorns on his
head, and nailed his hands and feet on the cross; but when he saw Gods angry
countenance toward him, that God was in show departed from him, becasue of our
sins, this made him complain. And this may teach us, that above all things, it
is the greatest grief to a Christian, to find that God is departed from him;
all other troubles a man may endure, but when God has taken away his grace,
this may make one bitterly to complain: So we see Saul complains of this to
Samuel, 1 Samuel, 28. 15.
(says he) The Philistines be come upon me, and God is departed from me; it
were nothing for to have all the world to forsake him, if God did not; but if
God forsake a man, where is his comfort? Now that which Christ suffered of God
on the cross, is showed two ways:

1. By the Cause. 2. By the Effects.
The first Cause was the darkening of the Sun upon him, The first cause.
the Effect was the bitter complaint that he makes, that God had forsaken him;
as if he should say, It does not grieve me, that my Disciples or my kindred
(notwithstanding the kindness and love that I have showed them) or that my
mother has forsaken me; but this is that which grieved me, that my good Father
has forsaken me for the sins of my people. O let us think of this, that it
is the heaviest distress that can befall us, to have God departed from us;
therefore howsoever our friends forsake us, and the world leave us, yet take
heed that God does not depart from us: It was David's comfort, that although his
father and mother should forsake him, yet God would not forsake him; so this
must uphold us, that although our friends and kindred forsake us, yet God will
not; for if God should, what comfort can we have?

But what was the cause of it? the apprehension of the fearful darkness of
the Sun three hours together, almost all the time of his passion, from
twelve a clock till three. Now in this darkness of the Sun, we may observe
three things:

1. The Manner of it. 2. The Cause of it. 3. The End of it.
First, 1
the manner of the darkness; it was at twelve a clock, at the brightness of
the day, The manner of it.
at noone time: secondly, it was of long continuance, almost all the time of
his passion: thirdly, it was not only about the Cross, and in Jerusalem, but
all the Land over. There is some difference amongst Divines about the extension
of the darkness, some hold it was all the Land of Judah over, some all the
world over; Tertullian says, that this heavy hap, that the Sun was darkened
all the world over, (at the time of the Passion of Christ) was put into a book
at Rome, and also amongst the Grecians it was so reported of; so likewise S.
Cyprian says, that this darkness was not in the Land of Judah, but all over
the world: And this was the manner of the darkness.

Now this darkness must put us in mind of the fearful darkness that shall
cover the faces of the wicked, Use*
if they do not repent; for as Christ's face was covered in the brightest time
of the day, so shall their faces be covered, when things should be at the best
with them, even when they be at the height of their glory: Amos 8. 9. In that
day, says the Lord God, I will even cause the Sun to go down at noonday,
and will darken the earth in the clear day; so that in the midst of their
joy, and in the midst of their glory, the Lord will bring darkness upon
them, and so dash all their glory and joy; Prove. 13. 9. it is said, God will
put out the candle of the wicked. And (for example) we see Haman when he was at
the top of the Kings favor, and in his chiefest glory, then the Sun was
darkened upon him, he was taken and hanged on the gallows which he had set up
for Mordecai; so likewise, Dan. 5. when Balthazar was drinking, tippling and
carousing in the vessels of the house of God, and presently the handwriting
appeared on the wall, and writ his destruction that night, he that was so
merry, was killed: So, Luke. 12. 20. the rich man in the Gospel, he would go
build his barnes greater, when presently there came a voice unto him, Thou
fool, this might shall they take away thy soul; even so all the wicked men of
the world, that are not careful to give glory unto God, when they be in the
top of their mirth and of their pleasure; all their mirth shall be turned into
sorrow, their glory into shame, their peace into trouble: So we see Herod, Act.
12. when he was in shining apparel, and had made an Oration to the people, who
cried out, The voice of God, and not of man; Simile.
because he was not careful to give glory unto God, the Angel struck him with
a loathsome disease, he was eaten of worms, and so died. Thus the Lord will
darken our comfort, if we do not repent; for if God brought darkness on his
Son, then he will much more bring it on the wicked for ever: Simile.
If a poor man have an house; and the Sun do shine in comfortably to
refresh him, and his children that be about him; if the same man take a veil
and hang between the Sun and the house, he does deprive himself and his
children of the comfort of the Sun; so God if he does shine comfortably upon
us, and we take the veil of our sins and hang up, what do we but deprive
our selves of those comforts and joys which we might have had, and so bring
darkness upon our selves. Now this darkness that shall come upon the wicked,
although they may escape it in this life, yet they shall be sure of it at the
day of Judgment: So it is said, Matthew. 25. Take the unprofitable servant,
bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness: And therefore,
howsoever the wicked may go on in joy for a season, and be partakers of the
light of the Sun, of the Moon, and many other comforts; yet the time shall
come, that neither the light of the Sun or Moon, nor any Star or candle
shall be any comfort to them; as we may see in Exodus, what a fearful
darkness there was over the Land of Egypt three days together, that they
could not go one to another; but how much more fearful darkness shall that
be, that shall not last only three days together, but for ever and ever:
therefore let us pray to God, and repent of our sins, get faith in Christ,
that we may be delivered from this fearful darkness that shall come upon the
wicked and ungodly.

Secondly, The second cause of it.
The cause of this darkness; It was not by any natural cause, but by the hand
of God, which I will prove by two Reasons:

First, Reason 1.
because there is no eclipse of the Sun, but it comes by the body of the
Moon, for the body of the Moon coming between the light of the Sun and
us, Simile.
makes the eclipse; as the hand of a man being held between the light of a
candle and his own eyes, does hide away the light of the candle from his eyes;
so the body of the Moon coming between the Sun and us, makes the Sun to
be eclipsed: Now the Moon comes not near the Sun, but when she changes,
but this was when the Moon was at the full, and in a perfect diameter to the
Sun; for we know that the Jews Passover was kept in the full of the Moon,
therefore it was no natural cause.

Secondly, Reason 2.
it was no eclipse of the Sun, for the Moon could take away but part of the
light, because the Sun is bigger by many degrees than the Moon; so then
there was no natural cause of this darkness, but it was only the hand of God
that did restrain it, even as he did restrain the heat of the fire, when the
three Children were cast into the fiery furnace; there was fire, but God
restrained the heat thereof, that it could not burn; so, there was the Sun
at that time, but God restrained the light of it three hours together: Again,
(as the Philosophers say) the second cause cannot work without the virtue of
the first, therefore if the first cease, Simile.
the second must needs cease; as we see in a clock, if there be a stand in the
great wheels, there must needs be a stay in the lesser, because the great
wheels carry about the little ones; so (as I may say) God is as the great
wheel that carries about the creatures, therefore when there is a stay or an
cessation in God, there must needs be a stay and cessation in the creatures.

This therefore should make us afraid to sin against God and displease him,
because he is able in a moment to destroy all the creatures, or to restrain
them; therefore we have cause to be afraid to offend or displease him: Simile.
we see how afraid men be to sin against the King and offend him, who yet can
but kill the body; but God is able to kill both foul and body, and cast them
into hell fire: All the Kings are not able to restrain the influence of the
heavenly bodies, but God we see is able to do it; he can restrain (as Job
says) the influence of the Pleiades and Orion; And therefore how afraid should
we be to snne against him? Indeed so much the more, because we have made a
covenant with God of new obedience; we see if a man have given one a piece of
gold or silver upon a condition, that if he do such and such things, he shall
double the gold; Simile.
if he be tempted, he will say, I dare not do it, because I am bound to the
contrary; so, if we be enticed to any sin, we should say, I dare not do so,
because I am bound to the contrary; if a man set a bowl well at the first, it
is like to run well, but if it be not set well, it cannot possibly run
well; so if we set our selves in a good course at the first, it is like we
shall continue well, but if we do not, how is it possible we should come in a
good course?

Thirdly, 3
The end of it: Some say the Sun was darkened, because it was ashamed to
behold the death of the Son of God; The end of the Darkness.
and therefore was darkened, even as Hagar would not see the death of her
child; some say that the end was to deter the Jews from the death of
Christ: Simile.
As a man when he would not have his servant to leave work, he will not put
out the candle; so say they, it was to keep the Jews from so vile a thing, as
to kill the Son of God, therefore the Sun was darkened: but in my mind
there is another end (howsoever these may be probable) and that is this, that
seeing Christ was to suffer for us, and for our sins, therefore God did darken
the Sun upon him: To teach us that we deserve not to have the light of the
Sun, Moon, or Stars to shine on us; therefore, when as we look upon our
gardens, wives, children, lands or goods, we must confess and say, O Lord, we
deserve that thou should have wrapped up all in darkness, and that we
should not have any light, to have seen any thy blessings: This should stir
us up to be thankful to God for the light of the Sun, Moon and Stars,
yea, for the light of a candle, even for the least light we enjoy.

SERMON XV.
MATTHEW. 27. 46. And about the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice,
saying, Eli, Eli, lamesabachthani, that is to say, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me?
IN the Gospel, when our Savior had fed five thousand people with five loaves
and two fishes, he bids them gather up the fragments, that nothing be lost: So
we should do in the sufferings of Christ, gather them up so that nothing be
lost, never a drop of blood that he shed in the Garden, never a sigh or sobbe,
or word on the Cross should fall to the ground; this must be our care, as
also that we get clean hearts and souls to keep all in.

That which Christ suffered at the hands of God was twofold; In the Garden,
and on the Cross, of which we have spoken.

The next thing we are to speak of is, 2
the bitter complaint of Christ on the cross; The effect of Christ's suffering
on the Cross.
wherein two things are to be considered:

1. The time when he complained. 2. What he complained of.
The time may be considered in three particulars: First, 1
that he complained at the ninth hour of the day, after the fearful
darkness, there was none of the soldiers, that complained, nor any of the
Jews that were moved with it; but we see Christ complains, when he saw how
the wrath of God came against him for our sins. Which must teach us that
though the world be not moved, nor touched with the present judgments that be
upon them, yet we should take them to heart, and labor to make a good use of
them: the Prophet complains of this; Thou have smitten them, and they have not
mourned, etc. And Ierem. 8. 6. I. harkened and heard, that they spoke not
aright; no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done: And
Zeph. 3. 5. Every morning does he bring his judgments to light, he fails
not, but the wicked will not learn to be ashamed. There is not one day that
comes over our heads; but there is one judgment or other, that befalls our
selves, or others; therefore howsoever others are not moved at it, nor take it
to heart, yet we should: SER. XV.
there be a number of strange judgments come upon us from time to time, which
though the wicked let slip and never regard, yet the people of God must be wise
to make a good use both of the judgments that come upon themselves and others:
Simile.
if a man hear the kings writs be out against him; will he let the matter
alone? No: but he will make agreement, or else he knows it will come to a
greater charge: so the judgments of God are Gods writs (as it were) what,
shall we let them alone? No, but agree quickly, lest it cost us a great deal
of pains and labor afterward.

But what was it that made Christ complain? It was in him the power of grace
that brought it home to his heart: Quest. Sol.
in like manner if the power of grace be in our hearts, it will teach us to
make a good use of all the judgments of God.

Secondly, 2
he complained on the cross, it was not in the garden; for there was some
distance of time, between that which Christ suffered on the cross, and that
in the garden, so that he did not suffer all his pains at one time, but there
was some space and intermission between them: which must teach us, that it is
the Goodness and Mercy of God, that all our afflictions come not upon us at
one time, but there is a space between them: this the Prophet Esai. 57. 16.
does note as a mercy of God; where it is said, For I will not contend for ever,
neither will I be always wroth, for the Spirit should fail before me, and
the Souls which I have made: all our troubles shall not come at an instant,
nor all our temptations, lest our spritis should fail, but there shall be a
space and a time betwixt them: so Matthew. 4. it is said, that the devil left
Christ for a season: hence appears not only the goodness but the mercy of
God, that the devil does leave tempting of us, for a season, yea, even God
himself, does leave and cease to bring all his afflictions upon us at one
time, still there is some intermission and space between them, that so we may
be quite overcome, but may have a breathing time to recover our strength
again.

The third is, 3
that it was the ninth hour of the day, a little before his death. This must
teach us, that greatest extremity, for the most part of a Christian is, at the
time of his death: so we see Esai. 38. 12. Hezekiah complaining, Mine age is
departed, and is remooved from me like a shepherds tent; I have cut off like a
weaver my life: he will cut me off with pining sickness; from day even to
night will thou make an end of me, etc. so in the Revelation we see, because
the devil has but a short time to continue, therefore he rages and takes on
the more: and bends all his forces to bring troubles upon the people of God.

There be two especial times, Two times the devil tempts busily.
that the devil is busiest to disturb Gods people: first, at their entrance
into a Christian calling; so Matthew. 4. no sooner was Christ called to his
office, but he was straightway tempted of the devil; the same still he does
to us, no sooner are we entered into a Christian course or calling, Simile.
having given our names to Christ, but we are assailed by him. I have showed
you heretofore, if a prisoner break prison the jailer will lay all the country
about till he has gotten him again: and if he take him he will lay more irons
upon him, and use him worse than he did before: so the devil does, when a man
is once converted and brought to God, escaped out of his thraldom, he will
labor by all means to catch hold on him again; so that we see at the
entrance of a Christian into an holy course the devil will be most busy.

Secondly, 2
at the time our death; when because the last enemy that shall be destroyed is
death, the devil thrusts himself in with death, that he might make death more
bitter and strong, thereby to destroy us if he could: Ioh. 14. 30. (says
Christ) for the prince of the world comes and has naught in me: so Genesis 15.
when the Sun was down, the fowls came, and fell upon the carcass of the
beast, that Abraham had killed for a sacrifice; in like manner when sorrow is at
hand or when death is come, the devil will be most busy to hinder us:
therefore being forewarned we should labor to get faith, patience,
repentance, with other graces fitting for a Christian, that so we may stand at
that time before God; and be able to say with Christ, Ioh. 14. 30. The prince
of the world comes, and has naught in me.

Secondly, what he complained of, that he was forsaken of God; it is a very
strange thing that the Son of God should be forsaken; yet very true, in
respect of the bitterness of his passion, and sense of his humanity, he being
oppressed with infinite dolor and pains; and this complaint of his is not of
desperation and diffidence, (for he calls God, his God) but of contention and
strife with his most bitter and sorrowful tentation. This must teach us, that
if the Son of God was forsaken, when he found sin upon him, though it were
but imputed, then we may be sure, that if God find sin upon us, he will
forsake us. Here we are to observe four things:

1. What it is to be forsaken. 2. How far He was forsaken. 3. For what He
was forsaken. 4. His carriage in this estate.
First, First, what it is to be forsaken.
to be forsaken of God is nothing else but to want the grateful presence of
God in goodness and grace.

Now there is a twofold presence: 1
there is a general presence to sustain and uphold us, in our being and
actions which is common to all: thus the devil has the presence of God, which
is that presence Paul speaks of in the Acts: In him we live, moove and have
our being; let a Carpenter make a house, and when he has done, let him go
whether he will, the house will stand: but it is not so with us; for God when
he has made us, must uphold us, or else we fall to the grave, and come to
nothing; as a staff in a man's hand, as long as he holds it: so long the staff
stands; but if he withdraw his hand, it falls: so it is with the world and all
things in it. Now besides this general presence, there is a particular
presence in grace and goodness; such as is spoken of Psalm. 145. 18. The Lord
is nigh unto all them that call upon him: to all that call upon him in truth.
So that God is not only present, to sustain and uphold us in the life of
nature: but to be present with us in the life of grace: therefore to want the
presence of God, Use 2.
is to want the comfortable feeling of God in grace and goodness: this is
meant by being forsaken of God, to find Gods angry countenance against us for
sin.

Secondly, Secondly, how far forth God forsaken.
how far forth Christ ( and so a Christian) may be said to be forsaken: I
answer two ways:

1. The one is in the life of nature. 2. The other is in the life of grace.
First, 1
in the life of nature, when God takes away our sight, our strength, our
health, our breath or life; and thus the dearest servants of God may be
forsaken, thus Christ was forsaken; and the Thief on the cross: he was not
freed of his bodily pains, yea and he lost his life too; but God did not
forsake him, in the life of grace he gave him his Spirit and grace still. And
thus the poor Martyrs were forsaken in the life of nature; Heb. 11. it is said
some were racked, and some were sawne asunder: I, but God did not forsake them
in the life of grace, therefore they suffered willingly the spoiling of their
goods; thus the dearest of Gods servants may be forsaken; yea this kind of
forsaking is needful; as in some diseases, when a Physician comes and sees a
man has abundance of blood* Simile.
whereby he is subject to maladies, he will presently open a vein and take
away the corrupter blood; so God this same skillful Physician, seeing that
abundance of ease, wealth, and health would do us hurt, many times takes away
from us, our ease, our health our wealth, and our worldly comforts: so David
says, Psalm. 119. 71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I
might learn thy statutes; therefore although a man may be forsaken in the life
of nature: yet if he may have the more strength in the life of grace, and can
feel it so with him, or as Paul speaks, that although he dies daily, yet his
comfort and consolation in God increases, then it is good for that man to be
thus forsaken of God.

The second desertion is, The second desertion.
in the life of grace: which consists in the power of the Spirit, and in the
comfort of the Spirit: it is nothing to be forsaken in the life of nature; to
have our sight, or our wealth, or our health, or ease taken from us, if God do
not take away his Spirit; but if God do not only forsake us, in the life of
nature, but also in the life of grace, this is the greatest and the heaviest
conflict that may befall a Christian: and therefore we had need pray to God
for this, that although he forsake us in the life of nature; yet that he would
not take away his Spirit and grace from us; so David prays, Psalm. 51. Take
not away from me thy holy Spirit; as if he should say, though thou take away
from me, Simile.
my crown, my kingdom, or my life, yet take not away from me thy Spirit, so we
should pray to God, that although he take away from us our health, goods, wife,
children, or worldly ease, yet Lord take not from me thy Spirit. Here we are
to take notice of an error in the world, that if men be forsaken in the life
of nature, then they complain, but never are moved when God takes away
sanctified graces from them. Saul complained when God had forsaken him in the
life of nature, as 1 Samuel 28. 15. The Philistines make war against me, and
God is departed from me; and yet never was moved when the Spirit of the Lord
departed from him, and an evil spirit from the Lord was sent to trouble him,
as we may read, 1 Samuel 16. 14. Thus we can complain, when God has forsaken
us in the life of nature, but are not troubled when we have lost any sanctified
grace; therefore howsoever poverty, blindness of lamenesse be upon us, yet let
us pray to God as David did, Psalm. 51. that He would not take away from us his
Spirit and grace.

Now since we are fallen upon this point, how far forth a Christian may be
forsaken in the life of grace, we will proceed in it a little farther for the
satisfaction of every man's conscience; and therefore chiefly take notice of
these two things for the better understanding thereof: That there is;

1. The comfortable feeling of the Spirit. 2. The grace or power of the Spirit.
For the first, How far forth one may be forsaken in the life of grace.
God is said to forsake a Christian, when he takes away the comfortable feeling
of his Spirit: thus a Christian may be forsaken, when he feels not the love
and favor of God on him, being so cast down as if he should never be saved;
yet for that time he may have the power and grace of the Spirit: Thus Christ
was forsaken in the life of grace, that he had no feeling of the Spirit, or of
Gods favor, yet nevertheless he had the grace and power of the Spirit. We
have many examples in the Scriptures, that the people of God have wanted this
same sweet feeling of Gods favor; we see how David complains, I said in mine
haste, I am clean cast out of thy sight: So the Church in the Canticles, Cant.
5. 7, 8. being as it were forsaken, went up and down to seek Christ; yet the
Church in that hard time did not want the operation and power of the Spirit,
though she wanted the sweet feeling thereof, and the joyful and delightful
presence of Christ; even so a Christian has not always a like feeling of it,
but when a man wants it, then he must sustain himself by faith, as we shall
hear hereafter.

Now if question be made, Quest.
how far forth God may forsake a true Christian? I answer in known terms,
That he does not forsake totally and finally. This I will first prove by
certain grounds; Sol.
secondly, I will explain it; and thirdly, I will make use of it.

First, 1
I will prove it by these four grounds:

The first is drawn from the promise of God: Four grounds proving that a
Christian, or a true believer, is neither totally nor finally forsaken of God.
There is a promise made, Josh. 1. 5. I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee:
this promise made to Joshua, Saint Paul applies to all the faithful people of
God, Heb. 13. Now if God will not forsake his faithful people, then we may
have comfort, that God will not forsake us, if we be faithful.

The second is drawn from the nature of God; 2
Now the nature of God is not changed, for them whom he loves, he loves to
the end, Ioh. 13. 1. And Romans 11. 28. The gifts and graces of God, are without
repentance.

The third is drawn from the power of God, 3
1 Pet. 1. 3. We are kept by the power of God to salvation: And John 10. 29. My
Father that gave them me, is greater than all; and none is able to take them
out of his hands.

The fourth is, from the virtue of Christ's Prayer, Ioh. 17. 11. Holy Father,
keep through thine own name those whom thou have given me: 4
So he prayed that Peter's faith might not fail him: Now as the prayer of
Christ sustained and upheld Peter in his false; so it shall uphold and sustain
all the godly in their falls; And these be the grounds.

Now I will explain the same: 1
First, that in all the falls of Gods people, they fall not totally from grace
and goodness, They fall in part.
they fall but in part; for as it is 1 Ioh. 3. 9. There is a seed in them; a
seed and a root of goodness and grace remaining in them, in all their falls; as
we see in David, when he had fallen grievously, Psalm. 51. Lord, says he, take
not thy holy Spirit from me: And so in his going astray, he cries and calls to
God, Psalm. 119. 178. I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant,
for I have not forgotten thy Commandments: So, Matthew. 26. 15. when Peter had
denied his Master, he crept away from the bad company, and was not at rest till
he had wept bitterly: thus we may see, that God does not totally forsake his
people: Simile.
And therefore, Act. 20. 10. as Paul said of Eutichus, when he fell out at the
window, Trouble not your selves, his life is in him: So we may say, in all the falls of Gods people, trouble not your selves, nor be discouraged, for there is
life in them, there is the Spirit of grace, although men do not see it.

Secondly, 2
though a Christian fall, yet he falls not finally; he shall not be forsaken for
ever, He falls not finally.
it is but for a little time; as Esaias 54. 7. For a small moment have I forsaken
thee, but with great compassion will I gather thee; in a little wrath, I hid my
face from thee for a little season: but with everlasting kindness, have I had
compassion on thee: So in another place it is said, Though heaviness endures
for a night, yet joy comes in the morning. I have showed you heretofore,
Simile.
that it is with a Christian, as with a man in a swound, bring a man then to
the fire, rub and chafe him, and put a little Aquavitae in his mouth, if there
be any life in him, he will recover again: So it is with a Christian in his false; if he be brought to the means, to the Word preached, to prayer, or to
the use of the Sacraments, if there be the life of grace in him, he will
recover again: so then God does not forsake a Christian finally. The Uses are;

First, Use 1.
seeing God does not forsake totally and finally; we may see what a
comfortable estate it is to be a true Christian, he may have assurance that
God will not forsake him for ever: this is an excellent privilege and
prerogative that a Believer has, his friends and kindred may forsake him, but
God will never; therefore such a man may say (by himself privately) Lord, I
thank thee, although my friends and my kindred have forsaken me, yet thou
have not; on thee I will rely, and put my whole confidence in thee, for thou
have promised, that whilst I trust in thee, thou never wilt forsake me: And
this is a sweet comfort that a Christian may have; a servant may be forsaken of
his master, as the Amalekite was, 1 Samuel 30. 13. and a child may be forsaken
of his mother, as Moses was, Exodus 2. 3. a husband may forsake his wife, one
friend another, but God will never forsake them that be his servants.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing God does not forsake his finally nor totally, let us labor to be one
of his servants, and then we have an evidence, that God will not leave us not
forsake us; a father may forsake his child, a master his servant, a landlord
may cast off his tenants, but God will not forsake them that do depend upon
him; if we be his servants, then we have an evidence to show, whereby we may
assure our selves, when all else leave us, yet God will not forsake us.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing God will not forsake us finally and totally, it is a shame for us to
forsake him; Simile.
the child has greater cause not to forsake the mother, than the mother has
to forsake the child; for the child cannot live without the mother, but it is
like to starve and perish, but the mother can live without the child; so we
have greater cause not to forsake God, than he has to forsake us, we cannot
live without him, and he can be glorified though we were in hell. Therefore,
seeing God has not forsaken us, it is a shame for us to forsake him.

The third thing is, 3
To know what the cause is, that God forsakes his people: To answer briefly,
Why God forsakes his people.
It is for sin: Why, is sin such a great matter, that it will make God
forsake his creatures? I answer, it is sin, and nothing but sin; let a man's
estate be what it will be, never so rich or poor, if he do not repent his
sins, but live in them, and commit them from day to day, it will cause God to
forsake him: therefore, art thou poor or rich? do not sin against God and
live in it without repentance, for it will make God to depart from thee: For,
look what was the cause that God did forsake his own Son, the same will
make him forsake thee: Now sin was the impelling cause that made God forsake
his Son, for when he found our sin upon him by imputation, he forsook him
awhile; therefore consider with thy self, if God would not spare sin, but
punish it upon his own Son, though it were but imputed to him; then it is
sure, if he find sin upon thee, he will forsake thee, if thou repent not for
it; for if God spared not the Angels when they had sinned, neither spared his
own Son, when he found our sins imputed unto him, surely he will not spare
thee unless thou repent; howsoever thou do not find it in time of health and
peace, yet when the day of death, or the day of judgment comes, thou shall
see thy self forsaken of God. O that the wicked would consider this, that if
they live in their sins, and do not repent, God will forsake them! It was
sin that made God depart away from his Temple and from his own house, as
Ezekiel. 8. 6. says God, Son of man, see thou not what they do, even the
great abominations that the house of Israel commits here, to cause me to
depart from my Sanctuary? So we see that sin made God to forsake his own
house, and the place that he had appointed for his own glory, if we provoke
him by our sins, he will depart from us, unless we repent.

Fourthly, 4
How a Christian should carry himself, when he finds himself to be forsaken of
God: How we should carry our selves being forsaken.
This may we see in the famous and memorable example of Christ; for look how
Christ carried himself when he was in show forsaken of God; so should we carry
our selves, when we likewise find our selves forsaken of him. Now Christ
carried himself;

1. Mournefully, for he did in that bitterness come to God. 2. Patiently, he
did not murmr or grudge against God. 3. Holily.
First, First, mournefully.
he carries himself mournefully; he did bitterly complain to God when he saw
himself to be forsaken. Now as Christ carried himself mournefully when he saw
himself to be forsaken of God; so we should mourn and bitterly complain to
^od, when we see our selves forsaken of him: as 1 Samuel 7. 2. we see the people
of Israel lamented after the Arc twenty years together, all the while being
without it; so we should weep and lament many days together, so long as we
find our selves forsaken of God. Ioh. 20. when Mary had lost Christ, she
seeks for him, and stands weeping by his Sepulcher: says Christ to her,
Woman, why weepest thou? to which she answered, they have taken away my Lord,
and I know not where they have laid him: I have good cause to weep, they have
taken him away, or I have lost him, in whom I have laid up all my hope, comfort
and joy; so a Christian man or woman may say when he finds himself forsaken
of God; I have good cause to weep and mourn, many a day together; for I have
lost Christ, he is departed from me in whom all my joy and comfort was laid up.

Secondly, Secondly, patiently.
Christ did carry himself patiently, he did not murmr and grudge against
God; for (as a learned man says) these words, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? are not words of expostulation and reasoning with God, but of a
mournful complaint. As Christ carried himself patiently, when he was
forsaken of God, so we should carry our selves patiently in our crosses, never
murmuring nor grudging against God: so we see David did, Psalm. 39. 9. I was
dumb and said nothing, because thou did it; and Mich. 7. 9. The Church
says, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against
him, etc. Augustine says, The devil is like unto a dog, if a man be at
dinner, the dog sits and waits to see if a crumme fall down, Simile.
or a bone; so long as they give him a bone or a crumme, the dog will still
wait; one shall not be rid of him, but if you give him nothing, the dog
will be gone; so the devil does with us, he waits upon a Christian when he is
under affliction, to see whither he will let fall a word of murmuring or
grudging against God; if he do, he will wait still, but if he do not, he will
be gone.

Thirdly, Thirdly, h^lily.
Christ carried himself holily; first in that he did rest and rely himself
upon God, by faith, though he did not feel a dram of comfort, so we should
carry our selves holily, to rest our selves on God, by faith, though we feel
no comfort, as Job did, Though thou killest me, yet will I put my trust in
thee; so Ion. 3. says he, out of the belly of hell I cried unto the Lord.
Secondly, Christ did not only carry himself mournefully and patiently, but he
labored to recover himself, to his former feeling of Gods favor again by
prayer; so ought we not only to rest and rely on God by faith, Simile.
but labor to recover our selves to our former feeling of Gods favor again,
as when trees are dead at the top, we lay fresh moulds to the roots to make
them revive again, so we should labor by the use of good means, prayer and
such like, that we may revive again to our former comforts, joy and feeling
of Gods favor.

Thus what Christ suffered of God, we have already spoken of: now we are come
to speak What he suffered of men, Secondly, what Christ suffered of men.
for such is the desert of sin, that it deserves to suffer of God and man,
and of every power that is able to make us suffer, therefore Christ standing in
our place and room, being our surety and pledge, it was needful, that he
should not suffer only at the hands of God but of man also; as our Savior
tells his disciples, Matthew. 17. 22. The son of man shall be delivered into the
hand, of men, and they shall kill him, but the third day he shall rise again;
so Christ, did not only suffer at the hands of God but of men also: and as
Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his
steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21. therefore Christ's example must teach us to be contented
not only to suffer of God, but of men also. This our Savior foretells Matthew.
10. 22. Ye shall be hated of all men, for my names sake: of this the Church
complains, Psalm. 66. 12. Thou have caused men to ride over our heads, we
went through fire and water. And Psalm. 124. 2. If it had not been the Lord who
was on our side may Israel now say, if it had not been the Lord who was on our
side, when men rose up against us, then they had swallowed us up quick, etc.
so a Christian man must look for this, not only to suffer at the hands of
God, but of men also. It is a corruption in the world, that men can be
contented to suffer at the hands of God, when sickness, lamenesse, or
blindness come, then they can say sinking and stooping down, that it is the
Lord, let him do as pleases him, but are impatient when they suffer at the
hands of men; it is not enough to be contented when God lays any thing upon
us, as sickness, lamenesse, and the like; for we ought also to be contented
to suffer at the hands of men, loss of goods, mockings, evil speakings, to be
hated and despised, and to be impeached in our good name; as those Christians
spoken of Heb. 11. suffered with joy cruel tortures, bonds, imprisonments, the
spoiling of their goods, etc. To help us herein there are three Reasons, that
may make us contented and patient to suffer at the hands of men.

First, Three reasons to enable us to suffer from men.
because we suffer nothing at the hands of men but that which God has
appointed, decreed and determined: therefore what art thou that resists that
which God has appointed; 1
for as the Primitive Chur^^ quiets her thoughts with the providence of God,
saying, Act. 4. 27. For doubtless against thy holy Son Jesus, whom thou have
anointed, both H^rod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of
Israel were gathered together; for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel
had determined before to be done: and David 2 Samuel 16. 10. when Shemei cursed
him, and Abisha the son of Zerviah would therefore have taken away his head,
says David, what have I to do with you, ye sons of Zerviah: So let him
curse, because the Lord has said unto him, Curse David. So should we still,
and quiet our selves in any affliction, with this consideration, What? there is
not any thing that a man can suffer but it is by Gods appointment.

Secondly, 2
because we suffer nothing, but that we have justly deserved in regard of God;
though (it may be) in regard of men we have not deserved it, Ierem. 10. 19.
This is my sorrow and I must bear it; I suffer nothing, but that which through
my own folly and sin, I have brought upon my self, it is my sorrow, and I
will bear it; and so in Mich. 7. 9. I will bear the wrath of the Lord
patiently, because I have sinned against him.

Thirdly, 3
because there is nothing that we suffer, but it tends to our good; although
it seems to be contrary, yet by a secret hand of God, it all turns for the
best; as Romans 8. 28. And we know that all things work together for the best
unto them that love God. I have showed you heretofore, that in clocks there be
some wheels turn one way, Simile.
some another way, yet all tend to make the clock go; so there be many
strange motions in the world, some run one way some another, as it were
against us, and yet by a secret hand of God, that does carry them, they tend
all to our good, by this cunning workman God almighty. Hence we learn that
we must be patient and contented to suffer at the hands of men too.

But what men did Christ suffer of? were they good men, then the matter had
been the less; but he suffered of vile and wicked men; as saint Paul says
Heb. 12. 33. Consider therefore him that endured such contradiction of sinners.
Which may teach us not only to be content to suffer of good but of bad men;
diverse be well enough contented to suffer of good men; as David, Psalm. 141.
Let the righteous smite me Lord, and that shall be good for me; but for
drunkards and vile persons to do it they cannot endure it. Oh say some men, if
they had been good men, that had done it, it would never have grieved us, but
to suffer of such bad men as they, this trouble us: well, but we must be
contented to suffer of the basest sort; Simile.
we see sometimes it falls out that a noble man suffers at the hand of a baser
man than himself, to have his head taken off, but he knows that his power is
directed by a greater power than his, which makes him submit himself to
suffer, so many times a Christian may suffer at the hands of one baser than
himself: but he must know, that the power that he does it by, is directed by
a power far greater than his own.

Now that which Christ suffered of men may be considered in three things:

1. His apprehension. 2. His arraignement. 3. His condemnation.
In the apprehension of Christ, we observe four things.

1. The place where. 2. The time when. 3. His preparation for it. 4. The
means, and manner of it.
First, First, the place where.
the place where Christ was apprehended: the text says; In the Garden, not in
the city; for there is a specification of the place, and that is in the garden.
Of which there be three Reasons why Christ was apprehended in the garden.

First, because sin began in the garden; the first Adam did begin sin
there, that (as a learned man says) where the wound began, there the medicine
might begin also.

Secondly, 2
because the garden was the place, where Christ had prayed, and meditated in;
and therefore he would be apprehended there: teaching us all herein this most
excellent instruction, that it is a good thing, when death or danger comes,
that it finds us in the place where we have repented of our sins, and most
constantly walked with God by holy meditation and prayer, where we have prayed
to God, and humbled our selves: so Dan. 6. we see that his accusers, did not
only find him in the place, but in the act of prayer: this also gave comfort
to Saint Paul in his trouble, Act. 24. 18. that He was found in the Temple: as
if he should say, O Lord I thank thee, that I was not found in the place of
drunkenness, of dishonesty and profaneness, but in the Temple, the place of
prayer. When Joseph and Mary sought for Christ, Luke 2. among their kindred,
Simile.
they could not find him there, but they sought him in the Temple, and there
they found him; so if any seek for us, it were good that we were found in the
Temple, in the place of preaching, prayer and holy duties; but I fear me, if
some were to be sought for, they should not find them in the Temple, nor in
the place of prayer, but idle at home, or a swaggering at the alehouse, in
places of drunkenness and profaneness: when Elias 1 King. 19. was come into
the cave, Simile.
there came a voice unto him, What do thou here Elias? thou art a Prophet of
God, this is not a fit place for thee to be in; so, when men are in profane
places, of disorders, the Spirit of God comes to them, by the motions of it;
and says, What do thou here? thou art a Christian, this is not a fit place
for thee to be here; therefore as Christ was found in the place of meditation
and prayer, when he was apprehended, so we should labor to be found when
death and danger comes, in the place where we have repented of our sins, and
where we have prayed in.

Thirdly, 3
because it was a known place to Judas; for Jesus resorted thither with his
Disciples; to show that Christ went willingly to his death, for if he had not
been willing, he would have gone to some other place more secret: at other
times he shunned death but now he was willing to dye; which should teach us,
that so long as God would have us to live, we should be contented to live, and
when he would have us to dye, we should also be contented to dye; when we
perceive the hour and the time is. Simile.
I have showed you heretofore that if a merchant has sent his servant to trade
and traffic beyond the sea, so long as his master will have him trade, he
trades, but when his master will have him pack up all and come away, he does
so; thus must a Christian do, so long as God will have us to trade here in
this world we should be contented; but when he will have us pack up all and
return, we should be contented to do so too.

Secondly, Secondly, the time when.
The time when Christ was apprehended; when his hour was come; so Ioh. 19. 28.
When Jesus knew all things were fulfilled of him, addressed himself to dye: So
he says, Luke 22. 53. When I was daily in the Temple ye took me not, but
this is your hour; he was in danger many times, and yet there was none that
touched him, because his hour was not yet come. This is an excellent comfort
to a Christian, that there is no man can do him any harm, or take away his
life, till the very time come that God has appointed. So says David, Psalm.
31. My times are in thy hands; as if he should say, if they were in the hands
of mine enemies, then it might come shortly, or if they might take me unawares;
but my time is in thy hands; therefore until our time be come, there is no man
can do us any harm, though they rage and take on; nay all the devils in hell
are not able to do us any hurt; or take away our lives; till the very hour be
come that God has appointed.

Thirdly, Thirdly, the preparation for it.
Christ's preparation for it, he did prepare and strengthen himself by prayer
and meditation. Now as he strengthened and prepared himself for his
apprehension, so we should prepare our selves, for the time of our death; for
if Christ which was the Son of God; prepared himself, much more ought we,
for he was strong, and full of holy courage and magnanimity, we poor and
weak; and besides that he knew the time when he should die, the place where,
and the manner how: but we are ignorant of all.

First, we know not the time when, whether in the day or night, when we are
young or old, whether this year or the next. Secondly, we know not the place
where; whether we shall dye amongst our friends or foes, whether in the fields
or in the house, whether on the sea or on the land. Thirdly, we know not the
manner how, whether we shall dye suddenly or of a lingering disease; of the
plague, or of the fever; therefore seeing we know none of these, we ought to
prepare our selves, to repent of our sins, to get faith, patience and
obedience, so to further our reckoning, for if Christ prepared himself by
prayer and meditation, much more had we need to prepare our selves. Mariners
when they see a storm hang in the sky, they take down their sails, shut up
their hatches, and make themselves fit to receive the storm; so when we see a
storm is ready to light on us, we should fit our selves to receive it. The
prophet Esaias, 2 King. 20. 1. told king Hezekiah that he should set his house
in order for he must dye; so because we know not when it shall be, whether to
day or to morrow, or the next day, therefore we should be prepared for it, as
Christ prepared himself for his apprehension, so we should prepare our selves
for our death.

Fourthly, Fourthly, the means and manner.
the means and the manner how; the special means was Iudes, as we may see in
the second and third verses; other means there was, as the Priests, Scribes
and Soldiers; but Judas was the especial means. In whom we observe four
things:

1. His condition; he was a Disciple. 2. What it was that moved him; the love
of money. 3. The manner of it; it was with a kiss. 4. The issue and event; he
went out and hanged himself.
First, his condition; he was a Disciple, whom Christ had nourished in His
own bosom, fed at his own table, was his treasurer, and carried the bag;
and yet for all this, he did more than Pilate and the soldiers, none did
worse than he: which may teach us, that there is none when they become evil
worse than they, that have had a taste of Religion, take heed, that we do not
lose our taste; for says our Savior, Matthew. 5. 13. Simile.
If salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be salted? other things
though they have lost their savor and strength, yet they are good for
something; but if salt have lost his savor, it is good for nothing: so if a
man has once had a little taste of Religion, and has lost his taste, he is
good for nothing, none worse than he. It is in the life of Grace, as in the
life of nature, we see as long as there is any life in a man, he is the
goodliest and beautifullest creature, Simile.
so that it delights one to look on him, and converse with him, but if he be
once dead, he is the loathsomest creature that is, we cannot abide to look on
him: so it is in the life of grace; as long as there is any life of grace in
him, he is an excellent creature, but if once he have a lost his life and is
dead, he is a most vile creature: therefore if men have a taste of grace and of
Religion, let them make much of it and nourish it; for if they lose it, none
be so vile creatures as they.

Again, Judas was not a stranger, but a Disciple and one of the twelve; and
that he should betray Christ, this was that grieved Christ and pierced His holy
Soul: therefore Christ complains of Judas, and not of the Jews, or of
Pilate, or the soldiers; therefore this must teach us, that the sins of Gods
people do more grieve Christ, than the sins of the prophaner sort, as Ioh.
1. 11. Christ complains that He came amongst his own, and his own received
him not; if he had come amongst strangers then it would never have grieved him;
but seeing that he came amongst his own and they received him not, this it
was that grieved him: and so the Lord complains, Hos. 4. 12. My people ask
counsel of stocks and stones, and their staves teach them; therefore we that
be the people of God, must be careful that we do not sin, and so grieve
the holy soul of Christ, for they be not the sins of the world, that grieve
Christ, but the sins of believing Christians.

SERMON. XVI.
MATTHEW 26. 14, 15. Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto
the chief Priests, And said unto them, what will ye give me, and I will
deliver him unto you? and they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver.
THe second thing concerning Judas (which we are now SER. XVI.
to speak of) is, The second thing, what did moove Judas to betray Christ.
what it was that moved him to betray Christ his Master: I answer, it was
covetousness, and love of money, he comes to the high Priests and says, What
will ye give me? This was a vile sin to sell his Master, but yet there was
nothing so vile but Judas would do it for love of money, and gain, he did
that for thirty pieces of silver, that a Christian would not do for a thousand
worlds, therefore when the love of money and gain possesses our hearts, what
is that we will not do? A profane and worldly man will do that for a penny,
that a Christian advisedly would not do for a thousand worlds: Hence it was 1 Timothy 6. 10. the Apostle says, that the love of money is the root of all
evil; for there is not any evil, but it will spring from this root, which if
the devil can plant into a man's heart, there is not any sin or evil, but
he will draw a man unto; therefore let us take heed of this sin, for we
know not what evil it will bring us unto.

Now this covetousness of Judas, is set out by a sale and bargain that was
made. In which we may observe these four things:

1. The merchant that sold the ware; it was Judas. 2. The chapmen that did buy
it; the Scribes and Priests. 3. The ware; it was Christ the riches and glory of
the world. 4. The price, it was for thirty pence; the price of a slave.
First, First, the merchant.
Who was the merchant: it was Judas, he did that for thirty pence, that another
would not have done for a thousand worlds; he first made a prey of his Masters
money, and then of his Master; he was false in his Masters money, and now he is
false to his Master: therefore men had need to beware of the beginnings of
sin, for if we give place to small sins, afterward we shall make no
conscience of greater: That which the Apostle says of one kind of sin, may
be said of all, 2 Timothy 2. 16. Stay profane and vain babbling* we may say of
all sins, stay the beginnings of sin; we see in experience, when a man
cleaves a block, he will first enter it with small wedges, and then a
greater, till at last he bring it to shivers; Simile.
so the Devil does, he first enters us with small sins, and then with greater,
till at last he works our overthrow; for we see Judas was first false in his
Masters money, and then he was false to his Master.

The second thing observed was, 2
the Chapman that bought these wares; the Priests, The Chapman.
who were covetous persons, they would not part from a penny for good uses, not
give a penny to cloth the naked, to feed the hungry; as we see in the Acts,
that a man lay at the gates of the Temple a long time, and they did not releeve
him, and yet they could part with their money to betray Christ: So it is a
corruption, that men are loath to part from any thing for good uses, and yet
they will part from their money to vex a good Preacher, or a good Christian; so
many can be content to part with their money, to buy Cards or Dice, but they
will not part with any to buy a Bible; therefore, Hosea 2. 9. says the Lord, I
will return and take away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the
season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax, etc. because they
bestowed it on Baal, on bad uses, to spend it on their lusts: we see the bad
servant in the Gospel, that hid his talent in a napkin, when his master came
to take account of him, there came an extent to him, to take away his talent,
and then to bind him hand and foot, and to cast him into utter darkness: Now
if this came upon him for hiding his talent, what shall become of those that
abuse their talents, and put them to bad uses?

Thirdly, 3
the ware he sold, Christ; the riches and glory of the world, the greatest
treasure on earth, The Ware sold.
in regard whereof, Paul counts all things to be dung and dross, and yet
Judas sold Christ for a trifle: so many men sell Christ, the riches of the
world, for a trifle, because men do not know the true value of Christ and of
his graces, which if they did, they would not lose the possession of him for a
thousand worlds, but they would take heed of the selling of Christ. Now this
ware was unlawful to be sold; for the Canon Law says, that it is unlawful to
sell a spiritual thing; therefore Saint Peter says to Simon Magus, when he
would have bought the holy Ghost with his money, thy money perish with thee,
Act. 8. Now Christ is the fountain of all spiritual things, therefore to sell
him it was unlawful.

Secondly, the Canon Law says, that it is unlawful to sell that of which the
right belongs to another: If a man have right unto a thing, he may sell it, but
Judas had no right to sell Christ, for he was to dispose of himself; says he,
I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it up again: And
therefore seeing he was to dispose of himself, it was unlawful for Judas to
sell him.

Thirdly, as Divines say, there be things of inestimable value and prise, which
nothing in the world can countervaile, therefore to sell those things it is
unlawful.

As first, 1
the gifts and graces of the Spirit, as Acts 8. Simon Magus would have bought
the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, 2
the kingdom of heaven is unlawful to be sold, for Mat. 13. it is likened to
a pearl, that a man goes and sels all that he has to buy.

Thirdly, 3
the Souls of men be unlawful to be sold, as Matthew. 16. it is said, What
shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his soul; all the world
it not comparable to it?

Fourthly, 4
to sell the loving favor and kindness of God is unlawful, as in the Psalm.
63. 3. says David, Thy Loving kindness is better than life: to sell a man's
life is unlawful, for as the Devil says of Job, Skin for skin, and all that
a man has he will give for his life; surely nothing in the world was
comparable to Christ's life, therefore to sell him it was unlawful.

Lastly, 5
very nature abhors, that a man should be sold to punishment and pains; it
had been much if Christ had been sold for a slave; but that he was sold to
the greatest pains and torments, the pains of the Cross, this was the
greatest indignity that might be; Judas is condemned of all men, for selling
his Master for thirty pence: But, O what do men now, but even sell heaven and
happiness for a penny matter, for a little profit and pleasure; and although
men cannot sell Christ to the Priests, yet they sell their souls to the Devil
for trifling things; therefore when men will be ready for a little pleasure or
a little profit, for a penny matter to sell heaven and happiness, what do
they but sell Christ? Now in all our bargains we should consider two things:

1. What we gain. 2. What we forgo.
It may be we may gain a little wordly ease and peace, and lose our peace with
God; we may gain favor with men, but lose favor with God, and then we make
but a bad match, for his favor is more worth than all the world besides;
therefore the world makes but a bad match of this to forgo Christ, heaven and
happiness, for a little transitory and fading things of this world; so Judas
match was but a bad one, to forgo his Master for thirty pence.

Fourthly, 4
What the price was; he was sold for thirty pence, the price of a slave; if he
had sold him for thousands, The Price.
the sin had been less; but to sell Christ, the riches and treasure of the
world, for a trifle, for thirty pence, this made the sin the greater. Now
these pieces of silver in Hebrew, be Shekels, of which there be two sorts, the
Shekels of the Sanctuary, and the common Shekels, Distinction of Shekels.
as we may see, Levit. 27. 25. and Numb. 3. 47. Now the Shekels of the
Sanctuary were double the weight of the common Shekels, half as much more; to
teach us, that in all the matters of Religion, we must give God down-weight; as
he gives us down-weight of his blessings, so we must give him downe-weight of
our service and duty that we are to perform unto him. Now the ordinary and
common Shekel, was but fifteen pence; so the price that Christ was sold for
was the price of a slave: And this was done to fulfill the Scripture, Zech. 11.
12. So they weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver; and the Lord said
unto me, Cast it unto the Potter, a goodly price that I was prized at of them;
and I took the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to the Potter in the
house of the Lord.

Now there be two reasons why this price is specified:

First, seeing Christ stood in our room and place, and took on him our
sins, 1
it was to teach us, that God esteemed no better of us, than slaves; therefore
howsoever we set an high price of our selves, yet we were no better than
slaves in Gods account.

Secondly, 2
to show the great sin of Judas, that he would be so vile to sell Christ for
a trifle. Esau is condemned of all men, that he would sell his birthright for
a mess of pottage; Heb. 12. 16. and Prove. 28. A wicked man (says Solomon)
will transgress for a morsel of bread; every little matter will make him
sin: I know all men condemn Judas for selling his Master for a trifle; but
how much may we be condemned, to sell heaven for trifling things: Indeed we
cannot sell Christ to the Priests for thirty pieces of silver, but yet we
sell our souls to the devil for a penny matter, a little pleasure or profit;
therefore, in this what do we but as Judas did, sell Christ for a trifle? God
give us eyes to see it, and hearts to abhor it.

Thirdly, 3
The manner how Judas betrayed Christ; with a kiss, a sign of great love and
friendship; and therefore Christ says unto him, The Manner.
Luke 22. 44. What do thou betray the Son of man with a kiss? I would it
were not so still, that men kiss religion, and yet betray their brethren;
kiss religion at the Church, and yet betray it at home in their bad life and
conversation.

Fourthly, 4
The issue and event; When he had sold his Master, and had but a little
comfort: The Issue and event.
First, he brings the money again to the Priests, he could not abide it:
which may teach us to take heed how we come by our money, 1
if we come by it well, we may have comfort, but if badly, it will one day lie
as heavy as lead on a man's heart.

Secondly, 2
Judas he comes and confesses his sin to the Priests, and then he went and
hanged himself, he thought to have carried the matter closely, and now he
discovered it in the Temple: Which may teach us, that if we sin against God,
though we think to carry away the matter closely and cunningly, yet there will
come a time when we shall discover the matter our selves, and make it known,
and say, I have been a drunkard and a bad liver, I have been a whoremaster, a
covetous person, and a deceiver of my brethren: And as meat that is eaten by a
weak stomach cannot be at rest till it be up again; Simile.
so a man cannot be quiet many times till he have discovered all his sins
himself; this is the property of a bad conscience, that it will egg a man to
commit sin, and when he has sinned, then it will never be at rest till have
it brought a man to desperation; Revel. 20. 12. it is said, that John saw the
dead both great and small stand before God, and the books were opened, that
is, their consciences; For howsoever men's consciences may be sealed for a time,
that they cannot see their sin, yet one day they shall be opened, and all the
sins they have committed brought before them: O what a fearful thing will
this be, Simile.
we see Judas did but read, as it were, a leaf or a page of this book, nay,
he read but (as it were) two or three lines and could not endure it, but goes
out and hangs himself; if it be so fearful a thing to read but a leaf or a
page, how fearful will it be when a man shall read every leaf and page in
the book? Men that be of trades, when they come to places of search, they be
unpackt, Simile.
and their fardels opened, the searchers come and look upon their ware, when
if they find any false ware there is a forfeiture made of it: So we do, as
it were, in this world pack up our wares in a fardell in our conscience, and
when we shall stand before God at the day of judgment, then our fardels shall
be opened, and if there be found any false wares, sins that we have not
repented of, we may look for that fearful sentence, Go ye cursed, etc. And
therefore every one should take heed what he packs up in his fardell, seeing it
shall one day be opened.

Having spoken of the Means of apprehending Christ, we are further to speak
of the Manner, which is laid down in three Actions:

1. In the taking of Christ. 2. In the binding of him. 3. In the leading him
away; first to Annas; then to Caiphas.
First, the taking of Christ; and here two things are implied:

First, First, in his taking, two things.
The mavelous obduration of the Jews, for it was a strange thing that they
had the heart to take Christ, 1
notwithstanding they saw the works of his Power, The Jews obduration.
and of his Mercy. First, of his Power, for so soon as he said, I am he, they
straight went backward, and fell to the ground, and were fully confounded.
Secondly, the works of his Mercy, in that whereas he flang them down, yet he
let them rise again; whereas he did but cast them to the ground, he might have
cast them to hell; and when Peter had cut off Malchus ear (being the busiest
to take Christ) he sets it on again, and healed it, and yet for all this, they
lay hold on Christ, as soon as they were up again, although they had felt the
power of Christ, and had seen the works of his mercy, yet they would not be
stopped in their course: Which may teach us, what a fearful thing it is to
have a hard heart, that nothing then can stop and stay a man in the course of
sin, neither the judgments nor the mercies of God; for as we see at this
day, though God cast many down to the ground, as it were into their sick
beds, and has graciously raised them up again, and as he healed Malchus
ear, has healed them, yet they straightway stretch out their hands to sin
against God, and to grieve him: therefore we see, when a man's heart is
obdurate and hardened with sin, nothing will do him good; so it was in
Pharaoh, Exodus 8. 15. His heart was hardened, and he harkened not to them as
the Lord had said; so likewise, Numb. 16. we see the great judgments that
befell Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, that the earth did cleave and swallow them
up, so that all the people fled away at their cry, and yet (the next day
after) on the morrow, all the multitude of the children of Israel did murmr
against Moses and Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the Lords people, etc. Hence
we may learn, what a fearful thing it is, to have a hard and obdurate heart,
nothing will move it, neither the mercy nor the judgments of God: therefore
let us pray to God to keep us from this fearful condition, and to give us a
soft heart, that when he has laid his judgments upon us, we may be bettered
by them, and when we taste of his mercies, we may be moved with them and
brought to repentance.

The second thing implied in the taking of Christ, Secondly, a meditation of
the last Judgment.
is, that as he was taken of the Jews, so this should put us in mind of the
fearful taking at the last day; for look how Christ was taken in the Garden,
so every unrepentant sinner shall be apprehended at the day of Judgment, the
drunkard for his drunkenness, the swearer for his swearing, the whoremaster
for his whoring; and so all unrepentant sinners shall be apprehended, yea, and
it shall be in a more fearful manner than Christ's was; For first, 1
he was apprehended of the wicked Jews, we shall be of the Angels: Secondly,
2
he was brought before the bar of an earthly Judge, but we shall be brought
before the bar of the heavenly Judge, which does not only judge of the
outward deeds and actions, but of our hearts and thoughts; so he says, Revel.
2. 23. Then all the Churches shall know that I am he that searches the reins
and hearts.

Thirdly, 3
he was apprehended to temporal pains, but the wicked shall be taken to
eternal torments; as it is said, Mark 9. the worm that never dies; there
shall be no end of their torments: And this shall be the fearful apprehension
of the wicked at the day of Judgment: wherefore, as the Apostle Saint Paul, 2
Cor. 5. 11. says, Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, Simile.
we persuade men, etc. So say I, knowing of this fearful apprehension of the
wicked, at the last day of Judgment, we persuade men to repent them of their
sins, and to please God, that So they may avoid it: If a man hear that the
Kings Writ is coming out against him, to arrest and carry him away to prison,
Simile.
he would surely make friends to stay the Process and Writ; so, when we hear
to know, that there is a Writ against us from heaven to come upon us, we must
labor to stop it, and send up our prayers to God to stay his judgments, that
so we be not farther vexed with them: thus the taking of Christ, should put us
in mind of the fearful taking of the wicked at the day of Judgment.

The second was, 2
the binding of Christ; one would not think that the Jews would have bound
him, The binding of Christ: three reasons of it, in regard of man's intention.
seeing he was so willing to be taken that he offered himself; yet there be
diverse reasons thereof, in regard of the Intention both of Man and of God; and
first in regard of the Intention of man, I will give you these three reasons:

1. For pain and punishment. 2. For caution and security. 3. To put the more
shame, and disgrace upon him.
First, First, for pain and punishment.
it was for Pain and punishment; so Paul in his persecution bound them that
called upon the Name of the Lord, it was for punishment and for pain; and so
Christ was bound in regard of both: Most think they can never be too harsh to
Christ, and to his members, and never tender enough to themselves and to
others; but these shall be put to all the pains: So we see, Psalm. 105. 18. it
is said, that Joseph's feet was in the stocks, and the irons entered into his
soul; that is, they entered into his live-flesh; so Heb. 11. it is said of the
faithful, that some of them were sawne in sunder, some racked, some were
stoned, and put to the greatest extremity that might be; Thieves, and
murderers and vile persons, can find favor and mercy, but Christ and his
members can find none at the hands of the world.

Secondly, Secondly, for the more security.
it was for caution sake and security; because they would hinder him in his
flight, and so keep him safe; for this cause Peter, Act. 12. had chains laid
upon him, to abate his force that he should not hurt or resist them, and so
Sampson was bound: now none of these reasons could move the Jews to bind
Christ, for though he might have escaped, yet he came and did offer himself,
and when they were down on the ground, Christ might have escaped and would
not; therefore there was no cause of fear: but this is the property of a bad
conscience to be afraid, when there is no cause of fear: especially of Christ
and his servants.

Thirdly, Thirdly, to put the more disgrace upon Him.
it was to put the greater disgrace and shame upon him: therefore seeing Christ
was content to have disgrace and shame put upon him for us, we should be
contented to suffer the like for him and for holy Religion: now seeing Christ
was contented to have disgrace and shame put upon him for us, though he was
God, and we men, he the Creator and we the creatures, he our Lord and we his
servants, he holy and we unholy, therefore let us be contented to be ashamed
and disgraced for him; says the Apostle Paul, I am not ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ, etc. So let every one of us say, I am not ashamed of Christian and
holy Religion: And these be the Reasons why Christ was bound, in regard of men.

Now as Christ was bound in regard of men, Secondly, He was bound in regard of
God: for three causes,
so he was bound in regard of Gods intention: and that for three causes,
first, To sanctify the bounds of his servants, that if any should suffer for
his cause or for Religion, his bands might be sanctified to them: 1
if we suffer with Christ, then our sufferings become the sufferings of
Christ, he sits at one end of the balance, and we at the other; Act. 26.
says the Apostle, for the hopes sake of Israel I am bound with this chain;
And Phil. 1. 13. So that my hands in Christ are manifest in all the palace, and
in all other places. This may give comfort to man in bonds and in affliction,
that by the means of Christ's bonds, they are sanctified to him, this is the
first cause why Christ was bound in regard of Gods Intention.

Secondly, 2
To teach us the desert of our sins; for as Christ was bound and fettered for
us, so we deserved to be bound with the chains of eternal condemnation, and
to be led away, that we should never see God: Esai. 53. 5. says the Prophet,
The chastisements of our peace was upon him, he stood in our room and place,
and therefore look how the Jews tied and bound Christ, so we deserve to be
tied and bound with the chains of darkness for ever: we see how many a man
goes jesting up and down, and does not consider how Christ was bound and
chained; but know thou whosoever thou art, this is thy desert for sin, if God
should draw out the arm of his justice against thee, and give thee thy due
deserving punishment. It is the speech of the holy man Jeremy, It is the Lords
mercy, that we are not all consumed, it is his mercy, that we have a house to
put our heads in, a bed to lie in, one bit of bread to eat.

Thirdly, 3
Christ was bound, that we might be loosed; his binding is our loosing, for he
was in our room and place; now in that Christ has suffered and was bound for
us, we are freed, the old debt cannot be required of us, for (as the Lawyers
say) if the debt be paid of the surety, in good dealing it cannot be required
again. Now there be two kinds of chains, that Christ does free us from.

1. The Chain of Condemnation. 2. The Chain of Corruption.
First, the chain of condemnation; First, the chain of condemnation.
for (as Divines say) the guilt of sin, is the binding of a man to answer at
Gods judgment bar for it; and therefore every sin that a man commits,
Simile.
is a spiritual chain, to bind him to answer for it; and as poor prisoners
go bound in fetters and chains to answer at the sessions, so a man goes bound
in chains by his sins to answer at Gods judgment seat. Now by Christ we
are freed from these chains so soon as we are converted, and lay hold on
Christ: as Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to those that be in Christ:
some pain there may be, Simile.
as when a jailer comes to knock off a prisoners irons, it may be he may wring
him this way and that way, and that may be more pain to him than his chains
were before; yet he is well contented with it, because it is to free him; so
when we be converted to God and lay hold on Christ by faith, when the chains
of condemnation be a knocking off, we may have more trouble of conscience than
before we had, but because it is to free us, we should be content with it; it
will not last.

Secondly, Secondly, the chain of corruption.
we are loosed from the chain of corruption, and of our sins; for as a man
that is fast chained and bound cannot stir, move, go, Simile.
or do any thing; so when men be bound in their sins they cannot perform
holy duties and services to the Lord; therefore, can not thou pray nor
perform any good duty to God? then thou art not yet freed of thy chains of
corruption, for those that Christ has redeemed, he has redeemed to serve him,
in holiness and righteousness, Luke 1. 51. Romans 6. This is always a
consequent of the former, therefore if thou be still a swearer, a drunkard, a
deceiver, or a bad liver, thou art not freed from the chains of condemnation,
therefore we must labor to be freed from the latter chain, and then we
shall be sure to be freed from the former chain.

Again, seeing Christ was contented to be bound of men, we should be
contented to be bound of God; Ezekiel. 4. 8. says the Lord, Son of man, Simile.
I will lay bands upon thee; so the Lord has put bands and holy ties upon us;
for every time we go to the Lords Table, we bind and tie our selves to the
Lord in holy vows and resolutions to serve him: Psalm. 118. 27. The beasts that
were sacrificed were bound to the horns of the Altar, that they should not
start away for fear of the bloody knife; so we should be content to bind and
tie our selves to God, by all the holy bonds and ties that may be, that we
do not start away from Gods service, in trouble and temptation.

The third thing is, Thirdly, Christ's leading away.
the leading away of Christ; first, to Annas, then to Caiphas. Now as Christ
was led up and down, and tossed from place to place; so we deserve to be
tumbled, and tossed from place to place; not to have an house to dwell in, nor
a bed to lie in, nor to have any resting place, for thus was Christ tossed up
and down, first to Annas, then to Caiphas; and what was the manner, how did
they lead him, quietly (as his behavior deserved?) no ^ut as Mark shows,
they led him away in so great rage and fury, that a good man hearing of it
(being in the dead time of the night) rose up and followed him in his shirt;
whom when the soldiers saw, they straightway laid hands on him, so as the man
lost his shirt, and fled away to save himself; which the Evangelist notes to
show the extremity that they used, they were so furious, that they would not
suffer a naked man to follow Christ, but they would straightway lay hold on
him: Thus we may see what a deal of labor, and pain, and toil it cost Christ
to redeem our souls, that so we seeing it, may not sell our souls to the
Devil for a little ease, pleasure, or profit: Do thou but consider, whosoever
thou art, that Christ does speak unto thee in the way of his passion; O man, O
woman, for thy sake was I taken of the Jews, bound, led away to be judged,
killed and said in the grave; therefore seeing it cost me such a deal of pain
and labor to redeem thee, do not sell thy soul for a little matter. But in
this story of the naked man, four things are to be considered:

1. A description of the person. 2. A declaration of his love. 3. The rage of
the soldiers. 4. The escape he made.
First, A description of his person; there is great question who this young man
should be, 1
some of the Fathers take it to be James, the Lords brother, because he went in
a linen garment, The Person.
for they say, he was one of the Priests: To this I answer, that it could not
be James, for these two reasons: First, because in the verse going before, it
is said, that all the Disciples of Christ fled; Now James was one of his
Disciples, and therefore it could not be he: Secondly, although the Priests did
wear linen garments, yet they but wear them in the Temple; when they went
out, they did pluck them off, Ezekiel. 44. 19. therefore it could not be James:
some others think it was the Evangelist John, as Chrysostom and Gregory; but
it could not be he, because John did follow Christ into the high Priests Hall,
John 18. 15. But this man did fly away: And therefore I take their opinion to
be most probable, who think it was a good young man, that dwelt thereabouts,
that hearing such a stir and ado about the taking of Christ, did arise to
see what would become of him; but what ever he was, we find him thus described.

First, 1
he is said to be a young man that did follow Christ; To teach us that young
men must look after Christ, A Young man.
and be followers of him: So the Wiseman, Eecles. 12. 13. Remember thy Creator
now in the days of thy youth: And Psalm. 119. 9. Wherewithal shall a young man
cleanse his way? by taking heed there unto according to thy Word: So we see
that young men should look after Christ; it is the sin of this age, that such
never look after Christ, but regard their ease, liberty, pleasures and
profits; they care not for Christ, they are no followers of him; Hos. 12. 3. we
may see that Iaakob did strive for the birthright in the womb; so men must
strive to follow Christ when they be young, for no man can come too soon; We
see when men ingrave letters on a tree, Simile.
as the tree grows greater, so will the letters; so labor thou to put the
seeds of grace into thy child when he is young, and he will grow in grace, as
he grows in years.

Secondly, 2
it is said, A certain young man; he was no great man of note, there was no
fame of him, he was an obscure man; and yet he did follow Christ when his
Disciples fled: Which may teach us, that if the Spirit of grace be in us, at
one time or other it will show it self in us; James 2. it is said, show me thy
faith; for if a man have true faith, it will show it self at one time or
other; this man was but an obscure man, and yet he followed Christ when all
his Disciples were fled; so it falls out sometimes, when great professors
fall away in the time of trouble, then weak ones show their religion and be
followers of Christ; as John 19. we may see that Joseph of Arimathea was a
close Disciple, and yet when all the Disciples fled, he goes to Pilate boldly,
and begged the body of Christ: Which is an excellent comfort, that if the work
of grace be in us, it will show it self at one time or other.

Secondly, 2
The declaration of his love, and that is seen in his actions: First, The
declaration of his Love.
that he did start out of his bed and come to Christ, for although he were in
his warm bed, in a cold night, fast asleep about midnight, when he had but a
little inkling of him, 1
he starts out to follow Christ: Which may teach us, that if we truly love
Christ, it is not our warm beds that can hold us, nor our pleasures, profits,
or ease from following him; so we see, Luke 19. Zacheus, when he heard Christ
should come by, gets him up to a tree to see Christ, because of the press of
the people; and so Mary, when she heard Christ in the house, she could not
hold, but went out to meet him; so the Church, Cantic. 5. 6. when Christ had
given but a knock at the door, she runs out after him, and could not be at
rest till she had found him: Thus where there is true grace, or love, they will
make declaration of it; and where there is a presence of Christ in grace and
goodness, it is not their warm beds, nor their houses can hold them, but they
will follow after Christ, where his presence is, there they delight to be;
therefore when it is not so with us, but every little matter will hold us from
Christ; this does show that our hearts are not possessed with the true love of
Christ.

The second Action, 2
wherein he declares his love, was, that he followed Christ; he did not follow
the soldiers; and this his love will be more perspicuous, if we consider it in
these three circumstances:

First, 1
that he followed Christ when he was in bonds, when he was taken of the high
Priests, and of the wicked Jews; not in the time of peace and liberty, but in
the time of trouble and danger, when the greatest disgrace and infamy was upon
him: which may teach us, that it is an easy matter to follow Christ in the
time of peace and liberty; but to follow him in the time of trouble and
danger, this does show the true love of Christ; Revel. 2. 8. the Church of
Smyrna is commended for keeping his Name, and that she denied not the faith,
even in the time of trouble, when Antiphas, Gods faithful servant was slain;
so the Church, Psalm. 44. 17. All this is come upon us, yet have we not
forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant, our heart is not
turned back, etc. So it is a hard matter to follow Christ in the time of
trouble and danger, but easy to follow him in the time of peace; we see when a
flood comes, (as I have showed you before) it will carry away sticks, and
strawes, and such like, but such things as are rooted, as trees and the like,
they stand fast, and move not; so when trouble and persecution comes like a
flood, all that be not rooted and grounded in the truth in carries away; but if
men be rooted and grounded in grace, then they stand and are not moved, nor
carried away: this commends the love of the young man to Christ, that it was
not in the time of peace, but in the time of trouble.

Secondly, 2
he did follow Christ, when all his Disciples fled, which were the great
preachers and professors of his name: This may teach us that although we see
great preachers and professors fall away and decline from God, yet we should
follow him and stick to him; therefore we are not to depend upon any man's
person whatsoever: For if a man have felt the work of Christ in him, though
all forsake him, yet he will follow him: we see in the Gospel, the man out of
whom Christ had cast out a devil, when all the country forsook him, yet this
poor man did follow Christ still; so if Christ have cast out the devil in us,
though all should forsake him, yet we should follow him.

Thirdly, 3
he follows Christ in his shirt, when he had nothing on but a shirt or a
linen garment, and that in a cold night too, when Peter was glad to go to the
fire; but it is our daintiness and niceness, that we cannot follow Christ,
except it be in our warm beds, and in our clothes; if we be punished and want,
then we cease, every little matter will keep us from following of him; this is
the reason why men do not come to Church, in the Summer it is too hot, and in
the Winter we stand with Christ for small matters, for a drop of water, when
he has not stood with us for great matters, but has shed forth streams of
his most pure blood for us: thus this young man did declare his love to Christ,
that he was contented to follow him with any inconvenience; so we, if we had
tasted of the power of Christ, we would be contented to follow him,
notwithstanding any inconvenience.

The third thing was, 3
The rage of the soldiers, that when they perceived him to be a favourer of
Christ, The soldiers rage.
they straightway laid hold on him: This is the rage of the world still, that
if men be friends to religion and favorers to that, they straightway lay hold
on them; but let a man be a drunkard, or a swearer, or a profane person, they
will never touch him; Act. 9. it is said, that Saul bound all them that called
on the name of the Lord; this was matter enough to bind them for: So in
Tertullians time, if men were friends to religion, O this man is a good man,
this man is a Christian, a lover of religion; thus they reproched him, this is
the entertainment, that Christ and his servants have in this world; therefore
it is good to take that counsel that Christ gives us, that we must do like
the wise builder, Matthew. 7.
consider beforehand what his building will cost him; so we should consider
what it may cost us when we enter upon religion, it may be it will cost us our
liberty, our goods, our peace, nay, it may cost us our lives.

Fourthly, 4
His escape, he left his garment and fled: here is a question made, whether
this man did well to fly? His escape.
I answer, he did well, for a man may fly in two cases:

1. When he has not a calling to stay. 2. When he has not sufficient strength
to suffer.
Now this may teach us an excellent point of wisdom; this man was rather
contented to lose all his garments, and fly, than to betray Christ, and to
lose the peace of a good conscience; so if men find not sufficient strength to
suffer, rather than they should betray religion, and lose the peace of their
conscience, let them rather lose their coat and shirt; as Joseph, we see,
rather than he would lose his honesty, he would lose his clothes; so we, rather
than lose the peace of our conscience, let all other things fall to the ground:
Simile.
As a man in a shipwreck, he never thinks of his losses, but is well
contented if he can save his life, he is thankful to God, and rejoices that
he himself has escaped; so when the time of trouble and persecution is, let
us not think of our losses, if we can escape with the peace of our conscience,
let us be thankful to God; it is the course of the world, that if any strange
disease fall upon their children, or their cattle, they say they are
bewitched, when as indeed it is their sins that does bewitch them; and what
do they then say? they have been damnified by a bad witch, therefore they must
go to a good witch to have help, and sometimes they do so, losing thereby
the peace of their consciences; but rather than we should do so, let us lose
children, and cattle, and all, before we lose Gods favor and the peace of
conscience; Matthew. 10. our Savior says to his Disciples, Be ye wise as
Serpents: Now this is the wisdom of the Serpent, that he will take a wound any
where rather than on his head, because life lies there; so rather than we
should lose Christ, let us lose all, because Christ is our life: Thus this
young man teaches us wisdom, who rather than he would betray Christ, lost
his garments, and ran away.

SERMON XVII.
MARK 14. 55, 56. And the Chief Priests and all the Council sought for
witness against Jesus, to put him to death, and found none. For many bare
false witness against him, but their witness agreed not together.
THe Apprehension of Christ we spoke of the last day: 1
Now we are to speak of his Arraignement; SERMON. XVII.
for though Christ might have been killed in the tumult, yet he was preserved.
Before whom he was Arraigned.
In the Arraignment of Christ, we observe three things:

1. The persons, before whom he was Arraigned. 2. The causes for which he was
Arraigned. 3. The manner of his Arraignment.
First, The persons before whom he was arraigned, Annas and Caiphas, the two
high Priests; it is worth our observation that these Priests were gathered
together early in the morning, for they could not be at rest, till they had
apprehended and condemned him; no question there were a number of other Priests
with them at the same time, who would not in all probability have been hired
for any money to come out of their warm beds to have done good; but to
condemn Christ they are up all night, and that a cold night too: so it is a
corruption still, that men cannot abide to sit up about any good duties of
religion, to repent of their sins, to pray to God; to speak of good things,
then they are asleep straight, but to sit up long at dice and cards and other
pastimes, this is their delight: Luke 5. we see the Disciples, when they were
fishing, they could hold out and not sleep, but when they came to pray with
Christ in the Garden, they were straight asleep, and there also, Matthew. 26.
Judas he slept not, but was busy about his market, with the Priests consulting
to take him; it is said of such, Prove. 4. 16. That they cannot sleep, except
they have done evil, and their sleep departs except they cause some to fall.

Now this diligence in the Priests, should teach us diligence in the performing
of good duties, for if they would spend whole nights to bring their wicked
purposes to pass, oh how diligent should we be to perform service to God:
Mark 1. 35. we see our Savior arose early in the morning to pray, and yet how
slow are we who cannot get up an hour after Sun in the morning to perform
good duties?

Secondly, Secondly, the causes why Christ was arraigned.
the causes why Christ was arraigned, were three: first, that we might not be
arraigned and condemned as the day of judgment; for he stood in our room,
interposed himself for us, and was contented to be taken of the Jews, 1
to be led away, arraigned and condemned, and to dye for us; therefore a
Christian believer may have comfort, that seeing Christ was arraigned for him
before men, he shall not be arraigned before God, as Romans 8. 1. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, etc. and again in the same
Chap. verse. 35. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God
that justifies, who shall condemn? so Ioh. 3. He that believes in me shall
not perish, but shall have everlasting life: therefore if we believe, we have a
certificate from God that we shall not be condemned: when the devil is ready
to accuse us, and to say thou art a vile sinner, and thou must come before God,
to be arraigned and condemned for thy sins, we must not deny the matter, but
say, it is true Satan, I am a great and grievous sinner against God, but
Christ was arraigned and condemned for me, and though I suffer not in my own
person, yet Christ has for me, and therefore it shall not be required at my
hands.

Secondly, 2
that he might have compassion, and pity on them that suffer, and be arraigned
for good causes; as Heb. 4. 15. says the Apostle, For we have not an high
Priest, that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in
all things tempted in like sort as we are, yet without sin: therefore seeing
Christ was arraigned, do not thou doubt, but if thou be arraigned for a good
cause, Christ will releeve thee and show compassion on thee; as Paul's
experience was 2 Timothy 4. 17. And I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion,
etc. This has made good men confident to hold out in trouble, as Dan. 3. when
the king would have had the three Children to have worshipped the image, which
he had made, say they, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter,
behold our God whom we serve is able to deliver us: so Act. 4. when the
Apostles were brought before the governors, and forbidden to preach, they said,
They could not but speak the things they had heard and seen: therefore (as
Saint Cyprian says,) a Christian may be killed, but cannot be overcome;
because he that is in them is greater than he that is in the world.

Thirdly, 3
that we might set up a throne in our own hearts, and arraigne our selves of
sin; for Christ's arraignement must teach us to arraigne sin, as he was
killed, so we must kill sin, as Christ was buried, so we must bury sin, to
which purpose it is said, 1 Cor. 11. 31. If we would judge our selves, we
should not be judged of the Lord; so our judgment is to prevent the judgment
of the Lord. Thus many good men have in holy Scripture arraigned themselves,
Job 9. 20.
as Job, If (says he) I should justify my self, ye then would condemn me:
David, 2 Samuel 24. 17. It is I that have sinned, but these sheep what have they
done? so the Church Esai. 53. we are all like sheep, that are gone out of the
way. To this purpose is that of Chrysostom; If thou will be a Judge, set up a
throne in thine own heart, and arraigne thy self, God has not made thee a
Judge of another man, but of thy own life: thus the arraignment of Christ
should teach us to arraigne our selves.

Thirdly, Thirdly, the manner of his arraignment.
the manner how; judicially under a color of law, as if they did intend
justice, whereas they intended nothing less, under this color they condemn
the innocent: and I would it were not so still in the world, that under the
show of law, they destroy the innocent: that it was so of old appears, 1 King.
21. where Ahab killed Naboth under color of law, and Act. 7. 23. Steven was
before Ananias; yea and now also are there a number of such Caiphas's in the
world, that will say they do nothing but law, and yet under the color thereof
destroy the innocent: but this may be a comfort to a Christian, that though he
be condemned in the court of man, yet he is clear in the great court of God,
where he shall be acquitted from all unjust taxations. Now there be four
testimonies of Christ's innocence.

First, Four testimonies of Christ's innocence.
that they sought picked matter against Him, they had none before they had
taken him, now they seek matter against him, and therefore they examine him of
his Disciples, and of his Doctrine; thinking thereby to pick out something
that they might lay to his charge, and find him guilty thereupon: but he who
was the wisdom of the Father, staves them off, and keeps them from taking
any occasion from his words, by his wise and discreet answer; as shall appear
if we take into consideration these two things:

1. His holy concealment. 2. His holy defense.
First, First, his concealment.
for His holy concealment he does not discover his Disciples, but answers
only for his Doctrine; not a word of them; he might have said, One of them
betrayed him, and another had denied him, and that they all fled from him, and
ran away; but because he could not speak any good of them, therefore He
rather would say nothing; would to God men would think of this, when they
speak of their neighbors, if they cannot speak any good of them, rather not
to speak at all: but it is a corruption in nature that men had rather speak
of their neighbors vices, than of their virtues, contrary to that precept,
Tit. 2. to speak evil of no man.

Secondly, Secondly, his defense.
His holy defense, he defends his doctrine, and sends them to all the common
people, that they might testify of it; says he, I spoke openly to the world,
I ever taught openly in the Synagogues and in the Temple, whither the Jews
resorted continually; And in secret places have I said nothing; ask them that
heard me, he cared not who should judge him, though if were his enemies: which
should teach us that we should so live, as that our enemies can have no just
cause against us; so Paul carried himself, 1 These. 2. 10. Ye are witnesses,
and God also, how holily, and justly, and unblameably we behaved our selves
amongst you: and the Prophet 1 Samuel 12. 3. Behold (says he) here am I,
witness against me before the Lord, and before his anointed, whose exe have I
taken, etc?

Secondly, 2
that they sought for witnesses against him; there were enough of witnesses for
him, but they seek for witnesses against him; if they had asked Nicodemus, he
could have told that no man could have done those miracles, except God were
with him. So if they had asked the blind man Ioh. 9. 33. or the people, Mark.
7. 37. they would have told them, He has done all things well: or the
officers and sergeants, and they would have answered, Never man spoke like this
man, Ioh. 7. 46. they might have found enough to clear Christ's innocence, but
they were bent the other way.

The third was, 3
that they got witnesses, but their witnesses did not agree; for howsoever the
Priests had plotted the matter, and put into their mouths, yet they disagreed;
so let men take heed, how they be false witnesses, they may plot the matter
and yet be confounded in their speech, and so bring a reproach to themselves:
and let such remember what is written, Prove. 19. 9. That a false witness shall
not be unpunished, etc. Now the Evangelists declare the matter further by an
example of two false witnesses, that came in against him, the one alleging
this man said, I can destroy the Temple of God, and build it again in three
days; Mark relates it, we heard him say, I will destroy this Temple that is
made with hands, and in three days I will build another made without hands.
Now the Spirit of God calls them false witnesses, for though Christ spoke
some such words, yet it was contrary to this sense and meaning; for they spoke
of the material Temple, and He of the Temple of his body. And this must make
us take heed how we report the words of Christ, lest we be false witnesses
against him, as the Papists are, who literally taking these words, This is my
body, say, that the bread is the real body of Christ, as he was borne of the
Virgin Mary; Christ means spiritually, that it is a sign of his body; though
they take it for the material body of Christ; so also the Arrians are false
witnesses because Christ says, My father is greater than I, they say Christ is
not equal with the Father: but he spoke in regard of his humanity.

The fourth testimony of his innocence was, 4
that He was condemned for the truth; for he said, he was the Son of God, as
he was indeed, and so he died an innocent man. But why does Christ enlarge this
answer: for two causes:

1. To comfort himself. 2. To terrify his enemies.
First, 1
to comfort himself; that howsoever he stood now as a poor prisoner
arraigned and condemned at their bar, yet one day they shall come before him,
to be arraigned of him; there he does comfort himself with future glory: now
as Christ did comfort himself even so should all Christians in the time of
their afflictions, when they be sick, poor and in distress, whatsoever thy
estate be mean or poor, yet one day think, I shall be with God, where I
shall not want anything: thus Christ comforts his Disciples, Matthew. 19. Verily
I say unto you, that when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his
majesty, ye which have followed me in the regeneration, shall sit upon twelve
thrones and judge the twelve tribes of Israel: so Stephen comforts himself,
when a shower of stones came about him, in that he saw heaven open, and Christ
standing at Gods right hand, ready to help him, and receive his soul.

Secondly, 2
to terrify his enemies; for howsoever they thought themselves great men; yet
one day they were to have Christ to be their Judge: even this same poor
Jesus: O that the world would think of this, that this Jesus, whom they have
despised and condemned, shall be their Judge, at last.

Now I thought to have passed over the condemnation of Christ, and to have
spoken little of it, but we must do, as the Goldsmith, who will not lose the
least fine of his gold, Simile.
but he will gather it up; so we should not lose the least thing or
circumstance touching Christ, but should gather all up: as in the Law we read
the Lord commanded, that the ashes and cinders of the burnt offerings should be
gathered up, Simile.
and laid in a clean place; in like manner we should do, gather up the very
ashes and cinders of the sufferings of Christ, wherefore our hearts must be
the clean place, to lay them up in; that so we may think of the great love
of Christ, to us and be provoked to love him again, who has loved us, and
washed away our sins. Now Christ was condemned in two courts; in the
Ecclesiastical, before Annas and Caiphas; and in the Temporal, before Pilate;
the one whereof was a forerunner of the other; and the reason is, because the
government was not in the hands of the Jews, who could not put any to death:
but in the hands of the Romans under whom Pilate was the chief governor,
therefore we will only speak of the condemnation of Christ under Pilate;
where we will observe these four things:

1. How many times Pilate sought to deliver Christ. 2. What was the means he
used. 3. What made him stand so stiff for Christ. 4. What drew him on to
condemn Christ contrary to the light of his judgment.
First, First, how often Pilate sought to deliver Christ. The first time.
how many times Pilate labored to clear Christ before he condemned him; and
that appears to be four several times; first, when they accused him,
saying, they had found this man perverting the people, and forbidding to pay
tribute to Caesar, saying that he is Christ our king, Pilate asked him, saying,
Art thou the king of the Jews? unto which he answered and said, Thou say
it: then said Pilate to the high Priests, and to the people, I find no fault
in him; indeed it is true, that he is a king, but his kingdom he says is not
of this world, therefore Caesar need not to be afraid of him, I see no cause
of death in him: you say he is a king: what though? it is of no worldly
kingdom, as Caesar's is, but it is a kingdom of another world: therefore
Pilate labored to free Christ at this time.

Now in the answer of Christ to Pilate; 1
we observe two things: First, that he does profess he is a king: this is
that same good confession Paul speaks of 1 Timothy 6. 12. who (under Pontius
Pilate) witnessed a good confession; therefore seeing Christ is a king we must
so accept of and receive him, as to be ordered by him in our life and
conversation, and governed by his Laws, because he is the King of the Church,
and of all the world: it is the sin of the time, that men can be contented to
have Christ to be their Savior and redeemer, to save them by his blood, but
they cannot abide to have him to be their King; as Luke 19. they say, We will
not have this man to rule over us; so men now adays can be contented to have
Christ to teach and to preach to them; but they cannot abide to have him to be
their King, to rule or reign over them, in their life and conversation; but
for this cause was he borne, and for this cause did he die; therefore if thou will ever reign with him in the kingdom of glory, thou must be ruled by him
in the kingdom of Grace.

Secondly, 2
he says, his kingdom is not of this world, it does not consist in the pomp
and glory of this world, for Christ's kingdom is of another world, in heaven, a
kingdom above the clouds, of glory and happiness: Which must teach us, that
seeing Christ's kingdom is not of this world; they that be subjects of Christ
must not look for especially worldly matters, or preferments; therefore, in
sickness, pains, troubles and afflictions, we must say, my kingdom is not of
this world, but above the clouds, it is an heavenly kingdom, a kingdom of
glory and happiness, my comfort is laid up there: when sickness and troubles
are come upon a man, he must carry up his thoughts and say, though I am sick,
poor, in distress and disgrace, yet it shall not always be so with me,
Simile.
for my kingdom is not of this world: If the heir of a great King should be
in a strange place, and hardly used there, he would gather up his thoughts and
think with himself, I am but a stranger here, and therefore they use me hardly,
but when I come home again into mine own kingdom, then it shall be otherwise
with me; so when we be hardly used here, we must consider that we are
strangers, and therefore they do hardly use us, but when we come at our
Fathers house, we shall have more comfort than this world can afford us.
Again, seeing our kingdom is not of this world, but a heavenly kingdom, the
glory whereof far exceeds all the transitory things of this life; therefore
were thou a subject of the best kingdom of the world, know it is nothing
unless thou be a subject of Christ's kingdom; it is nothing to be a citizen
of the best city in the world, unless thou be a citizen of the kingdom of
Christ: Therefore labor to be a subject in the kingdom of grace, to live by
faith, to be obedient to Gods Commandments, to be patient in troubles, and
then thou shall be a subject in the kingdom of glory: The Queen of the South
came from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon,
which when she came and heard, she thought it a great preferment to be one of
his subjects; says she, Happy are thy men, 1 King. 10. 8.
happy are these thy servants, which stand continually before thee, etc. Now
if it were a happy thing to be a subject in that kingdom, much more is it a
happy thing to be a subject in the kingdom of Christ; therefore let us labor
to be subjects to Christ in the kingdom of grace, that we may be subjects in
the kingdom of glroy.

The second time that Pilate labored to free Christ, The second time.
and to set him at liberty, was, after he had sent him to Herod; it is said,
That he called together the high Priests, and the rulers of the people, and
said unto them, ye have brought this man unto me, as one that perverteth the
people, and behold, I having examined him before you, have found no fault in
this man, concerning those things whereof ye accuse him; no, nor yet Herod, for
I sent you to him, and lo nothing worthy of death is done unto him. This ye
see is the second time that Pilate sought to deliver Christ: Which may teach us
to be constant in a good course, although things do not succeed well at first,
and have the success we desire, yet we must not give over, but to it again
and again: It is the sin of the world, that if things do not succeed well
at the first, they give over a good cause, and are discouraged; as Hag. 1. when
the Jews were hindered from building the Temple, straightway they left off;
so men be quickly discouraged in good courses, but it must be the wisdom of a
Christian, though things do not succeed presently, yet to go on again and
again: This was the wisdom of Pilate, and must be our wisdom also; as it is
observed of the Spider, Proverbs.
that although she be hindered in her labor, and one come with a broom and
sweep down her web, she will up again the next day; so this must be the
wisdom of a Christian, though he do not succeed well in a good course, and in
his labors at first, yet he must not give over, but to it again and again,
as long as there is life in him.

The third time, The third time.
when he labored to free Christ, was when he joined Christ and Barabbas
together, thinking by this means they would have rather freed Christ than
Barabbas; nevertheless, when he saw this would not prevail, he asked, But
what evil has he done? I find no fault in him, it is against my conscience
to put him to death; therefore he takes water, and washes his hands, but yet he
could not clear himself from the blood of Christ, all the water in the sea
was not able to wash him clean: Now there be some that have their hands as
deep as Pilate in the blood of Christ, I do not say it of my self, but the
Apostle Paul tells us as much, Hebr. 6. 5, 6. That they which have tasted of the
good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come; If they fall away, it
is impossible that they should be renewed again by repentance, seeing they
crucify afrosh to themselves the Son of God, and put him to an open shame:
And Hebr. 10. 26. If we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of
the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, etc. Therefore if thou
have been enlightened, and have tasted of the good Word of God, and of the
powers of the world to come; take heed how thou commit sin wittingly and
willingly, against thy knowledge, judgment, against the light of Grace shining
in thy heart, and lie in it without repentance, thou do no better than
crucify the Son of God, and so have thy hands as deep in the blood of
Christ, as Pilate had; so when thou live in thy sins in the light of the
Gospel, art a drunkard, a whoremaster, a profane person, a bad liver, take
heed, thou have thy hands in the blood of Christ.

The fourth time was, The fourth time.
when they cried, Crucify him, crucify him: I but Pilate would not do it,
and yet he was the Magistrate who had power in his hands to do it; which must
teach us, that although there be a power in our hands to do hurt unto our
neighbors, yet we must not do it; as it is, Proverb. 3. Withhold not good
from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it:
Although thou be mighty, yet God is mightier than thou, and thou can not
deliver thy self from him: Now these four times did Pilate labor to clear
Christ, which shows his innocence, that he died an innocent man, and that not
for himself, but for us; therefore never doubt, but that he has made
expiation and satisfaction for thee by his death.

Now there were four particular Means that Pilate used to deliver Christ; 2
but before we come to speak of them, The means used to deliver Christ.
we will answer a doubt or two that may arise:

First, Quest. 1.
Whether Pilate did well to seek to deliver Christ, seeing that Peter was
reproved and reprehended for the same thing?

Secondly, 2
Whether Pilate did well to labor to free Christ, seeing it did cross the
will of God, for it was the will of God that he should die?

To the first I answer, Ans. 1.
That Pilate did well to seek to deliver Christ; but Peter did not well,
because he did not seek to deliver Christ by good means, and in due order,
but he would have delivered him, by resisting and fighting for him, therefore
it was a sin to him; but Pilate sought to deliver him by good means and in
due order, threfore it was no sin in him. Again, Peter he knew the mystery
of man's redemption, therefore it was a sin in him, but Pilate was ignorant of
it, who took him to be but an innocent man, therefore Pilate did well do
deliver Christ.

To the scond I answer, Ans. 2.
the will of God is twofold:

1. The will of his Decree. 2. The will of his Commandment.
The will of his Decree, is the disposing of every particular man, and of the
whole world to his best pleasure, and can by no means be resisted.

The will of his Commandment is, what he would have us to do: Now it was the
will of God indeed, that Christ should die, but it was the will of his Decree;
for the will of his Commandment was, that when he brought Christ into the
world, all men should kiss him, seek to him for his favor, and do him all
the honor that might be; therefore Pilate did well in endeavoring to deliver
Christ. Now to draw this down lower to our selves, it may be it is the will of
God, we should be poor, or that we should be rich; therefore must we not be
idle and do nothing, for this is the will of Gods Decree, which is secret to
himself; but the revealed will of God, the will of his Command is, that every
man should eat his bread in the sweat of his face, and apply himself to the
means notwithstanding that God has appointed. But to return to the means
that Pilate used for Christ's deliverance.

The first means that Pilate used to deliver Christ, 1
was, Loquendo, by speaking for him: By speaking for Him.
And when did he speak for him? marry when all the world was silent: which is
a worthy example for us to follow, to speak for Christ, and in his cause for
the Gospel, though all the world should be silent, or else Pilate shall rise
up in the day of Judgment and condemn us; for if we be silent in the cause of
Christ and holy religion, before men, he will also be silent, at the day of
Judgment for us, before his heavenly Father; and if we speak in the cause of
Christ before men, and in the cause of religion, he will also speak for us at
the day of Judgment before his heavenly Father. Genesis 41. we see that Pharaohs
Butler did dream a dream, which Joseph did interpret, for which all that
Joseph did request in recompense of him, was, that he would make mention of him
to Pharaoh; so our good Joseph has done much for us, Simile.
and showed us great kindness, for which this is all that he desires at our
hands, to make mention of his Name to the world, that we should speak in his
cause and for religion: this we see the Apostles did, Act. 4. when they were
rated and rebuked for speaking in the Name of Christ; they made answer, That
they could not but speak of the things that they had both seen and heard: so
Hester 4. when the Jews were in distress, says Hester, If I perish, I
perish; as if she should say, Should I forsake the cause? no, whatsoever
befall me, I will venture my self, if I perish, I perish: to this purpose,
Exodus 4. says the Lord to Moses, Go thy way, I will be with thy month; from
which words Augustine collects, That if a man speak for the Gospel, and in a
cause of justice, then God opens his mouth; but if a man open his mouth to
swear, lie, deceive, slander his neighbor; or open his mouth against the
Gospel, then it is the Devil that does open his mouth; therefore it is a
pitiful thing, that Christ, Religion and the Gospel is condemned, and yet men
will be silent at it; but do not thou wonder in this case, if Christ be
silent for thee at the day of Judgment.

The second means that Pilate used was Mittendo, by sending Christ to Herod, 2
for he hoped that the Jews would not have followed him at all to accuse him,
By sending Him to Herod.
or if they did, he should have found some favor and friendship from Herod,
seeing he was desirous of a long time to see him, not out of any love to
Christ, to be saved by him, draw any grace from him, or take good by his
presence, but out of an humor and conceit he had, touching him, having heard
of the strangeness of his miracles that he did, that he was a Iugler, o^
some cunning man, that would have done seats; this it was that made him
desirous to see Christ: So there be a number of men desirous to see Christ, but
they have diverse ends, some because they would be fed, some because of his
miracles, some to get credit and favor amongst men, to be well accounted of;
but few seek him to a right end, to get grace and strength against sin, to
be quickened up in their affections; as John 1. 38. Jesus turned about when
he saw them that did follow him, and said unto them, What seek ye? So the
Spirit of Christ asks us, when we come to the ministry of his Word, what
seek ye? if ye seek for worldly ease, preferment, or credit amongst men,
then ye come to a wrong end, but if ye seek to Christ, to have your graces
increased, and to be strengthened against sin, then ye shall be blessed in
your coming; therefore when we come to the Word, we must see that we come to a
right end. Now when Herod had not that that he looked for, that Christ did not
follow his humor, he falls a mocking of him, puts on a white garment on him in
derision, and so sends him away: this is a strange thing, that Herod had a
desire a long time to see Christ, and now when he sees him, he makes a mock
of him, and puts a white garment upon him, though he had done so much at John's
preaching, that he did many things well and heard John gladly; yet now he makes
a mock of Christ: here we may see what a dangerous thing it is, to nourish
sin, for if a man harbor some secret sin, though he has good affections,
and good graces, it will eat out the heart of them, so Herod harbord one
sin, the taking his brother Philips wife, and the nourishing of this one,
eat out the heart of all his good affections. This was the case of Herod, and
is the case of thousands in the world, though they be hearers of the Word, and
have reformed many a thing, yet because they nourish some secret sin, they
fall to be mockers of Religion which eats out the heart of all their graces
and of good affections: as Matthew. 3. our Savior shows, that some seed fell
in stony ground, and sprang up, and when the Sun arose, it parched, withered,
and came to nothing, Simile.
because there were stones in the bottom, so if a man have good affections, if
he nourish one secret sin, all will come to nothing, it will eat out all
the heart of his graces.

The third means he used to deliver Christ was, Thirdly, by joining Christ
with Barabbas.
jungendo, by joining Christ and Barabbas together, for it was a custom at
their feasts, to let loose a prisoner: now Christ was matched with a notable
thief, that was in the prison, one that was a traitor, and a murderer;
therefore Pilate thought they would not have chosen him that was so vile, but
would rather have chosen Christ, but the Priests through envy stirred up the
people, who did choose Barabbas, and refused Christ: this, was a notable policy
in Pilate, and must teach them that have fine wits, and politic pates to use
them for Christ and not against him; as Levit. 2. The Lord commands that they
should offer fine flower, so if men have fine wits and fine policies; Simile.
God must have a handful of them, Psalm. 22. David desires to be kept from the
horn of the Unicorns; why was this? though is were a good, and sufficient
horn, yet it was a naughty head, that did bear it; so learning, wit and
policy is a good thing, when it is in a good heart, but if it be in a bad
heart, then we had need to pray to God, as David did, to keep us from the
horn of the Unicorn, keep me from his policy, Simile.
his wit and learning: a man that has a good wit, must use it for Christ, and
not against Him, for if he do, God will destroy his wit and him: In all the
histories of the Heathen, we find not the like example to that in the Bible
of Achitophel, whose counsel was as the Oracle of God, and yet because he used
policy and wit against God, and not for God, it was overthrown by a plain
man; so, the Papists and Jesuits beyond sea, are great Politicians, have fine
wits, and go far beyond us, in their policies, yet they have been often
overthrown in their deep fetches and subtle plots, and it has pleased God
to bless us in our simplicity and weakness; the reason whereof is, because
their policy is against Christ and the Gospel, and ours is for it. Thus much
for Pilate.

Now for the people, we see that they preferred Barabbas before Christ, who was
a traitor and a murderer, Christ being an innocent man; and yet by the
instigation of the Priests they chose Barabbas, and refused Christ. Now I dare
say, there is not any here, but will be ready to condemn the Jews that they
preferred Barabbas before Christ: but what? do we not as ill who prefer our
vile lusts and sins before Christ? For (as Divines say) in every choice and
election, there is a practical discourse in the cour^ of a man's conscience,
either to make choice of Christ and his graces; or else of his own sins and
his delights; there is Christ on the one side, and all his graces, with heaven
and happiness thereunto belonging, and on the other hand, sin, and all the
delights thereof, our vile lusts, pleasures, and profits; we stand in a middle
between them both, and put Christ into the one scale which we have in our
hands, and our sins and lusts into the other; then this question is made in
the court of every particular man's conscience, which of these will thou make
choice of? whether Christ and his Spirit shall live in thee, or thy vile
sins? if we answer, it is better to live in our whoredoms, in our
prophannesse, it is better to live in our pleasures than to choose Christ; what
do we else but prefer Barabbas before Him: we condemn the Jews but we
have much more need to condemn our selves, they did it in the time of their
ignorance, and we do it in the time of our knowledge; they did it in the time
of Christ's humility, and we now he is in his glory; they did it once, but we
often: and therefore if there be a question come into the court of thy
conscience (by the hearing of a Sermon) whether the spirit of Christ shall dye
or thy sins; when we make choice of our sins, and let the spirit of Christ
die in us; what do we but as the Jews did, prefer Barabbas before Christ?
and therefore every one should labor to take this home to himself.

The fourth Means was, Fourthly, by whipping of him.
Flagendo, by whipping of Christ; this was worst of all, and when he had so
done, he puts on him a purple garment, and so brought him forth; then Pilate
said unto them, Behold the man; as who should say, if there be pity or any
mercy in you, Look on the man, and let it move you to let him go: now this
one word of Pilate, Look on the man, is good for every Christian to remember,
to look upon the man; to look upon Christ, to consider what a deal of pains
he has suffered, what a deal of labor it cost to redeem us, Ecce home,
Look upon the man, see how his shoulders were whipped, his face buffetted, his
head crowned with thorns, how his sides were pierced, how his hands and feet
were nailed, his body racked and tormented; all this he has done to redeem
thy soul, therefore do not thou sell that for a small matter, which cost
Christ so dear. Every morning, let us consider this one word of Pilate, Behold
the man, and when we are about our labors, in the fields, when we go to bed,
look upon Christ and consider what a deal of pains it cost Christ to redeem
us.

Secondly, we must look upon Christ, and consider what we are to look for at
the hands of the world; if Christ was crowned with a crown of thorns, then
we must not look to be crowned with a crown of gold: If he suffered such
contumelies and reproaches, then we must not look to go scot-free: if we
suffer with him, we shall reign with him: if we would partake with him in his
glorious crown then must we with him in some sort be crowned with thorns.

SERMON XVIII.
JOHN 19. 5. Behold the Man.
WE showed the last day, how before Pilate condemned Christ, he used four
means to deliver Him; first, by speaking for Him; secondly, by sending Him to
Herod; thirdly, by associating him with Barabbas; fourthly, by scourging him,
that so pity might have stayed the cruelty of the high Priests and Scribes,
but all would not avail, their fury pressed on to his death: The uses whereof
we were the last day cut short of by reason of the time, therefore now we will
prosecute the same.

The first use is, Use 1.
that in looking on Christ, we may see what we are to look for at the hands
of the world; for if he was crowned with a crown of thorns. Then we must not
look to be crowned with a crown of gold; if he was mocked and scoffed at, we
must not look to go free; Ecce homo, behold the man; if we suffer with him,
we shall reign with him in glory. And therefore do not thou look to partake
with him in his crown of glory, unless thou partake with him in the crown of
thorns. In the 18. of John, Pilate asked Christ, if he was a king: he
answered, he was, but his kingdom was not of this world; even so a Christian
may say, my kingdom is not of this world, but I look for a kingdom above the
clouds, a kingdom of glory and happiness.

Secondly, Use 2.
a Christian may comfort himself in afflictions and troubles, by looking on
Christ, Ecce homo, behold the man: let thy troubles and thy afflictions be what
they will be, yet they are not like to Christ's, he was God, we are men; he the
son, and we the servants; he pure and holy, we wretched and sinful;
therefore let thy troubles be what they will, sure it is, thou can not
attain to the half of Christ's, to the crown of thorns, the buffettings,
mockings and railings upon, to his whippings, rackings and tormentings;
therefore if we look upon Christ's wounds, we shall find ours to be nothing
to his; thus we must comfort our selves in our afflictions by looking on Christ.

Thirdly, Use 3.
we may comfort our selves in temptations, for as a Christian has his Ecce
homo; so the devil will have his time for it; when we be sick and like to die,
then he will come and say, Ecce homo, behold the man; thou have seemed to be a
great professor, but now death seazeth on thee, and thou must be flung into the
grave, and there consumed to dust, and therefore what can thou do for thy
self? A man must not be discouraged at this, but must have his Ecce homo: and
send him back again to Christ, and say, behold the man, behold Christ, he
has done for me, he has gone before death, has seized upon me, he has
been trampled and trodden under foot of it, flung into the grave and risen
again, therefore seeing Christ has gone before me, I must not be afraid to
follow his steps that he has stepped in before me.

The third general point which we observed in the condemnation of Christ is,
Thirdly, what made Pilate so stand for Christ.
what it was that made Pilate stand so stiff for Christ; though after he was
drawn on to condemn him, partly through fear of Casar; and partly through
the importunity of the people.

Now there were five reasons that made him stand so stiff for Christ:

1. His own conscience. 2. The admonition of his wife. 3. Christ's strange
silence. 4. His holy Confession and protestation. 5. His Commination.
First, First, his own conscience.
his own conscience, for he was persuaded he was an innocent man, and
delivered unto him through the malice of the Jews, therefore he was loath to
condemn him, and so sin against his conscience; and yet he was but a heathen
man, therefore what a pitiful thing is it, when a Christian shall sin
against his conscience, and that shall smite him, as it did the Lepers in the
midst of their jollity, 2 King. 7. 7. who said, we do not well to tarry here,
etc. so when a man's conscience shall tell him, O, I do not well to swear, to
lie, and yet that same man should go on still in his wicked courses, this is a
pitiful thing, therefore a man must take heed he sin not against his
conscience; if a man should have a snake or a worm crawling in his body or in
his bowels, Simile.
though it should be quiet sometimes, yet upon every little occasion it should
crawle and stir about, he would think it were better to dye a thousand
deaths, but what is this to the worm of conscience, that will torment a man
for ever and ever and never dies? therefore (as a learned man says) all other
plagues a man may fly from, but he cannot fly from an evil conscience; a man
may fly from the plague, from famine or from the injury of men, but he cannot
fly from an evil conscience, whither soever he goes that will with him, if he
go into merry company, or into his chamber, into his closet, or into any room
under the earth the secretest place that may be, his evil conscience will go
with him and pursue him; like unto a man that has an ague, Simile.
he thinks if he were in this or in that place, in this room or in that, he
should have ease, but so long as he carries the matter of his own grief
about him, he can have none; so a man that has an evil conscience, he may
think to have peace in this place, in this and that company, but as long as he
carries about him the matter of his grief, he must never look to have ease,
therefore we must take heed of sinning against our conscience.

The second thing, Secondly, the admonition of his wife.
that made Pilate stand so stiff for Christ, was the admonition of his wife,
for Pilate being in the judgment seat, she sent him a message, Matthew. 27. To
have nothing to do with that just man: in which message we observe diverse
things:

1. The party that sent the message, Pilates Wife. 2. The time when she sent
it; when Pilato was upon the judgment seat. 3. The tenor of the message;
have thou nothing to do with that just man. 4. The reason, because I have
suffered many things this night in a dream touching Him.
First, First, who sent the message.
who it was that sent the message; Pilates wife: hence observe, it is a good
thing for women to stop and stay their husbands in the course of sin, they
must labor to prevent them, by good speeches and good admonitions, for women
were made to this end, to be helpers to their husbands, to help them to
heaven, therefore when the wife shall admonish the husband, and he do not
regard but despise and neglect it, Pilate shall rise up in judgment against
him, and condemn him, at the day of judgment.

Secondly, Secondly, when it was sent.
when it was; as he sat in judgment, it was a very fit time, a good season;
as David bad his servants say to Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. We came in a good season;
so it is a good season to stop a man in sin, when he is about the doing of
it: so the Angel of the Lord stopped Joseph, Matthew. 1. when he thought to have
put Mary away secretly, so Genesis 20. when Abimelech thought to have taken
Abraham's wife, says the Lord unto him, thou art but a dead man; it is a good
thing then to admonish one of sin, when they be about doing of it.

Thirdly, Thirdly, the message.
the tenor of the message; have thou nothing to do with this just man. If a
man be a just man and an innocent man, let us take heed, how we have to deal
with him or do him any wrong or any hurt, Psalm. 37. It is a note of a wicked
man, that he persecutes the godly man, for if a man be a just and godly man,
then there is matter enough for them; but we must take heed, we do them no
harm or wrong: a man may handle gold, Simile.
Oar, iron, as long as it remains in his own nature, but if the nature of
fire be put to it, then if we handle it, it will burn us; so we may deal with
men, as long as they remain in their own nature, but if once they have the
nature of God, take heed how we deal with them; lest it happen unto us, as
Revel. 11. 5. it is said of the two Prophets, that if any man hurt them, fire
shall come out of their mouths and destroy them.

The fourth reason was, Fourthly, the reason and cause.
Because she had suffered many things in a dream touching him, this is the
property of a good conscience, to be moved and stirred by the judgments of
God: it is a woeful thing when his judgments be upon us, yet we are not moved
and stirred at them; when he shall take away our wives, our children, our
cattle, or our goods, and yet we be not moved at it. If a Physician give a
man Physic, the next question that he will ask him, SERMON. XVIII.
when he comes to him, is, whether his physic did work or no? if it did not
work and stir the humors, it is twenty to one, but the party will dye; so
the judgments of God are his physic, and if they do move and stir us,
there is some good hope, but if they do not move and work upon us, there is
danger, twenty to one but we shall be more afflicted or die; therefore it is a
pitiful thing that Gods judgments be upon us in this unseasonable weather,
and yet we are not moved and stirred by them, nor drawn unto repentance to
return to God: the Lord complains of this, Ier. 5. Thou have stricken them,
but they have not sorrowed: And Zephan. 3. Every morning does he bring his
judgments to light, and yet the wicked will not learn to be ashamed. It is a
good thing to be afflicted with the judgments of God, as Numb. 21. the people
come to Moses, and desire him to pray to God, to take away the fiery Serpents,
not desiring to have their sins taken away; therefore when that judgment was
at an end, they had a greater, and so had no rest, till the Lord had destroyed
them; so men do now, when the judgments of God be upon them, then they pray
to have sickness, famine, scarcity and unseasonable weather taken away from
them, but never pray to God to have their sins taken away, to give them
repentance; and therefore when one judgment is at an end, it it the beginning
of a greater, the Lord will never rest till he has destroyed us, if we do
not repent us of all our sins, and turn to him in the truth of our hearts.

This must teach Christians, Use.
that have more light and knowledge, than they had, or than Pilate had, to take
heed that they do not sin against their conscience; Pilate had the light of
Nature, we have the light of Gods grace; it it a fearful thing, when a man
shall sin against his conscience; though a man sin of weakness, and of
infirmity, yet let us take heed we sin not against conscience; for what a
pitiful thing is it that a man's conscience shall say, as the Lepers said, O,
we do not well, that we do so; I do not well to sin, to swear, to profane
the Sabbaths, I do not well to nourish any sin, to backbite my neighbors: It
is a fearful thing to sin against conscience, all other accusers, one thing
or other will stop them, either bribes, or favor, or fiendship, or entreaty,
or flattery, but there is nothing that will stop the accusing of evil
conscience, neither bribes, nor flattery, nor friendship, nor entreaty; Revel.
20. 12. conscience is compared to a book that all things are written in,
Simile.
when there is question about a debt, come to the book and that does manifest
the matter; so there is a question, whether thou have sinned or not, come to
thy conscience, and that will resolve thee, all thy sins are written there,
although thou do not see nor feel them, yet at the Judgment day, when the
book shall be opened, then all shall be manifest, as if they were but new
committed.

Secondly, 2
other accusers do accuse us, but certain times, either at Term time, or
when anger is stirred, but an accusing conscience will give them no peace at
any time; the worm of conscience will torment a man at all times, in the night,
and in the day, when he is in company, and when he is alone.

Thirdly, 3
other accusers a man may fly from, for if they be in one country, he may
fly into another country; but there is no man can fly from the accusing of an
evil conscience, unless a man fly from himself; Augustine says, all other
plagues a man may fly from, from the famine, from the envy of man, from the
pestilence he may fly, but he can never from an evil conscience; Man (says
he) get thee into thy chamber, or into the secretest place that may be, and
although thou shut the door, yet thou can not shut out the accusing of an
evil conscience, unless thou shut up thy self: If a man were in a close
chamber full of small lights, and there were in the same room one great light,
Simile.
though he should put out all the other, and leave but this one, yet that were
sufficient to disclose, and to lay open his shame; so in the chamber of this
world, there be a number of lights, if all should be put out, and there be left
this great light of a man's conscience, this is sufficient to discover and to
lay open a man's shame.

Thirdly, 3
The strange silence of Christ, that answered nothing, though Pilate did urge
him, The strange silence of Christ.
and it did concern his life; therefore the more ready he should have been (as
one would have thought) to defend himself, for naturally men are ready to
defend their lives; as the Devil says of Job, all that a man has will he
give for his life: But see, Christ was silent, which shows how ready he was to
lay down his life for us, and how willingly; this was the reason why Christ
was silent and said nothing: here we may see the great love of Christ, that
whereas we should have lost our lives, have perished in hell for ever, he was
contented to lay down his life for us. Now Christ has not laid down his life
only that we should lay down our lives for him again, but that we should
lay down our sins; he was willing to part with his life, and we are not
willing to part with our sins for his sake; Hester 6. when Ahashuerosh could
not sleep in the night time, he calls to a servant to read in the Chronicles,
and then found what Mordecai had done in preserving of his life, Simile.
and so makes this inquiry, But what honor and dignity has there been done to
Mordecai for it? So when a Christian cannot sleep in his bed, he should be
thinking how willing Christ was to lay down his life for him, he should make
this enquiry, what honor and dignity have I done unto Christ for it?
Augustine says, this is the reasoning betwixt Christ and us; O man, will thou
make a change with me, will thou forgo thy sins and take my blood, take the
merit of my death, and I will take the punishment of thy sins!

Fourthly, 4
His protestation and confession, that he is the Son of God; for when Pilate
heard that, Christ's protestation.
he was afraid that God was engaged against him, and to oppose himself against
God, he was loath; this it was that made him to stop and stay, the reverence he
had to the name of Christ: O that we Christians had this reverence to the name
of God, that it might stop and ^^ay us in the course of sin! Pilate was
stayed at the mention of the name of God; but we hear of the name of God every
day, from day to day, and yet it cannot stop us in the course of our sins; we
see, Genesis 39. 9. that the reverent awe that Joseph had of the name of God, kept
him from sinning against God; so David, Psalm. 21. 22. Because I kept the ways
of the Lord, I did not wickedly against my God; for all his laws were before
me, and I did not cast his Commandments from me: And so here Pilate an Heathen
did reverence the name of God, this it was that stopped him, and made him stand
so fast for Christ.

Fifthly, 5
The holy commination of Christ, says he, He that delivered me to thee,
has the greater sin: Christ's Commination.
There is no man that can have his hand in the death of Christ, but he must
needs sin: This was it that made Pilate a Heathen man loath to condemn
Christ, be cause he should sin against God. This must teach us, that when we
hear it is a sin to swear or lie, not to do it, though it be to save a
man's life. We have heard it is a sin to profane the Sabbath, to mispend the
time wickedly, and yet nevertheless, dare we go on and do it: Surely Pilate
shall rise up in judgment against us at the last day, and condemn us for it.
We see 1 Samuel 14. 33. when Saul heard that the people had sinned in eating of
blood, he labored to stop and to stay them: O that there were such
affection in Christians to labor to stop others, but especially themselves
in the course of sin! For it is Gods great mercy that any thing comes in the
way to stop or stay us in the course of sin, whether it be our conscience,
or the admonitions of our wives, or any thing else. The Philosophers say, that
the upper Heavens would set all the world together, if they were not staid by
the nether, but whether that be true or no, this is; that there is such
greediness in man to commit sin, that all would come to confusion, if God
should not restrain him: 1 Samuel 25. 32. when David was in his heat, he
thought to have killed Nabal, and all his household; but when he met with
Abigail, and was come to himself, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, says
he, which has sent thee this day to meet me; And blessed be thy advice;
and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from coming to shed blood,
and from avenging my self with mine own hand: So, when we be in our heat,
then we care not what we do; but if we once come to our selves, then we can
say, O blessed be God for such a man and such a woman, that kept me from
sinning against him. When Balaam went to curse the People of God for a bribe,
if the Ass had not spoken to him and made a stop, the Angel of the Lord had
killed him: The Ass saw the danger, but he saw it not; therefore the Lord
gave Balaam cause to bless God for his Ass; even so if there be any thing
that stops us from committing sin, and though it be but an Ass, we have
cause to bless God for it.

The fourth general point that we observed in Christ's condemnation was, 4
What made Pilate to condemn Christ? What made Pilate to condemn Christ.
And that appears to be:

1. The importunity of the Jews* 2. The fear of losing Caesar's favor.
First, the importunity of the Jews, for the more he pleaded for him, the
worse they were; the more they cried out, 1
crucify him, crucify him. At last being wearied with their importunacie, The
importunity of the Jews.
he yields to them and condemns him. Here we may see what a wicked thing it
is to yield to any bad thing for any importunity whatsoever. Adam yields to
his wife, and so brought death upon himself and his posterity, and was thrust
out of Paradise: So Sampson yields to Delilah, and lost both his eyes. If a
man yield because he would have rest, he shall be condemned for it: If it be
good to stand out in the cause of Christ, the first and the second time, it is
good to stand out to the end: Simile.
As if one be set to keep away birds, he cannot excuse himself to say the
birds are busy, and I cannot make them leave; but the more busy the birds be
the more busy he should be to suppress them: So the more we be importuned to
sin, and the more busy the Devil is to tempt us* the more busy we should
be in Prayer and meditation, to suppress the temptations of the Devil. Simile.
It was Joseph's glory, that notwithstanding his Mistress lay at him day by day,
yet he yielded not to her: So this shall be the glory of a Christian, that
notwithstanding ghee be tempted to sin from day to day, Simile.
he yields not to it. It is noted of Christ that when the Tempter ended, the
Angels came and ministered unto him: So when we have stood out in temptations,
and they be ended, the Angels will come and minister to us a Cup of comfort, or
a Crown of glory. But Pilate because he stood not out in the cause of Christ,
as he had begun, but yielded; lost all his glory; therefore, it is said in
our Creed, He suffered under Pontius Pilate, which is a mark of disgrace unto
him, to the Worlds end.

The second thing that drew Pilate to condemn Christ, 2
was fear of losing Caesar's favor: Fear to lose Caesar's favor.
for when the Jews told him, that if he let him go, he was not Caesar's
friend, this did so perplexe and amaze him, that he sins against his
conscience, and inclines to the worser side: He had good affections and stood
out in the cause of Christ, when all were against him, but when it came to
this, that if he stood out still, he should lose Caesar's favor, or else Gods
favor; He makes choice of Caesar's favor: So it is with the world still, so
long as God and Caesar go together, so long as the world and religion go
together, so long they hold, but when it comes to this, that they must lose
Caesar's favor, or Gods favor, they will leave God, and choose Caesar's favor.
But it is remarkable and worthy our observation, that he that will make
himself a friend to the world, may have indeed Caesar's favor for a time, but
he shall be sure to have God his enemy, and then perhaps Caesar too; as we may
see in Pilate, who labored for Caesar's favor, and chose that before Gods
favor, yet through the just judgment of God, he lost Caesar's also, for upon
complaint made he was sent for, and put from his Office, banished the Land, and
so through grief and vexation, laying hands upon himself, desperately kills
himself: Let men take heed of this, how they keep men's favor and lose Gods;
for if it be so with them, they may look for Pilates judgment, to have
neither of them both, because the do not choose Gods favor above all.

SERMON XIX.
MATTHEW. 27. 31. And after that they had mocked him, they took the Robe off
from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him.
HAving spoken of the sufferings and condemnation SERMON. XIX.
of Christ; in the next place we come to speak of his Crucifying, wherein
diverse things are to be considered.

1. Why he must die the death of the Cross. 2. How he was led to be Crucified.
3. The place where he was Crucified. 4. The time and manner when. 5. How Christ
carried himself upon the Cross. The first thing, Christ must die the death of
the Cross for four reasons.

First, why of all other deaths, He must die the cursed death of the Cross,
for four Reasons:

First, because of all other deaths, this was accursed by the Law of God, none
else was: 1
burning, stoning, dying by the sword, or any other, there is no curse annexed
unto, Because it was only accursed.
but to this one only, Cursed is every one that hangs on tree, Gal. 3. 13.
Deuteronomy. 21. 23. So that he died not the least death, but the worst that might be,
even the cursed death of the cross; and it was because he would take our curse
upon him, for by reason of our sins, we deserved to be cursed both in life and
death: that we might be blessed in our deaths, and freed of the curse, he was
contented to take this same accursed death upon him. Let us therefore never
forget this great love of Christ to us, yea, remember what Saint Paul says to
Philemon, concerning Onesimus, If he owes thee any thing, set it on my skore,
I will satisfy thee for it; So Christ does engage himself to God for us, to
take our curse on him, that we may be blessed, to die for us that we may live,
to be forsaken of God, that we may be received of God; therefore let us never
forget this love of Christ to us, as John 13. Saint Peter wonders at Christ's
humility, Will thou wash my feet? So we may much more wonder at the humility of
Christ, that he that was the Son of God, higher than the Angels, would die
the cursed death of the Cross, that we might be blessed, die a death
temporal, that we might not die a death eternal.

Secondly, because of all deaths, it was a shameful death, for it was not
only a cursed death, 2
but a shameful death: therefore Paul says, Hebr. Because it was a shameful^
death.
12. 2. Who endured the Cross, and despised the shame. The reason why Christ
died this shameful death, was to sanctify all kinds of deaths to his dying
members; so that let the death be never so shameful, if one die in faith, or
in the pardon of his sins, in the fear God, his death is sanctified unto
him: he is a happy man, Heb. 11. it is said of such, They all died in faith,
they died not all in their beds, or of a lingering disease, but some of them
were racked, some stoned, some sawne asunder, but they all died in faith, and
therefore they were blessed men, what death soever they died on: So let men
labor to die in faith, and in the feeling of Gods love, in the pardon of their
sins, then let their death be what it will be, such a one, he shall be an
happy and a blessed man.

Thirdly, 3
because it was one of the painefullest deaths that was, Because it was one of
the painefullest d^aths. Reasons 4.
as appears by these four reasons: 1
First, because they that were to die this kind of death were whipped and
scourged; for so Christ's blood was spent with whipping and scourging, 2
that he was not able to carry his Cross. Secondly, because they suffered in
the most sensitive parts, in the hollow of the hands, and feet, for these
places are the quickest and fullest of sense; As Galen says, because there all
the ligaments and sinews make a meeting, therefore it must needs be
painful. 3
Thirdly, because they that were crucified on the Cross, were sore racked; For
although they had a thing to rest their feet on, yet they did hang by the
hands, with the weight of their whole bodies; Therefore Peter says, Acts 5.
The God of your Fathers has raised up Jesus; 4
whom ye slew and hanged on the Tree. Fourthly, because it was a lingering
death, they were two or three days a dying. Now we may make these two good
uses of this point, Christ dying such a painful death.

First, to teach us that it is an easy matter to reconcile us to God; when we
have sinned: Uses 2.
we think it an easy matter to be reconciled to God, but it cost Christ a
painful death; and therefore it is not a easy, but a great thing that must
redeem souls. 1


Secondly, seeing Christ dyed such a painful death, and overcame that which
was sorest, we know that he will comfortably raise us up from other deaths
that we shall dye of; Athanasius gives a good reason why Christ dyed not an
ordinary death as others do, 2
but a painful death; he brings it in against the heretics, for they
objected, Why did not Christ dye an ordinary death as others do? To this he
answers, that men of ordinary deaths dye because of ordinary infirmities, Why
Christ dyed not an ordinary death.
that they can live no longer; sickness and diseases come upon them, which
they are not able to withstand; but there can be no infirmity in Christ, he is
the eternal word, the Son of God. I, but why did he not make choice of some
other kind of death, but would dye such a painful death? To this he
answers, that if he had made choice of some other death, then they would have
thought that he had not had power to overcome any other death, but that; But
now he taking any death that they could put upon him, even the most
painefullest and sorest, and having power to overcome that; it is evident, that
he has power to overcome any other whatsoever. And so gives us comfortable
hope that he will raise us up, his members, from all other deaths: Even as a
Champion coming into the field, he will not make choice of the weapon, or the
man he is to fight with, but will take that which is put upon him; so Christ
does not make choice of what death he will dye, but he takes that which the
world puts upon him. This is the reason, why he dyed not by the sword, as John
did; nor was sawne asunder, as Esaiah was, nor knocked on the head as Amos was,
but was crucified: So that he triumphing over his death, we may know and have
comfortable hope, that we shall be raised from other deaths.

Fourthly, 4
because it was more eminent and apparent to be seen, for they that were to be
crucified, were lifted up, that all men might see them. Of which two reasons
may be given, why Christ must dye thus aloft.

First, 1
to conquer the devil, the prince of the Air in his own country, and at his
own door; And so dedicate a way to heaven, and rear a ladder in his death
and bloodshed, that it might be a step or a scaffold, whereby we might climb
up to heaven.

Secondly, 2
Christ dyed aloft, that all the world might see and know he was the means of
man's reconciliation and redemption; Therefore he dyed not in a corner, nor
below, but that all men might see, and behold it aloft: as good Moses set up a
Brazen Serpent on a pole, that so if any were flung with the fiery serpent if
they could but creep to their tents, and cast up their eyes to the brazen
serpent, they had help; so God has set up Christ on a pole on the Cross,
that men may see the means of their salvation and redemption, and so be
saved: Therefore let us do as Mary and John did, creep to the Cross of
Christ, as near as they could get, so that they heard the words of Christ,
speaking to them upon the the cross; in like manner though we cannot hear
the words of Christ speaking from the Cross, yet let us get as near as we
can, that so some of the warm drop of the blood of Christ, may fall into our
hearts, to comfort and refresh us, to cleanse and to wash away our sins.

The 2. The second point how Christ was led to be crucified.
point observed in his crucifying, was how they led Christ to be crucified; And
to open it thrughly unto you, let us consider these 2. ciru^stances:

1. He was led in his own Garments. 2. They made him bear his own Cross.
First, 1
he was led in his own garments, they put on him a purple robe to disgrace
him; In his own garments.
but it is said they plucked off that, and put on his own garments; and that
chiefly for these two reasons. 1. That he might be the better known to the
people. 2. To fulfill the scripture, that had foretold that his garments should
be divided. Wherein we may consider, that God that a secret hand in it; the
Jews were in have because of the preparation of the Sabath, and the 6. hour
ere they could get Christ condemned, about noone; and yet they must needs tarry
to put off the purple robe, Use 1.
and to put on his own garments; which must teach us that the wicked for all
their rage, heat, and malice, can do no more than God has appointed: for God
does so bridle them though they be brutish, full of rage and run on in their
courses, yet they can do nothing, but that God has appointed: Simile.
As a blind horse in a Mill, he knows not the end of his own motion, but
his master does, who has determined it: so the wicked are like blind horses
in a Mill, that go on and know not the end of their motion, but God he
knows it, who has determined what they shall do, and how far they shall
go? And therefore this may be a comfort to us, that the wicked can do
nothing, but that which he has appointed them to do.

Secondly, 2
that the least things that fall out in our estates, God has appointed and
decreed even the very garments we wear; as we see in Christ, that his garments
were fore-determined that he should be led in to be crucified. This is a
great comfort, that there is not any thing, that falls out in the course of our
lives, but God has appointed what shall be, what estate we all live in: yea
and our Savior says, There shall not fall a hair of your heads to the
ground, without your Heavenly Father: Hence a learned man inferres, If the Lord
has such a care of the superfluities of his servants, that nothing shall fall
to the ground but by his appointment; In what great safety is their souls in?
Therefore, let a man labor to fear God, to repent his sins, and to be in
Christ; and then let the rage of the wicked be what it will, they shall not
be able to take a hair from his his head, nor the meanest coat off his
back, without Gods permission and appointment.

Secondly, 2
They laid his cross upon him; and when he fainted under the burden of it,
They laid his Cross upon him.
they met with Simon of Cyrene, and compelled him to bear^ his cross; not for
any pity they had of Christ, but because they thought he would have fainted
and died, before he came at the place: Here three things may be observed:

First, 1
That every one that is Christ's Disciple, must take up his cross and follow
him: so if we be Christ's Disciples, we must be carriers of the cross; for
Christ has determined this in his own person, therefore we must be contented
to bear the cross; as it is exhorted, 1 Pet. 4. 13. But rejoice in as much as
ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, etc. So Heb. 12. 8. If ye be then
without correction whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards and not
sons. Therefore every man must fit himself to bear the Cross of Christ.

Secondly, 2
we must be contented to carry the Cross to Christ; for can a man see Christ
fainting or grovelling on the ground, and yet go by and not be affected
therewith? No, but he must set his shoulders to bear it: no man must make a
cross to himself, but if it be laid on him by God, he must be contented to
bear it.

Thirdly, we must bear all crosses imposed: there be diverse crosses in the
world. 3
Some be crossed in their children, some in their servants, some in their
names, some in their goods: But whatsoever our crosses be, we should be
contented to bear them. But it is a corruption in the world, that we think
if our crosses were as such and such a man's, then we could bear them. Thus
we are ready to buckle and take up another man's cross, but not willing to
carry our own which Christ injoynes, Math. 16. He that will be my Disciple,
must take up his Cross and follow me: we must not take up another man's
cross, but take up our own; and when we do so carry the cross as well as
we can, if we faint under it, God will send some Simeon of Cyren or other to
help us bear it; under the Law if an Ass was burdened and fell under it,
they were commanded to help him up again? Now if man were bound to show
pity to an Ass, much more to Christ, when falls under his burden; Simile.
But it is a pitiful thing to see that Christ is as it were fallen under his
load and burden, yet there is none that will set to their shoulders, to help
bear it; We see Job complains of it in his time, Job. 6. 14.
He that is in misery ought to be comforted of his neighbors, but men have
forsaken the fear of the Almighty; so Psalm. 69. 20, 21 I looked for some to
have pity on me, but there was none; and for comfort, but I found none;
therefore it is a miserable thing, that Christ now in his members is under the
cross, yet few there are that will help to bear up his cross.

The third general point was, The third thing where Christ was crucified.
The place where he was crucified, considered:

1. Generaly. 2. Particularly. 1

Generally, Without the Gate.
the place was without the Gate, without the City, so the Scripture says; And
when they came out, they found a man of Gyrene named Simon; that is, when they
came out of the city, out of the gate; So Paul Heb. 13. 12. Therefore even
Jesus, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, Three Reasons
why Christ suffered without the Gate.
he suffered without the gate; and that for 3. Reasons.

The first, To show he was the sin offering of the Church; for the sin
offering was offered without the Host; Levit. 16. 27. So Christ was crucified
without the gate, 1
to show he was the sin offering of the Church, the great propitiatory
sacrifice thy should make expiation for sin; therefore as in the Law when
they offered a beast, Simile.
the laid their hands on the head of the beast, and so by humble confession put
their sins on it which was killed, and they went free; so seeing Christ is the
sin offering of the Church that should make expiation for our sins, we must
carry them over to Christ and lay them on him: This is the deduction which S.
Paul makes of it, Heb. 13. 12. That Jesus might sanctify the people with his
own blood, He suffered without the gate, and so show himself to be the sin
offering of the Church. Here we may learn, as the people carried their sins
unto the beast, so that must be our wisdom to carry our sins unto Christ,
or else we shall answer for them. Therefore, consider with thy self
whosoever thou art, what a burden thou have laid upon Christ; it is not long
since thou laidst a great burden on him, and thou art coming with another to
day and to morrow, and so shall every day as long as thou live; and when all
is together, consider what a load it will be, I do not speak this to forbid
thee that thou should not bring them being past recovery; for if they be on
thy self, woe be to thee, thou art like to perish. Therefore, lay them still
on Christ, bring to him still, but do it with the more shamefastness and
humility: Simile.
come with them as Noah's sons did, when they covered their father, they went
backward, ashamed to look on their fathers face; so we should go to Christ
with the greatest humility, and the most shamefastness: In that we be the men
and women that lay such a load on him.

Secondly, To teach us that if we suffer with Christ, we must go out of the
gates, and out of Jerusalem; That is, we must go out of our pleasures and our
sins, to suffer with Christ, as the Apostle says, Christ suffered without
the gate; so let us go forth of the camp bearing his reproach: many an one
can be contented to have their part in the sin offerings of Christ, but they
will not go out of the camp, out of their sins, pleasures, profits, and be
contented to bear the reproach of Christ. But we have heard Christ suffered
without the gate, that we should follow him, and come out of our sinful
pleasures and profits; therefore let us be obedient and do so. We see Hebr.
11. that Moses is commended, for that he esteemed the rebuke of Christ greater
riches than the treasures of Egypt; and therefore as Mephibosheth said of Ziba,
Simile.
2 Samuel 19. 30. Yea, let him take all, seeing my Lord the king is come again
in peace unto his own house. I will never strive for it, but let him have it,
it is enough for me, that the king lives: so we should say, Let the world take
their pleasures, their profits, etc. I will leave that to the world, I will not
strive for that, it is enough that Christ is my glory, and that I shall be
partaker with him of eternal Happiness.

Thirdly, to teach us, that the casting out of Christ out of the earth from
Jerusalem, 3
and out of the society of men, is the bringing of us into the society of God
and his blessed Angels: Christ suffered without the gate, therefore when we see
that he suffered without the gate, and was cast out of the earthly Jerusalem,
we must consider it is the bringing of us into the heavenly; for as he was
cast out of the one, so we are brought into the other by the Angels at the day
of Judgment: The first Adam lost the earthly Paradise, and the second Adam
has purchased for us the heavenly Paradise, where we shall eat of the Tree of
life, that is in the midst of it, and of the hidden Manna, that is spoken of
Revel. 2. as Jonah 1. 12. says unto the men that were in the ship in the great
distress that fell upon them, when the Sea was troublesome, Simile.
Take me up, and cast me into the sea, so shall the Sea be calm unto you; so
Christ said to the Father in the great distress of all mankind, Take me and
cast me into the Sea, away with me unto the cross, fling me into the grave,
cast me from the society of men, and so shall heaven, and earth, and hell, be
at peace with you, and God pacified and pleased with you: Simile.
and as Cantic. 3. 11. Solomon says, Come forth ye daughters of Jerusalem,
and behold king Solomon crowned with the crown wherewith his mother crowned
him: so we are called out to behold Christ hanging on the cross, on mount
Calvary, crucified and killed for thy sins.

Secondly, 2
the particular place is Calvarie or Golgotha, the place of men's skuls; In
Golgotha.
Now some think it was so called because Adam was buried there, where his
skull being found it gave name to the place; But this opinion Saint Jerome
refutes as a fable; some again think it was called Calvary, because it was
made round like a skull; Othersome think it was called Golgotha, because it
was the place of execution, where commonly malefactors, suffered, and where
were left the bones and skuls of such as were executed; which opinion I incline
to. Now this we see could not choose but be a very infamous, loathsome, and
fearful place, in which Christ was put to death: which may teach us these two
things, the desert of our sins; that we deserve to die, in the infamous,
loathsome and fearful places that may be; SERMON. XX
to have all the disgrace that can be put upon us: indeed in regard of men, it
may be, we do not deserve it; but in regard of God we do; for as Christ
died in Golgotha, so we deserve not only to die in Golgotha, but to die in
Hell for ever and ever: therefore whereas we would have honor put upon us at
our death, and desire to be as much graced as may be, we must think of this,
that Christ died in Golgotha, in a loathsome place, to show the desert of our
sins, that we do deserve to die in the disgracefullest places that may be.

Secondly, 2
Christ died in such a disgraceful place, to purchase and procure a better
place for us to die in; he died in the fields, that we might dye in our beds;
amongst the Priests and Pharisees, and his enemies, that we might dye amongst
our friends; he on the cross, that we might dye in ease and comfort; for his
condemnation is our acquiting, his death our life, Simile.
his pains our ease. It is an observation that if a Be has stung any one
thing, it can sting no more, though it make a buzzing and a great noise; so it
is with death which having stung Christ, has now left her sting in the body of
Christ, therefore though death may keep a buzzing and ado about a Christian,
yet he can do him no hurt, because he has left his sting in his sacred body:
therefore the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 35. triumphs over death, saying, O death,
where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? O death, I will be thy death,
O grave, I will be thy destruction, Heb. 2. 14. Forasmuch as the Children, were
partakers of flesh and blood, he also took part with them, that he might
destroy through death him that had the power of death, that is, the devil.

The fourth point was, Fourthly, the manner of Christ's crucifiing.
The manner how, now before they did nail him to the cross, they gave him
vinegar to drink mingled with gall, so Saint Matthew: but Mark says they
gave him wine mingled with myrrh; now how can these two agree together? Matthew.
27. 34.
I answer, the one speaks of the quality of it, and the other of the
substance; Mark. 15. 25.
Matthew speaks of the quality, Mark of the substaine, for indeed it was
wine in substance, but sour wine, as sour as vinegar, and it was myrrh, yet
as bitter as gal in respect of the quality, for it was a mavelous distasteful
and bitter cup which they gave Christ to drink; one would not have given it to
any man; what was the reason that they gave him this? some say, it was to take
away the sense and feeling of his pain: but it cannot be so, for there be two
reasons against it; first, because the Jews had no such intent, to ease him
but rather to afflict him; secondly, there is no such operation in the things,
for wine is a comforter of the vital spirits, the heart and brain: other
think the reason was to hasten his death, and to rid him quickly of his pain,
for myrrh does open the veins; and in the margins of our Bibles, we find it
so noted: Physicians say, that wine being taken inwardly, does open the veins
also, but being taken outwardly does stop them: it is reported, that it was
the manner of the Jews, when they would hasten the death of any, they gave them
some bitter potion to drink: but this cannot be the reason why they gave it
Christ for they did it not, out of kindness or favor, but in cruelty, as we
may gather by the words of David, Psalm. 69. 21. where he says, they gave me
also gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. Prove.
31. Solomon wills us to give wine to those that are weak, and strong drink
to those that be afflicted; so the Jews did give wine to Christ, but it was
wine mingled with Myrrh, it had a tang, and a sour taste with it: so also many
such mingled cups, we give to our brethren, it may be we releeve and help
them, but it is with a tang, with bitterness and sowrenesse: it is said in the
Scripture that God gives to us a pure cup of comfort, and adds no sorrow to
it, such pure cups of comfort we should give to our brother: I dare say there
is not any man but would be ready to condemn the Soldiers and the Jews,
because in his extremity, they gave him a mingled cup; But let us look into
our selves, what do we? we give him such a mingled cup; for every sin we
do commit, is as a drop of poison put into a cup for Christ to drink;
therefore whereas we see, that we can complain of the soldiers and of the
Jews; we had need learn to complain of our selves much more.

Now Christ refused to drink of this. This may seem a strange thing in
Christ, seeing he yielded his back to the whip, and his head to be crowned,
his hands to be nailed, his face to be spitted on, and to be buffeted,
refusing none of these things, Quest. Why Christ refused the bitter cup.
What therefore was the reason that he refused to drink of this? I answer;
first, to teach us the true latitude and extention of Christian patience; for
there be two sorts of passions, 1
some there be that be of necessity, and some voluntary or arbitrary: now those
that be of necessity, Sol. Division of Passion twofold.
such our Savior did not refuse, such as was needful for the salvation of
man: but those that were arbitrary, and voluntary, those our Savior refused,
which may teach us this high point of wisdom, that those passions that be by
authority, and those that come immediate from God, these we must with
Christian patience bear: but if it be an arbitrary or voluntary passion, then
we may refuse it: it is an opinion of the world, that a Christian must bear
any thing that is put upon him, but we see in the example of Christ, how far
our Christian patience does extend.

SERMON XX.
MATTHEW 27. 34. They gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall, and when he
had tasted thereof, he would not drink.
WE may behold the resemblance and similitude of a great tree in a glass,
Simile.
but not in the same proportion that it has as it grows, but a great deal
less, for always the resemblance is less than the thing it self that is
resembled; so the Gospel is a great glass that does show unto us, the great
love of Christ in the work of our redemption; but as resemblances be less
than the things resembled; so whatsoever we say of the love of Christ it comes
far short of the love it self, which Christ has showed unto us; as it will
easily appear by the due consideration of the manner of Christ's crucifiing:
and therefore let us proceed in order from that which we left at.

The last day we made entrance upon the point, when amongst other things we
spoke of that bitter cup presented unto him, whereof he refused drink: one
reason whereof we showed then, which was to teach us the extent of our
Christian liberty, now we pass on to that which remains.

The second was, 2
that we might more sensibly see the love of Christ to us: for all the
suffering which were needful for our salvation he refused not, but did with
patience endure them, but whatsoever was voluntary or did concern himself,
those he refused. Jonas he could not endure the heat of the Sun for
himself, Simile.
yet he could abide to be thrown into the sea for the good of others and for
their safety; so Christ was contented for our good to be apprehended,
condemned, and to be spet upon, to be crowned with thorns, whipped, nailed
to the cross, flung into the grave; and yet he would not suffer any thing,
that did concern himself, but refused it.

Now the next general point to be observed, Fifthly, the crucifying of Christ.
is, the very act of his crucifying, showed but in a word, He was crucified,
and yet there is much pain, 1
much ado, a great deal of torment shut up in the belly and bowels of that
word: 2
For, first, they threw down the Cross upon the ground. 3
Secondly, they drew or pulled out all the fearful instruments for that
purpose. 4
Thirdly, they stripped him. Fourthly, they laid him on his back, and they
stretched out his hands and his feet upon the Cross, 5
and nailed him unto it. Lastly, they did rear up the Cross into the air, as
though he were unworthy to be upon the ground. And thus we see, what a deal of
pain and torments, is shut up in the bowels of this one word: whence for our
learning we may gather these good instructions following:

First, Use 1.
seeing Christ was crucified for us, this should make us bewail our sins
with bitterness, that we should be the parties should bring all these pains
upon Christ, forhe suffered not for his own sins, for he was innocent and holy,
but for my sins, and thy sins, which we daily live in; Esaias, 53. the
Prophet says, The chastisement of our peace was upon him; and 1 Pet. 3. 24. it
is said, Who in his own body bare our sins upon the tree: therefore seeing
our sins brought all those pains upon Christ, we have cause to bewail them,
Simile.
we can bewail the punishments we bring upon our selves, but how much more
should we bewail the punishment we bring on Christ; as the spickes and the
nails being driven into the hands and feet of Christ, when he was crucified,
made the blood run out at the holes; Simile.
so the meditation and consideration thereof should cause our consciences to
bleed. And now seeing our sins have brought Christ on the cross; what will
we do? mock him as the wicked Jews and the soldiers did; or be silent, as
the Disciples were, or stand still? No, but we must after a spiritual manner go
to the cross of Christ and say, Lord, will thou die for me, and suffer such
great pains and torments? I have eaten sour grapes, and thy teeth are set on
edge with them; It is I that have sinned, but Lord thou have done nothing
worthy of these great pains; therefore, O Lord, that I may never forget this
great love of thine, though I cannot perfume thy body, as Mary did, with sweet
spices, yet will I never cease to wash it with the daily tears of true
repentance for my sins: But alas, we can weep for the loss of our wives, of
our children, but we cannot weep for our sins; therefore we should do as
the Physician, Simile.
who when he finds men dangerously bleeding at the nose, lets them blood in
another place, and so turns the course of the blood another way; so our
weeping for worldly losses, we should turn to weeping for our sins, and for
the loss of Gods favor, that thus Christ was crucified for them.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing Christ was crucified, we should labor to see all our spiritual
enemies crucified with him; for when Christ was upon the Cross, he pulled the
Devil, sin, death and damnation to the Cross with him, and so also were
crucified; so Christ was not crucified alone, but all the enemies of man's
salvation with him: So the Apostle, Coloss. 2. 14. speaking hereof, says, And
putting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was
contrary to us, he even took it out of the way and fastened it to his cross;
and having spoiled the principalities and powers, he made a show of them
openly, triumphing over them in it: therefore the same Cross that served to
crucify Christ, the same has served to crucify our spiritual enemies; and
though the Jews saw none but Christ upon the Cross, thou that art a Christian
must go further, and see all the enemies of man's salvation, the Devil,
damnation, and sin, crucified with him.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing Christ was crucified upon the cross, we must be contented to crucify
our selves; and therefore after a spiritual manner we must go to the Cross
of Christ, and nail our hands and feet unto the Cross, that we may not move a
hand or a foot, to displease God; Nay, we must go further, and crucify our
sinful and carnal lusts, and inordinate affections; for the Apostle says,
that they that are in Christ have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts thereof: So that there is not a true Christian, but has been upon the
cross already, and has carried his corruptions thither to be crucified;
therefore look how busy the Jews were in crucifying of Christ, be thou as
busy to crucify thy sins and corruptions; howsoever men may talk of the
crucifying of Christ, yet if thou have no care to crucify thy sins, and thy
carnal lusts, thou can have no comfort by it; be sure then, as the Jews did
apprehend Christ, condemned him, set a crown of thorns upon his head, spet on
his face, nailed him to the Cross, killed him, and flung him into the grave;
even so do thou by thy sins, labor thou to apprehend thy sins, to
condemn them, set a crown of thorns upon them, spet at them, do all the
disgrace that may be to them, nail them to the cross, and bury them in the
grave of Christ, that so they never rise again.

Fourthly, Use 4.
seeing Christ was crucified, and suffered such extremities; This must teach us
to see what extremity all unrepentant sinners must look for at the day of
judgment; for if Christ suffered such extremity, that had but the imputation
of our sins upon him, what shall become of them that live in their sins,
inherit them? Our Savior we know says, If they do this to the green tree,
what shall become of the dry? If they did so to Christ that had no sin, what
shall become of thee? I will tell thee, if thou be found in thy sins, and have
not repented them, thou must look for no mercy; for if he spared not his
Son, then look that he will not spare thee: For (as the Apostle says, Romans
11. 21.) if God spared not the natural branches, but cut them off, take heed
lest he spare not thee, who art a wild olive tree.

Fifthly, Use 5.
seeing Christ was crucified, and suffered such extremity for the saving of
thy soul, then thou must be contented to suffer any thing to be saved: For,
did Christ suffer for thee? And art not thou that art a Christian contented to
suffer any thing, that thy soul may be saved? If men did know the true value
of their souls, they would be contented to suffer any thing to save them, as
the Apostle ssaith, Philip. 3. I count all things as dung and dross, to be
found in Christ: And so the holy Martyrs, Hebr. 11. it is said, Some of them
were racked, some were sawne asunder, and would not be delivered, that they
might obtain a better resurrection.

The third thing that the Evangelist shows in his crucifying, Of the stripping
of Christ.
is, how they did strip him; they did pull off his clothes, we see, first they
put off the purple robes, and put on his own garments, and now when they nail
him to the Cross, they strip off his own garments, and let him hang naked on
the Cross.

This shows the merit of our sins, Use 1.
that we deserve not the least bit of bread, nor the meanest coat that may be,
to live or to die in; hence we may learn that every must labor to find this
guiltiness in himself, for it is the Lords mercy that we have any thing; as
Christ was stripped at his death, so we deserve to be stripped of all comfort
at the day of death; and as Iaakob said, Lord I am less than the least of thy
mercies; so we may say, Lord I am not worthy of the least bid of bread, nor of
the meanest coat, nor of the least comfort that may be. Thus the Prophet
declares Gods goodness, Lament. 13. It is the Lords mercy that we are not
consumed; and it is Gods mercy that we have a coat to put on our backs, that
we have a bit of bread to put in our mouths, a bed to lie in, an house to put
our heads in, and if we have any thing more than others, we must acknowledge it
is the Lords great mercy to us, and we are to bless God for it, that he has
made our life any way comfortable to us: And the same Prophet Jeremy
complains of this neglect in his days, Chap. 5. 24. Neither say they in their
hearts, let us now fear the Lord our God, who gave us rain both early and
late, and appointed unto us the weeks of harvest: And even so the Lord
bestows on us abundance of his blessings; O that men would fear the Lord for
those his blessings, that from day to day they live in, but we have our hearts
hardened like them, who, Mark 6. 52. had not considered the matter of the
loaves, because their hearts were hardened.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing Christ was naked on the Cross, this must teach us, how naked we are in
the sight of God; that we have not a spiritual grace to cover our souls
with, for Christ was not so naked in the sight of men, as we be naked in the
sight of God; every man can see the nakedness of his body, and can complain
of that, but they cannot see the nakedness of their souls; according to that
which the Spirit of God says, Revel. 3. 17. Thou say I am rich and enclosed
with goods, and have no need of any thing, and know not that thou art
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing Christ was naked on the cross, this his nakedness does serve to
purchase and procure clothing for thee; therefore Christ was naked on the
cross in the sight of men, that thou should not be found naked in the sight
of God, but that thou may stand with comfort before God at the day of
judgment, covered with the righteous robe of Christ Jesus.

The fourth thing observed in the manner of Christ's crucifying, Next crucified
betwint two thieves.
was, That he was crucified between two thieves, and he was numbered amongst
the wicked; they did hang him in the middle, as if he were the chief of them:
Whereby we learn, 1
first, as it was the portion of Christ to be accounted and numbered amongst the
wicked; so it is the portion of Gods people to be numbered amongst the wicked
still to this day.

Secondly, 2
seeing Christ was crucified between two thieves, this must teach us wisely to
distinguish between the cross of Christ, and the crosses of the thieves, for
although the punishment was alike, yet the cause was not alike, for Christ he
died an innocent man, but they died worthily, for that which they had done, and
even so here we must learn to distinguish between the punishment of the
godly, and of the wicked, for many times taste of the same punishment, but the
cause is not alike. Yet let us beware of Popish superstitions which so admire
the cross outwardly that they eat out the life of all internal devotion
thereby: Five falsehoods of popish Crucifixes.
and to this end let us take notice of these five falsehoods in their
Crucifixes.

First, they picture Christ hanging on the cross, 1
whereas he stood on his feet, and we have great authority for it, as
Irenaeus, Iustine Martyr, Gregory, and Bellarmine; all these affirm he did
not hang on the cross, but stood: this is the first falsehood.

Secondly, 2
they affirm and make the wound to be on the right side of Christ, whereas it
was on the left side, for when the souldlers pierced him, water and blood came
out of it, now there is water no where about a man but at the heart, for that
only wants cooling, which is the office of the water about it; therefore in
probability it was on the left side, that being nearer the heart: and this is a
second falsehood.

Thirdly, they nail his feet but with one nail, whereas Christ had two
nails, 3
in each foot one: the Heathen could say, Away with him to the cross, two
nails to nail his hands, and two nails to nail his feet; and every man
cannot choose but think more than one nail was needful to nail his two feet.
A great Jesuit was the first inventor of this doctrine, and he pictured
Christ with one nail in his feet: this is the third falsehood.

Fourthly, 4
Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 11. Does not even nature it self teach you, that if
a man wear long hair it is a shame to him? It was not lawful for a man to
wear long hair, except he were a Nazarite; but they picture Christ with long
shag hair. Now we are to think, that Christ would not sin against nature,
for there was no sin found in him; again he was no Nazarite after the
custom of the Law, (though he were of Nazareth or a Nazarene, by reason of
habitation or the place where he dwelt) for he did drink wine and strong
drink, which was not lawful for the Nazarite to do: therefore it is very
probable, (if not certain) that Christ's hair was short: this is the fourth
falsehood.

Fifthly, 5
all the Evangelists say, that the titles that were set over the head of
Christ, were written, in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin; but in their crucifixes,
it is written in Latin only; this is the fifth falsehood. So that we see,
they are so far from the true power and virtue of the cross of Christ, a^
they have not a true form of it; therefore do thou whosoever thou art,
leaving these dead images, labor in the cross of Christ to crucify the
immoderate care of the things of this life, thy covetousness, thy impatience,
thy sinful anger, thy uncleanenesse, and though thou have no wooden cross,
nor no stone cross, as the Papists have, yet this cross shall be thy comfort
and joy in life and death.

The fifth point is, The behavior of Christ on the cross, which of all other
is most worthy to be considered, Fifthly, Christ's Behavior on the cross.
for though he did carry himself holily and patiently, the graces of God being
fully seen in him in his life time, yet especially they did shine most bright
and clearly when he came to dye; for as the stars do shine brightest in the
darkest nights, so the virtues and graces of Christ did shine brightest, when
he was upon the cross. Now this carriage of Christ upon the cross, must teach
us especially to look to our behavior in our crosses, for although a
Christian man's speeches, actions, and behavior, should be seemly and holy at
all times, there being no time wherein we should not walk worthy of a
Christian calling, yet especially when he is upon the cross, as it were, then
he must show all his Christian virtues and holy graces, for (says one) such as
a man is in trouble, such he is indeed, because then for the most part he
cannot deissmble, when trouble is upon him, as he may at other times, Simile.
when he is in peace; let one put water into a glass, if the water be clear,
shake and joggle the glass, and there is nothing but clear water seen, but
if there be mud or dregs in the bottom, if then you shake it, it will fly
all abroad and easily appear: so if a man's affections be pure, stir and
shake him, and there will nothing appear, but that which is pure, but if there
be dregs or mud in the bottom, sins or corruptions, then shake and stir
him, and all will fly about and be seen. I have showed you heretofore that the
devil is like a dog, whose quality is, if a man let fall a bone or give him
any thing, when he is at meat with him, Simile.
then the dog will wait for more, but if he give him nothing, let fall no
bone or crumme, the dog will wait no longer, he will seek him a new master;
so the devil does; if a man be in trouble, afflicted with crosses, he will
wait to see if a bad word or action do escape, if we let fall any, then he
will wait still, but if none fall, the devil will seek him a new master:
therefore as every man should look to his behavior at other times, so
especially he should when he comes to the cross and in affliction.

Now the carriage of Christ on the cross is seen in the seven last words of
Christ which he uttered on the cross. The seven last words of Christ upon the
cross. The first word of Christ on the cross.


The first is, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. Here we
may see, the love of Christ, that he prays for his enemies; and for such
kind of enemies as were his sorest and greatest, such as did not take away his
garments only, but took away his life; and that he prayed at such a time,
when the blood ran down his hands and feet, when his shoulders were rent
and torn with whipping, and his face was swelled with buffeting. Now from
these first words of Christ on the cross we may observe these four things:

1. Whom it was he prayed for; for his enemies, his greatest and sorest
enemies, such as did not take away his garments only, but his life also. 2.
What he prayed for; that their sins might be forgiven them, and that they
might not answer for them, at the day of judgment. 3. The time when he prayed,
at that instant when the action was a doing, at that time when he did hang on
the cross, when the blood ran from his hands and feet, when his shoulders
were rent and torn with whipping, when his face was swelled with buffeting. 4.
The reason why he prayed, that God would forgive them, because they knew not
what they did.
First, First, for whom Christ prayed.
whom it was that he prayed for; it was, for his enemies; not such as did take
away his garments only, but such who took away his life also in the greatest
extremity that might be. Which teaches us two things:

First, 1
to love our enemies, and to pray for them, that hate and persecute us, such as
do not only take away our garments, but our lives in the greatest extremity
that may be; so we see 1 Pet. 2. 21. For even hereunto were ye called, because
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his
steepes; and Col. 3. says the Apostle, forbearing one another, and forgiving
one another, even as Christ forgave you so do ye: this is the first lesson
that Christ taught us on the cross, for as Augustine says, Christ made a
pulpit of the cross, and the lesson that he taught us was, that we should love
our enemies. But in these days of sin and corruption, we are so far from
loving our enemies, that we can hardly love our friends whom we are bound to
love, both by the Law of nature and Religion, therefore how far are we from
that example of Christ, which shows that every one is bound to love his
enemies, and pray for them: I know a man shall have much ado to bring his
heart to do this; neither am I a Pope to give you a discharge if you do it
not; but this I say, that if you will take no more upon you than comes easily,
ye shall never be true Christians, Simile.
nor truly religious: a man must force and dress himself against the hair
(as they say) against his nature; we see naturally water will run down the
hill, but to make it run up we must force and drive it up by violence; so we
must force our selves, and go against nature, Simile.
against the hair as it were if we would come to heaven: if a man come into a
strange country, where he can have nothing but wine to drink, if his stomach
will not bear it, the custom is to allay it with a little water; so seeing
here is in us a great heat of sin, that we can hardly love our friends and
our enemies, we must therefore labor to allay this heat in us, that so we
may not only love our friends, but our enemies also: Five Considerations to
move us to love our enemies.
and that we may do this, there be five considerations to help us and to
further us.

First, the commandment of Christ, Math. 5. 44. But I say unto you, Love yor
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray
for them that persecute you: I say unto you, I that am your Lord, I that am
your Savior, love your enemies, and although you cannot love them for your
own sake, yet love them for the Lords sake, as Luke 5. 4. Our Savior bids
Peter, cast down his net into the sea; says Peter, we have traveled all
night and caught nothing; as if he should say, it is against the hair, we are
like to do no good of it, it is in the night time, yet at thy commandment I
will do it: So ought we to obey the command of Christ, how unlikely soever the
issue be, God will reward it, we shall have an happy end and issue.

Secondly, 2
The example of God, Matthew. 5. 45. He makes the Sun to shine on the evil
and on the good, and the rain to fall on the just and on the unjust: So
because Gods general goodness comes to all sorts men alike, to good and to
bad, our goodness must extend it self to all sorts of men, good and bad; if
we be the children of God, we must be like him; Balaam could say, Simile.
when he was sent for to curse the people of God, How can I curse them, whom
God has blessed? So if God bid us bless them, we must not curse them, unless
we will be worse than Balaam. Again, though they be our enemies, yet they
may be Gods friends, and them which he loves; as also it is a gift that God
does bestow upon his children, to love their enemies.

Thirdly, 3
Because it is the greatest love, to love that which is not capable of love: It
is nothing for a man to love his friends, but it is a hard matter to love our
enemies: Simile.
The Philosophers could say, that which is the hottest fire burns up that
which is not capable to burn as we see in the Kings, The fire that burned the
sacrifices, did lick up water, and consumed that which was not capable to
burn; so that is the greatest love, which works upon an object where there is
least matter of love, as the love of God to us was.

Fourthly, 4
Because it is the best way to make our enemies love us; Simile.
as we cannot quench fire with fire, but must quench it with water; so we
must overcome enemies with kindness, as the Apostles counsel is, Romans 12. Be
not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with goodness.

Fifthly, 5
Because if it do not bring a blessing upon them, yet it will bring a blessing
upon our selves; as Matthew. 10. our Savior bids his Disciples, when they come
to an house, Simile.
they should say, Peace be in this house; and if it did not rest on the house,
yet it should return to them again; so, when we pray for our enemies, and
bless them, if it do not rest on them, it shall return to us again.

Secondly, The second Lesson.
Seeing Christ loved his enemies, and prayed for them, much more will he love
and pray for his friends, servants and people. But how do we prove that?
Quest. Sol.
Because he loved his enemies, and prayed for them: The chief Butler forgot
Joseph, when he was lifted up and restored to his Office again: But Christ
will not forget his servants and his people; but even as good Joseph when he
was exalted in Egypt, Simile.
his father and brethren being in distress, he goes to Pharaoh and said, Sir,
I have a poor father in the Land of Canaan, and eleven brethren; there is a
famine in the Land, and they are like to starve; Simile.
Sir, you have bread and corn enough, I pray you let me send for them, and let
them dwell in thy country and kingdom, even in the Land of Goshen: So Christ
says to his Father; Father, I have a great many of poor distressed servants
in the world, afflicted and troubled with the temptations of the Devil, and
their own corruptions, and with wicked and bad men; Father let us send for
them, let them be in thy country, and come into thy kingdom, let them be in
joy, and in all that glory which thou have prepared for them: therefore labor
thou to be one of Gods servants and friends, and then thou may assure thy
self, that Christ loves, and prays for thee every day and hour, when thou
art dead-hearted and heavy, and can not pray, then Christ prays for thee,
this may give thee comfort.

Secondly, 2
What he prays for, for the pardon of their sins, that God would not lay
them to their charge at the day of judgment? What Christ prays for.
Now the pardon of our sins is the greatest blessing that we can have in this
world; this it was that Christ prayed for.

Thirdly, 3
When he prayed for his enemies, even in the very act, when they drove the
nails into his hands and feet, When he prayed for them.
when the blood did trickle down, when his shoulders were rent and torn with
whipping, when his face was swelled with buffetting, even when all his pains
were upon him: In which observe two things:

First, 1
that it was in the heat of sin, when admonition and good counsel would do no
good to them, then he prayed for them: which must teach us, when we should pray
for our enemies, when admonition and good counsel can do them no good: Simile.
When a clock runs riot, what, will a man go and pull down the plummets? No,
then it may be, he may have his load, even to lay all on his head, but they
will go to the great master-wheele that stirs all; So we should do when we
see men go headlong to sin, that nothing will stay them, we must not run
to the plummets to stay them, to the men, but we must go to the great
master-wheele of the clock, to him that carries all things and orders all
things, that is, to God, as 1 Samuel we see in the example of Abigail.

Secondly, 2
in the very act of his crucifying, when they were in the very heat of their
malice, when the blood did trickle down from his hands and feet, then he
prayed for them: It may be some can pray for their enemies when the heat is
over, and there is a calm, but see, Christ prays in the very act of their
malice; so Act. 7. Steven did, in the very act, when a shower of stones came
about his ears, he kneeled down and said, Lord, lay not their sins to
their charge.

Fourthly, the reason why Christ prayed for his enemies, because they did they
knew not what. Now the words were;

1. Words of Compassion. 2. Words of Extenuation.
First, 1
of Compassion, as if he should have said, Lord, they know not what they do;
Of Compassion.
for if they knew what an high sin, and great offense it were to kill the
Son of God, they would not do it; so we may say, when we see men run into
all kind of sins, of drunkenness, breaking the Sabbaths, swearers and
whoremongers, etc. Alas, they know not how highly they sin against God, for
if they did they would not do so, they do not know that it is the Devil that
blinds them, and leads them down to hell by these means, therefore good
Lord spare them, good Lord forgive them.

Secondly, words of Extenuation; Lord, what they do is not or knowledge, but
of ignorance, 2
therefore good Lord spare them: which may teach us, Of Extenuation.
That sin of ignorance be less, than sins of knowledge: therefore when men
swear, and know it is a sin to swear, it is a greater sin than if they
did it ignorantly, for there is no kind of ignorances wor^e than sins of
knowledge.

SERMON XXI.
JOHN 19. 26, 27. When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the Disciple,
standing by, whom he loved, he says unto his momother, Woman, behold thy
Son. Then says he to the Disciple, Behold thy mother. And from that hour
that Disciple took her unto his own home.
WE began to speak the last day of the holy carriage of Christ on the Cross,
many testimonies he showed in his life time, of faith, humility, patience, and
of piety, but especially when he came to die, and was upon the Cross, then
all his graces did shine forth most clearly; which carriage of his (I showed)
must teach us to look to our behavior, when we are under the cross, in any
affliction and trouble, for howsoever the speeches, actions and carriage of a
Christian should be seemly and holy at other times, yet especially, when he is
under the cross, in trouble and in affliction, then he must show all his
Christian graces and virtues, as Job did, Job 1. 22. when he was on the rack,
it is said, In all these did not Job sin, nor charge God foolishly. So the
holy people, Psalm 44. 19. say they, Thou have smitten us in the dens of Dragons
and covered us in the shadow of death, yet have we not forgotten the Name of
our God, etc. Thence we came to speak of the first words of Christ on the
Cross, and diverse other things which we will not now repeat, but come to that
which follows. The second words of Christ on the Cross; wherein we observe
three things:

1. The occasion of the speech. SER. XXI
2. The speech it self. 3. The effect of the speech.
First, 1
The occasion of the speech, was, that he being on the Cross, saw his Mother,
Occasion of the speech.
and John the Disciple whom he loved; for when others fled away from Christ,
these tarries with him, and followed him to the Cross, to see what would
become of him, and got as near it as possibly they could: this was the
occasion, of which there be two Uses:

1. A moral, and 2. A spiritual Use.
First, First a Moral.
the Moral use, that as Mary and John gathered to the cross of Christ, when
he came to suffer; So we should gather to our good friends when they be in any
trouble or affliction, especially when they be in their last extremity, ready
to die, that we be there to help and to comfort them: It is Joseph's blessing,
Genes. 46. 4. That he should put his hands upon his father Jacobs eyes, that
is, that he shall not leave them in the time of death: It is the tenderness
of many, that they cannot abide to be with their friends at the time of death,
but we that be Christians must labor to overcome this, and perform this
good duty, to help and comfort them, as much as we can: It is said of Abraham,
Genesis 19. 16. That when the Angels came to his house, and were to go from him,
he brought them on the way: the consideration of which duty, should put us in
mind to perform another, namely, that when we see them ready to depart, we
should attend them, with good speeches, with our prayers, and never leave them,
till we have brought them as far as we can: we read 2 King. when God would
take away Elias, Elisha would not leave him, Simile.
but attended him till a fiery chariot came, and took him away, and so carried
him to heaven; so we should not leave our friends and neighbors, but attend
them with good speeches and prayers, till God has received them into heaven, a
place of glory, the very seat of God.

Secondly, Secondly a Spiritual use.
the Spiritual use is, that as Mary and John gathered to the Cross, as near
him as possibly they might; so every man should gather to the Cross of Christ,
as near as possibly he can, that when others attend their pleasures, profits
and their sins, yet thou may get as near the cross as thou can, and
join thy self to Christ, that every drop of blood there may fall upon thy
soul and conscience: Simile.
If a man come where there is a fountain of water, if he be a-thirst, he will
make way to it, upon his hands and knees; so seeing God has opened a fountain
for us in the blood of his Son, as it is, Zech. 13. 1. If we be a-thirst we
will creep upon our hands and knees, to make way to this fountain and drink
of it, that so we may be nourished to eternal life: The Papists run to
Jerusalem to see the wooden cross of Christ, which when they have done, they
are never a whit the better for it; but do thou labor to mortify thy sins
in the cross and death of Christ, join thy self to him by a true faith, and
then thou shall partake of his cross, eat his body to live eternally, and to
drink his blood to thy everlasting comfort. Thus much for the spiritual use.

The second thing that was observed, 2
is, The speech of Christ, wherein we observe two things: The Speech it self.


1. The tenor of his speech. 2. The time of it.
First, 1
The tenor of it, is, Woman, behold thy Son, and to his Disciple, behold thy
mother, as if he should say, take this man for thy son, and he shall
perform the duty of a son unto thee in my room, take him to be thy son,
and take this woman to be thy mother.

Secondly, 2
The time when he spoke it, when he was in pains and torments upon the
cross; wherein diverse things are to be observed.

First, 1
we may see the care of Christ for his mother, that he provides carefully for
her, and therefore commends her to John: Which must teach us to be careful to
provide comfortably for those we leave behind us in this world, our wives and
our children; we read to this purpose, Hebr. 11. 21. that Iaakob blessed both
the sons of Joseph, by faith, when he was a dying; It is a heathenish saying,
when I am dead let heaven and earth run together; such care for no body but
themselves; but we who are Christians must have a care of the good of those we
leave behind us: So Isaak did, Genesis 27. 2. I am old (says he) and know not the
day of my death, come and let me bless thee before I die: So likewise Elias
says to Elisha, when he was to ascend in a fiery chariot, What shall I do for
thee before I be taken from thee? Object. Sol.
I, but some may say, I have no body to commit my wife and children to, I have
no friend nor kinsman: I answer, If thou have no body to commend them to,
neither friend nor kinsman, then commend them to God, and he will provide for
them; if thou layest them down in the arms of God, he will keep them: So
says our Savior Christ, John 17. 11. having none but God to commend his
Disciples to, when he was to depart this world, (says he) And now I am no more
in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee; holy Father,
keep them in thy Name: So Paul, Act. 20. 32. when he had no body to commend
the people to, he commends them to God, when he was to depart from them, (says
he) And now brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which
is able to build you up further, and to give you an inheritance amongst all
them who are sanctified: Therefore, if we have no friend nor kinsman to commit
those we leave behind to, we must commit them to God, and he will provide for
them; this must be our care, when we are to depart this world.

Secondly, 2
this care of Christ may teach us, that he is not only the Savior of our
souls, but of our bodies; therefore Luke 22. 35. our Savior says to his
Disciples, When I sent you out without bag, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye
any thing? And they said, nothing: so we see Christ did provide for the body
and soul: this is the reason why Christ did not only teach the people, but he
did feed them too, to show that he was not only the Savior of the soul but
of the body too, he did not only take care of their souls but of their
bodies also: this meets with the common corruption of these days, in that men
commit the care of their souls to God, but they are afraid they shall want
food, raiment, and things needful for this life, therefore they will take care
for their bodies themselves; but it is certain, that if Christ have care of
our souls which is the greater, he will have a care of our bodies which is
the lesser, this Christ teaches us in reason, Matthew. 6. Is not the life more
worth than meat, and the body more worth than raiment; and is not the kingdom
of glory more worth than the things of this life; therefore if he give the
greater, let us not doubt he will stand for to give us the lesser, which are
the things of this life.

Thirdly, 3
this care of Christ must teach us that we must so perform our duty to God,
as we do not neglect it to men, and we must so perform our duty to men, that
we do not neglect it to God; therefore the Lord has joined both together, as
Mic. 6. 8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good: and what the Lord
requires at thy hand, surely to do justly and to love mercy, and to humble
thy self, to walk with (...). As Exodus 25. the Cherubines that did stand upon
the Arc, did (...) upon the mercy seat as they did look with their faces one
toward another; so we must perform our duty to God, that we do not neglect
our duty to men; but in what order must this be performed?

First, Order of our Duty.
we must do our duty to God, then we must do it to men; Christ was
careful for his mother, but it was from the cross, for first he did submit
himself to the will of his father, Simile.
and was obedient to the death of the cross, after that he was careful for
his mother: so we must do, when we have done our duty to God, we must be
careful to perform duty of love and kindness one to another.

Fourthly, 4
if Christ were careful for his mother, let us not doubt but that he will be
careful for his church; Joseph when he was in Egypt, and his father in Canaan,
says unto Pharaoh, Sir, I have a poor father, and eleven brethren, that are
like to starve, you have corn enough, I pray Sir, Simile.
let me send for them, and let them dwell in the land of Goshen, so Christ
says to God his father, I have a company of poor distressed servants in the
world, afflicted and troubled, I pray thee send for them, bring them home unto
thee, that they may behold thy glory. I but, some men may say, indeed Christ
was careful for his mother, because she was his mother, and his good mother
too; Object.
but what is that to me? How may I assure my self, that he will be careful
for me too? To this I answer, Ans.
that if we do the will of God, then we are his brother, his sister, and his
mother, so Christ says, Matthew. 12. For whosoever shall do the will of my
heavenly father, he is my brother, my sister, and my mother, so if we do the
will of God, we are his brother, his sister, and his mother; and as he was
careful of his mother, and did commend her to John when he was to depart this
world, so he has given a charge to this whole world concerning his church, to
heaven and earth he has given a charge; to his Angels, Psalm. 91. 11, 12. For
he has given his Angels charge ever thee to keep thee in all thy ways, they
shall bear thee in their hands, that thou hurt nor dash thy foot against a
stone. Which although it be especially spoken of Christ, yet there is not a
member of Christ, but it concerns too; so he has given a charge to the whole
world concerning his Church, Psa. 105. 15. Touch not mine anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm: so also he has given particular men a charge to do us
good, even a number we know not of, Simile.
as 1 King. 17. 8. When Elias was in distress at the river and wanted meat
and drink, the river being dried up, The word of God came unto him, saying,
arise, get thee to Zarephath, which is in Sidon, and remain there: Behold, I
have commanded a widow there to sustain thee: so God has given a charge to a
number of men we know not of to feed us, and sustain us; therefore as Christ
commended his mother to John; so God has given a charge concerning his Church,
to Angels, to the whole world, to particular persons.

Secondly, Secondly, the time when he spoke.
the time when he spoke, when he was in pains and in torments upon the
cross: which may teach us when bodily pains be upon us we should stir up
our selves to do good, to those we leave behind us; so Christ (...) forgate
his pains and trouble, that was upon him, and stirred (...) himself to do
good; I know through frailety of the flesh, Simile.
we shall have little mind to think or to speak of any good, but Christians
must not give place to the flesh, but stir up the graces of God, which is in
them; so Steven Act. 7. coming near his death, when a shower of stones came
about his ears, kneeled down, and called upon the Name of God; old Iaakob
also when he came to dye he gathered up himself, and worshipped toward the
end of his staff, and bowed himself; Heb. 11. 21.
so a Christian must rear and stir up the spirit of grace which is in him;
if a man fill a bottle of ale, and fling it into the sea, howsoever a man may
pull down the bottle, it will rise again, if it be not held by plain
strength; so howsoever a Christian man may be held down through the pains
that be upon him, yet as long as there is a Spirit of grace in him, it will show
it selfeat one time or other.

Thirdly, Thirdly, the effects of his speech.
The effects of the speech, that from that time forth he took her home to
himself, that is, he took her for his mother, which must teach us, 1
that every one must be careful to perform the will of the dead: if it be
the will of the dead, we must be careful to do it, Gal. 3. 15. (says Paul)
Though it is a man's testament, yet if it be confirmed, no man does abrogate it,
or add any thing to it; so the will of a dead man is not to be disanulled: and
this is seated in nature, that it is an injury and wrong to a dead man when
they do not perform his will, as Ier. 35. 6. And I set before the children of
Rechab, bottles full of wine, and said unto them, Drink wine: But they said,
We will not drink wine; for Ionadab our father commanded us, saying, Ye shall
drink no wine, you nor your sons fo ever; which they observed only, because
it was the will of their dead father: much more we that be Christians, how
careful should we be to perform the will of the dead, seeing we believe the
Resurrection, that we shall all rise again? and then with what faces can we
look on them at that day? with what face can the wife look on her husband,
and the child on his father, and one brother on another, when we have not done
their wills, but have rather done injury and wrong to them.

Secondly, as John was obedient to Christ, in the estate of his humility when
he was upon the cross, much more we should be to him, in the estate of his
glory: let us be careful to remember his will and commandments, and do
them, for although he has not laid, it may be, the care of wife, or of
children on thee, or of servants, yet he has laid the care of the preserving
of thy own soul, and conscience; take heed therefore, do not starve or
famish it, for if we do neglect thar he puts us in trust to do, how shall we
look upon him at the day of judgment? we see in experience, if a man commit a
child to one to nurse, if she shall neglect, starve, and famish the child,
how can she look on the party that did put the child to her? so it is a
greater sin, to starve thine own soul, for this is the last charge that
Christ gave to us to feed and to nourish our souls, but if we neglect, starve
and famish them, how shall we be able to look on him at the day of judgment?

Now we come to the third speech of Christ on the cross, The third speech of
Christ on the Cross.
which was to the Thief that was crucified with him; wherein two things are to
be observed:

1. The occasion of the speech. 2. The speech it self.
First, First, the occasion of the speech.
the occasion of the speech; it was concerning the conversion of the Thief:
for there were two thieves crucified with him, of whom the one blasphemed and
rayled on Christ, because he would not save his body nor assuage or mitigate
his pains; the other applied himself to Christ for the saving of his soul,
and did not care what became of his body, so his soul were saved he did not
pray Christ, to pull out they spickes out of his hands and feet, nor to assuage
his pains, but his prayer was for the saving of his soul. In which two are
figured out all men when the come to die, some desire to have their body saved,
and to have pains mitigated, to be restored again to their health, and
because they be not, some of them murmr against God, the other sort desire to
have their souls saved, and care not what become of their bodies, so their
souls may be saved, they desire not so much to have health and ease, but let
all go, so they may have their sins pardoned, and have the salvation of
their souls, to come into Gods kingdom.

Now in the occasion of the speech, which was the conversion of the thief, we
may observe three things:

1. The Party that was converted. 2. The time when he was converted. 3. The
fruits and effects of his conversion.
First, First, the party who was converted.
the party that was converted, it was a Thief, a notorious offender and a bad
liver, and a naughty man, all his life time, yet now he is converted unto God,
and saved, therefore let no man despair of Gods mercies, whatsoever thy sins
be, it may be thou have been a vile liver all thy life time, happily thou have
lived a whooremaster, a drunkard, happily thou have been a scoffer of Religion, a
hater of good things, a covetous person, a coozener of thy neighbors, do not
despair of Gods mercy, if thou can repent, and turn to God, thou shall be
saved: so Paul says, that it is a worthy saying, and worthy of all men to be
embraced, that Christ came into the world, 1 Timothy 1. 15.
to save sinners; of whom I am the chief: therefore seeing Christ came into
the world to save sinners, no man must exclude himself from Gods mercy; so
likewise Ier. 3. 1. says the Lord, If a man put away his wife, and she go
from him, and become another man's, shall he return again unto her? shall not
that land be greatly polluted? but thou have played the harlot with many
lovers, yet return again to me says the Lord: In like manner, 1 Samuel 12. 20.
The Prophet speaks unto the people, Fear not, ye have done all this
wickedness, yet depart not from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with
all your hearts, etc. So howsoever men have lived wickedly, and done badly, yet
let them not turn away from serving the Lord, but let them be desirous to
please him, to repent of their sins, and they shall find mercy with God;
when Caine had killed Abel, he cries out, My punishment is greater than I can
bear: upon which words Augustine, Simile.
Thou lie Caine, the Lords mercy is greater than any man's sins, if he can
repent. Bernard says well, We know right well, O Lord, thou do not reject
the Thief that confessed, the sinful woman that wept unto thee, nor the
Canaanitish woman, that did humble herself before thee; nor the wicked
Adultresse brought unto thee, nor the Toller or Tribute gatherer that did
follow thee, nor the Publicane that repaired unto thee, nor the Disciple that
denied thee, nor Saul that did persecute thee, nor thy Tormentors that did
nail thy sacred body to the cross; O Lord, all these are fragrant fruits of
thy most sweet mercy, and by the sent of these sweet ointments, we run unto
thee and do follow thee. And from hence we conclude, that no man must
wilfully exclude himself from Gods mercy.

Secondly, Secondly, the time when he was converted.
The time when he was converted, which is to be considered in three
circumstances: first, it was when others did scoff and scorn Christ, and when
the Jews did mock, rail and revile at him, with his fellow thief, 1
then at that time he was converted: This should teach us, that we be not
carried away with the bad examples that be amongst us, that although others set
not a fly by Christ, nor care for his precious blood which he has shed for
us, but rather despise it, yet we must regard it, and set it at a high price,
and desire to have our parts in him, as Genesis 6. the Lord said unto Noah, Make
thee an Arc, when the world attended their pleasures and profits, and did what
they would, he provided an Arc; so do thou, make thee an Arc, labor to
repent thee of thy sins, and to turn unto God, and to get faith in Christ,
that thou may be saved though all the world does otherwise: we see (by
experience) when a flood comes, Simile.
loose things, and such as are not rooted, and unsettled or light things are
carried away with the stream, but such as are rooted and settled these remain,
the poor thief was then converted, when others did mock at Christ, railing
at him and reviling him.

Secondly, 2
when Christ was on the cross, in his greatest humility and abasement, not
when he was walking on the sea, or on the water, or working of miracles, giving
sight to the blind, making the dumb to speak, the deaf to hear, cleansing
of Lepers, casting out devils, raising the dead; not when he was giving life
to others, but when others were taking life from him, even then the thief was
converted: Hereupon Augustine says well, Moses believed God, but when was it?
when he spoke out of the fiery Mount; and Abraham was obedient to God, to go
out of his country, and from his kindred into a strange land, when God spoke
from heaven; the Patriarchs believed when he spoke in dreams and visions; the
Disciples and Mary saw the wondrous miracles; the Centurion he was converted
and believed, when the veil of the Temple rent, when the rocks did fly
asunder, and when the graves did open; but the poor Thief he was converted,
when he saw none of these wonders, but when Christ was in the greatest
abasement that might be: now if the Thief was converted to God when Christ was
on the cross, in his humility and abasement, how shall we answer to God at
the day of judgment, that we are not converted to him, now he is in his glory?
As Matthew. 12. 41. our Savior says, Simile.
That the Ninivites shall rise up in judgment and condemn the Jews, because
they repented at the preaching of Jonas, and behold, a greater than Jonas is
here: they would not repent at Christ's preaching: so say I, the Thief shall
rise up in judgment and condemn this world, in that he repented, and turned
to God, when Christ was in his abasement, on the cross, and they have not
repented and turned to God now he is in his glory.

Thirdly, 3
he was converted at the last hour of the day, when he came to dye, all his
life time he had neglected it, and had not a thought (it may be) of it, yet now
at the last gasp he did repent him of his sins, and turned to God: which may
teach us, howsoever we have neglected our repentance and conversion in our life
time, and have not looked after it, and it may be, we had not a thought that
way, yet when we come to dye, it is high time to look after it then or never:
but I dare not wish any man to defer his repentance till the last gasp, for
that is dangerous, but the best way is to repent as soon as may be: the
reasons I will not stand to show now, because I have sufficiently spoken of
them heretofore: the world abuses this example of the Thief, and will
therefore defer their repentance till the last gasp that they come to die,
and so make of a precious ointment, rank poison. Now that it is a dangerous
thing for a man to defer his repentance till the last hour, Danger of late
Repentance.
I make it clear, first, because this is a singular example; for there is but
this one in all the Book of God, that repented at the time of death, of so
many thousand spoken of that have died without repentance; therefore this is a
dangerous president for any man to follow: says one, There is but one example
that no man may presume, and there is one, that no man may despair.

Secondly, 2
he repented no sooner, because he was called no sooner; for if he had been
called sooner in probability, he would have repented sooner and turned to God:
as Augustine says, no man must defer his repentance, for he that was called
the first hour of the day, came the first hour, and he that was called the
second hour of the day, came the second hour, and he that was called the
sixth hour, came the sixth hour; and so he that was called the first hour
did not defer his coming till the fourth hour, nor he that was called the
sixth hour, did not stay till the last hour, but they came at the same hour
of the day, that they were called. Which must teach us that when God calls
us, we must not defer the time or delay it, but straightway turn to God;
says Chrysostom, God has promised the pardon of thy sins, if thou do
repent, not when we will, but when God will give it thee: and to that purpose
Heb. 3. it is said, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts,
etc. never defer it till to morrow, nor while the next day, for it is a
dangerous thing to defer repentance, but more dangerous to defer it till
the last gasp.

Thirdly, Thirdly the fruits and effects of the theefes conversion.
the effects and fruits of his conversion; which are four:

1. He reproves his fellow thief. 2. He confesses his sin, and the
punishment due unto it. 3. His apology, and defense for Christ. 4. His prayer
that he made to Christ.
First, First, the reproof of his fellow thief.
the reproof of his fellow thief; hence we observe three things:

1. Of what he reprooved him. 2. Upon what ground he reprooved him. 3. With
what affection he reprooved him.
First, for what he reprooved him; for the want of the fear of God, says he, 1
fear thou not God? as if he should say, if thou did fear God, thou
durst not speak as thou do, nor do as thou do, it is the want of the
fear of God, that makes thee do so: hence we collect the reason, why men
run into all disorder and sin, because they want the fear of God,
therefore men swear, be drunken, run into all profaneness and vileness,
because they are not afraid of the power of God, nor of his wrath, they think
not of condemnation or of hell; for if they were afraid of these things, they
durst not so do: therefore it is that the want of the fear of God, makes men
run into all disorder: of such Paul complains Romans 3. 15. Their feet are
swift to shed blood: and a number of other sins he reckons up that men run
into for want of this fear, which the Apostle sets down as a cause of all;
the fear of God is not before their eyes, ver. 18. for where this fear is
not, there is no sin so vile but men will be ready to run into it: so Deuteronomy.
25. 17. says the Lord, Remember what Amaleck did unto thee, in the way when
ye were come out of Egypt: how he met thee by the way, and smote the hindmost
of thee, even all that were feeble, faint and weary amongst you: and he feared
not God: so it is the want of the fear of God, that makes men run into all
disorder; therefore it is a good sign, when men be afraid to sin against
God, afarid of his power, wrath, dispeasure, hell, and damnation; but when men
thus fear God, this stops them in sin; so Nehem. 5. 15. says he, I durst
not do as the governors before me did, because of the fear of God: we read
Job. 31. 19, 20. the holy man making his Apology, thus, If I have seen any
perish, for want of clothing, or any poor without covering: if his ^ynes have
not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with the fleece of my sheep; If I
have lift up my hand against the fatherless, when I saw my help in the gate;
Let mine arm fall from my shoulder blade, and my arm be broken from the
bone: and presently he gives a reason of it, For destruction from God was a
terror to me; and by reason of his highness I could not endure: Therefore it
is a good thing to be afraid to displease God. A man that dwells by the sea
side, Simile.
as long as there is a wall or a bank, though it flow fearfully, yet thinks
himself safe, so long as the wall holds, but if it be once broken down, then
he thinks himself in danger of drowning; so, as long as we have the fear of
God, to be a bank or a wall about us, we be safe, but if we once break this
wall, we are ready to be drowned with sin and all disorder; therefore it is
good and profitable to have the fear of God always before our eyes.

Secondly, 2
On what ground he reproved him; because he was ready to die, as well as he,
and yet it was not long before they should both come before God in judgment,
to answer for all their sins; therefore now it is high time to fear God: In
like sort, although our case be not yet come to that extremity as theirs was,
that we are ready to die presently, yet because sentence is passed upon us;
for as the Apostle says, Romans 8. The body is dead because of sin; let us,
though death has not already taken the castle and tower of our hearts, yet
seeing he is entered within the walls and suburbs of the city; let us, I say,
therefore be careful to fear God, and to walk conscionably before him; for
we know not how soon death will take the tower and the castle of our hearts,
and then we must come to judgment: This use Isaak made of this uncertaintie of
life; Simile.
I am old (says he) and I know not the day of my death, come and let my soul
bless thee before I die; so because we know not the time of our deaths, how
soon we must come to judgment; therefore, before we stir or move a foot,
let us labor to repent us of our sins, and convert and turn to God.

Thirdly, Out of what affection he did it; out of love to do good to him, for
this is the nature of one that is truly converted, to draw others to Christ:
So we see, John 1. 41. Andrew said to Simon, We have found the Messiah, which
is by interpretation, the Christ; And John 4. 28. The woman of Samaria, when
she had been talking with Christ, goes into the City and says to the men,
Come, see a man which told me all things that I ever did; Is not this the
Christ? and so many came to be believers. In nature we see all natural things
desire to make other things like themselves, as fire does desire to make all
thigns that comes near it fire, Simile.
so water; and other living things, when they be come to strength of nature,
then they beget things like unto themselves, as a man, to beget a man, a beast,
a beast like to himself; even so it is with a Christian, he will labor to
make others like to himself, when he comes to his strength and ripeness;
indeed in his weakness he does not, but when he comes to his strength he
labors to make others like to himself.

Secondly, 2
The confession of his sin, and the punishment due thereunto; for first, His
confession of sin and punishment due thereunto.
he does not say, thou art here justly to receive things worthy of that thou
have done; 1
but he brings or takes in himself; We are indeed righteously here, for we
receive the due reward of our deeds: This is a note of a man truly converted
to God, to confess his sins, to shame himself and give glory to God: So if
men be converted to God, they will not talk of other men's sins, but they
will enclose themselves with others, and make confession of their own sins
also; therefore when men cloak and hide their sins, it is a shrewd sign
that they are not soundly converted.

Secondly, 2
he confesses that all these punishments and judgments of God are justly upon
them; this is a good sign of a man that is truly converted to God, to clear
the justice of God: as the Church, Micha 7. 9. I will bear the wrath of the
Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he p^^d my cause, etc. So Ezekiel.
20 43. says the Prophet speaking of sound conversion, And there shall ye
remember your ways, and your works, wherein ye have bin defiled, and you shall
loath your selves in your own sight, for all the evils which ye have
committed. So we must labor to clear the justice of God, in all our
punishments that befall us; therefore when men will wrangle and dispute with
God, and do not labor to bear with patience the judgments of God that do
befall them, it is a sign that such an one is not rightly converted unto God.

Thirdly, 3
His apology and defense for Christ; But this man (says he) has done nothing
miss: His apology and defense for Christ.
when every man was against him, the Governor, soldiers, and Jews, this
poor Thief could not be silent: This is a sign of true conversion, when men
can bear any thing, concerning themselves, with patience and silence, but if
it be against God, and his honor, they cannot bear it: this affection was in
Moses, for it is said, that he was the meekest man on earth, when things
concerned himself; but when the people committed idolatry, he brake the Calfe
in pieces and stamped it, and made them to drink of it, and he commanded every
man to put his sword by his side and to kill his brother: Which must teach us,
that every man in his own quarrel must be silent: But when the cause
concerns God, then silence is dangerous, and a very great sin against God.

Fourthly, 4
The prayer that he made, was, Lord remember me when thou come into thy
kingdom: The prayer which he made.
The other thief desires to have his body saved, to have his pains assuaged
and mitigated; of which, because he was not eased, he railed on Christ; but
this Thief did not desire to have his body saved or his pains mitigated, or
to have the nails and spickes pulled out of his hands and feet, but he was
contented to suffer any pain, he cares not what become of his body, so his
soul may be saved, and he may come into Gods kingdom: Which must teach us,
that when we come to die, we should not take care of our bodies, but for our
souls, Lord remember my soul, I beseech thee give me the truth of thy faith,
give me patience, let my body feel and suffer what it may, yet let my soul be
saved, and bring it into thy kingdom, and then no matter what become of my
body, any thing shall content me.

SERMON XXII.
LVKE 23. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. And one of the evil doers, which were hanged,
railed on him, saying, If thou be the Christ, save thy self and us. But the
other answering, rebuked him, saying, Fear thou not God, seeing thou art in
the same condemnation? And we indeed righteously, for we receive the due
reward of our deeds; but this man has done nothing amiss. And he said, Lord
remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. And Jesus said unto him,
Verily I say unto thee, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.
IN these words we proposed two things to be considered; first, SERMON. XXII.
the occasion of the speech; secondly, the speech it self; the occasion of the
speech was upon the conversion of the thief, at the time of his death: Now in
the conversion of the thief we consider three things; first, the party that
was converted; secondly, the time when he was converted; thirdly, the effects
and fruits of his conversion: from whence we then spoke of many things we will
not now repeat, but come directly unto that which follows.

The fourth thing we began to speak of was, Fourthly, the thieves prayer.
his prayer he made unto Christ in that extremity: wherein two things are to
be considered:

1. The ground of his prayer. 2. The prayer it self.
The ground of his prayer is threefold, first, that he was persuaded he had a
kingdom prepared for him, 1
howsoever he did hang on the cross basely, and contemptibly; and that he had
the dispensation and disposing of it.

The second is, a persuasion that he will not keep it to himself, but that he
will impart it unto others. 2


The third is, 3
that he will impart it to others who are poor penitent sinners, not only to
the just, but to the penitent, and this was the ground of his prayer. Now every
one of us must lay this ground of prayer.

First, 1
he must be persuaded that Christ has a kingdom, and that he was come into
it, and has the power and dispensation of it; so Matthew. 28. 18. All power is
given we in heaven, and in earth; so Ioh. 5. 22. For the Father judges no
man, but has committed all judgment to the Son.

Secondly, 2
a persuasion, that he will not keep it to himself, but will impart it to
others; even as a conduite receiving water, does not keep it to it self,
Simile.
but conveies it to others; so Christ received this kingdom, not to keep it
to himself, but to convey it unto us: as Luke 22. 29. therefore I appoint unto
you a kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me: so Christ does not retain
it to himself, but he does impart it to all others.

Thirdly, 3
that he will impart it to poor penitent sinners; Matthew. 9. 13. our Savior
says, that he came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; and
therefore if men will repent of their sins, let them not fear but that
Christ will bestow it on them, for he will not bestow his kingdom on the just
only, but on poor penitent sinners: this is the ground of his prayer.

Now for the prayer it self, and herein we observe two things:

1. What he prayed for. 2. The time when he prayed.
First, First, what he prayed for.
for what he prayed: he prayed to be remembered when Christ came into his
kingdom, he did not pray Christ to pull the nails and spickes out of his
hands and feet, to have his body saved, or his pains mitigated or assuaged,
but he desires to be remembered when he comes into his kingdom, so he lets all
the care of his body go, and applies himself to have his soul saved, to be
remembered when Christ comes into his kingdom. Now with the other, all his care
was for the saving of his body and to have his body eased of his pains, which
because Christ would not assuage, he railes on him; but this man is contented
to let all go, so his soul may be saved: now in these The^ves are figured out
all the men in the world, when they come to dye, with some all their care is to
have their life prolonged, their bodies saved, to have their pains assuaged
and eased; so we see it was the care of Ahaziah king of Israel, shall I
recover my fall? all his care was to know whether he should recover of a bodily
cure; so it is with the world, all their care is to know whether they shall
recover or no; but the Saints care not so much for the saving of their bodies,
as their souls; let the body suffer what it will, they are contented to suffer
any pains, so they may have their souls saved: I have showed you heretofore,
that if an house be on fire, Simile.
they will fetch out all the best things, so that if any perish, it shall be
the worst, because if all cannot be saved, it is wisdom to save the best; so
if our souls and bodies be in danger, that we cannot save both, let us
labor to save the best, which is our souls, as this thief did, not desire to
have the spickes pulled out of his hands and feet, to have his pains assuaged
and eased, but his desire is to be remembered, so what pains soever we
endure, we must say, I am contented to bear it, save my soul only. If a man
by a shipwreck be cast into the sea, a planke coming to him, Simile.
will he not let go his gold and silver and catch hold on the planke to save
his life? so we are all floating in the sea of this world, ready to be drowned
with the pleasures and profits thereof, ready to be sunk as low as hell,
therefore how much more had we need to castaway every thing that does hinder
us, and take hold on the means that God has appointed for saving of our
souls.

I, Object.
but what is it that he prays for? he prays to be remembered: why should he be
remembered? he was a thief, a bad liver, a notorious fellow, one would have
thought, he would have desired Christ to have forgotten him.

To this I answer, that there be two kinds of Remembrances.

1 Remembrance of God in Judgment. Ans.
2 Remembrance of God in Mercy.
First, there is a remembrance of God in judgment; as Psalm. 9. 12. For when
the Lord makes inquisition for blood, 1
he remembers them: he forgets not the complaint of the poor. So likewise
in Hos. 7. 2. And they consider not in their hearts, that I remember all their
wickedness. The Lord remembers all the others they have sworn, all the lies
they have told, all the Sabbaths they have profaned, all the hours they have
misspent; and so all their sins the Lord remembers to punish them.

Secondly, there is a remembrance of God in mercy, as Genesis 8. it is said, The
Lord remembered Noah: 2
that was in goodness and mercy; Psa. and 132. 1. Lord remember David, and all
his afflictions, and so the Thief desired to be remembered, not in judgment but
in mercy; in like manner, David desired not to be remembered in judgment; where
he says, Psa. 3. 25. Lord, remember not the sins of my youth, nor my
rebellion; he desires God to remember him in his tender mercy, and his loving
kindness; as also here the Thief prayed Christ not to remember him in his
sins, and in his transgressions, but to remember him in the multitude of his
mercyes.

Secondly, the time when he prayed; and it was, when he was upon the cross in
pains and torments, ready to dye, then he stirred up himself to prayer: and
this must teach us that when we come to dye, we must stir up our selves to
prayer, and to repentance, and to other Christian duties: I know when pains be
upon us, we shall have little mind to speak, or to do any thing, but we
must then stir up our selves to prayer, and gather up our selves; so we see
Stephen did, in the 7. of the Act. even when a shoure of stones came about him,
then he stirred up himself, and called on the name of God.

Now the next thing we are to speak of is, the Answer of Christ: and that is a
Promise, wherein we observe four things.

1 Upon what his promise was made. 2 Unto whom it was made. 3 What was
promised. 4 When he would perform his promise.
First, 1
upon what he made his promise: upon his prayer, which may teach us, that, true
prayer shall not want his due fruit; so Matthew. 18. 32. says the lord, I
forgave thee thy debts, because thou did pray me. And David Psalm. 120. 1. I
called upon the Lord in the time of my trouble, and he heard me: so Psalm. 11.
I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, etc. This is a great
encouragement for a Christian man to pray unto God, because prayer shall not
want his due fruit, but the Lord will hear him, and make a supply of his
wants, as shall be meet for his glory and our good.

Secondly, 2
to whom he made his promise: to a poor penitent Thief, one that was a vile
liver. This is a sweet comfort and encouragement that Christ will promise
heaven to a poor penitent sinner, upon his repentance, and put him in
possession of it. All the comforts and commodities in this life, all pleasures
and delights cannot do it; let the wantons set their minions before them, the
worldly man his goods, the covetous man his money, the hateful man his
revenge, and the proud man his fine apparel, all these cannot do it; but upon
repentance Christ promises heaven, and puts us in possession of it: nay, the
kings favor cannot do it, he may put us in possession of lands and goods
while we live here, after death he cannot: but repentance will put one in
possession after death.

Thirdly, Thirdly, what he promised.
what he promised: he promised two things:

1 Paradise. 2 His own company.
First, First, Paradise.
he promised Paradise: there were two Paradises spoken of in Scripture; an
earthly, and an heavenly Paradise: now it was not the earthly paradise, for
that was laid waste many thousands years before Christ was borne; but it was
the heavenly Paradise, of which Paul speaks 2 Cor. 12. 2. I knew a man in
Christ above fourteen years (...), whither in the body or out of the body, I
cannot tell, God knows which was taken up into the third heavens. Hence arise
two points of instruction:

First, First, instruction.
we may see what a goodly change a Christian makes at the time of death; for
all the while he lives here he hangs on the cross, (as the thief did) in
trouble and affliction, in pains and in sickness, but when death comes it
sets an end of all; it takes a man off the cross, it enters a man into heaven;
therefore a Christian has no cause to be afraid of death; for if a man be
profane and live in his sins, he has cause to be afraid of death, because
it is an ugly gate to let him into hell; but if he be a man of repentance then
death is only a gate to let him into heaven: therefore a Christian has no
cause to be afraid of it. If a King should promise one that if he would come
unto him he would bestow some great office, Simile.
or place upon him, if there should be at the palace gate an ugly and grisly
Porter to let him in, he would not cast his eye on the ugly porter, but upon
the Kings palace; even so death is as this ugly and grisly porter, to let a man
into heaven, let us not therefore look upon the ugly face of death, but upon
heaven, the place we are going to. We see when Elias was taken up into heaven,
there came a fiery chariot, and horses of fire to fetch him, and yet he was not
afraid, because it was the chariot and horses that should carry him to heaven;
Simile.
So death, though it came like a fiery chariot, and bring horses of fire with
it, yet let us not be afraid of it, because it is the chariot and horses which
shall carry us to heaven.

The second instruction is, 2
That a Christians estate is better than Adams was in the time of his
innocence; Instruction.
for he had an earthly Paradise, but a Christian shall have an heavenly
Paradise: therefore seeing we would be contented to take any pains, to be put
into possession of the earthly Paradise, if it were possible; how much more
then should we labor and take pains to be put into possession of the
heavenly Paradise?

Secondly, 2
He promises him his company, that he shall fare no worse than he fares, His
own company.
and shall go where he goes: And this is a sweet comfort to a Christian, that
Christ has made such a promise, that he shall have his company; as John 17.
24. Father, I will that they which thou have given me, be with me, even where
I am, that they may behold my glory: So Ioh. 14. 3. And if I go and prepare a
place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I
am, there you may be also: Therefore let a man labor to be joined to Christ
here in the use of good means, in the kingdom of grace, and he shall be
joined to him in the kingdom of glory, he shall go where Christ goes, shall
fare as Christ fares, and shall be where Christ is.

Fourthly, 4
The time when he promises Paradise, and his company; This day, he would not
defer it, The time of fulfilling this Prophecy.
for months and for years, but This day: Which may teach us, that the souls
of the faithful, when they die, go into heaven immediately; the Papists say,
that there is a middle place, that their souls must go to, where they must
stay a time, til they be thoroughly purged from their sins; but this error is
refuted in the example of the Thief, for when he died, his soul went into
Paradise immediately. I, but some object and say, that this was a special
privilege of the thief, and to none other. Object. Sol.
To this I answer, that the same privilege is to every faithful man; as we
may see, Luke 16. 22. when Lazarus was dead, he was carried by the Angels into
Abraham's bosom, into a place of rest and joy: And the Rich-man when he died,
was carried into hell, a place of torment; there are but these two places to
go to, when a man is dead, that the Scripture makes mention of, there is no
middle place; when men die, they go either to Heaven or to Hell, for we know
that all men that die in the state of repentance, go to heaven; they which die
impenitent, to hell: and therefore it is a vain thing to pray for them, for
their estates cannot be altered.

I, Quest. Sol. Object.
but is there any hurt to pray for our dead friends? I answer, if thou know
not, I will tell thee what hurt there is by it; it shows thy infidelity and
unbeleefe, that thou do not believe the Scriptures. I, but may I not speak
of my dead friends, would you have me say nothing of them? If thou do not
know what to say of them, Sol.
say as Paul says of the godly, that they are asleep in the Lord; so we see
what we may say of our friends, that they be now asleep in the Lord: Or as
Solomon says, that the remembrance of the just are blessed, such an one is of
holy remembrance, such an one was an holy man.

The use of this point is, Use.
seeing after death the godly go to heaven, a place of glory and happiness*
we therefore must labor to be obedient to God to do his will, and to be
content to endure the troubles of this life with patience; as the children of
Israel walked in the wilderness forty years together, following God in a
cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night, enduring many troubles and
afflictions till they came to the Land of Canaan; so we must follow God, labor
to do his will, and be contented to endure the troubles and afflictions of
this life, be it forty or fifty years together, till we come to this heavenly
Canaan.

The fourth words of Christ on the Cross, Matthew. 27. 46.
were, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? But having spoken of these
words not long since, I shall not need to speak of them again at this time:
Only I will give you the heads of them, which are four:

1. What it is to be forsaken of God. 2. How far forth a true Christian may
be forsaken. 3 What a grievous thing it is to be forsaken of God. 4. How a
Christian should carry himself, when he is forsaken.
First, 1
What it is to be forsaken of God, that is to want the grateful and the
acceptable presence of God, which is twofold: First, There is a presence of
God in power, to uphold his creatures, and to give a being to them. Secondly,
There is a presence of God in goodness and grace; to want this presence, is to
be forsaken of God.

Secondly, 2
How far forth a true Christian may be forsaken; In the life of nature he may
be forsaken; in the life grace he cannot finally or totally, for there is the
power of grace, and there is the comfortable feeling of grace. Now every true
Christian has the power of grace, but many times want the comfortable feeling
of it: and so far a true Christian may be forsaken. Thirdly, What a grievous
thing it is to be forsaken of God, for if he have forsaken us whom shall we
make our moan to it was the complaint of Saul, that the Philistines were come
upon him, and God was departed from him: we count it a great matter to be
forsaken of our kindred, or of our friends; O but it is a far greater matter to
be forsaken of God: therefore though our ^^ndred, our friends, and the world
forsake us, yet pray to God that he do not forsake us. Fourthly, How a
Christian is to carry himself when he feels himself forsaken; which was
showed in the example of Christ: First, he carried himself mournefully:
Secondly, he carried himself holily: he rested himself on God by faith.
Thirdly, he labored to recover himself by prayer.

SERMON XXIII. SERMON. XXIII.

JOHN 19. 28, 29. After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now
accomplished, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, says, I thirst. Now there
was set a vessel full of vinegar: And they filled a sponge with vinegar, and
put it upon hyssope, and put it to his mouth.
IN 1 Pet. 2. 21. the Apostle Peter does offer to our consideration, all that
Christ did upon the Cross: He did not all as the price of salvation only,
but also as an example of holy life, and Christian virtues: therefore look how
Christ carried himself when he was on the Cross, so we must carry our
selves, when we be under our crosses in any affliction or trouble. Many
testimonies Christ showed in his life time, of love, patience, humility,
zeal, piety, Simile.
and number of other virtues, yet when he comes to die, and was on the Cross,
then all his graces were gloriously dispersed and displayed: So, howsoever a
Christian is to show many testimonies in his life time of faith, patience, and
of piety, yet especially when he comes to die, then all his graces must be
gloriously displayed, and made to shine forth.

Now the Holy carriage of Christ is seen in the seven last words of Christ on
the Cross. The first was, his prayer for his enemies. The second, the care he
had of his friends. The third, the promise he made the thief upon his
conversion at the hour of his death; whereby all the people of God have
assurance of a blessed and a happy change after death, though they hang on the
cross, in trouble and affliction, in pains and in sickness here; yet death
shall take them down from the cross and shall transform them from men to
God, from earth to heaven; from mortality to immortality, from pains to
ease, from sorrow to joy, from shame to glory; and as he said to the Thief on
the Cross, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise; so he says to his
servants on their sick beds, this day shall thou be at ease and rest. Of these
I have already spoken; as also of the fourth, His desertion; when he cried
out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And now I am come to handle the
fifth words of Christ on the Cross, containing a complaint that he made of
bodily thirst: wherein we are to consider four things:

1. What were the causes of his thirst. 2. How he carried himself in his
thirst. 3. When he complained of thirst. 4. What were the effects of his
thirst.
First, What were the causes of his thirst, and they were two:

1. Natural. 2. Moral.
The Natural causes were these: 1
The first was long abstinence from meat and drink, The natural cause of it.
he was a whole night and day without any refreshing; He never ate bit from
the time he ate the Passover, till this time; this was a great matter
especially in that Country: for we read, Luke 13. 15. How the Jews did loose
their Oxen and their Asses on the Sabbath, and had them to the water, they
could not well tarry a day without drinking; therefore it was a great matter
for a man to tarry without meat and drink so long, especially being so
tossed and tumbled as Christ was; indeed if he had been idle and done
nothing, he might the better have borne it: But Christ was in action and in
employment, for they pulled him in the Garden, from thence hurried him to Annas,
and from Annas to Caiaphas; and in the morning from Caiaphas to Pilate, from
Pilate to Herod, from Herod back again to Pilate, and then to the Cross. So
Christ was in action and motion, and yet all that while took no sustenance, he
was without any refreshing; this could not choose but make him thirsty. Simile.
When Sampson had killed a thousand Philistines, he cried out, give me water,
or I shall die for thirst: so when Christ had encountered not with the
Philistines, but with our spiritual enemies, the Devil, Sin, Death, Hell and
Damnation, and had overcome them all, he cried out, I thirst.

The second reason was, 2
Exiccation or dryness within him; for he had lost much blood; By exiccation,
or dryness.
some in the Garden, and some in Pilates Hall, and on the Cross for (as the
Philosophers say) the blood is the Chariot of the Spirits, which wanting
moisture dries up, and then the spirits must needs fa^le, as we see many times
men fall in the Streets, by reason of the want thereof; according to that
Lament. 4. 4. where it is said, The tongue of the sucking Child cleaves to
the roof of his mouth for thirst.

Thirdly, 3
Extremity of grief and sorrow that was upon him, for man's sin: for the
Schoolmen say, Extremi^^e of grief.
that a sorrowful heart dries up the bones. And these were the Natural
causes of his thirst: All which was to show that it was not a light matter to
redeem us, but it cost him a great deal of pains and sorrow. The Moral
causes of Christ's thirst.
Therefore we must take heed we do not cast away that for a little ease,
pleasure, or profit, that cost so much to redeem us.

The Moral causes were: 1
First, he thirsted that we might not thirst; for such is our sinfulness,
that we deserve not when we lie on our sick beds and come to die, That we
might not thirst.
to have a drop of wine; nay, we are not worthy of a drop of wine to refresh
us, nor of cold water to cool us: we that have so many pots to drink by the
pound, or by the dozens, by the yard, the time may come that we cannot have a
drop of water to cool us with. We see the rich gluiton that in all probability
had his tasters, and all variety of daintiest dishes and rarest wines to
please his palate in this life, being in Hell, desires but a droope of water to
cool him and could not have it; and this is the desert of our sins. But
Christ thirsted, that we might not thirst: And therefore we may say, O
blessed be God for the thirst of Christ, for it has procured many a sweet
drop for us.

The second cause that Christ thirsted was to fulfill a Scripture. 2
This is a point very observable, To fulfill a scripture.
that all that Christ did was to fulfill the Scriptures; which is a phrase very
common through the whole Book of God: I will instance only in the Gospel by
Saint Matthew; Christ was borne of a Virgin, to fulfill the Scripture, chap. 1.
22. So also he was borne at Bethlehem, chap. 2. 5. He dwelt in Nazareth, verse.
ult. Went and dwelt in Capern^um, chap. 4. 13. only to fulfill the Scripture:
and so in many other places both of this and the other Evangelists, it is said,
Christ did so and so, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled: whence we
learn this point of instruction; That all that Christians do, must be to
fulfill a Scripture: we must not look to our own ease, and to our own
content, but we must carry our eye to the Scripture to fulfill that. This
must be the reason why we read, why we hear the Scriptures, or come to hear
the Word preached, why we pray and come to Church, why we do give to the
necessity of the Saints, and why we do the duties of our Callings; all to
fulfill the Scriptures. As Mariners when they be at Sea, howsoever the winds
blow here and there, yet look to their Card and Compass, and eye that,
because it is their direction; so Christians must do, how ever the winds blow
here and there, yet they must eye the Scriptures, because it is their
direction, and keep close to them, when profane wretches, the sons of Belial,
be swilling and drinking; do they eye the Scriptures? do they that they do
to fulfill the Scriptures? No verily, except it be this Scripture in the 1 Corinthians. 10. 7. They sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play: or
this, Job 21. 13. They spend their days in wealth, and suddenly go down to
the grave; so they shall have but small comfort of such fulfilling the
Scriptures. But let us fulfill the Scriptures, as Christ did, and then we
shall have comfort in life and death. He fulfilled many Scriptures before, and
had but this one to fulfill; so that he could not be at rest till he had
fulfilled it: So when we have fulfilled many Scriptures, and be upon our sick
beds, if there come one more into our minds, there is such a Scripture to be
fulfilled, such a neighbor to be reconciled unto, or there is some wrong to be
righted, we should not be at rest till we have done it. It is the manner of
the World, if they have fulfilled one or two Scriptures, they take a
dispensation for the rest, if they come to Church in the forenoone, they think
they need not come in the afternoon; If they pray in the morning, they may
live loosely all the day after; If they have done one duty or two, they have
done enough? But a Christian must do all the Scripture commands, and have an
eye to all the commandments of God, to do them: As David did, I have respect
to all thy Commandments, and Psa, lme 18. for says he* His Laws are before
me, and I did not cast away his Commandments: Therefore if a man has done a
number of good duties that the Lord commands him, and he remembers one thing
that he has not done, he must labor to do it; for we must not make
conscience of some duties, and neglect others; but ought to make conscience of
all the Commandments of God.

The third cause is, 3
that by his thirst, we might learn to be a thirst; for all the Actious of
Christ on the Cross, That by his thirst, we might learn to thirst.
are for our example: Therefore as Christ thirsted for water, so we should
thirst for the Spirit of grace. As he said, I thirst, so a Christian man must
say, O good neighbor I thirst; but what do thou thirst for? not for wine and
strong bear, but I thirst for Jesus Christ, for sanctified graces, faith,
repentance, the pardon of my sins, for Heaven and happinessse, and for Gods
favor. Augustine says, there be diverse thirsts in the world, some thirst
after wine and strong drink, some after goods and lands, some after honor and
preferment, some after pleasure, and some after blood: But thou O man, do thou
thirst after Heaven and happinese; be athirst for Gods favor, for the pardon
of thy sins and for righteousness, and then thou shall be satisfied; for
our Savior says, Math. 5.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall
be satisfied. Indeed there be a number of Christians in the World, every one
of whom has his thirst; the covetous man after his goods, the hateful man for
revenge; but the Christian man he must thirst for Gods favor. So David says,
My soul thirsts after thee, etc. therefore howsoever the men of the world
thirst after lands and livings, thou that art a Christian, must thirst after
Jesus Christ, and for the pardon of thy sins, and thou shall be satisfied,
when they with the rich glutton in Hell shall thirst, and have not a drop of
water to refresh them or cool them.

Secondly, 2
how Christ carried himself in his thirst, he complained and cried out and
said, Christ's carriage in his thirst.
I thirst: which may teach us, that the people of God are not stocks and
blocks, but they have sense and feeling of their wants. We see Christ
complained of his thirst, so we may complain to God of our wants: And is it
not also as lawful to complain to men? Yes, but we must be sure to use no
unlawful means to ease our selves, but wait on God where we may see the
difference between a true christian and a man of this world^ for the one may
desire peace, ease, wealth and such like, but there is a moderation in their
desires, not to have it with any condition, but by good means; which if they
thus obtain not, they can rest contented with the good will of God; so we may
desire these things, but not against the peace of conscience; but the other,
the men of this world care not what means they use, to have their desires, as
Matthew. 4. when Christ was hungry, the devil came to him, and bade him turn
stones into bread; Simile.
so the devil does still, when Christians are in want and necessity he will
come to them, and bid them turn stones into bread; that is, use unlawful
means, put themselves upon bad courses, to come out of it; but we must take
heed of this, if we have not our desires, yet we must wait on God and be
contented with his good will: So Psalm. 123. the Church does, As the eyes of a
servant look to the hands of his master, and as the eyes of a maiden to the
hands of her mistress, so our eyes wait on the Lord our God till he have mercy
on us. In like manner if we be in want or in any trouble we may desire to come
out of it, but we must use no unlawful means, only wait we must on God, and
be contented with his good will whatsoever it be, in the use of good means.

Thirdly, the time of his complaint; When all things were accomplished, when he
had lost a great deal of blood, and endured a great deal of pain; All this
time he held it to himself till he had set man's salvation in safety, and made
that sure, he never complains of his thirst. Wherein we may consider the
mavelous love of Christ, that till he had made man's salvation sure, did not
look to himself; such a careful eye he carried for our good, and safety:
Which love of Christ to us, must teach us to show the like love to him again,
to forget our own ease, profit and pleasures, that we may do service to him:
as Io^ did, I have (said he) preferred the words of his mouth before my
appointed food: So Ioh. 4. Christ being weary set himself down on a Well when
his disciples were gone into the city to buy meat; Simile.
in which time came a woman to draw water, whom he did convert, after which
when his disciples came again with meat, and would have had him to eat, he
made this answer, That it was meat and drink to him to do his fathers will:
He had not so much regard to himself as to his Fathers will; so it must be
with a Christian, he must pass by himself, and care not what become of him,
so God may have glory: We may see a worthy example hereof in Abraham's servant,
Genesis 24. 33* who being sent to get a wife for his masters son, when there was
mea^e ^et before him, he could not eat till he had done his business he came
about: Now if a servant have so much care of his masters business, that he
would not eat or drink till he had done it, much more should we be careful
to do Gods will; therefore when men have so much regard to their own case, and
profit, and pass by that which tends to Gods Glory, this does show that there
is not the like love to Christ, we see in experience, if a child fall into the
fire, or water, if the mother hear of it, Simile.
what business soever she has, she lets all alone, and cannot be at rest,
till she has set her child in safety again; so it was with Christ, he
forgate himself till he had set our salvation in safety, and then he did
thirst; and we should show as near as may be the like love to Christ again.

The fourth was, 4
The Event of his thirst; Christ being on the cross complains of thirst; The
event of his thirst.
Now is there any that brings him wine, to comfort him, or drink to refresh
him, or water to cool him? No, but they give him vinegar to drink: And
because it was not afflictive enough, they gave him it with Hyssope to make it
more bitter and sour. Here we may see the vileness of the soldiers to give
such a draught to Jesus Christ, our Lord and blessed redeemer in his extremity,
we are all ready to condemn them, and that justly for it, but I pray God we be
not the men and women, that do the like. For as Christ said upon the cross,
Sitio, I thirst; so be says now to all the men and women by his spirit in the
world, Sitio, I thirst, what will thou stand still and gaze upon him, or will thou not regard him? I dare lay, that there is never an one here but would be
ready to say, Lord, what would thou have, what is it thou thirstest for? Why,
I thirst not for the wine, nor for the strong drink, nor for thy honey or thy
milk; But, O man, I thirst for thy salvation, thy conversion, thy Repentance,
and for thy faith. And therefore seeing we hear that Christ does thirst, what
will thou do, O man, will thou give him vinegar to drink, as the soldiers
did? or will thou give him wormwood to drink, or temper a cup of poison and
give him? Now the truth is, There is no wormwood or gall so bitter to our
taste, Simile.
as thy impenitencie, hard-heartednesse, and the sins thou live in are unto
Christ, for every sin we commit, we do as it were, put a drop of poison into
a cup for Christ to drink; therefore whereas we condemn the soldiers, we had
need condemn our selves, and come home to our selves; Let us therefore temper
a better cup for Christ to drink on than this, let us repent us of our sins,
convert and turn to him, this will satisfy Christ. We read in the English
Chronicles of a Monk, that got a Toade, and pricked and pressed her in^^ a cup
of wine, and gave it to his Liege-lord to drink; Now I dare say there is never
an one here but does detest the fact. But the truth is, every sin we commit,
we do, as it were, temper such a cup of poison for Christ our blessed Savior
and Redeemer; therefore I pray God, whereas we condemn them for this vile
fact, that there be not just cause to condemn our selves.

SERMON XXIIII.
JOHN 19. 30. When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It is
finished.
AMongst the seven last words of Christ, this is the sixth in order; And it is
a Song of Gratulation, and a triumphing Song, for the work of man's Redemption
and Salvation. When Moses had led the children of Israel through the red sea,
and had drowned their enemies, then they sung a song of thankes-giving for
their deliverance, Exodus 15. And so likewise Deborah and Barak, Judges 3. 1.
when they had overcome Sisera, Simile.
sang a song of thankes-giving: so also the holy people, Revel. 15. when they
had passed through the glassy sea, mingled with fire, and were delivered out of
trouble, then they sang a song of thankes-giving to the Lord: in like manner
here, Christ when he had conquered all our spiritual enemies, death, hell,
sin, and the devil, sung this song on the cross, SERMON. XXIIII.
to the joy of the world, It is finished; Now is man's salvation accomplished
and perfected: As if he should say, All this while it has been but a working
out: For this cause was I nine months in the womb of the Virgin, borne in a
stable, laid in a ^anger, fasted forty days together, prayed on the mount,
swet in the garden, and did hang three hours together on the cross in pains
and torments; but now I have finished and perfected man's salvation, now it is
at an end, sin is abolished, death is destroyed, hell is conquered, the
devil is subdued, heaven is opened, God is pacified and pleased, this is that
he uttered in these words. Now for the better understanding of them, we are to
consider three things:

1. What he meant, when he says, It is finished. 2. The time when he says, It
is finished. 3. By what actions it was finished.
First, First, what is meant by finishing.
what he meant, when he says, It is finished: The full meaning is not
expressed in this place, but it was some secret and close action, that was in
the mind and thought of Christ, that he had an eye to the perfecting and
fulfilling of. Now what was that all these Scriptures show us, Luk 19. 10. The
Son of man is come to se^ke and to save that which was lost; Mat. 20. 28. The
Son of man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life for the
r^nsome of many; and Hebr. 9. 12. Neither by the blood of Goats and ^alves; but
by his own blood, entered he once into the holy place, and obtained eternal
salvation and redemption for us: these were in the heart and mind of Christ,
therefore it is out of question, that Christ, by saying It is finished, meant
the finishing and perfecting of the great work of man's Redemption, which the
Apostle intimates, Hebr. 10. 14. With one oblation and offering has be
consecrated for ever them that are sanctified: Alluding to this very action of
Christ; so that by this saying of Christ, It is finished; is to be understood
the finishing and perfecting of man's salvation and redemption. Now besides this
consummation or finishing, there is another consummation, that is spoken of
Genesis 2. Thus the heavens and the earth were finished and all the ^ost of them;
which finishing is of the work of Creation, but what comfort could a manhave,
that God has made the heavens to cover us, and the earth to bear us, sea and
land to feed us, the sun and moon and the stars to give us light, if
Christ also had not finished and perfected man's salvation and redemption on the
cross.

There is also another consummation and finishing, which is spoken of, Revel.
10. 7. That the mystery of God shall be finished, as he has declared to his
servants the Prophets. Now what is this mystery of God? It is the end of the
world. But alas, what availes it us for the world to have an end, if this
redemption and salvation be not finished and perfected by Christ; therefore all
other consummation is nothing without this: for what is it to finish a great
building, or to finish ones estate in greatness, or to finish all his days in
joy and delights, unless he have finished his salvation, and applied Christ
unto himself? This is the happiest consummation that is, this is the joy and
content of a Christian when he lies on his deathbed; he can say, Lord I
thank thee, I know my salvation is finished in Christ, I have applied him unto
my self, and I find by the merit of his death and passion my salvation to be
perfected: Therefore, into thy hands will I commend my spirit, steadfastly
believing, that at the latter resurrection I shall enjoy the blessed presence
of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Happy, yea thrice happy is the estate of
such a man that shall thus depart in the Lord. The uses to be made hereof are
these following.

First, Use 1.
seeing our salvation and redemption is perfected and finished in Christ, as
the Apostle concludes, Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to those that be in
Christ Jesus: Why? because Christ has answered the justice of God, and has
been condemned already; therefore, he that is in Christ, shall not be
condemned: As Esaias 53. 5. It is said the chastisements of our peace is upon
him, and with his stripes we are healed; and verse. 6. All we like sheep have
gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid
upon him the iniquity of us all. We see John 18. when the soldiers came to
take Christ, says he, If ye seek for me, let these go: let me suffer, and
let these go free: So Christ does interpose himself to the Justice of God,
and says, Father, let my people go free, let me suffer that which they should
suffer, and bear that which they should bear. Thus we see our salvation is
made sure in the holy Person of Christ, and there is no condemnation belongs to
them who are in him; therefore let us labor to be in Christ, that we may say
with the Apostle, The life which I live now in the flesh, I live by the faith
of the Son of God, etc. and then there is no condemnation belongs to us, but
life and salvation is sure, because all is finished in the holy person of
Christ.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing our salvation is perfected and finished in Christ, all our care must be
to apply and to lay hold on Christ; for though he has purchased salvation for
us, yet if we do not apply him, and lay hold on him, we are never the better
for it. If a man should stand in the cold stark naked, Simile.
and one come by and see him, who should show compassion to him, and get
clothes and put it to make for him; how would this man carry his eye all the
while to the workman; and when he saw it all was finished, would lay hold of
it with both his hands, and put it on his back to cover his nakedness: so we
ought to carr^e our eyes on Christ, seeing salvation is wrought in the midst of
us; as the Psalmist says, therefore we ought to put forth both our hands, and
to lay hold on this salvation finished and perfected by Christ. It is a strange
corruption, that many know it and hear of it, that it is finished; but they so
attend their pleasures, profits, and ease, that they never regard it.
Therefore, it must be every man's care, seeing salvation is finished by Christ,
to apply and lay hold of it.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing salvation and redemption is finished and perfected by Christ, we may
see what a hateful and a detestable doctrine, the doctrine of Popery is: for
they say that every one may finish his redemption without Christ, and merit
something at the hand of God by his own works: Notwithstanding, all the
pains that Christ suffered to redeem man, and so they make the work of man's
redemption of none effect; nay the moderatest of them says that salvation is
begun in Christ, but they must finish and perfect it in themselves; whereas
the Scriptures does attribute all to Christ only, as Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he
is able also to the uttermost to save them, that come unto God by him, seeing
he ever lives to make intercession for them: and Heb. 10. 14. For with one
offering has he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified: so then we may
see that Christ is a perfect Savior. Quest.
But why then are we commanded to work out our salvation with fear? I
answer, Sol.
Christ has wrought salvation by himself alone, but we must apply it.
Secondly, the time when he said it is finished; which is to be considered in
two circumstances: First, 2
when he was ready to die, The time when he said it is finished.
and to part with this world, then he said, It is finished, and never till
then; as if he should say, all this while it has been a working, and a doing,
and now by my death it is finished. 1
Four thousand years the World was in expectation of it; all the Patriarchs
and Prophets have looked for it; and thirty three years he himself upon
earth was a working of it, and never till now when he comes to die, to the
closing of his life, did he cry out, It is finished. Thus we may see what a
deal of labor and pains it cost Christ to redeem us: He was four thousand
years a preparing it, and he was three and thirty years a working it; which
does show what a great work the work of man's redemption was. God was but six
days a making the World, but he was three and thirty years, a long time of
redeeming it. Hence let us be instructed, that when we have spent our days
in Prayer, in hearing of the Word, reading of the Scriptures, in meditation,
and in much labor and toil; If we can stand before God with comfort, and say
at the last gasp, Lord, I thank thee; my salvation and redemption is finished
and perfected in Christ, I have laid hold on him, my salvation is sure, then
we may have much comfort. Therefore, should we not think much though we spend
all our life time in labor and pains, if we can say at the last gasp, It is
finished: for all our pains then are well bestowed. Simile.
We see the Children of Israel wandered up and down in the Wilderness forty
years together; sometimes in the day, and sometimes in the night; sometimes
they wanted bread, and sometimes water; and they met with fiery Serpents by
the way which did sting them, yet they went on still till they came to the land
of Canaan: so we should be contented much more, though we live in much
trouble and affliction, and do travel in the Wilderness of this World,
twenty or forty years together, till we be brought to the heavenly Canaan.

Secondly, 2
when he had encountered with our spiritual enemies, with sin, the Devil,
Death, Hell and damnation, and had overcome them, had made man's salvation, and
had finished it, though all the world were in a conspiracy against him, and
he had many combats with the Devil, yet he overcame all; and at the last
gasp cries out, It is finished. Which must teach us, that although all the
men in the world should conspire against us, and though we endure many
temptations, of the Devil, yet we should break though all, and apply Christ to
our selves. so Revel. 2. He that over comes shall not be hurt of the second
death; and Matthew. 11. 12. Hitherto the kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and
the violent take it by force: So that none but violent people can have Heaven;
this is a Metaphor taken from Soldiers that seek to enter in upon a Town,
Simile.
that though the enemy come and beat them down upon their hands and knees,
yet they will up again, Simile.
and never give over, till they have gotten their purpose: So such violent
people only take the kingdom of Heaven, that though they be cast down upon
their hands and knees, by the temptations of the Devil, yet they should get up
again, and never give over till they have gotten the kingdom of Heaven.

Thirdly, 3
By what actions it was finished. Now it has not relation to that which went
before the giving of him vinegar to drink, By what actions all was finished.
but to the action immediately following; and how was it finished? In the death
of Christ; So there is the consummation and finishing of man's salvation and
redemption, according to the testimony of the Scriptures; Heb. 2. 14.
For So Much then as the children were partakers of the flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part with them, that he might destroy through death him
that had the power of death, that is, the Devil; and that he might deliver all
those who for fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage. And
again, the same Apostle, Romans 5. 10. For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son; much more being reconciled, we
shall be saved by his life.

Now although the Scriptures do attribute man's salvation and redemption to the
death of Christ, yet we are not to exclude his life, for he was a working of
it all his life time, even from his very birth to his death. So we see Philip.
2. 5. He took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness
of men; and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross. All his life long was a
preparatory and a working of it: And by his death it was accomplished and
finished; as a man filling of a cup, first, by a quart, then by an half,
Simile.
and so till the last drop come, and make the cup run over; so Christ all his
life time, by little and little, finished man's Redemption, and by his death he
did perfect it, which was as the last drop, for all the sufferings of Christ
were for man's salvation. And his death was that which did finish all. The use
is twofold.

First, Use.
that seeing our Redemption and salvation is finished in the death of Christ,
we should be thankful for it; for it is a great mercy that God has made us
reasonable creatures, and has given us eyes to see withal, hands to handle,
and feet to go with, but it is a greater mercy, that God has redeemed us by
his Son, not only by his life, but by his death also: And therefore (as S.
Andrew says) I am more beholding to thee, O Lord, for the work of my
redemption, by the death of thy Son, than for the power by which I was
created; therefore if a man should be thankful for his creation, much more
should he be for the work of his redemption, for it was a mavelous love of
Christ, the he took our nature upon him, to come into the world, to work our
redemption, to lose his life, to finish and perfect it, and therefore how
thankful ought we to be for so great a mercy.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing our redemption and salvation is perfected and finished by the death of
Christ, we may see the grievousnesse and greatness of our sins, that when
we had sinned against God, all the powers in heaven and earth could not do it,
but it must be Christ, that eternal Son of God, and it was not with his
life only, but with his death: we think much of suffering any little
affliction or trouble; SER. XXV.
but Christ must die to expiate sin and to abolish it, whereas neither Angels
nor Archangels, nor all the Saints and holy men in the world could have done
it, therefore seeing Christ paid so dear for it, we must take heed we do not
account it a light matter to sin. Therefore let us take heed how we grieve
him by our sin, seeing he was contented to lose his life, and to shed his
heart blood for us.

SERMON XXV.
LVKE 23. 46. And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said, Father,
into thy hands I commend my spirit: And having said thus he gave up the ghost.
OF the seven last words which Christ spoke on the cross, this is the last;
which contains an holy Resignation of the soul and spirit of Christ into the
hands of his Father: wherein something in general, and something in particular
is to be considered.

The general is this, That all the speeches and words that Christ did speak
on the cross (from the first to the last) were holy and good: so he did not
only begin well, but did end well also; he made an holy close of his life,
when he came to breathe out his last breath* which must teach us what the care
of a Christian should be when he is in sickness and trouble, not only to
begin well, but to continue well till he come to dye, and breathe out his last
breath, and then to make an holy close of his life: this is that which Christ
speaks of Mat. 24. He that continues unto the end shall be saved; and the
spirit of God Revel. 2. 10. Be thou faithful to the death, and I will give
thee a crown of life. An Archer though he aim and draw well* yet if he in
the loose let his hand slip or sink down, Simile.
he will be wide of the mark; so though we begin and aim well yet if we start
aside or sink down, when we come to die we lose all our glory: therefore it
must be our care, not only to begin but to end well also: It is in sanctified
motions, as it is with wheels that be swiftest at the first and afterward
slower and slower, till the wheel stand still; so it is in sanctified motions,
they be swiftest at the first, and afterward by little and little they abate,
till at last they dye, if they be not supplied by good means; therefore it is
good not only to begin well, but also to end well too, when we breathe out our
last breath, John 2. Christ set out the best wine at the last; But quite
contrary, it is the manner of the world to be best at first, and worst at
last, with the people of God it must not be so, for if there be any worst it
must be the first, and the best at the last. Indeed it is the fashion of the
world to begin well, and to end ill, but the people of God must not do so,
they must not only begin well, but also continue well and end well, and so
make an holy close of their life, when they breathe out their last breath, and
when they shut up their eyes from the light of this world, they may see the
kingdom of heaven. The next thing to be considered is the practice of Christ
when he came to dye. In which observe five things:

1. To whom he commended his spirit: to his Father. 2. What it was he
commended: his spirit. 3. When he commended his spirit: at the instant of his
death. 4. Upon what ground he commended his spirit: upon a persuasion that he
was his Father. 5. What comfort we may have by the commending of his spirit
into the hands of his Father.
First, 1
to whom he commended his spirit: the Text shows, to his Father: When we be
alive we commend our selves, To whom He commends his spirit.
to our friends in hope of comfort, but when we come to die, we must commend
ourselves to God only; therefore as Christ when he came to dye, shut up his
eyes, and did not look upon his mother, nor his disciples, nor upon any
beloved: but he did wholly commend himself into the hands of his Father, in
hope of comfort; Simile.
so when we come to dye, we must shut up our eyes, and not comfort our selves
in our wives, children, friends, and those we love deareliest: but we must
commend our souls into the hands of God: Yea, the people of God have good
cause to do so, in regard he is all in all to us, as David says, Psalm. 73.
25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee; therefore he cast himself upon God, in hope of comfort, so a
man while he lives, may have many friends to commend himself to, but when he
comes to dye, there is none but God that we can commend our souls to.

Therefore, seeing no man has any body to commend his soul to at last but God
only; it must be our wisdom to keep God our friend: for if we despise him
in our health, it is just with him to despise, and reject us when we come to
die. Simile.
We read Judge, 10. 14. when the Children of Israel, had forsaken the Lord, and
followed Baalam and Astaroth, and served them, in their distress when they
came and cried to God to save them out of the hands of their enemies, the Lord
said unto them, Go and cry unto the gods whom ye have chosen: Let them save
you in the time of your tribulation. In like manner the Lord will say to us,
when we have despised him in the time of our health, and have followed our
pleasures, profits, and our old sins, go and cry unto the gods whom ye
have served; see if your money will save and help you; you that have made your
pleasures, your belly, and your sins your God; now see if these will help
you: for if ye despised God in your life time, it is just with God to despise
you when you come to die; therefore it is good to make God our friend whilst
we be alive: This is the counsel that Christ gives us, Luke 16. 9. Make to
your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness; the Fathers take it for
the poor, that we should make friends of the poor: But the meaning is, that
we should make God our friend in our life time, that we may have a friend of
him, when we come to die: therefore because every man must commend himself to
God when he dies, it is good to please him, and to walk holily in all our
courses that we may commend with boldness our soul to him at the last gasp.

Secondly, Secondly, what he commended.
what it was be commended into the hands of God, His Spirit: his body he left
to Pilates mercy, but all his care was for his soul, therefore he commends
that into the hands of God: which may teach us two things; first, though our
bodies dye, yet our souls do live; all the Scriptures show this, 1
Eccles. 12. 7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the
Spirit shall return to God who gave it: so Revel. 6. 9. And when he had
opened the fifth seal, I saw under the Altar the souls of them that were
killed for the Word of God, and for the Testimony which they mainetained; so
also Heb. 12. 22. For ye are not come to the mount that might be touched,
etc. but ye are come to the mount Sion, and to the city of the living God, the
celestial Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, and to the
congregation and Church of the first borne whose names are written in heaven,
and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect. So it
is a plain truth in Christianity that though our bodies dye, our souls are
immortal, therefore seeing our souls never dye, but shall live for ever, how
careful ought we to be for them, and to pass our time in holiness and fear
before God, as they may live with God for ever in heaven? Indeed if our souls
might dye, our care might be the less, but seeing they shall never dye, it is
a wondrous corruption amongst most to see how* they cloth the body, feed and
physic that, run from market to market, to make provision for it which yet
must dye, and their immortal souls they take no care for; therefore one says
well, O man, of all thy parts take care of thy immortal part that which never
dies.

Secondly, 2
it teaches us, that seeing Christ commended his Spirit into the hands of God,
we see what the especial care of a Christian should be, not to care so much
what become of his body, so his soul may be saved: Christ he left his body to
Pilates mercy, but he commended his soul into the hands of God; so a
Christians care must be especially that his soul may be saved, that it may
come safe into the hands of God, what soever become of the body; this was the
care of the holy thief, Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom;
all his care was for the saving of his soul, it being provided for, he cares
not what become of his body: we see when a man's house is on fire, if he have a
precious jewel, he will labor to save that, though the rest perish; so seeing
the soul is the most precious jewel, whatsoever thy labor and pains be,
labor to lay up thy soul safe, in the hands of God; as Steven did, when a
storm of stones came about his ears, he bowed himself down and said, Lord
Jesus receive my soul, all his care was for the saving thereof; that it might
come safe into the hands of God; as if he should say, Lord, receive my soul, I
care not what becomes of my body, so that thou save my soul all shall be
well, this will content me.

Thirdly, Thirdly, the time when he commended his soul to God.
the time when he commended his Spirit; at the time of his death, which was the
very close of his life: when he was ready to breathe out his last breath: which
may teach us that every man should make this his practice when he comes to
dye, to be sure to make a holy close of his life, then it is a time to commend
his soul to God: Now there be other times for a man to commend his soul to
God, as first in the time of danger and peril, so David did, when he was in
peril of Saul, Psalm. 31. 5. says he, First, danger.
Lord into thy hands do I commend my spirit, because I have no body else to
commend it to, nor no body to trust it with, in assurance of safety, therefore
Lord into thy hands I commend it; likewise Psalm. 10. 14. the poor commits
himself unto the Lord; seeing no man regards him, nor cares for him, he
commends himself to the care of God, so that the time of distress and danger,
is a time to commend our souls to God. There is also another time that we
should commend our souls to God, Secondly, daily.
and that is daily, because our life is uncertain, therefore we should every
morning when we do rise, and every night when we go to bed, (not knowing not
what will befall us in the day,) commend our souls to God: there be a number
of men in the world, that be greatly overtaken in this, they never commend
their souls into the hands of God; if a nurse go abroad and leave her child,
and do not commit it to the care of some body to keep, Simile.
and to look after it, if the child catch any hurt, they will blame the nurse
for it; so, if we do not commit our selves, our wives and children to God, in
the morning and at night, if any hurt befall them, we may thank our selves for
it, the blame lies upon our selves; 1 Samuel 18. 28. we see when David came into
the host to his brethren, they asked him this question; with whom have thou
left those few sheep? So we should commend our temporal estate to the keeping
of some body, where it may be safe; and if we should commend that to keeping,
much more must we commend oursoules to God. Now as at these times we should
commit our souls to God, yet more especially we must do it, when we come to
dye, because the devil will then be busy, and we have a long journey to
go; if a man were to pass into France, and to carry all his goods with him
that he has scraped together all his life time, Simile.
he would look into what ship he did commit his goods, and if he had a
rotten bottom he would beware how he committed his goods to it, so seeing we
are to pass from earth to heaven, a long journey, we must take heed we do
not commit our souls to a rotten bottom, but be careful to lay them up into
the hands of God that so they may remain safe there.

Fourthly, (...).
upon what ground he commends his soul into the hands of God, upon a
persuasion of the Fatherly care of God, that God was his Father: this made him
bold to commend his soul into the hands of God, and may teach us, that all
that commend their souls to God, must commend them upon a good ground; we must
not commend them upon a merry conceit without a ground, but we must have a
ground for it. Now there be three grounds, upon which a man may comfortably
commend himself to God.

First, Three Grounds whereon to commit our souls to God.
because he is the Father of Spirits, and the God of all men's souls; our
bodies we have mediately from our parents, but our souls immediately from
God; therefore he is called the Father of Spirits, Heb. 12. and Eccles. 1
12. it is said, The soul goes to God that gave it: therefore, seeing God
gave them and made them, we may be bold upon this ground, to commend our
spirits back again unto him: for every workman will preserve his own work,
therefore let us commend our souls to God, as a faithful Creator, for seeing
he made them, he will preserve them, if we will commit them to him.

Secondly, 2
a persuasion that God is our Father, by the means of Christ; if God be our
Father, we may be bold to commend our souls to him, for with whom may one be
bold, if a child may not with his father; therefore as he is the Father of
Christ's, so labor to make him thy Father, and then may thou with comfort
commend thy self into the hands of God, Christ when he would comfort his
Disciples, says to them, Tell my brethren, I go to my Father, and to your
Father, to my God, and (...) your God; when we can find this, that he is not
only the Father of Christ, but my Father, we may be bold to commend out souls
into his hands upon this ground.

Thirdly, 3
we may be bold to commend our souls to God, upon the former experience we
have had of Gods favor and mercy toward us* this made David bold to commend
himself to God, Psalm. 31. 5. Into thy hands Lord, I commend my spirit; because
thou have redeemed my soul, O Lord God of truth; I have had experience of thy
love and mercy, therefore into thine hands I commend my spirit: In like manner,
when we have experience of Gods goodness and mercy, it makes us bold to
commend our souls into the hands of God. And these be the grounds, for we must
not do it of nothing, or of a mere conceit, but of a good ground, as Christ
did, so must we.

Fifthly, 5
What comfort we may have by the practices of Christ in commending his soul
into the hands of God? I answer, What comfort we may have by Christ's commending
his soul to God.
we may have a twofold comfort.

First, as Christ did not commend his own soul only into the hands of God,
but my soul, thy soul, and all the souls of the faithful men in the world,
because all the souls of the faithful are bound in a bundle with his, 1
therefore deposing and laying down his soul in the hands of God, all the
souls of the faithful are deposed and laid down with it; Simile.
for as his body was a pawn and a pledge for our bodies, so his soul is a
pawn and a pledge for our souls: therefore Athanasius says well, Our Lord
Jesus when he did commend his soul into the hands of God, he did not only
commend his own soul, but with it, all the souls of the faithful men in the
world, for as they die in Christ's death, and rise in his resurrection, and
ascend by his ascension; so by his deposing and laying down his soul into the
hands of God, he does with it commend all the souls of the faithful men in
the world: which may be a great comfort to a Christian at all times, that his
soul is safely deposed in the hands of God when he dies.

Secondly, 2
seeing he laid down his own soul in the hands of God, and with it our
souls; therefore when men die, their souls do not sleep in their bodies,
nor wander about the graves, nor pass up and down in the world, nor are in a
place of torment, as the Papists say, but they be in the hands of God. I think
there is no man here, but takes this speech to be a metaphor and borrowed
speech, for God has no hands, but by hands is meant that they are under Gods
protection, in safety and security: Simile.
For as a man that has a Jewel will not lay it down at his friends feet, but
he will put it into his hands for the more safety; so Christ has put all the
souls of the faithful into the hands of God, to be kept in safety till the
resurrection, and the last day of judgment: Act. 5. We may see when the
people had sold their possessions, they laid down their money at the Apostles
feet; but the souls of the faithful servants of God, are not laid down at
the feet of God, but are put into the hands of God for more safety and
security; as Revel. 1. it is said, that Christ holds the seven Stars in his
right hand; to show that he that pulls away a preacher, he must pull him out of
the hands of God; and so, Ioh. 10. 29. says Christ, My sheep hear my voice,
and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hands; neither
wicked man nor devil, no power can pluck them out of my hands; therefore it
is a sweet comfort, that when a Christian dies, his soul goes into the hands
of God; if it were in our own keeping, then it were subject to the temptations
of the Devil, and a number of troubles, and much hurt; but being in the hands
of God, they shall be kept from all danger, all the powers in heaven and earth
shall not be able to hurt them. And thus we have heard briefly, and with a
great deal of weakness, the seven last Words of Christ expounded, which he
spoke on the Cross.

SERMON XXVI.
JOHN 19. 30. When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It is
finished; and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.
HAving spoken of the Crucifying of Christ, SERMON. XXVI.
now in the next place we are to speak of his Death, for when he had hung
three hours in pains and torments on the Cross, He bowed down his head,
and gave up the ghost; that is, he died, as we do, his soul and body were
parted.

Now in the Death of Christ, there be diverse things to be considered:

1. Why it was needful that Christ should die. 2. The time when he died. 3.
The manner of his death. 4. The manifestation of it. 5. The power of it. 6. The
effects of it.
First, 1
Why it was needful Christ should die; of which there was three causes that
made a necessity of his death: Why it was needful that Christ should die.
First, To satisfy the justice of God for man's sin; for such was the
heinousness of man's sins (sentence being passed) that heaven and earth could
not reverse it; therefore, either we must die in our own persons, or Christ
must die for us, he took our nature upon him, died for us, and so gave
satisfaction to the justice of God. In the Law we see, Simile.
when lots were cast for the Goats, he that the lot fell on was killed, and the
other escaped; so there were lots cast whether we should die or he; it pleased
God that the lot fell on Christ, he was killed and we escaped: wherein we may
see the infinite love of Christ, that died to satisfy the justice of God, that
we might not die; we read, 2 Samuel 10. 33. David cried out, O my son Absalom,
my son, my son Absalom, would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son,
my son; wherein he showed the true affection of a father: Now that which
David desired for his son, Christ has performed for us; and therefore when
we think of the death of Christ, we may think of the infinite love of God to
us: Simile.
If one should commit such a fault against the King, that he should lose his
head or his eye, or some part of him, how far should a man go to find such
a friend, to take his punishment upon him, and so free him? But Christ does
more for us than this, he has not only lost an eye or an hand for us, but he
died for us; therefore as often as we think of the death of Christ, so often
we should think of the love of God: The Centurion, Luke 7. sent the Elders of
the Jews to Christ, to tell him of one that loved their nation, and builded
them a Synagogue; but Christ has done more for us, than to build a Synagogue,
for he has loved us, and wished away our sins in his blood, as Saint John
says, Revel. 1. 5. And therefore as often as we think of the death of Christ,
so often let us think of the infinite love of Christ, that he would die for
us, to satisfy the justice of God for sin.

Secondly, 2
it was needful that Christ should die, that our sins might die in his
death; for he took all our sins upon him, as Saint Peter says, Who in his
own body bare our sins upon the Cross; when he went to die on the cross,
all our sins were bound unto him, who carried them up with him unto the
cross, that they might be crucified with him, and die in his death: this was
another thing that made a necessity of the death of Christ; therefore if we
live in sin, what do we but pull down our sins from the cross of Christ,
Simile.
bring them to the fire, rub and chafe them, as it were, put Aqua-vitae into
the mouth of them, that they may live again: Joshua 7. we read, that Achan
stole away a wedge of gold, and a Babylonish garment, of the spoil, when
Jericho was destroyed, and that proved his own destruction in the end; Simile.
so if we steal our sins from the cross of Christ, notwithstanding Christ
died, that sin might die with him, then these same stolen sins will be our
destruction.

Thirdly, 3
it was needful that Christ should die, to seal unto true believers, the
promises that God has made in the Gospel; God has bequeathed life
everlasting, and Christ heaven and happiness to those that repent and believe.
In the law there is nothing but death and destruction promised to those that
did transgress and break it, but in the new testament God has promised to
them that repent and believe, life and salvation, heaven and happiness;
Therefore that these promises might be sealed and confirmed, Christ must die,
for as long as the testator lives the testament is of no force, As it is Heb.
9. 16. For (says he) the testament is confirmed when men be dead, because it
is of no force, as long as he that made it is alive; therefore that the
promises of God might stand good unto us, it pleased the son of God to die
for us, and to seal it with his blood: all which is to sustain and comfort
us, for although we have nothing here, but misery and trouble, yet one day we
shall be put in possession of heaven and happiness: Simile.
as a man that has a patent or a sealed deed, that he shall have such lands
and livings one day, though he have not any thing to help himself, yet he will
comfort himself with that which is to come; so though we be put in possession
on these promises presently, yet let us comfort our selves, that one day, they
shall be verified unto us, and although we endure troubles and afflictions in
this world, yet we may bodly stand up and say, Lord I thank thee, I have a
sealed deed to show, that one day I shall enjoy the promises that thou have
made in the Gospel; here we see for the comfort of a Christian, it was
needful for Christ to die, and to seal with his blood the promises that are
made in the Gospel.

Secondly, Secondly, the time when (...) dye^.
the time when he died; when he had finished the work of man's redemption, and
done the work he came for; a long time did he hang on the cross in pains
and torments, yet he dyed not till he had done the work he came for: which
must teach us that we should be willing to die when we have done our work,
when we have repented of our sins, and made Christ sure to us, then we
should be willing to die, and never till then: so it is said of David, Act. 13.
36. After he had served his generation, by the counsel of God, he fell on
sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption: so the Lord said to
Moses, Numb. 31. 2. Avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites; and
afterward shall thou be gathered unto thy people: in like manner we must do
the will of God, and fulfill the work he sent us to do, and then we shall be
willing to dye, Simile.
and never till then. If a master should send his servant beyond sea to deal
for him in his business, if he come home and do the half only, and leave
the other half undone, he must look for a cold welcome home; so God has
sent us into this world, to do his business, whereof if we do but the half,
leaving the rest undone, we may look for a cold welcome when we come to dye:
1 King. 19. 4. we read that Elias laid him down under a Juniper tree, Simile.
and desired that he might die, saying, it is enough, O Lord, take away my
life, for I am no better than my fathers: at which time an Angel came unto him
and said, Up Elias, eat and drink, for thy journey is too great for thee: so
many times a Christian may have a desire to dye, when troubles and griefs are
upon him, but the Spirit of God comes unto him, and bids him arise, for God
has another service for him to do. We see Christ was not willing to dye, till
he had done the work of God which he came for; and what was that? the work of
man's salvation and redemption; Christ if he had pleased, he might have dyed at
the very instant as soon as he was on the cross, but he would not, because
he had not done that he came for: which may teach us the time when we should
be willing to dye; and that is when we have finished and perfected the work of
our salvation and redemption, and have made that sure, when we have repented of
our sins, and laid fast hold on Christ, then we should be willing to die, and
never till then: we see a number of men are contented to creep out of the
world, but if they have not first finished their salvation, and made that sure
to themselves, and repented of their sins, they can have no comfort, for it
is a fearful thing for a man to dye in his sins, as our Savior threatens
the Jews, Ye shall dye in your sins: O, it is a fearful and lamentable
thing, when men do thus dye, as we heard in the forenoone, out of Matthew. 12.
41. that the men of Nineve shall rise up in judgment to condemn the Jews,
because they repented at the preaching of Jonas, when as the Jews did not
repent at the preaching of Christ; for if we do not profit by the preaching of
the word, and by the good means amongst us, even dead men that have lain
rotting in their graves an hundred years together, shall rise up in judgment
against us, and condemn us, therefore it is a fearful thing for a man to dye
in his sins: old Simeon had a desire to live till he had seen Christ, Simile.
and when he had seen him, and embraced him in his arms, then he says, Lord,
now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation; so we should have a desire to live till we had seen Christ, and
made heaven and happiness sure to our selves, and then when we have seen
Christ by the eyes of our faith, and embraced him, we may be willing to dye,
and to say as old Simeon said, now Lord let thy servant depart in peace.

Thirdly, Thirdly, the manner of His death.
The manner of his death; which may be considered two ways:

1. That it was a violent death. 2. That he dyed willingly.
First, 1
that it was a violent death, he dyed not an easy death, but a very painful
one: now there be diverse reasons, why Christ dyed such a painful death; which
I have handled before, and therefore will repeat in this place only the heads,
thereby to imprint them the better into your minds.

First, Four reasons why Christ died a painful death.
To teach us, that it was not an easy matter to redeem man; for Christ must
therefore dye, not an easy, but a violent, a painful death to redeem us;
therefore Saint Jerome says well, that a man of all wounds, will take heed of
such as one as will ask much ado to heal; 1
therefore seeing sin makes such a wound, that Christ must dye to heal it, and
that such a violent and painful death, we should be careful to decline it.

Secondly, 2
To show the desert of our sins; for when we come to dye, we deserve to dye
the violentest, and painefullest death that may be; we do not deserve to dye
in our beds, but on the cross, not amongst our friends, but amongst our
enemies; therefore look what death soever we dye on, the most painful and
most grievous, yet we may say, as the Thief said, We suffer things worthy of
that we have done, we deserve all the extremities in death that may be.

Thirdly, 3
Christ dyed such a painful death, to purchase a more easy death for us; he
dyed on the cross, that we might dye in our beds; amongst his enemies, that
we might dye amongst our friends; with all extremity and pain, that we might
have ease and comfort in our deaths, therefore look what ease and comfort we
find in our deaths, it is purchased to us by the painful death of Christ;
for there was a deadly cup of poison of Gods wrath put into our hands to
drink, and Christ has taken all the malignity and sowrenesse out of it, and
has given us the sweet.

Fourthly, 4
To sanctify all kinds of deaths to his dying members; for if any one should
have dyed an easy death, then we might have thought that he only had been
the holy man that died such a death; but Christ dyed a painful death to
sanctify all kinds of deaths to his dying members; so that let the death be
what it will be, if one dye in Gods favor and in the pardon of his sins, he
is a blessed and happy man, as Heb. 11. it is said, All these dyed in faith,
they dyed not all in their beds, some were stoned, some sawne asunder; yet
because they dyed all in faith, they were all happy men; so let us look to our
conscience, and to our cause, and then let the death be what it will be, we are
happy men: the heathen men could say, we would not dye on sea, nor suddenly,
nor of such or such a disease; but thou that art a Christian, let thy death be
what it will, if thou dye in the favor of God, penitent for thy sins, thou
art a blessed and an happy man: it is reported of the beasts of the
wilderness, Simile.
that they are afraid to drink of the waters, because they have poison in
them, till the Unicorn come and wash his horn in it; so men were afraid to
drink of the bitter waters of death till this same true Unicorn Christ Jesus,
had washed his blessed body in this same painful death. And these be the
chief reasons why Christ dyed such a painful death.

Secondly, 2
he died willingly, for he did not only dye, but it was also willingly, as is
showed by two actions; He died willingly.
First, in that he bowed down his head, and then gave up the ghost. 1
Men when they dye, do first give up the ghost, and then they bow down their
heads; But Christ quite contrary, he first bowed down his head, even ready to
meet with his death, and then he gave up the ghost; so it was a voluntary
death that Christ died.

Secondly, 2
in that he cried with a loud voice; When men dye they languish by little and
little, their speech fails them, they rattle in the throat, and so weakness
comes upon them by little and little, till their breath be quite gone; But
Christ at his death cried with a loud voice, so that nothing of his strength
was abated: to show, he dyed voluntarily, and willingly: as John 10. 17, 18. I
lay down my life, that I might take it up again: No man takes it from me.
Quest.
But why did Christ dye a voluntary death? Sol.
That it might be the more grateful and acceptable to God. For actions that be
done in obedience to God and voluntarily, are grateful, acceptable, and more
precious than those we do nill we will we, against our minds and intentions;
therefore that Christ's death might be the more acceptable to God, he died
voluntarily and willingly: which must teach us, that if we would have our
actions grateful and acceptable to God, we must do them willingly and
voluntarily, and if we would have our deaths acceptable to him, we must be
willing to dye, when God would have us; and to live, when God would have us to
live, therefore it is a pitiful thing to see how men hang on the world, when
God would have them to die: It is said, Psalm. 116. 5. Precious in the sight of
the Lord is the death of all his Saints, therefore when we die willingly, it is
precious in the sight of God, when one is not only contented to part with his
pleasure, goods, lands, wife and children, but also is contented that his soul
and his body should part; therefore if we would dye well, we must dye
voluntarily and willingly in obedience to God: As two subjects beyond sea, the
king sends for them home, the one he means shall attend upon him, upon whom he
will bestow some honor, and the other he will keep in perpetual imprisonment:
both these come home, but there is great difference in their coming, for the
one comes home joyfully, but the other sorrowfully and heavily, and would
shift the matter if he could; so the wicked and the godly live both in this
world, when the Lord sends for them they come both, but there is a great
difference in their coming, for the one when he dies, he dies with comfort,
because he knows that God will bestow a crown of life on him, he shall be in
heaven and happiness for ever; but the other though he come, yet it is
unwillingly, if he could shift the matter he would, because he knows he
shall go to a place of torment; therefore if we would dye well, we must be
careful to live well.

The fourth thing was, 4
the manifestation of his death, set forth unto us by two evidences, The
manifestation of Christ's death.
which with your p^tience I will now handle, because all hope of salvation
hangs on the death of Christ. First, that when the soldiers had taken the
legs of the thief, 1
and broken them, they came to break Christ's, but did not because he was dead
before they came. Secondly, that a mad fellow one of the soldiers standing by,
2
did thrust a spear through the side of Christ, and forthwith there came forth
blood and water; so that if there had been left any little life in him, they
had done enough to have taken it away; For it is a rule in Physic, that if a
man be pricked in the heart with the least prick of a pin, it is present
death. Therefore it was a plain evidence to the world, that Christ was truly
and really dead.

But Why did they not break Christ's legs, Quest.
as they did the thieves? I answer, for two reasons:

First, Sol. Of the Paschall Lamb.
to fulfill a Scripture, that says, that a b^^e of him shall not be broken,
Psalm. 34. 20 to show that he was the true pascall Lamb.

First, the Pascall Lamb was male without blemish, to show that Jesus Christ, 1
he that should redeem us should be without any spot of sinne^ Secondly, 2
as they did keep the blood of the Lamb in a Basin, and did sprinkle it on
their door posts, that so the Angel of destruction might pass over their
houses: So we should get the blood of Christ, and sprinkle our consciences with
that, that so the Angel of destruction might pass over us. 3
Thirdly, the Jews when they did eat the Lamb, put away Leaven from them,
and this must teach us to put all maliciousness from us. 4
Fourthly, they did eat the Lamb with sour herbs, to teach us that Christ
will never be truly sweet to us, unless we eat him with grief and sorrow
for our sins. 5
Lastly, they did eat the Lamb with their staves in their hands, their loins
girded, their shoes on their feet; they did eat it in haste, ready to take
their journey: so we must eat of Christ also, that we may take our journey to
Heaven, and therefore must take our dinner and Supper often in this kind,
feeding on him by faith.

Secondly, to teach us that the wicked Jews could not do any thing to Christ,
but by Gods appointment: They took Christ, and did crucify him, but they
could not break a bone of him; and this is a comfort to a Christian, that
howsoever the wicked rage and take on, yet they cannot break a bone without
Gods appointment, they cannot do the least thing that may be to him.

SERMON XXVII.
MATTHEW 27. 50, 51, 52, 53. Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud
voice, yielded up the Ghost. And behold, the veil of the Temple was rent in
twain, from the top to the bottom, and the Earth did quake, and the Rocks
rent. And the graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which slept, arose,
And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy
City, and appeared unto many.
BEcause all the hope of salvation depends on the death of Christ, SERMON.
XXVII.
as being the price to satisfy the justice of God for man's sin: It pleased
God therefore, to show two evidences to the World, that He was really and
truly dead.

First, that the Soldiers did not break the legs of Christ, as they did of
the Thieves, because they found him dead before they came; for if he had not
been dead, then as they did break the legs of the thieves, so they would
have broken the legs of Christ: but in that they did not, it was a plain
Evidence that Christ was truly dead, so that his greatest enemies gave an
evidence to the World that he was truly and really dead.

The second was, that a barbarous Soldier finding Christ dead, takes a Spear
and thrusts into his side near his heart; so that if there had been but a
little life left, this had been enough to have bereft it; for all know that a
wound at the heart is deadly, if it be but with a prick of a pin; for the
blood and water coming forth of the side of Christ, did show that the
Pericardium was wounded, and his heart pierced. Some of the schoolmen cannot
tell from whence this blood and water should come, as being ignorant of
Anatomy; others take it to be a miraculous thing, as Thomas Aquinas, for he
says in other dead bodies it is not clear blood that comes from them, but
their blood is congealed, and clear water does not run from other dead bodies,
but it is mixed with blood; and therefore miracles did not cease in the dead
body of Christ: But we need not doubt but it is a natural thing that blood
and water did come from the side of Christ, only the manner was miraculous in
it: There was something that was natural, and there was something that was
miraculous.

That which was Natural was that blood and water that came out of the side of
Christ: 1
for as Physicians say, there is a filme containing water about the heart,
which serves to cool it and keep it in temper, which they call Pericardium;
therefore Christ's heart being wounded, there came forth blood and water: blood
from the wound in his heart, water from the Pericardium or filme involving the
heart, wherein is contained water.

That which was Miraculous, 2
was that the blood flowed apart by it self, and the water apart without any
mixture together; therefore, seeing the heart was wounded, it is an Evidence to
the World, that Christ was truly and really dead: and yet these two things had
a further mystery and meaning.

First, 1
whereas we see the legs of Christ was not broken, as the legs of the
thieves were; this was to teach us that all the wicked of the World could do
no more to Christ than God had appointed; they could take him, and buffet him,
and whip him, and crown him with Thorns, and nail him to the Cross, and
kill him at last, but yet they could not break a bone of him. Hence we may
learn for our own comfort, that all the wicked in the World can do nothing
to a Christian without Gods appointment; they may trouble and molest them, but
they cannot break a bone of them. so we see, Psalm. 34. 20. Many are the
troubles of the righteous; good people may have many troubles, and they may put
them on the Cross, but they cannot break a bone of them; For the Lord keeps
all his bones, so that not one of them shall be broken.

Secondly, 2
there was not a bone of him broken, to show he was the true Paschall Lamb: As
1 Cor. 5. 7. Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, as the Passover did
keep the Israelites from the stroke of the devouring Angel; so this same true
Paschall Lamb does keep us from the wrath of God, falling upon us at the day
of Judgment; and as the Lamb was taken up four days before they killed him;
So we should labor to get Christ into our hearts before death comes.

The second Evidence is, that water and blood did flow out of the dead body of
Christ, to teach us that God has opened a fountain of grace and life, as
Zecharie had foretold, for sin and for uncleanesse. But what comfort have we
by it? Zech. 13. 1.
Is there any power or virtue in the dead body of Christ? I, says the Lord,
there is power and efficacy in it; or from these two streams that issued out
of the dead Body of Christ, there is infinite comfort that does arise, as 1
John 5. 6. says he, This is that Jesus Christ, that came by water and blood,
not by water only, but by water and blood. There were two streams that did
issue out of the dead Body of Christ; there issued a stream of pure blood to
wash away the guilt of sin, and a stream of clear water as clear as
Crystal, to wash away the filth of our sins: for these be two maine things
that trouble the people of God.

1. The guilt of sin, binding us to punishment. 2. The filth of sin, making
us hateful and loathsome in the eyes of God.
First, 1
therefore do thou feel thy heart troubled with the guilt of sin? run
unto the Cross of Christ, For the guilt of sin.
and catch hold of some of the drops of blood that came from the side of
Christ; offer them to God and say in thy meditation, Lord, behold the blood of
thy Son; and sprinkle it by the hand of faith upon thy Soul and Conscience,
and God will be pleased and pacified with thee.

Secondly, 2
If thou be troubled with the filth of thy sin, run unto the Cross of
Christ, The filth of sin.
and get of the water that issued out of the side of Christ, and besprinkle thy
soul and conscience by the hand of faith* and so thou shall be clean in Gods
sight. To make this plain, suppose there were a man that had a foul yard, who
laid stones and gravel on it, yet still it remained durty; Simile.
in which time there came a friend to him, who seeing him labor in vain to
make his yard clean, gave him this Counsel, saynig, you have a Spring in your
yard, open it, and it will carry all your soil and baggage away, and so your
yard will be clean: So if we find our hearts unclean, we must get to one
of these same Springs that come out of the dead body of Christ, and this will
carry away all the baggage and soil: this is the benefit we have by the dead
body of Christ; therefore, blessed be God that has opened such a Fountain for
sin and for uncleanness; and as David longed for the waters of the Well of
Bethel, 2 Samuel 23. 15. much more should we long for the blood and water that
did issue out of the side of Christ, Simile.
and labor for it, although it be with the hazard of our peace, and loss of
our lives.

The next thing we are to speak of is, 5
Of the power of Christ's death; for although there seemed to be nothing therein
but weakness, The power of Christ's death.
yet there was power in the death of Christ: for the veil of the temple was
rent in twain from the top to the bottom, without any hands: The earth did
quake, and the stones rent in sunder: Hammers and other instruments could not
do it, but the death of Christ did it: The graves did open, and the dead
bodies of the Saints did rise, and did go into the holy City, and showed
themselves to many. so we see there was great power in the death of Christ; as
great Princes, and Kings, and great Monarchs when they live, are able to do
great matters; but when they dye, there is no power nor might in them, they are
able to do nothing, never a Cloud will moove, a Stone stir, or Grave open at
their deaths; but at the death of Christ they did: Therefore, this does show
there is great power in the death of Christ.

First, 1
it is said, that the veil of the Temple did rent in twain from the top to
the bottom: The Temple veilerenting.
Christ did hang in Mount Calvary dead, and yet the power of his death did
pierce into the City and Temple, and did rent the veil without hands from the
top to the bottom. Now they which know the Scripture, know that the Temple
was divided in two parts, in the first was the Table, the Shewbread, and the
Candlestick, this was called the Holy place; and in the other was the golden
Censer, the Arc of the Testament, over-laid with gold round about wherein was
the golden Pot, which had Manna, and Aarons rod which had budded, and the
Tables of the Testament, and over the Arc were the glorious Cherubins,
shadowing the Mercy seat; which two places were separated by a veil: Now at
the death of Christ this same veil was rent in twain from the top to the
bottom; whereof there be diverse Reasons:

First, Reason 1. Of the veil of the Temple reuting.
That an entrance might be made into heaven by his death; for this was the
golden Key that did open heaven to all true believers, our sins did shut up
heaven, but the death of Christ is as a Key to open heaven: therefore blessed be
God for the death of Christ, because he has made heaven open to us: Act. 7.
56. Steven before his death saw heaven open, and Christ standing at his right
hand ready to receive him: So it is a sweet comfort to a Christian, when he
comes to die, that he sees heaven open, and Christ standing at Gods right
hand ready to receive him: If a man should come to a Kings Palace, Simile.
and find all the doors shut and locked up fast, and a friend should come and
put into his hands a key that he might go from chamber to chamber, till he
came to the Kings Presence, this would be a great comfort; So the death of
Christ is as a golden key to open heaven to us, that we may come into the
Presence Chamber of God; therefore blessed be God for the death of Christ.

Secondly, Reason 2.
it was to show that the Ceremonial Law was abrogated by the death of Christ;
The Priests must not offer any more sacrifices, for now all the ceremonies had
an end, and by his death is cancelled the handwriting that was against us; as
it is, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. He is our peace, who has made both one, and has
broken down the middle wall of Partition between us; Having abolished in his
flesh the enmity, even the Law of Commandments contained in ordinances, for to
make in himself, of twain, one new man, so making peace; therefore, who ever
shall bring in again any of the Leviticall ceremonies, either in whole or in
part, he does set up the veil that Christ has taken down: Act. 15. 28. the
Apostle says, It seems good to the Holy Ghost and us, to lay no other
burden upon you than that which is necessary; therefore it is a dangerous
thing to bring in the Leviticall ceremonies again. Saint Jerome says well,
Thou say that it is not a dangerous thing to bring in the Leviticall
ceremonies, but I tell thee, and proclaim against thee, that that man which
shall bring in these ceremonies, he casts himself headlong into the pit of
hell. The Schoolmen do distinguish the Ceremonies into three times; First,
Three times of Ceremonies.
(as Thomas Aquinas says) there was a time when the ceremonies were
profitable, and that was before Christ, 1
because they were commanded of God. Secondly, after Christ's death they were
dead, 2
but not deadly till the Gospel was planted. 3
And then lastly, they were both dead and deadly; and therefore it is a
dangerous thing to bring in these ceremonies again in whole or in part.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
to show that by that he had cancelled or torn down the veil of our sins,
that made a separation between God and us, that we could not see the face of
God; as Esaias 59. 2. But your iniquities have made a separation be^ ween you
and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not
hear: Now they are taken down, and he has hanged up another veil in the
room thereof, that though our sins have hid Gods face from us, yet in the
death of Christ they are taken down, he having hanged up another veil in
place of the other, to look through and behold us, the veil of his flesh, as
Saint Paul says, Hebr. 10. 20. for when God looked on us, he looked through the
veil of Christ's flesh, or else if he had looked upon us in our selves, there
is such a deal of sin and corruption, that it would have made God to abhor
us, and to that end Christ with the veil of his flesh has covered all our
sins, as the Prophet David speaks, Psalm. 85. 2. Thou have forgiven the
iniquities of thy people, and covered all their sins.

The fourth Reason was to show, Reason 4.
that the veil of ignorance was taken away in the Law, for the Law was covered
with a veil, which was the reason why M^ses face was covered with a veil, as
Saint Paul says, 2 Cor. 3. 13. but by the death of Christ this veil is taken
away in the preaching of the Gospel: And therefore seeing this veil is taken
away, if men remain ignorant, how will they answer it at the day of judgment?
The Papists hang up another veil, and what is that but the veil of an
unknown tongue, they read the Scriptures to the people in a tongue they do
not understand, and so set up the veil again that Christ has taken down;
therefore let them look how they will answer this to Christ at the day of
Judgment.

The second thing is the rending of the stones, 2
how the stones did cleave asunder at the death of Christ, The rending of the
stones.
which hammers and other instruments could not cleave; therefore we may see
what stupiditie and hardness of heart there is in us, that the stones did
cleave, and the earth quake at the death of Christ, and yet we are never moved
nor stirred at it; therefore let us pray to God that the death of Christ may
be powerful to move and to stir up our hearts.

Thirdly, 3
The graves were opened, and the bodies of the Saints which slept arose and
went into the holy City, The graves opened.
and appeared to many: even men that had been dead along time, that were
dissolved to dust and ashes, by the power of Christ's death the graves did open,
and they did rise again, to show us, that all the Saints one day shall rise by
the power of Christ's death, the graves shall open, Death cannot keep them
down, but they shall rise again; which is an excellent comfort to a man in
misery, all that the world can do is to take away life, which when it is gone
they turn to dust and ashes, yet a time will come when the Saints shall be
raised to joy and glory, the graves shall be opened by the power of Christ's
death; Simile.
for as Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, and then
was cast upon the dry land, when the Lord spoke unto the Whale; so Christ will
speak to the earth, to the sea, and to the beasts that have devoured men, and
they shall give up their dead; and as the graves did open by the power of the
death of Christ, so all the people of God at the time that God has appointed
shall have their graves opened by his power and death, and their bodies shall
rise by the power of Christ's resurrection to everlasting happiness and glory.

The next thing is, 6
The effects and fruits of Christ's death; whereof, because I have spoken often
heretofore, The effects of Christ's death.
I may be the shorter in it at this time. The first is, that Christ's death
does free us from eternal death; John 3. 1
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son to die for us;
that whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have everlasting life: So
also, John 5. 24. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that hears my Word, and
believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come unto
condemnation: And therefore howsoever a Christian may be condemned in the court
of man, yet he shall not be condemned in Gods court; this may be the stay of a
Christian, Romans 8. the Apostle says, There is no condemnation to those that be
in Christ; so if a man be in Christ, he is freed from eternal death. 2
Secondly, The death of Christ has freed us from the sting of death; for (as
we have heard) ever man has a deaths cup put into his hands, but Christ has
taken the sour out of our cups, and put it into his own, and we have the
sweet. Thirdly, He has altered the nature of death; for it was a curse unto
us, 3
and now he has made it a blessing; as in the Revelation, Blessed are they
that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow
them. 4
Fourthly, We are freed from the power of death; it was seize upon us for a
little season, but it cannot keep us under; it is impossible that death should
hold him under; so it is said of Christ, Act. 2. 24. He has loosed the
sorrows of death, because it is impossible he should be holden of it. So it
shall be with every true Christian, death shall not hold them. 5
Fifthly, By his death he has destroyed the Devil, sin, hell, damnation,
and all other spiritual enemies, and has not only conquered them for
himself, Joshua 10. 24.
but for us; therefore, as Joshua, when he had conquered the five Kings, he
called his servants, and made them set their feet in their necks: So Christ
will call forth his servants to set their feet on the necks of their
spiritual enemies, and so make them conquerours: Therefore let us lay hold on
Christ, if we have him, we have all things, and if we want him, we lack all
things; let us roll and wrap up our selves in the death of Christ, and then his
pains shall be our ease, his shame our glory, his life our death.

SERMON XXVIII.
JOHN 19. 38. And after this, Joseph of Arimathea, (being a Disciple of Jesus,
but secretly for fear of the Jews) besought Pilate that he might take away
the body of Jesus, and Pilate gave him leave: he came therefore and took the
body of Jesus.
BEloved, ye have been at the burial of many your good friends, SERMON. XXVIII.
and I must entreat you to be at one more; and that is at the burial of
Christ, and not so much to honor him with your presence, as Christ may honor
you: and I must further entreat you not only to bury Christ, but to bury your
selves, to lay your body upon his body; I mean your vile lusts and sins, and
then as Christ lay three days in the grave and then rose again, so we shall
rise at the time appointed to glory and everlasting happiness.

Now in the burial of Christ we observe diverse particulars:

1. What were the causes why he was buried. 2. Who were the parties that buried
him. 3. The place where they buried him. 4. The manner of his burial. 5. The
fruits and effects of it.
The reasons why Christ was buried are in number four: First, the reasons why
Christ was buried, are four.
first to give us further assurance of the death of Christ, because all the
hope of a Christian depends on his death, as being the very price to satisfy
the justice of God for man's sin; and it is (as we heard) the golden key to
open heaven to the true believers; Reason 1.
therefore there must be undoubted evidence of his death; and what better can
there be than this, he was buried? for let a man be dead and straight way they
bury him, if Christ had been alive, Pilate would not have given leave to
Joseph to have taken him down: and therefore before he would give license to
bury him, he enquired of the Centurion to know whether he were dead or not; and
finding that he had been dead an hour, Pilate gave leave to Joseph to take
him down: and again, if Christ had not been dead, Joseph would not have
buried him, because he was a friend to Christ, if there had been but a spark
of life in him, he would not have buried him, therefore this is another
evidence that Christ was truly dead, for men (if there be any humanity or
compassion in them) do not use to bury living men but dead men: therefore
Abraham says in Genesis 21. Give me a place that I may bury my dead in: so that
Joseph's burying of Christ was an evidence that Christ was truly dead, and Gods
justice fully satisfied, death and hell conquered, the devil subdued, and God
pacified and pleased. Matthew 12. our Savior says, that he will be the sign of
the Prophet Jonas to them; Simile.
Now what was that? when they were at sea there arose a great storm, and the
men were in danger of drowning, so that they were feign to cast out their
goods, but when that would not do, they took Jonas and cast him into the sea,
and there was a great calm: so in the general distress of mankind we were
all like to perish, till Christ was killed and cast into the grave, and then
heaven and earth were at peace, God was pacified and pleased: therefore in all
the distresses of a Christian let him go to the grave of Christ, behold him
killed and crucified for thy sins, this will make fear to fly away, and
comfort will spring from it.

Secondly, Reason 2.
that he might conquer death in his strongest hold, even in the cabin and
house of death; as Job says Chap. 17. 13. for the grave is the house of death;
and there be the chambers and rooms of death, and there is the greatest power
that death has to subdue mortal men; therefore Christ was buried that he
might conquer death in his strongest hold. Simile.
Brave Conquerours and Captains are not contented to overcome their enemies in
the field, but they will pursue and follow them into their strongest holds and
castles, and so will conquer them there, thereby to make their victory the
greater; so Christ did not only conquer death on the cross, but followed him
into his den, and strongest hold and overcame him there. Simile.
Sampsons victory was the greater, that he suffered his enemies to bind him,
and then did break in sunder his bands and overcame them; so this made the
victory the greater that Christ would suffer himself to be bound with the
chains of death, and to be laid in the strongest hold of death, yet there to
overcome him. Now as Christ conquered death, so must every Christian conquer
death, not by flying and avoiding it (for that we cannot do) we may not look
to do as Henoch did, go to heaven without death, but we must go to the place
of death, and into his dens and conquer him there.

Thirdly, Reason. 3.
to sanctify and to sweeten the grave for us; for in it self it is a place of
rottenness and filthiness; and therefore David says, Psalm. 59. that their
throats are an open sepulcher, even like an open grave, a stinking place, a
place of rottenness; and Matthew. 23. 27. our Savior says, that the Pharisees
were like painted graves, that look gloriously without, but within were
loathsome and filthy; therefore because the grave is the lothsommest and
filthiest place in it self, Christ was buried that he might perfume and
sweeten our graves: so we see that Christ has altered the nature of the
grave, for that whereas it was a place of rottenness, now he has made it a
sweet resting place to his servants: Chrysostom says well, Simile.
that which was a prison house of a severe Judge he has made a storehouse to
lay up his treasure in; for the grave was a prison house, wherein men lay bound
under the chains of death until the day of judgment, now he has made it a
storehouse to treasure up his servants till the time of Resurrection, as Esaias.
57. 2. says the Prophet, He shall enter into peace; they shall rest in their
beds, every one that walks before me: so the grave is as the bed for his
servants to rest in till Christ bring them to glory and happiness. Simile.
If a man were to pass into another country, and must go through dens,
graves and hollow places in the earth, if one could espy the footsteps of one
of our dear friends that had passed that way, this would give a man comfort to
follow after; so we are to pass into another country, to heaven, and we
must go through the dens, caves and hollow places of the earth, if we can
see by the eye of faith that Christ has gone the same way, there be footsteps
and marks that he has left behind him, this will give a man courage and
comfort; therefore howsoever death may be terrible and dreadful to the eye of
sense, and to be trodden and trampled under feet of death is a fearful thing,
yet by the eye of faith we may see that Christ has perfumed the grave, and
made it a sweet resting place to his servants, and therefore this may comfort
us.

Fourthly, Reason 4.
that we might have power and strength to bury sin; for we must not only
have power to kill sin, and work the death of it, which is much; Simile.
but there must also be (as it were) a burial of sin, there must be a
consuming of it, by little and little till it be utterly wasted: as a dead man
when he is laid into the grave and buried, consumes by little and little; so
we must bury sin till it be consumed and wasted; for as it is with man, so
it is with sin; in a man, there be two things, Simile.
the life and the body of man, take away the life from the body and that is
nothing but a lump of earth, if it remain unburied it will poison the air:
so there is in every man the life of sin, and the body of sin, the life of
sin is the reigning of it, and the body of sin is the lump of lust and
corruption: therefore when the life or rather reigning of sin is taken away,
still there remains the body sin; this we must bury or else it will infect
us: so the Apostle Paul faith, Romans 6. that we do not only dye to sin in
the death of Christ, but we are also buried with him; therefore let us carry
this same body of sin unto the grave of Christ, Simile.
and bury it in his grave. And you that have been at the burial of your
friends, turn again to bury your sins, every one must address himself to
this burial, that so it may be wasted and consumed: we read Ezekiel. 39. 14. of
a strange speech that there were scearchers appointed to go through the land,
who if they found any dead men's bones, they were to set up a stick till the
buriers did come and bury them: so a Christian must do, his conscience must
be the scearcher, it must find out our sins which be as dead men's bones,
and when we have found them, we must set sticks up by them for marks, and
never be at rest till they be buried, and may rot and consume to nothing;
therefore seeing Christ was buried that we might have power and strength to
bury sin, we must take heed that we do not root them out of the grave
again, and uncover the moulds; to this end let every man pray for grace, that
he may suffer his sins to be buried. Simile.
If a man should rake a man out of the grave that had lain there four days as
Lazarus did, he would poison the air and infect the country; so our sins
if we should root them out that have been buried these hundred years, they
would be ready to infect all the country, therefore we must pray to God that
our sins may be buried, and kept down by the power of Christ's burial, that
so they may never rise again.

The second thing observed was, Secondly, the Parties who buried Christ.
the parties that buried Christ, Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus: now these
were great rich men, Senators, honorable men, and Counselors, who buried
Christ with their own hands; 1
they did it not by a servant, Joseph he begs the body of Christ, and took it
down (in all likelihood) with his own hands, and Nicodemus brought an
hundredth pound of sweet odours, of Myrrh and Aloes, to imbalme the body of
Christ. It is a strange thing that these honorable persons would stoop to so
mean a service as this, but it was the love that they bare to Christ that made
them; and it may teach us, that if we truly love Christ we will stoop to
any mean duty and service for Christ or his members, as Genesis 18. when the
Angels came to Abraham's house, he made them a feast, and he waited on them: as
if he had been a servant, because of the love he did bear to them, so in
Exodus 2. 11. we read Moses was the adopted son of Pharoahs daughter, and yet
he did not scorn to go out and look on the burdens of his brethren, and
when there was injury offered unto them, he did labor to right it; so also
Zacheus, he was a rich man, who when he did hear that Christ came by, gets
himself into a fig tree to see Christ; now one should have thought that such a
man would have scorned such a thing to climb up into a tree amongst boys and
girls, and yet love to Christ made him do it: in like manner our Savior
Christ, John 13. did rise from the Table and took a towell, and girding it
about him, washed his Disciples feet, and after he had done, he said, ye call
me Lord and Master, as I am indeed, if I then your Lord and Master have washed
your feet, ye ought much more to wash one another feet; if there be any
love in us to Christ we will stoop to any mean duty or service for Christ or
his members: one would have thought that such an honorable person as Joseph,
would have been squeamish to have taken down the dead body of Christ in his
own arms, to have soyled and foiled himself with the blood that came out of
his wounds, but the true love he did bear to Christ made him do it: so if
there be true love in us to Christ, we will not be squeamish to do any mean
service and duty for him and his members; we will not be squeamish to come to
their sick beds to comfort and relieve them: Simile.
we see a mother through the love she has to her child, will stoop to do
any mean service and duty that another woman would be somewhat squeamish of;
so if there be true love to Christ in us, it will make us do any service and
duty to the meanest of Christ members, even to do that which another would
scorn: S. Iierom says, O man, when thou go to the sick beds of thy
neighbors, thou art somewhat squeamish, and thou make a sour face at it,
consider with thy self that thou art made of the same element, and the same
thing that is befallen him, thou might have suffered, think his sorrows
and pains to be thine own, and then thou will not be so squeamish.

Secondly, 2
they were Disciples, yet but weak Disciples; Joseph was a secret Disciple,
but for fear of the Jews he durst not show his face openly in that
profession, and Nicodemus he came to Christ by night, now these were weak
Disciples, and yet in the greatest disgrace stood to Christ, when Judas had
betrayed Christ, and Peter had denied him, and all the rest of the Disciples
were fled from him: which may teach us, not to despise our weak brethren, but
to think humbly of our selves, and to carry our selves lowly, for these weak
ones may stand to Christ and to the profession of holy Religion, when great
learned men shrink, men of great graces, therefore we should not despise our
weak brethren, as Paul exhorts, Romans 14. 4. who art thou that condemnest
another man's servant? he stands or falls to own Lord and master; yea he
shall be established, for God is able to make him stand. Now I do not speak
this to nourish any one in his weakness, for it is a good thing to speak
boldly in the cause of Christ; who says, he that denies me before men, I will
deny him before God. There is a pretty story in the book of Martyrs of two
Protestants, that were doctors of Divinity in the days of King Edward, says
one of them, I am afraid I shall not have courage to stand out for Religion in
the time of persecution, I think I cannot burn for Religion: says the other,
knowing that I do know, if I had one hundred lives, I would give them and be
contented to lose them in the cause of Christ: well the time of persecution
came, and the strong man became a Papist, and the weakest remained a
Protestant, although he did not burn for it, but dyed in his bed; therefore
the strong must carry themselves humbly and lowly, and not despise their weak
brethren, but pray to God, that they may show love to Christ in the time of
greatest troubles.

Now what was it that made them perform this duty to Christ? this
consideration that they had heard Christ preach unto them, and had not profited
by it, that he was entertained into many of their houses, but not into their
hearts, and now that they had taken Christ and killed him, if ever they will
show their love to him, now they must do it or never; this consideration made
them hold and stand to Christ when others did shrink. Now the same thing must
work upon us the like effect, we have heard the Gospel a long time, yet have
profited little by it, whereas we might have grown in grace, and have been
teachers of others, still we remain ignorant the more shame for us; we should
rather reason thus, I grow old, and I know not how soon the day of my death
will come: now is the time where in I should get grace, the time wherein I
should get knowledge, it must be now or never; this consideration may stir
us up to show love to Christ and to his members.

The next point is, Thirdly, the place of his burial.
the place where Christ was buried; and this is to be considered in diverse
circumstances:

1 That it was another man's grave. 2 That this grave was Joseph's grave. 3 That
it was a new grave wherein never any man was laid. 4 It was in a Garden.
First, First, another man's grave.
it was another man's grave that Christ was buried in, for he was so poor that
he had not a grave of his own; we see that poor men though they have not an
house to hide their heads in, Reason 1.
yet they have a grave to bury themselves in, but Christ was so poor he had
not a grave of his own to bury himself in; neither was it only in his death,
but also in his whole life, for when Christ was borne, he was borne in another
man's house, when he preached, he preached in another man's ship, and when he
prayed he prayed in another man's garden; when he eat, the women ministered unto
him, when he did ride to Jerusalem, he did ride on another man's Ass, when he
was buried, he was buried in another man's grave, he had nothing peculiar to
himself but his cross; which no man would touch, much less take from him,
for they compelled Simon of Syrene to bear it; all which may teach us that
Christ has sanctified a poor estate to us, so that if a man be never so poor
and mean, let him be contented with it, and labor to be Gods servant, that he
may say of him, Behold my servant, and behold my son, then this poor estate
is sanctified to thee.

Secondly, Reason 2.
Christ was buried in another man's grave, to show that he would come in a
nearer conjunction with us, That he would not only take our nature upon him,
come into our houses, and eat at our Tables but he would also lie in our
graves with us; it is a great love that a woman hears to her husband, Simile.
that she will be contented to forsake her fathers house and leave her
kindred, and go and dwell with her husband; but it is a far greater love when
she will follow him into the prison, and down into the dungeon; so it is a
great love of Christ that he would take our nature upon him, come into our
houses, and feed at our tables, But it is a far greater love that he would
go into the grave with us, and lie there trodden down of death, that so he
might give life to our dead bodies.

Secondly, Secondly, Joseph's grave.
this grave was Joseph's: now Joseph was a rich man as we have heard; and this
was to fulfill that Scripture Esaias 53. 9. where the Prophet foretold it, He
made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; on the cross
contemned and despised, but in the grave he was honored: so it is with a
Christian, so long as he is in troubles and crosses of this life, so long he is
contemned and despised, but when he is in the grave, then he is honored; as
we see the Jews did persecute the prophets in their life time, but* when they
were dead they did paint and garnish their tombs: therefore our Savior says,
ye are witnesses unto your selves, that ye are the sons of them that
murdered the prophets; when they were alive then they could not abide them,
but. when they were dead then they did honor them, and so in Prove. 10. 7. The
memorial of the just shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot.
The sight of a good man is grievous to a number, they cannot abide to see his
face, but let God take him away and then they honor him; it is not so with the
wicked man, for he has his honor whiles he lives, here every one does
applaud him and speak to him fair, but let him dye and then his name rots, as
Job 21. 17. it is said, How often is the candle of the wicked put out; and how
often comes their destruction upon them? where we may see the life of a wicked
man compared to a candle, that when it is light, every man takes delight to
look on it, but let it be put out, and it leaves a stinking snuff behind
it; even so it is with a wicked man, as long as he lives every man seeks to
him, and many do applaud him, but if he be dead, then he leaves nothing but a
stink behind: and therefore this is a comfort to a Christian man that though
he be despised here while he lives, yet he shall be honored in the grave.

Thirdly, 3
it was a new grave, wherein never man lay: and here was a special providence
of God in it. A new Grave.
Now there were two causes why he was buried in a new grave:

First, Two causes why Christ was buried in a new Grave.
lest the Jews should surmise that it was not Christ that did rise again, but
some other that was buried before him, therefore he was buried in a grave
wherein never man was laid before him.

Secondly, lest the Jews should think he did not rise by his own power, but
by the power of some holy man that had been buried there before; even as the
man spoken of 2 king. 13. 22. when he was put into the grave of Eliseus, and
did touch his dead bones, life came into him again; so lest they should think
that some holy Man had been buried there, and by touching of his dead bones
life came into him again, therefore wisdom of God appointed that he should
be buried in a Grave wherein never man was, so that God would stop all
occasions of surmising to the contrary. In Hos. 2. 6. Behold (says the Lord) I
will hedge up the way with thorns, and make a wall that he shall not find her
paths: some take this way to be the way of affliction, but it is a Metaphor
taken from men that do enclose beasts in a pasture, that do thrust bushes into
every gap, because they should not creep out; even so, because we are ready
to creep out at every gap, therefore the Lord does stop them, that so we may
not wander here and there.

Fourthly, 4
it was in a garden that as the first Adam did commit sin in a garden: It was
in a garden.
so the second Adam came to bury sin and utterly to destroy it in a garden.
I, but why did Joseph make his grave in the midst of his garden, seeing the
garden is a special place of delight? the reason is, that he might remember
death in the midst of his pleasures, and to put him in mind that he must lie
there and be dissolved to dust, which does teach us a special point of
Instruction, that we ought to remember death in the midst of all our pleasures
and delights: our Savior in his life often speaks of death, as Matthew. 20. 18.
and Luke 18. 31. When Christ was transfigured on the mount, Simile.
and Moses and Elias talked with him, it is said, They appeared in glory, and
spoke of his decease, Luke 9. 31. so in the midst of our mirth and of our
delights and pleasures, we should think of death: Saint Jerome says it was
the custom amongst the Romans, that in the midst of their triumphs there was
one at the back of them, who cried out, Remember thou art a mortal man, and
for all this applause that thou must dye; so it was the manner of Egyptians
that at their merry meetings, to bring in a Sceleton, the picture of a dead
man, whose flesh was pulled off the bones, and one said unto them, Eat and
drink, and be merry, for thou shall be such an one after death: Now if the
Romans in their Triumphs had their remembrance of death, and the Egyptians at
their merriments, then how much more should we that be Christians think of
death? they had but the light of nature, and we have the light of Gods grace.
We read Genes. 22. When Abraham saw the place afar off where he should
sacrifice his son, he took the wood of the burnt offering and laid it on his
son Isaac, and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both
together: so when we see afar off the place of death, or the time when we
shall dye by contemplation or meditation that we are old or that sickness is
upon us, Simile.
we should fit and prepare our selves for it, that so we may dye in faith and
in the favor of God, in assurance of the pardon of our sins, that so when
we part with this world we may enter into joy and happiness.

Fourthly, we are to observe the manner of Christ's burial, wherein diverse
things are to be considered: 4 The manner of Christ burial.
As first, that Joseph before he would take down the dead body of Christ
would ask leave of Pilate: for the bodies of the condemned be in the hands of
the Magistrates. 1
This was the reason why he would not take down the body without leave.
Secondly, when he had leave, 2
he goes and pulls the nails and spicks out of the hands and feet of Christ,
takes his body down and gets it on his back, and in this meditation it is
likly said, Lord, thou have borne the burden of my sins, and now I will bear
the burden of thy body. 3
Thirdly, that Nicodemus did bring an hundred pound of sweet odors of Myrrh and
Aloes, to imbalme his body, and lest the Jews should think it were
superfluity, it is said, It was the manner of the Jews to do so. 4
Fourthly, when they had imbalmed his body, Joseph gets a kircher, and tied
upon his jaws, and wrapped up his wounds and sores with fine linen, and laid
him in a fair sheet and wrapped him in it. Fifthly, when this was done they
laid him into the earth, the one at the head and the other at the feet, 5
and then they rolled a stone upon the grave that no body might do any hurt
unto the dead body of Christ. Now from hence diverse things worthy our
observation offer themselves unto us, but for the present we will content our
selves only with these two observations.

First, Obser. 1. Their readiness to bury Christ.
The readiness of these men to bury Christ, wherein they showed their true
love to him; the one he brought fine linen to wrap up Christ in; the other,
an hundred pounds of ointment to anoint the dead body of Christ: these men
thought nothing too much to bestow on him: But where are the men that are so
ready now to do service, or to bestow any cost on Christ? These men did but a
little in his life time; but now he is dead, they stand at no ^ost, they are
ready to do any service unto him; which may condemn us that now live in the
light of the Gospel: now when Christ is not dead but alive in glory, and
amongst us in his lively members, and are no more ready to show our love to
Christ, who is yet to be clothed and helped: therefore, (as a learned man
says) Let us go with these two Disciples and buy fine Linen, and wrap the
body of Christ in it, and let us bring an hundred pound of sweet spices to
imbalme him with, and if thou can not buy an hundred pound, then buy ten
pounds; if thou can not buy ten, buy five; if not five, then one pound; and
if not one pound, then buy one ounce: ye know what Christ says, That which ye
do to of these little ones, ye do it to me; and if thou have nothing to give
Christ, yet take heed how thou take away any thing from Christ. As the fine
linen and the sweet spices that Joseph and Nicodemus had prepared for the
burial of Christ; therefore, if there be any money, or bread, or any thing
else to be bestowed on Christ in his poor members, let us take heed how we
do take it away: If (I say) we have nothing to bestow on Christ or on his
poor members, yet let us take heed how we take away from him that which Joseph
and Nicodemus has given, I mean that which Gods people has bestowed.

Secondly, 2
we observe in the manner, that as too much sumptuousnes is to be avoided,
Observatio^
so too much sluttishnesse: there is a golden mean if one could hit it; there
be some too fine, and there be some too sluttish; and therefore, if we have no
better rule than this, let us follow the manner and custom of Gods people; we
see here it was the custom of the Jews so to bury. Now there be foolish
toys used amongst us, I know not from whence they came, but I am sure it is
not the ancient manner of Christians so to bury.

The fifth is, 3
The fruit and benefit we have by the burial of Christ, which is, The fruit
and benefit of his burial.
That sin may be buried in us; and therefore as every man would be contented
to bring something to the burial of Christ, if thou can not bring fine
linen with Joseph to wrappe the body of Christ in, 1
nor an hundred pound of sweet spices with Nicodemus to imbalme his body, yet
do thou bring thy sins and thy corruptions, let them die in his death, and
be buried in his grave; this is acceptable to God, and seeing he looks for thy
sins and my sins, and has waited three days together being trampled and
trodden down of death, therefore what may we look for if we do neglect it.
Now that sin may be buried in us, there be four things required:

First, 4
that we labor to kill sin, for if we have not killed it, we cannot bury
it; Ways to bury sin.
as long as their is life in it, it will rise again, and therefore let us slay
sin and labor to kill it: this is that which Paul speaks of, Colos. 3. 1.
Mortify therefore your members which are on earth, that is, kill your sins,
and your lusts: We see when the Soldiers went to bury the thieves, finding
them alive, Simile.
they first brake the legs of them and killed them; so when we go to bury
sin, if we find sin to be alive still, we must first break the legs
and kill it, and then we must bury it.

Secondly, 2
We must hate the loathsome face of sin; for if we like it and love it, we will
never bury it: and this is the reason why we are content to bury our friends
though we loved them and liked them well, Simile.
because after they are dead, ARTI. IV.
they become loathsome: so when sin is loathsome and we cannot abide to see
the ugly face of it, then we should endeavor to bury it. Simile.
Therefore, when men will swear and lie, and profane the Sabbathes, and be
drunken, it is certain they do not see the loathsome face of sin, and then
they care not for the burying of it.

Thirdly, To remoove it out of our sight, and out of our houses, as we remoove
a dead man out of our houses; therefore Abraham said, 3
Let me bury my dead out of my sight: Ez^. 39. 14. There is related a strange
story, that there were searchers appointed to go through the lan^, who if
they did find any dead men's bones after a great slaughter, were to set up a
mark or a stick by them, Simile.
till the buriers came; so every man's conscience must be the searchers to find
out his sins, which when he has found out, then he must set a mark by
them, and never leave till thou have buried them out of thy sight.

Fourthly, When we have buried sin them we must rake moulds on it, which if
we do not, the Devil will come and put life into it again: therefore it must
be every man's wisdom by prayer and meditation to rake moulds over his sins,
that so they do not rise again, and his latter end be worse than his
beginning.

SERMON XXIX.
ACTS 2. 27. Because thou will not leave my soul in Hell, neither will thou
suffer thy holy One to see corruption.
HAving spoken of the death of Christ, now we come to handle a further descent
of Christ's humiliation, for there were certain steps thereof, on which he
descended, till he came at the lowest step; and it was (as all Divines agree)
His descention into Hell. Genesis 28. 12. We may see that on the ladder that
Jacob saw in his vision, there were Angels ascending and descending: Simile.
so on the ladder of man's redemption, there was Christ descending lower and
lower till he came to the lowest step, and sinful man ascending higher and
higher, till he came to the highest top of glory; it is an experience in
nature, that those would carry water up to high Towers and Steeples, must let
it fall exceeding low, Simile.
ere it can rise: So our Savior Christ the most cunningest Artificer in the
World, that he might raise the frail nature of man to the highest top of
glory, SERMON XXIX.
was contented to fall exceeding low, to the lowest step of humiliation, that
so he might raise man to the highest glory: This is generally the mystery of
Christ's descention into Hell, as all do agree.

Now for the particulars, I must grant there be diverse opinions of it; some
think one thing, some another yea there is not only diversities of opinions
between the Protestants and the Papists, but in both sides even in the bosom
of their Churches, and amongst themselves. It is the opinion of some Papists
that Christ was not in the place of the damnd of Hell, but they say he was in
the skirts and brimmes thereof; but Bellarmine, he dissents from them, and
affirms he was in the vaults and chambers in Hell; and another says, he was
not in Hell bodily, but by efficacy and vertually: so we see the Papists be not
all of one mind, but there be diverse opinions amongst them. Now before we go
any further, there be two sorts of men that must be satisfied.

First, 1
such as say seeing there is such a diversity of opinions, they will believe
nothing till all be agreed. To such I answer, if thou will believe nothing
till all be agreed, then thou will never believe at all, and so thou shall
never be saved, because there have been dissentions in all ages; Moses was
withstood by Iannes and Iambres, Elias with Baals Priests, Jeremy with the
false Prophets, Christ with the Pharisees, and the Apostles with Simon Mogus:
so there has been diversity of opinions from the beginning, and will be as
long as there is the seed of the woman and the seed of the Serpent; so long
as the Flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, so
long as we see but in part, as it were in a glass; and therefore if thou will
not believe till all agree, thou will never believe, and so thou shall never
be saved; as in Chrysostom^ time many heathen came unto him and told him, that
they would be Christians, but that there were such diversities of opinions
amongst them, and such divisions, every one pretending the truth. Now Origin
does worthily answer this, says he, Will thou not be a Christian, because
there be diversity of opinions? thou had as good say, thou will not be of any
calling, for there is no calling but has its diversities of opinions and
dissent in judgment: will thou be a Philosopher? some of them be of one
judgment, and some of another, and there is an hundred opinions amongst them:
Will thou be a Physician, there is diversity of judgments amongst them too?
Will thou be a Lawyer, why, one interprets the law one way, and one another
way; yea, there is not any Art, but therein are dissentions in judgment one
from the other; and therefore if thou will do nothing till all be agreed,
thou can not be of any calling. It is a strange thing that men should do
more foolishly in religion, than in any thing else: If a man has his lands to
sow, and he go and ask his neighbor when it is best to sow; Simile.
some will say at such a time, and some at such a time, and every man will
speak according to the judgment and light of knowledge he has; therefore
will thou neglect sowing thy land: so it may be thou may be starved. Now
since for diversity of men's opinions concerning the season, thou will not omit
the time of sowing; much more do not thou neglect the saving of thy soul:
This is the madness of men, they will not neglect the sowing of their land nor
the building of their houses, and yet they will neglect the saving of their
souls.

Another sort of men that must be satisfied, 2
are such who say, if great Doctors and learned men are not able to settle
themselves; how shall we be able that are unlearned? I answer, that if a man
make conscience of plain truths, God will reveal the other so far forth as
shall be needful for him: Saint Paul gives us a rule for it, Philip. 3. 15.
Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded and if in any thing ye be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even the same thing unto you.
Nevertheless, in that whereunto we are come, let us proceed by one rule that
we may mind one thing. Now there be some truths that we all generally agree
in, we hold that whoredom is a sin, that drunkenness, swearing, lying and
slandering our neighbor be sins, and dealing unjustly is a sin, and if we
make not conscience of these known truths, it is just we should care and
wander in the great matters, therefore let us make conscience of known
truths, and God will reveal the other to us; As we see Acts 10. in the
example of Cornelius, he being ignorant in a maine point, fasted, prayed, made
conscience of known truths, and God did inform him in the same by Peter; so
likewise Peter in the same Chapter being ignorant of the conversion of the
Gentiles, preached, and prayed on the house top, and making conscience of
that known truth, God did reveal the other to him in a vision. So likewise
Apollos, Acts 18. knowing nothing but the Baptism of John, went on and
preached life and salvation by Christ, and making conscience of that known
truth, God did reveal the other; he stirred up Aquila and Priscilla, and they
informed him; therefore let us make conscience of known truths, and God will
reveal the other as far form as shall be needful for us. Simile.
If a man power water into a glass, if the glass foul the water and mud it,
he will stay his hand and will power in no more, but if it remains clear,
he fills it up to the top: so if God power knowledge into a man, if he marres
his knowledge or soyles it, then God will stay his hand, but if he with his
knowledge labor to glorify God, and make conscience of his ways, then God
will fill him up to the top. This may be the stay of a true Christian when
great Doctors err and wander, and be unsettled, if thou make conscience of thy
ways, and walk in the plain truths, God will reveal unto thee the other.

Now having satisfied these two sorts of men, I will show you first what I
allow not of; secondly, what I take to be more probable, and come more near
the truth; thirdly, what I take to be the truth in my judgment, all under
correction of the more grave and learned.

First, what it is that I reject and allow not of; for though no man can
presently know the certain truth of this, yet it is good to avoid the
dangerous opinions: Simile.
As a man that is at sea, if he cannot hit of the right haven to arrive at, yet
if he can avoid the dangerous rocks and sands it is well; So although we
cannot know all certain truths, yet it is well if we can avoid uncouth and
false opinions. Now there be four opinions which I allow not of.

First, That his body descended into hell; this in my judgment stands not with
the Scripture, for Christ's body was in the grave three nights and three days,
Four opinions of Christ's descension into hell.
as Christ speaks, Matthew. 12. 40. As Jonas was three days and three nights in
the Whales belly; so the son of Man shall be three days and three nights in
the body of the earth; 1
therefore the body of Christ was no lower than the grave, it descended no
further: And this may be a sweet comfort to us, that the bodies of Christians
descend no lower than the grave; therefore when we see a Christian laid into
his grave, he is in the worst estate we shall see him in; but the wicked
descend lower and lower til they come at hell, though their bodies do not
descend when they be buried, yet when they shall rise again at the last
Judgment, then not only their souls, but also their bodies shall go to
hell; as Psalm. 9. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations
that forget God; but when a Christian is buried and laid in his grave, here is
the worst estate shall befall them, for where the body of Christ rested, there
the bodies of Christians shall rest after death, to wit, in the grave.

The second is, 2
That Christ went down in his Spirit into hell (or descended thither) to
preach to the damned to convert them: The second Opinion.
This opinion seems more unreasonable than the former; but Bellarmine confutes
it, for he says, that life is the time of grace, there is no repentance nor
converting unto God after death, according as Christ says, John 9. Work while
it is called today, for the night comes on when no man can work: And 2 Cor.
5. We shall all appear before the judgment seat of God, to answer for that we
have done in the body, whether it be good or bad: So there is no repentance
after death, but then we must come to judgment to answer for that we have done
in our flesh: And Galath. 6. Whiles we have time do good; here in this
lifetime is the doing of good, and therefore it is a sure thing that if we do
not repent and turn unto God while we live here, we shall not repent after
death, because this lifetime is the time of grace, and of repentance;
therefore it must be the wisdom of men to repent of their sins, to turn unto
God, lay hold on life and salvation while they live here, for if they be dead
and laid in the grave, it is impossible that they should repent, because this
life time is the time of repentance: S. Chrysostom says, there be two kinds
of Repentance, fruitful and unfruitful, or penal repentance: Fruitful
repentance is in this life, Penal repentance after this life in hell, for it
is true (says he) the damned in hell shall repent them of their sins, the
whoremaster of his whoring, the drunkard of his drunkenness, the swearer of
his swearing, but this repentance shall be unfruitful, though it be an
afflictive repentance; therefore if we would have fruit and benefit by our
conversion, we must repent whiles we live here.

The third is, 3
That Christ descended into hell to suffer the pains and torments of hell in
his soul, The third Opinion.
where we should have suffered: I answer, the Scripture is plain for this,
that Christ did not suffer for us in hell, for he suffered on the cross,
where all was finished; therefore he did not need to descend into hell to
suffer pains and torments there; as Hebr. 2. 14. For So Much as the children
were partakers of the flesh and blood, he also himself having took part with
them, that by death he might destroy him that had power ever death, Object.
that is, the Devil; so Christ did overcome the Devil by dying.

But it may be objected and said, that we deserved to have suffered the pains
of hell for ever; and therefore Christ descended into hell for us. To this I
answer, Sol.
that if this reason were good, then he in soul should not only have suffered
the torments of hell, but his body too, for we deserve not only to have our
souls tormented, but our bodies also; therefore this cannot stand us in stead:
Christ suffered the pains of hell, but not in the place of hell, but partly in
the Garden, and partly on the Cross, which was sufficient for man's offense; as
a man that has a sum of money to pay, if he pay it (though it be not in the
same place) all is well, it cannot be required again; so Christ has paid and
satisfied God for our sins, though not in the same place where we should have
suffered, but partly in the Garden, when he was in the bloody sweat, and partly
on the Cross, when he made that bitter complaint, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? And therefore this may give us comfort that God is satisfied
and will not require any more at our hands, if we be in Christ.

The Fourth is, 4
That Christ went not down to hell, but he went to the upper skirts and brims
of hell where the Fathers were floting, The fourth Opinion.
so to fetch them thence. This is the opinion of the Papists, and is more
unreasonable than any of the former, for the Fathers were not in the upper
skirts and brims of hell, but were saved by the same faith we be; as we see,
Act. 15. 11. But we believe through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ to be
saved as they do; so the Fathers were saved by the same means we are, for the
same means were in the Old Testament that is in the New, but that there was a
veil before it: To this effect we have Psalm. 102. 24. I said, take me not
away in the midst of my days; but there is a plainer place than this, Eccles.
12. 7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall
return unto God that gave it. So the souls of good men, we see, went not to
the border of hell, but to God, as Luke 16. when Lazarus was dead, his soul
was carried into Abraham's bosom, and Dives into hell.

Now there be two evidences that Lazarus was not in the border and skirts of
hell: First, 1
because his soul was carried by the Angels, who do not carry men's souls
into hell, 2
but into heaven: Secondly, because that he was in a place of comfort and joy,
but there is poor comfort in hell; therefore we may see that the Papists
opinion is very erroneous and false.

But there is another Scripture to be answered, Object.
where it is said, Heb. 9. 12. that the way to the holiest of holy, was not
made by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by the blood of Christ; and then it
follows, there was no way to heaven, but by the death of Christ.

To this I answer, sol.
first, that there was no way to heaven by the legal sacrifices, only the
virtue and power of Christ's sacrifice laid the way open to us. Secondly, all
that came to heaven must come by the virtue and power of Christ, for his death
was as vertuall and effectual to save men from the beginning, as it is now;
therefore in the Revelation, it is said, He is the Lamb slain from the
beginning, because it was effectual and vertuall in Gods account; As when a man
is arrested and carried to prison for a great sum of money, and meets with
his friend, who asks him whither he is going; Simile.
he tells him he is going to prison, who thus pleads with the man that this
party was indebted to; If ye let him go I will pay the debt, I have not so
much money about me as will pay thee now, but at such a time I will pay all
that money; well, he keeps the day and pays the money, and all is well; So
we be infinitely indebted to God, and were going to prison, Christ promises
to God he will satisfy him, at the time appointed he brought him a bag of
money, that is, of his merits, then we were discharged, God was pacified and
pleased. Thus ye have heard of those four opinions that I cannot assent unto,
now we are to speak of that which in my poor judgment is nearer the truth,
and carries some probability for it.

First, Two more probable Opinions.
That Christ descended into hell to subdue the Devil, and conquer him in his
own house; this is more probable than any of the other, and there be learned
men that do hold so, 1
but I dare not yield to it, because I have reason to the contrary; Reason 1.
First, because most of all Divines hold, that Christ's descension into hell is
the lowest step and degree of his abasement; yet let it be what it will be,
David rejoices at it, as a thing of great deliverance, that he had escaped the
grave, Therefore (says he) my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices; my flesh
also shall rest in hope, for thou will not leave my soul in grave, neither yet
will thou let thine Holy One see corruption: And Augustine says, that by this
poverty of our Lord Jesus Christ we are enriched: But if Christ descended into
hell to triumph over the Devil in his own house, then it is not the lowest
step of his humiliation and abasement, but it will appear that he had the
first beginning of his Kingdom, and first step of his exaltation in hell;
therefore in my judgment this cannot be the true sense of it.

Secondly, 2
all the Scriptures show that his soul went not into hell, but into heaven; as
Luke 23. Christ says to the thief on the cross, This day thou shall be with
me in Paradise; so the soul of Christ went to Paradise, not into hell; and in
the same chapter, when Christ gave up the ghost, he commended his soul into
the hands of God; so Christ's soul was not in hell, but was laid down in the
hands of God, and his body remained here till he was taken up; and Augustine
says, if we think that the soul of the Thief went to heaven, then it were
our sin to think that Christ's soul did not as well as his. Some shifts this
and say, his soul went to heaven first, and presently after he was buried, he
descended into hell; and some again say, his soul went to hell first, and
after it went to heaven; but this is against that Scripture, Luke 16. it is the
speech between Abraham and Dives, that there is a great space beeweene us,
that they which are here, cannot come there, and they which are there cannot
come here; there is no intercourse between them: And Bellarmine says he was
in heaven and in hell all at one time; but he that is in heaven cannot be in
hell, and he that is in hell, cannot be in heaven, because it is proper only
to the Godhead to be in all places at one time.

Thirdly, 3
Origin says, he triumphed on the cross and in this world over all his
spiritual enemies; and if he did it in this world and upon the cross, then
he need not descend into hell to triumph over the devil and to subdue him. In
the Colossians the Apostle shows how Christ did triumph on the cross over
principallities and powers, there he vanquished and overcame them, and there
he trod down all his spiritual enemies.

But here may an Objection arise, Object. Sol.
how could he overcome them, seeing he was overcome himself of death? I
answer, he overcame them in his soul by his holy graces, he carried away a
glorious triumph, though they seized upon his body; so it is said of meaner men
than Christ, Romans 8. 36. All the day long we are killed, and are accounted as
sheep for the slaughter; and yet for all this they were more than conquerours
by the holy graces they had, by their faith, patience and care, so they carried
away the glorious triumph. Now if men did triumph on the cross, much more
Christ; which must teach us, that seeing Christ did triumph on the cross,
every Christian should do so, when he is under the cross, then he should
triumph over his spiritual enemies by his faith and holy graces, so to carry
away a glorious victory. So Matthew. 5. 29. our Savior says, If thine eye
offend thee, pluck it out, and if thine hand offend thee, cut it off: for it
is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy
whole body should be cast into hell. It is an easy matter to the world, when
they be in health and in peace, to tread down all the spiritual enemies, but
a difficult task when they be in sickness, and in pains, yet a Christian we
see, if he will follow the example of his Lord and master Jesus Christ, must
triumph on the cross.

Fourthly, Saint Luke says, 4
Act. 1. 1. I have made the former treatise, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus
began both to do and teach, until the day that he was taken up: now if Saint
Luke did write of all that Christ did till the time he was taken up, then he
would have wrote of this, it being an act of Christ to descend down into hell;
but Saint Luke has not recorded it, he has not written of this, and therefore
Christ did not descend into hell to subdue the devil there. Augustine says
well, whatsoever our Savior Christ would have us to believe, he has commanded
his Disciples to record it; but they have recorded no such thing, therefore it
is not to be believed.

Fifthly, 5
there be many Divines say, that all the devils be in this world till the last
day, and then they be not in hell. Now I dare not say that all of them be in
this world, but I think the greatest part be here; for Ephesians. 6. the devil
is said to be in high places, that is, in the air; and Job 1. the Lord asks
the devil from whence he came, whose reply is, from compassing the earth, so
the devil is in the earth; and Matthew. 8. our Savior Christ cast out a devil
out of a man, and he asked him what his name was, and he said, Legion,
because there was alegion of devils, is that a great number: so that the
greatest part of the devils be in this world; therefore he needed not to
descend into hell to subdue the devils, the most of which might be subdued here.

Lastly, 6
all the articles of our Christian faith are confirmed by plain places of
Scripture, but there is no plain place of Scripture to confirm this that
Christ went down into hell to subdue him in his own house: and Augustine
says, that all those points of faith that are fit for a Christian to believe
are confirmed by plain places of Scripture; but this is not so confirmed,
therefore not to be believed.

Now against this, Object. Sol.
there be three Scriptures alleged: the first is taken out of Psalm. 16. Thou will not leave my soul in grave or in hell: neither will thou let thy holy One
see corruption: where by soul is meant life, and by hell is meant the grave;
for the sense is; thou will not leave my life in the grave. Now that this is
the true sense it may appear by these two reasons:

First, Two reasons to prove the point.
out of Psalm. 88. where the like phrase of Scripture is, My soul draws near
to hell, that is, my life draws near to the grave, as appears plainly by
the words following, 1
I am counted amongst them that go down into the pit, free among the dead,
like the slain lying in the grave.

Secondly, it may appear by the same words that Peter brings in to prove the
resurrection of Christ; 2
Act. 2. the Apostle there makes an opposition between Christ and David, that
Christ is ascended up into Heaven, but David was not, his body remaining in the
grave: so Christ was where David was not; therefore we cannot prove by this
that Christ's soul was in hell.

The second Scripture is out of Romans 10. 7. Object. Sol.
Who shall descend into the deep, that is, to bring Christ again from the
dead? Now by the deep is not meant the deep of hell; but of the grave, the
depth of the grave where the dead lie.

The third is out of Ephesians. 4. 9. Now in that he ascended, what is it but that
he also descended first into the lowest parts of the earth? Object. Sol. Two
parts of the earth.
Chrysostom expounds the place, and says, it is the very grave; for in the
Hebrew tongue there be two parts of the earth, there is the face of the earth
which is the place where we be, and the lower part, and that is the grave; so
that the lowest part of the earth that Christ did ascend to is the grave.

The second more probable opinion is, The second probable opinion.
that Christ descended into hell, when he left the pains of hell in the
garden and on the cross: this is a true ground, but it does not agree with the
order of the Creed; for his descension into hell was a thing that was done
after he was buried, and his sufferings in the garden and on the cross was
before, now it was not repeated again, for in so short a confession, men use
not to repeat, therefore it was something that was after his death and burial.

Now that which I take to be the truth in my judgment is, that Christ lay in
the grave three days together, trampled and trodden down of death, so that the
descension of Christ into hell is nothing else but the captivating of Christ
under death for a time.

For our instruction there be two uses to be made of this point: first, that
as Christ descended lower and lower, till he came to the lowest step of
abasement, Use 1.
before he ascended into glory, so every one must labor to be contented to
descend lower and lower, till he come at the lowest step of humiliation, before
he ascend into glory: to this effect Paul says of Christ, he that descended
is the same that ascended far above all heavens; so that a Christian must
descend first before he can ascend.

Now there be two descents of a Christian, Two Descents of a Christian.
the one is in his soul, and the other is in his body: 1
the first is in soul, to descend low into our selves, and to sink down as
low as Hell in the sense and feeling of our sins and vileness before God,
that God may advance and lift us up; so the Prophet David did, and other holy
Saints recorded in the sacred Scripture; and therefore Origin says, Simile.
that those which God does purpose to advance, he does first make them descend
low into themselves to become as no body that so they may be lifted up to
glory: secondly, they must descend in their bodies, they must be contented to
descend into the grave and to lie in the dust many years together kept under
of death, and then afterward they shall be raised to glory.

Secondly, 2
that as Christ descended lower and lower, so we should be contented to come
down to the lowest degree that God shall assign us; there be many that be
contented to come down somewhat, but to lose all and to part with all our
goods, there is not one of a thousand that will be contented: 2 Samuel 6. 22.
when David daunced before the Arc, Michal despised him for it, unto whom he
makes this answer, that if it be a vile thing to do so, he would be more
vile; so should we do, be contented to become more vile in our own eyes,
Simile.
to come to any estate that it shall please God to bring upon us, that so he
may advance us, as Job 19. 25. when he was despised of his servants and all his
goods lost, yet he was contented with it, and cheareth up himself by faith,
saying, I know my Redeemer lives, and in my flesh I shall see God; so if we
be contented to be humbled here in the kingdom of grace, we shall be advanced
in the kingdom of glory.

SERMON XXX.
1 CORINTHIANS 15. 4. And that he was buried, and that he rose again the
third day according to the Scriptures.
HAving spoken of the degrees of Christ Humiliaation, SERMON XXX.
now we are to speak of the degrees of his Exaltation: but before we speak
of this, the consideration of both of them together will not be unprofitable
for us; because from thence we may learn this good instruction, that as there
was a time of humiliation, and a time of exaltation unto Christ, so all the
people of God in several ages have had these two times; a time of humiliation,
and a time of exaltation; so says the Prophet Ierem. 30. Alas, for that day is
great, so that none is like it; it is even the time of Iaakobs trouble, yet he
shall be delivered out of it: there is a time of trouble, and a time of
deliverance from trouble, as Psalm. 105. 18, 19. Joseph had his feet in the
stocks and was laid in Irons, till his appointed time came, and the Lords word
had tried him; so there was a time of his trouble, and a time of his
deliverance out of his troubles. This may be the comfort of all the people of
God, that as there is a time of humiliation, so there is a time of exaltation,
which they may look for; as they have trouble, so they shall have deliverance
out of it, as Paul says, 2 Timothy 2. 12. If we suffer with Christ, we shall
also reign with him; of these things says the Apostle put them in
remembrance, as they be humbled here, so they shall be exalted in time to
come: all the people of God must sustain themselves with this, as Job 14.
where he says, All the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change
come: their shame shall be turned into glory, and their pains into ease, their
trouble into joy; so also says David Psalm. 123. as the eyes of a servant wait
on his master, and the eyes of a maid attend on her mistress, so we will
wait on thee, till thou have mercy on us; therefore it is plain as there is a
time of trouble, so there will be a time of mercy, as Christ had these two
times, so all the people of God shall have these two times.

Now there be four degrees of his exaltation.

1. His resurrection from the dead. 2. His ascension. 3. His sitting at the
right hand of God. 4. His coming to judgment.
Now of the resurrection of Christ there be diverse things to be considered:

1. Why it was needful Christ should rise. 2. When he rose again. 3. The
manner of his rising again. 4. In what estate he did rise again. 5. The
manifestation of his rising. 6. The fruit and benefit we attain thereby.
First, The first degree of his exaltation.
The reason why it was needful Christ should rise; for as there were reasons
why he should suffer; so there are also reasons why he should rise again.

First, His Resurrection. First, three reasons why it was needful that Christ
should rise.
To assure us that all our sins are pardoned, purged, and expiated in the
death of Christ; for if there had been but one sin of so many thousands
committed, unexpiated and unreconciled, the guilt of that one sin would have
held Christ under for ever; for Paul says, the wages of sin is death:
therefore seeing Christ did rise again, it is a plain evidence that there is
not one sin but is done away and reconciled, and ye many a man does not
think of this, but lies in a number of sins, whereas we see that one sin
had been sufficient to have held Christ under death for ever: therefore says
Paul Romans 8. 33. who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God
that justifies, who shall condemn: and again, in chap. 4. ult. he says,
Christ was delivered for our sins, and raised again for our justification;
for as Christ was justified before God, so is every true Christian by the
means of Christ. Simile.
We see in experience that a man being cast into prison for another man's debt,
having chains cast on his hands, and fetters on his feet; if the party see a
little while after the chains taken off his hands, and his fetters knocked off
from, his feet himself to have liberty to walk abroad, he may surely think
that his debt is discharged: this is the case between Christ and us, we were
indebted to God, Christ is become our surety, he is taken and cast into the
grave, and the chains of death are cast on him, therefore when a little while
after Christ comes out of the grave, and casts off the chains of death and
walks at liberty again, we may think man's debt is answered, we reconciled,
God pacified and pleased, and we shall not answer for it before the tribunal
of God: for if there had been but one sin unexpiated, that one sin would
have kept Christ under, therefore in that Christ rose, it is an evidence that
our sins are pardoned and expiated.

Secondly, Christ rose to apply salvation, for he did purchase and work man's
salvation by his death, and rose again to apply it: for though salvation and
redemption was wrought by his death and purchased for us, yet unless he had
rose again to apply it, we could have had no benefit by it, for all that we
might have perished: as Ioh. 7. 39. it is said, The Spirit was not yet given,
because Jesus was not yet glorified; there were many goodly promises made unto
the Church, and gifts given, but they had them not till such time as Christ was
risen to apply them; Augustine says, that he made excellent promises to the
Church, but there was not a hand of power to bestow them till Christ was risen;
and therefore it was needful that Christ should rise: as Physicians and
Surgeons temper a great many of plasters, Simile
and then send their servants our to apply them, so Christ has tempered many
plasters with his blood to heal the conscience that is sick of sin, and he
sends out his faithful ministers to apply them: we see many times a father
does purchase goodly lands and livings, which the child never enjoyes, but
Christ he has not purchased life and salvation for us, but he lives again
to put us in possession of it; therefore it was needful that Christ should
rise again to apply salvation to us.

Thirdly, Reason 2.
That he might be an undoubted evidence to us that we shall rise again.
Augustine says, that which went before in the head shall follow in the
members, for as Christ did rise out of the grave, so he shall raise all his
members. Now he will raise them two ways: first, out of the grave; secondly,
out of trouble, whiles they live here.

First, 1
Christ will raise his members out of the grave: for as he himself rose out
of the grave, so he will raise them out of it, by the same virtue and power,
howsoever they may dye as others do and turn to dust, yet one day they shall
rise again out of their graves; so says Paul 1 These. 4. 16. the dead in
Christ shall rise, and verse. 17. he shows that they which are a live at the
coming of Christ, shall not prevent them which are dead: which is plainly
manifested, 1 Cor. 15. 22. that as in Adam all died, even so in Christ shall
all be made alive. Now every man sees how we dye by Adam, but the faith of a
Christian must go further, and see how he shall live by Christ; this must be
the only stay of a Christian; that howsoever he shall dye and be turned into
dust, yet one day he shall rise again by the power of Christ; therefore
howsoever we may be humbled here, have much trouble and affliction, and in the
end dye and turn to dust, yet let us comfort our selves with this, that one
day we shall rise again by the power of Christ to possess eternal
happiness; thus Job did sustain himself, when he was forsaken of his friends
when he was a stranger to his maids, his wife not regarding him, he says
joyfully to himself in the nineteeth Chapter, I know my Redeemer lives, and
he shall stand at the latter day on the earth; and though after my skin,
worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my flesh: in like manner a
Christian ought to sustain himself, that though a great deal of sorrow and
misery befall him, yet one day he shall see God with his eyes; so also David
says, Psalm. 16. 9. Wherefore my heart is glad, and my tongue rejoices, my
flesh also rests in hope, for thou will not leave my soul in the grave,
neither will thou let thy holy one to see corruption: and more over this was
that comfort that Christ gave to his Disciples, Matthew. 20. 19. when he told
them of his passion. And they shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and
to scourge, and to crucify him, but the third day he shall rise again. Now
that which comforted Job, David, and Christ, must comfort us, for as Christ did
rise, so all his members shall rise; and therefore let us conjoyne our selves
to Christ whilst we live here, that so we may dye with Christ, and let us
lay our selves under him in the grave, I mean our lusts and sins; and then
as Christ rose so we shall rise; but if thou do not conjoyne thy self with
Christ in his death, and lie under him in the grave, then Christ shall rise,
and thou shall lie still in the grave; nay, it were well if it might be so,
for thou shall rise again, but Christ shall rise to glory, and thou to shame;
Christ shall rise to possess eternal life, and thou eternal death.

Secondly, 2
we shall not only rise out of the grave, but we shall also rise out of
trouble; for as there is a power of Christ to pull us out of the grave, so
there is a power of Christ to raise us out of trouble: It is an opinion in the
World, that there is a power of Christ to raise them out of the grave, yet they
do not know that there is also a power of Christ to raise them out of their
troubles; but howsoever this is unknown to the world, yet it should be known
to a Christian. To which effect the Apostle speaks, 2 Corinthians. 4. 10. We
always bear about in our bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life of
Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal bodies. And verse. 14. says he,
knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by
Jesus, and shall present us with you. These words are to be understood of
raising them out of trouble, to comfort them in this world: And so 2 Timothy 2. 9.
Remember (says he) that Jesus Christ made of the seed of David was raised
again from the dead; Remember this you that suffer for good causes, that as
Christ was raised, so you shall be raised to comfort and joy out of your
troubles; so these be the reasons why it was needful Christ should rise:
First, To assure us that our sins are expiated and pardoned: Secondly, To
apply Salvation: Thirdly, To be an undoubted evidence to us, that we shall rise
out of the grave, and out of our troubles in this world.

Secondly, 2
The time when he did rise again; and that is exactly set down, The time
when he rose again.
the third day, according as Christ foretold in the 2 of John, I will destroy
this Temple, and in three days I will build it again, and Matthew. 20 19. the
place before mentioned, and they shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock and
to scourge, and to crucify him, but the third day he shall rise again; and so
in this place which I read unto you, that he was buried, and that he rose the
third day according to the Scriptures.

Now there is reason why he rose no sooner, and there is reason why he rose no
later, as that being the fittest time for him to rise in; of which I will
speak at this time.

First, Reason 1.
Because that it might he an evidence to the Jews that he was truly dead: for
if he had risen the first day or the second, Why Christ rose no sooner.
then they would have thought he had been in a trance or in a sound only; and
therefore to clear this point, he did not rise till the third day, because all
the hope of the pardon of our sins hangs on the death of Christ and all the
hope of Gods favor, and therefore he would have this point sealed to the World:
and this was the first reason why Christ rose no sooner.

Secondly, Reason 2.
That the Disciples might have an evidence of the power of the death of Christ:
for there was a greater power in Christ to rise again, when he had been
possessed and vanquished of death three days, than if he had rose the first
day. And Augustine says, that Christ did more show his power in rising from
death when they had killed him, than he should have done if he had come down
from the Cross when they ^ad him: so there was a greater power of Christ seen
in rising the third day, than if he should have risen the first day, or the
second, it was a greater matter that he should recover, when all hope was
passed; the widows son in the Gospel was raised when he lay upon the Beer
to be carried to burying; Entichus when he fell out of the window; and the
dead man as soon as he did touch the dead bones of Elisha; but Christ recovered
when he had been three days together vanquished of death: and this does show
the great power of Christ.

Thirdly, To teach us Christians patience, that if we do not arise out of
trouble the first day, or the second, yet still to wait with christian
patience till the third day, that is many days together, till the time that
God has appointed. Therefore if we be not raised out of trouble so soon as
we desire, let us not murmr or grudge against God, and be impatient; but
quiet our selves with the good will of God, and wait with patience till the
time he has appointed for our deliverance. It is the manner of the world if
they be in their troubles but a day or two, they say, how long Lord, how long?
as if they tarried too long; but the patience of Christ must teach us patience,
and to quiet our selves with the good will of God: so David did, Psalm. 123. As
the eyes of a servant look to his master, and the eyes of a Maiden to her
Mistress, so our eyes wait on thee till thou show mercy: and though it be not
to day, nor to morrow; yet we wait on thee till thou show mercy: ye remember
that Christ Jesus said to Marie when there wanted wine, My hour is not yet
come. There be two hours; God has his hour, and we have our hour; our
hour is as soon as we stand in need but Christ's hour is to help when all
means fail, there be many that desire ease, and peace, and comfort, but we
must tarry Christ's hour, we must wait with Christian patience till the
third day come. So much for the reasons why Christ rose no sooner; now we are
come to speak why he arose no later.

The first reason is, Three Reasons why Christ rose no later.
To show that if he had deferred it any longer, the Jews might have thought
that it had not been Christ, but some other: And therefore whiles the matter
was fresh and the Soldiers about the Grave Christ rose.

Secondly, 2
That the faith of the Disciples might not faint nor stagger; for we see Luke
24. 21. that two of them say, We trusted that it had been he that should have
delivered Israel, and besides all this, to day is the third day: so their faith
began to stagger, and therefore Christ rose that he might strengthen their
faith: this is the great goodness and kindness of God to his servants. In the
Scripture it is said, He remembered that we be but dust: Now as Christ had a
care of the faith of his Disciples, so he has a care of the faith of us
Christians; for he might have deferred his rising till we shall rise, and
then we might have doubted whether we should rise again or no: therefore lest
we should doubt of our resurrection, Christ would tarry no longer; and so by
this means to strengthen our faith, that as he arose at his time, so we shall
arise at our time.

Thirdly, 3
That he might apply it* and therefore the Angels give a charge to the woman,
that she should go and tell his Disciples he was risen.

Fourthly, 4
Because it was the time that God had appointed; He stirred not the first day
nor the second, he lay dead without motion, there was not a word of his
rising; but when the third day came, then Christ rose with majesty and power,
to give us comfortable hope that we shall rise one day out of trouble: for
although there be little hope of comfort to day, or the next day, yet when the
time comes that God has appointed, we shall have ease, and we shall have
comfort: And therefore as Christ was contented to tarry his time, so we must
be contented to tarry the time God has appointed for our ease, comfort and
deliverance.

Thirdly, 3
The manner how he rose; wherein be three special things to be observed. The
manner how Christ rose.


First, That though he died in weakness, yet he rose in power; which was seen
in this, 1
that he rose notwithstanding all the oppositions the Jews made, for they
rolled a stone upon the mouth of the grave, and they sealed it, and set a watch
to keep him down, and yet he rose in spite of them all: which must teach us
that Religion shall rise, and the Gospel shall rise, notwithstanding all the
opposition that is made to the contrary, though they roll a great stone upon
it, Obser. 1.
and labor to keep it down, all the powers in Hell shall not prevail
against it, but the Gospel shall rise, and Religion shall be advanced in all
times: so we see in Exodus 1. that notwithstanding Pharaoh made laws for the
vexing and troubling of the Jews, yet they did increase and multiply; and this
may be our comfort, that as Christ did rise notwithstanding all the
oppositions to the contrary, so Religion and the Gospel shall rise,
notwithstanding all oppositions that can be made against it. It shall break
through the stones, an armed power, nor all the Devils in Hell are not able to
keep it down; so our savior says, Math. 16. Thou art Peter, and upon this
rock will I build my Church, an^ the gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it: much less then shall worldly power be able to overcome it. So Esaias 54. 7.
says he, All the weapons that are made against thee shall not prosper, and
every tongue that shall rise up against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn.
As also the Prophet Zechary 12. 3. says, And in that day will I make Jerusalem
an heavy stone for all people: All that burden themselves with it shall be cut
in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it:
which Chrysostom says, was a Metaphor taken from the custom of the Jews,
Simile.
whose manner was to have a great stone lie at every gate to try their
strength by lifting at it, which if a man was not able to lift, the more he
did strive and struggle, the more he crushed himself with it; so the Lord
will make the Church and holy Religion to be such a stone, that the more they
strive and struggle with, the more it shall crush them; which is a great
comfort to the people of God that religion, the Gospel and holy profession
shall rise in spite of all that make opposition against it; Exodus 3. 2. Moses
saw the bush burn, and yet not waste, Simile.
because God was in it; so all the troubles and afflictions of the Church do
not waste it, because God is in the midst of the Church: for as Christ rose,
so the Gospel shall rise, notwithstanding all the oppositions against it.

Secondly, 2
the power of Christ's rising, is seen in this, that then there was an Earth
quake, the earth did shake and quake; which shows that death had not taken
away any of the power of Christ, or abated or diminished it; it was as great
when he rose, as it was before his death, we see that all the great Emperors
that have died were not able to stir a cloud, or to move the earth, but
Christ did, he made the earth to quake and tremble, Death could not keep him
under; so Matthew. 28. Christ says, All power is given me in heaven and earth;
and Revel. 1. 18. it is said, I am alive, but was dead; and behold, I am alive
for evermore, Amen; and I have the keys of hell and death. We therefore
seeing there is such power in Christ should labor to be under his defense, and
then we shall be safe from danger; as Christ says, John 10. My sheep hear my
voice, they follow me, and I give them eternal life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any one pluck them out of my hands: Simile.
Therefore as a man in the time of danger runs unto a rock, or sure place of
defense; so in the time of danger, let us run to Christ, and we shall be safe
from danger, by making him our defense.

Again, the grave had detained Christ but three days, and yet we see how the
earth did quake and tremble; therefore, O thou that have not kept down Christ
three days together, but many days, how ought thou to quake! many days
Christ has been rising in thy heart by the motions of his Spirit, and yet
thou have suppressed and kept him under; learn thou therefore of the dumb
earth that quaked and trembled for keeping Christ under but three days;
learn, I say, to quake and tremble for thy great hardness of heart, that have
kept him under, Simile.
not days only, but many years together; as the three Apostles, Peter, James
and John, Matthew. 17. when they saw the great glory that was put upon Christ in
his transfiguration on the mount, and heard a voice saying, This is my
welbeloved Son, hear him; they fell on their faces, and were afraid, because
they had not formerly attended Christ, nor regarded him as they should; so when
thou shall see Christ rise in great power, and shall see great glory put upon
him, if thou have not kept him under three days together only, but many days,
how will thou quake and tremble, seeing thou have not better attended nor
regarded him?

Thirdly, 3
An Angel came and ministered unto him; which did roll away the stone,
terrify the soldiers, comfort the women; here we may see the wicked, they
roll a stone upon Christ to keep him down, but the Angels take it away, they
minister unto Christ; which may be a comfort to Christians, that as the Angels
ministered unto Christ, so they shall do service to them, they shall take away
the stone, dig away the earth and moulds to pull them out of their graves, that
they may come joyfully forth, and be made partakers of everlasting life; as
Matthew. 25. Christ says, that he will send forth his Angels to gather together
his Elect from the four corners of the earth, to dig them out of the earth,
to pull them out of their graves, that they may stand comfortably before God at
the last day. And there is a further comfort we shall have by the Angels, for
they shall not only help us out of the graves, but they shall also help us
out of trouble; as we see when Peter was in prison, Acts. 12. it is said, And
the Angel of God brought him out, and set him in safety; so also Daniel being
cast into the Lions den, the Lord sent his Angel to stop their mouths; in
like manner when Sodom was destroyed, the Lord sent an Angel to bring Lot
forth, and his wife, who took Lot by the one hand, and his wife by the other,
and brought them out of the city; so the Angels do not only help us out of
our graves, but do also help us out of troubles.

The second special thing in the manner of Christ's resurrection was; 2
That when he rose, Christ when he rose left behind him all Deaths ornaments.
he left all the sins of mortality and death, he stripped himself of all
the grave-clothes, and left them behind him; and Saint John says, Ioh. 20. 7.
that when the women came to the Sepulcher all the grave-clothes were foulded
up, and laid in a place; whereof there be two Reasons:

First, Reason 1.
that it might be an evidence to the Jews to convince them; for they had given
money to the soldiers to say his Disciples came by night and stole him away:
Now it is like that if they had stolen away his body, much more they would
have taken away the fine linen sheets he was wrapped in: and again, if they
had stolen away the body of Christ, they would not have laid up the linen
handsomely, they durst not have tarried to do it, for in a fear men do not
things handsomely, but ill favouredly: therefore this is an evidence to
convince the Jews, that the body of Christ was not stolen away.

Secondly, 2
to teach us that when we rise to the life of grace, that we should leave all
the sins of mortality and death behind us, all the grave-clothes, that is, all
our vile sins and old corruptions that we have long lived in. There be many
that creep out of the grave (as it were,) get out of ignorance, but because
they be not wise to shake off the sins and corruptions they have lived in, have
drawn them to themselves, and have not left behind them the signs and marks
of mortality and death; therefore are not yet conformable to the rising of
Christ: It is the Apostle Paul's exhortation, Put off the old man, and put on
the new; ye that would rise with Christ, leave your old sins and your
corruptions; there be many that rise to the profession of the Gospel, who
still keep on the grave-clothes, they will swear, lie, make no conscience of
their ways, and deal deceitfully, such are not stripped of their
grave-clothes; but Christ, when he rose, he left all the grave-clothes behind
him; so if we will be conformable to him, we must leave all (as he did) behind
us.

Thirdly, 3
The Company Christ rose with; he rose not alone, but a great many did attend
him; The Company he rose with.
as we may read, Matthew. 27. 52. though Christ died alone, yet he did not rise
alone, but he rose with a multitude to accompany him; to teach us, that his
resurrection appertains to us, one day all we shall rise by the same power
that these did at his first resurrection; therefore all the people of God must
labor to establish their hearts in this, SERMON. XXXI.
that one day they shall rise out of their graves by the power of Christ, for
Christ did not rise alone, but with a great company: As in a shipwreck one
swims out, Simile.
and labors to draw all his fellows out with him; so Christ rising out of the
grave, did draw all his members out with him. Simile.
We see in nature, if the head be above water, so long the body cannot be
drowned; so seeing our body is risen, and our head is above, we shall not
sink or lie still, but shall be raised up again. It is an undeniable truth
that others have risen out of their graves, but there was great difference in
their rising and Christ's: The dead man when he touched Elias bones; Lazarus
when he had been three or four days in the grave; the widow of Naim's
son when he was in the coffin, and Eutichus when he fell out of a window;
when these rose never a cloud did stir about them, and they rose alone by
Christ's power, as also to die again; but Christ did rise with a number and
multitude with him by his own power, and that never to die again; which does
show there is a great difference in their rising; he rose with a great many, to
show his rising pertaines to a great many, for he rose not as a private, but
as a public person for the good of many, and to show there is a communicative
power in his rising from the dead.

SERMON XXXI.
MATTHEW. 27. 52, 53. And the graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints, that
slept, arose, And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into
the Holy City, and appeared unto many.
IN the manner of Christ's rising, we may observe, that although Christ died
alone, he did not rise alone, but had a multitude to rise with him, which was
to show that Christ did not rise as a private man or person, but representing
the persons of all the Church; for as Christ rose, so we shall rise; he rose
not alone, but with a number of Saints, communicating life and glory to them;
therefore howsoever the Saints die as others, yet they shall rise again. All
the people of God must be persuaded of this, that there is a power in Christ to
draw and to pull them out of the grave; for as even now I showed in a
shipwreck, if one swims out to the land, he does his best to draw all his
fellows to the shore; so Christ escaping out of the dens of death, will draw
out all his members with him: It is said by one of the ancient Fathers, that
Christ did enter into heaven at the narrow passage of his passion, by which way
we must also enter into heaven.

Now by the power and virtue of Christ's resurrection we find others to be
raised, as if the cleaving of the rocks asunder, and the quaking and trembling
of the earth had awaked them out of their sleep; for it is said, And the
graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints, that slept, arose, etc. In which
story we may take notice of diverse things, worthy our consideration:

1. who they were that did rise with Christ; the Saints. 2. What number did
rise with him; a multitude. 3. What time; after Christ's resurrection. 4. What
they did; they went into the holy City and did appear to many. 5. What became
of them; whether they went into the grave, or into heaven.
First, 1
Who they were that did rise; it is said, the Saints, they were sanctified and
holy people, Who they were, who did rise.
not one wicked man did rise when Christ did rise; to teach us, that the Saints
only shall rise (properly) by the virtue and power of Christ's rising; there is
not a wicked man that shall be an halfe-peny the better for Christ's rising; as
1 Thessalonians. 3. 4. it is said, Those who sleep in Jesus will God bring with him;
and 1 Corinthians. 15. it is said, Christ is the first fruits of them that sleep:
therefore they that be in Christ only shall partake of Christ's rising; none
shall feel the benefit and comfort of it but the Saints only: and therefore
would thou find benefit and comfort by Christ's rising? labor then to be a
sanctified man or woman, sanctified in speech, sanctified in thy actions and
life, and then as Christ rose, so thou shall rise, but if thou be not a
sanctified man or woman, he shall rise and let thee alone, thou shall lie in
the grave and rot: well thou may rise with Cain, Judas, Herod, Pilate, and
Pharaoh, but thou shall not arise with Christ, nor with the Saints, thou shall
not rise in that rank: It cannot be denied, but that all shall rise, by the
power of Christ, as John 5. it is said, The hour shall come in the which all
that are in the graves, shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and come
forth; so all shall be raised by the voice of the son of God; but there is a
great difference, for he shall riase his servants and Saints, Difference of
raising up godly and wicked.
being as a head to them, a merciful Savior and Redeemer; but he shall raise
the wicked as a terrible Judge, to be revenged of them for their sins: O it
were well with them that the mountains might fall upon them, and hide them from
the presence of God: Simile.
we see in experience, that if there be two men cast in the Jail, the one an
innocent man, and the other a thief, murderer, or traitor, when the Assizes
come the prison door is opened, and the innocent man comes forth, and the
thief; the one comes forth an innocent man to be so proclaimed by the Judge in
the hearing of the country, the other to receive sentence of condemnation for
his vile facts; the prison door indeed is opened to both, but there is great
difference, the one comes forth to be set at liberty, the other to be
executed; so the graves are opened to all, but yet there is a great difference,
for the Saints rise to possess eternal life, the wicked to possess eternal
death; therefore although we know we shall all rise again, yet if we do not
rise Saints, it were better for us that we did never rise at all.

Secondly, Secondly, what number rose with Christ.
What number ^se with Christ; a multitude: whereof there be two reasons:

First, That we might see that the benefit of Christ's rising is not confined to
some few, but to many; and therefore it is to set out the large hand and
liberality of God in Christ, as Matthew. 8. it is said, That many shall come
from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaak, and Iaakob, in
the kingdom of heaven; So Heb. 2. 10. it is said, For it became him for whom
are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory,
to make the Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings: Therefore
Christ rose with so many, to show that he is willing to communicate his
goodness to many; Esau complained of the narrowness of his fathers blessings,
but we cannot do so by Gods blessings, for he extends them largely.

Secondly, 2
he rose with so many that there might be many witnesses of his resurrection,
for the rising of Christ from the dead being a maine pillar of our Christian
faith; therefore it was requisite that our faith might rest on a strong
foundation, there should be many witnesses of his resurrection.

I, Quest.
but there may a question be moved, what was the reason that all the Saints did
not rise with Christ, as well as some? It is a strange thing that Abraham lay
still in the grave, the father of the faithful, and Isaak and Iaakob, and all
the Prophets, and David, and a number of other holy men, all which died in
faith; what was the reason then they did not rise as well as the rest?

To this I answer, Ans.
that it was the wise counsel of God so to appoint it, 1
for if all should have risen again, then there might have been some doubt
whether we that have died since Christ's rising, should have rose again or not;
for 2 Timothy 2. 18. Hymeneus and Philetus said, that the resurrection was past
already. Now if all had risen, then much more Christians might have doubted of
the matter; and therefore to take away this doubt, this is the reason why they
did not all rise; for look how many dead Patriarks, and Prophets, and holy men
there be that rose not, so many pledges and pawnes there be of our
resurrection, for howsoever we might doubt it, in regard of our selves,
because of our sins, yet because there be so many dead Saints lie still in
the dust, whom he will one day raise, we have comfortable hope that we shall
rise with them, for look how many dead bodies of the Saints there be amongst
us, so many pledges and pawnes there be to us, that our bodies shall one day
rise again.

Secondly, seeing tha^ some of the Saints did rise, and not others which were
left in the grave, and yet as good and holy men as they (nay, it may be
holier;) This may teach us a worthy point, that there is a special
dispensation of God, in the dealing with some of the Saints; therefore every
one must labor to be contented with that God does assign him. So Numbers 12.
7. says the Lord, My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all my
house; unto him will I speak mouth to mouth: where was a speicall favor that
God did show to Moses more than he showed to the rest: in like manner Matthew.
17. Christ did take but th^^ of his Disciples with him when he was
transfigured in the Mount; which must teach us that every one must be
contented with his assignement: This is the reason why he raises some to
comfort, and leaves some in heaviness; some are rich, and others are poor;
some in sickness, and others in health; because there is a special
dispensation. When Christ had told Peter what death he should die, and that he
should be crucified; Peter out of a nice curiosity asks straight, Simile.
What shall this man do? Christ checks him and says, If I will that he tarry
till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me, look thou to thine own
calling, to thine own duty, follow thou me. So when we see such special
dispensations, that some be rich, and some poor some be in health, and some
in sickness; some in ease, and some in pains; some in comfort, and some in
heaviness; some in prosperity, and some in adversity; and yet as holy and as
good men as we, (yea, it may be better and holier than thou which art in
prosperity) when we see this, I say, let every one labor to be contented
with his own estate, and look to his own calling and duty, let him follow
Christ, because there be diverse dispensations, for thou may be in comfort,
and thy brother in heaviness, thou may be rich, and thy brother poor, and
yet as holy and as good as thou, nay it may be better; therefore be thou
contented with thy own lot.

Thirdly, 3
The time when they did rise, after Christ's resurrection; before Christ did
rise, When they did rise.
though the Rocks did cleave, and the Graves open, yet there was not a man
that did stir or come out of the Graves; but when Christ was risen, then well
was he that could get up with him: which must teach us, that seeing Christ is
risen, we must rise: I do not mean that we can rise out of the Graves, for
that we must not look to do till the last d^y; but we must look to rise out
of sin spiritually to newness and holiness of life: therefore if Christ be
risen, rise thou in thy affection. It is Paul's exhortation, Colos. 3. 1. If
Christ be risen, seek the things that be above where Christ is: you that be
Christians and hope to be partakers of Christ, do you rise in your
affections, do not lie still in your sins, but rise to newness and holiness
of life. Simile.
We see in experience that if the Master be up, it is a shame for the Servant
to lie still; so seeing Christ our Master is risen, let us rise with him to
newness and holiness of life; and therefore let us not lie still in the grave
of our sins, for if we do not rise here in this life with Christ, we shall
not rise with comfort at the day of judgment. I did show you in the morning
that when the Devil is cast out of a man, if he be not wise to hold his
advantage and to shut him out, he will make a return again, and he will
consult himself and say, I have an old friend in such a place: I will return
again to him and then he will come with seven Devils worse than himself, so
that the end of that man is worse than the beginning therefore as Christ rose
out of the grave, do thou rise out of thy sins, We see in experience if a
Toil be set to catch Dear, Men drive them upon it, and set Dogs to hunt
them in; If the Dear run full upon the Toil, Men will say nothing; but if
they run aside, then they will make an outcrie against them; Even so the
Devil deals with a man, Simile.
he pitches his Toils in many places, and then labors to drive a man into
them, and as it were, sets dogs, subtle temptations and allurements to drive
him in; if the man run headlong in his snares, he says nothing, all is
whist and quiet, but if he run aside and decline the way he would have him
go in, then he cries out and makes a filthy stir, and will not be quiet till
he either gets him in again, or quite and clean loses him: therefore if men
be wise let them rise out of their sins whilst they live here, and then
they shall be partakers with Christ in glory hereafter, but if we do not rise
with him in this world in holiness and newness of life, we shall not rise
with him in the world to come in glory and happiness for evermore.

Fourthly, What they did when they were risen; they went into the holy city
and did appear to many, 4
Matthew. 4. Jerusalem is called the holy city, because there was the means of
holiness; What they did being risen.
and what did they there? they did appear to many. The Greek word is that
they did show themselves as witnesses of Christ's resurrection, of the power and
of the grace of it; some think if God would send some from the dead to
testify of the glory that the godly shall enjoy, and of the pains that the
wicked shall have, men would repent of their sins, and would believe: but the
truth is, that if men that be dead should rise, they would tell us no other
things than the Scripture does: The Saints that did rise, did witness of the
power of Christ's rising, and of the grace of Christ; So if all the holy people
should be brought out of their graves, this it is that they would witness,
how blessedly men shall rise to glory, as Matthew. 17. when Christ was
transfigured on the Mount, there appeared Moses and Elias unto him, and it is
said, they talked with him: but whereof? that S. Luke tells us, they talked
of Christ's death, and the power of it: here we see the Saints when they did
rise testified of the power of Christ's Resurrection, and of the grace of
Christ; and these holy people (when Christ was transfigured on the Mount) spoke
of Christ, of his departure, of his death and the fruits and benefits thereof;
which should teach us what the conference of Christians should be when they
meet, to talk of Christ, of the grace of the Gospel, of the great benefits
we have by him, and of the happiness in the life to come.

Fifthly, 5
what became of them; this is a great question; but (as I think) cannot be
better answered, What became of those who rose.
than by answering one question by another: What became of Moses body, and of
the bodies of the Angels that came to Abraham's Tent and did eat and drink? It
is an opinion amongst some Divines, that their bodies dissolved to the same
matter they were made of, when they had done the work of God they came for,
they laid aside their bodies, so why might not these men, when they rose again
and appeared, having done the work of God they came for; have their bodies
dissolved to dust, their souls returning to the place they came from;
othersome hold that these Saints ascended into heaven with Christ, but I cannot
see how this should be, because there was none but Christ seen when he rose
again, it is said that the earth and the sea gave up their dead: but we do
not read that the heavens gave up their dead.

The use hereof is, that seeing the Angels and these Saints were contented,
when they had done the business and the work of God they came for, to lay
aside their bodies, and that they should dissolve and come to dust again; so
when we have done the work of God we came for in this world, we should be
contented meekely and patiently with the rest of our brethren to lay aside our
bodies, that they may dissolve and come to dust and ashes, until the time of
the general resurrection.

Having spoken thus of the manner of Christ's rising, now we come to the
manifestation thereof; for though no man saw him at the very instant when he
rose, yet when he was risen he did manifest himself to the world so far
forth as was fit; which may teach us, that although the world do not see the
very instant or moment when we be humbled or when we repent, 1
and turn to God, or when we are brought to an estate of Grace; yet when we
be converted and have turned unto God, we must let the world see the fruits of
our conversion; so (we see) the Thief did, as soon as he was converted he
did show the fruits of his conversion, for he reprooved his fellow, confessed
his sins, clears Gods judgments, and pleads for Christ: so Saint James
says, show me thy faith, never talk thou have faith, unless thou show it,
let the world see it, show it in thy speeches, in thy actions, and in thy life,
that thou art converted and turned unto God: to this effect the same Apostle
says, Chap. 3. 13. Who so is a wise man and is endued with knowledge amongst
you, let him show it, by good conversation; so if thou have repented and turned
to God, show it in thy life, and in thy speeches, let thy words show the fruits
of it: this is that which Christ himself exhorts to, Matthew. 5. Let your light
so shine before men that they may see your good works and glorify your Father
which is in heaven; for it is not enough to have light in our selves but we
must let our light shine, Christ did rise and no man saw the very instant and
moment, and yet when he was risen he did manifest himself to the world; so
though no man see the instant when we were converted, yet when we be
converted, we should show the fruits of our conversion; for as it is in the
life of nature that a man cannot have life in him but it will appear, either
by stirring, breathing or panting, so it is in the life of grace, Simile.
if a man have life in him it will be seen by one means or other.

Secondly, this may serve as matter of comfort, Christ was not seen at the
instant or moment when he did rise and yet did show by infallible tokens that
he was risen; many an one are troubled that they know not the very instant or
moment of their conversion, and therefore make question of their Christian
calling; but this example is fit to relieve such: that although a man knows
not the very instant or moment when he was converted, Comfort for not knowing
the moment of calling.
yet if he can prove by infallible tokens and marks he is converted, he may
resolve undoubtedly that he is called. We see in nature that a child has
life, and yet the mother does not know the instant ormoment of its life and
quickening, Simile.
but by the stirrings and movings she does know there is life initiated in her
child; so it is in the life of grace, there may be life in a man though he
know not the very instant and moment when he first received that life, yet if
he have evident marks of it, he may have comfort that he is converted
though he know not the time of it.

Now there were twelve several times that Christ did appear, wherein he did
manifest himself to the world, it is too long to speak of all, therefore I
will speak of them that are most fit for our instruction.

There were five several times that Christ appeared that day he rose in.

1. To Mary Magdalen. 2. To the two women going from the grave. 3. To the two
Disciples going to Emmaus. 4. To Simon Peter. 5. To the Disciples being
together, only Thomas away.
Now what is the reason that Christ appeared so many times that day he did rise
on, Quest.
so that all the day long he did appear to one or other, at one place, or
another, to his followers, and did spend it in holy exercises and in holy
apparitions? I answer, it was to dedicate, and institute the Christian
Sabbath, Ans.
therefore Christ did so many times appear that day: it is a great question
amongst Divines, who it was that did alter the Sabbath; some think that it was
the tradition of the Church, but it is not the Church, nor all the Churches in
the world that can alter it, it must be Christ only that must do it:
therefore he did appear so many times that day to set it apart to holy uses,
by his own example: the Apostles did not institute the day, nor dedicate it of
themselves, but gathered together by the divine knowledge they had, that it was
Christ's meaning and will to teach them by his appearing so many times in one
day, to appoint that day for the Christian Sabbath; and therefore the Apostle
did put it in practice; so we see Act. 7. 20. and 1 Cor. 16. 2. and Revel. 1.
10. where the name is given to it, as the first day of the week, and the Lords
day; whence it is manifest that Christ did dedicate and sanctify the Christian
Sabbath, as Augustine says well, that by the resurrection of Christ on that
day it was consecrated to be the Christian Sabbath.

The first appearing was to Mary Magdalen, out of whom he cast seven devils:
And there be three things to be observed in this point of his appearing:

1 The Cause why he did appear to her. ART. V.
2 The Manner of his appearing. 3 The end of it.
First, First, why Christ appeared to Mary Magdalen.
The cause why he did appear to her, not because she was a great
stateswoman, a rich woman, or a more holy woman than the rest; for there was
Mary the Mother of Christ an holier woman, one would have thought he would
have appeared to Caesar, or to Emperors and Kings, to Noble men and to great
men of the world, or to the holiest and most sanctified women in the world, or
that he should have appeared to his Mother, but he did appear first to Mary
Magdalen, out of whom he had cast seven devils, one that was infamous and a
great sinner, yet she was penitent for her sins and a true convert, as
appears in that she did show such special love to Christ, upon her
conversion, in attending about his grave: and this was the cause why Christ
appeared to her, Observation
and may teach us, that although we be not Kings and Queens, noble men and
women, nor yet the holiest and most sanctified men and women, although we be
sinners, yet if we be repentant sinners, and show special love to Christ upon
our conversion, he will appear to us and we shall see his glory: therefore
would thou, O man or woman, have Christ appear to thee and show thee his
glory, then be a repentant sinner and show special love to Christ upon thy
conversion, and fear not but Christ will appear to thee and thou shall see
his glory. So Christ says, Ioh. 14. 21. He that loves me shall be beloved of
my Father; and I will love him and show mine own self unto him and dwell with
him; so likewise Genesis 18. we read, that God appeared unto Abraham in such a
familiar manner as he never did to any; no not to Adam, in the state of his
innocence, nor to Henoch in the state of excellency; and why did he appear so
to Abraham? because he had showed specially love to Christ, as we may see in
the Chapter foregoing, that he obeyed God to the cutting off his flesh and the
effusion of his blood; even so if we would have God come in a familiar manner
to us, to be at our tables, at our labors, and to be in our houses, then we
must show special love to God in obeying his commandments: if we repent us of
our sins, convert and turn to God, and show special love to Christ, we are
the men that shall enjoy Christ by the eye of faith: Six notes of Mary's love.
now there be six particular notes of Mary's love.

First, 1
she continued seeking when others gave over; Peter and John sought him, but
when they came and saw nothing but the linen clothes they gave over, but Mary
she continued still; wherein she showed special love to Christ: now in these
two are figured two sorts of Christians, the cold Christians are figured out in
Peter and John, and the fervent Christians in Mary: the cold Christian could be
contented to have Christ, but if he be gone, he cannot help it, he seeks but
coldly to find him: O but the fervent Christian, if he cannot find him the
first or the second day, he will never give over till he have found him: this
is a special argument of true love; so the Church does, Cant. 3. she never
gives over seeking till she have found him.

Secondly, that she sought him with tears, and weeps for the loss of him:
so when we can weep for the loss of Christ, and of Gods favor, this is a
note of true love, we see how Mary Magdalen could weep for the loss of
Christ, the Angel asked her what she ailed? says she, Do you ask me what I
aile? they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him;
he in whom I have laid up all my hope and all my comfort and joy; so we may
say by our sins, if any ask us why we weep, we may reply, our sins have
taken away the comfortable feeling of Gods favor, they have taken away Christ
from me, he in whom I have laid up all my joy and all my comfort and hope; and
have I not cause to weep? therefore it is a pitiful thing that a man can
weep for the loss of a wife, or a child, or a son, or some worldly wealth,
or because he is sick and wants health, but will never weep for the loss of
Christ, and for the want of Gods favor, it is said of a learned Father, that
there be no tears so acceptable with God as the tears that be shed for
sin, for all other tears that be shed for worldly losses fall to the ground,
but these tears are kept in a Bottle.

Thirdly, 3
she showed her love to Christ in her diligence in seeking of him, It is said,
she bowed her self down at the grave to look in there; and yet Peter and
John had told her there was nothing but the linen clothes, yet she loo^ed this
way and that way, to see if by any means she could have espied Christ, or have
any hope of finding him, she was loath to leave the place where she thought she
might find him; this was an infallible sign of true love, Mary sought for
Christ in the grave, but we must seek for Christ in the face of the Gospel,
there he is to be found now or no where else; therefore when men seek for
Christ in the use of good means and in the preaching of the word, although
they do not presently find him, yet if they be loath to give over seeking of
Christ, because that is the place where they may have hope of finding of him,
they may expect good success, as Ioh. 5. we see when the waters had been
troubled by the Angel, the man that lay at the poole side of Beth^^^ a long
time to be healed, still one or other stepped in before him and was healed, yet
he lay still till at last Christ healed him; so we should come to the
preaching of the word to seek Christ, to repent of our sins and to turn to
God, where although we see others to catch away the blessing from us, yet let
us continue still and we shall speed; therefore as the shepherds Luke 2.
exhort one another, saying, Come let us go to Bethlehem to see the thing the
Angels tell us of; so we should exhort one another, and say, Come, let us go
to the preaching of the word, where we shall see Christ not lying in a cradle,
but crucified for our sins and gloriously sitting at the right hand of God in
his throne. It is reported of the Elephant that although he cannot swim as
other beasts can, yet he will be wading about the water; so though we cannot
do as other Christians do, yet let us keep about the waters, let us keep
about good means, and at last we shall find Christ to our comfort.

SERMON XXXII.
JOHN 20. 11, 12, 13, etc. But Mary stood without at the sepulcher, weeping,
and as she wept, she stooped down, and looked into the sepulcher, And sees
two Angels in white, sitting, the one at the head, and the other at the feet,
where the body of Jesus had layen. And they say unto her, Woman, why weepest
thou? She says unto them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know
not where they have laid him, etc.
I Declared the last day, that Christ's first appearing was to Mary Magdalen,
out of whom was cast seven devils, who had been infamous, and a very great
sinner, but was become a convert, and a repentant sinner, and had showed
special love to Christ upon her conversion and repentance, in attending about
the grave; and therefore, although she was none of the great gallants of the
world, nor yet the holiest and most sanctified woman, yet because she was a
repentant sinner, and showed great love to Christ, therefore Christ did first
appear to her. I will show you six particulars wherein Mary did show her love
to Christ:

First, 1
that she continued seeking, when others, Peter and John gave over.

Secondly, 2
in that she wept and mourned for the loss of Christ, when others went away
without mourning and weeping. We see in nature, if one comes to a birds-nest,
Simile.
and take away her young ones, the bird will fly about the nest, take on, and
in some sort bewail the loss of her young, but the Devil may come and catch
away the graces of Christ, repentance, faith, patience, the comfortable feeling
of Gods favor, with the hope of heaven, and yet thou never weepest for the
loss of these; therefore it is a good thing, when a man has lost these
graces, if he can bewail them: It is said of Joseph and Mary, when they had
lost Christ, SERMON. XXXII.
they sought him with heavy hearts; even so when a man has lost the
comfortable feeling of Gods favor, and the graces of Christ, he seeks for
them, and does weep in regard of the loss of them, this is a true note of
true love to Christ.

Thirdly, 3
in that she bowed down into the Sepulcher, and looked here and there, if by
any means she could find Christ. Of these we have spoken already, now to
proceed.

Fourthly, 4
Her true love to Christ is seen by the continuance of her complaint. For
notwithstanding she had seen the comfortable sight of Angels, the one sitting
at the head, the other at the feet of the Sepulcher (showing that they were not
only ready to attend the head, but also to minister to the meanest of the
members of Christ) who gave her comfortable speeches, asking why she wept, as
if they should say to her, Indeed, if Christ should lie still trampled and
trodden under-foot of death, if thy sins were yet upon him, and held him
under, there might be cause for it; but Christ has risen from the dead, and
has vanquished and overcome Death, Hell, and the Devil, and therefore thou
have no cause to weep: yet for all this sight she had seen, and for all those
good speeches, the Angels could not give her comfort, till she had the thing
she sought for; So if a man have true love to Christ, it is not all the Angels
can give him comfort till he find Christ, and feel the comfortable assurance
of the pardon of his sins, and the hope of Gods favor, nothing will make him
glad till then; as Mary complains to the Angels, and says, Simile.
They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him, in whom
I have laid up all my joy and comfort, all my hope, and all my delight; so a
Christian may complain and say, My sins have taken away Christ from me, they
have taken away the comfortable feeling of Gods favor, Note.
the hope of heaven. We marvel that the good speeches that Preachers and good
Christians give to a man in distress do not comfort him, but it is no
marvel, for the Angels cannot do it, till a man be possessed with Christ;
therefore no marvel that good Preachers and good Christians cannot give them
comfort; it is a pitiful thing, that a number when they have lost Christ,
every little matter will comfort them, they need not have Angels sent from
heaven, for a few angels of gold will do it.

Fifthly, 5
The divulgation of her complaint; she complains to the Angels, and she
complains to Christ, thinking he had been the Gardener, she was not ashamed
that he should know, that the cause of her heaviness, sorrow and weeping, was
for Christ; this is a certain note of true love to Christ, when we are not
ashamed to let the world know, or see, that the cause of our sorrow and
heaviness is, because we have lost Christ by our sins, and the comfortable
feeling of Gods favor: So in the Canticles, when the Church had lost Christ,
she runs through the streets and lanes to see whether she could find him, she
was not ashamed to let the world know that the matter of her grief and sorrow
was because she had lost Christ; so afterward she lays out for Christ; If ye
meet my love, tell him that I am sick of love; she was not ashamed to let the
world know that she was sick of love; so when it is thus with a man, that he
is not ashamed to let the world know and see that the matter of his sorrow and
griege is, because he has lost the comfortable feeling of the pardon of his
sins and of Gods favor; this is a note of true love to Christ; Hebr. 2. 11. it
is said, that he was not ashamed to call them brethren, therefore if he be not
ashamed of us, let us never be ashamed of him: Indeed there is good cause, why
he should be ashamed of us, there is such a deal of corruption and sin in us;
therefore he might be ashamed of us (especially when he shall stand before God
in judgment.) Now if Christ be not ashamed of us, let us never be ashamed of
him; for if we be ashamed of him before men, he will be ashamed of us before
God, and all the holy Angels.

The sixth note of true love which she bare to Christ was, 6
the strange proffer she made to Christ: Tell me (says she) where thou have
laid him, and I will take him away, if he be never so deep, if it be never so
far, I am contented to take any pains to have him; this is a strange proffer
which she makes beyond her power and ability, her weak arms were not able to
carry Christ, but herein she shows her true love to him; so when a man is
contented to take any pains or labor to go through it, be it never so far,
if he can find Christ is contented; this is a note of true love to Christ, for
Luke 7. 37. our Savior says, that where the dead bodies be, thither the
Eagles will resort: Simile.
As the Eagles when they sent a dead body, they will fly many a mile to it; so
we should (like the Eagles) get a sent of the dead body of Christ, and be
contented to go many miles, take any pains and labor that we might have
Christ: Ioh. 21. when the Disciples were a fishing, Christ came and appeared to
them, upon which discovery Peter launches into the water, Simile.
the ship could not hold him, but he leapes into the sea, to come to Christ; so
when we know that Christ is to be found in the use of good means, in the
preaching of the Word, nothing should keep us from thence: Mary was content
beyond her strength and ability to seek Christ; so we should show our love to
him above our strength and ability, as 2 Cor. 8. it is said of the
Macedonians, that to their power, and beyond their power, they were willing;
And as he says, Psa. 119. Thou have commanded me to keep thy Precepts
diligently, O that my heart were directed to keep thy Statutes; I cannot do as
I would, but would to God my heart were directed to keep thy Statutes: David
had no strength to do as he would, but he desires it above his strength; so
should we.

Secondly, 2
The manner how Christ did appear to her; He showed himself strange a long
time, The manner how Christ appeared to her.
and held her in suspense, and yet Mary sought for Christ, and sought for him,
when others gave over, with tears; which may teach us, that many a good
Christian may seek for Christ with tears, that is, Note.
in truth of affection, and yet not presently find him: they may seek long,
and attend upon the means; but as Christ did appear to Mary, so in due time
thou shall see him to thy comfort.

Now there were two causes why Christ did not appear to Mary, nor show
himself to her presently: Two causes why Christ put off Mary so long.


First, 1
through her own default; for when Christ appeared to her, she thought it had
been the Gardener; He did not appear in such a form, but Marie thought so,
she did so sorrow and mourn for Christ, that though he were before her, she
could not see him; it was through her own default: so God many times gives
comfort to us, when through our own default we see not the comfort that is
before us, through the sorrow and grief we sustain: but refuse it when it is
offered; and this is the cause why it is so long^ere some can receive comfort:
As Psalm. 77. David says, My soul refused comfort: so it is with Christians
many times, God offers comfort to them, and they refuse it; this is the
estate of the best: so likewise Christ appeared to the World, when through
their own default they could not see him, through the blindness and ignorance
that remained in them even to this day: they see not though he speaks unto
them day by day, they have not the eyes of Faith to see him. This is the estate
of the World, though God speaks unto them they know it not, they think it is
the Gardener, they think it is the voice of a Man, and not of God, but the
true Church of Christ knows when Christ is speaking unto her, It is the voice
of my welbeloved: so Christ no sooner speaks but they know it, but the
greatest part of the world do not so, though he speaks unto them from day to
day, Christ appears unto them, and through their own default they do not see
him.

The second cause was, 2
Through a special dispensation, that she might the more repent of her sins
and make a trial of her faith, to make the present more comfortable: as Joseph
made himself strange to his brethren a long time, Simile.
and afterward did reveal himself unto them: so though Christ make himself
strange, and hold us in suspense for a time, it is because he would have our
faith tried, and because we might have the greater comfort when we find him.

Now though he held himself a long time in suspense, yet Christ did discover
himself by a word for he says, Marie, and she turned about and said Rabboni,
Master: so it was but a word of Christ that gave comfort, he can do it by a
word, he can make all our discomforts to cease, and give comfort with a word.
Thus we see Matthew. 8. that the Centurion said to Christ, Do but speak the
word, and thy servant shall be whole; If Christ do but speak a word, his
wisdom is to lay hold on that word; which must teach us that we must catch
hold on every little word of Christ. I have showed you heretofore that it is
the nature of the Vine to catch hold on every little stick, or on every little
thing with his twigs to lift up himself; Simile.
so a Christian must lay hold on every little word of Christ to help him by.
But it is a pitiful thing that one word of Christ will not serve, nor all the
words of Christ, nor the mercies, nor the judgments of God to turn us to him:
as Marie catched hold on every little word, so it must be our wisdom to lay
hold on the least word that may bring us to Christ: From hence two things are
to be considered.

First, 1
That true faith does lay hold on every little word of Christ: It is like the
Vine that lays hold on every little stick and post with his keys and
clanvers to lift up himself; Consideration.
so true faith will lay hold on every little means to lift up it self, if it
be but a word it will lay hold on it: as we see John 2. Christ says to his
mother Marie, Woman my hour is not yet come; she lays hold on this word of
Christ, and says to the servants, whatsoever he bids you do, that do you,
and you shall not want wine, so Matthew. 15. It was but a word that Christ spoke
to the woman of Canaan, and a sour word too, yet the poor woman catches hold
of it: so in the book of Kings when Benhadads servants came unto the king,
they catched hold on every word; thus where there is true faith it will lay
hold on every little word of Christ: therefore when men cannot catch hold on
one word of Christ, nor all the words of Christ: this does show the dullness
and deadness of men's hearts. It is said, Jonah 2. They which follow lying
vanities, forsake their own mercies: and there is great mercy offered in the
Word, in the preaching of the Gospel; but they which despise and refuse it,
despise and forsake this great mercy that is offered unto them.

The second thing is, 2
The infinite comfort that a Christian has after he finds Christ:
Consideration.
Heaven and Earth cannot give that comfort that a Christian has after he has
found him. Therefore although it cost a man sore travel and labor, and a
great deal of pains, yet he thinks his labor well bestowed if he can find
him at last: so we see in Marie that she sought Christ and sought him with
tears, and yet when she had found him, how joyful was she, saying Rabboni,
Master, thou art the man I sought for, thou, thou art he I did long for: so
Ioh. 1. 41. Andrew says to Simon Peter, we have found the Messiah, and the
wise men, Matthew. 2. when they had found Christ they rejoiced exceedingly;
therefore whatsoever pains a Christian takes to seek Christ, if once he have
found him, the World cannot make him so glad, he thinks all his pains and
labors well bestowed. Simile.
If a man find a bag of gold how glad will he be, but all the gold in the
World is not like to it, the Apostle counts all things dung and dross in
regard of it; It is like the pearl that the Merchant went and sold all that he
had to buy the field where the Pearl was.

Thirdly, 3
the end why Christ did Manifest himself to Marie, was twofold: The end why
Christ did manifest himself to Marie.


1. By information and instruction to inform her self. 2. To Comfort his
Disciples.
First, these words, touch me not, are words of information and of instruction
to her, for she would have embraced Christ, but Christ refused her. Now this
is strange that Marie had sought so long for Christ, and sought him with
tears, and now finding him, he forbids her to touch him: therefore these words
are words of instruction, wherein are two limitations.

The first is, Noli me tangere, touch me not now, for I am not yet ascended,
there will be time enough hereafter, but now I have a more needful duty for
you to do: Go and tell my brethren that I am risen, for the Disciples were at
the grave, and saw nothing but the grave-clothes, therefore they went away with
a conceit that some body had stolen away Christ, taken away his body, and so
their faith was in danger, and if it should be longer held in suspense, might
be sore shaken, if not utterly ruined: and therefore it was, that Marie must
be sent in such post to acquaint them with his rising, and may not stay the
time to touch Christ: now though it were a good thing to do so, yet she must
prefer this more needful thing. First, go and tell his Disciples that he
was risen: which must teach us, that we must apply our selves to the duty that
God calls us too: there be many examples of it in the Scripture, as Ios. 7. 10.
He humbled himself, fasted and prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord said unto
Joshua, Up Joshua, what do thou there? I have another duty for thee to do,
it is a good thing indeed to fast and pray, but I will not have thee to do it
now, I have another service and duty for thee to do; there is an execrable
thing committed, go and find it out. And so Matthew. 8. Christ bids the man to
follow him; but he will first go and bury his father, though Christ says,
Let the dead bury the dead, but follow thou me. It is a good thing to bury
ones father, but Christ calls him to another duty, therefore it was not
needful then to do it.

To make use of it to over selves, 1
it is a good thing to perform the duties of our calling, to buy and sell, to
bargain, plant and to sow, and such like, but when the Sabbath day comes do
it not, then God calls us to do duties of Prayer, repentance, hearing of the
Word, receiving of the Sacraments and such like; so it is a good thing to read
on a good book, or in the Scripture; but when we come to Church, God calls us
to another duty, to hear, to pray with the Minister, and therefore do it not.

The second limitation is, 2
Noli me tangere, Touch me not so: touch me not with the hands of thy body, but
touch me with The hands of thy faith; it was Thomas his resolution, Unless I
touch him with my hands, and put my fingers into his side, I will not believe:
Christ replies, Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou have believed;
Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed, Ioh. 20. 29. It is
a good thing to touch Christ with the hands of our bodies, O but it is a
blesseder thing to touch him with the hand of our faith; hence we learn, That
to enjoy Christ's bodily presence is not so great a thing as to apprehend him by
the hand of our faith: Augustine (speaking of the woman that had the bloody
issue) said, There were a number of people that did throng and thrust Christ,
but they drew no virtue out of him, she only did, and that by a touch of her
faith: therefore it is a more blessed thing to touch Christ with the hand of
faith, than with the hand of our body; there be a number think, that unless
they touch Christ, and feel him, and handle him, it is nothing, I, but do
thou labor to touch Christ by the hand of Faith, and this will be of force to
draw virtue from him.

The second end was, The second end of his appearance to Mary.
to send comfort to his Disciples; for Christ did not only dye for them and
us, but when he had done, he took care to apply it; this is the great
goodness and mercy of Christ not only to dye for us, but also to apply his
death to us. Now in this sending of Mary we may observe three things:

1. The party that did carry it: It was Mary. 2. Unto whom: To his brethren. 3.
The message it self: That I ascend to my Father and to your Father, to my God
and your God.
First, Quest.
who it was that carried it, Mary: but why did not Christ go himself? I
answer, it was to find them the more humbled for their sins and their
offenses: Ans. 1.
It was a great wisdom in Christ and a singular dispensation to send Mary,
for what might the Disciples think of it, that Christ had appeared to Mary,
and had not appeared to them. Thus, we be unworthy of his company, we have so
often denied and forsaken him: therefore that he might find them the more
humbled for their sins and their offenses, he sent Mary: In like manner when
we see others receive comfort against their sins and we cannot; others be in
peace, and we be not, what may we think? but what we be unworthy of it,
therefore that we may be the more humbled for our sins and offenses, and the
fitter to receive him, Christ does defer his comfort from us, as 1 King. 19.
when Elias was in the cave, there came first a whirlewind, then an earthquake,
then a fire, then a still and soft voice, where God was; why did God come thus
with a whirlewinde, an earthquake, and fire; it was to make the Prophet the
more humbled when he came, and the more fit to receive the charge that was to
be imposed upon him: so Act. 9. when Christ came unto Paul, he flung him off
his horse, and stroke him with blindness that he might make him the more
humbled for his sins and his offenses, and the fitter to receive the charge
which should be given him.

Secondly, Ans. 2.
to show how ready we should be to communicate good things one to another,
for when we have received any good, we should be ready to impart it to another:
We see the little birds, when they have got a worm they fly home to their young
ones, and make them partakers with them; so when we have gotten any good
thing, we should carry it home and make our families partakers of it: Simile.
As naturally the Sun casts his light on the Moon, and Stars, and the Moon
and Stars casts it down again on the earth; so all the light of knowledge
that is cast upon us we should cast upon our brethren: and as Christ said to
Mary, Go tell my brethren, Simile.
so I say to you, Go and tell your friends, your acquaintance, your neighbors,
and your own children and families the good things that God has revealed unto
you.

Thirdly, Ans. 3.
to instruct the disciples which were the doctors and pastors of the Church:
Mary was but a poor woman, and yet she did inform them of one of the
greatest mysteries of Salvation, the Resurrection of Christ: which may teach us
how mean soever the person be not to despise to learn any good of them, so we
see Exodus 18. that Moses was contented to take the counsel of Iethro his
father in law, one that was infinitely short of the gifts and graces of Moses;
so also. Acts 18. Apollos was instructed by Aquila and Priscilla, poor
Tent-makers: therefore it must be the wisdom and humility of a Christian to
take good by the meanest persons that may be.

Secondly, 2
whom she must tell; his brethren: this is a strange thing that Christ calls
them his brethren, Whom she must tell.
he might have said, Go and tell my Disciples, my revolters, backsliders, and
such as have denied, and forsaken me; yet we see the goodness and kindness
of Christ that he puts a special term of dignity upon them, Go and tell my
brethren, partakers of the same glory and immortality with me: whereas he
might have said, One of them did betray me, and another denied me, and all of
them did shamefully forsake me, yet he is contented to swallow up all, because
though they had sinned, yet they sinned of weakness, they had repented for
it, and wept bitterly, therefore Christ sends such sweet terms and calls them
brethren: Which may teach us that although we fall into great sins, if we
fall of weakness, and if we have repented for it, he will take us for his
brethren; we see in experience that although a man turns his back upon the
Sun, Simile.
and is going from it, yet the Sun follows him with his heat, light and
with his beams: so when we turn our backs on God, and are going away from
him, yet he follows us with his beams of goodness, kindness, and with his
love, though we forsake him yet he does not forsake us.

Thirdly, 3
what the message was that she should tell his brethren; That I ascend to my
Father and your Father, What her message was.
to my God and your God: From hence arises a twofold comfort.

First, A twofold Comfort, first from his ascension.
Go and tell my brethren that I ascend: what, is this such a comfort that
Christ ascends, that he goes away and leaves them? yea, it is a comfort, and a
great comfort too; as appears,

First, 1
because he is ascended to Heaven as a pledge and pawn to take possession,
and to prepare our place till we come there: As Augustine says, the Head going
before, all his Members shall follow: Christ ascended as a pledge and pawn to
hold possession for us: So John 14. 2. 3. I go to to prepare a place for you,
and if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again and take you up to
my self, that where I am, there you may be also: So it is a comfort to a
Christian to know that Christ as ascended. Secondly, it is a comfort to know
that Christ is ascended for our good, 2
to befriend us in the Court of Heaven, to procure the graces of his Spirit, to
reconcile us unto God, and to make Intercession for us; therefore howsoever
some men may think it to be a great comfort to have Christ on the Earth
amongst us, yet it is a far greater comfort that Christ is ascended into
Heaven to procure the graces of his Spirit, to reconcile us unto God, as our
Savior says, John 16. 7. It is expedient for you, that I go away, to
reconcile you to God, to procure the graces of his Spirit, to make intercession
for you: Therefore, it is a comfort unto us, that Christ is ascended to Heaven.

The second comfort is, Secondly, from his going to our Father.
that Christ says, He ascended to my Father and to your Father, to my God and
your God; For when we know the Father of Christ, is become our Father; and the
God of Christ is become our God; by the means of him, we cannot choose but he
comforted: There was a time when God was our enemy, by reason of our sins;
but now Christ says, I ascend to my Father, and to your Father, to my God, and
your God: therefore this is a great comfort that we have such a Father as is
able to bless us, and to do us good; for seeing he is become our Father, He
will make a supply of all our wants, as shall be needful for us. A Christian
may say, Lord Jesus do thou ascend into Heaven to hold a place for me against
I come, to procure the graces of thy Spirit, to reconcile me unto God, to make
intercession for me, and then I shall be happy. And thus we see it is for
the good of Christians that Christ is ascended.

SERMON XXXIII.
LVKE 24. 13. And behold, two of them went that same day to a Village called
Emmaus, which was from Jerusalem about threescore furlongs.
TWelve several times Christ did manifest himself after his resurrection,
five whereof were in one day. The first was to Marie Magdalen: The second, To
the women coming from the grave. Of these two we have spoken, and are come to
the third, to these two Disciples going to Emmaus; In which manifestation there
are diverse things to be considered:

First, what disposition Christ did find them in, laid down in two
circumstances.

First, 1
That they went to a Town called Emmaus, that was about threescore furlongs
off Jerusalem: Circumstance.
They did not attend the grave and seek for Christ (as Marie did) but they
were going away from him and from Jerusalem, as men clean out of heart. Here
we are to consider the kindness and goodness of Christ, that he did not only
manifest himself to them that sought him and did attend the grave, but to them
also that did go away from him; so we see the disciples were in another
condition, they heard a brute of Christ's rising, yet they were not wise to
nourish this same spark, but they were as men out of hope, and yet Christ goes
after them and leaves them not, till he had brought them home to the company
of believers. So here is the goodness and kindness of Christ not only to
manifest himself to those that seek him and attend upon good means, but also
to those that go away, and have not a thought of him: so we see John 7. the
woman of Samaria, that came to draw water, she had not a thought of Christ,
and yet he did manifest himself unto her: and Luke 2. 8. the Sheepheards were
tending their flocks by night, they had not a thought of Christ's coming; but
the Angels came unto them, and told them that Christ was borne, when they
looked not for it: so also Matthew. 8. when Matthew was about his bags and his
money matters, he had not a thought of Christ, yet then he called him: Here we
may see it is Gods mercy to prevent us with his love, when we have not a
thought of him, but are busy about our profits and pleasures, SERMON XXXIII.
then he seeks us and brings us home unto himself, even when we are going
from him: as (in the comparison I showed you a little before) though a man
turn his back upon the Sun, and go away from it, yet the Sun follows
him with his heat, light, and beams, so when we are going away from Christ, he
follows us with his kindness, and follows us with his goodness and mercy:
so Christ did manifest himself to these two Disciples when they were going
from him, therefore let us think of the kindness and goodness of Christ.
Esaias 55. says the Lord, I was found of them that sought me not: It is a great
mercy of God, that he will be found of them that seek him, but a greater mercy
that when men go away from him and have not a thought of him, then he to seek
after them.

The second circumstance is, 2
that although they were going from Christ and from Jerusalem, Circumstance
yet they were talking of him by the way, there was some sparks and seeds of
goodness left. Now this Town they went to was not a Town of Religion, though
a Country Town, and it is very like that they went about country business,
yet as they went by the way they talked of Christ: (...) must teach us what
manner of talk a Christian must have, though (...) worldly business, going to
a Fair, or to a Market or any other journey. We read 2 Kings 2. 11. when Elias
and Elisha went together, they went walking and talking till a fiery Chariot
came and parted them, took away Elias and left Elisha on his calling. And what
were they talking of? not of money matters but of immortality and of Heavenly
things: so in the Acts, when the Eunuch was on his way riding in his Chariot,
and had no body to talk with, he pulls out his Bible, and would have God to
talk with him: and to this end Deuter. 6. 7. we have a Commandment from God
to speak of his Word, Simile.
When we rise, when we lie down, when we go by the way, and when we be at
our meat. Thus Psalm. 37. 30. David says, The mouth of the righteous will
speak of wisdom, and his talk will be of judgment; and he gives a reason
of it, because the Law of God is in his heart: so a righteous man's mouth will
speak of good things, he will be talking of Religion. Simile.
If a man have a Spring in his ground he can hardly hold it but it breaks
forth into other grounds: in like manner if there be a spring of grace and of
goodness in a man's heart, he cannot hold it, but it will break forth and
flow out to others: therefore, when men go up and down and never speak of
the Word, it shows there is not a Spring of grace in them. It is a good thing
for a Christian to talk of Christ, and of the work of Redemption, and of the
great things that God has prepared for them, even when they are about their
worldly business and labors; and if it be a good thing to speak of Christ and
of the Word when we be about our labors and business, then it is much better
to talk of the Word when we come from a Sermon, and from hearing the Word
preached on the Sabbath day, or at other times. Nehem. 8. 1^. It is said, The
people rejoiced that they had heard the law read unto them, and that they did
understand the sense of it: Simile.
so when we hear the Word of God preached, we should go away rejoicing that
we have heard it, and understood the sense of it. Luke 2. 44. When they
returned from Jerusalem from the feast, they went in Troops, and a great
company together, the reason was, because they might speak of the good things
that they had heard: so it is a Christians duty to go in companies together,
Simile.
to confer of the good things they have heard. We see when men come from the
Sea, they will speak of the Sea, Simile.
or from the War, they will speak of the War; or from the Market, they
will talk of the Market: and if men have been at their work, they will talk
of their work; but many times we go to a Sermon, and speak not a word of
that: the Mariner may speak of the Sea, the Soldier of his War, the
Husbandman of his Markets; but it is a pitiful thing that Christians will not
speak of the good things they have heard out of the Word of God: There be
three causes why men do not speak of it.

The first, ^
a profane contempt of God and goodness, Causes why men delight not to speak
of the word.
because they desire to have as little to do with him as may be: as the
devils, Matthew. 8. 29. cried out and said, What have we to do with thee Jesus
thou Son of God? so they say, 1
What have we to do with God and goodness? and as in Job 21. 15. the wicked
said, Simile.
who is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit should we have
if we should pray to him?

The second is, 2
want of caution; that (...) watchful over their ways, but suffer a great
deal of idle speech to come from them, as the waste water of a conduit; for
many men do not consider that they shall answer for every idle word, not
only for the bad words, but for the idle also that tend to no good end. Simile.
We see in a conduit, there is not only a pipe to let out the water, but a
cock also to hold it in; so we must have a cock, as it were, to keep in our
speeches; therefore as David prays, Psalm. 141. 3. Lord, set a watch before
the door of my lips: so we must go to God, and pray him to set a watch before
the door of our lips.

The third is, 3
want of love to our brethren: because we do not love them, therefore we do
not speak of good things to them; for if we did love them, then we would be
ready to impart the good things that God has made known to us.

The second general point is, Secondly, How Christ did manifest himself to
them.
how he did manifest himself unto them: and that was first when they were
talking of Christ by the way, then he came and did join himself unto them:
Here we see the blessing of God upon good talk; 1
let men talk of Christ when they be going on their way, and when they be at
their labors, when they be journeying, and they shall find the blessing of
God upon their speeches; therefore, would thou have Christ present at thy
table, and at thy labors, and as thou go by the way, then speak of him, for
there is such a drawing power in good speech, as it will draw Christ to thee;
and let us speak of him and of Religion, and then we shall find the blessing
of God upon us, but as long as there is filthy speech and cursing amongst us,
Christ will not come to us, but that will drive him away from us.

Secondly, 2
in the manner we may observe, that Christ did manifest himself and they did
not know of it; their eyes were held that they did not see him: so Christ does
manifest himself in his word and in the Sacraments, Simile.
and talks with us from day to day, and yet there is not one of twenty that
knows it: the Israelites had a presence of God in the midst of them, yet they
asked if there were a presence of God amongst them; so there is a presence of
God amongst us, and yet there is such a veil of ignorance before our eyes that
we cannot see Christ; and therefore we must pray as David prays, Lord, open
mine eyes that I may see the wonders of thy Law. The Church says, Cant. 3. It
is the voice of my welbeloved; so the people of God know the voice of Christ
howsoever the world does not know it.

I, Quest.
but what (...) reason they did not know Christ? It is said, their eyes were
held; so the fault was not in Christ, but in their eyes: now the Papists take
occasion at these words and such like places of Scripture to uphold their
transubstantiation, that seeing Christ can transform himself to any shape or
any likeness, then why may he not be without a form in the bread and wine?

To this I answer, Sol.


1 There is a fault in the consequent. 2 In the ground:
First, In the conseque^^ for ^^ppose that it should be granted that Christ
could change himself into any form, yet he could not be without a form; as
wax may be changed into any one form, and yet it cannot be without a form,
Simile.
it is wax still; so though we grant that Christ can change himself into any
yet he cannot be without a form, he is a man still. And as there is a fault in
the Consequent; so there is likewise in the Ground; for Christ did not change
himself, but their eyes were held that they could not know him. Now the
reasons why their eyes were held are two: Two reasons why Christ could not be
s^ene.


First, That they might be grounded on the Scriptures, and not on the bodily
presence of Christ; 1
which may teach us, that it is a more comfortable thing to have our faith
founded on the Scriptures, than on Christ's bodily presence. It may be many an
one thinks if he might have a visible presence of Christ he should have
comfort; O but it is a better thing to have our faith founded on the Scriptures.

Secondly, 2
to teach them, that properly to discern natural objects is the power of God:
if our eyes be shut we cannot see, if our ears be stopped we cannot hear,
till God be pleased to open them: so that we are not able to discern between
one man and another, but by the power of God: now if we cannot discern of any
thing here but it must be of God, much more we cannot discern the way to
heaven but it must be of God.

Thirdly, it is said, that Christ came and did join himself with them, and
demanded what manner of speech they had: Thirdly, Christ joined with them.
so if Christ were present he would demand what manner of speech, and what
manner of communication ye have; what, do you talk of Christ? do you talk
of Religion, or of the word? If ye talk of Christ and of Religion and of ^oly
things, then I have a blessing for you, but if ye talk of the world, of money
matters only, I have no blessing for you: which may teach us, that if Christ
should come amongst us, as he did to the Disciples, he would look after our
discourse what it is of. Many a man thinks he may speak what he will, and
what he list himself, O but if Christ were present he would demand what
speech they had: we see in the time of a public judgment, Ier. 8. The Lord
hearkened and heard, so now he comes to our houses, and hears what passes
between the wife and the husband, and what they speak in their houses and at
their labors, and as they travel by the way.

Now Christ does not demand of them what they said, because he was ignorant of
it, for he knew what they said; but he had another end in it: as Genesis 3. when
the Lord demanded of Adam what he had done? it was not that he was ignorant of
it, for he knew well enough what he had done; but by this means he calls him
to the consideration of his fault: and so Genesis 4. when the Lord asked Caine,
where is thy brother Abel? it was not that he was ignorant of it: so in this
demand, it was not that Christ was ignorant, but it was to nourish and to
continue their good communication; for when a stranger comes if men be talking
of good things they will be silent; therefore Christ asks this question to
set their good talk on foot again. Hence we must take heed we do quench
good speeches, but labor to nourish them; as we see Act. 28. The Barbarians
kindled a fire and Paul gathered sticks to nourish the same; Simile.
so if there be a fire begun (any good speech) we should get a bundle of
sticks, we should nourish the good talk: a number cannot abide good speech,
they say they come to be merry, whereas if they were wise, this were the only
way to make them merry: Simile.
if a number of children were in the dark, and a merciful man should set up a
light for them to light them the way home, and one should go and blow out this
light, what a wicked deed were this? so we are here in this world like little
children in the dark, and when men be speaking of good things they do set up
a light, which to quench were a very evil thing.

The next thing is, the answer of Cleophas to this demand, wherein there be two
thing to be considered:

1. A Reprehension. 2. A Declaration.
First, a Reprehension; Cleophas does reproove Christ, by way of admiration,
says he, Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and have not known the
things that are come to pass there in these days? can there be any so
ignorant of it? Now as Cleophas does wonder and admire at Christ, we may truly
wonder and admire at the ignorance that is amongst us; it was Christ's speech to
Nicodemus, Ioh. 3. Art thou a teacher in Israel, and do not know this? so we
may say, art thou a Christian, and have thou had means of knowledge so long
and art thou ignorant of the principles of Religion?

The second is, a Declaration; and herein we observe, that the Disciples had
faith; First, Faith.
secondly, that it was weak faith they had. Faith was seen first, in
commending of Christ; and secondly, in discommending of the fact of the Jews
in killing of Christ.

First, their faith was seen in commending of Him, and there were three things
they commended him for, first, that he was a rare man, he had rare things in
him; so a Christian must be a rare man, it is not ordinary things must content
him: Three things a Christian is commended for.
Matthew. 5. our Savior says, If ye love your friends only what singular
things do ye? a Christian must have singular things: and so Paul, 1
2 Timothy 3. But continue thou in the thing thou have learned; a Christian must
excel and go before others in all things. 2
Secondly, he was mighty in word and deed; there is many an one mighty in word
but not in deed, 3
but a Christian must labor to be mighty in both. Thirdly, Before God and
man; so it is not sufficient to approve our selves to God but to men also, as 2
Cor. 9. the Apostle says, we must procure things honest in the sight of men
also; so that a Christian must approve himself to God first, and then to men.

Secondly, Secondly, their weakness of faith.
The weakness of their faith was in these words; But we trusted it had been
he that should have delivered Israel, and as touching all these things to day
is the third day since they were done: we were of good hope that it was he
that should have delivered the Church, but now we do not hope, all our
comfort is gone, he is now crucified and killed, and laid into the grave;
indeed we had good hope, and we looked for great matters, but now we do not:
so that their faith was shrewdly shaken; and it may teach us, that a man may
have true faith, and yet be shrewdly shaken; the truth is, it cannot be
wholly lost, because as Saint John says, there is a seed remains, yet it may
come to such a stand as that he may have little comfort of it: Simile.
as a man may have a little cole of fire by him and yet may sit till he be a
cold, till he rub his hands, and knock his feet and heels together; so a man
may have true faith and yet as little joy and comfort by it as though he had no
faith: as David did, Psalm. 30. I said in my prosperity I shall never be
moved; yet in the next Psalm he says, I am clean cast out of thy sight: so
Job 20. says he, I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver
of men? why have thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to
my self? so Matthew. 14. 30. Peter walked upon the water at first, but when he
saw the waves rise, then his faith began to be at a stand; so a good man may be
at a stand in his faith, therefore though a man feel weakness of faith in
him, yet he ought not to be discouraged, but must labor to help the
weakness thereof: is the man in the Gospel cried out and said, Simile.
Lord, I believe, help my unbeleefe; so we must say, Lord I have faith, help
the weakness of my faith: I, but what was it that did weaken the faith of
these two Disciples, and why did not they trust still in him? I answer, there
were three things that did hinder their faith:

The first was, Three hindrances of the Disciples faith.
Scandalum crucis, the scandal of the cross, for as long as they saw Christ
in his power walking on the sea, casting out of devils, giving sight to the
blind, clensing of the Lepers, raising up of the dead, 1
so long they had faith in him; but when they saw him hang on the cross,
crucified, and killed, and laid into the grave, then they began to stagger;
this it was that did weaken their faith: and I would to God it were not so
still, for it is the scandal of the cross that does weaken out faith now
adays, for as long as all things go well with us, that we be in health,
peace, and want nothing, we are the beloved of the Lord: I, but let the cross
come, and then we begin to sincke and be as men out of heart: as the people
of Israel, when they came out of Egypt by a strong hand with signs and
wonders, then they rejoiced, but when they came into the wilderness, and
wanted bread and water, then they said, would to God we had died in Egypt,
Exodus 17. so Judge. 6. 18. this it was that did stagger, the faith of Gideon,
says the Angel, God is with thee thou valiant man: he replies, O my Lord, if
the Lord be with us why then is all this come upon us? so Eliphaz says to Job
4. 3. Behold, thou have taught many, and have strengthened the weak hands; but
now it is come upon thee, and thou art grieved, it touches thee, and thou art
troubled; the hand of God is upon thee, and thou art out of heart: and
therefore it must be the wisdom of a Christian to strengthen his faith by the
cross, and not to weaken it, for it was the triumphant chariot to carry Christ
to glory, lest that for want of wisdom that which should be a means to
strengthen our faith become a means to weaken it, for indeed this might
strengthen our faith, because the way to heaven is through many afflictions and
tribulations, as Paul says, Act. 14. 22.

The second is, 2
The consideration of the time; for they say, this is the third day: as if they
should have said the scandal of the cross we could have passed by, but the
consideration of the time, that this is the third day and yet we have not
seen him, how can we choose but doubt? why, though it was the third day, yet
it was not expired, but they were too hasty, and too nimble, Esai. 28. 10. it
is said, That he which believes shall not make haste: I, but these were too
quick and too nimble, for though the third day was come yet it was not expired,
and therefore they cast away their confidence, and so this it was that did
weaken their says: this is that which does weaken the faith of many because
they have not the thing that straight they desire; they have not comfort by and
by, therefore they cast away the confidence they have in God: good Moses was
overtaken that way when he complains, Exodus 5. 23. For since I came to
Pharaoh to speak in thy Name, he has vexed this people, and yet thou have not
delivered thy people; there Moses was too nimble with God; therefore it must
be every man's wisdom to wait on God, till the time come of his comfort and
deliverance, they must not be too hasty and too quick with God. Galath. 4. 4.
it is said, When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made
of a woman, etc. there was great expecting and looking for of Christ when great
men, Kings and Queens, Patriarchs and Prophets came into the world, but
Christ came not till the fullness of time was come; and when that was come,
Christ came; so when we look for ease, comfort, and for deliverance out of
trouble, yet we cannot have it till the fullness of time be come, that God
has appointed; and therefore we must not be too hasty and quick with God.

The third thing that did weaken their faith was, 3
that although the Angels had told the women that Christ was risen, and the
women had told the Disciples, and there was great evidence that it was so, yet
they did not see him; this it was that did weaken their faith: so men must take
care of this, that they do not tie their faith to their eyes and fingers, that
they will believe God no longer than they see with their eyes, and feel with
their fingers, for a Christian must believe God against sense and reason. It is
the manner of the world as long as they see with their eyes, and feel with
their hands, as long as they have peace, and ease, and wealth, so long they do
believe God, but when this fails, then their faith fails them. I, but Christ
says to Thomas, Blessed are they which believe and see not: Thomas did believe
when he saw, but it is a more blessed thing to believe and see not; and
therefore we must rest in the promises of God against sense and reason.

Now finding this weakness of faith in them, he does labor to reestablish
and strengthen them; lo here we may see the goodness of God, that by the
weakness of their faith he does take occasion to strengthen the same. It is
the great mercy of God that all things shall work together for the good of
them that love him; there be a number of things in the world that seem to work
against the people of God, but God turns all of them to the good of his
people, Simile.
and of them that love him: as we see in a Clock, that some wheels turn one
way and some another, yet all serve to make the Clock go; so there be many
crosses and contrary things in this world, but all serve to one end, even to
work for the good of them that love him. This may bring comfort to Christians,
that the weakness of their faith the Lord can turn to their good: Simile.
we see in experience if a man set young Trees, he will pull and shake the
Tree, as if he would pull it up, and all that he does is but to settle the
Tree the faster; even so the Lord does many times, as if he would overthrow a
Christian, and yet all is to settle his faith, and to make him cleave the
faster to God.

Now Christ does strengthen the faith of his disciples two ways:

1. By reproving and rebuking of them. 2. By informing them.
First, he reproves and rebukes them, that they were slow of heart to believe
the scriptures; which may teach us, that if there be a presence of God among
us, he will be reprooving of us, whereas many think they may go away with
any sin closely, yet if there be a presence of Christ among us, he will
reprove us for our sins, and for the weakness of our faith: This is that
which Christ speaks in the Gospel of Saint John, That when the Spirit of
Christ is come into the world, he shall reprove the world of sin, etc. so if
the spirit of Christ be come into our hearts, he will reprove us for misspending
the time, for our ignorance, for every thing that is amiss; but if it be not
so with thee, but thou art at peace and securely sleep in thy sin, then
the spirit of Christ is not come into thee; for if the spirit of Christ be
come into thee, he will reprove thee of thy sins, and make thee say (as the
L^pers said, We do not well to tarry here, etc.) O, we do not well to break
the Sabbath, to be drunken, to speak filthily, we do not well to lie or to
swear. Now what was that he reproves them for? That they were slow of heart to
believe the Scriptures: and here we are to take notice of a corruption that is
in us, that we are slow to believe the Scriptures, and the Gospel, but quick
to believe a foolish tale, or a lie, or a false report of our neighbors, from
this the Lord has much ado to stay us, although he has strictly charged us
to enquire the truth of it, Deuteronomy. 17. 4. where he says, If it be told thee,
and thou have heard it, then shall thou enquire diligently if it be true, and
the thing certain, before we speak of it. If there be a false report of a good
Minister, or of a good Christian, that we can believe presently, but we are
slow to believe the Scripture or any good thing, we are tardy, here is our
fault, and this corruption has been in our nature ever since the fall of Man;
for we see Genes. 3. The Lord told Adam, That in the day that he did eat of
the fruit, he should dye the death; but the devil came and told him, Ye shall
not dye at all (clean contrary) and yet we see that they were more ready to
believe the devil than God: Will ye see a comparison to explain it the
better; Simile.
If an earthly king should say to us, If ye will be contented to do me some
service a few days, and to attend me, I will afterward advance you and
bestow great honor upon you, what man is there that would not rest himself
upon the kings promise? In like manner, God has said unto us, Attend me in the
duties of holiness, and do me service a few days, whilst thou live
here, and afterward I will make you an Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
thou shall be near unto me, and yet we will not believe God. Now there be
two uses to be made of this Doctrine, which shall be declared unto you (God
assisting) the next time of our meeting.

SERMON XXXIIII.
LVKE 24. 26, 27. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter
into his glory? And beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, he expounded unto
them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself.
We heard the last day how Christ did labor to SERMON XXXIIII.
strengthen the weak faith of his Disciples when they were going to Emmaus,
and therefore let us travel with them and over-heare them; that so that which
did serve to strengthen them in their faith, Simile.
may serve to strengthen us in ours: If a man have a leg or an arm out of
joint he cannot be at rest until it be set again, even so when we feel
weakness of faith, let us not be at rest till we have gotten the same
strength of faith that we had before, therefore let us creep into the company
of Christ, Simile.
and go as far as Emmaus with him: If a man hang on the top of an high Tower
by the hand, and there be a number of sharp stones under him, that if he
fall it will burst him in pieces, how careful will he be to strengthen that
hand lest he fall down? so faith is the hand we lay hold on God by, and we
hang, as it were, at the top of an high Tower, whence if we fall, we are like
to fall to hell, how careful therefore should we be to strengthen that hand?
Now two ways I told you Christ does labor to strengthen their faith:

1. By reproving of them. 2. By informing of them.
Of the first we spoke the last day, Two reasons why we are so slow to believe
the Scriptures^
and therefore are now to proceed to the uses; but before we come to them,
give me leave to show you two reasons, why we are so slow to believe the
Scriptures:

1. Nobilitas Objecti, The nobleness of the Object. 2. Debilitas Subjecti; The
weakness of the Subject.
The first is Nobilitas Objecti; 1
the nobleness of the Object: for the Scriptures are the wisdom of God,
which wisdom goes infinitely beyond our reach, being of such infinite
excellency that we cannot attain the height of them; for as the Philosophers
say, that a thing exceeding sensible does destroy the senses, Simile.
as too much light does destroy the sight, too much cold does benumme the
senses, too much heat does consume us, too much noise does make one deaf; so
the wisdom of God, being of so great excellency above us, that it transcends
the capacity of our understandings, cannot be apprehended by us, and therefore
we are slow to believe the Scriptures.

Secondly, 2
Debilitas subjecti, The weakness of the subject; the Scriptures excellency,
and the dullness of our apprehension makes us slow to believe; for nature
cannot work above her power, but the wisdom of God is above the power of
nature; for as the Apostle says, The natural man perceives not the things
that be of God; because there must be a power above nature to make us to
understand and believe them: therefore as the woman of Samaria says, John 4.
The Well is deep, and I have nothing to draw with: Simile.
so we may say, The Scriptures are deep, and we have not any thing to found
them with, therefore we are slow to believe them. Now the uses to be made of
this first point are:

First, seeing we are so slow to believe the Scriptures, no man need to
marvel though we see so few converted, Use 1.
or so few believe; for every man has a let in his own nature, therefore no
marvel though so few believe: Let a man fling a narrow-mouth bottle into the
sea, and if the mouth be downward it will receive no water; Simile.
so we are like narrow-mouthed bottles, for although we be in an Ocean sea of
good means, yet we cannot receive it, we have a let at home in our selves.

Secondly, 2
seeing we are slow to believe the scriptures, seeing we have such a let in
our selves at home, therefore it must be our care to take the more pains, and
to labor with our hearts, that so we may believe the Scriptures. If a man have
nothing but green wood he must take the more pains to blow it, and to lay it
together, that so it may burn; Simile.
so seeing our hearts are like unto green wood, we must take the more pains
with them, to make them believe the Scriptures:

Secondly, by informing of them: and two things he does inform them of:

1. Of the Necessity of his suffering. 2. The good Use and utilitie of the
same.
First, Two ways how Christ strengthens his Disciples faith.
that it is needful that Christ should suffer; and secondly, that by suffering
he must enter into his glory: and thereby seeing this was the way for Christ
to enter into his glory, he takes away the scandal of the Cross.

First, First, the necessity of Christ's sufferings.
It was of necessity that Christ must suffer; now the necessity was not in
himself, for he might have gone to glory the same hour he came into the
World, because it was hereditary to him, but in regard of us, for it was the
good of us that made a necessity, and put this upon him. Therefore, Paul
says, Ephesians. 5. 2. He gave himself for us, and Heb. 2. He tasted of death
for all men: therefore, he suffered not for himself, but it was for us: One
asks the question, What is the reason that Christ calls it his glory? and
answers, he calls it so in regard of us, for he could have gone some other way,
but we should have been left here; therefore it was needful in regard of us,
and that by reason of a double necessity:

1. The Necessity of paying the price of Man's Redemption. 2. The Necessity of
good Example.
The first was, 1
The Necessity of paying the price of Man's Redemption, because when we have
sinned, Necessity.
such is the Justice of God, that either we must suffer in our own persons, or
we must suffer in the person of Christ, either Christ must suffer or we:
therefore when the wrath of God was ready to seize upon us, it pleased Christ
to suffer for us, and to satisfy the Justice of God. We may remember by this
occasion that which I have showed heretofore, that O^esimus, after he ran away
from his master, Paul converts, and sends him home again to his Master, with a
letter in his hand to this effect; Receive him again, Simile.
if he have done thee any wrong, set it on my score, I will answer it: so we
are run away from God, and Christ has sent us back again with a letter as it
were in our hands to this effect; Father, admit them and receive them into thy
favor, make them partakers of thy glory, If they have done thee any wrong, or
ought thee any thing, set it on my score, I will answer it; I Jesus have
written it not with pen and Ink, but with mine own blood: and therefore we
see it was needful that Christ should suffer to pay the price of man's
Redemption.

Secondly, 2
it was needful that Christ should suffer, in regard of good ex^^ple; for no
man would go to Heaven through so many troubles, Necesstie.
unless Christ had gone before them. Saint Peter says, Christ has suffered,
leaving us an example, therefore did he go through all these troubles and
shames, that we might be contented to follow him: If a Man go through bushes,
briers, Simile.
rugged ways, through dens and caves and rocks, if he find the footesteps
of his loving friend, this gives him comfort: so seeing we find the
footesteps of Christ in these afflictions, we may be bold to go on that way;
and therefore it was of necessity that Christ must suffer, as well in regard
of good example, as to pay the price of man's redemption, what man then has
cause to be offended at the scandal of the cross, seeing it was so needful
that Christ should suffer these things?

I, Quest.
but some Man may say, Was it of necessity that Christ should suffer so many
things, that his head should be crowned with thorns, that his back should be
whipped, his face buffeted, his sides pierced, and he himself at last to die
such a shameful death as on the cross?

I answer, Sol.
it was needful that Christ should suffer all these things which we have
spoken of, for if he had suffered less, then it would have done us no good:
Man's sins were so hateful in the eyes of God, that he must suffer all these
things, howsoever the Friars say, that one drop of the blood of Christ was
enough to redeem us, yea all Men, yet it cost Christ all his blood to redeem
Man: for when Man had sinned, all the Angels or Archangels in Heaven could not
redeem him, nor all the Patriarchs and holy Men, but it must be the blood of
the Son of God, and all his blood, and in so great extremity as we have heard.

From the consideration of this we have the more cause to be thankful unto
him; as Ioh. 13. Peter wonders at the humility of Christ, that he would stoop
so low to wash his Disciples feet; or he that was the Lord of all, higher
than the Heavens, Simile.
should stoop so low to wash my feet; so we may much more wonder and admire
at this love of Christ, that he would dye for us, and dye such a cursed death:
O Lord will thou interpose thy soul for mine, and thy body for my body, and
dye for me that I might live still; and therefore we have no cause to be
offended at the cross of Christ, but we have cause to be the more thankful to
God for it, and to say as Saint John says, He has loved us, and has washed
away our sins in his blood: as it is Esaias 53. All we like sheep have gone
astray, we have turned every one to his own ways; and the Lord has laid upon
him the iniquite of us all. Ambrose confesses that he was more beholding to
God for the work of Redemption, for redeeming him with his blood when he was
lost by sin, than for creating him by his Power: Therefore, this may take
away the scandal of the cross, because it was of necessity that he must
suffer.

Now that which took away the scandal of Christ's cross, may take away the
scandal of our cross: for many times a Christian man is at a stand and at a
maze in himself, and says as the Disciples said, We trusted it should have
been he that should have delivered Israel: so I trusted and hoped once that I
should have been saved, but there be so many crosses and so many troubles
come upon me, that I doubt, I make a doubt of it, whether I shall be saved or
no. And that it is needful we should suffer as Christ did, these reasons
plainly show:

First, Three reasons why of necessity we must suffer.
it is of Necessity that we should suffer, because we should be conformable to
him, for as the head suffered so must the members; as Christ speaks Matthew. 1
16. If any man will follow me (says he) let him deny himself, and take up
his cross and follow me; so Col. 1. 24. Now rejoice I in my sufferings for
you; and fill up that which is behind of the affliction of Christ in my flesh:
as Christ suffered in the flesh in himself, so Paul suffered in his members;
and therefore it is of necessity that we should suffer.

Secondly, 2
because there be a number of sins that be so sunk and soken into the flesh,
that they cannot be purged out but by the cross: so David says, Psalm. 119.
67. Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now have I kept thy word, so
Esai. 27. 9. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Iaakob be purged, and this
is all the fruit, the taking away his sins: hence there be a number you see
of sins that are so sunk and soken into the flesh that they cannot be
purged out but by the cross; Simile.
as if gold be rust and canker-fretted, it cannot be helped, but it must be
cast into the fire, so there be some sins that cannot be purged out, but it
must be by the fire of affliction.

Thirdly, 3
it was of Necessity that we should suffer, To prevent sin in us: so we see
Genesis 20. the Lord came in a dream to Abimelech and told him that he did keep
him that he should not sin against God; and how did God keep him? by laying
his judgments upon him, so 2 Cor. 12. when Paul was carried into the third
heavens; and saw things that could not be uttered, lest he should be lifted
up above measure, the Lord sent the prick of the flesh and the messenger of
Satan to buffet him, to keep down this natural pride; so we see there is a
necessity of the cross; and therefore have no cause to be offended at it.

The second thing that Christ does inform them of, is, the good utility, end
and issue that the cross has: that it is so far from taking away any thing,
Secondly, Christ informs them of the utility of his Suffering.
as that it does open away to the kingome of heaven, as Phil. 2. 8, 9. Paul
shows, he humbled himsel^e and ^^^me obedient to the death, even to the death
of the cross, wherefore God has also ^^ghly exalted him, and given him a Name
above all other Names: here is another consideration to take away the scandal
of the cross, because it was by it that Christ entered into his glory; so if we
will go to glory, we must go the same way; there is no other, there is no
nearer way to heaven but by the cross, as it is Act. 14. Through many troubles
and afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: so Matthew. 20. when
the woman came with her two children, she makes this request to Christ, that
the one may sit at his right hand, and the other at his left: Christ answers
by way of question, Can ye drink of the cup that I must drink of, and be
baptized with the baptism that I must be baptized with? for before ye drink
of the cup of glory, ye must drink of the cup of affliction, therefore no man
ought to be discouraged at afflictions or crosses, seeing it is the way whereby
we enter into glory. 2 King. 2. 11. when Elias was taken into heaven, he was
not carried in a golden chariot, Simile.
as the Papists say that Henoch was, but it was a chariot of fire, and horses
of fire; and yet he was not afraid of them, because they were the horses and
the chariot that should carry him to heaven; so when we see the fiery horses of
afflictions and of death to come, we should not be afraid of them, because they
be the horses and chariots that carry us into glory: therefore this is that
which should make us go cheerfully thorough all troubles and afflictions;
this is that which made Paul say that he counted all things but dung and dross
that he might win Christ, and that he might come to glory; so whatsoever it
cost a man though it cost him his life and his blood, yet all is well bestowed
so he may win Christ and come to glory.

Now to this information he does annex a Confirmation, Fourthly, confirmation,
to information.
and proves it by the Scriptures, and so begins at Moses and the Prophets and
does interpret all the things that are spoken of him.

Now herein we may observe many things: first, he does labor to sound the
faith of the Disciples on the Scriptures; he might have discovered himself at
the first and said, I am he, or might have showed them his hands or his sides,
as he did afterward in this chapter; but he goes on, and leads them through
the Scripture and does interpret unto them all the places that were spoken of
him; the reasons, because he would their faith should be grounded on the
Scriptures: which must teach us that we must ground our faith only on the
Word of God; therefore Christ says, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye
think to have eternal life; so it is not true faith till it be founded on
the Scriptures, it may be a counterfeit, or it may be an opinion, or it may be
a persuasion, but it cannot be true faith till it has his ground there; so
says Paul, Romans 10. Faith comes by hearing of the word preached; as also the
Schoolmen say, the best resolution of faith is of God, that they do believe
because God says so: here we are to take notice of an error in the world,
that many say, they have faith, and yet have no ground for it, but they will
tell you such a Preacher said so, or such a good man, or we heard it a great
while ago, but it is not true faith till they can say that God spoke it, well
he may have a persuasion, or an opinion, or a conceit, but it cannot be true
faith till it be founded on the word of God.

Thus we heard in the former verses, how Christ did found the faith of the
Disciples on the Scriptures; he might have discovered himself at the first,
and have given them a sensible knowledge of him, as he did after in this chap.
but He drew them on by little and little, and did lead them through the
Scriptures, the book of God, that so he might open unto them all that was
spoken of him.

In the next place we come to the discovery of him, where we may see that when
they drew near unto the town they went to, Christ makes a proffer to be gone,
as though he would have left them, after he had begun the work of grace in
them, and had kindled some sparks in them: in like manner through the wise
dispensation of God he does still, he begins the work of grace, and
kindles some sparks of faith in us, and then he will proffer to be gone, if
we be not wise to lay hold on him, and retain him: therefore Moses makes his
prayer, Numb. 10. 36. every time the Arc removed, Return O Lord, to the many
thousands of Israel; he knew that the people had given God just cause to be
gone from them, therefore he makes his prayer that God would yet return again
to them. In like manner David, Psalm. 44. 9. makes his complaint, But now thou
art far off, and put us to confusion, and go not forth with our
armies: here David sees the Lord to shrink from him making a proffer to be
gone, and therefore complains he thus; so we shall find that the Lord does
shrink from us and makes a profer to be gone, and to take away the Gospel and
our comfort, if we be not wise to lay hold on him, and stay him.

Now there be three things by the which a man may know when Christ's makes a
proffer to be gone: Three trials to know when Christ will be gone from us.


First, When men grow idle and cold in the use of good means, in prayer,
hearing the word, 1
reading and meditating thereon, they do not apply themselves to it as they
have done, but they attend about the world, this makes Christ proffer to be
gone. Luke 2. 47. Joseph and Mary never lost Christ all the while they were in
Egypt, they kept him when they were under the cross, and in affliction, but
when they were in peace and at Jerusalem then they lost him; and the reason
was, because they attended their friends, kinsfolks, and the rest of the
company, but did not attend Christ, never looked after him, therefore he was
presently lost; even so most men as long as they be under the cross keep
Christ, but when they be in peace then they lose him and the comfortable
feeling of faith; they attend to the world, to their profits and pleasures, and
grow loose in the use of good means, forgetting to nourish the good things and
holy feelings of Gods favor in themselves: to this effect, Psalm. 51. 11. David
prays unto God, That he would not take away his spirit from him; he felt the
Lord to shrink from him, and make a proffer to be gone, and therefore he
says, Lord, take not thine holy spirit from me, whatsoever thou take away from
me, though it be my crown and kingdom, yet take not thy spirit from me: As
we see if a man has fish in his pond, as long as the water tarries, Simile.
so long the fish will remain, but if the water be drawn out, then the fish
will follow the water; even so as long as we use good means, so long Christ
will tarry with us, but if once we grow loose then Christ will follow the
means. And this is the first thing whereby we may know whether Christ makes a
proffer to be gone.

Secondly, 2
we may know whether Christ makes a proffer to be gone, When we live in
known sins against our judgment and conscience, giving way to our flesh,
and following bad examples, then we may justly fear he will be gone, or make
a proffer to be gone. For as Ezekiel. 8. 6. the Lord says, Son of Man, see thou
not what they do? Even the great abominations that the house of Israel
commits here, that I should go far off from my Sanctuary: So if we
commit sins against God, it will cause his Spirit to depart from us: as also
Exodus 33. 7. When the people of Israel had committed a great sin against God
in worshipping the Calfe, Moses took the Tabernacle, and did pitch it without
the Host: to show unto the people that God was departing from them, because of
their sins, if they were not wise to stay him by repentance, and turning to
him by Prayer: Another example hereof we have, Judges 16. 20. Sampson, who was
a good man, and yet because he loved a harlot and sinned against God, The
Spirit of the Lord departed from him; for when she said, the Philistians be
upon thee Sampson, he awo^ke out of his sleep, and said, I will go out as at
other times before, and shake my self: And he wist not that the Lord was
departed from him: Even so if good Men sin against God, it will cause the
Spirit of Christ to depart from them, for when they have committed great sins
against God, though they shake themselves and think to do as they have done
before, to pray and perform such like duties, yet for their life they cannot,
because the Spirit of God is departed from them: hence we may learn that
though a man be a good man, yet if he sin against God, God may give him over,
and he may lose the Spirit of grace, and the comfortable feeling of it for a
time; therefore every man must take heed how he give way to the flesh to
commit sins against God, and as Jacobs sons said to the Sichemites, If ye
will be circumcised, then will we give our daughters to you and take your
daughters to us, and we will be one people, Genesis 34. 16. Even so God says
to us, if ye will be circumcised and cut off your lusts and your sins, and be
a sanctified and holy people, then ye shall be one with me; but if ye will not
be circumcised and cut off your lusts and your sins, then ye will cause me
to depart away from you. And this is the second thing whereby we may know when
Christ makes a proffer to be gone.

Thirdly, 3
When we feel a decay of Gods graces in us, when we have lost our zeal, care
and love; as when the King removes from a place, we may know it by his
carriage going before: Simile.
so the graces of Gods Spirit be as it were the carriage; therefore when this
goes away, know then Christ will remoove, then he makes a proffer to be gone.

But why did Christ make a proffer to be gone? It was not that he had any
purpose to depart, but to try their affections, and to see what account they
would make of him; so the Lord does still make a proffer to be gone from us,
and to take away the Gospel and many times the comfortable feeling of his
favor; which he does to try our faith and our affection, and to try what
account we will make of him. So we see Matthew. 15. 22. Christ deals with the
woman of Canaan, makes a proffer to be gone, as may appear by conferring this
with other places: for it is said in Mark 17. 24. Christ went into an house,
and would have no man know it, as if he would have been gone from her, yet
she follows him; he goes into the fields, and yet she follows him; this was
not that he had any purpose to be gone from her, Simile.
but to try her faith and her affection. As 1 Samuel 7. 2. the Arc was in the
borders of Israel twenty years together, and all the people lamented after
the Lord: He kept the Arc twenty years together aloof of them, to see how
they would long for his presence: So God deals with us, he withdrawes the
comfortable feeling of his presence, to see how we will long after it, Simile.
and what account we make of it: as a loving mother sometimes hides her self
from her child, not because she means to go from it quite, but because she
would try the love of her child, and how it longs after her; so Christ does
shrink away from us, and hide his presence to try our love, our faith, and
our affection. Therefore, when Christ makes a proffer to be gone, we must do
as the people did, Mark 1. 45. follow him, not being at rest till they had
found him; though he went into never so secret a place: If he be departed
away from us, we should not be at rest but follow him and labor to recover
him again by prayer, meditation, and the use of good means.

Now when Christ made a proffer to be gone, these two Disciples would not let
him go, but one hanged on the one arm as it were, and the other on the other,
till they constrained him to tarry with them. Hence we must learn that if
Christ makes a proffer to be gone, we must not let him go, and do as the
World does, If he will go let him go, and say, we cannot hold him; but we
must importune him and constrain him to tarry with us, as it is said of the
good people, Luke 4. 42. And when it was day he departed and went into a desert
place, and the people sought him and came to him, and stayed him that he should
not depart from, them: So when we feel Christ to depart from us, we must
constrain him to tarry with us as Jacob did, Simile. Gene^^ (...) 26.
Genes. 32. 26. When he and the Angel wrestled together, Jacob laid hold on
him and would not let him go, till he had blessed him: Now the Angel that did
wrestle with Jacob was Christ. So also Exodus 32. 15. When the Lord told Moses
that he would not go with them, but an Angel should go with them; Simile.
Lord (says he) Carry us not away from this place, unless thy presence go
with us: Lord, let me die here and go no further, unless thy presence go
with us; so we should pray to God not to carry us away from our houses, that
we may not stir from the places where we be, unles the presence of God go
with us, and when we feel the presence of God to be going from us, we must
pray him to tarry with us, and constrain him too.

But why do they desire Christ to tarry with them? because they had tasted of
the goodness, power, sweet graces, and excellency of Christ, this was the
reason of it: therefore no marvel though the world let Christ go, and do not
desire him to tarry with them, because they never felt the power of God,
neither tasted of the sweet and excellent graces that be in Christ, but such as
have tasted hereof will be contented to take any pains and labor to enjoy
Christ; therefore the Apostle Peter gives us this exhortation, 1 Pet. 2. 2.
Simile.
As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word that ye may grow
thereby; as who should say, If so be ye have tasted how good the Lord is, you
that be Christians and have tasted of the Gospel and the sweetness of it,
even as a child desires the milk of the breast, and it is not at quiet till
it has it; so desire ye the sincere milk of the word that ye may grow
thereby; and as Abraham said, Genesis 18. Lord depart not from thy servant, so we
should desire Christ to be with us and to say, Lord depart not away from me
till the day of my death.

Now there are two especial times wherein every Christian should pray that
Christ may be with him: Two things, wherein every Christian should pray God to
be with him.


1. In the time of Trouble. 2. At the time of Death.
First, In the time of trouble, when there is misery and extremity upon us, 1
then we had need to have a great deal of grace to sustain us: we see ships
in a great storm, Simile.
if they have not good Anchors and good Cables they may quickly miscarry and
dash against some rocks, and so make shipwreck; in like manner if trouble and
danger be upon us, if Christ be not with us, we are like to miscarry,
therefore as the two Disciples said to Christ, Simile.
The day is far spent, and the night draws on, tarry with us; so we should
say, The day of prosperity is far spent, and there is a night of affliction
drawing on, therefore, Oh Lord, tarry with us, and give us a good issue out of
troubles; so David prays Psalm. 22. 11. Be not far from me, O Lord, because
trouble is near, for there is none to help me: this is a special time to
have Christ with us.

Secondly, At the day of death, when we come to end this life, this is a
special time to have Christ with us, 2
as the disciples said to Christ, Tarry with us, for the day is far spent,
and the night draws on; so a Christian should say at the time of his death, My
life is far spent, old age is come upon me, and sickness and death draws
on, Lord, tarry thou with me, and I pray thee that I may so shut up mine eyes
in this world, and that they may be opened in the kingdom of heaven, and that
I may dye in thy favor, in the pardon and forgiveness of my sins, and in
the peace of a quiet conscience. Thus David prays in the Psalm. Yea even
until mine old age and gray head, O Lord, forsake me not; And so again Psalm.
27. 9. Hide not therefore thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away in
displeasure; thou have bin my succor, leave me not nor forsake me, O God, of
my salvation. And these be the two times, when we are specially to desire
Christ to be with us:

Now we come to the next thing, which is, how Christ was known of them, and it
is said, In the breaking of the bread: here two questions are to be answered:

1 What is meant by Bread? 2 How Christ was known by the breaking of Bread?
First, Quest.
what is meant by Bread? whether it were ordinary common Bread, or whether it
were sacred, and consecrated to an holy use? I answer, that the Bread here
spoken of is not Sacramental, Sol.
but ordinary Bread. The Papists take advantage by this place (as they do by
all others that seem to serve their turn) for when they be urged and asked
why they break the Lords institutions to give Bread, and not wine, contrary to
the commandment of Christ, seeing Christ instituted both: to this they answer,
that the Church of Rome has an example to do so, because Christ did
administer the Sacraments to the two Disciples going to Emmaus. But we can
prove by these two reasons taken out of their own Doctrine and Canons, that
this breaking of Bread cannot be meant of Bread used in the institution of the
Sacraments, but of ordinary and common Bread:

First, 1
because they hold it a sacrilege for any Priest to consecrate Bread without
Wine; for they will have them both consecrated together, though none but the
Bread be administered; but in this place there is none but Bread spoken of, and
therefore it was not Bread used in the Sacraments.

Secondly, because their own Doctrine and Canons say, that it cannot be a
Sacrament without the five words of consecration, 2
Take, eat, this is my body; but there were not these five words of
consecration; and therefore it is not meant of the Sacrament.

Now they have two reasons against this argument:

First, The first popish argument.
In that they say, there is the same form of words that is used in the
institution of the Sacrament, both in Matthew. 26. and also in the Gospel of
Saint Luke, where the institution is spoken of; and that is that he took the
bread, and blessed it, and gave it, etc.

To this I answer, they may as well prove the five loaves and the two fishes
that Christ fed the people with, Sol.
Matthew. 15. to be a Sacrament, for there it is said, he took the bread and
blessed the same and gave it, so there are the same form of words.

Secondly, The second popish argument.
they say, if it had not been this Sacrament, Christ would not have
administered it, he would not have blessed the bread and brake it and have given
it, because he was a stranger.

To this I answer, Sol.
that it was the manner of the Jews, that the best men in the company gave
thanks, brake the bread, and did not put it off to a child as many do at
these days; therefore because he was the best, and most gravity did appear in
his face, therefore he did bless it and gave it. 2 Uses.
Now then if it were an ordinary food, or Repast; this must teach us two
things.

First, 1
that we should not take a bit of bread into our mouths till we have blessed
God for it, and so it was the manner of the people to do, 1 Samuel 9. 15. the
maids said to Saul, that The people would not eat till Samuel came and had
blessed the sacrifice; and so Act. 27. Paul when he was amongst strangers in
the ship in the presence of them all he gave thanks: We see Christ did not
take bread till he had given thanks and blessed it. Therefore how dare any man
take a morsel or a bit of meat into his mouth, till he has by holy prayer
drawn down a blessing upon him. Christ he would not, he that was the Creator
of all, and therefore how dare a Man, that is but flesh and blood, take his
dinner and supper, and never give thanks nor bless the bread, surely man has
not more liberty than Christ.

Secondly, Use 2.
that as these two Disciples did travel with Christ, and when they came at
their ways end did then eat and drink with Christ, and comfortably refresh
themselves; so let us travel with Christ here in this world, and when we come
at our journeies end, we shall eat and drink with him in the Kingdom of
Heaven: so we see Luke 22. 29. Therefore I appoint unto you a kingdom as my
Father has appointed to me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my
kingdom: so Revel. 2. To him that overcommeth will I give to eat of the
h^dden Manna; Therefore let us labor to travel with Christ here in this
world, and then howsoever we may have trouble and affliction here, yet when
we come at our journeyes end, we shall be comfortably refreshed in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

The second question is, how Christ was known in the breaking of bread: some
say because he brake the bread so smooth as if it had been cut with a knife,
but it cannot be so, because it is said he was known in the breaking of the
bread, not by the breaking; and some say he was known by the manner of his
thanksgiving, but it is not said that he was known by this, but in breaking
of the bread; therefore it is best to follow the words of the Text, That he was
known of them in the breaking of the bread, for their eyes were held that they
knew him not before, and at that very instant, at the act of breaking the
bread, then the Lord opened their eyes; which may teach us, that there may be a
presence of God in our houses, in the fields, and in the places where we be,
and yet we cannot see it, unless the Lord open our eyes: Therefore as the two
blind men cried unto Christ and said, Simile.
O Son of David, have mercy on us; whom Christ asked what they would have;
they said, Lord, that our eyes may be opened: so we must cry to Christ to open
our eyes that we may see his goodness and mercy to us.

The next thing is what they did when Christ was vanished out of their sight:
here be diverse things to be considered, only I will commend unto you two things:

First, 1
that they said one unto another, Did not our hearts burn when he spoke unto
us? so we should examine our selves when Christ has spoken unto us, whether
our hearts burn, whether we were afflicted with that which was taught us: If
we find not this, we may say to our selves, What did we hear, why do we
misse-spend the time?

Secondly, 2
that they could not be at rest, they could not tarry, but they went and told
it to their brethren; so when God has made any good thing known unto us, we
should not be at rest, but should tell it to our wives, to our children, to our
friends, and to our acquaintance: we remember what Christ said to the women,
Go tell my brethren: and even so I may say to you, Go tell your friends, and
tell your brethren the good things ye have heard, tell it to your wives and
children, and if ye cannot remember any more, yet remember this, how we may
retain and keep Christ; namely, with this short prayer of these disciples,
The day is far spent, and the night draws on, tarry with us; so my life is
night spent, and the night of death draws on, Lord, tarry with us; and then we
shall make a happy close of our life, when We shall sit down with Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven.

SERMON XXXV.
JOHN 20. 19. Then the same day at Evening, being the first day of the week,
when the doors were shut where the Disciples were assembled for fear of the
Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and says unto them, Peace be unto
you.
FIve several times Christ appeared the same day that he rose again: first,
To Mary Magdalen: secondly, To the two women going from the grave: thirdly, To
the two Disciples going to Emmaus: fourthly, To all the Disciples being met
together, Thomas being away: fifthly, To Simon Peter.

I have showed the reasons why Christ appeared so many times in one day, which
was to dedicate and institute the Christian Sabbath, that Christ spending the
whole day in heavenly apparitions might leave example to us to spend it in holy
duties and service, therefore a Christian has no other original of his
Sabbaths than the Lord himself: now if Christ has ordained the Sabbath (he
that has all power in his hand) then it must be our care to keep it: Judas is
condemned by the mouth of all men, not only that he stole, but also that he
stole from Christ; so if we do not apply our selves to the duties of the
Sabbaths we steal from Christ: nay Judas stole but his money, but thou
stealest away Christian duties and service from him. Now in this manifestation
of Christ to his Disciples we may observe three things:

1. In what Disposition they were. SERMON XXXV.
2. In what Manner he appearde. 3. The Effects of it.
First, what Disposition they were in; laid down two ways:

First, First, their disposition. Simile.
they were assembled together; after the death of Christ they were all
scattered and did fly one from another; but now they were assembled like a
flock of sheep that are scattered with a dog which afterward gather together
again: which may teach us, that if we fall we should labor to rise again,
and if we scatter, we should labor to gather together again: so Christ
says, Revel. 2. 5. Remember from whence thou art fallen, Repent and do thy
first works: and Psalm. 119. ult. David says, I have gone astray like a lost
sheep, Lord seek me: for as a sheep that is gone, is not at rest, Simile.
but cries to the shepherd, and the flock, and is not at quiet till it be in
the fold again; so if we be scattered from God, we must not be at rest but
cry unto God and unto the flock, till we come home to God again: and
although we fall, yet we must labor to rise again, though one throw mud into
a fountain, Simile.
yet in time it will work it self clear again; so if we fall into any sin
we must labor to clear our selves again: we see in nature, the little Birds
though they fly here and there, in the day time, yet they will home to their
nests at night, Simile.
in like manner howsoever a man may have some falls in the day time, yet let him
return home again to God in the night; this must be the care of Christians
that seeing they have daily fearful and dangerous falls, yet they must labor
to rise again and to recover. Two Reasons of their meeting.
There be two reasons to be given of their gathering together.

First, 1
to nourish the little sparks of Faith that was left in them; this was the
cause why the Disciples were assembled, and may teach us that although there be
but a little faith, and life of grace in us, after we have battered it with
the temptations of the devil, yet we should labor to nourish that little
spark that is left: which is the counsel Christ gives us in the Revelation,
Be awake and strengthen the things that remain and are ^^dy to dye, although
there be but a little faith, and grace, yet labor to nourish them: so also
lately we heard our Savior Christ did to the two Disciples going to Emmaus,
finding their faith weak he does labor to nourish and strengthen the same: 2
King. 9. as Iehoram, when he was wounded of the Assyrians returned to Iezreel
to be healed of his wounds: so when the devil has wounded us in our faith,
love, care, and in our zeal, we must return to the use of good means, that so
we may recover again. If a man have a tree that stands in his orchard, if
there be but a little life left in it, he will dig and dung it about, and lay
fresh moulds to the root of it; so if there be a little life of grace left in
us, we should labor to nourish the same by prayer, Simile.
hearing the Word preached, and by receiving the Sacraments; that so we may
recover again: thus the Disciples were assembled together to nourish that
spark of faith which was left in them.

Secondly, 2
because they were in hope thereby to find a blessing upon them: others had
seen Christ, and they assembled together in hope to see him too: which may
teach us that the blessing of God upon others in the use of good means, must
give us comfortable hope, that if we use the same means we shall find a
blessing of God upon us, that as others have been brought by the preaching of
the Word, to faith and repentance, and to a comfortable feeling of Gods favor,
to be persuaded that their sins are pardoned; so if we use the same means,
we shall have the same blessing upon us: As David says, Psalm. 48. We have
thought of thy loving kindness O Lord, in the midst of thy Temple; other men
have found a blessing upon them, and therefore we look for the like upon us.
But why were the Disciples desirous to see Christ? because they had felt the
power of Christ, and had tasted of his sweet graces, and of the excellency
that was in him: so if men had tasted of the sweet things that are in Christ,
they would long after him; therefore Christ says to the woman of Samaria, John
4. If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee, Give me
drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living
water: This was the reason why the two Disciples constrained Christ to tarry
with them, because they had felt of the goodness and of the excellency that
was in him.

Secondly, 2
it is said, the doors were shut for fear of the Jews: this is a strange
thing, He appeared when the doors were shut.
that they shut the Door for fear of the Jews, they were bold to confess
the name of of Christ before all men, and now they are afraid of the Jews; and
no marvel, for they had killed and crucified him, and therefore they would
make no scruple to kill them: which may teach us two things. First, that we
should be careful to avoid all needless dangers; as Matthew. 16. Our Savior
says, If any man will follow me let him deny himself, take up his cross and
follow me: If it be a cross that God lays upon us, we must take it up with
both hands, but we must take heed of making crosses to our selves: We read
Luke 22. That Christ prays that this cup might pass away; so we must pray
that this trouble and affliction may pass away, but if it be the will of God
that it shall abide with us, then we must willingly yield to it. Indeed the
cross is needful when God lays it upon us, but we must take heed how we
bring needless crosses upon our selves: Simile.
If a Physician should give us rank poison, he would so temper and qualify
it, as that it should do us good, but if we take it our selves, it may poison
us; So God this same skillful Physician, if he lay the cross and trouble upon
us, it will turn to our good, but if we take it our selves, it may trouble and
hurt us; therefore it is good to avoyde all needless dangers or crosses.

The second thing that it does teach us is, 2
that Every man must measure his own actions by his strength: the more
strength a man has, the more courage; and the less strength, the less
courage: so it was with the Disciples; the more strength, the more courage they
had in the cause of Christ; and the less strength, the less courage: here is
the question answered by that which has been spoken of before, whether it be
lawful to fly in the time of persecution? If one has strength and courage to
stand, then he were best to abide it, but if he have not strength, then he
were better to fly, as Mark 15. There was a young man that did follow Christ in
a linen garment, whom they caught hold on, and he left the linen cloth and
fled from them naked: But did he well to fly from Christ? I answer, he did
well to fly, for he had not strength to resist, nor means to prevail.

The second thing is, 2
The manner how he did appear, and that was when the Doors were shut: The
manner how Christ did appear.
Hence we learn no Doors can keep out Christ; when Paul was in prison and
the Doors shut, he came to Paul, so that all the Doors could not keep out
Christ. There be diverse opinions how this could be; some be of the mind,
that the Doors gave way to Christ and did open, as the iron gates opend when
the Angel did fetch Peter out of prison; as S. Jerome says, that the Creature
gave place to the Creator: A schooleman says that the Door did open so softly
and shut again, as that they did not perceive it: others think that he did so
attenuate his body, and make it so subtle, as that it could pass through the
Door, or any little chinke or Crevise, as the Sun passes through the glass
window: Others again think there is such power in a glorified body, as that
it is able to pass through any solid body, as a man may pass through water or
the Air. Therefore Christ's body rising a glorified body, was able to pass
through the Door: so our bodies glorified, if they were in an Iron or Steel
Chest, in a Marble stone, or Tomb, it could not hold them, a glorified body is
able to pass through them. Hence the Papists would prove their
transubstantiation, Object.
that seeing he could make his body pass through the Door, he could make it
pass into the bread and wine. To this I answer, there is great difference
between them, Sol.
for although he passed through the Door, yet he was in the same proportion,
figure and dimension that he had before, but in the Sacrament there are not the
same proportions nor the same figures, nor the same dimension; so there is a
great difference between them.

Thirdly, the Effect of this appearing, when Christ came amongst them he said,
Peace be unto you: this is a strange speech of Christ to say to them, peace
be unto you, seeing some of them had betrayed him, some denied him, and all
had fled away from him; yet he says, Peace be unto you, as if they had not
offended him; the cause was they had repented of their sins, condemned and
judged themselves, therefore, Christ brings peace unto them: So though we sin
against God and offend him, yet if we weep for our sins, repent of them,
and condemn and judge our selves, he will bring peace unto us. Here we may
see what Christ brought out of the grave with him to his Disciples, even as
when a father is absent from his child he comes home comfortably: so Christ
being absent from his Disciples brings out of the dens of death, and out of the
Grave, peace with God, with the holy Angels, with all the Creatures, and peace
of their own conscience with him. Therefore if any man shall demand and say,
Quest.
Christ indeed was crucified and he died and was laid into the Grave, but what
good have we by these things? To this I answer, that he has brought the
greatest good with him that may be, Sol.
for he has brought peace with God, with the holy Angels, with all the
Creatures, and peace with our Consciences, this is a great comfort to a
Christian, for though he be not a great man in the world, nor one of the
brave gallants, yet he is a happy man, because Christ has brought a peace with
him unto him.

Further, this may teach us, where we are to seek our peace; no where but in
the death of Christ; Use.
therefore if thou would have peace with God and in thy own conscience,
Where we are to seek for peace.
seek it in the death of Christ, there thou may have it: if thou have peace
which does not arise from hence, it cannot be true peace, nor the peace of
conscience, till thou can see by the eye of faith Christ dying upon the
cross, bleeding in the Garden, flung into the Grave for thy sins; so it is
Christ, that brings us peace: so the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2. 17. He came
and preached peace to you which were afar off, and to them that were near:
So Esaias, 26. 12. Lord, unto us thou will ordain peace, for thou have wrought
all our works for us: Therefore, every man that would have peace, Must look
to have it in the death of Christ. Here we see what the maine benefit is
Christ brought from the Grave with him, peace; yet it is restrained and with a
limitation ( to you.) that is, To those that have repented of their sins and
long for Christ. So then let every one look to himself if he have repented
his sins, and longed for Christ, then Christ brings him peace, but if he be
impenitent and do not long for Christ, then there is no peace for him.
Therefore when thou do consider Christ is come from the Grave and from the
Cross, laden with a number of blessings, think unless thou have repented
thee of thy sins, thou shall have no part in him. There be a number of men
desire to have peace in the World, but if they have not repented and do not
long for Christ, he brings them no peace nor comfort.

Thirdly, it is said, He showed them his hands and his feet, which was for
further confirmation of their faith; 3
for they had a number of fantasies and thoughts in their minds, He showed
them his hands and feet.
they thought he was a Spirit; and therefore Christ bids them feel and handle
him, for a Spirit has not flesh and blood, as ye see me have; therefore to
take away these fantasies, and these thoughts Christ did show him his hands:
here we are to take notice of a corruption of ours, that if we go about any
good thing, we shall have a hundred thoughts to hinder us come into our
minds, as Zech. 3. 1. we may see, when Joshua was offering of sacrifices, Simile.
Satan stood at his right hand to resist him: So when a Christian is going
about any good thing, he shall be sure to have one thing or other to hinder it.

Secondly, he showed them he hands and feet, To teach them he did not rise
with another body, 2
but with the same body that was crucified and killed; which may serve for a
further confirmation of our faith in the resurrection, that we shall not rise
with other bodies, but with the same bodies; Origin says, that it is not the
same body we lay down, that shall rise again, but another; but Saint Jerome
confutes him, and says, the same bodies we carry about us, and the same
bodies we have sinned against God with, the same we shall rise with to receive
judgment: and Job 19. (says he) I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he
shall stand the last upon Earth, and though after my skin worms destroy this
body, yet shall I see God with my flesh, etc. And therefore the same bodies we
lay down, the same shall rise again.

The Use is, Use.
that seeing the same bodies shall rise again that we carry about us,
therefore how careful ought we to be to keep them pure, for the same
tongues we have spoken filthy words with, the same bodies we have defiled
through unchastity, and the same hands we have stolen with, the same eyes we
have looked after vanity with, the same feet that have carried us to
disordered places, with the selfsame shall we stand before God: And therefore
how careful should we be to keep our bodies pure?

Thirdly, The third point, the effects of Christ's apparitiom.
The effect and fruit; it is said, The Disciples were glad when they had seen
Christ, after a great deal of labor and a great deal of pains; so if we
can see Christ after a great deal of pains and labor by the eye of faith, we
should think our labor well bestowed, for a man may see Christ with the eye
of his body and yet perish, but if we see him by the eye of faith we shall
be saved. Therefore as the Disciples said, we have seen the Lord, we have
seen Christ though we had lost him, so we may thank God, though we have
lost Christ by our sins, yet that we have seen him again, and that
although God send the cross and affliction to us, yet we are glad that we have
seen Christ; whom if we can see here in this World by the eye of faith, we
shall see one day in the kingdom of glory; therefore happy is that man or
woman that can see Christ.

Thus we have heard what riches and treasure Christ brought to the Church, that
he came not empty from the cross, nor from the grave, but laden with a number
of rich graces for the good of the Church, as Peace of conscience, pardon of
sins, justification, sanctification; all these graces Christ brought with him.

Now in the next place, we are to consider the care that Christ has to
communicate his graces to the Church, Christ's care to communicate his graces.
and to apply them; for though he have a number of rich graces in himself,
what were we the better for it, unless there were means to convey it to us;
therefore as the woman said to Christ, Ioh. 4. The well is deep, and we have
nothing to draw withal: so Christ is like a deep well, we cannot come by his
graces, unless we have means, Simile.
therefore also it is the care of Christ to appoint means to convey them unto
us, and put us in possession of them: as a man finding a spring in his ground
will get pipes to convey it to his house, so Christ is a fountain of grace,
and it is his care how to convey it to us. Now the ministry of the word is the
means, Simile.
this is the hand of Christ to convey all his graces, these be the pipes
whereby we receive all the excellency that is in him; all the benefits that he
has purchased, he has bound the^ in a bundle together and laid them down that
they may be conveyed to us this way: as 2 Cor. 4. 7. the Apostle Paul says, We
have this rich treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of power may be
of God, and 2 Corinthians. 5. 18. says he, And has given unto us the ministry of
Reconciliation: so the Gospel is the means by the which Christ does apply
unto us all his rich graces: we see Genesis 42. 17. Joseph filled his brethrens
sacks with corn, which they carried into the land of Canaan to preserve them
alive till they came into Egypt: so the true Joseph Jesus Christ has put these
spiritual treasures into a sack, Simile.
and has sent his servants to dispense them and give them to his brethren, to
nourish and to comfort them till the good time they come home unto him; this is
the first care that Christ has when he came from the grave, He sends out his
Disciples. Here observe four things:

1 He Arms them before he sends them. 2 The Commission, as my Father sent me,
so send I you. 3 The Ability that he gives them; to perform their charge. 4
The Authority.
First, 1
before Christ sends his Disciples, He arms them, (says he) Peace be unto
you: Christ arms them.
It is a strange thing, that seeing there is such great good offered in the
Gospel, that it should be so unwelcome, one would have thought it would have
been entertained and received joyfully: but Christ knew that of all messages
this is unwelcomest, and therefore Christ faies, Behold, I send you as sheep
among wolves; though ye be as sheep yet ye shall meet with wolves: and
what is that he comforts the^ with that? God is at peace with them; this is all
the armor he fences them with against the unkindnesse and hard dealings of the
world, to know that God is at peace with them and loves them by the means of
Christ; so Ioh. 16. he says, In the world ye shall have trouble, but in me ye
shall have peace, be of good comfort for I have overcome the world; this may
teach us, that if a Christian be at peace with God and knows that his sins
be pardoned, and that God loves him by the means of Christ, here is enough to
bear him out against all the encounters and unkindnesses that the world
affords: therefore when a Christian man is in any trouble or affliction, let
him descend into his own heart and see if God be at peace with him by the
means of Christ, that his sins are pardoned and that he knows he shall be
saved: this will give a man comfort; so we see, Lam. 3. the Church did; and
Ier. 14. says he (in the greatest distress that might be) The Lord is my
portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in him. I have showed you
heretofore that if a man fall into the hands of thieves and robbers, and they
rob him and take away his goods or his money, if he has a jewel of
infinite price about him and they leave him that, Simile.
he will say, Lord, I thank thee, I have my jewel still, howsoever I have
lost my goods and my money; so a man may say, though sickness had taken away
my health, and bad neighbors my money, yet Lord I thank thee, I have my
jewel, I have my peace with thee and assurance that my sins be pardoned:
Heb. 10. 34. it is said of the good people, That they suffered with joy the
spoiling of their goods, knowing that they had in heaven a better and an
enduring substance; so as long as a man has peace of conscience, pardon of his
sins, hope of Heaven, he is armed and fenced against all troubles, and all
the unkindnesses the world can offer unto him.

The second is, the Commission, As the Father sent me, so send I you: here are
two things to be considered:

1. Who it is that sends. 2. To what end he sends.
First, by whom they were sent, by Christ; As my Father sent me, so send I you:
thence we learn, It is Christ that is the Author of all Ministry, he it is
that sends Ministers to the Church, as Matt. 23. 34. Behold, I send unto you
Prophets and wise men, Scribes, etc. so Esaias says, The Lord God and his Spirit
has sent me: so it is Christ that is the Author of all Ministry, as Ephesians. 4.
14. When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto
men: And these were the gifts, He therefore gave some to be Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, some Pastors and some Teachers: so it is Christ
that sends Ministers at this day, but yet there is a difference, for he sent
the Apostles immediately by himself, and he sends Ministers at this day
mediatly by the means and authority of the Church.

Now there are good uses to be made of this point, some that do concern us
Ministers, and some that do concern you.

First, Use 1.
seeing it is Christ that sends us, he will assist and bless us in our
labors; For Ministers.
as Matthew. 28. Go and teach all nations, and baptize them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, And lo, I am with you always
to the end of the world.

Secondly, 2
seeing it is Christ that sends us, we must do the business and the work he
sends us to do; so Christ says of himself, John 5. 30. Because I seek not
mine own will, but the will of my Father that sent me. Simile.
If a Merchant should send his servant beyond sea to be a Factor for him, who
should apply himself to gather money, and to make an estate to himself,
neglecting his master, he may look for a cold welcome home; so seeing he has
sent us to be Factors for him, and to do his business, if we shall apply
our selves to get money, and to make an estate to our selves, and so leave the
Lords business undone, we may look for a cold welcome home, when we shall
go to God.

Thirdly, seeing it is Christ that sent us, we must give our account to him at
the day of judgment, for every man must give account to him that sends him; we
see Luke 10. that the Disciples being sent of Christ to preach, they return
again and give account of that they have done; And so in Job. 2. the devil
being sent of God, returns again to tell what he has done. Now the uses that
concern you be these:

First, Use 2.
seeing it is Christ that sends Preachers, ye must learn to acknowledge the
great goodness of Christ, For the people.
that he would make any sending to such as ye be; 1
it had been much if he had sent to us men, when we had sought him and turned
to him, but that he should send when we had not a thought of him, but were
sinning against him, this is a far greater mercy, therefore how thankful
should we be to Christ that he sends to us? Daniel chap. 6. 22. does
acknowledge this as a great blessing, says he, My God has sent his Angel,
and has shut the mouths of the Lions, that they have not hurt me; so we are
to acknowledge it a great mercy and kindness of God to send his Preachers and
Ministers, not when we lay bound in the Lions den, but when we lay fast
bound with the devils, and has preserved us from them: It was a great
kindness and favor that Joseph would send to his father, and to his brethren,
and bade them leave all, and come into the land of Egypt, and willed them that
they should not care for their stuff, for they should have the best of the
land, notwithstanding the unkindness of his brethren: Joseph's brethren were
not so unkind to him, as we be to Christ, and yet we may see the goodness
and the mercy of the Lord Jesus that he should send to such as we be.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing Christ sent Preachers and Teachers, then it is your duties to receive
them; Esaias says, The Lord sent me, and Jeremy said so, when the people would
have stoned him: one would think it were enough to strike terror into the
hearts of men, to do any injury to Ministers, when they know the Lord sent
them; and although there be nothing in themselves to cause us men to do it,
yet we must receive them for Christ's sake. The Apostles says 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Now then are we Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you through
us; We pray you in Christ's stead that ye would be reconciled unto God: And
therefore seeing Christ sends the Ministers, and they come of the Lords
message, it should be your care thankefully to receive them.

Secondly, Secondly, their commission to what end they were sent.
their Commission, to what end they were sent; to the same end that Christ was,
As my Father sent me, so send I you, Luke 19. 10. it is said, The son of man
is come to seek and to save that which was lost; Now all true Preachers are
sent to the same end, 1
to seek and to save that which is lost: Men are lost in sin, and run away
from God, the Preachers therefore are sent to seek that which is lost, and to
bring them home again: so it is an easy matter to go into the wilderness,
but it is a hard matter to find the way out again; It is an easy matter to
go into the world, O but it is a hard matter to be brought to God; therefore
when men have lost themselves in their sins, and run away from God, as
far as the prodigal son ran from his Father, the true Preachers are sent
to seek them up again, and to bring them to God.

Secondly, 2
Christ was sent not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance, as
appears Mat. 9. 13. to the same end all true Preachers are sent, to bring men
to Repentance, to convert them to God and to turn them from their evil
courses, to a hatred and detestation of sin and wickedness.

Thirdly, 3
Christ came To preach deliverance to the captives, as appears Luke 4. 18. All
men by nature are become captives to the devil and slaves to sin, being
unable to help themselves, whrefore God, seeing man's misery, sent his only
Son Jesus Christ, to take man's nature upon him, thereby to set at liberty and
free mankind out of the vassalage of sin and Satan: and to this end also are
the Preachers sent as the Apostle Paul witnesses, 2 Timothy 2. 25. In meekness
instructing those that oppose, if God peradventure will give them repentance,
that they may know the truth and that they may recover themselves out of the
snare of the devil, who are are taken captive by him at his will: therefore
let us not stand in our own light, but let us now arise to lay hold on so
great a good, as the redemption of our souls and bodies from the miserable
slavery of sin and Satan, which now is offered unto us by the Ministers of
the Word of God.

Thirdly, the Ability Christ gave them to perform their charge; he breathed
on them, Thirdly, the ability Christ gives them.
and said to them, Receive the holy Ghost: wherein two things are to be
observed:

1 What He gives them. 2 By what sign.
First, What he gives them; the holy Ghost: all our preaching can do no good,
First, what he gives.
till it pleases Christ to send the holy Ghost, and to mingle his spirit with
our speeches and words, that it may be effectual to convert men, to beget
faith, and increase grace in us. This is an excellent blessing that it pleases
Christ to mingle his Spirit with our words; so that the spirit of Christ
attends the Ministry of his word, as the apostle says 2 Cor. 3. 6. Who also
has made (...) able Ministers of the new Testament, not of the letter, but of
the spirit; for the letter kills, but the spirit gives life: It is called
the Ministration of the spirit, because the holy Ghost does attend it, and make
it fruitful and effectual: Therefore this is excellent comfort to all Gods
people, that it pleases Christ to mingle his spirit with the words of the
Preacher, for if a Preacher have but a little spark of the spirit of Christ,
he is able to do much: We see if a man have but a little spark of fire, let
him come to a house of gunpowder, and this spark will be a means to dissolve
and bring the whole fabric to nothing by blowing it up: So if a Preacher have
but a little spark of the spirit of Christ, it will dissolve this same huge
house of corruption that the devil has, and at length bring it to nothing:
Therefore it is good for men to attend the word and regard it, for Christ does
not send the bare Ministry of his word only, but he gives his spirit with it
also.

Secondly, Secondly, how he gives the holy Ghost.
by what sign he gave the holy Ghost; He breathed on them: Now we are not to
think that this breath was the Holy Ghost it self, for it was but a mere
wind, or air, but we may safely say and think it was a sign of it; so we
see Esai. 6. 7. And he laid it upon my mouth and said, Lo, this has touched
thy lips, and thine iniquity shall be taken away, and thy sins shall be
purged; we may not think that the Prophets sins were taken away by touching
his lips with a coal from the Altar; for it was only a sign of it; so also
Zech. 3. 3, 4. Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and he stood
before the Angel. And he answered and spoke unto those that stood before him,
Take away the filthy garments from him. And unto him he said, Behold, I have
caused thine iniquities to depart from thee. Here we are not to think the
Angel took away Ioshuas sin by the outward act of taking away his filthy
garments; for this was nothing but a sign of it, that as he took away those
filthy garments from him, Simile.
so God did by his inward grace, take from him all his sins and iniquities: in
like manner Christ by breathing on the Disciples gave them a sign that he
would also give them the holy Ghost.

But why did Christ give it by a sign? 1
that men might know that they had received of the same spirit which was in
Christ; we see when Moses did ordain Elders, He laid his hands upon them,
that men might know that they received of the same spirit that Moses had, so
Christ did breathe on them, that they might know they had of the same spirit of
Christ in them.

Secondly, 2
it was for the more assurance that he gave it by an outward sign; for when
men do know that the spirit of Christ is in them, and are persuaded of it, it
makes them regard and attend it.

Fourthly, The authority, whose sins ye bind on Earth shall be bound in
Heaven, 4
and whose sins ye retain shall be retained: Now here is great power given,
The authority he gave them.
Whose sins ye bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whose sins ye
loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven: But ye Must know this power is not
given to our persons, but to our function: this same binding and loosing is a
Metaphor or borrowed speech taken from a man that is fast bound in fetters and
chains, so as he is not able to stir till he be unloosed: so every man by
nature is, bound in fetters and chains with his sins, and cannot be loosed,
till God sends true Preachers to loose them: as we may see when Lazarus was in
the Grave, Simile.
though he had life in him, yet he was not able to come forth, being bound
with his Napkins, and cloths till he was unbound: so when the Philistines had
taken Sampson, they bound him, Simile.
and laid fetters and chains upon him: In like manner the Devil does lay
spiritual fetters and chains upon us, so as we are not able to stir in the
life of holiness, till the Lord send Preachers to us, to unloose us: Simile.
Therefore as a man that is in fetters and chains, when the Iaylor comes to
knock off his chains and fetters, though he be never so much pinched and
pained, yet he will hold still and take it in good part, because he shall be
freed and set at liberty; so when the Preachers come to break off our gives
and chains, though it be more painful than before, yet we must take it in
good part, because we shall be set at liberty by it.

Now two ways a Minister may forgive sins: How a Minister forgives sins;
two ways.
First, By pronouncing forgiveness of sins to such as do repent and
believe, as the Priests in the old Law did pronounce those that were made
clean, to be clean: so a Minister when he sees a man thoroughly washed and
purified by the tears of true repentance, 1
may without fear absolve that man from all his sins, and iniquities. But
how can this be, may some man say, seeing it is God only that does forgive
sin? I answer, There be two Courts; there is the Court of Heaven, and there
is the Court of this World: In the Court of Heaven, none but God can forgive;
but in the Court of this World, a Minister may forgive, upon the true
confession that a man may make, and the hearty repentance he may see in him, he
need not fear to pronounce unto him the forgiveness of his sins.

Secondly, 2
By way of authority, (not as the Papists do) but when in distres of
conscience he sees cause to charge the party to believe the remission of
sins, as having just title to Heaven, manifested in his good life and holy
conversation amongst men, though at that time God suffer him for trial, to
want the sense and feeling of his faith in Jesus Christ.

SERMON XXXVI.
JOHN 20. 24, 25. But Thomas one of the twelve called Didymus, was not with
them when Jesus came. The other Disciples therefore said unto him, We have
seen the Lord. But he said unto them, Except I shall see in his hands the
print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust
my hand into his side, I will not believe.
FIve several times Christ did appear the same day SERMON XXXVI.
that he did rise from the Dead, and this is the sixth time of his appearing;
and it was eight days after when Thomas was present, for when Christ did
appear to his Disciples. Thomas was away, therefore when the Disciples saw
Thomas, they told him, They had seen the Lord; Thomas answers them, Except I
see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my hands into his side, I
will not believe: Therefore Christ in compassion comes eight days after, and
suffers him to put his hands into his side, and bade him that he should not be
faithless, but faithful.

Now in this appearance there be four things to be considered:

1. The Occasion of Christ's appearing. 2. The Time of it. 3. The Manner of it.
4. The Effects and fruits of it.
The Occasion was, 1
To heal the infidelity of all his Disciples; for he had now but one that
did remain in infidelity; The occasion of Christ's appearing.
therefore he comes to cure that one. Here we see the tender care of Christ,
that having but one Disciple that did remain in unbeleefe, yet could not be at
rest, till he had cured that one: so we see the care of Christ does not only
extend in general to al his Disciples, but also in particular to every one;
which is a sweet comfort to a Christian, that the care of Christ is not only
in general for the good of the Church, but in particular for every one: so
that if there be but one weak and frail member, Christ has a care of that
one. It is said, John. 10. 3. that The good shepherd calls his own sheep
by name; He does not only know the gross sum, and keep the whole tale of
them, but he knows every particular one: If there be but one man or woman that
does belong to him, Christ has a care of him; as we see in that parable, Luke
15. Of a man that had an hundred sheep, whereof when one of them goes astray,
he leaves the ninety and nine, and goes and seeks for that one sheep: If
there be but one weak and frail member, Christ will have a care of that one;
for he himself says, John 9. 18. Of them that thou have given me, I have not
lost one: so that if we can once bring our selves to be members of Christ, he
will regard and have a care of us. This is an excellent comfort to Gods people;
for as Numb. 12. 15. When Miriam was shut out of the Host for her sin, the
Lord would not let the Arc remove till she was recovered and brought in
again; so if there be but one gone astray, God will never rest till he have it
home again: Therefore as Saint Paul says boldly, where he does apply Christ
unto himself particularly, Galath. 2. 20. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, and the life I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith
of the Son of God, who has loved me, and given himself for me: for when
Christ was on the cross, he did not only eye the general good of the Church,
but in particular, England, Essex, Clavering, and so of every particular man
and woman; which may comfort us, howsoever we may err and go astray, yet if
we belong to Christ, there will be a time when Christ will have a care of us,
and bring us back again to God; for there was but one Disciple that did
remain in infidelity, and Christ had a care of that.

But let us enquire, what were the causes that Thomas remained in unbeleefe:
there be two causes expressed in the Text.

First, Because he was away when Christ came, he remains in his unbeleefe;
here we see what a loss it is to be absent from holy meetings, First, the
cause of Thomas's unbeleefe.
for thoughg it be but once (for Thomas was but once away) yet he lost the
sight of Christ; if he had been present with the rest of the Disciples, then
it is like as they did believe, he would have believed; for they were as deep
in infidelity as he; but they being met together when Christ came were cured
of it, and it is very likely if Thomas had been there, he would have been
also; therefore we may see what a loss he had by being absent from holy
meetings: Now when the Disciples met Thomas, they told him that they had seen
the Lord; they had seen him that had triumphed over death, and the grave, and
you have not; so Christians may say when they have been at holy meetings, we
have seen Christ in the face of the Gospel, we have had motions of faith and
of repentance, we have been brought to the sight of our sins, and you have
not: therefore little do men know, what a loss they have by being absent from
holy meetings, though it be but once; for Luke 8. 9. the Word is compared to
seed, and why? because although the land be good, yet it is hardened and
bears nothing till it be plowed and sown, Simile.
so the increase comes of the seed: if a man should steal, but a pecke of
seed from one, he does him more hurt, than if he should steal a bushel of
corn out of his barn, because he steals away his increase; so our hearts
being barren till the Word of God be sown in them, when the devil steals
away but a little of this seed of the Word, he does us more hurt than the
world can do otherwise, and that by keeping us away From these holy meetings,
because he steals away out increase of grace. We read Act. 10. 6. That the
Angel says to Cornelius, send for Peter, and he shall speak words unto thee
whereby thou shall be saved, and all thine house: so a man may chance to be
absent at that time when he might hear words that he might be saved by, for
who knows whether that time might not be the time of his conversion, and the
time of his repentance? and therefore little does a man know what he may lose
by being absent but one time from holy meetings; Thomas was away but once when
Christ came, and we see how grievously he fell in infidelity: and this was
the first reason why he remained an unbeleever.

Secondly, The second cause of the unbeleefe of Thomas.
Thomas prescribed a law of believing to himself, and put on a condition upon
Christ, Except I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger
into the print of the nails and thrust my hand into his side, I will (...)
believe: so this law that Thomas made unto himself was another reason why he
remained in unbeleefe: and yet there was matter enough to make him believe,
though he had not seen him, for Christ told him before that he should rise the
third day; and he had seen Christ raise Laza^^ out of the grave a little
before; besides the Disciples told him that Christ was risen; and he had the
Testimonies both of the Angels and women, notwithstanding all which Thomas
makes this Law to himself; which may teach us, that we must take ^eed how we
prescribe a law unto our selves, that we will not believe, nor repent, except
God do so and so for us: Job. 4. 48. our Savior says unto a certain Ruler,
Ye will not believe unless ye see signs and wonders; so Matthew. 27. 42. the
Jews say to Christ, Let him come down from the cross, and we will believe
him: and 2 King. 5. 11. it is said of Naaman, But Naaman was wroth and went
may, and said, Behold, I thought with my self, he will surely come out, and
stand and call on the name of the Lord his God, and put his hands on the place,
and heal the Leyer: and if his servant had not been wiser than himself, he
had gone away a Leper, as he came; therefore every man must take heed how he
prescribes a law of believing unto himself. But what law was this that Thomas
made? I answer, a strange, unjust, and unequal law; for, says he, Except I
see in his hands the print of nails, and put my finger into the print of the
nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe. Now there is
nothing more contrary to true faith than this, because as Saint Paul says,
Heb. 11. 1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of
things not seen: in natural things, we have first experience, and after we
believe, as feeling fire to be hot, when we have experience of it, then we
believe it to be hot, and feeling water to be cold, we believe it to be cold;
so experience goes before, and faith follows after; but in divinity, faith
goes before, and experience follows after; for we must believe though we
have no experience: so then this law that Thomas makes is contrary to true
faith: I dare say we are all ready to condemn Thomas, but there be a number
of us whose cases be like this, they will believe no longer than they see with
their eyes, and feel with their hand the goodness of the Lord to them; and
when sense and feeling fails them, then their faith fails them: so Judge. 6.
13. the Angel says to Gideon, God be with thee thou valiant man: says he, O
my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all this come upon us? because he
could not see Gods goodness, and feel it with his fingers, therefore he did
not believe: but we must take heed we do not tie our faith to the sense, sight
or feeling, but to rely upon God, and to believe in him against sense and
reason, and to shut up our eyes, and rest in the bare promises of God, as that
holy man, Job 13. 15. says, Though thou kill me, yet will I trust in thee; he
relied upon God against sense and reason: so Christ when he did hang on the
cross, he rested himself by faith on his fathers good will, and therefore
cries out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? so also David, Psalm. 73.
26. My flesh fails, and mine heart also, but God is the strength of mine
heart, and my portion for ever: therefore Thomas's law is unjust, unequal and
contrary to faith.

The second thing is, Secondly, the time when Christ appeared.
the Time when Christ appeared, eight days after; so long Thomas lay in his
sins, and longer would have lain, if Christ had not come: here we are to
take notice of our corruption, how prone we are to fall into any sin, and how
difficult and hard a matter it is to recover again; for being once plunged in,
of our selves we have no mind to recover, or to come out of our sins, till
Christ bring us back again: an example hereof we have in David, who after
he had committed the great sins of adultery, and murder, lay in sin a
whole year, and longer would have lain in it, if the Prophet Nathan had not
come and told him of his sin: So the people of Israel, Amos 4. 11. when the
Lord brought a number of judgments upon them, Yet have ye not returned unto
me, says the Lord. This then we see is a fearful and lamentable corruption
of our natures that we soon fall into sin, but when we be fallen, we have
no mind to recover, nor turn back again, till Christ bring us back: as
appears plainly Luke 22. 60. When Peter had denied Christ his Master, he
ran further into sin, till Christ cast a gracious eye on him, even so when
we sin against God, we shall go further and further, till he cast a
gracious eye on us. Now the reason why Christ came not till the eighth day, are
chiefly these two following:

First, Two reasons why Christ appeared the eighth day.
to sanctify this day as the Christian Sabbath, and to dedicate it; here we
may observe they had not a word of Christ all the days of the week besides;
but when the eight day came, then Christ did appear to them: which may teach
us to walk in the strength of that we get one Sabbath, till the next, for it
may be we shall not hear a word of Christ, till the next Sabbath: therefore
it must be our wisdom to get so much at one bait, as may serve to carry us
to another; even as Travelers will so refresh themselves at one time, as that
it may carry them to the next baiting place, so seeing we have a long journey
to go, we must so refresh our selves on the Sabbath, as that it may
comfortably carry us to the next Lords day.

Secondly, to teach us that although we cannot keep our Easter with Christ
and his Disciples the first day, yet we should labor to keep it with Thomas
the eighth day; that is, if we cannot be of the first rank of believers, yet
let us labor to be of the second rank, as Numb. 9. 6. There were certain men
that were defiled with a dead man, so as they might not eat of the Passover
the same day, therefore they came to Moses for resolution; he referres the
matter to God, and the Lord answers them, that he that could not take it the
first month in the season, must take it the second Month: so if we cannot be
of the first rank of believers: Let us labor to be of the second rank, if
not of the second, then let us labor to be of the third rank, if not of the
third (rather than to be of none) let us labor to be of the last: as Math. 20.
the laborers that were sent into the vineyard, Simile.
some came in at the first hour, some at the fourth, and some at the eleventh
hour: so if we cannot be of the first rank of those that believe and repent
them of their sins, yet let us labor to be of the second sort, nay to come
into an estate of grace, though it be in the last hour.

The third thing is, 3
The manner that he appeared in, it was in the same sort as he did appear
before; The manner how Christ appeared.
for he came in When the Doors were shut, and stood ^^ngst them, and said,
Peace be unto you, and showed them his hands and feet: But why did Christ
appear in this manner? There were two reasons of it:

First, Why Christ appeared thus.
To confirm the faith of the Disciples, for no doubt they had told to Thomas
before, how Christ was risen and had appeared to them before, and therefore
Christ comes in the same manner to confirm their faith. 1


Secondly, 2
Because Thomas had said in a private meeting, that he would not believe
unless he did see; therefore Christ answered him in his own words and
speeches: which may teach us that Christ overheares us every word we speak in
our private houses, in our chambers, when we speak of this friend and that,
of this body and that, and will relate them at the day of judgment, even the
same words we speak; therefore every man must be careful of his speech, and
of his words, that he do not speak filthy or idle words, for at the day of
judgment Christ will repeat them all again: as Hosea 7. 2. says the Lord,
And they considered not in their hearts that I remembered all their wickedness.
this is the reason why men run into sin and wickedness, because they do not
consider that God remembers it, for if they did, then they would not do as
they do; they would not speak a word, or think a thought contrary to Gods
will.

Thomas indeed was much too blame to prescribe such a law to Christ, and yet
notwithstanding, such was the goodness and mercy of Christ, that he yields to
his weakness: And why does Christ yield to him? Because he did see there was a
desire in him to believe and repent, therefore Christ yields to him and his
weakness: Hence we may learn that such is the goodness and mercy of Christ
to sinful men, that notwithstanding they prescribe unjust and unequal laws
as Thomas did, yet he will yield to their weakness, if they have a true desire
to believe. So Mark 5. 23. It is said, The Ruler of the Synagogue came unto
Christ, and besought him that he would come and lay his hands upon his
daughter, and heal her; where he prescribed a kind of law, in thinking that
unless he would come to her, he could not help her; and if she were dead,
he could not give her life again: yet notwithstanding Christ condescends and
yields to his weakness, and goes and helps his daughter: This is the
goodness and mercy of Christ to yield to our weakness. Now here are two
questions to be answered.

First, 1
Whether there be any wounds in a glorified body or no; seeing Saint Paul
says, Whether there be wounds in a glorified body.
1 Cor. 15. 43. That it is sown in dishonor, it rises again in honor, it
is sown in weakness, and it rises in power? I answer, that commonly and
ordinarily there is no wounds nor scars in a glorified body, for as there is
glory in one part, so there is glory in all the parts, as Tertullian says of
death, that it is not in one part but in all; so (says he) there is not glory
in one part, but there is glory in every part; and therefore commonly and
ordinarily a glorified body has no wounds: but that Christ's body had wounds in
it, it was by special dispensation, for our good and benefit, that we might
have faith in the resurrection of Christ, for he was contented for our good
and benefit to abate of his glory; this should teach us that we should be
content to abate of our glory for the good of our brethren: and it is not mine
but the lesson which S. Paul teaches us, Phil. 2. 5. Let the same mind be in
you that was in Christ, who humbled himself and became obedient to the death
of the cross for our good; therefore we should be contented to humble our
selves and to do good to our brethren.

The second question is, 2
why he would have his Disciples to look on his wounds? I answer, to show
them where the comfort of a Christian was, not in Christ's walking on the water,
or raising of the dead, or casting out of devils, or cleansing of the Lepers,
but in Christ's bleeding and dying on the cross: so the comfort of a Christian
is from the wounds of Christ.

The fourth general point is, Fourthly, the effect of Christ's appearing.
The effect and fruit of his appearing; Thomas conversion: for he presently
says with great affection, my Lord, and my God: as if he should say, what a
pitiful estate was I in, I might have perished in mine infidelity and
unbeleefe, if thou had not condescended to my weakness; therefore seeing
thou have showed so great mercy, Thou art my God and my Lord: so a Christian
may say, when he feels the goodness and the mercy of Christ unto him, in the
pardon of his sins, O Lord, I thank thee, I might have perished in mine
ignorance and blindness, I was going the broad way to hell, and it has
pleased thee to give me faith in thy promises, repentance for my sins, care
to walk before thee in newness of life; thou art therefore my God and my
Lord, I am glad and I rejoice in it.

SERMON XXXVII.
ACTS 1. 9, 10, 11. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld,
he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight. And while they
looked steadfastly toward heaven, as he went up, behold, two men stood by them
in white apparel, Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up
into heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so
come, in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.
We heard the last day, that though we have not SERMON. XXXVII.
kept our Easter with Christ, and his Disciples the first day that he rose, yet
that we should labor to keep it with Thomas the eighth day; that is, if we
cannot be of the first rank of those that have repented and believed, yet to
labor to be of the second rank, if not of the second, then yet of the third,
yea labor to be of the last sort, rather than none at all: and though we
cannot see Christ in his rising the first day with the Disciples, nor yet with
Thomas the eighth day, yet let us clear our eyes, and see Jesus Christ
triumphantly ascending into heaven. Now having spoken of the Resurrection of
Christ, we come to speak of his Ascension; wherein we are to observe these
particulars:

1. Why it was needful Christ should Ascend. 2. The time when he did Ascend.
3. The place from whence he did Ascend. 4. The manner of his Ascension. 5. The
fruits and benefits of his Ascension. Why it was needful that Christ should
Ascend.

First, Why it was needful that Christ should Ascend: Howsoever we may think
it had been better for Christ to converse with us here, yet Christ tells us,
ARTI. VI.
that it is for our good and benefit that he does ascend, John 16. 7. It is
expedient for you that I go away, for if I go not away the Comforter will not
come unto you: For as the Sun does us more good being in the Sky, than if it
were amongst us, Simile.
because then every Hill and House, and every Barn would keep the light from
us: so if Christ were personally here amongst us, then he would be confined
to one Country, Town, House, or to one Man; and when he were present in one
place, he would be absent in another: Therefore as the Sun being in the Sky,
does send out his light, heat, and beams to all; So Christ being in Heaven
does infuse his graces unto all his people every where: Now this argument of
utility may make us quietly rest on God; Simile.
for as a mother when she is going from her child, uses to still and quiet it
by saying, hold thy peace, I will fetch thee a good thing* so Christ did still
his Disciples when they were in heaviness. It is for your good that I go
away, to convey the rich graces of my Spirit to you. There be five reasons why
Christ ascended.

First, Five Reasons why Christ ascended.
To prepare a place for us, for we cannot always live here in this World, a
time will come when we must away; and therefore Christ is gone to prepare a
place for us, that when Earth excludes us, Heaven may receive us; 1
when we part with men, we may go to God; and when we leave these Earthly
houses, we may have in Heaven a Mansion house. As Christ says, John 14. 4. I
go to prepare a place for you; If I go not away, the Comforter will not come;
But if I go, I will come again, and receive you to my self; that where I am,
there may ye be also: For (as I said) Christ is gone to prepare a place for us,
and to hold possession for us, till we be ready to enter and take possession
our selves: As Genes. 45. it is said, That Joseph was sent into Egypt to
prepare a place for his old father, Simile.
and for his brethren and to take up the best of the land: So the true Joseph
Christ is gone into Heaven to prepare a place for us, even the best, Heaven it
self, and to take possesion till we come and enter our selves, 1 Pet. 1. 4. To
an inheritance immortal and undefiled, and that fades not, reserved in Heaven
for us. This inheritance is kept in the hands of our Lord Jesus, till we be
ready for it, who will faithfully deliver it to us: Even as a Guardian does not
take up land for himself, Simile.
but for the Heir, who when the time does come, does willingly resign it
again to him: So Christ is ascended into Heaven to take possession of it for
us, and when the time comes, he will faithfully deliver it to us. Ephesians. 2. 6.
It is said, God has raised us up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places in Jesus Christ. Here Augustine says, we sit not in our
selves, nor in our own persons; but Christ sits in our right, till we be
ready for it. This is a sweet comfort to a Christian in all extremity, that
Heaven is our inheritance, and Christ sits there in our right till we be
ready for it; well may death take away our lives bad neighbors our good name,
thieves our goods, but they cannot take Heaven from us: Therefore a poor
christian may say, though I am not a great man in this world, though I have no
great Revenewes, Lands or Livings, yet I thank God Heaven is mine Inheritance,
Christ does keep possession of it till I am ready: And when he looks up to
Heaven, he may say, There is my Country, there is my house, Christ holds
possession of it, and one day he will faithfully deliver it to me. If a
stranger should go into a far country, if he should see a number of little
Cabbins or Cottages, and but one brave Building, Simile.
and asking whose house it is, a poor man should answer and say, It is mine
house, a good friend did purchase it with a great deal of gold and silver for
me, and one day I shall have it; would not this man think that his estate
were good, though he dwelt now in a Cottage a while? So we dwelling in
Cottages of clay in this World, if one should ask us when we look up to
Heaven, whose house is this? and be answered by any of Gods people, it is mine;
I thank God, Jesus Christ has purchased it, not with gold and silver, but
with his most precious blood, and one day I shall have it; would not every man
think this man's case to be good, and he a blessed man. This is the first
reason why Christ is ascended into Heaven.

Now if Christ be ascended to Heaven to prepare Heaven for us, then every man
must prepare himself, and make him ready to receive Heaven: ^evel. 19. It is
said, That the Bride the Lambs wife is ready. So we should make our selves
ready for Heaven, we must repent and believe, make conscience of our ways, and
be obedient before God while we live here.

Secondly, Christ ascended into Heaven, To send down the Holy Ghost into the
hearts of his servants; 2
as he says, John 16. 7. It is expedient for you that I go away, Why Christ
Ascended.
for if I go not away the Comforter will not come, but if I depart, I will
send him unto you. But had not the Disciples the Holy Ghost before Christ
ascended? I answer, yes, for they could not have the smallest mea^^^e of grace,
but it must be by the Holy Ghost, for as Saint Paul says, 1 Corinthians. 12. 3.
No man can say Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost; yet he full measure of
grace, and the abundance of the holy Ghost was not given till Christ ascended,
but was reserved till then: therefore John 7. 30. It is s^id, That the Holy
Ghost was not given, because Christ was not ascended: Even as a King, Simile.
whose gifts bestowed on his Favorites are but petty, till he be installed,
and then be they great gifts; so the gifts of the Spirit be given but in a
small measure, till Christ was ascended, and then were they great gifts, unto
which he daily adds more gifts and graces of his Spirit still: Simile.
as a loving husband when he is absent from his wife, will be sending of
love tokens; some Gold-rings, Jewels or Pearls to comfort and to cheer her;
sending still by every messenger that comes one thing or other, till he
himself comes home: so Christ being absent from us, does send unto us Rings,
Pearls, and Jewels, even the gifts and graces of his Spirit until he come.
This is a great comfort, howsoever we want the presence of Christ here, so
long as we have his Spirit to assure us of Gods favor and of the pardon of
our sins, and that Heaven is ours, all is well we know: 2 Kings 2. 9. When
Elias was to depart from Elisha, says be, Simile.
Ask what I shall give thee: Elisha answers, that thy spirit may be doubled
upon me: So when Christ at his ascension bids us ask what we would have, we
must make this request; Lord, that thy Spirit may be doubled upon me, that so
my mind may be enlightened, my will sanctified, and all my affections rightly
ordered.

Now as Christ is ascended to send down the graces of his spirit into our Use
hearts, Simile.
so we must prepare our selves for it: as the Disciples, Acts 1. 14. Did all
continue in Prayer and Supplications with one accord: so seeing the Spirit is
promised, let us read the Scriptures, meditate of them, pray, and so make our
selves fit to receive the holy Ghost. As 2 Kings 4. 10. when Elisha came to
Shunem, says the Shunamitish woman to her husband, Let us make him a little
chamber I pray thee with walls, and let us set him there a bed, and a stool,
and a candlestick, that he may turn in thither: Now if this good Shunamite
did prepare a chamber to receive the Prophet into, how much more should we
prepare our hearts to receive the Spirit of God?

Thirdly, 3
Christ did ascend into Heaven to lead captivity captive, to triumph over
Sin, Cause why Christ ascended.
Death, Hell, the Devil, and our spiritual enemies: when Sampson was beset
with the Philistines, in Gaza, it is said, He rose at midnight, Judge. 16. 3.
and took the doors of the gates of the City, Simile.
and the two posts, and lift them away with the bars, and put them on his
shoulders, and carried them up to the top of an high hill: so Jesus Christ
being beset with all our spiritual enemies, has triumphed over them, and is
gloriously ascended into heaven: As Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 4. 8. When he
ascended up on high, heeled captivity captive; Death, Hell, Sin, and the
Devil; so that now a Christian may see all his spiritual enemies in fetters
and chains.

I, Object.
but some may say, What is this to me, seeing I am subject to Death, Sin, and
to the grave? Sol.
To this I answer, that Christ's victory is our victory, his triumph is our
triumph; there is not a true Christian, but one day he shall triumph over all
his spiritual enemies, but it must be as Christ was. For first he was killed,
and thrown into the dens of thieves and death, then he arose again, and
triumphed over all our spiritual enemies, and did gloriously ascend into
Heaven: so when we be killed and thrown into the dens of death, and rise
again, then we shall triumph over all our spiritual adversaries, and say, as
Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 15. O Death, where is thy sting? O Hell, where is thy
victory? and then we shall ascend into Heaven. Therefore labor thou to be a
servant of God, and then doubt not but as Christ triumphed over all our
spiritual enemies, so shall thou; for as Christ speaks, John 16. 33. In the
World ye shall have trouble, but in me you shall have peace; be of good
comfort, for I have evercome the World; Augustine says, some men will object,
what are we the better for it, that Christ has overcome the world, and
triumphed over all our spiritual enemies; why? all that Christ did is for our
sakes, that one day we may succeed in the same triumph. Judges 10. we see
Iosh^a when he had enclosed the Kings, and shut them up in a Cave, He brings
them out, and makes his Soldiers and Servants to tread on the necks of them,
whom yet he himself had conquered, so making all his Servants Conquerors: so
Jesus Christ will make every true Christian to tread on the necks of our
spiritual enemies, Sin, Death, Hell and the Devil, that so although the
conquest be Christ's, yet he might make all us his Servants Conquerors. 4


Fourthly, To fill the Church with spiritu^ll gifts.
Christ ascended to fill the whole Church with his gifts; As Ephesians. 4. 8. When
he ascended up on high, he gave gifts to men: and verse 10. of the same
Chapter, He that descended, is the same that ascended far above all Heavens,
that he might fill all things: so that the goodness of Christ is spread all
the World over. Christ's ascension is like a tree, the roots whereof be in the
Earth, Simile.
but the fruit is above our heads, but shake the tree, and the fruit will
tumble at our feet; so the roots of Christ be here amongst us in this earth,
here he was conceived, borne, and here he died, and rose again; I, but the
fruit of Christ is in Heaven, above our reach; but if we touch him by the hand
of faith, and tongue of prayer, then all the fruits tumble at our feet. This
is a great comfort that Christ is ascended to give gifts to men, to fill all
places with his goodness.

Now as Christ's ascension was for the good of the Church, Use
and to make men the better for it, so every man must make his ascension like
to Christ's, that the Church and the whole country may be the better for it:
And therefore have thou any ascension from being a mean man; Art thou become a
gentleman from a mean man, a knight from a gentleman or lord* etc? Then make
thy ascension like to Christ's, make the Church the better for it, and the
country where thou dwell, not to take gifts, but to give gifts, so that the
Church and Country may have comfort by thine honor and by thine ascension.

Fifthly, 5
Christ ascended To make intercession for us; he did prostrate himself in the
Garden, To make intercession for us.
and upon the cross, in the vale of his flesh for us, and now he is ascended
into Heaven, to make the Court of Heaven friendly and favorable unto us; for
we know if we have a matter in the law, or a friend on the bench, then the
court of rigor is turned into a court of favor; Simile.
so seeing we have Christ our friend, who is ascended into Heaven, to make the
Court of Heaven friendly to us, we may be comforted, in that the Court of
Justice is turned into the Court of mercy, and the Court of rigor is become a
Court of favor: Revel. 4. 3. we see the Throne of God was compassed with a
Rainbow; Now the Rainbow was a token of Gods mercy, and of his favor; to teach
us that that which was a Throne of Justice, now is made by the means of Christ,
a Throne of mercy: and therefore Paul asks the question, Romans 8. 34. Who
shall condemn us? It is Christ that dyed, yea or rather that is risen again,
who is even at the right hand of God to make intercession for us: Hence
therefore let us comfort our selves when we cannot pray, yet Christ prays for
us.

But how does Christ make intercession for us? Quest.
I answer, How Christ makes intercession for us.
there be two kinds of prayer, vocal prayer, and real prayer; now we are
not to think that Christ makes any vocal prayer, that he does prostitute
himself at the feet of God, 1
as he did in the garden, for this will not stand with the majesty of Christ,
who is the Judge of all men, and God has put all judgment into his hands: but
it is a real prayer that he makes; and for your apprehension I will show by a
similitude, Real Prayer what.
what Real prayer is; Exodus 2. little Moses was put into an Arc, and thrown
into the water, Pharaohs daughter coming down to wash her, saw this Arc, and
caused it to be brought her, Simile.
and when she had opened it, she saw the child weep: now the child spoke
never a word, and yet this weeping of the child was real prayer unto her to
show mercy to it; so though Christ speak never a word, yet the presenting of
his body before God, is a Real prayer; effected two ways in his intercession.

First, The first way of his Intercession.
by presenting his pierced sides, his nailed hands and feet, and his bloody
wounds; so Christ's body does speak for us, when we cannot speak, and his
blood cries, when we cannot cry: for what was it that did uphold Peter in his
dangerous fall, but the fruit of Christ's prayer, as we see Luke 22. 32. He
says unto him, I have prayed that thy faith fail not: and so it is still the
fruit of Christ's prayer that does uphold us; in confidence whereof we may say
as Christ did to the Woman in the Gospel, Some body has touched me, for I
feel virtue to go out of me: even so may we say when we feel strength
against sin, and grace increased, it comes not by my self nor by mine own
virtue, but by the intercession of Christ; whose blood (as Saint Paul Heb. 12.
24. says) speaks better things than the blood of Abel, for that cried for
vengeance, but the blood of Christ for mercy.

Secondly, Christ does not only present his own person, but also every
faithful man and woman; as Exodus 2
28. 29. we see when the high Priest went into the holy place, he carried
before him the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel, Simile.
so Christ does not only present the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel, but
the particular name of every faithful man and woman; therefore let this be our
comfort when we are dull and cannot pray, that Christ is ascended into heaven
and presents us daily before God. Simile.
The unthankefull Butler did not remember Joseph, notwithstanding his
kindness, O, but Joseph did not forget his old Father, and his brethren, when
he was advanced, but he says to Pharaoh, Sir I have a poor father and poor
brethren in the land of Canaan, they are like to be famished, they want bread;
I pray thee sir, that I may have chariots to fetch them hither, that they may
dwell in the best of the land: and even so the true Joseph, Jesus Christ
remembers us to God, says he, Father I have a number of poor servants in the
world troubled and afflicted, I pray thee send for them, and let them enjoy the
happiness I have prepared for them. And this is the blessing we have by the
ascension of Christ.

The second point is, Secondly, the time when Christ ascended.
the time when Christ ascended; laid down in three circumstances:

First, after he was risen; so it is in the order of the Creed, he was
crucified, dead, 1
and buried, he descended into hell, the third day he rose again from the
dead, and then he ascended into heaven; which must teach us, that we must never
look to ascend to heaven till we be risen, for as Christ rose out of the grave
before he ascended, so we must rise out of the grave of our sins and
corruptions before we ascend: therefore Saint John says Rev. 20. 6. Blessed are
they, that have their part in the first resurrection, for on such the second
death has no power: now there be two resurrections; there is the rising of the
soul out of sin in this life, to newness and holiness of life; and the
rising of the body at the day of judgment to immortality and everlasting life:
therefore whosoever thou be, that do not labor to rise in thy soul out of
the grave of thy sins, to rise (I say) to repentance, and a turning to God in
the care of an holy life, then thy body shall not be raised to immortality,
and life everlasting; but if thou labor to rise out of thy grave of sin and
wickedness to a holy life, then as Christ did rise, and afterward ascend, so
shall thou, but if thou do not, Christ shall ascend, and leave thee here;
nay, well it were if thou might remain in this life, but Christ shall
ascend to heaven, and thou shall go to hell; and therefore let every one
labor to rise out of his sins here in this life, that he may ascend with
Christ into heaven. There be a number of people in the world think to ascend
to heaven, and go to God, but if they do not rise out of their sins, but
continue in them still, they are like to perish in them. Heb. 11. 5. It is
said, By faith Enoch was translated that he might not see death, and was not
found, because God had translated him: for before his translation, he was
reported of that he pleased God: so labor thou to please God in a good course,
and walk with him, so far forth as frailty will permit, and then when thou
parts from this world, thou shall be sure to go to God.

The second circumstance is, 2
that it was forty days after he rose, as it is, Act. 1. 3. Christ had right
to heaven so soon as he rose, but for the good of his Church, and of his
Disciples, he was content to tarry from it for a time; which must teach us to
be content to tarry from heaven for a time, for the good of them amongst whom
we live; so we see Paul did, as it is Phil. 3. Nevertheless to abide in the
flesh is more needful for you: and having this confidence, I know, that I shall
abide and continue with you all for your furtherance and joy of says: so 2
King. 20. 2. it is said of Hezekiah, Then ^e turned his face to the wall and
prayed: Why did Hezekiah weep and pray to the Lord that he might live? I
answer, not that he was afraid of death, but he desired to live for the good
of the Church because Religion and the worship of God was in danger, which he
desired to establish: as Martin a bishop in France when he came to dye, for the
good of the Church desired to turn into the world again. Now these examples
may serve to make us contented to tarry out of heaven for a time for the good
of others: if Christ tarried forty days for the good of the Church, much more
should we be contented to leave places of honor, and of preferment for the
good of the Church; for there be too many men that will not step one foot from
their preferment for the good of their brethren, as Nehem. 5. he lays it as a
great fault on the rich men, that they would not ease their poor brethren; and
there is a curse denounced against such, Judge. 5. 23. Curse ye Meroz, says
the Angel of the Lord, curse the inhabitants thereof, because they came not
out to help the Lord against the mighty; unto which many are now liable, who
will hazard nothing for the love of Christ.

The third circumstance is, that, before Christ ascended, he gave a change and
a commandment to his Disciples; as we may read, 3
Act. 1. 2. Until the day in which he was taken up after that he through the
holy Ghost, had given commandment unto the Apostles whom he had chosen. And
what was the charge he gave them? It was concerning the kingdom of God,
religion and the worship of God; which may teach us before we ascend, and
death take us away, we must give charge to our children, to our servants, and
to those which do concern us, touching Religion, and the worship of God, that
they be faithful in the covenant of God, when we be dead and gone; and then
we may comfortably ascend to heaven* so we see David did, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. when
he came to dye he gave a charge and a commandment to his son Solomon, says
he, And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him
with a perfect heart; and with a willing mind, for the Lord searches all
hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: If thou seek
him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cost thee off
for ever: so likewise Moses did Numb. 27. 18. And the Lord said unto Moses,
Take thee Joshua the son of Nun a man in whom is the Spirit, and put thy hand
upon him, and set him before Eleazer the Priest, and before all the
congregation, and give him a charge in their sight: so every governor, and
every master and father should give charge and commandment concerning Religion
and the worship of God to those which do concern them, that they may be
faithful in the covenant, and hold out Religion when they be dead and gone;
and then they may comfortably ascend as Christ did.

Thirdly, Thirdly, the place where he ascended.
The place from whence he ascended: now in every motion, there is the place
from whence they go, and the place whither they go, the place a quo, from
whence Christ ascended was Bethanie, 1
as Saint Luke 24. 50* The mount of Olives, as it is Act. 1. which was the
place, whence a little before he went to his Passion, it was the place where he
sweat water and blood, and where he was apprehended; yet here it is said, to
be the place from which he ascended to heaven; which may teach us, that i^
we be faithful and walk carefully and conscionably before God, the places
that he places of trouble and of torment to us, he will make them Mount Olives,
places of comfort; and therefore do thou lie on thy sick bed, art thou
troubled with pain and sickness, and have been many years together, be
faith fall and God can make thy sick bed Bethania, to thee, a place to ascend
to heaven from; and so likewise art thou in prison or in any other base place,
be faithful and of good comfort, the Lord can make it like the Mount Olives,
a place to ascend to heaven from; do thou dwell in a poor cottage and a
smoaky house, be of good comfort, God can make this a means to ascend to
heaven by and go to God.

Secondly, 2
the place ad quem, whither he ascended, and that is into heaven, so the Angels
say, Act. 1. 11. Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing into heaven, this
same Jesus which is taken from you into heaven, shall so come* as ye have
seen him go to heaven: so again, Peter says of him, Act. 3. 21. Whom the
heavens must contain, until the time that all things be restored: and Paul,
Heb. 9. 24. He is gone to appear in the presence of God for us: so it is
clear by all these Scriptures, that Christ is gone to heaven. Now if he be
gone to heaven, then it is in vain to seek him here in this world: The
Papists say, that the bread in the Sacrament after the words of consecration
are turned into the body of Christ, nay into the very flesh as he was borne of
the virgin Mary, now then if we ask the Papists where is Christ, they will be
ready to say in such a Church and such a Church, or he is between such a
Priests fingers; but ask the faith of a Christian professor where he is, and
that will tell you that he is ascended into heaven, and therefore to avoid
this Doctrine of the Papists in all likelihood it is that our Savior says,
Matthew. 24. 23. If any man shall say unto you, here is Christ or there is
Christ, believe him not; do not go after them, for Christ is ascended into
heaven, whither seeing Christ is ascended, let us gather after him, and
although our bodies cannot yet ascend, yet let our hearts and minds; and as
the Disciples did follow him with their eyes, till a cloud came and took him
up out of their sight; so let us follow him with our hearts and minds, till we
be in his sight.

Fourthly, The manner of this ascension; Luke 24. 50. He lifted up his hands
upon them and blessed them, Fourthly, the manner of his Ascension.
this was the last farewell he did not leave unto his Disciples houses and
lands, castles and manors, but he left them his blessing, as the best portion;
which must teach us when we are to depart this world, 1
though we cannot leave lands and livings to our children, yet let us leave
Gods blessings behind us, the knowledge of God, the hatred of sin, the love
of virtue, conscience to walk with God: as Genesis 28. 3. when Rebeccah sent her
son Iaakob for a wife, though his father was rich, yet he was to the eye of the
world but meanly provided, having for his journey only a staff in one hand
and a bottle of oil in the other, but together with them he had his fathers
blessings and Gods blessing laid up in it; and with these his mother thought
him better furnished than his rich brother Esau with all his wealth: so let a
poor man leave Gods blessings to his childn, and then he shall have the best
portion that can befall him. Now by the virtue of this blessing the Apostles
passed through many troubles, and were fenced with it against all the hard
dealings of this ungrateful world, for they cared not who cursed them, so God
blessed them, nor who hated them, so God loved them; so if we get Gods
blessing, if that be upon us, then we are ^enced against all the hard dealings
of the world.

I, Object.
but some man m^^ s^y, how shall I be partaker of this blessing of Christ? O,
that I had lived at that time, and had been amongst the Disciples! Sol.
To this I answer, David tells us who be the persons, and how we may have this
blessing, Psalm. 24. 4. Even he that has innocent hands, and a pure heart,
which has not lift up his soul to vanity, nor sworn deceitfully; be shall
receive a blessing from God: so then labor to be an innocent man, and to have
a pure heart, do not drink in the sins of the age thou live in; and thou
shall be the man that shall be blessed; and though thou be not blessed in the
sight of others in this world, yet thou shall be pronounced blessed at the day
of Judgment, even that mouth that shall curse the wicked, and drive them to
hell, shall bless thee; and say, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the
kingdom prepared for you.

Secondly it is said, 2
While he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up to heaven
(that is) he went by little and little, not suddenly, as he went from the two
Disciples that went to Emmaus: but here he went leasurely, by little, and by
little, till he was taken up, till a cloud came and took him up out of their
sight, after which manner he shall come again. And so say the Angels Act. 1.
and therefore so often as we look upon the clouds, we may think that the
same chariots shall bring Christ again, howsoever they do now bring us snow,
and rain, and hail, and wind, yet they shall be the chariots to bring Christ
to Judgment, at the last day. But the enlargement hereof we defer till the
next time.

SERMON XXXVIII.
LVKE. 24. 50, 51. And he led them out as far as to Bethanie, and he lift up
his hands, and blessed them. And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he
was parted from them, and carried up into heaven.
HAving before spoken of the Reasons why it was needful that Christ should
ascend, and of the Time when he ascended, and also ( a quo) of the place whence
he ascended, and that was Bethania, and ( ad quem) whither he ascended, and
that was to Heaven. As also we began to speak of the manner of his ascension;
and therein we first observed that at his ascension, He lift up his hands and
blessed them, which was his last farewell to the Church, and to his Disciples;
we read Genesis 27. 33. what Isaac said, Iaakob have I blessed, and he shall be
blessed; so Christ will say to his servants and people, I have blessed them,
and they shall be blessed: For if Christ's ^^essing be upon us, we are fenced
against all the unkindnesse of this ungrateful world; if a father give a
bitter cup to drink into his sons hands, he will put a little sugar to
allay the bitterness of it; Simile.
so though the Lord give us a bitter cup to drink of troubles and afflictions
in this world, yet therewithal he gives us a little sugar to allay the
bitterness of it, the comfort of his Spirit, the pardon of our sins, and the
feeling of his favor.

I, Quest.
but some man may say, may every man have this blessing of Christ? I answer,
No, for as Jacob said to his mother, when he went to get the blessing from his
brother Esau, Sol.
It may be that my father will feel me and handle me, and then if I be found
to be a deceiver, I shall bring a curse upon me instead of a blessing: so
Christ will handle us, Simile.
and feel us as it were, to see if we be right children, if we be not, we
cannot have his blessing, for it belongs to none but children adopted by his
grace and mercy: Some will be ready to say, how may this blessing come upon me?
would I had been amongst the Disciples when Christ was upon the earth. I will
not answer thee, but God shall, SERMON. XXXVIII
by the mouth of the Prophet David, declaring who shall obtain this blessing,
Psalm. 24. 14. Even he that has clean hands and a pure heart, which has not
lift up his soul to vanity, nor sworn deceitfully, he shall receive the
blessing from God: he that is a harmless man and does not wrong or injury to
his neighbor; he that does not drink in the sins of the age he lives in,
he that does not lift up his mind to vanity (for there is a great deal of
vanity in man, vanity in the speech, vanity in apparel) this is the man that
shall receive this blessing from God, and he shall not only be blessed in
this world, but be pronounced also blessed at the great assembly, when heaven
and earth and hell shall meet together before God and all the blessed Angels
and holy men, even by that sweet mouth of Christ which shall chase and drive
thousands to hell, and shall curse the wicked, but shall say to such, Come ye
blessed my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning;
therefore labor thou whosoever thou art to be thus blessed of Christ, and then
thou art fenced against all the injuries and wrongs that this world does afford
us.

Secondly, we did observe in the Manner of Christ's ascension, that when he
departed he went not suddenly away from them, as he did from the Disciples
that went to Emmaus, but he departed by little and little leasurely, till a
cloud came and took him out of their sight. Now in several ages there were
some that ascended, as Henoch in the time of Nature, Elias in the time of the
Law, and Christ in the time of the Gospel; To teach us that heaven is the
house prepared for the faithful in all ages.

But there was great difference in their ascensions; Differences betwixt the
Ascension of Christ and others.
Others ascended by means, as we may see in the 2 Kin. 2. 12. Elias was carried
up in a fiery chariot; but Christ did ascend by His own power and virtue,
without the help of any; and so in Luke 1
16. 22. When Lazarus was dead, he was carried of the Angels into heaven; But
Christ ascended by his own power, which may teach us, that al others have need
of help to ascend to heaven, but Christ had none.

Secondly, Others ascended before death ceased on them, as Elias; but Christ
ascended after he was killed and crucified and put into the grave; hence we
learn, all the people of God shall rise and ascend; but first death must kill
them, and they must be laid into the grave, and then they shall rise and after
that ascend; as Revel. 11. 9. it is said, That the bodies of the two Prophets
lay in the streets three days and an half, and after life came into them
again, and the world wondered at it; and ver. 12. it is showed how they rose,
That they heard a voice from heaven, saying, Come up hither, and they ascended
up to heaven in a cloud. in like manner, labor thou to be joined with Christ,
and as Christ ascended, so shall thou ascend.

Thirdly, 2
Others went only themselves to heaven, but made no way for any body else, but
when Christ ascended, he made way for others to ascend and follow him: he did
not as Lot, Genesis 19. who when he had taken in the angel, shut the door; but
Christ when he entered into heaven, left the door open for others to enter in;
so it is said, Heb. 10. 20. He entered by the new and living way, which he
prepared for us, through the veil, that is, his flesh; even by the veil of
his flesh has he dedicated a way for us to heaven, therefore Chrysostom says
well, Christ has entered into heaven at the narrow hole of his passions, and
has left a broad door for his members to follow.

Fourthly, Others when they were ascended could do nothing there, though they
could work miracles on earth but Christ being ascended, 4
is as powerful to administer to his people in this kingdom, as if he were
with them in this world; for Act. 2. 33. he being ascended, sent down the
gifts and graces of his spirit upon his Disciples: others being ascended can
do nothing, their power being confined to the place where they be, but Christ
being ascended, as is powerful here as if he were present.

Fifthly, 5
Others went away on a sudden, as we see 2 King. 2. that Elias ascended in a
Whirlewind; but Christ ascended by little and little, by degrees, till a cloud
came and took him out of their sight.

Now there be two reasons why Christ did not ascend into heaven suddenly, but
by little and little: Two reasons why Christ ascended to heaven leasurely.
first, that they might sensibly see he had left this world and was ascended
into heaven, therefore we should not look for him here: 1
it behooves the Church to know that Christ is ascended into heaven and that
for their good, to prepare a place for them, to send down the gifts and graces
of his spirit: so Ioh. 6. we may see the Disciples when Christ told them that
he should go away from them, sorrowed and mourned for it; I, but when they did
consider that he was ascended for their good, to prepare a place for them, and
to hold the possession of heaven till they were ready, and to send the holy
spirit into their hearts, this was a great matter of joy and comfort to make
them glad.

Secondly, 2
to take away an error in the world, that many an one thinks he shall go to
heaven in a whirlwind, out of the midst of their sins and of their
profaneness: nay, look on Christ, he ascended by little and little, and
made many ascensions before he came at heaven, so must thou do, and therefore
thou must not think to go in a whirlwind into heaven, out of the midst of
thy lusts and of thy sins, but thou must make many ascensions every day in
thy care zeal, faith and thy repentance: It is Christ's speech, Can. 3. Who is
this that ascends up out of the wilderness, perfumed with myrrh, etc. so the
people of God ascend up leasurely till God receive them, Simile.
as S. Jerome says, speaking of the 42. journies of the children of Israel to
the land of Canaan; so we must not think to go to heaven with ease, but it
will cost many a journey, and a Christian must be every day rising in his care,
in his zeal, in his faith, in his repentance and in his love, till at last he
come at heaven gates.

Thirdly, Thirdly, the manner.
A cloud came and took him out of their sight; so Saint Luke says, Act. 1. 9.
And when he had spoken these things whilst they beheld him he was taken up,
for a cloud took him out of their sight, that is, it came under the foot of
Christ and so did cover him: and as he went away in a cloud, so He shall come
again at the day of judgment, so the Angels said: the Prophet Dan. 7. 13.
says, I beheld in a vision by night, and behold, one like to the Son of man
came in the clouds of heaven: so Mat. 24. 30. And then shall appear the sign
of the Son of man in heaven, and then shall all the hindreds of the earth
mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven.

Now the use of this point is, Use
that seeing Christ ascended by a cloud into heaven, and as he ascended, so
will come to judgment, therefore so often as we look on the clouds, we may
consider that these be the chariots that shall bring Christ to judgment,
however they now bring us wind and rain, and snow, and hail: as Genes. 45.
24. When Iaakob saw the Chariots that Joseph had sent for him, his Spirit
revived again: so when we look on the Chariots that shall bring Christ to
judgment, our hearts will or should revive; therefore so often as we cast up
our eyes to Heaven, we should think of this.

Now we will come to speak of the fifth point, Fifthly, the benefit we receive
by Christ's ascension.
the use and benefit we should make of Christ's ascension: and I would I had an
hundred tongues to speak, and that I had the words of motion, that I might
make you feel and see the excellent things that God does offer unto us by the
Ascension of Christ.

First, The ascension of Christ must cause a spiritual assension in us; for as
the body of Christ did ascend to Heaven, 1
so our hearts and minds and affections must ascend; and although our bodies be
here, yet our hearts and minds and affections must be in Heaven: so says
Paul, Colos. 3. 1. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things that be
above where Christ is; as if he should say, Christ is in Heaven; let not your
hearts therefore and your minds be on the Earth, but let them ascend to
Heaven: so it is said Philip. 3. But our conversation is in Heaven. There be a
number of men in the world that grovell on the ground, their hearts be glued
and tied to the world: Oh but a Christian man whiles he is in this world, he
must have his conversation in Heaven by living justly, and holily in this
world; Therefore, whilst we live here our hearts and minds must ascend to
Heaven, because our souls shall not ascend till the day of death: Nay, if our
souls do not ascend whiles we live here, our bodies shall not ascend at the
day of judgment, for every man must begin his Heaven here; therefore Christ's
ascension must cause a Spiritual ascension in us. But what shall we say of
such men, as for their lives cannot lift up their hearts and their minds to
Heaven? we may say as God says to Ad^m, Genesis 3. Earth thou art, and to Earth
thou shall return; Dust thou art, and to Dust thou shall return: Nay, it were
well with them if they might return to Earth, but they shall go both soul
and body to Hell without repentance, and therefore labor to ascend in thy
heart and affections whilst thou live here; pitiful is the state of these
men* I, but what shall then the people of God do when they cannot feel their
hearts to ascend? they may say, O Lord Jesus, thou art ascended, and I am
grubbling on the Earth; therefore I will pray as the Prophet David does, Psalm.
119. Lord quicken me and raise me, that I may ascend in my heart, mind and
affections, while I live here.

Now the rules to know whether we be ascended with Christ in the holiness of
our lives, How to know whether we ascend or not.
and conversations here on Earth, that so we may ascend to him hereafter in
glory, are chiefly these two:

1. By an Opticke rule, a rule of humane learning. 2. By a rule of Scripture.
First, 1
By a rule of humane learning, or an Opticke rule; In all ascensions the higher
a man goes, Trial.
the greater the things above seem to be, and the things below seem the
lesser: As for example, if a man go to the top of an high Castle, the things
above seem great, and the things beneath seem small if he look down; I,
but if he go up to the Mountains, then the Castle seems small or lesser, but
if it were possible that he could go up as high as the Sun, Simile.
or the Moon or Stars, how great would the Stars and Spheres, and the
amplitude of Heaven appear to be, when as this Earth would hardly be seen
thither, and if seen, would it seem scarce so big as a little Moule-hill: so
it is in our spiritual ascension, the nearer we come to Heaven, the greater
Heavenly things seem to be, and the further we go from these worldly things,
the lesser and lesser will they seem to us; and therefore the pardon of thy
sins, and the favor of God, and the hope of Heaven, are these great in thine
eyes, and the things of this life like little motes flying in the Sun? be of
good comfort thou art ascended: but if the things of this life be great in
thine eyes, and the things of Heaven small, then thou art not ascended as yet.
And thus by this rule we may give a true judgment of our selves.

Secondly, 2
A rule of Scripture: Ephesians. 4. 9. it is said, He that ascended, is the same
that did descend first into the lower parts of the Earth: Trial.
So by S. Paul's rule, before there can be an ascension to Heaven, they must
first descend, and that to the lower parts: Paul's words be plain, that a man
must first descend before he can ascend: and therefore every man must consider
with himself, whether he has descended into the lower parts, whether he has
been cast down with the burden of his sins, in the sense and feeling of
them, and that he has been brought as low as Hell, and the Grave, and into
the Dungeon of GODS wrath and displeasure, if thus then thou have ascended; but
if thou have not descended into Hell, and as low as the Grave in the sense and
feeling of thy sins; If thou have not been in the dungeon of Gods wrath and
displeasure, then thy ascension is yet to come. I have showed you heretofore,
Simile.
that a man that would bring water to the top of an high Castle or Tower, he
first makes it fall exceeding low: so every man that would ascend, he must
first descend, and come down low in the sense and feeling of his own sins,
and then he is fit to ascend: Therefore, look into thy own self, and
consider whither thou have descended, and have been brought low in the sense
and feeling of thy own sins: If thou have, thou have ascended; but if not,
thy ascension is yet to come. David begins one Psalm with De profu^dis,
Psalm. 130. Out of the deep places have I called unto the Lord: so we must be
brought to call to God out of the deepes.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing Christ is ascended into Heaven, Let us be willing to go to Christ as
soon as may be; Simile.
we see in nature that all the members will have recourse to the head, because
that gives life and motion to the rest of the members; so because Christ our
Head is gone before to Heaven, we should be willing to ascend to him: we know
and have often heard how willing old Jacob was to go into Egypt; his spirit
revived when he saw the Chariots of his son Joseph came for him; Simile.
so we should be willing to leave all, and to ascend to Heaven, and how should
our spirits revive, when we see the chariots of death come for us? But yet
there must be a moderation this way, for as a good servant will not go away
till he have a discharge from his master, though he long for the time of his
freedom, and look to the shore of the Sea to see when the Ship would come to
carry him away, and think every day seven, Simile.
and every year seven till the time come, yet he goes not before his master
calls: so it should be with a Christian, though he be willing to go to God,
and to leave all, yet He must not take down the Tent himself, but he must
tarry till the Lord give him a discharge, and then think every day seven
days, and every year seven years till the time come; and when it is come, he
must willingly go to Christ. It is an infinite wonder notwithstanding all the
happiness men shall enjoy by ascending with Christ, that they cannot by any
persuasions be induced to forsake and leave off this hanging on the world; I
do not mean, only when God would have them to live, but even when men lie on
their sick beds and are ready to depart this World.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing Christ is ascended, we must labor to feel the virtue and Power of
Christ's ascension; there be many that can talk and tell long stories of it,
but this is nothing, unless they can find the virtue and power of it. Phil. 3.
9, 10. says Paul, I desire that I may be found in him, and that I may know him
and the virtue of his resurrection, etc. So we must desire that we may feel
the Power of Christ's ascension; as Psalm. 68. 18. It is said that when Christ
ascended up on high, he led captivity captive; that is, (as ye heard before)
that when he ascended, he did triumph overall our spiritual enemies, and
they were bound and tied to the triumphant Chariot of Christ in fetters and
chains like slaves. Now everyman must feel this triumph and conquest in
himself; therefore, do thou feel the Devil to be bound, and Hell to be
stopped; Death to be weakened, and the power of thy lusts and sins abated;
then thou do truly feel the virtue and the power of Christ's ascension; but
if thou do not feel the Devil to be bound, Hell stopped, Death to be
weakened, and thy lusts and corruptions to be abated, then have thou no virtue
by Christ's ascension. Saint Bernard says well, If thou do not feel the
virtue and power of Christ's ascension, he is not ascended for thee, thou shall
have no good, nor be a penny the better for it; therefore let every man labor
to find the virtue and the power of Christ's ascension in himself; as Hell to
be stopped, Death to be weakened, and Sin to be abated, and then he may have
comfort by Christ's ascension.

Now there is another virtue we must find by Christ's ascension, spoken of
Psalm. 2
68. 18. at his ascension He gave gifts to man, and what gifts were they?
Gifts of Christ's Ascension.
of two sorts: First, Royal gifts; and Secondly, Personal gifts: Personal
gifts be such as Teachers and Preachers have: Royal gifts be such as be in a
Christian, as Knowledge, Spiritual wisdom, Understanding, Faith, Repentance,
Love, Zeal, and the gift of Prayer: Therefore have thou knowledge, spiritual
wisdom, understanding, faith and repentance? have thou love and zeal? and
have thou a gift in Prayer? Then thou do feel of the virtue and power of
Christ's ascension; but if thou be an ignorant and a blockish man, and have no
knowledge or understanding, no faith or repentance, no gift in prayer, then
thou art not one penny the better by Christ's ascension, neither can thou
have any comfort in it.

Fourthly, Use 4.
seeing Christ is ascended, what must we do till he come again to us: the
Papists tell us we must have an Image or a picture of him, and must keep it
to put us in mind of him, till he come again: but this is against the second
Commandment: And 2 Corinthians. 5. 16. the Apostle Paul tells us, that we should
no more know Christ after the flesh, says he, yea though we had known Christ
after the flesh, yet now henceforth we know him no more; so that this is not
the way the Papists tell us, to have an image or a crucifixe of Christ: But
there is another way, for the Lord has left us the glass of the Gospel; as 1 Corinthians. 13. 12. But now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face:
Therefore we must look well into this glass, for there we shall see Christ
borne in a Stable, and laid in a Manger, praying on the Mount, bleeding in the
Garden, hanging on the Cross, laid into the Grave, and rising from Death, and
gloriously ascending into Heaven: Therefore we must not do as the Papists
tell us, but we must keep us to this glass, hold us to it, and look into it,
and at last Jesus will come and join himself to us, nay, he will stand by us,
and transport our bodies, and make them like to his glorious body. Now the next
uses are uses of Comfort.

First, Uses of Comfort.
that seeing Christ is ascended into Heaven, this may give us comfort, 1
that one day we shall rise and ascend also; for He is our pawn and pledge,
and has taken possession of heaven for us: which is a great comfort to a
Christian, that where Christ is, there he shall be also, as Christ says,
Ioh. 14. 3. I go to prepare a place for you, and I will come again unto you,
and take you unto my self, that where I am, there you may be also; therefore
seeing Christ is in heaven, he will draw all his members after him: so Ioh. 17.
in that sweet prayer that Christ makes, he says, Father, I will that they
which thou have given me, may be with me, even where I am, that they may behold
my glory: Tertullian says well, Christ the Mediator of God, and man has taken
the pawn of our flesh, and has carried it into heaven, and has left us the
pawn of his Spirit; therefore now flesh and blood be secure in Christ: and
Athanasius says, God has repealed this heavy sentence, Earth thou art, and to
earth thou shall return again, dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall
return again; for Christ has carried thy flesh into heaven, and has taken
possession of it, and holds it till thou art ready: therefore let not a
Christian be afraid of the troubles and afflictions that he meets with in this
world, for as Christ is ascended, so one day he shall ascend when the time
comes: this is a sweet comfort to a poor Christian when he lies on his sick
bed, when he meets with many troubles and afflictions in this world; unto whom
I may say, as Christ said to the Church of Smyrna, Encouragement against the
Cross.
Revel. 2. 10. Fear none of these things that thou shall suffer; even so I may
say, fear none of these things that thou shall suffer, fear not trouble,
affliction, sickness, death, nor any thing: Art thou a poor man, and do
thou want a house to dwell in? why Heaven is thy house: do thou want friends?
God is thy friend, and all the Angels and Saints: do thou want comfort? God
will be thy comfort, and therefore be not afraid of trouble, nor of death,
but be like the five wise Virgins that had their lamps ready burning, and
their loins girt, ready to enter into their Masters joy.

Secondly, The second use of Comfort.
seeing Christ is ascended into Heaven, our salvation is the nearer to him: we
see in nature as long as the head is above the water, the body cannot be
drowned; in like manner so long as our Head is safe in Heaven, Simile.
he will save all his members. To this effect Paul says, Ephesians. 2. 6. That he
has set us together in heavenly places: and how has he set us together in
heavenly places, not in our own persons, but in the Person of Christ, he holds
it, and he will one day faithfully deliver it into our hands.

Thirdly, The third Use.
seeing Christ is ascended, we may be bold in the time of our need, trouble
and affliction, to go to God in Prayer, and may have comfort that Christ will
hear us, and that we shall be regarded: This is the use Saint Paul makes of
it, Heb. 4. 14. where he says, Seeing we have a great high Priest, which is
entered into Heaven even Jesus Christ the Son of God, Let us go boldly to the
Throne of Grace, that we may find mercy, and receive grace to help in the
time of need: So chapter 10. 19. says he, Seeing therefore Brethren, that by
the blood of Christ we may be bold to enter into the holy places by the new
and living way, which he has prepared for us through the veil, that is, his
flesh, let us draw near, etc. If a man had a great suit at Court, and did know
no body there, Simile.
a man may look for small comfort when he comes thither: but if he knew that
the Kings son would be ready to speak for him to his father, and to grace
him before all the company, this will give him comfort; so if we go to God as
to a Stranger, then we can look but for cold comfort: I, but if we know that
Christ will speak for us to God, grace us and bring us into favor with him,
this may comfort us, and make us with boldness go to the Throne of Grace.
There was great difference betwixt the time when Joseph's brethren knew him, and
when they knew him not, Simile.
for when Joseph would not acknowledge them for his brethren, he handled them
roughly, and took them for Spies; but when he did acknowledge them to be his
brethren, then he did kindly entertain them, and did fill their sackes with
corn, that they might be preserved till they came into Egypt; so there is
great difference when we be strangers, and when Christ does acknowledge us,
for when he knows us, he will speak to God for us, and grace us, will fill
our sackes with the best of Heaven; therefore the true Christian may have great
comfort to go to God in Prayer in the time of his need, and he shall be heard
and regarded of God.

SERMON XXXIX.
MARK 16. 19. So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, He was received up
into Heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.
AS in the climbing of a Tree a man will catch hold of the upper boughs,
Simile.
and so will go higher and higher till he come at the top: so we must do
in the rising of Christ, we must rise in our affections as he rises, and
therefore having followed him in two degrees of his exaltation, his
resurrection from the Dead, and ascension into Heaven: we will proceed now
unto the third, which is his Session at the right hand of God; as if we were
got within the veil, to see Jesus Christ sitting at the right hand of his
Father in glory and majesty: Simile.
as Cantic. 3. 11. The daughters of Sion are called out to behold king Solomon
crowned with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his
Espousalls, and in the day of the gladness of his heart: So I may say, come
forth all ye people of the land, out of your houses, and out of your Towns
and places where ye dwell, and behold Jesus Christ the true Solomon, fitting
at the right hand of God, crowned with honor and glory, so that when others
shall ask ye, what ye went out to see? as Christ asked the people; ye may say
and answer again, we went to see Christ crowned with honor and glory, Heb.
2. 8. Thus John 20. 25. the Disciples tell Thomas, as a matter of great joy,
that they had seen the Lord, and yet they had seen him, but rising out of the
grave and out of the den of death; therefore much more should we be glad and
rejoice that we have seen the Lord, not rising out of the Grave, or out of
the dens of death, but sitting at the right hand of God, for the good of the
Church; And therefore I say, good Brethren stir up your selves to behold Christ
within the veil, sitting at the right hand of God for the good of the Church.
Now in speaking hereof we will observe five things.

1. What is meant by the right hand of God. 2. What it is to sit at the right
hand of God. 3. SERMON XXXIX.
Why he is said to sit, and not to stand. 4. To what end he sits at Gods right
hand. 5. The fruits and benefits we have by his sitting at Gods right hand.
First, 1
what is meant by the right hand of God: To speak properly, God has neither
right hand, First, what is meant by Gods Right hand.
nor left hand, for he is a spirit, as it is, John 4. 24. Therefore seeing he
is a Spirit, he has no bodily parts nor dimensions, and therefore neither
right hand nor left; but it is a borrowed speech taken from the manner of Kings
and Princes, who are wont to advance their favorites next to their selves in
any office or dignity. Augustine says well, If it be a wicked thing to make an
image or a picture of God, to make him like an old man with hands and feet,
and to set it up in a Church, or a Temple, seeing God is a Spirit; much more
(says he) is it a vilde thing to frame an Image of him in a man's heart, seeing
it is a Temple for God and his Spirit to dwell in. Now the right hand of God is
taken in three senses in Scripture:

First, Three several acceptions of right hand in Scripture.
the right hand of God does signify his power; because the chiefest power and
strength of a man lies in his right hand, for by this right hand he does work
and bring things to pass; so by the right hand of God, 1
is meant the power of God, by the which he is able to do whatsoever he will:
So Exodus 15. The right hand of God is glorious in power, the right hand of the
Lord has bruised the enemies; and Psalm. 118. 15. The right hand of God is
taken for the Power of God; but it cannot so be understood in this place,
because the power of God is in all places, but the humanity of Christ is
confined to one place only, therefore this cannot be the true sense; indeed,
it is said, Matthew. 26. 64. Nevertheless, ye shall see the Son of Man sitting
at the right hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds: the meaning whereof is
expressed afterward, chap. 28. 18. that all power and authority is given unto
him of God.

Secondly, The second acception.
the Right hand of God is taken for The goodness and glory of beaven and
happiness, as Psalm. 16. 11. At thy right hand are pleasures for evermore: but
it cannot be so taken in this place, for though it be true that Christ is
blessed in the kingdom of heaven, in joy and happiness, yet this is common to
all the Angels and Saints, for they enjoy all the pleasures in heaven; but to
sit at the right hand of God is peculiar to Christ only: as it is Heb. 1. 13.
To which of his Angels, said he, at any time, Sit at my right hand till I make
thine enemies thy footstool.

Thirdly, The third sense.
the right hand of God, is taken for the Next place to God in dignity and
honor, Rule and government: It is the manner of Kings and Princes when they do
advance any to office next themselves, to set them at their right hand, as 2
King. 19. Solomon caused a seat to be set for the Kings mother, and set her at
his right hand: And Psalm. 45. 9. it is said, Upon thy right hand did sit the
Queen in a garment of gold: so to sit at the right hand of God, is to be in
the next place to God in Dignity and Honor, in Rule and Government. And this
is here meant; for this sitting at the right hand of God, is nothing else but
a dignity and honor given him of the Father whereby he is endued with a power
to rule and govern all things immediately both in heaven and earth.

Secondly, How Christ is said to sit at the Right hand of God.
how he is said to sit at the Right hand of God, and that is because he is in
the highest place next to God in dignity and honor, administration and
government of this whole world, and also particularly of the Church of God: so
to sit at the Right hand of God implies two things.

First, The first meaning.
That Christ is in the next place to God in dignity and honor; as Phil. 2. 9.
says the Apostle, Wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given a name unto
him above all names, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow of both
things in heaven and things in earth and things under the earth; which is to
be understood not only of the outward gesture and reverence to be used at
the Name of Jesus; but chiefly of the internal sovereignty and authority of
Jesus; because he should set his throne above all thrones, in that all powers
shall be subject to him both in heaven and earth, and so all knees shall bow
unto him.

Secondly, The second meaning.
That he is in Rule and Government in the highest place next to God: Ephesians. 1.
20, 21. it is said, That God has set him at his Right hand in heavenly places,
far above all principality and power and might and dominion and every name
that is named, not in this world only, but also in that which is to come; and
has made all things subject under his feet, and has appointed him over all
things to be the head to the Church. These be the two things employed in his
sitting at the Right hand of God: whence we are to take notice of two things.

First, That Christ has enobled our nature, and has lifted it up above Angels
and Archangels: 1
therefore seeing Christ has thus dignified and enobled the nature of man, in
setting it above Angels and Archangels, what shall we answer to God, if we
abase it and bring it below the meanest of the creatures? I do not say, below
the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, which are constant in their motions and
courses, but below the dumb creatures, for they do moderate themselves in
their appetites, they will take no more meat and drink than will do them
good, and will be moderate in their sleep; therefore what shall we answer to
God for our excess. But I would to God we could stay here, Christ has lifted
up our nature above the Angels, and we imbase it and bring it below the devils;
for when men be ruled by the devil, they make themselves slaves to him, and
so bring themselves below the devil: as we see he could no sooner bid Adam
eat, but he did eat, and Caine kill his brother, but he kills him, and Judas
betray his Master, but he betrayed him; so he can no sooner bid men swear, but
they will swear, or lie, but they will lie, or profane the Sabbath, but they
will do it; therefore when men are thus ruled by him, what is it, but to make
themselves slaves to the devil? and then how shall men answer this injury and
wrong done to Christ: we read Prove. 31. 4. Bathsheba says to her son, Simile.
It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, to drink wine, nor for princes to drink
strong drink, lest they drink and forget the law: so is not for Christians to
swear, to lie, to deceive one another, to profane the Sabbaths, for Christ
has graced them, and therefore they must take heed they do not disgrace their
selves; Christ has innobled their nature and set it up above the Angels, and
therefore they must take heed they do not disgrace it by a sinful life.

Secondly, we are to take notice, that seeing Jesus Christ is in the next place
to God in administration and government, 2
so he is in honor not only next unto God, but also has all at his command,
he is the ruler and governor of this whole world, and therefore will govern
it for the good of the Church and of his people, and one day thou shall bless
God, and bow thy knees, and thank him, that he has put the government into
his hands. Romans 8. 24. it is said, that all things shall work together for the
best, or good of them that love him: the whole world shall wind and turn to
his good, Simile.
if a man be a friend to God, and love him: there be number of strange turnings
and motions in this world, all which shall turn and wind unto the good of the
Church: as in a clock there be some wheels turn one way, and some another
way, they being cross and contrary one to the other, and yet by the skillful
and cunning workman they turn all to one end, to make the clock go; so in
this world there be many strange turnings and motions, that seem to run
cross and contrary one to the other, yet by the skillful workman Jesus
Christ, all is carried to the good of the Church; therefore great is the
comfort that the Church may have by this: for what shall the Church do in the
time of trouble? run to Christ, and pray him to turn all to the good of
them, Simile.
because the government is in his hands. We see in experience when there is a
cunning Pilot set at the stearne of a ship, though it be tossed with the
waves, and troubled with winds, yet he will carry the ship safe into the
harbor; even so, as long as Jesus Christ is our Pilot and sits at the stern
of heaven, though there be many winds and waves beat on the ship; that is,
though there be many troubles and afflictions that do arise, yet he safely
brings both soul and body to the haven or harbor of rest. It is a good
meditation that the learned have out of Matthew. 8. Simile.
the Disciples were in a ship at sea, where arose a great tempest, so that the
waves beat on the ship, which was in danger, whilst Christ was asleep in the
ship. Then they cried to him and awaked him: and he arose and rebuked the
winds, and the sea, and there was a great calm: so (say they) the Church is
compared to a ship, and this world to the sea, the troubles and afflictions of
this life, to the winds and waves that beat upon the ship, and endanger it;
therefore we must do as the Disciples did, run to Christ, awake him by our
prayers, and stir him up by our repentance, and then he will arise and rebuke
the winds, and the sea, and there shall he a great calm: therefore in all the
troubles and rages of the world, we are to consider that Christ sits at the
right hand of God, and has the government of the people of the whole world,
and he will turn all to the good of his Church and people. Now the
consideration of this will make fear fly from thee, as the darkness does
from a candle.

Thirdly, Thirdly, why Christ is said to sit and not to stand at Gods right
hand.
why Christ is said to sit, and not to stand at the right hand of God. Of which
there be three reasons:

First, To show unto us that he has now finished the work of man's
redemption, and having done all, 1
he is set down at the right hand of God: this is that he would have the whole
world to see, that now man's redemption is finished and perfected: so Heb. 10.
12. But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sat down for
ever at the right hand of God. Now although Christ has wrought the redemption
of man, and is set at the right hand of God, yet we must not sit down too,
but seeing he has done his part, we must do our parts, though he be set, yet
we must not sit, but labor to lay hold on that which he has purchased, and
apply it to our selves; for, although Christ has purchased it, yet if we do
not apply it, Simile.
we shall be never the better for it. If a man lie bound hand and foot in a
deep dungeon, and a Iaylor come and set open the prison doors, bidding him
come to him, and he will take the Gives and Bolts off from his hands and feet,
and when he has done so, the Iaylor sits himself down with the keys in his
lap; now do you think though the Iaylor sits still, the prisoner will? no I
warrant you, but rather would labor to creep out of the stinking prison; so
seeing Christ has opened the prison doors, and has knocked off the Gives,
and the Bolts of sin, and is set down at the right hand of God with the
keys of hell, and of death, we must not sit down too, but apply our selves to
come out of our sins, and to lay hold on the mercy that is offered to us.

Secondly; 2
because there is a judiciarie Power committed unto Him, that is, a power of
judgment* he sits to arraigne men, and to give judgment and sentence against
them; and as earthly Judges sit to order and to determine of all things that
are done ^ so Ioh. 5. 22. it is said, The Father judgth no man, but has
committed all judgment to the Son; therefore because Christ holds a court of
judgment to judge the whole world, we must be careful to pass the whole
time of our life and dwelling here, in fear and holiness before God, because
He sits to judge us; and though we be not afraid of earthly Judges, yet let
us be afraid of the heavenly Judge, for howsoever men may shift the matter,
and blind an earthly Judge, yet they cannot blind the heavenly; therefore
every man must consider when he is drinking, deceiving, lying, swearing and the
like, that Christ will judge him for it.

Thirdly, because he is in the continual act of judgment, he is always on
the judgment seat, 3
always ready to administer judgment to the world; earthly Judges be not
always on the judgement-seate, but they have their vacation times out of
term, (as they say) that is, they have certain times of hearing: Simile.
O, but Christ is in the act of judgment, and on his charge continually; Moses
sat from morning till night to hear the people, but he was weary of that; but
Christ sits continually, and is never weary in the act of judgment. Hence we
may learn these good instructions following:

First, to comfort us in afflictions and crosses, that Christ is always ready
to wait and attend on the causes of his servants, Use 1.
and people; a man may come at an unseasonable time to men, as Luke 11. it is
said, the man came to his friend at midnight, and he was rebuked of his friend:
O, but we cannot come at any unseasonable time to Christ, he sits night and
day on the throne, and will be ready to hear us, therefore in all our
troubles this may give comfort.

Secondly, Use 2.
to strike terror into the hearts of men, and to make them afraid of sin,
and to offend him, because he sits on the throne still, and is ready to execute
judgment: Simile.
If a thief should steal, or cut a purse when the Judge is on the bench, he
in worthy to be hanged, sentence is ready to pass upon him presently; so
seeing Christ is on the bench, and in the act of judgment, if a man sin
against him, sentence is ready to be passed, he may presently have execution
done upon him: and indeed all the judgments that come from day to day upon us,
come from Christ; the executions be in the country, Simile.
but the writs, and sentences amongst us come from a higher court, from London:
so here in this world be all the executions, but the sentence and the writs
come from above, they come from the court of heaven.

Fourthly, Fourthly, to what end Christ sits at Gods right hand.
To what end Christ sits at the right hand of God: for two ends; first, To make
intercession for us, as Heb. 9. 24. For Christ is not entered into the holy
places made with hands, which are similitudes of the true Sanctuary, but is
entered into heaven to appear now in the sight of God for us. 1
We see in Samuel that Saul was angry with David many times, Simile.
and would have killed him, but still Jonathan interposed himself, and
labors to pacify his fathers anger; so God is angry with us many times, and
would kill us, but the true Jonathan Jesus Christ does interpose himself, and
labor to mitigate his anger by presenting his wounds and body before God;
therefore when we cannot lift up our voice to God, nor our hearts as we
should, yet Christ makes intercession; his body speaks, when we cannot speak;
and his blood cries, when we cannot cry: Now I shall not need to show you the
manner how Christ makes intercession for us, having spoken of it but a little
before; and therefore I will now proceed without any repetition to the second
end why Christ ascended.

Secondly, The second end what it is.
That he might more powerfully and more mightily administer and govern his
Church; for therefore God has exalted him that he may rule the whole world for
the good of the Church; as the people rejoiced exceedingly at the crowning of
Solomon, so we may much more rejoice that Christ is all in all, and that he
sits at the right hand of God for the good of the Church.

Now by four actions Christ does govern in his Church:

1 He draws people to himself. 2 He does guide and govern them. 3 He does
exercise them with crosses and troubles. 4 He does protect and defend them
against all their enemies.
First, He does draw people to himself.
He does draw and pull people unto himself and brings them to Faith and
Repentance, and an estate of grace, that they may be saved; so Christ says to
Jerusalem, Matthew. 23. 37. How often would I have gathered thy children
together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would
not? to the same effect also, Ioh. 11. 52. It was said of him, That he dyed
not for that nation only, but that he should gather together in one the
children of God which were scattered abroad: so then it is Christ that does
gather and draw us; there is not any man living that is able to draw himself
out of the kingdom of the devil, and pit of hell, into the kingdom of grace
and state of blessedness, it must be Christ only that must draw him.
therefore it is said in the Acts, that There were added to the Church daily
such as should be saved; so it was not they themselves that drew themselves
out, but it was Christ, by his Word and by his Spirit, that did draw them and
pull them out of their sins, and brought them to an estate of grace.

Now is there any man thus drawn out of his sins into an estate of grace,
let him know it is the hand of Christ, that did draw and gather him, Simile.
for Christ's sitting in heaven is as powerful to draw and pull men out of
their sins, as the Adamant is to draw Iron to it. Wherefore when men see
themselves thus drawn out of their sins, and pulled out of the kingdom of
the devil and pit of hell, they may say as Judas did, Ioh. 14. 22. What is the
cause thou show thy self to us, Simile.
and not unto the world? even so we must admire the goodness of Christ, and
say, Lord, what is the cause thou have pulled us out of the kingdom of the
devil, and pit of hell, and have brought us to an estate of grace, to Faith
and to Repentance; there was nothing in us Lord, but it was thy good pleasure
and mere mercy to do it. Now the means whereby he draws and pulls men unto
himself, is especially by the Preaching of the word and Gospel, Means of
drawing.
therefore Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 4. 12. he gave some to be Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
gathering together of the Saints, and for the work of the ministry, and for
the edification of the body of Christ, etc. so Esai. 53. 1. the Word of God is
called the Arm of God; because that even as men do draw and gather with their
arms things to themselves; Simile.
so the Lord does draw and gather men to himself by the preaching of the
Gospel; so it is the Arm of God to draw men out of the estate of damnation
into an estate of salvation, and out of the kingdom of the devil into the
kingdom of Christ: Hereof we may make these profitable Uses following:

First, seeing the preaching of the Gospel is the Arm of God to draw men unto
himself; Use.
therefore faithful Ministers must remember that they be the hand of Christ
to draw and to pull men out of their sins; Chrysostom compares Preachers to
a number of servants in a great shop, of whom, Simile.
some be in one place and some in another, yet all comes to the common box,
and is for the advantage of the master; so, says he, this world may be
compared to a shop, wherein some of the Preachers are in one place and some in
another, employed in preaching, and yet all must come to the common box, all
must turn to the advantage of our Lord and Master, they must not turn it to
themselves and to their own advantage, but they must labor to draw and to
pull men to God, because this is the ordinary means to draw them by.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing the preaching of the Word is the Arm of God to draw and pull men to
God, therefore we must hold us to the means, and keep close to them, that so
we may be brought to an estate of grace; to faith and repentance, and so to be
saved.

It may be objected, Object.
All come to the means, but all are not drawn and gathered to God, a number
hang in their sins still. I answer, though thou do not find thy self to
be drawn to God presently, Sol.
yet do not neglect, but come still, for if thou do despise it and come not
at it, then it is not possible that ever thou should be gathered and brought
into the state of grace, but if we come to the means, then we may have hope
that one day God will draw us unto himself, though not at the first hour of
the day, yet he may at the second; and if not at the second, yet at the sixth;
and if not at the sixth, yet at the last hour of the day: Therefore we must
wait on the means, and attend that till God give his blessing unto it. John 5.
we see a lame man came to the poole to be helped of his diseases, Simile.
and lay there a long time, for he was intercepted by one or other that did
step in before him, yet he continued still, because there was means of his
help, and at last Christ came and did help him: so when we come to the means,
to the preaching of the Word, and come a long time; and we see others catch
away the blessing, others are drawn to faith, and to repentance, and to an
estate of grace, and we are not; yet let us not tarry at home, for then we may
die in our sins, but let us come to the means, and wait and attend on it,
and then at last we shall find Gods blessing upon us.

Thirdly, seeing the preaching of the Gospel is the means to draw us to God,
Use 3.
every man must labor to feel this work of grace in himself; for if a man
hear never so often, if he be not gathered to God, and his heart brought
home, but lies still in his sins and corruptions, he can have little
comfort by preaching; therefore labor thou to be brought home to God, to
Repentance, to Faith, and to an estate of Grace by it. Simile.
We see in experience when the Hen clockes, the Chickins will run after her,
and gather under her wings: Now the Gospel is (as it were) the clock of
Christ, whereby he does call us, and therefore when he calls us by his
Clocking, let us run unto him and gather under his wings, that so we may be
covered in the time of danger. I have showed you heretofore when Jeremy was in
the Dungeon, there was one that did put down a cord to him, and cast in a few
rags, whereupon he caught hold and put the rags under his arms, Simile.
and so was pulled out; in like manner we all lie in the Dungeon of sin, by
the preaching of the Word, the Lord puts down a cord as it were to save us;
therefore it must be our wisdom to apply our selves to it, that so we may
be drawn out of our sins. This is the first Action.

Secondly, 2
when Christ has gathered a people to himself, he does not leave them at six
and sevens, Being drawn, he governs them.
but does govern and guide them to Eternal life; as Psalm. 48. 14. it is said,
For this God is our God for ever and ever, and he shall be our guide till the
day of our death: So Luke 1. 79. it is said, Christ came to give light to them
that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet into
the way of Peace: So he does not only draw and gather people to himself and
so leave them, but he does guide them by his Word, and by his Spirit, and
attends them, until he have brought them to Heaven and happiness. A goodly
figure we have of this in the Law, when the children of Israel were in the
wilderness of Arabia, and were traveling to the land of Canaan, they knew not
which way to take, yet the Lord sent them a Cloud by day, and a Pillar of fire
by night to conduct them till they came to Canaan; Now what is this but a
plain figure of our journey to Heaven? Simile.
For we are all passengers, and travelers to Heaven, and are to pass through
the wilderness of this World, wherein there are a number of by-pathes, and
dangerous places, where we are like to lose our selves, and therefore Christ
lest we should go astray and be in danger of losing, has left his Word and
Spirit to conduct and lead us to Heaven: this is a great comfortable mercy,
that Christ does not only draw men unto himself, but when he has gathered
them, he does govern and guide them by his Word and Spirit. We see it is not
enough for a father to set down his child in the way, ^imile.
but also takes him by the hand, and leads him in it, and when he is weary, he
recovers and rests him, and when he comes at a bridge, he carries him over* so
Christ does by us, for it is not enough for him to set us down in the way that
leads us to Heaven, but when we be in it, he takes us by the hand and leads
us, and when we be weary, he takes us up, and when we be fallen, he does
recover us; when we come to a bridge, that is, when we come to any hard
pinch, he carries us over: this is therefore our case, and of all the children
of God, and we must be contented to be governed and guided by him in all our
actions. It is the madness of the World to have Christ to be their Redeemer,
but they will not have him to be their Governor and Guide; which is the
reason why so many in the World miscarrie in their actions and their courses,
because they be not guided and governed by him; therefore every man must labor
to submit himself to the holy government of Christ. In the 73. Psalm. 24. the
Prophet David says, Thou will guide me with thy Counsel, and afterward
receive me to glory. Hence we may conclude, that if a man will not be guided
by Gods counsel whilst he lives here, he shall never be received to glory: as
also Acts 27. The Lord had given the lives of all them that were in the Ship to
Paul, if they did abide in it: And therefore when they were in danger, and
would have taken another course, Paul tells them, they cannot be saved, unless
they abide in the ship; so unless we abide in the true Ship Christ Jesus, and
be guided by his counsels whiles we live here, we cannot be saved: and this
is the second Action.

The third Action is, 3
That Christ does exercise his Church with diverse temptations and trials for
their good; he exercises of he Church with diverse tentations.
we see in standing waters that Toads and Frogs breed, but the Rivers carry
them away; even so when there is peace, then there are many vilde lusts and
sins breed in the heart of a Christian, Simile.
as we may see in David; and therefore God does exercise his Church with many
temptations and trials to scowre away the rust of their sins: as Matthew. 8.
23. When he had called his Disciples, he went into a Ship with them, Simile.
and a great Tempest did arise, so as the Ship was in danger of drowning,
whilst Christ was asleep in the Ship, and his Disciples went and awaked him,
so there was a great calm: Now what is this but a plain figure of Christ's
dealing with us? for he places us here in this World, as on the Sea, He
raises up many troubles and afflictions, and seems to be asleep; therefore we
must go to Christ with the Disciples, and awake him by our Prayers, and stir
him by our repentance, and then he will drive away our troubles; this is one
Act of Christ's administration, therefore when it is thus with a Christian, that
there is one trouble after another, he must remember it is one part of Christ's
holy government, and therefore must submit himself unto it.

There be three causes why Christ does exercise the Church with diverse
temptations. Three Causes why Christ exercises the Church with diverse
temptations.


First, To set aworke their graces* for when God has given them Faith,
Repentance, Patience, and other graces of his Spirit, then he does exercise
them and set them aworke. So Genesis 22. when God had given says to Abraham, 1
then he tries him and sets aworke his Faith, and his other Graces, by offering
up his Son: And so likewise we see the Lord tried Job by the Devil, Job 1. 3.
says he, Have thou not considered my servant Job, how that he is a just and
upright man? The Lord would have the World and the Devil to see the graces,
that were in Job, and how he was strengthened from Heaven, and therefore the
Lord let in the Devil upon him: If a man make a curious glass, and would have
one to see the pretiousnesse, excellency and strength of it, he would put it
into ones hand, and bid him fling it against the wall, dash it against the
ground, be at it with a hammer, and knock it never so hard he cares not: so
the Lord does when he has made a Christian; he puts him sometimes into the
hands of the World, and lets it dash him against the ground or walls, knock
him with a hammer, and tread him under foot, that men may see the virtues and
graces that be in him, and how he is strengthened from Heaven.

Secondly, Reason 2.
the Lord tries and exercises his Church with diverse temptations and trials,
To pull down spiritual pride that they swell not with the graces of God.
Simile.
I have showed you heretofore that when men have good wines they will lay them
up, in low cellars, for if they lie high they will sour; so because spiritual
pride will sour Gods graces, and we are ready to lose them and to run into
the world, therefore the Lord is feign to exercise us with crosses to lay them
low in us: this is the reason why the Lord 2 Cor. 12. did send a prick in the
flesh, and the messenger of Satan, to buffet Paul black and blew, that he
might not swell of his graces, but that he might lay them in a low cellar, and
so retain them.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
to keep them from sin: we see a father if he sees his child padling with
fire and water, Simile.
he will take him and make him afraid as though he would fling him into the
fire, or into the water, and yet he means no hurt to him but does it only
to make him afraid; so the Lord deals with us, for many times we be padling
with sins, and then the Lord takes us and makes as if he would throw us into
hell, as if he would destroy us, and yet he means not hurt to us but does it
to fright us, and to keep us from sin, that so we may creep to heaven and
be saved.

SERMON XL.
HEBREWS 10. 12. But this man after He had offered one Sacrifice for sins
sat down on the right hand of God.
I Showed you the last day that one special end why Christ did sit at the
right hand of God is, to rule and govern the whole world for the good of the
Church, so that Christ's exaltation to glory (I mean his sitting at the right
hand of God) tends to the good of the Church, they have the benefit of it and
not himself. Now there be four Actions of his holy administration and
government that he exercises toward the Church: there whereof we have spoken
of already, Act. 4.
the fourth remains, which is, That Christ does preserve and protect his
people and Church against all the enemies of it; he is that great Michael that
is spoken of in Daniel that stands up to defend his Church: and but for whose
defense there would not be left a man or a woman to profess the name of
Christ: so this is one of the Actions of Christ to defend the Church against
all the enemies and adversaries thereof.

Now by five means Christ does defend and protect his Church: Five means
whereby Christ does protect his Church.
first, by bridling and restraining of them that they cannot do all the hurt
they intend; as Genesis 31. Laban pursued after Iaakob, and thought to have done
him some hurt, 1
but the Lord came in a dream to him, and bad him take heed he spoke nothing
to Iaakob but good; Simile.
so many times when the men of the world do follow and pursue the Church
thinking to destroy and to hurt it, then the Lord comes with this charge, take
heed ye speak not ought but good to them, take heed ye do them no hurt; so
Rev. 20. 2. says Saint John, Simile.
I saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit,
and a great Chain in his hand, and he took the Dragon, (which is, the old
Serpent, the devil and Satan) and he bound him for a thousand years, and
cast him into the bottomless pit, and he shut him up and sealed the door
upon him: so it pleases God to lay a chain upon the devil and upon Tyrants,
that they shall, nor cannot do all the hurt or mischief that they intend
against the Church, and against faithful men: this is the end why God does
restrain and bind them, to give ease to the Church that it may grow and
increase; therefore labor to grow in grace when God gives thee rest, that so
thou may be fitted the better against the time of trouble: so we see the
Church did Act. 9. 31. Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea and
Galilee and Samaria, Simile.
and were edified and walked in the fear of God, and comfort of the holy
Ghost, and were multiplied; for when it pleases God to restrain Tyrants, and
to give rest unto the Church, they must labor to gather Faith, Repentance,
Patience, and comfort against the time of trouble. Simile.
Basil reports that there be seven days in the dead of winter that are very
calm without storms, wherein a little bird called the King-fisher gets to the
sands, makes her nest, lays her eggs, hatcheth her young, and then gets away
from the sea: so must we do, in the winter of this world God gives rest
sometimes, therefore then we must make our nests, lay our eggs, and hatch our
young, that is, we must get Faith, Repentance, and the Graces of Gods Spirit;
and so provide comfort against the time of trouble: this is one means whereby
God does protect his Church, by bridling and restraining the enemies that they
cannot do all the hurt they intend.

The second means is, The second means.
by bridling of the enemies and by shadowing of the Church by his own hand
from the fury of the world; so Ierem. 36. 26. the king would have killed
Jeremy, and Baruch, but the Lord did hide them; and so likewise Revel. 12. 14.
it is said, But unto the woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she
might fly into the wilderness into her place, where she is nourished for a
time, and times, and half a time; that is, all the time of Antichrist the Lord
did hide the Church with his holy hand: in like manner Genesis 19. when the Angels
came to Lots house into Sodom, the men of the city came out of their houses and
would have gone in to trouble Lot, and the Angels; but they were stricken with
blindness and could not find the door; so the enemies of the Church,
Papists, Atheists and such like, they have a long time been seeking to trouble
and molest Gods Church; but the Lord has stricken them with blindness that
they grope about the Church and cannot find the door, that is, they cannot
find an entrance, nor the way to begin: this is another means how the Lord
does defend his Church by hiding of them. The Papists demand of us where our
Church was before Luthers days. To this I answer, the Lord did hide them in
the wilderness all the time of the rage of Antichrist: Saint Hilarie says,
Ye do not well to love the walls of the Church, and to make such account of
the Temple, know ye not that Antichrist shall fit in the Temple of God
boasting himself as if he were God; therefore says he, look not for the
true Church of God in the Temples, but look for it in mines, caves, and secret
places.

The third means whereby Christ defends his Church is, Miraculously and
wonderously; so the Lord delivered the Church out of Egypt from Pharaoh; and so
likewise, The three children out of the Fiery furnace, and Daniel out of the
Lions den, and Peter out of Prison when he should have been brought out the
next day to execution: Yea, the Lord does not only defend his Church
wonderfully, but also graciously: as 1 Samuel 13. 26. it was told to Saul that
David was in the wilderness of Maon, presently Saul and his men followed him:
and Saul with his men were on the one side of the mountain, and David with his
men were on the other side: but there came a messenger to Saul, saying, Haste
thee and come, for the Philistines have invaded the land: so David was
delivered graciously, though it were not miraculous and wonderful, but by a
rumor and report only: here we see though the Lord do not deliver us
miraculously and wonderfully, yet he does graciously in making our greatest
and chiefest enemies friendly unto us, and so gives us peace.

The fourth means whereby Christ does defend and protect the Church is, The
fourth means.
By giving them invincible courage to endure all that the world shall put upon
them: so although they be slain at the foot of the Lamb and the blood come
down at their heels, yet they go away with a glorious conquest. So Paul Romans
8. says, For thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are counted as
sheep for the slaughter, nevertheless in all these things we are more than
conquerours through him that has loved us; for through their Christian courage
they carry away the conquest: Revelation, 12. 11. it is said, But they overcame
him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the Word of their testimony, and they
loved not their lives to the death. Cyprian says well; God would let the world
see that though Christians be slain and trodden under foot for the Gospel,
and for the testimony of the truth, yet they cannot overcome them, because they
be not afraid to dye in the cause of Christ: for as Christ by dying overcame
death, so all his members must overcome by dying. Augustine makes this
question, whether the Tyrant does overcome, or the Christian? in the eye of
sense and reason, one would think that the Tyrant has the better, because he
takes away life and blood, but it is the Christian that does overcome, because
the Tyrant aims does not so much at the life or blood, but he labors to take
away God, Christ, the hope of heaven, and to destroy Faith and Religion; but
the Tyrant though he take away liberty or blood or life, yet he cannot take
away God, nor Christ, nor the hope of heaven, nor the pardon of their sins
from them; therefore a Christian is the conqueror, he has the better. As we
see in nature, a man comes to kill a serpent, Simile.
he strikes at the serpent, the serpent labors to fence his head, because his
life lies in his head, he will take a wound any where before he will take it
there; now as long as the serpent fences his head and keeps his life, he has
the better, because the man fought to take away his life and yet he keeps it;
so when a Tyrant labors to take away Christ, God, and faith from a Christian,
yet as long as he can keep Christ and his graces, it is sufficient, because
he is the head and life lies in him: though he be wounded in his name or in
his goods, or his life taken from him, yet a Christian has the better: I will
further show it you in an example of Scripture; we see that the Devil was as
it were let loose on Job, he took away his children, and his goods, and he
left him nothing but the stench of his teeth, yet Job had the better, because
the devil did labor to take away his faith and comfort in God which he could
not, and therefore seeing Job did keep this, God sets the crown on his head,
and he goes away the conqueror; so though sickness take away a man's health,
and usurers his money, and thieves his goods, and tyrants his life and blood,
yet as long as a man keeps God, Christ, his faith and hope of heaven, he has
the better.

The fifth means is, The fifth means.
By destroying and confounding all their enemies; for although it pleased God
to use them for the chastening of his children, yet at last he will destroy
them; a father uses a rod to chasten his son for his amendment, yet at last
he will destroy the rod; so we see Exodus 5. what grievous taskes were laid on
the children of Israel by Pharaoh, Simile.
to make them willing to depart the land, the Lord was feign to do as men do
by bees, to smoke them out to make them leave their hives, so the Lord did
smoke them out of the place, and at last Pharaoh the rod it self was drowned
in the red sea; Simile.
so Dan. 8. we see the Little horn, which was the King of Macedonia, he did
overcome for a time, and tread under the people of God, yet at last his horn
was broken; so also Revelation 12. The Beast that had seven heads and ten
horns, that did labor to devour the woman, he also shall go to
destruction: and therefore let not Christians be discouraged and dismayed,
though they see the Church has great enemies, for God will defend and protect
them against all their enemies, if they walk worthy of the Gospel, and labor
to please God in all their courses; these be the four actions whereby Christ
does rule and govern the Church: which for your memories sake, I will briefly
recapitulate unto you.

First, that he does draw and pull them out of the condemned multitude of the
world, and bring them to an estate of grace: secondly, he does guide and
govern them by his Word and Spirit: Thirdly, he does exercise them with diverse
temptations and trials: Lastly, he does protect and defend them against all
their enemies.

The Uses we are to make of Christ's sitting at the right hand of God are; Use
1.
first, that seeing Christ sits in the highest place next to God, therefore we
must labor to submit our selves unto him, sink down at the feet of Christ,
and be contented to be ruled and guided by him: but they that are ruled by
their own lusts and sins, they do (as it were) pull down Christ out of his
throne, and set up their sins in his room: Psalm 2. says the Lord, I have
set my king upon mine holy hill; it is the decree of God that we should serve
and fear him, that we should labor To kiss him, to submit our selves unto
him, lest his wrath be kindled and then we perish suddenly.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing Christ sits at the right hand of God, therefore we must take heed we
do not sin against him and offend him, because he is in the next place to
God; It is a great matter to sin against him and offend him, as 1 Cor. 8. 12.
says he, Now when ye sin against the brethren and wound their weak
consciences, ye sin against Christ: It is a great matter indeed to sin
against Christ, Augustine says, the Jews condemned Christ, and are blamed for
it, but there is a great difference between their sins and the sins of
Christians under the Gospel, for they sinned against Christ in the time of his
humiliation when he did hang on the cross, but thou art a christian, sin'st
him now he is exalted into glory and sits at the right hand of God; we see
David when he had cut off but the lap of Saul's garment, his heart did smite
him; so much more should our hearts smite us, when we have sinned against him
and offended him.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing Christ sits at the right hand of God, do thou labor to be in Christ a
true Christian, and then he will defend thee from all dangers, and turn all
they troubles into comforts, all thy pains to ease, thy sorrow into joy, thy
sickness into health, and thy death into life. Acts 7. 36. we read that
Stephen saw Heaven opened, and Christ standing at the right hand of God ready
to receive him; Simile.
so if a Christian man or woman behold Christ with the eye of Faith sitting at
the right hand of God at the day of Death, this will give them comfort against
all their troubles.

Fourthly, Use 4.
seeing Christ sits at the right hand of God, therefore as Christ overcame the
Devil and all our spiritual enemies, so we must first overcome sin, the
Devil and all our lusts, and then we shall sit at the right hand of God: this
promise makes, Revel. 2. 21. To him that overcommeth will I grant to sit with
me in my Fathers Throne, even as I overcame and sit with my Father in his
Throne: and therefore do thou never rest, but labor to overcome sin and thy
own corruptions whatsoever thy pains and troubles be, and then thou shall sit
at the right hand of God: Simile.
Matthew. 19. 28. says Christ, Ye which follow me in the regeneration shall sit
on twelve Thrones and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel; you that follow me in
a holy life, you that are borne again anew, and you that repent of your sins
and make conscience of your ways, you shall sit upon the throne of Christ,
when others shall sit down in the shadow of death, and in the dungeon of Hell,
with the Devil and his Angels; therefore as Christ overcame Sin, Death, and
Hell and the Devil, and when he had done it he sat down then at the right
hand of God, so when we have overcome, we shall sit at the right hand of God
for ever.

SERMON XLI.
1 PETER 4. 5. Who shall give account to him that is ready to Judge the quick
and the Dead.
WE are come to speak of the last degree of Christ's exaltation, SER. XLI.
which is in the next Article of our Christian profession, a branch whereof is,
that from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the Dead. He that was
judged of others, shall judge us: even he that was judged of Pilate, Caiaphas,
Judas and Caine, He shall judge the quick and the Dead; that is, all the
people that have been in all ages, and times, even all that have been dead
many a thousand years before, and all the people that be living at the
present: for when all men have played their pageants on the stage of this World,
then the Lord Jesus Christ shall have his time to play his part, to shut up
all, and gather his servants and saints together into Heaven, but the wicked
shall be cast into Hell. This is that which Job speaks of, Job 19.
I know my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on Earth: when all men
have played their parts on the stage of this World, when kings have given up
their Crowns and flung down their Scepters at the feet of Christ, then he
shall stand the last on the Earth, to gather his Saints and people unto
himself, and to condemn the wicked to everlasting torment. This is a point to
be considered, bringing with it great comfort, that he which is our Savior
and Redeemer, shall be our Judge. Now there be two commings of Christ
mentioned in the Scriptures, his first, to work man's redemption, as it is,
Luke 19. The Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which is lost; his
second coming is to judge the whole World, as it is, Psalm. 96. 13. For be
comes to judge the Earth, He will judge the world with righteousness, and
the People with Equity: therefore seeing Christ's coming is to judgment, it
must be every man's wisdom to lay hold on his first coming, labor to be
converted, and to repent of his sins, and to get Faith, and to be brought to
an estate of grace, for his second coming is to judgment: heerefrom we may
observe these six particulars:

1. That there shall be a judgment day. 2. Who shall be the Judge. 3. The
place where be shall judge. 4. The time when he shall judge. 5. The Person that
shall be judged. 6. The manner of the judgment.
First, 1
There shall be a judgment day, That there shall be a judgment day.
and a solemn arraignment of the whole World; there be many judgments, as
Zephan. 3. 11. The just Lord is in the midst thereof, he will do no iniquity,
every morning does he bring his judgments to light, and he fails not; but
the wicked will not learn to be ashamed: so there is first particular and
special judgments, that light on partiticular persons, Diverse Judgments.
as Genes. 15. 13. the Lord said to Abrahm, Thy seed shall be a stranger in a
Land that is not theirs four hundred years, and shall serve them, 1
and they shall come out with great substance, notwithstanding the Nation whom
they shall serve will I judge. Secondly, besides this judgment, there is
another more private at the day of death, 2
as Hebr. 9. Saint Paul says, It is appointed for all men to die, and then
comes the judgment; there is an appointed judgment at the day of death
between God, and a man's soul and conscience, as further appears, Luke 22.
23. And it was so that the beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into
Abraham's bosom: The rich man also died, and was buried, and being in Hell
torments, he lifted up his eyes, etc. so we see the one went to comfort, and
the other to pain. Thirdly, besides these, 3
both particular judgments that befall particular and special men, and the
private judgment that is at the day of death: there shall also a general
judgment, and a solemn arraignment of this whole World, where every person
shall be judged and arraigned, as we believe in our Christian profession, From
thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead; that is, he shall judge
all sorts of people, even every Man and Woman that has lived in this World, or
shall live.

Now if any man demand, Three Reasons of the Judgment day.
what is the reason why there shall be a general judgment, seeing there is
particular judgments that light on particular men, and the private judgment
at the day of death? I answer there be three reasons thereof:

First, Reason 1.
Because the Bodies must be judged, as well as the Souls: for seeing men sin
against God as well in their Bodies, as in their Souls, therefore both shall
be judged: as Revel. 20. 12. the Evangelist says, And I saw the Dead both
great and small stand before God: they did not only stand with bodies, but
with souls also, for says he, The Sea gave up the dead in her, and Death and
Hell delivered up their Dead that were in them: So we see the bodies rise
again to be judged, as well as the Souls.

Secondly, Reason 2.
That there may be a declaration of the just judgment of God; that all the
World may see the judgments of God are just upon men for their sins; as Romans
2. 5. But thou after thy hardness of heart that cannot repent, heapest upon
thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just
judgment of God: therefore besides the private and close judgment, there must
be a general and solemn arraignement in the view of the whole world, that so
there may be a declaration of the just judgment of God.

Thirdly, The third Reason.
Because they shall not be judged as private persons, but as public in the
same body that they lived in: either in the body of the Saints, or in the body
of the wicked, for they shall be judged as they be members of the same body
they rise in: and as they are found to have done good or bad, accordingly shall
the division be made, as appears, Mat. 25. 31. where it is said, And before him
shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from another,
as a sheapheard does separate his Sheep from the Goats, and he shall set the
one at his right hand, and the other at his left hand, etc.

Now because this point is a great, and a very weighty one, and to be
considered before others in a Christians life, being like the great wheel of a
clock, Simile.
it turns all the inferior wheels; so if a man be once persuaded of this,
that he must give an account to God for all his actions, and must stand before
God in judgment, it will make him to pass his days holily and virtuously
while he lives here: and therefore let us see briefly what be the proofs, and
grounds that there shall be a judgment; which are chiefly these four
following.

The first, Four proofs that there shall be a General judgment.
is taken From the Truth of God, because he has said it, and therefore it
shall come to pass, for God is not as Man that he should lie, neither as the
Son of Man that he should repent; He has said it, and shall he in do it?
and has he spoken it, and shall he not accomplish it? As it is, Number. 23. 19.
Therefore whatsoever he has said, it shall come to pass in the time that he
has appointed.

Now that Christ has said there shall be a judgment day, there be many
Scriptures for it, As Matthew. 10. 15. Truly I say unto you it shall be easier
for them of the land of Sodom and Gomorah in the day of judgment, than for
that City: So also Matthew. 12. 36. But I say unto you, That of every idle word
that men shall speak, they shall give an account at the day of judgment: And
verse 41. The men of Ninevie shall rise up in judgment with this Generation,
and shall condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of Jonas. We see
the Testimony of the Lord is plain for this, that there shall be a judgment
day: Augustine says, God has made us many promises, and has performed them,
and shall we not think that the judgment day shall come, according as he
has foretold us? It is said, Psalm. 144. The Lord is righteous in all his
ways, and holy in all his works: If the Lord has promised any thing, it
shall come to pass, for the Lord has left his Scripture which is his
handwriting to assure us of the truth of it. And therefore do thou not
believe that there shall be a day of judgment? The Lord himself shall
answer thee; thou have the handwriting of GOD, and what must thou do? Look
into that and see, what a company of things he has promised in his Word, as
unlikely as this, which are all come to pass; he has promised that He would
send his Son into the World to work thy Redemption; Look into his Word,
thou have his handwriting, has he performed this promise? Then assure thy
self likewise that one day he will come to judgment: He has promised that
He will send down his spirit that should lead them in all truth; thou have
his hand writing, see if this promise be come to pass, then assure thy self
withal, he will come to judge this World; has he promised, He will preach the
Gospel to all Nation, look into the Scriptures, has he performed it? Why
then never doubt but that thy body also shall rise because he has foretold it.

The second is, The second Proof.
because it is the nature of Gods Justice to give to every man according to his
due desert, good things to good men, and evil things to evil men: but it is
not so here in this life, but the best men be in the worst estate for the most
part, and evil men in the best; for as Solomon says, Eccles. 9. 2. All things
come alike to all: there is one event to the just, and to the wicked, to the
pure, and to the polluted, and to him that sacrifices, and to him that
sacrifices not, as is the good, so is the sinner, and he that swears, as he
that swears not, or fears an oath: so the worst be in the best estate, and
the good be in the worst estate; hereof Habakkuk complains Chap. 1. 13. Thou
art of pure eyes, and can not behold wickedness; wherefore do thou look
on the transgressors, and hold thy tongue, when the wicked devoureth the man
that is more righteous than be? here in this life there be many aberrations and
swervings from the right rule of justice, therefore there must be a judgment
to bring that which deflects from the rule to rectitude and straightness:
Again, Augustine speaking out of Pssalm. 101. says, God has two times; there
is a time of mercy, and a time of judgment; therefore do thou not account God
unjust, though good and bad speed alike, he makes the rain to rain on the
just and the unjust, the Sun does shine on both, and they drink all of one
fountain, and draw in the same air, yet do not think God to be unjust,
because this is the time of mercy, but there will come a time of judgment; and
therefore (says he) O, my brethren be wise an take heed, do not say, I did
naughtily to day, and yet it was well with me, and I will do naughtily to
morrow, and I hope to do well too, this is but the time of Gods mercy, there
will come a time of His Judgment wherein He will call thee to account for all
thy sins.

The third is, The third Proof.
from the wisdom of God, and wise order be has in the governing of all
things: for in all well ordered commonwealths, there are Assizes, Sessions, and
Law-daies; and in every city, town, and hamlet there are courts to order and
determine things: Simile.
if it be so in all well ordered commonwealths, then it must needs be so in
Gods Kingdom; if this wisdom be in man, that is but finite, much more
surely is it in God that is infinite; and therefore seeing in all well ordered
commonwealths, there is a time of judgment, it holds much more that God
should have a Judgment day to arraigne the whole world in.

The fourth is, The fourth Proof.
from the common consent of all, that is, of Angels, men and of devils: Of
Angels as we see Acts. 1. 11. Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye here gazing to
heaven? this Jesus whom ye see taken from you into heaven, shall so come, as
ye have seen him go into heaven. And holy men do acknowledge thus much, as
Saint John in the Revelation, and Henoch long before did prophecy of it, Jude
14. so David, Psalm. 89. ult. For he is come to judge the earth, with
righteousness shall he judge the earth, and the people with equity: Yea, the
devils believe it, and tremble, as Matthew. 8. Art thou come hither to torment us
before our time: therefore seeing there is a common consent of all, Angels,
holy Men and devils, it is certain there shall be a judgment day: which
granted, as needs it must, let us make some profitable Use for our instruction.

The first use is, Use 1.
That seeing there is a judgment, therefore we should reverently stand in
fear of it, for one day thou shall rise out of thy grave, and shall stand
before Christ in judgment to answer for all thy thoughts, words and actions,
and therefore it is not a light matter, but stands every man in hand to be
reverently afraid of the judgment day, which Paul calls the terror of the
Lord, because it is a terrible thing to stand before God in judgment. Simile.
We see what a fearful thing it is when a thief (shut up in the Iayle) is
to make his appearance before an earthly Judge, which is but the danger of this
life: how much more then will is strike terror into us, when accused of our
own consciences, we are to come before Christ in Judgment who will judge both
soul and body? When Paul preached to Felix of temperance and judgment, Simile.
it is said, Felix trembled; now if he trembled at the name of judgment, then
how much more ought thou to tremble? thou that art a cold Christian, that
have lived loosely and badly, how ought thou to to tremble (I say) hearing
of the severity of Christ? It is a good saying Saint Bernard has, if thou have
put away all shame which appertains to so noble a creature as thou art, Simile.
yet cast not away fear, for, says he, men use to load an Ass, and he bears
it because he is an Ass, but thrust him in the fire, or into a pit, and he
will shun it, because he fears death, and loves life: therefore be not
worse than the beast, fear death, fear hell, fear Judgment.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing there is a Judgment day, therefore we should be careful to pass the
time of our dwelling here in holiness and fear, because we shall stand
before God in judgment; heaven and hell cannot avoid it, the mountains and
hills cannot cover and hide us from his presence; therefore every man must be
careful to please God, and to pass his time well here, because he must stand
before God in judgment hereafter: Men that go to markets and faires, Simile.
knowing that their packs shall be opened by the searchers to see what wares
they bring, will be careful what wares they pack up; so seeing our packs and
f^rdels shall be opened at that day, that is, our consciences, we must be
careful what we pack and fardell up, seeing all shall be discovered; we
read John 11. 7. when there was word given out that it was the Lord that was
on the shore, Simile.
Peter did gird his coat to him, and cast himself into the Sea: this was a
strange action of Peter, one would have thought rather he would have let it
alone, or have put off his coat; but Peter did wisely consider, that he must
stand before Christ, and therefore that he might stand seemly before him, he
did gird himself: so seeing we shall one day stand before God in judgment,
we must gird our coats unto us, and cast our selves into the glassie sea of
this world, that so we may stand seemly before him at that day.

Thirdly, seeing there is a judgment day, therefore we must labor to repent
us of our sins; Use 3.
if we repent of them, they shall be forgiven us, if we do not, we shall
answer for them at that day: this counsel Christ does give us, Simile.
Luke 12. 58. Whilst thou go with thy adversary to the ruler, as thou art
in the way, give diligence that thou may be delivered from him, lest he
bring thee before the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Iaylor, and the
Iaylor cast thee into prison, I tell thee, Thou shall not depart thence, till
thou have paid the uttermost mite: so we are all in the way to the judgment
seat, whilst we live here, therefore let us make our peace with God, repent
us of our sins, and be reconciled to him, for if we do not, he will
deliver us to the Iaylor, and we shall be cast into hell, and shall never come
out. Simile.
It is a good saying of Saint Austine, if an earthly Judge pass sentence
against thee, and should condemn thee to dye, to morrow or the next day, tell
me what would thou do? would thou sleep in thy chains, and fetters?
would thou idle out the time? No, but thou would go to this friend, and
to that friend, and would sell all thou had to purchase a pardon: and if
a friend should say to thee, what do thou mean to run up and down, and
sell that thou have? why, thou would answer and say, I am condemned to dye
to morrow, or the next day, therefore whilst I have time, I will labor to
save my life: so the heavenly Judge has given sentence of us, and we may dye
to morrow, or next day, and therefore what must we do? sleep away the time,
or idle it away? No, but labor to make friends, to sell all we have, to part
with our wealth, and goods, to pray unto God, to repent us of our sins, that
so we may escape that heavy sentence.

Fourthly, Use 4.
seeing there is a judgment day, this may give us comfort against all the
injuries and wrongs that are done unto us: Thus Paul does comfort himself 1
Cor. 4. 4. But he that judges me is the Lord: therefore judge nothing before
the time until the Lord come, who both will bring to light things that be hid
in darkness, and will make the counsels of the hearts manifest: and then
shall every man have praise of God. Therefore howsoever a Christian man may be
condemned for a dissembler, an hypocrite, and a proud person, yet this may give
him comfort, that there is a judgment day, and then men shall see whether they
died in truth or no. This was Moses's comfort, Simile.
Numb. 16. when Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, came and told him, be took too much
upon him, and counted him a proud person; says he, To morrow the Lord shall
show who are his, and who appertain to him: so this should be the comfort of a
Christian, when he is slandered, and evil spoken of, and counted a
dissembler, he may say to morrow the Lord shall show you whether it be so or
no, when the day of judgment is.

SERMON XLII.
ACTS 10. 42. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify
that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead.
THat there shall be a Judgment day, SER. XLII
wherein Christ will arraigne the whole world (besides the particular
judgments that fall on particular men, and the private judgments at the day
of death, together with the uses) has bin declared already, what was then
delivered, I will not now repeat, but come directly to the next point which is
this.

Secondly, Who shall be the Judge? Secondly, who shall be the Judge.
Christ only shall be the Judge; in this world there be many tribunals for
offenders to be judged at, but when all these tribunals shall cease, then
Christ shall be the Judge only: Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 15. 24. When he has
put down all things, all rule and authority, then God shall be all in all; and
Ioh. 5. 22. it is said, he has committed all judgment to the Son: so in
this place which I have read unto you, Act. 10. 42. And he commanded us to
preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he that is ordained of God
to be the Judge of quick and dead; as also, Romans 14. We shall all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ, etc. so we see Christ is the Judge and
none but he; and there is a Reason for it, for there are two things required
of a Judge: 1 Sufficient Knowledge, to know all things whatsoever. Two things
needful in a Judge.
2 Sufficient Power, to punish all offenders. Which two are most eminent in God.

First, There is sufficient knowledge, because Christ knows all things that
are done, First, knowledge.
there is nothing in all the world, but he knows it; Angels know not the
thoughts of men, Devils know not men's intentions, and men know not all actions
that are done, but Christ knows men's thoughts, intentions, and actions;
Therefore it is said, Matthew. 9. That he saw their thoughts: And Ioh. 21. Peter
says unto Christ, Lord thou know all things; So Hebrew. 4. 13. it is said,
That all things are naked and manifest before him with whom we have to do:
therefore he is the fittest for to be a Judge.

Secondly, as he has sufficient knowledge, so he has Sufficient power to
punish offenders; 2
when man has killed the body, he can go no farther, he cannot kill the
soul; but there is a power in Christ Power.
To kill both body and soul, and cast it into hell fire. Even he, Matthew 3.
which has his fan in his hand, and will make clean his flower, and gather his
wheat into his garner; but will burn up the chafe with unquenchable fire. And
Revel. 20. it is said, And whosoever was not found written in the book of
life, was cast into the lake of fire: so there is sufficient power in Christ to
punish all offenders, and sufficient knowledge; therefore he is fittest to be
the Judge, Angels are not, because they know not men's thoughts; men be not
fit, because there is a defect of power; when they have killed the body they
are not able to kill the soul.

Now if any man shall object and say, Object.
Is Christ the Judge only, seeing he says himself, Mat. 19. That those
which do follow him in this regeneration, shall sit upon twelve thrones, and
judge the twelve tribes of Israel; which also Saint Paul seems to agree with,
1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the world? How
then shall Christ be the only Judge?

I answer, Sol.
It is true that when the Saints themselves have had judgment, then they shall
be taken up, and sit with Christ in judgment; But how? Christ shall give the
final sentence, and they shall be Approovers or Assisters, so they shall
judge, but not as supreme Judges, but as Assisters: as we see at the Assizes,
the Judge gives the final sentence, and the Justices do but assent, Simile.
ratify, and confirm it to be true judgment; so it is Christ that is the
Supreme Judge to give the final sentence, the Saints do but assent to it, and
approve of the judgment to be true judgment. The Uses are:

First, Use 1.
seeing Christ shall be our Judge, we must labor to be found in Christ, and to
be Members of his body, because he wishes well to his own body: Therefore
let us labor to be found in Christ, to live in him, and then it shall go
well with us; Paul tells us, Romans 8. There is no condemnation to those that be
in Christ: all the comfort of a Christian arises from this, that he is one
with Christ, that he has the Spirit and grace of Christ, to say as Saint Paul
does, Gal. 2. 20. Thus I live, yet not I now, but Christ lives in me; then
he may have comfort at the day of judgment when he is found in Christ. It was
Paul's care, Philip. 3. That he accounted all things as dung and dross, that
he might win Christ, or be found in him: Now that which was Paul's care must
be ours also, that we should account all things but dirt, dung and dross, to
be found in Christ. If a man have judgment passed against him, to lose his
hand, his eye, Simile.
or some other member for his offense; if he has the skill, that he can make
his eye and his hand, the hand and eye of the kings son, the king would surely
spare him for his sons sake; so there is a sentence passed against us for our
offenses, and we are judged not only to lose an hand, or an eye, or any one
member, but all our parts; now if we have the skill to make our hands, eyes
and members, the hands, eyes, and members of Christ, and become one with him,
then God will spare us for his Sons sake. Thus to be found in Christ is very
difficult, and therefore let us consider these three things, which are
necessarily required thereto.

First, Three things required to be found in Christ.
He must make a remoove from himself, that is, from his sins and
corrnptions, and become a new Creature; as Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any
man be in Christ, he is a new Creature: Therefore, if any man stand in his
sins and remain in them, 1
he cannot be in Christ.

Secondly, 2
He must long in Soul and Spirit for Christ; as an hungry man does for his
meat, and a thirsty man for his drink; and Matthew 5. Simile.
Christ says, Blessed is he that hungreth and thirsts for righteousness,
etc. So that if a man hunger and thirst for Christ, he is a blessed and an
happy man.

Thirdly, 3
He must be settled on Christ with all his affections: he must cleave unto him
by faith, and apply him home to himself as the woman in the Gospel did throng
and thrust to Christ to touch him, Simile.
and did draw virtue out of him to heal her; so we should thrust and throng to
Christ, and touch him by the hand of Faith, and so draw out his virtues and
graces.

Secondly, Use 2.
that seeing Christ is our Judge, we must take heed we do not displease or
offend him: A number of men do not regard him, but attend their profits and
pleasures, set light by Christ, and care not to please him, no more than a man
would please a Dog, with what face can these men look on Christ? How abashed
and ashamed shall these men be to look on him? We see Genesis 45. when Joseph did
discover himself to his brethren, and said, I am Joseph, how abashed and
ashamed were they? If they had used him well, they might have had comfort, but
their consciences told them, that they had done injury and wrong unto him, sold
him for a slave, and cast him into a pit, therefore they were ashamed and
abashed when he said, I am Joseph; so when men have done well, when they have
repented them of their sins, and obeyed Christ, then they shall have comfort,
when Christ shall come in the Clouds, and say, I am your brother Joseph, I am
your Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: but if they have done injury and wrong to
Christ, condemned his laws, despised him, and set light by him; how shall they
then be ashamed, confounded and abashed? and with what faces shall they look
on him at that day? Christ tells us, Matthew. 24. That when becomes in the
Clouds, all the kindreds of the Earth shall wail and weep that they were
mistaken in taking him for a bare man. The Gentiles shall wail and weep that
they thought it folly to believe in one that was hanged on the Cross; and the
cold and lukewarm Christian shall wail and weep, that he loved the World
more than Christ: At that time Christ shall say unto them, I descended from
Heaven, that you might ascend; I was contented to be borne in a Stable, laid
in a Manger, that you might be in a better place; I was crowned with thorns,
that you might be crowned with glory; I was buffered and whipped, that you might
have case; I was killed on the cross, that you might live; I was contented to
descend into the Grave, that you might go to glory: where is the fruit of all
these my labors, and pains? where is your repentance, your care to please me?
I counted of you more precious than my blood, for I was contented to shed my
most precious blood for your sakes, and yet you account of me most vile; for of
all the Elements, the Earth is the most base, and you account of me baser than
of it; therefore we see when men despise and contemn Christ, heavy comfort
shall follow them, when he shall say unto them, Receive damnation with the
Devil and his Angels.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing Christ shall be the judge, it must be every man's care to please him: If
the world should be our judge, then we might labor to please that, or if a
noble man, kings, or princes, then we might please the^; but insomuch as Christ
is our judge, it is nothing to please the world, or to please the King or
Princes, as noble men, unless we please Christ; as 2 Cor. 5. 10. (says S.
Paul) Wherefore also we desire that dwelling at home, and removing from home,
we may be acceptable to him: why does he desire to be acceptable to God?
because (says he) We shall all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ;
because Christ shall be the Judge. There be a number of civil men in the
world, that think all is well with them, if the world cannot touch them for
any fault, but what is it for the world to approve of a man, Simile.
if Christ condemn him. Chrysostom says well, A man in a race when he runs
for a prise, does not take heed of the applause of the standers by, but his
eyes be on the Judge of the game, and his care is to please him, because he
shall give him his reward; so seeing we all run in race to Heaven, and
Christ is the Judge of the game. Therefore let us not take heed of the applause
of the standers by, which are but men, but let us eye Christ, and labor to
please him, because it is he that must give us our reward, and our crown:
Augustine on Psalm. 34. says, with what face shall I go to Christ, if I shall
please others and sin against him, and offend him? it may be (says he) that
I may die to day, or to morrow, or the next day, and then with what face shall
I stand before him?

Fourthly, seeing Christ shall be our Judge, therefore this may give us
infinite comfort, that he that was our Savior and Redeemer shall be our
Judge, he that bought us with the precious price of his blood: if a man knew
his father, brother, or his friend should be his Judge, he might hope he
should do well; but it is Gods great mercy to us in this, that he has not
made our father, brother, or our friend our Judge, but he has made Christ our
Judge, our Savior and Redeemer, one that has done more for us than all the
world beside: the Butler was not afraid to go before Pharaoh, Simile.
because Joseph had told him he would be set at liberty; so seeing Christ
has told us, that this is a time of joy and liberty, therefore we should not
be afraid to go before him; Luke 22. says Christ, Lift up your heads with
joy, for the day of Redemption draws near. We see in experience, Simile.
if a man have a weighty matter to try in the court of justice, if he hear the
chief of his counsel is become the Judge, he that was his advocate and
pleaded the matter a long time, he hopes that it will go well with him: so we
have a weighty matter to try in the court of Heaven, it concerns our life and
salvation, and Christ he that was the chief of our counsel, is become our
Judge, he that was our advocate, and pleaded our matter a long time before God:
this may give us comfort that it shall go well with us. Saint Jerome says
well, the day shall come when the whole world shall weep, and wail, and
mourn, and grieve, when thou that art a Christian shall be glad and rejoice;
when Plato, and Aristotle, and others shall say, we did not know him, and the
Jews we took him for a bare man, and the Gentiles, we thought it silly to
beeleeve in One that died upon the cross, and the cold Christians shall say,
we have loved the world, and have not regarded him; then the true Christians
shall comfortably say, This is our Savior and Redeemer, this is our God, and
we have waited for him.

The third point, the place, where he shall judge us:

The place is to be considered two ways: generally and particularly:
generally, the place where we shall be judged is, in this earth, therefore
we say in the Articles of our Christian says, from thence he shall come to
judge both the quick and the dead: and Act. 11. 1. the Angels tell us, that
this Jesus which is taken from you into heaven, shall so come as ye have seen
him go into heaven; so also Jude 24. Henoch tells us that the Lord shall come
with thousand of his Saints to give judgment against all men: so that this
world is the place of judgment; and moreover I will prove it by these two
reasons:

First, 1
because this is the ordinary course of Justice, for where men commit their
offenses in the same places they are judged: as we see in the same countries
where men have done their faults there the Assizes are kept: Simile.
so seeing we have sinned against God in this earth, here we shall be judged:
as 1 Samuel 7. 6. it is said, Samuel went about year by year to Bethel, Gilgal
and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all those places.

Secondly, because it is the fittest, and meetest place for it: it cannot be
in hell, or in Heaven; not in Heaven, because the unjust cannot come there, not
in hell because the just cannot come thither: as we see Luke 16. 26. Abraham
says to Dives, Between you and us there is a great gulf set, so that they
which would go from hence to you cannot, neither can they come from thence to
us: and therefore seeing they which are in heaven cannot come in hell, and they
which be in hell cannot come to Heaven, there must be a middle place, to
judge the world in, and that is this earth.

Now there be two uses to be made of this point:

1. A terror to the wicked. 2. A comfort to the godly.
First, it shall be a terror to the wicked to be judged in the same place
where they dishonored God, Use 1.
and blasphemed his Name, and where they have committed most grievous sins;
in the sight of their fine houses, gallant gardens, friends and acquaintance
they shall be judged: if it were in a corner that no body should see them,
their grief were the less, or if it were in a far country: but seeing it
shall be in this world where they have sinned against God in the sight of
their friends and acquaintance, this shall be the greater terror, as Hest. 7.
11. Haman was hanged on the gallows which he had set up for Mordecai; it had
bin shame enough for him to have died in another place, Simile.
but to dye at his own house, in the sight of his wife, and children,
servants, and by the means of his goods, this made his terror the greater; so
the wicked shall be judged here in this world, in the sight of their wives and
children, and in the sight of their friends and acquaintance, this makes for
the terror of them.

Secondly, comfort to the godly, that in the same place where they have been
despised and and disgraced, there they shall be honored: Joseph's honor was
the greater that he was advanced in the same place, where he was a poor slave;
therefore it shall be for the comfort of the godly, that they shall be judged
in the place where they have been disgraced. It was the manner of the Romans
in their triumphs, Simile.
that they began in some private place without the city, and thence went into
every street, till they came in the high and capital streets: so the people of
God have their honor begun in this world, whence the Lord does carry them
thorough the clouds, and fiery region, till he bring them to the capital
street, to heaven: this is a great comfort to the godly, where they have been
disgraced, and despised, there they be honored.

SERMON XLIII.
ACTS 17. 3^, 3^. But now commands all men every where to repent, Because he
has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness,
by that man whom he has ordained.
WE spoke the last day concerning the last judgment SERMON XLIII.
of the place where it shall be: all Divines agree that the place in general
shall be on the earth; not in heaven, nor in hell, nor in any remote place, out
of knowledge, but in this earth where we have passed our days, and where we
have sinned against God, therefore according to our usual phrase in the Creed,
it is said, from thence he shall come: David says of his child, 2 Samuel 12.
23. I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me: but it is not a sure
thing that we shall go first to Christ, till he come to us. So in general we
all agree, that in this earth shall be erected a glorious throne, for Jesus
Christ to sit upon, and to judge the whole world, where we have lived, and
where we have passed our days, where we have sinned and dishonored God: The
Uses whereof were matter of terror, and matter of comfort; which I handled
then, therefore I proceed;

To the particular, In what place of the world men shall be judged? This is a
thing uncertain, and the best Divines hold, it cannot be determined out of the
Scriptures in what place it shall be, but only by probability; Therefore in
things of this nature, it is good to take Saint Paul's rule, Romans 12. 3. Sapere
ad sobrietatem, to think soberly, not above what we ought to think; We
should not pry and look into God's Ark, that is, into his secret Counsel,
more than is meet, but we must content our selves with things revealed; as
Genes. 32. 13. Iaakob said of his sheep, that he would not overdrive them,
lest they die: Simile.
so there be a number of men that overdrive their wits and bring them into an
high strain, and so make them die: therefore a learned man says well, It is
better not to judge of things secret and hidden, than to strive and contend
about them. There be a number of Papists that do determine the place where it
shall be, though the best Divines hold it uncertain; and they bring Scripture
for it too; Some say that the place is the valley of Iehosaphat, Joel, 3. 12.
Let the World be wakened and come up to the valley of Iehosaphat, for there
will I sit to judge all the Heathen round about: which words are spoken not of
the last judgment, but the meaning is, that the Lord would judge the Amorits
and the Ammonites, which were the enemies of the people of God in those times,
there the Lord would overthrow and destroy them; and to prove it is not
intended of the last judgment, there be diverse reasons:

First, Reason 1.
because he speaks by way of Allusion: It is a Metaphor, and a borrowed speech
as we may see by other places of the same Chapter, as verse 18. And in that
day shall the Mountains drop down new wine, and the hills shall flow with
milk, and all the Rivers of Judah shall flow with waters, and a Fountain shall
come forth of the house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of Shittim: Now
as those words cannot stand in their literal sense, but be Metaphorical, and
are spoken by allusion only, so likewise is it in this place, and therefore it
cannot be meant of the last judgment.

Secondly, Reason 2.
because bodies must have distance and place, as Augustine says, Take away
distance and place, and then bodies are no bodies; therefore, it is not
probable, that the valley of Iehosaphat, should hold all the bodies of all the
men, that have lived from the beginning of the World, to the latter end of all
ages, in all the Countries and kingdoms of the world: It is not possible they
can stand all there to be judged at the same time.

Thirdly, the Schoolmen, say, Reason 3.
it is probable that it should be on Mount Olivet, because Christ did ascend
to Heaven from thence: Now if it should be on the Mount Olivet, it could not he
in the valley of Iehosaphat, because they be a great distance one from the
other: as 2 Chronicles. 20. 20. we may see when Iehosaphat went out to war, he
went to Tekoa, which was six miles from Bethlehem; and Bethlehem was six
miles from Jerusalem, and then the valley of Iehosaphat, must needs many miles
be distant from Jerusalem; so this opinion overthrowes the other. But they say
the valley of Iehosaphat, was near Jerusalem; between the Mount of Olives and
that; but it cannot be so, because it is said, 2 Chronicles. 20. 27. that
Iehosaphat and the men of Jerusalem and Judah returned home to Jerusalem, from
the valley. So that it was many miles distant from Jerusalem, whereas the Mount
of Olives was near; for Christ sat on that Mount, and did see men cast into
the Treasury: therefore the valley of Iehosaphat cannot be the place, where the
last judgment shall be.

Fourthly, Reason 4.
because the dsciples, Luke 17. when they heard Christ speak of the fearful
separation that shall be at the last day of judgment: that there shall be two
in the bed, of whom the one shall be taken, and the other refused: two in the
fields, one refused and the other taken: said unto him where Lord? and he said
unto them, whersoever the dead Carkas is, thither shall the Eagles resort. Now
if it had been set down in the Scripture, Christ would never have left it as
uncertain to his disciples, when they did ask him of it. So then it is
manifest, the particular place where Christ shall judge the World is uncertain.

Now if men will not be contented with this, but say, there must be a
determined place where he shall judge the World, which is like to be where he
was borne, planted the Gospel, did preach, and work most of his miracles: I
must say for mine own part I do incline that way: But whether it shall be in
Bethlehem, where Christ was borne, or upon Mount Olivet, from whence Christ
ascended, or whether it shall be on Mount Calvery, where Christ was crucified,
or on Mount Tabor, where Christ was transfigured, I dare not determine, for
that is left uncertain to us.

Now the Use be made of it is, Use
that seeing the particular place is uncertain, therefore let us labor to be
joined with Christ, to lie with him in the Manger, pray with him on the Mount,
fall down by him in the Garden, to go with him to the Cross, to be killed
and crucified with him, to descend into the Grave with him, and to lay our
bodies by him, and our bones by his bones, and to be joined with him; and then
as he did rise himself our of the grave, so he will raise thee out of thy
grave, and thou shall be gathered unto him by the hand of an Angel, and
brought unto him wheresover the place be.

Fourthly, 4
The time of the judgment: For when we hear there shall be a judgment day,
then we make enquiry when it shall be: It is a desire in nature to look after
it, The time of the judgment,
if once believed; therefore not only the wicked say, where is the promise of
his coming; but his Disciples also Matthew. 24. came unto him, and asked him
when the end of the world should be: Augustine says well, All men that labor,
desire, to know or to have an end of their labor; Therefore as the husbandman
casts with himself how many weeks it will be to Harvest; Simile.
The Merchant man how many days to Return; The Traveller what time he shall
get to his Inn; So a Christian that has took pains to get Heaven, cannot
choose but be desirous to know when the end of the world shall be, that he may
have amend of his labor.

Now concerning the time of the last judgment, I will lay down these three
conclusions:

1. That the Time is certain to God. 2. That the Time is uncertain to us. 3.
Although it he uncertain to us, yet he has given us certain Signs and
Tokens of it.
First, 1
The Time is certain to God: which I will prove by Scripture, and by Reason:
Conclusion. The certainty of the last judgment proved.
First, by Scripture, Matthew. 24. 36. But of that time and hour comes no man,
No not the Angels in heaven, but my Father only: So Acts 17. 30. But now he
does admonish all men every where to repent, Because be has appointed a day, 1
in which he will judge the world: By Scripture.
so Revel. 14. 7. the Angel says, Fear God, and give glory to him, for the
hour of his judgment is come: Therefore although we do not know the certain
time, yet God knows the day and hour when it shall be.

Secondly, we will prove it by reason, for look what God has done in any
special and particular judgment, 2
that he does in the general; By Reason.
but God has appointed and determined the very hour and time of special all
and particular judgments; ARTI. VII.
therefore he has appointed and determined the very day and hour of the great
and general judgment. Now that he has appointed particular and special
judgments, and consequently knows the hour and time of them, is manifest
out of Genesis 6. where the Lord foretold the destruction of the old world: and he
prefixed a time, Ion 1. That in forty days Ninivie should be destroyed: so
also it is said, Revel. 9. 14. The four Angels were loosed, which were
prepared at an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year: so that we see
there is never a special judgment, but God has appointed the day and hour
of it, and therefore they are certain to God; much more there is the general
and great judgment. But let us come to the ^ses.

First, Vse^^
seeing the time of the last judgment is certain to God, we may assure our
selves, that although it come not in a time we look for, yet it is certain it
will come in the time God has appointed; therefore every man should be prepared
for it; as Matthew. 24. 48. says Christ, But if the evil servant will say in
his heart, my master will defer his coming; and begin to smite his fellow,
and to eat and drink with the drunken: that servants master shall come in a
day when he looks not for him, and in an hour when he is not aware of, and
shall cut him off in twain: therefore it stands every man in hand to prepare
for that time; so it is said, Psalm. 50. The Lord will come, and he will not be
silent: though the Lord be silent whilst we live here, and winkes at us, and
says nothing, because this life time is a time of mercy: yet when he comes
he will not be silent, because it is a time of Justice.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing it is certain to God, though it come not so soon as we look for,
yet we should with patience wait for it; though it comes not to day or to
morrow nor the next day, yea though it be many years, yet we must wait with
patience till the time comes. We see in Hab. 2. the Prophet says, For the
vision is for an appointed time, but at last it shall speak and not lie,
though it tarry yet wait for it, it shall surely come and not stay. Augustine
says well, out of Psalm. 33. O man, thou art Gods labourer, and his work man,
do thy work and thy business, and he will pay thee thy hire, and thy wages
when thou have done thy work: when thy pay-day comes: but if thou will not
wait till the pay-day, but wilt have thine hire before thou work, surely God
will be displeased at thee; in like manner consider with thy self whosoever
thou art, if thou should set a man at work, Simile.
and he should say, give me mine hire first, or my wages, thou would say,
Do thy work first, and then I will pay thee: but if he say, nay, I will be
paid first; would not thou be angry with him? But our waiting on God is much
more sure of payment than from the hands of men, for they may deceive us, but
God will not; he will give every man that which is his due; therefore though
the judgment day come not so soon as we look for, yet we must with patience
wait for it, seeing God has certainly appointed the time.

The second conclusion is, The second conclusion.
that It is uncertain to us; we know not the day, or the year, or the time,
or the age of it, no nor the Angels, nor Christ himself, as he was man, as
Matthew. 24. 36. But of that day and hour no man knows, no not the Angels in
heaven, but my Father only: so Act. 1. 17. the Disciples of Christ asked of
him, saying, Lord will thou at this time restore the kingdom to Israel? he
said unto them, It is not for you to know the times and seasons which the
Father has put in his own power: therefore we see the time is uncertain to
us, we know it not, no not the Angels. Hence we conclude, they be mere
imposters and deceivers, that set down a certain time when the judgment day
shall be.

The Jews had a prophecy, that the world should continue six thousand years,
two thousand years before the Law, two thousand under the Law, and two
thousand years under the Gospel: but a learned man says well, if he that
made that prophecy could not set down the certain time before, which was the
easiest, how should we believe him for time to come? for from the beginning of
the Law, till the coming of Christ, it was but one thousand five hundred
years, and from the creation, to the giving of the Law two thousand years. In
our time in Germany there was one that prophesied that the day of judgment
should be in such a year and such a day, which made the people to neglect
their plowing and sowing, and so were like to have starved themselves, if they
had not been releeved by the Emperor: so also there was one amongst us, that
prophesied that the world should be at an end in the year one thousand five
hundred eighty and eight; after which he made a calendar that the world should
continue thirty years after, now we have lived many a year longer (thanks be
unto God) to prove this a lie. But why has the Lord kept this unknown to us?
I answer, that we might be the more prepared for it; therefore it stands
every man in hand, to labor to get faith and repentance, and to bring himself
into the estate of grace, that so he may have comfort at that day; Therefore
Luke 12. says Christ, Let your lamps be burning, and your loins girded, for
the Son of man will come in an hour that ye are not aware of; and Saint
Ambrose says, the day of the Lord is uncertain to man, that he might prepare
his heart for it: for he knows he will come, but he knows not the time
when, and therefore we must be like the wise virgins with our lamps burning,
and our loins girded, ready to enter into our masters joy.

The third conclusion is, that although the time of this judgment day be
uncertain to us, yet he has given us certain signs and tokens of his
coming; for the hope that is deferred is the drying of the bones; and
therefore that our hope might not faint, the Lord has given us certain signs
and tokens of his coming: as Matthew. 24. 33. When ye see all these things,
know, that the kingdom of God is near, even at the doors: So Luke 21. Christ
tells his Disciples, when they see the darkning of the Sun, and Moon, and the
Stars, and those signs that he spoke of there; then they should lift up
their hands and hearts with joy for the day of their Redemption draws near.
Whereupon Chrysostom says, when we see an old man that creeps on the ground
by his staff, and is feeble and weak in his joints, Simile.
we say, that man cannot live long, though we know not the time when he will
die, yet it is certain he cannot live long because nature is decayed in him;
so when we see the world has his burden (says he) things grow old, nature
decaies, and the creatures groan and are weary of bearing, then it is certain
it cannot be long ere the world fall, though we know not the time when it will
be. Now there be two reasons, why the Lord does give us signs of his coming.

First, Two causes why Christ gives signs of his coming.
for more certainety to assure us of his coming; as 1 Samuel 10. when Samuel,
went to anoint king Saul, he told him of certain signs that he should see,
as namely, that the Asses were found that he went to seek, and that he should
see three men going to God to Bethel, one carrying three Kids, 1
and another five loaves, and another a bottle of wine, that when Saul saw
those things, Simile.
it might the more assure him of the truth of those things that Samuel told
him; so when we see these things that Christ has told us of come to pass, we
may the more assure our selves of the truth of his coming: 1 King. 13. when
the Prophet did prophecy against the Altar, and told them that there should
be a Child borne to the house of David, Simile.
Josiah by name, and upon thee shall he sacrifice the Priests of the high
places, that burnt incense upon thee, and they shall burn men's bones upon
thee: and he gave them a sign, that the Altar should cleave in sunder and the
ashes should fall through, to the end this sign might assure them of the truth
and certainety of it, though it were three hundred years after: so Christ does
give us signs, that when we do see any of them, we may the more assure our
selves of his coming; for the Lord will not steal on the world and come upon
them unawares, but he gives them signs of it. Simile.
We see when the king remooves, the lackies and pages go before, whom when men
see, they know it will not be long ere the king come; so signs be, as it
were, Gods reteiners, his lackies or his pages, they commonly go before him:
therefore when we see these, we may know the Lord will remoove, he is not
far behind, he will quickly follow after.

Secondly, for excitation; To stir up, quicken, and awaken the world, that
they may be provided for his coming: as Matthew. 2
25. it is said, that at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the Bridegroom
comes: then all those Virgins arose out of their beds, and trimmed their
lamps and made ready to meet with the Bridegroom: so every sign that we see
is as it were a loud voice or cry, The bridegroom comes; and therefore every
one should bestirre himself, get faith, repentance, the graces of the Spirit,
and make himself ready to meet with the Bridegroom; for Christ gives us these
signs that they might be as so many tokens and warnings unto us, to make our
selves ready to meet with Christ.

Now there be two consequents, 2
that may be deduced from this Doctrine: Consequents.


First, 1
that the day of judgment cannot be far off, because all the signs that
Christ told us of, be almost all passed already: Matthew. 24. and Luke 21.
Christ gives us many signs of his coming which are almost all come to pass
already; I mean, such as are remooved signs, and do precede his coming: for
there be signs that shall not be till the immediate and present coming of
Christ; therefore the day of judgment cannot be far behind. Hence for our
instruction we are to take notice of, that seeing we know not how soon we
shall stand in judgment before God, every man must awake out of his sins,
and lay hold of salvation, that so we may stand with comfort at that day. Romans
13. 11. The Apostles exhortation is, and that considering the season, it is now
time that we arise from sleep, for now is our salvation nearer than when we
first believed; and so again 1 Cor. 7. 30. But this I say, Brethren, because
the time is short, let them that have wives, be as they that have none; and
they that use the world, as though they used it not; and they that buy, as if
they possessed not; for the fashion of this world passes away: as if he should
say, let all go seeing the time is short, and lay hold on salvation, and make
heaven sure to your selves. One says well, it is good for men to know that it
is but a short time to the day of judgment, for it will make them the more
earnestly apply themselves to virtue; as a man in a long journey when he
comes within the sight of the city, Simile.
it will make him gather up himself and make haste, because the way is but
short, for (says he) quick and nimble men in a long way grow heavy and dull,
and heavy men in a short way, be nimble and gather up themselves: In like
manner we, because we have but a short way should gather up our selves and
apply our selves to virtue. The fathers before the flood are to be commended,
and we are to be condemned, because they knew not of the judgment day, that
it was so near, and yet they did apply themselves to virtue: but Christ has
told us that the day of our redemption draws nigh, and yet for all this we
sleep in our sins and Gods wrath eternally is ready to break in upon us.

The second consequent is, that the day of judgment cannot be yet, because all
the signs be not yet come to pass. 2


There be two signs in my own observation that must come to pass before that
time: Two signs to come.
The first is, Revel. 17. 12. that the ten kings that did uphold the whore,
shall make her naked and desolate. Now this sign is not come to pass yet,
because there be some of the kings that do yet uphold her, as the French king
and the king of Spain.

The second is, the calling of the Jews; for they be not yet called: It is
true indeed that some particular men of the Jewish Nation be called, 2
such as belong to Gods Election from day to day: But the Scripture tells us
that there shall be a public profession amongst the Jews, as there is amongst
the Gentiles with one consent. Now these two signs be yet not accomplished,
and therefore the judgment day cannot be yet. Some silly people think, that
if there be Thunder or an Earthquake the day of judgment is come, and are
exceedingly afraid: It is good indeed to take occasion at such times to repent
us of our sins, and to turn to God, for although the general judgment day
be delayed, yet the day of thy death may come upon thee, thou know not how
soon, and this is a particular judgment day to thee.

Now if a man should demand why Christ does defer the judgment day, seeing all
Creatures groan and long for the coming of it, as Paul says, Romans 8. the
creatures they groan by the instinct of Nature, and the people of God, by the
instinct of Grace; therefore we may marvel that God does defer the judgment
day. I answer, there be three causes or reasons of this delay:

1. Gods patience in waiting for man's repentance. 2. Three causes why the
Judgment is delayed.
His goodness to his Creature. 3. His care of the Elect.
First, it arises out of the patience of God, in that he waits for our
repentance, as Peter shows 2 Pet. 1
3. 9. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, (as some men count
slacknesse) but is long-suffering toward us, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance; so Genesis 6. the Lord gave the
old world, an hundred and twenty years to repent in; this S. Peter calls the
patience of God in his first Epistle Chap. 3. verse 20. Because the Lord does
give us time to repent, and does defer his judgments, and waits with
patience from year to year, and from day to day, to see when we will return
to him. So then this delation of the judgment day arises out of the patience
of God, Revel. 2. 21. it is said of the woman Iezabel, that God gave her time
to repent her of her fornications; and when she did not the Lord did threaten
to cast her into a bed of sickness; so all the time that God gives us here is,
that we may repent and turn to him, but if we do not, but despise the
patience and kindness of God, he will not only cast us into a bed of
sickness, but he will cast us into hell.

Secondly, 2
it arises out of the goodness of God to his creature; which he extends to
the reprobate, so far forth as it does not impeach his justice: for seeing it
is a long time to lie in hell for ever and ever, in torments where there shall
be no mitigation or intermission of pains, but all the wicked shall be
tormented day and night, they shall have no Sabbath of rest, nay they shall not
have the least moment of ease; therefore the Lord out of his goodness does
defer the judgment day: Mat. 8. the devils desired to be kept from hell, and
the Lord shows his goodness to them. Now if the Lord showed his goodness to
Devils, much more to men.

Thirdly, 3
this delay arises out of the care and love that God has of his Elect. There
be a number of men that be yet unborne, and a number now living, unconverted;
therefore it pleases Christ to defer the judgment day, till the number of
them be accomplished. It is said, Revel. 6. 9, 10. The souls of them that lie
under the Altar did cry unto the Lord, saying, How long O Lord, holy and true,
do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them which dwell on the Earth? and
answer was made, that they should rest for a season until their brethren and
fellow servants should be killed as they were: so there be a number of them
that be yet unborne, and not yet converted, that the patience of God stays
for, and therefore the judgment is delayed: as Genesis 19. the Angel could do
nothing to Sodom, Simile.
till Lot was in Zoar, set in safety: so the Lord Jesus will do nothing, till
he has set his Elect people in safety. We see a Ship that takes in
passengers, Simile.
lies at Anchor till the last passenger be come in, then they hoist up sail
and away they go: so the Lord Jesus lies (as it were) at Anchor here in this
world to take in passengers, for the number of his Elect, and when the last man
is come, then the judgment day shall be.

But some man will say, if the judgment day be not yet, then it will make men
secure. To this I answer, that although the judgment be not yet, yet we know
not how soon the day of death may come; therefore we should prepare our selves
for it, repent us of our sins, get faith in Christ, for As the day of death
leaves us, so the judgment day shall find us. It is almost sixteen hundred
years since Judas dyed, and yet he shall stand before God in the same
condition he dyed in, an unrepentant man, and in the same condition and estate
he shall stand before God in judgment. Augustine says well, on Psalm. 36.
Suppose, that the day of judgment cannot be yet, yet the day of death cannot
be far off; therefore, O man, prepare for it, for look in what estate death
leaves us, in the ^ame estate shall judgment find us.

I, Object.
but ye will say, though the judgment day be not yet, yet it is good to keep
men in fear of it?

To this I answer, Sol.
that Christ would not have his Disciples build on a false ground; and Paul
says, 2 These. 2. 1. Now we beseech you brethren, by the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and by our assembling unto him, that you be not soon shaken in
mind, nor troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as from us,
as though the day of the Lord were at hand: Let no man deceive you by any
means, for that day shall not come, except there come a departing first, and
that man of sin be disclosed: so he would not have their fear grounded on a
false ground: and I accordingly excite every Christian man or woman to be
quickened hereby, that as death leaves him, so judgment shall find him;
therefore we should so shut up our eyes here in this world as that they may be
opened again in the kingdom of God.

Fifthly, 5
The persons that shall be judged, be the quick and the dead; that is, The
Person that shall be judged.
all the men and women that are dead, and all them that are alive, at his
coming: for all men shall stand before him, of what estate and condition
soever they be, rich and poor, high and low, we which are present, and they
which are absent; as S. Paul says, We shall all appear before the judgment
seat of Christ: no man can be absent from it; there were many exempted from the
marriage, but there is no man that can be exempted from this; the mountains
cannot hide us, hell cannot hold us, but we must all appear before Christ in
judgment: and I would to God this were written in our hearts with the point of
a Diamond, that it might not be forgotten. There be many ways to shift men's
Courts and Tribunals: they may fly the country, or bribe the Judge, or
compound and agree with their adversary; or if this do it not, they may be
prevented by death: O but we cannot shifts Gods judgment bar, we cannot fly
the country, for whither shall we go but he will find us out? hell cannot
hide us from his presence, we cannot bribe the Judge, because he is an heavenly
and a righteous Judge, and will give to every man according to his works;
neither can we compound the matter with our adversary, for it is the devil
that will accuse us, who will not be agreed with; nor can we prevent it by
death; for as Saint John says in the Revelation, that Death and Hell gave up
their Dead that were in them: so we see nothing can keep us from the judgment
seat of Christ. O that this were sealed in the hearts of all men, and surely it
would make them much more careful how they pass their days in this world.
Saint Paul compares wicked men to those that gather and treasure up money in a
bag, Simile.
which being opened discovers a number of strange coins that they did not know
of; so every day that a Man sins, he does as it were treasure it up in his
Conscience, and when the judgment day comes, then his bag shall be opened,
that is, his Conscience: then shall he see a number of sins that he thought
not of. Therefore, seeing we shall all appear before the judgment Seat of
Christ, let us be careful how we live and pass our days here; for although
we may escape Westminster Hall and the Kings Exchequer, we cannot escape Gods
judgments. Therefore I say, let us labor to repent of our sins and get a
pardon for them, till we have gotten our quietus est in our Conscience, that
so we may stand with comfort at that day; that although we be found sinners,
and great sinners, yet we may get a pardon for them sealed with the blood of
Christ, and show it unto God, who will be thereby pacified and pleased. Simile.
If a Man have committed Treason against the King by coining money, he will
not be at rest and quiet, till he has gotten a Pardon for it; So because we
have committed Treason against God, diverse and sundry ways, we should not be
at rest, till we have got a Pardon for them sealed with the blood of Christ.

SERMON XLIIII.
ACTS 17. 30, 31. But now commands all men every where to repent, Because he
has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness,
by that man whom be has ordained.
IT is a profitable and a fruitful thought (as one says) to think of the
last end, SER. XLIV
not only of the day of Death, but also of the day of Judgment; How this
whole World shall be dissolved, and that we must stand before God to give an
account of all our thoughts, words and actions; How we have lived and passed
our days here. Philosophers say, That it is the end that moves all Agents;
and the Schoolmen say, that All actions are determined in regard of the end.
Simile.
Therefore they compared it to the Stern of a Ship, which is behind the Ship;
when the Ship goes before it, and yet the little Rudder that hangs at the
Stern of it, that does order and govern the Ship this way and that way; so
the end of a man is the best thing that should order all the Actions of his
life, therefore it is a profitable thought, not only to think of the day of
Death, but also of the day of Judgment, thereby to prepare themselves, that
they may stand before God to give in their accounts: for certain it is,
because men do not think of their last end, they run jnto all sin and
disorder: Moses complains of this, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Oh that they were wise, that
they would understand this, that they would consider their last end: And so in
Lament. 1. 9. it is said of Jerusalem, she remembered not her last end,
therefore she came down mightily, she had no comforter: Here we see it is a
profitable thought to think of our last end, and not only of the day of
Death, but also of the day of Judgment; that there shall be an end of this
whole world, and that we must give in our accounts of all our thoughts, Simile.
words, and actions. Philip king of Macedonia, had a little boy to knock at
his chamber door every morning, and to say unto him, Remember Philip, thou art
but a mortal man, and thou must die; so much more we that are Christians
should think of our last end, every night when we go to bed, and every
morning when we rise, and every time we go into the World, that Christ shall
judge us, and that we must give in our accounts of all our thoughts, speeches,
and actions. When Paul preached to Felix, of temperance, and of the last
judgment, he shifted away the matter, and could not abide to hear of it;
because he had a naughty conscience; for Josephus tells us he was a naughty
man, for the woman that was with him (whose name was Drusilla) he had enticed
from her husband, and therefore his conscience accusing him, he shifted away
this thought; but the people of God be often thinking of this, that so they
may be fitted for it; as Job 31. considered with himself, What shall I do
when God stands up, and when he visits me, how shall I answer? so should
we do.

The last day we spoke of the persons that shall be judged, and showed you out
of Scripture, that they were all men, of what estate and condition soever they
be; I that speak, and you that hear; they which are absent, and they which
are present; both the quick and the Dead, as it is in the Creed, that is, all
men and women that ever were, or shall be, past, present, or to come; no man
shall be exempted from that day: So Saint Paul says, We shall all appear
before the Judgment seat of God: and Revel. 20. 12. I saw the Dead both great
and small stand before God: Therefore, it is a sure thing that all shall come
to judgment; the Hills cannot hide us, nor the Mountains cover us, so there is
no man can escape it, nor no man can avoid it. Here in this World there be
many shifts to escape men's Courts, and Tribunals; they may fly the Country,
or bribe the Judge, or compose and agree the matter with their adversary, or if
these do not serve, Death may acquit them; but there is no flying from God;
whither can we go where he will not find us out? If we were in Hell, he
would fetch us thence: Neither will this Judge take bribe, for he is a severe
Judge, and will not be bribed; nor can we compose the matter with our
adversary, for it is the Devil, and he will not be satisfied; he is so cruel
that he will not take the whole World to agree the matter; nor shall we be
acquitted by death, for we see, Revel. 20. that Death and Hell gave up their
Dead that were in them: so there is no way to escape the Judgment seat of
God, but all shall appear before him, from the first man that entered into the
World, to the last that shall be borne, and therefore this should make us the
more careful to pass our days in reverence, and fear before him. Acts 19.
20. as when there was a commotion in Athens, Simile.
the Town Clerk staid all with a word, (as it were) saying, We stand in
jeopardie to be accused of this days sedition: So if men would think of this,
when they be in the heat of their affections, and in the course of sin, it
would stop them, that one day they shall come to judgment, and give in their
accounts for all that they have done, there is no man that can escape it, no
man that can avoid it. When we have sinned through weakness and infirmity,
we should not be at rest, till we have gotten a pardon for it, sealed with the
blood of Christ: As a man that is guilty of Treason, cannot take contentment in
any thing, he cannot eat, drink, or sleep in rest till he has gotten a
pardon from the King; Simile.
so seeing we are guilty of Treason before God, and have sinned many ways
against him, we should not be at rest, till we have a pardon, sealed with
the blood of Christ, and showed it to God, saying, Lord, I confess I have
sinned against thee, but here is a pardon sealed with the blood of Christ, I
know thou will not deny it.

Sixthly, Sixthly, the manner of the judgment.
The manner of the judgment, whereto there belong diverse Actions, so that at
the day of judgment there shall not be one Act only, but diverse.

The first, 1
The burning up of the whole World, even the whole frame of Nature, all
Creatures visible and sensible shall be destroyed and brought down into the
dust; Once the World was destroyed by water, and now it shall be destroyed by
fire: God that set Sodom and Gomorrah on a fire in an instant, and destroyed
it, shall set this whole World on a fire, and no man shall be able to quench
it, and put it out: David says, Psalm. 50. 3. Our God shall come, and shall not
keep silence; A fire shall devour before him, and a mighty tempest shall be
moved round about him. Daniel 7. 9. And he ancient of days did fit, whose
Garment was as white as snow, and the hair of his head like purple wool, his
Throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels like the burning flame; A
fiery stream issued and came forth. So 2 These. 1. it is said, When the Lord
Jesus shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire,
rendering vengeance unto them which know not God, nor obey him in the Gospel:
so that in small time the whole World shall be consumed, and all the glory of
it shall be brought to nothing.

Now if any man shall demand and say, Quest.
What be the particulars that shall be destroyed? I answer, The Apostle
shows, 2 Pet. 3. 10. That the earth with all the works thereof shall be
consumed and burnt up: Sol.
all the habitations where we now dwell, shall be consumed and come to
nothing: many times if ordinary and slight houses be burnt, such as be of
brick and stone escape, but at the day of judgment, not only the slight
buildings shall be burned, Simile.
but also the stronger houses, such as are made of no combustible matter, of
brick and stone. We see 1 King. 18. The fire that came down upon Elias his
sacrifice, did not only burn up the sacrifice and the wood, but it did lick
up the water, and burn up the stones and the dust; so the fire of heaven will
not only burn the slight buildings, but also the strongest houses that be
made of solid matter, of brick, and stone, and marble, yea if they were houses
of iron, they shall be destroyed and dissolved, and brought to the matter they
were made of: so all the world shall be dissolved, and burnt up. From hence we
learn these Uses.

First, Use 1.
seeing the earth with all the works thereof shall be consumed and burnt,
therefore this should teach us to moderate our care for the things of this
life, that we be not so eager and greedy of them, as to scrape and scratch
together these things unconscionably, seeing the fire of Gods wrath shall fall
upon them, and consume them; they shall be dissolved and burnt up; all these
goodly houses, and gardens, hawks, and hounds, all shall be burned with fire;
therefore we should moderate our selves in the things of this life. For which
cause Matthew. 20. when the Disciples came to Christ, and showed him the goodly
buildings of the Temple, says Christ, Do ye so admire these things, and dote
upon them, the time shall come that there shall not be left one stone on
another: Simile.
so may we say, when men dote on the things of this life, and do not seek
after heaven and happiness, Why do ye so dote on these things, the time
shall come that there shall not be a stone left upon a stone. Zerxes when he
had a purpose to go to war, did muster his men in a place, and he saw seven
hundred thousand men, whom he went up unto an hill to take view of, and at the
sight of them wept; his nobles asked him why he did weep? he said, that he
wept to consider how in the revolution of an hundred years, there should not
one of all these be left: so it is good for a man to do as Zerxes did, to
muster up all his delights, pleasures, and profits, to take a view of them, and
to consider that after the revolution of a few years, all shall come to
nothing.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing this earth with all the works thereof shall be burnt up, therefore to
labor for the rich graces of Christ: which is the use Saint Peter makes
thereof, 2 Pet. 3. 11. Seeing therefore that all these things must be
dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be in holy conversation and
godliness? and indeed how ought we to labor to get Faith and Repentance, to
be brought to an estate of grace, that so we may be saved and stand with
comfort at that day? If a man should gather a great deal of wealth together,
Simile.
and put it into an house, if one should come and set the house on fire and
burn up all, he would cry; I am undone, I am undone; so if we lay up all our
comfort and joy here in this world, when the fire of Gods wrath shall come
down from heaven, and consume all these things, we may cry out, We are
undone; and therefore it must be our wisdom to lay up our treasure in
heaven, and then it will be safe; this is the counsel that Christ gives us;
Matthew. 6. Lay not up for your selves treasure upon earth, where the moths and
canker corrupt, and where thieves dig through and steal, but lay up treasure
for your selves in heaven, where neither the moth nor the canker corrupts,
and where thieves neither dig through or steal. Hereupon Augustine says well,
there was a friend that came to a friends house, Simile.
that he had laid up his Corn in a low dark room, telling him that if he
laid it there, it must needs corrupt and putrify, but lay it up on an high
loft, and then it will keep safe; so says he, Christ is this friend that
comes to a friends house, he sees that we lay up our treasures in this World
where they will corrupt, and come to nothing; therefore he gives us this
Counsel, that we should lay up our treasures in Heaven in an high loft, where
we may be sure they will be safe.

If any man here make a doubt, Quest.
and put this question; What is there nothing but this world and the works
thereof that shall be consumed, and burnt? Sol.
I answer him, from the same place of Peter, not only the earth and the
works thereof, but the heavens shall melt with heat, and the elements, so
much as is visible and sensible; even those that are most true and regular, and
constant in their courses, clockes may deceive us, but these will not, they be
true in their courses, and yet these shall melt with hear, and shall pass and
run away from the presence of Christ. Simile.
Here we may see the lothsomenesse of sin, that does not rest in the center
of the earth, but goes thorough the clouds, and does infect the air, almost
to the seat of God himself. I would to God men would think of this; when we
see a man strangely taken away by untimely death, or a house on fire, we think
it strange, but for the sin of man, God will destroy the heavens and the
earth. We see in the Law, that if a man had the Leprosy upon him, he should
be shut up, Simile.
and the walls of the house should be scraped, and if it brake out again, then
the house should be pulled down, and the timber, and the stones, and the (...)
carried away, that it might not infect the people, Levit. 40. 41. so the Lord
does scrape us (as it were) by his judgments, but because sin breaks out
still, he will pull down the house, even destroy this whole world: so that at
the last day no man shall know his former house, or his land, to say here is my
house, or here is my land, as Job speaks, When a man dies, he knows neither
house, nor land.

Now here another question may be demanded, seeing the heaven and the earth
shall be dissolved, Quest.
and burnt up, what shall become of the people of God? To this I answer out of
the Apostle Paul's words, where he tells us, as a Mystery, We shall not all
sleep, Sol.
but we shall all be changed, (...) is, all shall not dye, for those that be
alive, or that be living at Christ's coming shall be changed from mortality to
immortality, this shall be their estate at that day; the creatures appointed
for the fire shall be burned, and the fire shall fall on the wicked, but all
the people of God shall be preserved, as the three Children were in the fiery
furnace: Hence we learn what a comfortable thing it will be, when Gods people
shall see all the world on a fire about them, over their heads, and under their
feet, but it shall not touch them; Moses told the Children of Israel, that the
Lord would bring great plagues on the Egyptians, which should not touch any of
them, so the Lord at the day of judgment will bring down fire on the wicked,
and the ungodly, which shall not touch any of the people of God, howsoever they
be set light by here, not accounted of, nor regarded, yet at that day they
shall see what a comfortable thing it is to be a Christian.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing the heavens and the earth shall be dissolved, and burnt with fire, let
us labor to be found in Christ, to be one of the people of God, and then the
Lord will work strangely for us: if a town or a country should be on fire,
Simile.
and there should be a little house of stone, where whosoever could get into
it, should be preserved from the fire, O how men would thr^ and throng thither:
Beloved, Christ is as a little house of stone, and whosoever is in him shall
be preserved from the fire, when the fire shall fall on the wicked and
ungodly, and burn them, then they that be in Christ shall be safe from
danger; therefore every man should labor to be in Christ, that so he may be
saved: we see Phil. 3. Simile.
the Apostle Paul says, that he accounts of all things to be but dung, and
dross, that he may be found of Christ; so it should be with a Christian,
Simile.
to esteem all things but dung and dross, that he may be found in Christ, let
who will take the world with all the delights and pleasures thereof; we must
labor to lay up our comfort in Christ, and to make God our friend, and then we
shall be preserved when this world shall be dissolved. When the unjust steward
in the Gospel knew his master would turn him out of his office, Simile.
he made a friend with his masters goods; so because we know not how soon the
Lord may turn us out of our offices, out of our dwellings; therefore let us
labor to make God our friend, and then it shall go well with us howsoever.

SERMON XLV.
2 PETER 3. 13. Nevertheless, we according to his promise look for new
Heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells Righteousness.
THe last day we began to speak of the actions that belong to the great day
of judgment, and then we discoursed at large of the first of them, which is,
the burning up of the whole world, and dissolution of the whole frame of
nature; together with the several uses and instructions that did arise
therefrom; now therefore to avoid further repetition I will proceed to the
actions following.

The second action is, the renewing of Heaven and earth, for as soon as this
world is dissolved, by the power of Christ, it shall be renewed again, as you
see it is said in the words read unto you; But we look for a new Heaven, and a
new Earth according to his promise, wherein dwells Righteousness. The people
of God they know this, though the men of the world be blinded as birds are
blinded with snow, but we that be Christians know it, and look for it as a
promise from God, as Esai. 65. 17. For lo, I will create a new Heaven, and a
new Eart^ and the former shall not be remembered; and to put it out of all
doubt, Saint John saw it, Revel. 21. 1. so then it is plain by the Scripture
that we shall have a new Heaven, and a new Earth. But how shall it be new? I
answer, not in regard of substance, but in regard of quality; whence we see the
reason why the creatures are said to groan, Romans 8. 22. that is, they have a
kind of longing or desire to have this time come, SERMON. XLV.
when they shall be set at liberty by this renewing, and brought into as
glorious a state as they were in before they were brought under the bondage of
sin: Psalm. 102. 26. it is said, The heavens shall be changed as a vesture,
etc. whereupon one says well; that the Heaven and the earth shall be changed,
even as a man when he puts on a garment is changed; Simile.
and that is only in the outward view, not in the substance of his body. And
Saint Peter (me thinks) is very strongly for it, in this Chapter, verse. 6. and
7. where he shows, as the world was once destroyed with water, so it shall
be again with fire; how was that? even in the outward view only, the outward
beauty and glory thereof shall be destroyed but the substance shall remain:
Simile.
as a Christian is said to be a new creature, though he be not new in regard
of substance, but in regard of his affection, and disposition; so 2 Cor. 5. 17.
every man (says he) that is in Christ is a new creature: so the Heavens are
the same in substance, and new only in quality and disposition.

Now the heavens are said to be new, Heavens how new.
first, in regard of the use of them; now they bring us rain and snow and
hail at the time appointed, but at the day of judgment they shall bring
Christ, 1
and exhibit him to the world the goodliest sight that ever mortal eye saw,
as Matthew. 26. 64. says Christ, I say unto you, hereafter shall you see the
Son of man sitting at the Right hand of the power of God, and coming in the
clouds of the Heaven, etc. so we see that the heavens shall be changed in
regard of the use of them.

Secondly, the heavens shall be new, in regard of a new disposition; now they
never stand still, 2
but wind and turn up somewhat of the thread of man's life, but then when the
expiration is come, and all time ceases, then they shall stand still, so that
there shall be no more time; which is manifest Revel. 10. 6. Where the Angel
swears by him that lives evermore, which created Heaven, and the things that
are therein, and the earth, and the things that are therein, and the sea, and
the things that are therein, that Time shall be no more. And the Philosophers
say, that, Time is nothing else but the mooving of the heavens and revolution
of them, therefore when all time ceases, and eternity is come, then the heavens
must needs stand still.

Thirdly, 3
the heavens shall be new, in regard of new effects; for now they be the
storehouse of judgments, and his armorie-house from whence he brings his
judgments upon the world, as Psalm. 29. The Lord makes it to thunder from
heaven, etc. But at the day of judgment they shall no more be the
armorie-house of His judgments, but the Lord shall there cause to flow out
abundance of goodness and kindness: therefore the Prophet says, that at the
day of judgment the mountains shall drop down new wine, and the hills shall
flow with milk; so that the influence of Gods goodness shall be distilled
out from the clouds. And thus much for the renewing of the Heavens, we proceed
now to the Earth.

The Earth shall be new in four regards; The Earth shall be new in four
Regards.
first, we see that now there is a great deal of it wast and barren, possessed
with wild beasts, Serpents and Ostriges for the sin of man, 1
as Psalm. 107. 34. A fruitful Land is made barren for the sins of the
people; so now there is a great part of it wast and barren for the sins of
men, but when man's sins are taken away, then the earth shall be made
fertile, and every place shall be replenished.

Secondly, 2
now the earth yields nothing without man's labor and pains, because of the
curse that was laid upon it for sin, but at the day of judgment there shall
be no more curse, for then it shall yield fruit without labor and pains.

Thirdly, 3
now the earth is the valley of tears, where the best men have most trouble,
but at the last day, it shall be a door to let us into glory: as Josh. 2. 15.
the Lord does promise to the Children of Israel to give them the valley of
Achor for a door of hope, so this earth shall be the door of our hope to let
us in to glory, here we shall begin the glory which afterward we shall have
perfect and consummate in Heaven.

Fourthly, 4
the earth now is walled and paled, and hedged in a great part of it, wherein
every man labors to draw the commodity of it to himself, but at the last day
all shall be laid common, there shall not need to be any statute against
enclosures, but all shall be laid open for his Saints and people.

Now here may a question arise, Quest.
seeing the just shall go to heaven, and the wicked to hell, To what end shall
this Earth be renewed? I answer, there be three causes of it: Sol.


1 In Regard of Christ. Three Causes why the earth shall be renewed.
2 In Regard of the Godly. 3 In Regard of the wicked.
First, First, in regard of Christ.
In Regard of Christ; because he shall set up his throne here in this earth,
and make it his judgment seat; now we may not think that it can stand with
the glory of Christ, to set up his judgment seat on the dead cinders, and
fruitless ashes of this sinful world; therefore it shall be renewed to make
it a fit place for Christ to sit in judgment: as when Judges come to sit in
Judgment, Simile.
though the place be mean and unhandsome before, yet then they hang it with
tapestry, deck it, and strew it, to make it a fit place for the Judges to sit
in; so this Earth shall be renewed in regard of Christ.

Secondly, Secondly, in regard of the Godly.
the Earth shall be renewed In Regard of the Godly; that they may see that
there was nothing lost by Adam, but it is made good again by Christ; for
whatsoever was lost by the first, is restored again by the second Adam. In the
Law the year of Iubile being come, when the trumpet sounded, and liberty was
proclaimed; every owner returned to his possession again, that he had been
kept from a long time; so at the last Judgment when the trumpet shall sound,
and liberty shall be proclaimed, all the people of God shall return again to
their possessions, from which they have been withheld, ever since it was lost
by the first Adam.

But why shall the earth be renewed for the Godly, Quest.
seeing they shall be in heaven? I answer, as Chrysostom says, great Kings
and Princes though they keep in their great chambers of estate, Sol.
yet they pass into them through some gallery, or some courtyard; so says
he, though the people of God shall dwell in the great chamber of heaven, yet
because this earth is the gallery and courtyard that they must pass through,
therefore it shall be renewed.

Secondly, 2
For a further increase of glory; as it is a glory and an honor to our king,
that he is king, and Lord of a great many of countries, though it may be he
means never to come into them, Simile.
but dwells here in this land: so this is a great honor to the people of God,
that they be kings and lords of this earth, though they stay not there.

Thirdly, 3
the Earth shall be renewed, in regard of the wicked, that they may the more
sensibly see what a deal of glory their sins have deprived them of, In regard
of the wicked.
they shall not come into heaven to see that: for Revel. 21. it is said, No
unclean thing shall come there: therefore the Earth shall be renewed, that by
it they may have a glance of Heaven, and a slash of the glory that shall be in
Heaven, as it were through a Crevis, that so it might be a further vexation to
them. We read 2 Kings 7. 9. when there was great plenty of victuals, and other
things foretold by the Prophet, Simile.
which the Prince there would not believe; the Prophet says to him, Thou shall
see it with thine eyes, but thou shall not taste thereof: so it shall be unto
the wicked, surely not without great anguish and terror when they shall see
the Earth renewed and themselves to have no part in it. Now the Uses hereof may
be:

First, Use 1.
seeing there shall be a new Heaven and a new Earth, we should labor to be
new Creatures, because none but such dwell in this new Heaven, and new Earth:
For the Text says, We look for a new Heaven, and a new Earth according to
his promise, wherein dwells righteousness: that is, righteous men, such as be
renewed by the Spirit and grace of God. Here in this World there is a mixture
of good and bad together, as in Adams house Cain and Abel, in Abraham's Ishmael
and Jacob, and amongst Christ's Disciples, John and Judas: But in this new
Heaven and Earth, there shall dwell never a wicked man: therefore labor thou
whosoever thou art, to be renewed by the Spirit of Grace, and to repent thee of
thy sins, to return unto God, and thou shall have thy part in this new
Heaven, and new Earth for evermore.

Secondly, Use 2.
that seeing the Heaven and the Earth shall be renewed, there is never a wicked
man that can claim or challenge a foot of it to himself; here in this world
they may have hundreds and thousands of Acres of Land, they may say, in such
and such a place I have so much land, here is the Patrimony that my Father
gave me, here is that which I did purchase; Oh but in the new World they cannot
claim a foot of it: Therefore they may see what a fair thread they have spun
to deprive themselves of all their lands, even such as have had great revenewes
here of the old Earth, shall not have a foot of this new Earth. It is reported
by some Historians, of a certain Nation that every year did elect and choose
themselves a king, who had as goodly attendance as might be, rich apparel and
all things fit and meet for a king; but when the year was expired, they did
turn him naked into an Island, where he did endure extreme misery: Now there
was one of them who was wiser than the rest, that had closely and secretly
before his year was expired, conveyed into this Island, rich apparel and
servants to attend on him, and had builded him a house, and sent all things
fit and meet for him thither beforehand, so that when his year was expired,
and they had turned him into this Island naked, he having provided for himself
before was not distressed: The truth of this I stand not to discuss; but the
moral I am sure may be profitable: for this Kingdom is a Type and figure of
this World, where there be a number of men that have all things that their
hearts can desire, but when death comes, then they are turned as it were into
a wast Wilderness naked, there to endure extreme misery; and therefore it
must be our wisdom, to do as the wise kings did, every day to send
something before, and to provide comfortably for our selves, that when we are
turned out of this World, we may have comfort in the World to come.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing there shall be a new Heaven and Earth, this may be a comfort to poor
Christians, that though they have but a small portion here in this World, yet
they may have a great portion of the new Heaven and Earth, if they please God
and walk conscionably before him; as Revel. 21. 7. It is said, He that
overcommeth, shall inherit all things, etc. What is that which he shall
inherit? Saint John tells us, that he saw a new Heaven and a new Earth, namely
the things that are spoken of before: To him that overcommeth, that is, To him
who can overcome his lusts, his sins, and his corruptions, and is not carried
away with the bad examples of the World, Simile.
the new Heaven and Earth shall be for a possession, as David does acknowledge
with thankfulness to God, that he had given unto him the Land of Canaan, much
more should we acknowledge with thankfulness that the Lord has assigned to
us a Celestial Canaan: therefore comfort you your selves, O ye holy people of
God, in this that you shall have your parts in the New Heaven and new Earth. 1
Cor. 2. 9
It is this that which Paul says, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor
Tongue is able to express, the great joys that God has prepared for them
that love him: as The Queen of the South when she came and heard the wisdom
of Solomon, 1 King. 10. 7.
said, The one half was not told her which she found. So the holy people of
God, they shall say that good people did not tell them the one half of the joy
and comfort that they shall find: therefore beware you do not ^ell this for
toys and trifles; for what a comfort shall it be, Matthew. 25. 34. 41.
when Christ shall look out of the Clouds, and he shall say unto the Godly,
Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you; when he
shall chase and drive all the wicked to Hell, and shall say unto them, Go ye
cursed of my Father, into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. And here let every one of us be exhorted to repent his sins, for now
is the time, yet the gate is not shut: Hereafter thou, if thou now refusest,
thou shall not inherit with the people of God, but may with the foolish
Virgins, knock too late when Heavens gates shall for ever be shut upon thee.

SERMON XLVI.
MATTHEW 24. 30, 31. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in
Heaven: and then shall all the Tribes of the Earth mourn, and they shall see
the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven, with Power and great glory.
And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall
gather together his Elect from the four winds, from one end of Heaven to the
other.
HEretofore ye have heard of the two Acts, SERMON XLVI.
considered in the manner of the last judgment: First, The burning of the
whole World: Secondly, The renewing of the Heaven and the Earth: whence at this
present we are to proceed to the ensuing Acts.

The third Act is, The third Act in the manner of the last judgment.
The appearing of the sign of the Son of man; after which sign immediately
will follow Christ's own coming in Person unto judgment: For the better
clearing of this, we are to consider three things:

1. Why it is called the sign of the Son of Man: 2. What this sign is: 3.
What the Effects of it be: First, why so called.

First, why it is called the sign of the Son of Man, (...), for excellencies
sake; because that Christ himself immediately upon the sign appears: for
there be two sorts of signs; either remooved signs such as precede and go a
long while before Christ's coming, which I mentioned heretofore; or immediate
signs; such as are near or in a manner joined to his coming; as some of the
Prophets foretold long before Christ's coming; Simile.
but John was the immediate forerunner, he pointed at Christ; and therefore
when they saw John, they were rowsed up to the beholding of Christ: so when we
see this sign, then we must presently look for Christ: for therefore it is
called the sign of the Son of Man, because of the excellency, that it goes
immediately before his coming.

Secondly, Secondly, what this sign is.
What this sign is? there be diverse opinions of this, some think one thing,
and some another; some take it to be Christ himself, but it cannot be taken
so, because always the sign is not the thing signified. 1
There is an opposition between these two, Opinion.
so that the sign can never be the thing signified; and therefore it is some
other thing that is meant by the sign of the Son of Man. 2
Some others take it to be the burning up of this World, Opinion.
because it is said, that A fiery stream issued out when the ancient of days
sat upon his Throne. But it cannot be this, because that this sign appears
in Heaven only, and this universal fire is not only in Heaven, but also in
Earth: Others take it to be the sound of the last Trumpet; 3
but it cannot be this, because there is a distinction between them, Opinion.
for Christ tells us of the sign of the appearing of the Son of Man, verse
300 and of the sound of the Trumpet, verse 31. The Papists they say that it is
the sign of the Cross, 4
and Bellarmine says, that all the fathers do so expound it; Opinion.
But there is a Jesuit one of their own fellows that contradicts him, who
affirms it is not certainly found out what is meant by the sign of the Son
of Man, for the fathers do diversely expound it: therefore we may ^ee that
Bellarmine is too bold to say that all the fathers expound it so, because there
is no man that reads the fathers but may see it otherwise: for Origin takes it
for the miraculous power and virtues of Christ: Saint Jerome takes it to be
Christ himself: Chrysostom expounds it of the wounds that be in the hands
and feet and side of Christ: therefore whereas Bellarmine says the fathers
do expound it to be the Cross; any man that will consult them may see there
is no one of the fathers who expound it so: besides there be two reasons why I
dare not assent to take the sign of the Son of man to be the Cross.

First, Two Reasons why by the sign of the Son of Man is not meant the
Cross.
it is true that there is the sign of Christ, but the Cross is no where taken
for the sign of Christ in the Scriptures; therefore there is no ground for
this opinion. Some of the Papists think that it is the wooden Cross, but that
was broken into diverse shivers; therefore if it had pleased God to make that
the sign of the Son of Man, he would have preserved that, 1
and have kept it as he did the bones of Christ, that one of them was not
broken. Again, it is not the wodden Cross, for that is a thing that is turned
to corruption, 2
unless we will believe there is a resurrection of the Cross, as there is a
resurrection of the body. The Church of Rome indeed does keep a feast in
honor to the Cross, and say that it shall be joined with his coming, but
thence to infer it shall be so, 3
is no good consequence: Some of them again do think it shall not be the
wooden Cross, but a cross that shall be in the Air, the truth whereof I
find no where in the Scripture. And now to tell you my heart told me always
that Christ did expound it in this chapter, and that the Disciples did
understand what the sign was, or else they would have asked him of it, as they
did Matthew. 13. when he told them of the tares, Master (say they) Tell us the
meaning of the tares. Then I perused the Chapter and I did light on verse 27.
where it is said; As the lightning comes from the East, The sign of the
Son of Man, what it is.
and shines into the West, so shall the coming of the Son of Man be. That
is, with infinite brightness and splendour shall he come at that day; In which
place Christ tells his Disciples, that there be many shall say, Lo here is
Christ, and there is Christ, but believe them not, for I will give you a sign
of my coming, and that is when you shall see infinite brightness and
splendour, that shall come from the body of Christ, the brightness whereof
shall darken all other lights. When they shall see this, it shall awaken the
World, and stir up every man to look for Christ. Now that there shall be
such brightness and splendour, come from the body of Christ, it is clear by
the Scriptures, Revel. 21. 23. And the city has no need of the Sun, nor of
the Moon, to shine in it, for the glory of God did light it, and the Lamb is
the light of it: So the brightness of Christ's body shall be infinite, more
than all the lights of this World, and Matthew. 7. when Christ was transfigured
on the Mount, His face did shine as the Sun, and his clothes were as white as
the light. Moses when he came from the Mountain and had talked with God,
Differences of Christ and Moses glory.
his face did shine, and there was great glory put upon him; but yet there was
great difference between the glory that was on Christ, and his; 1
For first, this glory was but only on Moses face, but this was all Christ's
body over. Secondly, when Moses put a veil over his face, they could not see
his glory, 2
but Christ did shine through his garments. Thirdly, the glory that was on
Moses was fearful that the people fled away, 3
but the glory that was on Christ was amiable, for Peter says, It is good
being here, let us make three Tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moses, and one
for Elias. 4
Fourthly, Moses could not communicate his glory to any, but Christ he
communicates his glory to others; for Matthew. 13. it is said, That the Just
shall shine as the Sun in the Firmament. So we see that the glory of Christ
is greater, and yet this glory that was on Christ in the Mount was but a type
and figure of the glory that shall be on Christ, at the day of judgment: and
this glory and brightness that shall appear before his coming, I take to be
the sign of the Son of Man.

Thirdly, Thirdly, the effects of the Son of man's coming.
what the effects shall be of the sign of the Son of man: and surely,
fearful shall they be to the wicked, and comfortable to the godly, for when
the sign of the Son of man shall appear, then all the wicked shall mourn, 1
weep, and cry out of their sins, that they have not loved Christ but
despised him, have not obeyed his Laws, but contemned, and set light by them;
therefore it will be a fearful time to the wicked: but to the godly it shall
be great comfort, for Christ tells the Jews, Matthew. 23. 29. Ye shall see me
no more, till that ye say, Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord;
the very reprobate shall say, these be the happy and blessed men, howsoever we
have hated and despised them; O, that we had lived as they did, then we
should have been happy too: I have instanced often before in the example of
Joseph, Genesis 45. 5. and because it is apt to the purpose, I cannot pass it at
this present; Simile.
for when Joseph did discover himself to his brethren, thren, they were
abashed and ashamed, because their conscience told him that they had betrayed
and sold him for a slave before, nay, some of them would have killed him; if
they had loved him, and used him well, then it might have been a comfort to
them, when he did discover himself, and say, I am your brother Joseph: so I
say of Christ, what a terror will it be to the wicked and ungodly; because
they have despised and condemned him, if they had used him well they might have
had comfort at his appearing: Simile.
we read likewise 2 Samuel 2. 22. when Asahel pressed upon Abner, Abner said to
him, depart from me, wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? how then
shall I be able to hold up my face to Ioab thy brother? so when we shall
sin and offend Christ how shall we hold up our faces at that day. So then we
see it shall be a terror to the wicked, and to such as have not repented them
of their sins; but unto the godly, Christ's coming shall be greatly
comfortable, as Augustine says: we see in reason, Simile.
if two men should be beyond sea, and their lord and master should send for
them, the one to be honored for his good service, the other to be punished
for his offenses; though it may be they both come home in one s^ip, eat at
one table, lie in one bed, arrive at one haven, and come to one place, yet
their thoughts would be diverse, for the one would think, now is the time that
I shall be honored for my good service, therefore it is a comfortable time to
him: the other would think, now is the time that I shall be punished for my
offenses; therefore it must be a time of discomfort to him: this is the direct
case between the godly and the wicked, that they may eat at one table, lie in
one bed, dye all one kind of death, and yet their thoughts be diverse; for the
godly, they shall rejoice when that time comes, because they shall be
honored and advanced, and it shall be a terror to the wicked, because they
shall be punished for their offenses, as John 20. when Christ appeared to Mary,
Simile.
(being grieved and dejected for the loss of him,) and said, Mary, she turned
about and said, Rabboni, Master; as if she should say, I am glad that I have
found thee, Heaven and earth could not make her so glad as she was when she
found Christ; so when a Christian has looked out at his windows and doors to
see Christ, many a time, and at last shall see him come in glory and breaking
the clouds, and coming to Judgment, he may say as Mary did, Rabb^ni, Master,
I am glad to have found thee, so they may say, O Lord Jesus, art thou come?
Thou art He that I have longed for a long time, and blessed be God, that this
day is come: therefore seeing Christians are desirous of Christ's coming, this
should teach them to prepare for it: we see a loving wife, Simile.
in the absence of her husband, when she looks for his return she will
trim up her house, garden and walks to have all things handsome; so we that
be Christians, when we hear that Christ will come, we must trim up our
houses, that is, our hearts, and our consciences, and make all fit to
entertain Christ.

Having declared the signs that go before, and also such as join with the
coming of Christ, we proceed to the next thing, which is the manner of his
coming, and that is glorious, attended on by Angels, he shall come in the
greatest glory that Heaven and Earth can afford. There is great difference
between the first and the second coming of Christ. His first coming was base
and mean, contemned and despised of all sorts of men; and we see how unkindly
he was used at the hands of men, in that they condemned him, the Soldiers set
a crown of Thorns on his head, they did mock at him, buffet him, and
crucify him; and why? Because he was apparelled and clothed with our sins,
which may teach us, that the noblest and greatest one that is, if sin be upon
him, it will disgrace and put him down: therefore as Christ did cast away
sin, and did put it off, and then entered into glory, so we must labor to
do as Christ did, to put off sin, to kill it, to make a grave for it, and to
bury it, and then as Christ comes in glory, so we shall come in glory also;
But if we do not put off sin, nor cast the filthy rags of it from us, Christ
will come in glory, and we fall to shame, disgrace and contempt. Now in the
manner of Christ's coming to judgment, we may observe three things:

1. How he shall come in glory. 2. Wherein this glory consists. 3. What Benefit
we shall have by it.
First, how he shall come; it shall be in glory as we have heard, a little
before: so also it is said, First, He shall come in glory.
Matthew. 16. 27. For the Son of Man shall come in the glory of his Father,
with his Angels, and then shall he give to every man according to his deeds;
and again, Luke 9. 26. For whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my Words,
of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he shall come in his glory, and
in the glory of his Father, and of the holy Angels: So then Christ shall come
in all the glory that Heaven and Earth can afford, and therefore it is manifest
there is great difference between his first coming and his second coming;
For his first coming was in the estate of humility, he was despised and
rejected of men, He was a man full of sorrows, and we esteemed him not; and
as the Prophet David says of him, a worm and no man, for our sins brought
him to the lowest step of abasement. As a few drops of water, being put
into a lamp, by little and little, Simile.
the light decreaseth, till at last it dies and goes out; so our sins being
put upon him did so darken and abate his glory, that it brought him to the
lowest step and degree of abasement. We think it no matter when we sin
against God, but here we see when our sins were imputed to Christ, it cast such
darkness and abasement upon him, that though he were glorious in himself, yet
in the sight of the world he was the most abject amongst men: and if Christ was
thus abased, much more then the most noble and the greatest man that is, if he
sin against God, it will take away all his glory; we marvel that sin
should cast such disgrace upon men, and bring such shame upon them; but we
need not marvel at it, seeing it cast such disgrace on Christ, when it was
but imputed unto him. Simile.
Genesis 49. 4. it is said of Reuben, Unstable as water, Thou shall not be
excellent, because thou wentest to thy Fathers bed, thou did defile it;
therefore thy dignity is gone; so if we sin against God, it will take away
all our glory: as the false Prophets said, when they were demanded, What are
these wounds in thy hands? Then he shall answer, Thus was I wounded in the
house of my friends, Zech. 13. 6. So we may say by our sins, when they have
brought disgrace and shame upon us, what is this? They be the wounds that I
have received in the house of my friend. ^imile.
It is well observed of a learned man, that if one take the brightest color,
let it be what it will, Scarlet, or Purple, or Watchet; and hold it in the
Sun, and it will have a dark shadow; so the brightest sins, and the most
brave, they will have but a dark shadow when they come before the Sun of
righteousness Christ Jesus unto judgment. Therefore seeing sin brings such
disgrace upon us, we should take heed we do not sin, but rather cast it
from us. We see when Christ had cast away our sins from him, he had the
former glory that he had in the beginning; as Heb. 9. 28. It is said, That
Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many, and to them that look
for him shall he appear, the second time without sin unto salvation. Which
may teach us, that if we cast away our sins, and labor to bury them in the
grave, we shall have that former glory that we had in the beginning, before
the fall of our first Parents: Simile.
so Judges 16. it is said of Sampson, That when he had sinned against God, he
lost his strength, but after that his hair grew again; as soon as he had
renewed his repentance, his strength did come again, as appeared in that He
killed more at his death, than he did in his life; so he had more glory at his
death, than in his life; so howsoever our sins may bring disgrace and shame
upon us, yet if we can repent of them and turn to God, we shall have greater
glory than ever we had at the first, or should have had if Adam had stood in
his innocence.

Secondly, Secondly, wherein this glory consists.
wherein this glory of Christ consists: which is chiefly in three things:
First, In the train of Christ, that he shall be accompanied and attended
with, all the holy Angels; for there is never an Angel, Archangell, Cherubin
or Seraphin, but they be ready to do service to Christ and to attend him: So
Daniel, 7. 10. It is said, A fiery stream issued and came forth from him,
thousand thousands did minister unto him, and ten thousand did stand before
him; and 2 These. 7. When the Lord shall show himself from Heaven with his
mighty Angels, in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto all them that know not
God nor obey his Gospel; and Jude 14. the Apostle shows that Henoch the
seventh from Adam did prophecy of this saying, Behold, the Lord comes with
thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all men. This is one point
of the glory of Christ, that the Angels shall attend him, and be ready to do
him service: we see the person of a King is glorious in himself, Simile.
but when he is enclosed with his Nobles and Guard, it is more glorious; so the
person of Christ is glorious in himself, but more glorious when he is
accompanied with all the Angels and Powers in Heaven, who are ready to do him
service: Let this therefore be a comfort to Christians, for we see when Christ
came to his passion; he was guarded with a company of base Soldiers; but at
his second coming he shall have thousand thousands of Angels to attend him.
Secondly, this glory consists in the brightness of his body.


Secondly, it consists in the splend^r and brightness of his body; it shall
darken all other lights, even the light of the Sun and the Moon. So Revel.
21. 23. it is said, that the City has no need of the light of the Sun,
neither of the Moon to shine on it^ for the glory of God does light it, and
the Lamb is the light thereof. This is another part of the glory of Christ,
unto which the most eminent glory of the greatest kingdoms and states on Earth,
is not comparable: and therefore why do men so dote on the glory of this World.

Thirdly, Thirdly, in the eminency of his Sovereign power.
it consists in the eminency of his Sovereign power and authority, that he
has to arraigne and judge all men as the supreme Judge. So Psalm. 110. 1. The
Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies
thy footestoole: All the enemies of Christ shall be brought under foot of
Christ, and shall lick the dust of his feet: so also 1 Cor. 15. 25. it is
said, For he shall reign till he has put down all his enemies under his
feet: this is another part of Christ's glory. Tell me, do you think that
Adam was a glorious man, when all the Birds and Beasts were brought before him,
to receive names from him as their Sovereign Lord? Then what a great glory
will this be to Christ, that not only the Birds and Beasts shall be brought
before him, but also all men, and that not to receive names, but to give a
final sentence either of absolution or condemnation?

I, but what shall we be the better for this glory of Christ? I answer, Christ's
glory is for the good of his Saints and People; he is glorified not only for
himself, but also for the good of Christians that believe in him; Christ has
two keys.
for he has two keys; the key of Hell and of Heaven. First, the key of Hell
to shut up all the wicked and damned thereinto; As Revel. 1
20. And I saw an Angel come down from Heaven, having the key of the
bottomless Pit, and a great chain in his hand, and he took the Dragon that
old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and he bound him a thousand years,
and cast him into the bottomless pit, and he shut him up, and sealed the door
upon him, etc. Thus we see it is Christ that is this Angel that has the key
of Hell in his hand, to shut up the Devil and the damned and the wicked into
Hell; so that there shall not be left a Devil nor a wicked man, nor any of the
damned to annoy or hurt any good man: So Matthew. 15. 41. The Son of Man shall
send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things
that offend, and them which do iniquity. Now in this world, in the most
sanctified Church and best reformed, there is a number of disorders and
corruptions that does trouble toil and offend the People of God: but at the
last day every thing that offends shall be taken away, the Devil, the Damned
and Wicked men shall be shut into Hell; so that a dog (as it were) shall not
so much as moove his tongue at one of Gods People.

Secondly, the wicked shall not only be shut into Hell, but Christ has a key
also to open Heaven and to let in the godly; as John 14. 3. He says to his
Disciples, I go to prepare a place for you, and if I go to prepare a place
for you, I will come again and receive you unto my self, that where I am,
there may you be also: So when he has locked up the wicked and ungodly in
Hell, then he will make a way to Heaven and open it to his Servants; as 2
Kings 10. 15. When Iehu had slain Ahabs seventie sons and Ahaziahs brethren,
and the blood was yet warm upon his hands, meeting with a good man, Iehonadah
the son of Rechab; He blessed him and said unto him, Is thine heart upright
as mine is toward thine? and Iehonadab answered, It is; If it be, give me
thine hand: and he gave him his hand and took him into his Chariot; so the
Lord will do when he has chased all the wicked to Hell, and the blood of
them is yet warm (as it were) on his hands, meeting with a good man he will
say; You are a good man, your heart is upright; then he will take him up into
his Chariot, that is, into Heaven; so God will honor all his servants. Thus a
These. 1. 10. it is said, That he will come to be glorified in his Saints, and
to be made mavelous in all them that believe: He will not account himself
glorified, till he has glorified his Saints, therefore he will not be only
glorious in himself, but he will also make his Saints glorious. The Uses are:

First, Use 1.
seeing Christ communicates his glory to his Saints, therefore they should
comfort themselves with the hope of this, that one day there will be a time of
glory, howsoever they are kept down here in this world with many crosses and
afflictions; so Col. 3. 3. it is said, Ye are dead, and your life is hid with
Christ in God: there is a life in a Christian, and that a glorious one too,
though the world cannot see it because it is hid in Christ, Simile.
yet it is truly in him; as the beauty and life of the flower lies hid in the
root all the wintertime; so the life of a Christian and his glory lies hid in
Christ, but when he comes then he shall be perspicuous, then his glory shall
appear. Simile.
When Christ came before Pilate he asked him, if he were a King? sure he
thought him but a poor king: Christ answers, My kingdom is not of this world;
so a Christian may say in all his disgraces, my kingdom is not of this world,
but is above the clouds, a kingdom of glory and happiness. Chrysostom says,
in this world is the place of conflict and combat, therefore we must look for
nothing but blows, wounds, and blood, but when the combat is at an end, then
we may look for crowns and rewards; therefore we may comfort our selves in
the hope of this, that one day we shall have glory.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing that Christ communicates his glory to his Saints, all true Christians
have good cause to long for his coming: the wicked care not how long it be
ere he come, the longer he tarries they think it the better; O, but the
people of God, they care not how soon he come, because it is the better for
them, for when he comes they shall have glory; therefore Saint Paul says, Romans
8. that the creatures groan, and the Saints groan desiring and longing when
this time of glory will be, as Job 14. 14. says he, If a man dye shall he rise
again? all the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come,
etc. So Christians look and wait for a change, Simile.
from mortality to immortality, from an estate of humility, to an estate of
glory; therefore they desire and long for Christ's coming: as Sisera's mother
did wait and long for Sisera, Judge. 5. 28. where it is said, The mother of
Sisera looked out at a window, and she did cry out at the latise, why is his
chariot so long a coming, and why tarrieth the wheels of his chariot? so the
people of God long for Christ's coming, SERMON XLVII.
and when they look out of their doors and windows they may say, O, when
will Christ come in his glory, that we may be glorified with him.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing that Christ communicates his glory to his Saints and to his people, do
thou labor to be one of them, and it will be a comfortable day to thee:
therefore David says, Psalm. 119. ult. I have gone astray like a lost sheep,
seek thy servant for I have not forgot thy Commandments; as if he should say,
I have gone astray, I have been a sinner, but Lord seek me and make me one of
thy servants: so a Christian may say with the holy father Bernard, O Lord Jesus
make me one of thy servants and receive me, and as thou tookest away the
sins of thy people, so do thou now take away mine; and Lord breed
conscience and care in me, that when thou glorifiest thy Saints, I may be
glorified with them: there be many masters strive for my service, as pride,
vainglory, and covetousness; but I strive against them all, and I renounce
them, and bid farewell to them, for I will bestow my love only on thee, Christ
shall be my king, he shall be my Lord and Master, and so when he comes in
glory, I shall have glory with him.

SERMON XLVII.
MATTHEW 24. 30, 31. And they shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds
of Heaven, with power and great glory. And He shall send His Angels with a
great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together His Elect from the
four winds, from one end of Heaven to the other.
WE heard the last day that Christ shall come in glory to judge the whole
world: before he came in the estate of humility, as a man clothed with our
sin; but now he shall come in glory: before he came in the state of a
servant, but now he shall come in the state of a Lord and King: before he had
John Baptist to his forerunner, but now he shall have an Archangell to Usher
him: before he was attended with twelve poor Disciples, but now he shall have
thousand thousands of Angels to guard him: before he was laid in a stable, but
now he shall sit on a glorious Throne: before he did ride on an Ass to
Jerusalem, but now he shall come on the clouds: before he raised up some three
or four dead, but now he shall raise up all the dead: Hence we learn the
greater glory Christ shall have, the greater is the comfort of Christians, for
he shall not only be glorious in himself, but shall be made glorious in his
Saints.

Now the glory of Christ shall be the greater, that an Archangell shall go
before him, to gather together all men, and to set them before him; or to
summon or cite all men, and to give warning to the whole world to appear
before Christ, who sits as supreme Judge to give sentence upon all men. In
which summons three things offer themselves to our observation:

1. Who shall sound the Trumpet. 2. What the power of the sound is. 3. To what
end it shall be.
First, 1
who shall sound the Trumpet; Who shall sound the Trumpet.
It is an Archangell, as 1 These. 4. 16. says the Apostle, For the Lord
himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, and with the voice of an
Archangell, and with the Trumpet of God; Hence we learn, that there is never
an Angel nor Archangell, but shall be ready to do service to Christ and to
attend him and therefore much more should we be ready, being but dust and
ashes, to do him service, and to attend him while we live here: We see Luke
7. 38. how ready Mary was upon her conversion to do service to Christ, and to
attend him, for She sits down at his feet, she weeps, and washes them with
her tears, and wipes them with the hair of her head* Simile.
her eyes were as a basin of water to wash Christ's feet in, and her hair as a
towell to wipe them. In like manner, we upon our Conversion should be ready to
do service to Christ, though we cannot sit at his feet, as Mary did, to wash
them with our tears, and wipe them with our hair, yet we must be ready to
do him service in the duties of Faith, Repentance, Love, and Holiness;
according to Paul's exhortation, Romans 14. 18. For whosoever in these things
serves Christ, is acceptable to God; and approved of men: Therefore although
we cannot with Mary sit down at the feet of Christ, yet let us labor to do
him service in the duties of Love, and holiness, for such service will be
acceptable to Christ: and therefore fie on the pride of men that disdain to
do service unto him in the duties of Prayer, hearing of the Word preached,
Repentance, and the like whereas there is never a state in heaven, Angel nor
Archangell, but is ready to do him service and to attend him.

Secondly, 2
what shall be the power of the sound: That appears in two things; What shall
be the power of the sound.
first, that the sound of it shall be heard all the world over to the furthest
part of it, and the living shall not only hear it, but the dead, such as have
lain rotting in their graves many years together. 1
Secondly, they shall not only hear it, but they shall stir, and startle at
it, and move out of their graves But from whence comes this power? I answer,
the voice is the voice of the Archangell, but the power is of Christ; so the
Ministry is the Angels: Therefore seeing all the dead shall hear it and shall
not only hear it, but shall stir and be awaked therewith, what a pitiful
thing is it, that we daily hear Christ call unto us in the Ministry of his
Word, and yet we do not stir or be awaked at it, or move out of our sins
and corruptions? In Ezekiel. 37. we read of a number of dead bones that lie
scattered here and there, and when the Prophet did prophecy to them, There was
a noise and a cluttering the bones together, bone ran to bone, and the sinews
and the flesh came up upon them: But God by his Ministers has prophesied to us
a long time, and yet there is no noise nor cluttering of the bones amongst us,
bone does not run to his bone, nor sinews grow on the bones, grace does not
grow in our hearts, nor true repentance move us to newness of life: there is
never a man living but he shall hear the voice of the Archangell; for
howsoever he will not hear the voice of Christ to his conversion in this
world in the Ministry of his Word, yet he shall be sure to find it
powerful to his confusion at the great day of judgment in the world that is
to come.

Thirdly, 3
to what end this sound shall be: to summon and cite all men before Christ as
the supreme Judge, To what end the sound shall be.
to give warning to the whole world, and to call all men together, to give in
their accounts, not only the living but the dead, thousand thousands of men
and women that the grave has now devoured; thousand thousands that the Caves,
Rocks and Dens has swallowed up thousands that the beasts and the birds
have destroyed, and thousand thousands that the sea has devoured; All shall
come forth and make their appearance before Christ: so says Paul, 1 Cor. 5.
10. For we shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ: not only
the living but the dead also, all shall make their appearance and stand before
Christ, as the Judge of this whole world: Hence we learn, how careful every
one of us ought to be to pass his days in Reverence and Fear before God, as
that we may stand with Comfort before him at that great and terrible day. If
we compare these two places together, Exodus 19. 19. and Heb. 12. 21. we shall
find that when Moses heard the trumpet blow louder and louder, and shriller
and shriller, Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake: Now if Moses was thus
afraid and quaked at the giving of the Law, when God did speak to him, how
afraid shall men be at the day of Judgment, how shall they quake when the
Lord shall come to punish the transgression of the Law: Esaias 6. 5. the Prophet
cries out, Woe is me, for I am undone, Simile.
because I am a man of polluted lips, and I dwell amongst a people of unclean
lips: for mine eyes have seen the king, the Lord of hosts. In like manner,
every wicked man of this world shall cry out at that day, Woe is me, I am
undone, I am a sinful and polluted man, I have despised Religion, I have not
walked carefully and conscionably before God, and now mine eyes shall see the
Lord of hosts: O how shall men quake and tremble, and how terrible will that
day be? To illustrate this unto you and press it home to your consciences give
me leave to relate a story, the truth whereof is not to the purpose to enquire,
for the moral is that which I intend, and you may make profitable use of: and
this it is; There was a certain king that did weep and was heavy and sad,
which when his brother saw, he asked him, why he was so heavy and sad? Says
he, because I have judged others and now I must be judged my self: Why
(says his brother) art thou so heavy and sad for this, it will be a long time
ere that day come, Simile.
and besides that, it is but a slight matter: the king said little to it for
the present: now it was the order in that country, when any man had committed
any treason, there was a Trumpet sounded at his door in the night time, and he
was brought out the next day to be executed: now the king commanded a Trumpet
to be sounded at his brothers door in the night time, who waking out of his
sleep, when he heard it, arose and came quaking and trembling to the king:
How now, says the king, what is the matter you quake and tremble, and are so
afraid? I am attached of treason (answers he) and I shall be executed the next
morning: why, says the king to him again, art thou so afraid and do thou so
tremble at that? knowing that thou shall be judged by thy brother, and for a
matter that thy conscience tells thee thou art clear of: how much more
therefore may I be afraid, seeing that God shall judge me, and not in a matter
that my conscience frees me in, but of that which I am guilty of? and besides
this, if the worst come it is but a temporary death, that thou should dye;
but the death I am subject to is eternal, both of body and soul. Hereby we
may see what terror will be to a guilty conscience, that has not repented of
his sins; how dreadful will that day be, when the books shall be opened,
and all the thoughts, words and works of every man shall be manifested, as well
the secretest lusts of the heart-adultery; as the shameless blasphemies of
open profanenes; as well the private corruptions of bribed justice, as the
public gratings of heard-hearted oppression? then neither poverty nor riches,
neither meandness nor honor, no state or condition shall free us, Quest. Sol.
all must appear and answer for themselves. But what shall we do in this
case may some man say? I answer, we must do as Iaakob did when his brother
Esau came against him, Simile.
with four hundred men, Genes. 34. I will pacify his wrath with a present; if
I have found grace in thy sight, then receive my gift; so when we know that
God is coming our against us, not with four hundred men, but with thousand
thousands of his Angels, we must do as Iaakob did say, I will give him a gift,
I will pacify his wrath with a present, that so I may find favor in his
sight to compose the matter with him before that great and terrible day come.

Now the next thing, The great gathering of all.
that shall be at the day of judgment, is the assembling and gathering
together of all men at that day; so that which we hear now with our ears, we
shall see then with our eyes; for the Angels shall gather together God elect
from the one end of heaven to the other, so the words of Christ be. In which
gathering together of the elect we observe three things:

1. What they be that shall be gathered. 2. By whom they shall be gathered. 3.
To whom they shall be gathered.
First, First, who shall be gathered.
who they be that shall be gathered; Gods elect, as the text shows: now it
is out of all question, that not only Gods elect shall be gathered, but the
wicked also which Christ, shows in two parables; first, of the tares, Matthew.
13. 41. for as the tares are gathered and burnt in the fire, so shall it be in
the end of the world, says our Savior, The Son of Man shall send forth his
Angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend; and
then verse. 44. in the parable of the draw-net that is cast into the Sea, and
gathers of all kind of fishes, which when it is full, men draw to land, and
sit and gather the good into vessels, and cast away the bad; so the wicked
shall be gathered too. Quest.
I, but seeing the wicked shall be gathered as well as the godly, why is it
said that the Angels shall gather together the elect only? Sol.
I answer, to show the tender care that Christ has of the elect, that he would
not have so much as a little bone lost or a finger or a toe or a hair of their
heads, such a tender care has he of them: as David gave a charge to his
Captains, Simile.
2 Samuel 18. 5. concerning Absalom, If you meet with the young man, entreat him
kindly for my sake; such a charge Christ shall give to his Angels, entreat the
elect well for my sake, have a tender care of them, that there be not one of
them wanting. Now what is the reason that Christ has such a tender care of the
elect? I answer, because they be his mystical members and he will be complete
in all his members; therefore if we be of hsi elect, there shall not a bone, or
a finger, or a little toe, nor so much as the hair of their heads be wanting,
such a tender care God has of his elect; but the wicked they shall be hurried
and haled to the bar as thieves, villains and traitors; when the other shall
be brought tenderly by the hands of Angels. Therefore seeing there shall be
such an assembly of all men both good and bad at that day, how great should our
care be to provide our selves against that dreadful appearance. O man,
whoever thou art, do but consider with thy self, and think what a number of
men there have been of the Romans since it was Rome, what a number of men
there have been in England since it was inhabited, or in France, and so of all
other Countries, and then think of all the men, that have been in all ages,
and at all times from the beginning of the world to the latter end, and that
all these shall be gathered together before Christ; and then how can thou
choose but be careful how thou pass thy days here, that thou may stand
with comfort before Christ, in such an assembly: David says, Psalm. 1. the
wicked shall not stand in the Judgment; if a man be a wicked man though he be
a king or a lord, or a kinght or whatsoever he be, he shall not be able to
hold up his head in judgment; but the godly man though he be a poor man he
shall lift up his head with comfort, whereas there is never a man that is
wicked which shall stand before God in this great assembly; therefore labor
thou to repent of thy sins, and to get faith in Christ, and to be prepared
for that day. I would to God I could persuade you a little to sequester your
thoughts from the world, and to think of the day of the Lord, that all men
shall be gathered together before the Lord, and arraigned, to give an account
of all his actions that he has done; how would this work on our hearts to lay
up comfort for that day? Esai. 10. 3. The Prophet demands, Simile.
What shall ye do now in the day of your visitation and of destruction? so
the wicked may say, what shall we do at that day, when we shall be convicted
and found haters of God, despisers of good things, contemners of religion, and
deceivers of our neighbors: so the consideration of this might make every one
to be prepared for it. Thus we see that not only the elect shall be gathered,
but the wicked also.

Secondly, Secondly, by whom they shall egathered.
by whom they shall be gathered; by the Angels: Now the Angels do service to
us; first, when we be living; secondly, when we be dead; thirdly, at the day
of judgment.

First, First, the Angels serve us living.
they do us service whilst we are living, they attend us, and carry us in
their hands, as it is said, Psalm. 91. For he shall give his Angels charge over
thee to keep thee in all thy ways; they shall bear thee in their hands, that
thou hurt not thy foot against a stone: so Psalm. 34. 7. The Angel of the Lord
pitcheth round about them that fear him, and delivers them.

Secondly, Secondly, at our death they serve us.
at the day of death, they be round about our houses, attend our chambers and
our sick beds, and when we are dead, they carry our Souls into Heaven; as we
may see, Luke 16. in the story of Lazarus.

Thirdly, Thirdly, at the day of judgment.
they do us srvice at the day of judgment; to open our graves, to dig and
pull away the mould, and to conduct and carry us into the presence of Christ;
therefore do thou labor to be a servant of Christ, and to fear God, and the
Angels shall not only attend thee while thou live here, but shall dig thee
out of thy grave, and take away the moulds, and shall conduct and bring thee
into the presence of Christ; as Acts 12. when Peter was in prison, the Angel
came and opened the prison door, and there was a light did shine round about
him, and he smote off his fetters and chains, and led him into the streets of
the City: so the Angels shall do to the godly at the day of judgment, they
shall open their graves which is a Prison, and shall knock off the Gives of
mortality; a light shall shine round about them, and they shall take them by
the hand (as it were) and lead them from country to country till they come at
the presence of Christ, to the new Jerusalem to enjoy fellowship with God, and
his blessed Angels.

Thirdly, Thirdly, to whom we shall be gathered.
to whom we shall be gathered, To Christ, first, as to the Head; and then one
to another, as to the members.

First, 1
we shall be gathered to Christ our Head, there shall not one of his members
be wanting: which may be a great comfort to all Christians; for this is that
they desire, that all their prayers they conceive, all the Sermons they hear,
all their labors and pains tend to; it is the center of their desires: for
this they sigh and long to be gathered home to their Head Jesus Christ. So
Phil. 1. Paul desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, though it be
with the loss of life or goods he was contented. Genesis 45. 1. Simile.
we see when Joseph and his brethren met together, what joy there was; Joseph
did weep on his brethrens necks, and they on his: so when Christ and his
members meet, O what joy there shall be at the day of judgment; they shall
not weep one upon another neck, but there shall be joy unspeakeable and
glorious.

Secondly, 2
they shall be gathered one to another, as to members; though they live now in
diverse Countries and Kingdoms, in diverse Towns and Houses, and (by reason
of some corruptions) it may be we may have little comfort one of another, yet
at the day of judgment all shall meet together again, and then we shall
rejoice in the company of each other; then we shall meet with all the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors and all our godly
friends and acquaintance that ever we knew, came of or heard of; Simile.
we see when friends have been absent a long time one from another, and meet
together again, how welcome are they one to another, and how do they rejoice
in the company of each other? So at the day of judgment, when we shall meet
with our godly friends and acquaintance that have been absent from us a long
time, what joy and comfort will there be? Simile.
We see also when friends meet together at a Feast, what joy there is one
with another: O, but there shall be greater joy at the day of judgment, when
all the godly meet together and when every man's joy shall be our joy: So it
shall be a comfortable assembly to be gathered to Christ, and one Christian
to another: we see here on Earth when Christians are met together to pray, and
confer, and to sing Psalms, what joy and comfort is there, and yet there is
many times means of coffeehouse; but when all weakness shall be at an end,
and all imperfections shall cease, much more joy and comfort in Heaven shall
we take one in another? Therefore if we have any wit in our heads, or grace
in our hearts, let every one of us labor to be one of Gods people, to be a
member of Christ, and then we shall be gathered first to Christ our Head, and
then to one another as fellow members.

Now we shall not only be aggregated and gathered together, As a gathering of
all, so there shall be a separation of all.
but there shall be also a separation; for all the World shall be divided into
two flocks or Herds; the Sheep shall be set at the right hand, and the Goats
at the left; and they shall be separated as a Shepherd separateth the Sheep
from the Goats, who although they feed all the day long in one pasture,
Simile.
drink all of one water, and are refreshed all under one shadow; yet when the
night comes, he gathers the Sheep into the Fold, and leaves the Goats to
be devoured of the Wolves: so the Lord Jesus Christ shall separate the good
from the bad, howsoever they lived together here in this world, may sit all at
one table and lie in one bed, yet when the day of judgment comes, he will
gather his sheep into his fold and leave the wicked to be tormented with the
Devil. Now in this separation, we observe three things:

1 That there shall be a separation. 2 The Time when it shall be. 3 Who shall
be separated.
First, First, there shall be a separation.
there shall be a separation of the good from the bad by the power of Christ:
The Scripture is plain for it, and when the Son of man comes in his glory
with all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit on the Throne of his
glory, and before him shall be gathered all Nations, which he shall separate
as a shepherd separateth the Sheep from the Goats. So Matthew. 13. 24. The
Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his
Kingdom all things that offeud; and them that dqe iniquity; and verse 49.
says Christ, So shall it be in the end of the World, The Angels shall go
forth and sever the bad from amongst the Just: and Luke 17. 34. says Christ, I
tell you in that night there shall be two in a bed, the one shall be received
and the other shall be left: Two women shall be grinding together at the Mill,
the one shall be taken, and the other shall be left. So then there shall be a
separation in the nearest and dearest society that may be, even between the
most nearest and dearest friends: there they shall not cast out the bondwoman
and her son only, but the husband shall be taken from the wife, and the wife
from the husband, and the father from the son, and the son from the father,
and one friend from another; such a separation there shall be of them that
have dwelt in a house a long time together, laid in one bed, and sat at one
table; the one shall go to Heaven, and the other to Hell; the one shall go to
joy, the other to pain; the one shall go to God and his Angels, the other to
the Devil and the damned. Hence we learn for our instruction these profitable
and comfortable Uses.

Seeing there shall be a separation of the most dearest and nearest society
at the day of judgment; Use 1.
this therefore should teach us what the care of good couples and friends
should be, so to live together here in Gods fear, as that they may not be
parted at that day. To this Saint Peter exhorts married couples, 1 Pet. 3. 7.
Likewise ye husbands dwell with them, as men of knowledge, giving honor unto
the woman as to the weaker vessel, even as they which are heirs together of
the grace of life, that your prayers be not interrupted: Here we see the
Apostle would have good couples live together, as heirs of the grace of life,
that so they may not be parted at the day of judgment: for what a heavy
parting shall there be when the husband shall be taken from the wife, or the
wife from the husband; the father from the child, or the child from the
father; or one friend from another, when there shall be a separation in the
most dearest and nearest society, even of those that have laid in a bed
together, sat at a table and dwelt in a house together a long time? O think
of this beloved brethren, what a heavy parting it will be at that time, when
they which have lived twenty or thirty years together, must be separated! Let
husbands and wives, fathers and children, masters and servants, and one friend
with another all consider it, and therefore let them endeavor so to live
together in the fear of God here, as that they may not be parted at the day
of judgment, when this fearful separation shall be. We see Luke 13. 28. It is
an aggravation of the grief of the wicked, that they shall see Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, in the Kingdom of GOD, and they themselves thrust out a-doores; but
it will be a far greater grief to us, when we shall not only see Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of GOD, but our Husbands, wives, Childeren,
Friends and Neighbors, and we our selves shut out and never to come to them;
they to enjoy happiness with God and the blessed Saints and Angels; we misery
and everlasting torments with the Devils and damned reprobates. We see what a
sorrowful separation there is, when a wife buries her husband and commits him
to the Grave to be devoured of the worms, she goes home, weeps, wails and
takes on; and yet they may meet together in Gods kingdom. O but what a heavy
parting will there be, when the one shall be taken up into Heaven, and the
other shall be left to be devoured in Hell, where they shall never meet; but
shall be as far asunder as Heaven and Hell, as God and the Devil: Therefore,
good brethren be persuaded to think seriously of this heavy and dreadful
separation which will be at that day; and let it be the care of all good
couples, so to live together here in Gods fear, as that they may not be
parted and separated at the day of judgment.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing there shall be a separation at the day of judgment; therefore the
godly may comfort themselves with the hope of this, howsoever they be troubled
here with bad neighbors and wicked men that hate and persecute them, yet at the
day of judgment, there shall be a separation of the good from the bad, and
there shall not be one wicked man left to trouble or annoy them. It was Moses
comfort Exodus 14. 13. Simile.
says he, Fear ye not, stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord,
which he will show to you this day: for the Egyptians whom ye have seen this
day, ye shall never see again: So the Lord will say to the godly, stand still
and behold the salvation of your God, which he will show to you this day, the
wicked which ye now see, ye shall never see them again; they shall not trouble
nor molest you any more, but shall be thrown into Hell: we have often heard
that Jesus Christ shall come with a great key in his hand to lock up the
Devil and all the damned in Hell; and therefore we need not fear, for there
shall be never a wicked man left to annoy or trouble Gods People.

Thirdly, seeing there shall be a separation at the day of judgment, Use 3.
therefore how should all the wicked of the world be afraid, howsoever they
dwell in the society of good people here in this world, yet one day they shall
dwell with the Devil, and the damned: here indeed in this World, though they
dwell not among the godly, yet they may dwell among civil and sociable men,
such as will do them no hurt for a world; but at the day of judgment their
case shall not be so good, for they shall dwell with all the vile people, and
rascals, murderers, thieves, and all the scumme of the World; Nay worse, with
the Devil and his Angels: and therefore how afraid should a wicked man be to
think of this? Chrysostom says well, The very name of separation, what a
confusion is it to a wicked man? for if (says he,) a King, a Duke, Simile.
or a great man should pick one out of a great Company, should embrace him,
show great kindness and favor to him, and set him in his own seat, but
should frown on thee, lowre, turn his back on thee, and shut thee out of the
doors, with the Dogs, what a terror would this be to thee? Far greater
horror will it be when the Lord Jesus shall sit on his throne, and shall say to
the godly, Come ye blessed of my Father, shall embrace and grace them before
Angels and men, but will frown on thee that art a wicked man, lowre, turn his
back on thee, and shut thee out of doors with the Dogs, (that is) with the
Devil and wicked men: O let such consider this as go on in their profaneness
and impenitency, let the despisers of God and good people, meditate hereon:
many there be now that cannot abide good people, but at that day they would be
glad to do them any service; to be hewers of wood, and drawers of water to
them, as the Gibeonites were to the people of Israel, Josh. 9. 21. We see in
Hester, that Haman was in great favor with King Ahashuerosh, Simile.
and was bid to the Banquet, but when his sins brake out, his face was
covered, and he was hanged on the gallows, which he set up for Mordecay, so it
shall be with all the wicked, if they be not wise to make God their friend and
repent of their sins, though they may be in favor with Kings and great men,
if they be not in favor with God, they shall be thrust into hell with the
Devil and the damned Therefore let it be every man's wisdom to separate from
his sins in this life, that his sins do not separate him from Christ at
the day of judgment: thus the Lord does show us hell to bring us to heaven,
Simile.
and he preaches terror to bring us to comfort, as Augustine says; He does as
a man that sees a bird which he loves ready to fall into a snare, he hunts
after the bird, and makes a noise, and so the bird escapes the snare; so all
the Prophets and our Lord Jesus himself, foreseeing how we are like to fall
into the snare of the Devil, and into Hell, they have lifted up their voices
and made exclamation to us, and have cried to keep us out of hell, that we
might avoid the danger of it beforehand.

Secondly, 2
The time when this separation shall be, at the day of judgment; so the text
says, The time of the separation.
when the Son of Man shall sit on his throne: Here in this world, they may
continually live and converse on with another, live in a house, lie in a bed,
sit at a table, dwell in a town, meet together in a Church, but at the day of
judgment they shall be separated, the servants of God shall be separated from
the servants of sin: So Psalm. 14. David says, that the wicked are like to
the Chafe which the wind drives away; we see in a floor of a bame where
there lies a heap of corn, Simile.
mingled with Chafe, when the wind arises, it blows away the chafe, and
the corn lies still on the barn floor, so the godly and the wicked are like
unto a heap of corn and Chafe in this world, that lies on the barn floor
of Almighty God, but let the wind of Gods wrath arise, and it blows all the
wicked into Hell, so there shall not remain a wicked man in the floor of Gods
House: but this separation shall not be till the day of judgment. The uses are:

First, Use 1.
seeing the separation shall not be till the day of judgment, therefore no man
must look for a perfect estate of a Church in this world, because good and bad
being laid together in this world as chafe and corn, the bad labor to hinder
the good, and if they cannot hinder them, then they will corrupt them;
therefore one says well, though there be tares in a Church, yet our faith
must not be hindered, nor no man ought to be discouraged, because the corn is
not separated from the tares, they shall remain together till the day also
judgment; and therefore we must not separate from the floor of Christ, but
hold to it for all this.

Secondly, Use 2.
because the separation shall not be till the day of judgment, therefore we can
look for no perfect peace in this world till that time; so Exodus 23. 29. says
the Lord, I will not cast forth the Canaanites out from thy face in one year,
lest the Land grow barren, (as a wilderness,) and the beasts of the fields
multiply against thee. So the Lord would not destroy the Canaanites clean,
Simile.
but a remnant of them must remain for the good of his people; in like manner
he will not root out all the wicked, but there shall some remain for the good
of his Church, for there be a number of sins that break out in Gods people
from day to day, and the wicked be as scourges to them, and to set a-worke the
graces of Christ in them; therefore no man must look for perfect peace in this
world.

Thirdly, Thirdly, the Persons that shall be separated.
Who they be that shall be separated? The good and the bad, sheep and goats,
the sheep shall be set at the right hand of Christ, and the goats at the
left: Now the properties of the sheep be these.

First, Properties of Sheep.
They will hear the voice of the shepherd and follow him, they will not
follow a stranger, John. 10. 4. such a sheep was Samuel, 1 Samuel 3. 10. says
he, speak Lord for thy servant hears; such a sheep was David, 1
Psalm. 85. 8. I will hearken what the Lord says. Let the world say what it
will, and my friends, and my pleasure, and my profit, I will hearken what God
says, for he will speak peace in his people; I will have none other teacher,
but he: and therefore when men will not hear the voice of Christ, but will
hear what the world, what pleasure and profit says, they be none of the true
sheep of Christ.

The second is, 2
that they will leave all to follow Christ their shepherd; their pleasures,
profit, sins, and whatsoever is dear to them, even life; it self; such a
sheep was Paul, Philip. 3. 8. where he says, that he accounted all things a^
dung and dross to be found in Christ; such sheep were the Disciples, Math.
19. 17. And therefore when men will not leave all to follow Christ, all their
sins, pleasure, and profits to follow him, it is evident they are none of the
sheep of Christ.

The third is, that they are never well, till they be under the government of
their shepherd: such a sheep was David, 3
Psalm. 119. Teach me O Lord the (...) of thy statutes; and Psalm. 40. 8. I
desire to do thy will O Lord, etc. Therefore when men desire not to live under
the government of Christ, but will be governed by themselves, they are none of
the true sheep of Christ.

The fourth is, when he has lost the shepherd, he runs here and there, and
(...) at rest till he has found him again, 4
so when men have lost Christ by their sins, they should not be at rest, but
run here and there, bleate and take on, til they have found the shepherd, and
be brought home again, to the sold: Such a sheep was David, Psalm. 119. ult.
says he, I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant, etc. And
therefore when men have lost Christ by their sins, and can pass away the
time and years merrily, never socking after, Christ, it is a fearful token
they are none of the true sheep of Christ.

The fifth is, that they will carry fleece and wool to the shepherd: If there
be any grace or virtue in them, 5
whereby they may do service to Christ or good unto his members they will be
ready to do it. He shall have the honor and glory of it: therefore when men
do not carry their fleece and wool to Christ, to let Christ have all the
honor and glory of the good things they have, they are none of the sheep of
Christ. Let me exhort you all therefore to labor to find these properties of a
sheep in you, to hear the voice of Christ and be contented to leave all to
follow him, to desire to live under his government, and never be at rest, when
thou have lost him, till thou find him again; to carry your fleece and wool
to Christ; if there be any virtue or grace in you let Christ have the glory of
it; therefore let every one labor to be a true sheep of Christ, and he shall
sit at his right hand, I do not say, labor to live amongst the sheep, but to
be one of the sheep of Christ, for a man may live amongst the sheep, that
is, in the visible Church, and yet he may be shufled out amongst the stinking
Goats.

It is good observation of a learned man, Three ranks of men.
that the World may be didivided in three ranks or conditions: In the first,
are Heathen, Infidels and Atheists, 1
and such as know not God: In the second, are Carnal professors, such as know
God, 2
Christ, and his Word, and yet they feel not the power of it in their lives, 3
and are not reformed by it: In the third rank are Gods Elect, near unto the
center Christ; and therefore O man consider thy standing of what rank thou art
of; if thou be of the first rank such as know not God, then never rest till
thou art got within the second rank, till thou know God and his Word; and when
thou have got within the second rank, labor to come within the third, to be
one of Gods Elect, and to be as near the Center Christ as may be. Therefore
labor to be a true Sheep of Christ, and then thou shall be set at the right
hand of Christ.

We have done with the Sheep, Four properties of the Goats.
and are come to the Goats, whose properties or uses are chiefly these four;
which I must dispatch in one word.

First, 1
the Goats in the Law were offered for a sin offering, to teach us that our
sins will make us sit at the left hand of Christ. 2
Secondly, a Goat is a stinking thing; so our sins stink in the nostrils of
God. 3
Thirdly, they toil with their horn and annoy the water; So wicked men are
turbulent, 4
(as Ezekiel speaks.) Fourthly, they will feed on the top of the Rocks,
they cannot abide to feed on the Plains; so they will be in the dark places
of the Scripture, they will not feed in the plain places where Gods people
feed; but are full of wranglings and janglings which profit not.

SERMON XLVIII.
REVELATION 20. 12. And I saw the Dead, small and great, stand before God, and
the Books were opened: and another Book was opened, which is the Book of
Life: and the Dead were judged out of those things which were written in the
Books, according to their works.
TWo things now only remain to be handled of the last judgment: SERMON
XLVIII.


1. The conviction of the Offenders. 2. The sentence of the Judge.
First, The conviction of the offenders; for before the sentence of the Judge,
the offenders shall be convicted, and shall acknowledge that the judgment of
Christ is just upon them in regard of their sins: Chrysostom says well, O
man, by the quality of thy place, thou may read thine own doom, as when
thou art brought into the presence of a Judge or a King, by the quality of the
place thou may know whether it be for good or ill; if thou art bid to come
up near to the King or to the Judge, then it is for good, but if thou keep
aloof, or he bid thee stand apart, then it is for ill; so by the quality of
the place thou may know what shall be thy sentence: if thou be set at the
right hand of Christ, then thou art a sheep of Christ, but if thou be set at
his left hand, then thou art a Goat; and yet notwithstanding though every man
may know what his sentence shall be by the quality of his place, because there
shall be (as the Apostle says) a declaration of the just judgment of God,
therefore before sentence be given, there shall be a conviction of the
offenders, for the books shall be opened and every man's sins shall be made
manifest. Now in this conviction we observe four things:

1. That there shall be a conviction of the offenders. 2. The means by which
they shall be convicted. 3. The persons that shall be convicted. 4. The effects
of this conviction.
First, First, that there shall be a conviction.
that there shall be such a conviction, it is plain by Scripture, and by
Reason: first, by Scripture, Romans 2. 15. Their conscience also bearing
witness, and their thoughts accusing one another or excusing at that day: when
God shall judge the secrets of men, by Jesus Christ: So also, 1 Cor. 4. 5.
Therefore judge nothing before the time until the Lord come, who will bring to
light things hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the heart manifest: So
it is plain by Scripture, that there shall be a conviction of the wicked of
all their sins and offenses.

Secondly, 2
by Reason, for in all courts of justice there is no man condemned till first
he be convicted; so because the court of Christ is the most exactest court of
equity and justice, we may well think that no man shall be condemned till he
be first convicted, and evident proof made of all his sins and offenses.

Now this conviction shall be in laying open of all our sins and offenses, for
there be a number of sins that we have committed, which we do not know (the
devil does so blind our eyes that we cannot see them) but at that time all
shall be made patent and open; there is no sin that we have committed all our
life long, but it shall come into our mind as fresh as if we had committed
them at the present, and ten thousand of sins which we took to be no sins,
then we shall know them to be sins, and thousand thousands that we have
forgot shall come into our minds, and then we shall know how we have offended
God, and injuried our brethren, despised his judgments, and abused his
mercies; these sins and a thousand others, which we think not on at that
very time, shall come into our minds, and or hearts shall frame such a bill
against us, as we shall be never able to answer, howsoever now they be close
and covered: we see in experience of nature, Simile.
if a man write a fair piece of paper with the juice of a Lemman or an Onion,
there will be nothing seen, but bring it to the light of a candle, or to the
flame of the fire, and then all the letters will be seen, and it may be read;
so it is with sin, some men write it with such a cunning pen that none can
discover it, the paper (their foreheads) is fair and clean, but bring it to
the flame of Gods wrath and to the bright candle of Gods Law, and then all the
ugliness of their sins shall be laid open. Hence the use is:

Seeing there shall be such a conviction at the day of Judgment, Use
therefore how careful ought we to be to live well, because all the sins we
have done shall then be laid open before us; so Solomon says, Ecclesiast. 12.
13. Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man;
for God will bring every work to judgment, with every secret thing, whether
it be good or bad: Therefore, because every sin shall be known, how careful
should we be to please God? If a man should think nothing, speak nothing, nor
do nothing, Simile.
but it should be cried up and down in the next Markettowne, he would take
heed what he thought, spoke, and did; it should be much more the care of
Christians to take heed what they think, speak, and do, for it shall be
proclaimed in the Theater of this world, before all men; neither shall any part
of their actions (though never so closely acted) Simile.
lie hid and not be manifested; Genesis 44. when Joseph's brethren did go out of
Egypt, they went in peace, and all was well, because their sacks were shut up;
O, but when they were made after, and the sackes opened, and Joseph cup found
in one of their sackes, then they rent their clothes, and took on pitifully;
so it is with a number of men in this world, when they die and go out of this
world, they go with peace, because their sackes, their consciences be shut,
they do not reprove them; O, but when the Lord shall open their consciences,
when their sackes shall be opened, then see what a deal of bad stuff there is
in them: therefore we should take heed what we gather into our sacks: Simile.
As it is in the story of Aesop, his master beat him for eating of figs, but he
desired his master before he beat him, to give unto every one of his fellows a
draught of warm water, which his master did, and they did vomit up the figs
again, whereby the false accusation laid unto Aesop was discovered; so it is
in this world, there be figs eaten, and some say this man has eaten them, and
some say that man, and no body knows who has the figs; There is something
taken away, injury and wrong done, this man is blamed and that man; well, the
Lord shall give us such a heavy draught at the day of Judgment, that we shall
vomit up all the sins that be in the secret corners of our hearts, and then
will be seen who has eaten the figs, who has had this thing and that,
hereby is manifest that there will be a day when the wicked shall be convicted,
and all their sins laid open: therefore we must take heed what we do, and
speak, and think; Simile.
we see in the story of Iaakoh, Genesis 31. when he fled into Assyria, Lahan made
after him, and when he had overtaken him, he went into his tent, and did
search to see if he could find any thing that was his; which if he had found,
he would have carried all back again so when we fly away from the devil,
he will make after and search us, to see whether we have gotten any thing of
his, he would make us his bondslaves, carry us into bondage, into hell: and
therefore consider what ye gather, and what ye take into your packes.

Secondly, 2
The means by which they shall be convicted, shall be by opening of the
books, The means of their conviction.
which we are not to take literally, that they be paper or parchment books,
but it is a metaphor taken from earthly Judges, who read all their Indictments
out of a book; Simile.
so all our sins shall be laid open before us, as if they were written in a
book, not by any report, or surmises of others: We find in Scripture mention
made of two books:

1. The book of Gods remembrance. Two books opened at the day of Judgment.
First, the book of Gods remembrance.
2. The book of every man's conscience.
First, there is no sin that we do commit, but it is written in Gods
remembrance, howsoever we may forget them, and make little account of them,
yet the Lord will remember them: So we see Hos. 7. 2. And they consider not in
their hearts, that I remember all their wickedness; and Malach. 3. 14. we may
see how the wicked did scoff at the godly, and said, It is in vain to serve
God, and what profit is it that we keep his Commandments? etc. Then spoke
they that feared the Lord, every one to his neighbor, and the Lord harkened
and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him, for them that
feared the Lord and thought upon his name. Now as the Lord has a book written
of the good deeds of his servants to remember them, so it is certain that he
has a book of remembrance to record all the deeds of the wicked in.

The second book, Secondly, the book of Conscience.
is the book of every man's conscience; For there is never a fin we commit, but
it is written in our consciences, Romans 2. 15. Their conscience bearing
witness, and their thoughts accusing one another, and excusing at that day,
when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ: So their conscience is
a witness to them, whether they have done well or ill.

Now against these two books no man can take exception: No exception against
th^se books.
First, they cannot take exception against the book of Gods remembrance,
because God cannot remember that which never was: for he is prima veritas, the
fountain of truth, and therefore he is not capable of any untruth, he cannot
lie like to us: Simile.
As the Sun is the fountain of light, and therefore is not capable of any
darkness; and the fire is the fountain of heat, and therefore is not capable
of cold, so God is the fountain of all truth, and therefore he is not capable
of any untruth; and therefore against this book no man can take exception:
again, Philosophers say, That which is never done, and that which is false,
cannot be remembered nor come into mind, much less then can God remember it,
who is most true in himself; therefore against the book of Gods remembrance
no man can take exception: Neither can any against the book of man's
conscience, because he shall not be judged by another man's conscience, but by
his own, which no other man has the writing of but himself, and wheresoever
a man goes he always carries it with him; therefore against this book no man
living can take exception: these be the two books that shall be opened at the
day of Judgment, wherein every man's sins shall be made known, and laid open
at that day, howsoever we may forget them, yet the Lord will remember them,
howsoever he passes by them now, and seems to wink at them, yet they are all
written in the book of his remembrance, and one day this book shall be
opened, and the world shall see them, for the Lord will set them open before
all men: It is said, Psalm. 50. 21. But I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes; And Psalm. 90. 6. the Prophet complains, Thou have set
our iniquities before thee, and our secret sins in the light of thy
countenance: So out of the book of Gods remembrance, the Lord will declare all
our sins.

Again, the book of every man's conscience shall be opened, and his conscience
shall accuse him of every particular sin that he has committed here in this
world: Simile.
A man's conscience is like a sealed book, though he have committed a number of
sins, and have offended many ways, yet the consscience never accuses; but
when the books shall be opened, then every man's conscience shall cry out
against him, how he has sinned against God, and against men in this thing and
that, in this place and that, and the devil will draw such a bill against us,
as we shall never be able to answer; Simile.
as the Lepers said in the 2 King. 7. O we do not well to do thus; So every
man's conscience shall cry out against him, and say* I did not well to swear,
to lie, to deceive, to slander, to profane the Sabbath; and therefore what a
fearful thing will it be, when a man's conscience shall thus cry out against
him; we see what an intolerable burden it is, when in this world the Lord
touches a man's conscience but for one sin; as Mat. 27. 3. when Judas had
betrayed his Master, Simile.
and his conscience touched him for it, he could not abide it, but he went and
hanged himself: Now if it were thus into lerable for one sin, what will it
be, when all our sins shall be made manifest before God? Simile.
If it were thus fearful, when Judas did read but one page or leaf of the
book, what an intolerable burden will it be, when all the particular sins
that we have committed from the first day to the last hour of our lives shall
be laid open? when we shall not read a leaf or a page only, but all the
whole book from end to end, how intolerable and unsupportable will it be?
Some use to say that they do not love to come on the score, they cannot abide
it; but of all scores, take heed thou come not on Gods score, Simile.
and on the score of thine own conscience, it will be a fearful thing;
therefore keep an even reckoning with God, that so thy conscience may be
clear. And these be the means by which the offender shall be convicted at the
day of Judgment; first, by the book of Gods remembrance; and secondly, by the
book of every man's conscience.

Thirdly, 3
the parties that shall be convicted; which are not only the wicked, but the
godly, The parties convicted.
such as repent them of their sins, and seek reconciliation and atonement in
the blood of Christ, and are brought in the estate of grace, these shall not be
convicted, but they shall have a discharge of all from Christ; and although
they had their sins and infirmities as other men had, yet because they did
repent of them* labor to be reconciled, and to be at peace with God, therefore
they shall not answer for them, as Romans 8. 33. says Saint Paul, Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? ^is God that justifies, who shall
condemn? So Revel. 7. 14. it is said of the godly, These are they which came
out of great tribulation, and have washed their long white robes in the blood
of the Lamb: They were not white by nature, no, nor did they not keep them
white, the best men that were; For (as Saint James says) In many things we
sin all; and the best may pray with David, Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not into
judgment with thy servants, for in thy sight there shall none that lives be
justified: So Job 9. 3. (says he, If he would contend with him, he could not
answer him one of a thousand: So that no man is white by nature, no, nor the
best men cannot keep themselves white, but their garments are made white in
the blood of the Lamb: And therefore although we have sins as other men
have, yet let us labor to repent of them, and to be reconciled unto God, and
to lay hold on Christ by faith, and to have our consciences washed in the blood
of Christ, and then our sins shall not be laid to our charge, we shall not be
convicted of them at the day of Judgment, Dan. 9. 24. it is said of Christ,
that he should finish transgression, and make an end of sins, and make
reconciliation for iniquity; which is a metaphore taken from a man that has
paid a debt, Simile.
he gets the bonds and bills, and seals them up that no body should see them;
so Christ has paid our debts, and has sealed up our sins; which is a
comfort to a Christian, though he has committed many sins, yet if he can
repent of them, and lay hold on Christ by faith, his sins are sealed up, with
this same great seal, that neither the devil nor the world shall be able to
find them, nor all the powers in earth or in hell.

Fourthly, The fourth effect of Conviction.
The effect of the Conviction, and that is in a word, They shall be judged,
even all the wicked, gallants, brave men and captains, they shall stand as
dead men before Christ, when these two books shall be opened, and all their
sins laid before them, then they shall cry out of themselves that ever they
offended; Matthew. 23. 39. says Christ to the wicked Jews, ye shall see me no
more henceforth, till that ye say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of
the Lord: So the wicked shall say of the godly, O these be the blessed and
happy men, but we hated and despised them, O that we had followed their
counsel, and that we had been ruled by them, and (as it is in the book of
Wisdom) This is he which we have had in derision, and in a parable of reproach,
we fools thought his life madness, and his end without honor; how is he
counted amongst the children of God, and his portion among the Saints?
Wherefore, how ashamed and confounded shall the wicked be, in that they shall
desire the hills to fall upon them, and to cover them from the presence of
Christ; as it is, Revel. 6. and what a grief will it be to them to see the
godly go to heaven, into joy and happiness, when they must be tormented in
hell? Philosophers say, That no Element is weighty in his own place; Simile.
as let a man be in the bottom of the Sea, and have the Sea on his back, he
shall not feel the weight of it, but take him out of the Sea, and put a
pailefull or a bucketfull of water on his head, and then he shall see how
weighty it is; so this world being the proper place of sin, Why the weight
of sin is no more felt.
men feel not the weight of it, because it is in his own Element, but bring
it to the judgment bar of God, and then they shall feel the weight and
burden of it.

SERMON XLIX.
MATTHEW 25. 34. Then shall the King say unto then on his righthand, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world.
IT is a busy time; SERMON XLIX.
and I hope ye have learned that all business must yield to the Lords
business, Exodus 34. 31. the Lord says, Six days shall thou work, and in the
seventh day thou shall rest, both in earing-time, and in the harvest, thou
shall rest: It is a worthy example we have, 1 Samuel 6. 13. where it is said,
Simile.
And the men of Bethshemesh were reaping their wheat-harvest in the valley, and
they lifted up their eyes, and saw the Arc, and rejoiced to see it; but
afterward they did fling down their sickles, left their labors, and went and
offered burnt offerings; So we must do at these times, when the Sabbath
comes lay aside our labors, and perform the duty that God requires at our
hands: and thus much to prepare us.

Now concerning the last Judgment, we are come to the last point; the last day
we spoke of the Conviction of the offenders, that all the wicked shall be
convicted of all their sins that they have committed; and then shall come the
sentence of the Judge, which will be most joyful and welcome to the godly, and
doleful, heavy and unwelcome to the wicked. In the sentence of the Judge we
observe three things:

1. The Quality of the sentence. 2. The Order of the sentence. 3. The Sentence
it self.
First, 2
The quality of the Sentence, that it is the final and last sentence, because
it shall be the last which shall be pronounced: The quality of the sentence.
therefore it shall be unrevocable, for look how the sentence passes, so we
shall be found in weal or in woe for ever and ever, never to be altered and
changed: As long as we live here, Simile.
we may find mercy and favor with God, if we repent our sins, lay hold on
Christ by faith, and be brought into an estate of grace; yea, and although it
be but the day before this judgment come, but if once the sentence be passed,
all mercy is excluded, and the gates of heaven and Hell shall be shut up, and
every man shall be so found in weal or woe, for ever and ever to abide and
continue. We see the five foolish virgins, came and knocked at the gate, but
because they came too late they were excluded; Simile.
so likewise Esau, sought the blessing, and that with tears, as Heb. 13. and
yet went without it because he sought it not in time; this time of life is the
time of Mercy and grace, therefore we must seek it in this world, for it will
be too late when once the sentence of the judge shall be pronounced: Simile.
It is a fit resemblance, as long as a man has a stone in his hand to fling,
he may incline the motions thereof this way and that way, but if it be once
thrown then he cannot; so as long as we live here we may dispose of our
selves, this way or that way, but if once the final sentence of the Judge be
out, it cannot be revoked or altered; therefore it is good to repent as soon
as may be, and to lay hold on Gods mercy, offered in Christ. Simile.
One compares the time of life to a drawbridge, if a man should make a goodly
house, with gardens and walks, and all things needful for it, and make a
drawbridge to it; and this should be the order of the house, that when the
drawbridge were down every man that would come might dwell there* but if they
did attend their profit and pleasure, till the bridge were drawn up, that
there were no way to enter in, they should be excluded; so men may enter into
the Kingdom of God, in this life, as long as the drawbridge is down, that is,
as long as there is life, but if the drawbridge be once taken up, that is, if
this life be once ended and the sentence pronounced, it will be too late to
enter, all such loyterers shall be excluded and shut out. Therefore while we
live here it must be our wisdom to repent of our Sins, to seek for Gods
favor in Christ, for if once the final and last sentence be pronounced it can
never be altered and changed: this is the quality of the sentence.

Secondly, 2
The Order of the Sentence; For the order of the sentence, it is first
pronounced to the just, The Order of it.
Come ye blessed, and then to the wicked, go ye cursed. Diverse Divines do
diversely conceive of this, some think that the reason why the sentence is
pronounced first to the just, is* Diverse opinions.
because the Lord is more inclined to mercy than to judgment, 1
as Matthew. 3. he will gather his corn into his barn, and then he will burn
the chafe with unquenchable fire: So because that the Lord is more inclined to
works of mercy, which is most agreeable to his nature, than to works of
justice; this some think to be the reason why sentence is pronounced to the
godly first.

There be others think that the Reason why the sentence is pronounced to the
godly first is, 2
that it might be for the more comfort of the just, because they should not be
terrified with the terrible and dreadful sentence pronounced against the
wicked, when he shall chase and drive them all into Hell: So it is out of the
tenderness of Christ, that sentence is given to the godly first.

But I take it, 3
that this order of the sentence is, because the godly shall judge the World,
they shall be assessors with him at the day of judgment, and sit in judgment
with him; which is the reason why the sentence is pronounced to the godly
first: Now that the Saints shall judge the World, it is plaineby Scripture, as
Matthew. 19. Christ says, that they which follow him, in the regeneration shall
sit on twelve Thrones and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel; so also 1 Corinthians.
6. 2. (says the Apostle) do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the
world? and again in the 3 verse. know ye not, that we shall judge Angels, etc?
So they shall be assessors and sit in judgment with him: which cannot but be a
mavelous comfort to a Christian, though the world take upon them to censure
their care, zeal, and conscience now, yet one day they shall be Judges of such
worldly caitiffes, so that they which have judged others, that is, the Saints,
shall be judged of them at the day of judgment: Simile.
If Joseph's brethren had known, that their brother Joseph should have judged
them: when they stripped him of his coat, cast him into a pit, and sold him
away, Genes. 37. they would have used him more kindly and better by far in
all probability: so if the world did know that the Saints should judge them, it
would make them wary what they did to them, and careful to use them more
kindly, for howsoever they judge of Christians care, zeal and conscience now,
yet one day the Saints shall judge them.

Thirdly, The ^^ntence it self; which is diverse according as it lights on
diverse persons: wherein we observe two things* first, the Sentence of
Remuneration, to the Sheep on the right hand* and secondly, the Sentence of
Condemnation, to the Goats on the left hand. In the Sentence of Remuneration,
we observe 4. things:

1. An Invitation. 2. A Commendation. 3. An Assignation. 4. A Reason.
The Invitation is in ^hese words, 1
Come ye blessed: it is a calling of all the holy and good people to come to
Christ; as if he should say, The invitation.
Come ye holy people you that have repented you of your sins and walked in
newness of life, come to me; but you that are drunkards, whoremasters and
covetous persons, such as spend your time loosely, away with you to Hell, to
the Devil, to pains and torments, but you that be holy and sanctified come
unto me, and enjoy the Kingdom ye have long looked for* and as Genes. 45.
Simile.
when Joseph did discover himself to his brethren they were abashed at it, and
crept into a corner, in conscience of their bad dealing with him, but Joseph
bids them come near my brethren, come near, be not abashed, so at the day of
judgment when we shall be ready to creep into a corner and stand aloof, in
conscience of our bad dealing, that we have been disobedient to him and have
not regarded him as we ought, then he shall say to us, Come near me my
brethren, come near me, be not abashed, nor afraid. Now this Invitation or
calling of the holy and godly people to Christ does imply two things:

1. An Association with Christ. 2. A Dissociation from the wicked.
First, 1
an association with Christ; all the people of God are called to come to
Christ, Association with Christ.
to enjoy him and live with him: and indeed here all their desires are set on
Christ, their prayers tend to this end, all the Sermons they hear, the labor
and pains that they take is to enjoy Christ, and to live with him, and it is
Christ's promise, John 14. 2, 3. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go
to prepare a place for you I will come again to receive you to my self, that
where I am there may ye be also: and so John 17. 24. in that holy prayer that
Christ makes to his Father (says he) Father, I will that they which thou have
given me be with me, even where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou
have given me: So here then is the comfort of a Christian that he shall be with
Christ, as we read Ierem. 52. 31. that the King of Babel in the first year of
his reign lifted up the head of Ieh^jachim King of Judah, Simile.
and brought him out of prison, and spoke kindly to him, and set his Throne
above the Kings, that were in Babel with him, and changed his prison-garments,
and he did eat bread continually before him all the days of his life. So
Christ will deal with his faithful people, he will take them out of the
prison, (out of the graves) change their prison garments, speak kindly to
them, and set their Throne above all the wicked Kings and Princes in this
World, and they shall eat bread with him, all the days of their life: that is,
enjoy all heavenly comforts in glory and happiness, for ever. We read 1 King.
10. 10. when the Queen of Sheba came to hea^^ ^he wisdom of Solomon, and saw
the order of his house, and of his servants, and his wisdom, she said, happy
are thy men, and happy are thy servants, etc. So when we shall see the glory
and happiness of the Saints, and shall hear the wisdom (not of Solomon,)
but of Christ, how much more are the people of God happy and blessed: thus much
of the association with Christ, that they shall be called to come to him.

Secondly, 2
a dissociation from the communion of the wicked and ungodly that vex them and
trouble them here in this world: Dissociation from the wicked.
The Church is like a Lily amongst the Th^rnes, as Cantic. 2. 2. her^ they are
troubled with a number of ^ad neighbors such as Ezekiel speaks of, a number
of goats that tread down the pasture, mud the waters, push with the horns and
kick with the prick, but they shall be sundred and separated from them that do
trouble and annoy them; they shall hear a voice from heaven, saying, Come up
hither, as it is Revel. 11. 12. Where we may see the two witnesses that were
slain in the city, which spiritually is called So^om and Egypt, after three
days and a half the Spirit of life from God shall come into them; and they
shall stand up on their feate, and shall ^eare a voice from heaven, saying,
Come up hither, and their bodies shall be taken up* in like manner all the
godly, shall be called to an association with Christ, and a dissociation from
the wicked and ungodly.

Now this come unto me, depends on another come unto me, for Mat. 11. Christ
calls us to come unto him, here in this world, to come to him by Repentance,
faith and Obedience, and then we may boldly come unto him at the day of
judgment: every man could be contented to come to Christ in the Kingdom of
glory, but first we must come to him here in the Kingdom of grace, by
repentance, faith, obedience and the like, and then we shall be sure to come to
him in the Kingdom of glory; for no man comes to him in the Kingdom of glory,
2
but by the Kingdom of grace. The commendation.


Secondly, The Commendation; This is laid down in these words, Ye blessed of my
Father: O you be the blessed, that hear me, you that have repented of your
sins, that have faith and obedience, that make conscience of your ways; you
be the happy men, and women; here is the glory of the Saints that in the
theater of this world they shall be pronounced blessed and happy by the mouth
of Christ before Angels and men in the hearing of the whole world. Now this is
to be opposed against all the judgments of this world, for the world counts him
a blessed and a happy man that is rich, that has his barnes full of corn,
that has a great deal of Land and money; O* but indeed he is the blessed and
happy man that is in favor with God, has repented of his sins, made
conscience of his ways; and therefore why do men so dote on this world, to
rake and gather together a deal of pelf, that will not stand them in stead,
at that day? Then they shall see, that the godly man, is the blessed and happy
man, and that a dram of Religion and of true saving faith is better than all
the world besides; and will do them more good. Simile.
If a man were to go into France, and did hear that the coin in this Land
would not go there he would go and change all his money for the coin of that
country; so seeing we are to go into another country, where our goods, lands
and money will not go, let us labor to change all that we have for that which
will pass at that day, let us get repentance, faith and sanctified grace, and
then we shall find comfort, when this whole world will afford us none. Now
when the godly be pronounced happy and blessed by Christ, then all the wicked
shall be driven to Hell, where they shall go to pains and torments, and this
shall make their happiness the greater, Matthew. 28. 4, 5. when the Angel of God
came down from heaven and appeared in glory, the keepers were astonished and
became as dead men. But the Angel answered and said to the women, Be not
afraid, for I know that ye seek Jesus that was cruci^^ed: Even so when Christ
shall appear to judge the world, they shall be as dead men before him, but he
shall say to the holy people, be not afraid for I know whom ye seek, ye seek
Jesus that was crucified, and now him that ye have so long looked for ye shall
enjoy; as 2 Kings 10. 15. when John was in a great fury and had killed the two
Kings, yet meeting with (...), the Son of Rechab; he took him by the hand,
and lifts him up into his chariot; even so Christ shall do, when he has
driven all the wicked into Hell, and meets with a good man, he will say, You
are a good (...), you are a blessed man and he will take him up into his Throne,
to sit in glory with him: And this is the glory that the Saints shall have when
all the wicked shall be driven into Hell.

Thirdly, The assignation; wherein we are to observe two things:

1. What is assigned, a Kingdom. 2. By what Title; by Inheritance.
First, First, the thing assigned.
what it is that is assigned; it is no less than a Kingdom, that God has
promised his people; as Luke 12. Fear not little flock, for it is your
Fathers pleasure, to give you a Kingdom: so Dan. 7. 27. it is said, and the
Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom, ^^dee the whole
^eaven, shall be given to the holy people of the most high, whose Kingdom is
everlasting. Earthly Kings and Princes though they b^stow great gifts on their
subjects, yet they keep the Kingdom to themselves, meaner matters serve than
a Kingdom; Simile.
so we see although Pharaoh did bestow great honor on Joseph, and did advance
him, yet he kept the Kingdom to himself, none might sit on the Throne but the
King; but here is the bounty of Christ, that he bestows a Kingdom on his
servants: It was a large proffer that Ahashuerosh made Hester 5. 6. in that he
would give Hester one half of his Kingdom; but God has made a larger promise
to us, not that we shall have one half of his Kingdom, but he will give us
his whole Kingdom. We read Luke 12. 13. There was a Man that came to Christ,
and said unto him, Master, bid my brother divide the inheritance with me: but
Christ will not divide his Kingdom to his servants, but will give it whole and
the glory of it to them: therefore men must labor to become converted and be
the servants of God, because he will bestow a Kingdom on them. Most men will
labor and toil in this world for less matters than a Kingdom, some are
scattered all the world over to gather straw and stubble, as the children of
Israel were, and therefore how much more should men labor to repent of their
sins, to get faith in Christ, to become one of Gods servants, and then he
will bestow a Kingdom on them. But some man may be ready to say, although it
be a Kingdom that God will give his people, yet it may be so mean as it is
not worth the labor of obtaining; therefore Christ tells us what a Kingdom it
is; it is an heavenly Kingdom, a Kingdom prepared of God: Three properties of
the Kingdom of heaven.
So it is such a Kingdom as is worth all our labor and pains. Now this
Kingdom is set out to us by three properties:

1 It is a Kingdom prepared of God. 2 It is prepared for his elect and chosen.
3 It was prepared before the foundation of the world.
First, 1
it is a Kingdom prepared of God: Therefore it is a most glorious Kingdom: A
Kingdom prepared of God.
Saint Paul says of it 1 Cor. 2. 9. The things which the eye has not seen,
neither ear heard, neither came into man's heart, is that which God has
prepared for them that love him: No tongue is able to express, nor heart of
man to conceive of the glory and excellency of this Kingdom; so it is Psalm.
31. 19. O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that
fear thee, and done to them that trust in thee, before the Sons of Men? We
may well think it is no small matter, that all Gods attributes are set a^worke
to furnish this Kingdom, his wisdom, power, mercy and justice: Therefore we
may will conceive thereby the excellency and glory of it. We see the more
magnificent, wise and potent that the first founders were of Kingdoms and
cities, the more famous, excellent and noble were the Kingdoms founded by
them. Therefore it is said Genes. 10. 10. of Nimrod that the beginning of his
Kingdom, was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Cal^eh in the Land of Shinar;
that is, famous and noble cities: and so likewise Nabuchadnezzar, was a golden
head in regard of the other Kings that did follow him; Solomon also was a wise
King and of great power, of whose Kingdom, it is said 1 Kings 10. 17. That he
gave Silver as stones, and Cedars as the wild figtrees that grow abundantly in
the plain; that is, as the crabtrees amongst us: So then the more magnificent,
wise and potent the first founders were, the more excellent were their
countries and Kingdoms; which granted, it must necessarily follow, that
because no man's wisdom is able to compare with Gods wisdom, no power with
his power, therefore as much as he wisdom of God goes beyond the wisdom of
men, and his power beyond the power of men, and heaven beyond this earth, so
far is the glory and excellency of this Kingdom beyond all the Kingdoms of
this world.

Now in four things the excellency of this Kingdom, goes beyond all earthly
Kingdoms. Excellencies of heaven before all other Kingdoms.


First, in regard of the bounds and Limits; for all earthly Kingdoms have
their bounds and limits set them; as it is said of the Kingdom of Solomon, 1
that it reached from river to river, from the river Nilus to Euphrates; And so
likewise in Hester, For limits.
it is said of the Kingdom of Ahashuerosh, that he reigned from India, to
Ethiopia over an hundred and seven and twenty Provinces; But of this Kingdom
there is no bounds or limits assigned; for Rev. 21. 7. it is said, he that
overcommeth shall inherit all things; not a little house, or a little land, or
a little Kingdom of this world, but he shall inherit the new heaven and the
new earth: So there shall be no bounds nor limits to this Kingdom.

Secondly, 2
it does excel all other kingdoms in regard of time, because the former at
length are swallowed up of the latter; For time.
but this Kingdom shall continue for ever and ever. So we read Dan. 2. 44. And
in the days of these Kings, shall the God of heaven set up a Kingdom which
shall never be destroyed; And this Kingdom shall not be given to other people,
that is, it shall not pass from one people to another, but it shall continue
for ever and ever.

Thi^dly, 3
all other Kingdoms have their wants and defects, though they may abound with
many things: In regard of defects.
we see Salomons Kingdom that did excel all other Kingdoms, yet it had
wants, as 1 King. 10. he had his gold out of Ophir, and his horses out of
Egypt: But in the Kingdom of God there is no want nor defect, all things are
there that the heart of man can wish, as Psalm. 16. says the Prophet, in thy
presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right band are pleasures for
evermore.

Fourthly, 4
all other Kingdoms have their terrors and fears, Cantic. 3. 7. Behold the
bed which is Salomons; In regard of tranquillity.
Threescore strong men are round about it, of the valiant men of Israel, they
all handle the sword, and are expert in war; every one both his sword upon his
thigh for fear by night: So we see Salomons Kingdom was not without his
terrors and fears, though it were a peaceable Kingdom: But this Kingdom is
without all fear, for Revel. 24. 25. it is said, that the gates of this city
shall stand open day and night: So they are not afraid of any enemies
whatsoever.

I, Quest.
but seeing this Kingdom excels all the Kingdoms of the World, why do not
men respect it, and seek for it more, but rather are in love with the
Kingdoms of this world?

I answer, Sol.
by an Opticke Rule; because things that be afar off seem to be but small,
and things that be nigh seem great: Therefore because men dwell amongst the
Kingdoms of this world and touch them, and are far off from this Kingdom,
therefore they do not respect it so much; but let a man change his standing,
and get within the Clouds, and draw near to God, then it will be great in his
eyes, and he shall see it does excel all the kingdoms of the World: The Uses
hereof are these following:

First, Use 1.
seeing this kingdom excels all the kingdoms of this world, therefore we
have a better estate by Christ, Our estate better than Adams in six things.
and greater honor than ever we lost by Adam. For first, we lost by him
Paradise, but by Christ we have Heaven. Secondly, 1
Adam was lord only of the Earth, and we of heaven. Thirdly, he had it but on
his good behavior, we shall have it without condition. 2
Fourthly, he lived amongst Beasts and Birds, and we shall live amongst the
Angels. 3
Fifthly, he had the presence of God but by fits, 4
and we shall enjoy it continually. Sixthly, when he had all thing he had
need of a help, 5
but God shall be all in all to us. Therefore as a learned man says, 6
O happy fall of Man, that we have received all this good by. This therefore
may serve to inform our judgment, that we may see that our estate by Christ,
is better than that which Adam lost.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing this Kingdom excels all the kingdoms in this World, why do not men
seek and labor after it? as Judge. 18. 9. there were spies sent to discover
the land, who came and told the people the land was a good land, and said to
them, Why sit you still, and why are you slothful to enter in, Simile.
and possess the land? So seeing all the Patriarchs and Prophets, and
Apostles, and Christ himself, are the spies of this good land, and they tell
us that Heaven is a good land, and excels all the kingdoms of this World, why
do ye sit still, and why are ye slothful, to enter in and to possess it?
This is the use that Saint Paul makes of it, Heb. 12. 28. Wherefore seeing we
receive a kingdom that cannot be shaken, Let us have grace whereby we may
serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear: therefore seeing it is
not a mutable and a changeable kingdom, as the best kingdoms are in this
World, why do we not labor to please God, to spend our time well here, attend
him that we may have it, and enjoy this kingdom? We see what labor and
pains men will take for less matters than a kingdom; for a little food and
raiment, how early men rise in the morning, and go late to bed, to get in a
little corn, and men do well in it; much more should we labor and take
pains, that we may enjoy this Heavenly Kingdom.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing this Kingdom excels all the kingdoms of this world, therefore
Christians must comfort themselves with the hope of this, though they be mean
and poor, and it may be have not house or land, yet let them comfort
themselves I say, with the hope of this, that God will bestow a kingdom that
does far excel all the kingdoms of this World, if they can repent of their
sins, have says in Christ, if they walk with care and conscience before
him; therefore let every Christian stay himself, with the hope of this, and
let us enter into the veil, and lay hold with the Anchors of the Soul; as
Saint Paul says, Heb. 6. 19. To hold fast the hope that is set before us,
which we have as an A^chor of the Soul, both sure and steadfast, and which
enters into that within the veil. Saint Basil says, The hope of reward
will carry us through any affliction in this World with comfort; art thou
afraid of shame and reproach for the Gospel sake? God will grace thee before
men and Angels: art thou afraid thou shall lose thy friends? God will be thy
friend: art thou afraid thou shall lose thy goods, and thy wealth? God will
bestow Heaven on thee: therefore think on the riches that God has prepared
for thee: thus every Christian must comfort himself with the hope of Heaven.

Secondly, 2
it is no mean kingdom, because it is prepared for his chosen and Elect. A
kingdom prepared for his Elect.
The kingdom of this World God has prepared for the good and the bad both
together; therefore sometimes wicked kings do reign; but this kingdom he
has prepared for sanctified and holy people only; as Christ says, John 3.
Except a man be borne again a^new, ^e cannot enter into the Kingdom of God;
So this kingdom he has prepared for the Elect only: David ^aith, Psalm. 111.
5. He has given a portion to them that fear him. We see this World that God
has made it for good and bad, how it is walled in with the sea, and covered
with the Heavens, and the Sun and Moon and Stars to give us light; Birds,
Fishes and Beasts to feed us, with Trees and Plants for the use of us: O but
it is a special portion that he will bestow on them that fear him: therefore
when we look on the kingdoms of this World, we may say, this is not the
kingdom that God has prepared for his Elect and chosen only; but together
with them for his enemies also; but there is a glorious Kingdom, that God has
prepared only for his Elect and chosen, and therefore why do we not gather up
our hearts, and labor for it? It is the madness of the World to spend all
their strength in laboring after toys and trifles; Naboth would not part with
his possessions; Simile.
God forbid (says he) that I should part with the inheritance of my father, or
the Lord keep me from giving the inheritance of my father; so we should say,
when we meet with temptations in the world to draw us out of this way; Lord,
keep me from giving the inheritance of my father: Simile.
Esau is condemned by the mouth of all men, for that he sold his birthright for
a mess of pottage, so how worthily shall many a one be condemned, that will
sell heaven for a little pleasure and profit, for a penny or a halfepenny
matter, for a little beer, or for a draught of strong drink; even for toys
and trifles.

Thirdly, 3
it was prepared for the Elect before the foundation of the world; for before
we were, It was prepared of old.
God loved us and prepared this kingdom for us, before we looked on the Sun
he did regard us, therefore it was not our merits, that was the cause why God
did bestow this kingdom on us, but his free love in Christ which makes the
gift the greater: 1 Samuel 25. says Nabal, Shall I take my bread and my water,
and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it to men whom I know
not? I, but here is the love of God, that when we were strangers and enemies
unto him, then he prepared heaven for us: it is a good saying that a learned
man has; when I had no beginning, thou thoughtest on me, and when I was
nothing thou did prepare for me, and therefore it was nothing in my self
that was the cause of it, but it was thy mercy and goodness to me.

Secondly, Secondly, the title and tenor.
in the Assignation, we considered the title to his Kingdom: it is a title of
Inheritance, therefore it is the best title and tenure, and the surest, that
any man can hold by, for so long as a man lives so long his inheritance holds
good, if he could live for ever and ever therefore seeing we shall have it by
such a tenure, we may assure our selves we shall have it for ever and ever.
And here we may with holy admiration admire Gods mercies to us, as 2 Samuel 7.
18. David does admire Gods kindness to him, Who am I Lord God, and what is my
Fathers house, Simile.
that thou have brought me hitherto? and yet was this a small thing in thy
sight, O Lord God; but thou have spoken also of thy servants house for a long
time to come: so we may much more admire the goodness and the kindness of
God to us, in that he has prepared, such a kingdom for us; we may say as
David said, Lord God who am I, and what is my fathers house? I am but a poor
sinful man, and thou have spoken of thy servants house for a great while: and
we must stir up our selves to look after it, and to take heed we be not
carried away with the stream of corruption: therefore Augustine says well;
Lord, I am contented to endure any torture or any pain, to endure imprisonment
or the rack, or whipping or burning, so that I might be but in heaven one
day; in like manner should we be contented to endure trouble and pain a
little while here, that we may be in heaven for ever and ever.

SERMON L.
MATTHEW. 25. 35. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty,
and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in, etc.
I Showed the last day of the blessed and happy SERMON. L.
estate that all the people of God are called to at the day of Judgment; that
they shall have no less matters than a kingdom, and a kingdom prepared for
the elect; and that as a peculiar portion from the beginning of the world,
which should greatly set on foot the desires of a Christian, to hear the
blessed and the sweet voice of Christ, calling them to come and possess this
kingdom; Matthew. 21. 12. it is said, The kingdom of heaven suffers violence,
and the violent take it by force: Simile.
So none but violent people can get heaven; it is a metaphore taken from a
soldier that breaks into a Town, who although he be beaten back and on the
ground, yet up again he gets, and never leaves till he enter the town; so
they must be valiant men that must enter into heaven, though they be driven
back, and laid on the ground, yet they must up again and at it, and never
leave till they have gotten heaven; yea, although hell lay in our way, we
should break through it and go to heaven, such a royal kingdom it is,
furnished with all good things: Saint Jerome says, It is a great labor to go
to heaven, but the reward is greater, for they shall be where all the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and Christ himself is, and where the
joy shall be unspeakable; so it is no less matter that God will bestow on his
people than a kingdom.

Now we come to the fourth thing observed in the sentence of remuneration; 4
the Reason of it, The reason of the Assignation.
For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, I thirsted, and ye gave me drink;
I was a stranger, and ye lodged me: I was naked, and ye clothed me; I was
sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me: Then shall
the righteous answer, saying, Lord when saw we thee an hungered, and athirst,
or naked, and so forth? The answer is, Insomuch as you have done it to my
servants, and to my members, you have done it to me. So, this is the Reason of
the Assignement. The Popish Church lay hold on these words, Object.
and would prove thereby that their works merit at the hands of God, because
Christ gives heaven to those that do good to his servants, and because they
shall be judged by their works: To which I answer, Sol.
although this be the reason, Works not the couse of our obtaining heaven.
why the Lord assigns heaven to them, that they did works of mercy, and
although we shall be judged by our works, yet works are not the meritorious
cause of it, why he gives us heaven, but the signs and tokens who be the
persons so qualified that shall have heaven, such as love Christ, and show
mercy to his needy members, and do good to them: I will clear it you by an
example; Simile.
The King of England makes a promise to bestow on his subjects a great reward
out of his bounty, and there came before him his subjects and his enemies; and
he says to his subjects, I will bestow this gift on you, for when I was in
France ye did attend on me, and showed your love to me; ^ow this gift shows,
who be the subjects of the King, and who be the enemies: So at the last day,
when the good and bad shall be before Christ, and Christ shall tell them this
is the reason why I bestow heaven on you, because I was hungry, and ye gave
me meat; this is not the cause of it, but it shows only who be the persons
that God has assigned heaven to, to those that love him and regard him in his
members: therefore one says well, Christ shows not for what he bestows
heaven in this place, but on what kind of persons he will bestow it: And
Chrysostom says, though the Saints do a thousand such things as these, yet
they deserve nothing at the hands of God, it is his bounty to bestow heaven on
them for so small and mean things as these. So then we see works are not the
cause why Christ assigns heaven to us. And there be four grounds for it:

The first ground^ is, Four Reasons against the merit of works.
from the estate and condition we be in; Reason 1.
all are servants: Therefore, whatsoever we do is but our duty, and if it be
our duty we cannot merit any thing at the hand of God: So says Christ, Luke
17. 10. When ye have done all these things which are commanded you, say, We
are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do:
Therefore the very estate and condition that we are in does show, that we
cannot merit any thing at the hands of God: And Chrysostom says, No man is
able to show such an holy conversation of life, to deserve any thing at the
hands of God, but when he has done all, he is but an unprofitable servant.

The Papists reply against this, Object.
and say, That although a man cannot merit any thing being in the estate of a
servant, yet if of a servant he become a friend, he may merit: Now that he
may be a friend, it is plain by the words of Christ, John 15. 15. Hence call
I you no servants, for the servant knows not what his master does, but I have
called you friends; and in the verse before, Ye are my friends.

To this I answer, Sol.
we are servants still, though it please God to accept of us as his friends; we
are only made friends by acceptance in the merit of Jesus Christ, which alters
not the former condition of duty and service, as may be proved by these places,
Romans 6. 18. Being then made free from sin, ye are made the servants of
righteousness: and in the 1 Pet. 2. 16. he exhorts them, As free, and not
using the liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God:
And Christ says, Ioh. 15. 19. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I
command you: therefore, because we be servants still, and remain in the same
estate and condition, we cannot merit any thing; but when we have done all,
we do but our duty.

The second ground is, Reason 2.
our own impotencie, that we are not able to do any good thing of our selves;
much less can we merit anything: Now that we can do no good thing, it is
plain by the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15. 10. By the grace of God, I am that I am:
And 2 Cor. 3. 5. says he, Not that we are sufficient of our selves, to think
any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God: So Phil. 2. 13. For
it is God that works in you both the will and the dead, even of his good
pleasure. Now then if all we do is by the power of grace, and if it is God
only which works both the will and the deed, then we are beholding to God
for it, and God is not beholding to us. Origin says well, No works of man can
deserve any thing at Gods hand, because they cannot think any good, or do any
good, but it must be from God.

The Papists reply and say, Object.
that God may give a man grace which he may so husband, as that he may deserve
any thing at Gods hand; and they make it plain by this similitude; A father
gives a farm to his son, and gives him a stock, now the son may so raise
the stock and play the good husband, as he may purchase any thing that the
father has; in like manner, say they, God may give a man grace, and he may so
husband it, as he may purchase any thing at Gods hand.

To this I answer, Sol.
If a father should give his son a farm and a stock to use, and when he had
done so, his child could not earne a penny, but it must be the father, and the
son could not stir a foot or a hand, without the father, then the father is
not beholding to the son, but the son to the father. This is the case
between God and us, for when he gives us any grace, he must give us a second
grace to use and to employ it well; and therefore it is manifest we cannot merit
any thing at Gods hands: it is the doctrine of the Schoolmen, and Aquinas
makes it plain, he puts the question and resolves it; says he, A man may
receive a benefit from another, and may deserve it at his hands, as a man may
give one an house, which he may deserve; but if a man when he has given
another an house, must give him also power to use the house, and wisdom to
govern the same; that man cannot be beholding to him that receives, but the
receiver must needs be beholding to him that gave it; so although God give a
man grace, which he cannot use well, unless he also give him power to use it:
Therefore God is not beholding to us for any thing, but we are to God; and
therefore we cannot merit any thing at Gods hands.

The third ground is, Reason 3.
our imperfection, that in every thing we do we sin against God, and if we
sin against him, then we cannot merit any thing at his hand; it is the
doctrine of their own Schoolmen, that a sinner cannot merit, but we be all
sinners against God; therefore we cannot merit any thing. Now that we be all
sinners it is plain by the Scriptures, Job 9. 3. If be would dispute with him,
he could not answer him one of a thousand: So Lament. 3. 22. It is the Lords
mercy that we are not consumed, etc. Saint Jerome says, Who is it that has
not sinned? and if a man has broken but one of the Commandments, he is
guilty of the whole Law; therefore no man can merit any thing at Gods hands.

The fourth ground is, Reason 4.
a disproportion between our works and Gods justice: For merits are grounded
on Commutative justice (as they say;) and Aristotle says, That commutative
justice is equally to give weight for weight, so much for so much, but there is
no proportion between our works and Gods justice; for Saint Paul says, that
all the afflictions of this life, are not worthy of the glory that shall be
showed to us, Romans 8. 18. One says well, if a man should suffer all the
sufferings that the people of God had done from Adam till this present time,
having all the virtues of the holy men; yet he were not worthy of the glory of
heaven; if a man should live a thousand years, and spend them all religiously,
he did not deserve to be in heaven half an hour: Object.
To this the Papists have devised a subtle answer, say they, It is in justice,
that God should give heaven to the best men, not by a proportion, so much for
so much, but because God will bestow heaven on some body, therefore, it stands
with the justice of God, rather to bestow it on the godly, than on the wicked,
I answer, this is sophistical that tells us it is justice, Sol.
that God should give heaven to some body; but what justice is it? it is not to
give so much for so much, weight for weight, It is not commutative, but
distributive justice; and therefore there is a disproportion between our
works and Gods justice. Again, the Papists are overthrown in their own
argument, for they say, it was commutative justice, not by an Arithmeticall,
but a Geometrical proportion: I answer, commutative justice, to give weight
for weight, so much for so much, is not that, but it is according to
distributive justice, not by Arithmeticall, but by a Geometrical proportion,
seeing he must give heaven, to give it to the best men: So the answer of the
Papist is sophistical. Now in these, words are four things to be observed:

1. That the Judgment at the last day, shall pass according to works. 2.
That good works shall be reported and rewarded. 3. That they shall works of
mercy. 4. That they shall be such works of Mercy as are done to Christians,
because they are Christians.
First, 1
The Judgment at the last day shall be according to works; Therefore look
what our works be, The judgment shall be according to works.
such shall be the judgment that shall pass on us: So Romans 2. 6. says the
Apostle, Who will reward every man according to his works; So also Revel. 20.
18. it is said. And they were judged every man according to their works; And
Matthew. 12. 36. says Christ, But I say unto you, that every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give account thereof at the day of Judgment: So then
the judgment shall pass according to works; but mistake me not, I do not
say, according to the merit of our works, (for we deserve nothing) but
according to the quality of our works: Saint Gregory shows out of Psalm. 7.
It is one thing that God should render for a man's works, and another thing to
render according to man's works. If God render according to a man's works, then
it will be well for good works, and evil for evil works.

I, but here a question may be made, Quest.
seeing we shall be judged according i^ works, Sol.
what shall faith do then? I answer, Faith is all in all; for Faith is
proposed as the price of our Redemption to the Justice of God; because we are
saved by Faith. And Acts 18. 31. it is said, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,
and thou shall be saved, and thy household: and Ephesians. 2. 6. the Apostle says,
by Grace are ye saved; through Faith not of your selves. And so 1 Pet. 1. 9.
Receiving the end of your Faith, even the Salvation of your souls. So then we
are saved by Faith: In sum there be two special properties in Faith:

First, 2
It makes us the sheep of Christ, it gathers us to him, and sets us at his
right hand: and moreover, it makes us of the Sons of Adam, the Sons of God;
1
this is the power of Faith. Properties of Faith.


Secondly, 2
It makes our work acceptable before God; as Heb. 11. it is said, By Faith
Abel offered a greater sacrifice* than Caine: so Faith makes our works
acceptable before God. I, but seeing we are saved by Faith, why is there no
mention of it then. Quest.
I answer, because there shall be a declaration of the just judgment of God;
Sol.
Now Faith is secret in the heart of a Man, and works be open, therefore a
man shall not be judged, by the secret and hidden graces, that is in his
heart, but by the Effects and Fruits which are open and manifest to the World.

The use is, that seeing we shall be judged according to the fruits, and not
to the secret graces that are in us; therefore we must join to our faith good
works; for look what our works be, such shall be the verdict that shall
pass upon at that day; therefore James 2. (says he) O man show me thy faith
by thy works: Thou say thou have faith, and thou talkest of faith, but let
me see it, let it appear in thy life and conversation; join good life to it:
and so Luke 5. 20. it is said, that Christ saw their faith, and he healed them;
He did not only see with the eyes of his Divinity, but he saw their faith
by the effects and fruits of it; for they laid the sick man on a bed, and did
break through the roof of the house, and let him down to Christ: Therefore
(as one says well) it is faith that is seen and visible that saves us, not
that which is secret and close in the heart, but it must be visible showed by
works, Simile.
Genesis 27. Isaac would not bless Iaakob by the voice, or by his speech, but he
feels and handles him; and when he found they were Esaus hands, he blessed
him: so Christ will not bless Christians by the voice, when they shall say I
am a Christian, I am a professor, but he will handle them and feel them: If
he find their hands to be Esaus hands; that is, his beloveds hands, that they
have done good and have been open to the poor Saints, and ready to minister
to their necessities, then the Lord will bless them and entertain them into
his kingdom.

Secondly, 2
All our good works shall be remembered and rewarded at the day of judgment,
All good works shall be remembered and rewarded.
and Christ will make rehearsal of them; there is never a good deed we have
done, but it shall be remembered and rewarded, so that our labor shall not be
in vain, as Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 15. ult. so Revel. 20. 12. it is said,
And I saw the dead both great and small stand before God, and the books were
opened, and another book was opened, which is the book of Life, and the dead
were judged of those things which were written in the books, according to
their works: So the Lord has all the good deeds of his servants written in a
book which shall be remembered, reported and rewarded: therefore what a
comfort is this to a poor Christian, that in the hearing of all the world, all
his good deeds shall be reported: how many painful Iourneyes they have taken
to hear the Word; how many hours they have spent in prayer; how many tears
they have wept for sin; that they have entertained the Saints, that they have
fed the hungry, clothed the naked, visited the sick; what a great inticement
this is to do good* to think what honor it is? that all their good deeds
shall be remembered and rewarded; Matthew. 26. 15. Christ says of the woman when
she had powered the ointment on him, that this which she had done, should be
spoken of her wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached for a memorial of
her: Simile.
But what is the speech of men to the speech of Christ? the praise of men, to
the praise of Christ? when he shall stand out and make a report of all our
good deeds we have done; therefore what a comfort will this be?

I, but have not the people of God sin? I answer, they have their sins, and
their great sins too, Object.
even the best men that be; but here is the comfort: Sol.
when the day of judgment comes they shall not be remembered, but pardoned,
and carried on the shoulders and neck of Christ, and our good deeds only
shall be remembered. As Esaias 33. ult. it is said, The people that dwell therein,
shall have their iniquity forgiven. So Jeremy 31. 33, 34. says the Lord, I
will make a new Covenant with them, and I will write my laws in their hearts,
and I will be their God, and they shall be my People; and they shall teach no
more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord:
for they shall all know me, from the greatest to the least (says the Lord)
and I will forgive their iniquities, and will remember their sins no more.
Here is the comfort of Christians, that all their sins shall be forgotten,
only their virtues shall be remembered; Exodus 34. Simile.
Moses put a veil on his face, that the children of Israel should not see the
glory of it; but Christ has hanged a veil over our sins, that they should
not be seen, even his holiness and sanctify, that the world should not see
nor behold them, for they are all pardoned, remitted, and covered with the Robe
of his righteousness.

Thirdly, 3
the judgment which shall pass upon us shall be according to the works of
mercy, The judgment shall pass, according to works of mercy.
and not only works of mercy, but all other good works shall have a reward;
as Malach. 3. 16. it is said, Then spoke they that feared God, every one to his
neighbor, and the Lord hearkened and heard it; and a book of remembrance was
written before him, for them that feared God, and thought upon his Name. So
there was a book written of all the good deeds of them that did fear God: and
so Matthew. 5. 11, 12. says our Savior, Blessed are ye when men revile you and
persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you, for my Names sake
falsely: Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in Heaven; as also
Matthew. 10. 32. Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I also confess
before my Father, which is in Heaven. So then we see all our good works shall
be rewarded.

But why does Christ mention only works of mercy? Quest.
I answer, there be two reasons of it: 1
First, Sol.
because the Lord does not accept of any work we do, Why the Judgment passes
chiefly by works of mercy.
of hearing of the Word, of praying, nor of any other good duty we do, if we
do not show mercy and compassion to our brethren. As 1 Cor. 13. 3. And though
I feed the poor with all my goods, and though I give my body that it be
burnt, 1
and have not love, it profits me nothing: and Esaias 1. 14. says God, My
soul hates your new Moons and your appointed Feasts; they are a burden to
me, I am weary of bearing them: and the reason was because they did not show
compassion to their brethren, as may be gathered out of the 15. verse. In like
manner the Prophet brings in the people expostulating with God, and he
answering them, Esaias. 58. 3. Wherefore have we fasted and thou seeft not?
wherefore have we punished our selves, and thou regardest is not, etc? Is not
this the fasting that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to take
off the heavy burdens, is let the oppressed go free, and that ye break
every yoke? verse 6, 7. Is it not to break thy bread to the hungry, and that
thou bring the poor that wander unto thy house, and when thou see the naked
that thou cover him, and hide not thy self from thine own flesh; and
therefore we may assure our selves the Lord will accept of none of our works,
without we be merciful to our brethren.

Secondly, 2
because as it is Hos. 6. 6. The Lord desires mercy and not sacrifice; when
both may stand together then God will have both: But if they cannot, he will
have mercy showed; he had rather lose his own part, than a poor man should
lose his. So the command is, Heb. 13. 16. Gods mercy so great, that he had
rather abate of his own service, than man want his comfort.
But to do good and to distribute, forget not, for with such sacrifices God is
well pleased: Such is the tenderness of God, that he is contented to abate of
his own service, rather than man should want of his comfort. As Matthew. 5. 23.
If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has
ought against thee; leave there thine offering before the Altar, and go thy
way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
Hence we see though it be a great duty that we owe to God, yet for man's good
he will be contented to stay for his own service. Philosophers say, Simile.
that the fire which is farthest remooved, is the hottest and most vehement; so
it is in love, that love which is furthest remooved from God, is the hottest
and the most vehement love of all other. It is an easy matter to love God in
himself: O but for a man to love God in his poor distressed members; to love
him in his poor Saints and People, this is the hottest love, and most
difficult. Now since all our good works shall be remembered, and more
especially our works of mercy: Therefore it is a good thing for a man to
feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, to visit the sick: and let us meditate
with our selves in this case, Simile.
as David said, 2 Samuel 7. 2. I dwell in a house of Cedar, and the Ark of God
remains within curtains; so we should say I dwell in a goodly house and many
of Gods people have not a house to put their heads in; I lie in a soft bed,
when many of them have not a bed to lie on; I have good food, when they have
not a bit of bread to eat. So then it is a good thing for a man to go out of
himself to consider the wants of other, and to show mercy to them, especially
at this time, because God has been merciful unto us, in giving us seasonable
times to inn the fruits of the earth to our comfort, and giving to us the
appointed weeks of the harvest, as Ierem. 5. and giving of us strength to
undergo our labors: we see Numb. 31. 49. when the captains had been at
war, and were returned home again, Simile.
they muster their men and find not a man lost, therefore they bring an
offering and offer it to the Lord in thankfulness for it: so we should do,
every one look into his family and number his men, and when he sees that
there is not one of them has miscarried, but that he has his number still,
give thanks to God for it, and as God has been merciful to us, so to be
merciful to our brethren.

I, but some will say, Object.
I am a poor man and cannot feed the hungry, cloth the naked, nor (as Christ
speaks) do any great matter, what shall I do? I answer, Sol.
that the least and smallest matter that is done in true love to Christ shall
not want his reward, if it be but a draught of drink, or visit of the sick;
so Christ shows, Matthew. 10. 42. And whosoever shall give unto one of these
little ones a cup of cold water to drink (only in the name of a Disciple)
verily (I say unto you) he shall not lose his reward; so we see Luke 21. the
poor widow that cast into the treasury but two mites was more accepted than
them that cast in of superfluity; it is not the great quantity that is
accepted, but with what affection; for the smallest thing done Christ will
accept, if it be done in love. Exodus 35. we see the people brought gold and
silver, and brass and silk, ramskins and goats hair, and so forth, for the
building of the Tabernacle; Origin says well on that place, Grant Lord (says
he) that I may be found to bring something to the building of thy Temple, that
I may be found to being a little gold to make the mercyseate on or the Arc,
or to make the candlestick, or a little silver to make the pillars on, or a
little brass to make the bosses on, or a little silk to make the curtains
on, a little goats hair, that so I may not be found empty to have brought
nothing to the building of thy spiritual Temple. Simile.
So what a grief may it be (at that day) when Christ shall say; here is the
gold, silver; brass, silk or the goats hair that such a man and such a woman
brought, and I shall be found to bring nothing? what a shame and what a grief
(I say) will this be? therefore will I ever beseech God to give me the grace
that I may be found able to bring something and bestow it on Gods spiritual
house, that it may be a comfort to me at that day; and let every man be
exhorted to do what they can out of true love to God and compassion to his
poor members, and no question it shall be accepted, though it be but a little
goats hair: we see Math. 21. when Christ rode to Jerusalem, every man was
ready to do him service and honor, some strowed their garments in the way,
Simile.
some cut down boughs and branches to make way for his coming; so do thou,
if thou have not changes of garments to strew, yet cut down a boughe or some
little branch: bestow something on Christ, on the Church of God, on his poor
Saints and people, and God will accept it* for as it is 1 Cor. 8. if there be
but a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not
according to that which he has not; therefore let men do what they are able,
and God will accept of it, though it be but a little.

Fourthly, 4
the judgment that shall pass upon us at the day of judgment, shall be, The
Judgment shall pass according to works of mercy to Christians.
of such works of mercy as are done to Christians because they are Christians;
it is good thing to do good to all, as Solomon says, Eccl. 11. cast thy bread
on the waters, for after many days thou shall find it; though it seem to
thee to be lost and to be cast away, yet thou shall find it again. But
especially do good to Christians because they be Christians, as it is Gal. 6.
9. do good to all, especially to the household of faith; and so Romans 12. 13.
the Apostle exhorts to distribute to the necessities of the Saints: for, that
which is done to the Saints, is done to Christ himself, thus 2 Samuel 9. David
makes inquiry, Simile.
if none of the house of Saul was left, for Jonathan was dead unto whom he
could show no kindness, therefore he makes inquiry to see if any of his race,
were left that he might show kindness to them for Ionathans sake; so Christ
is in heaven, we cannot bestow our bread or our cloth on him: O but there are
a number of his brethren and servants here in want and in need, these we must
feed, cloth and show kindness to for Christ's sake: again, though we are to
do good to all, yet especially to Christians because they are Christians, for
there is such a near conjunction between Christ and Christians, that their
wants he takes to be his wants, their injuries and wrongs to be as done to
him. Therefore one says well; that Christ takes all the injuries and wrongs
that are done to his servants as if they were done to himself; as Acts 9. Saul
persecuted the Church, and Christ cries out of heaven, Saul, Saul, why
persecutes thou me? Saul, kicked at the foot, and the head cries out of
heaven, why do thou persecute me, such a near conjunction there is between
Christ and his members that all the injuries and wrongs that are done to them
are accounted as done to Christ, and all their wants to be his wants:
Therefore tell me O man or woman, if Christ should hang on the cross and cry
out and say, I thirst, what would thou do? Let him thirst still; nay
would thou not rather bring him wine or milk to comfort him? this is the
same case still, Simile.
for when a Christian is a-thirst, or an hungered, or in any want, Christ cries
out of heaven, I thirst, I am an hungered, I am in want, and therefore look
what thou would do to Christ, that do to his servants and he will accept
it as if it were done to him.

Now their remains something to be spoken morr, but because the time passes I
will speak breifely of it: The Saints reply and say to Christ, when saw we
thee an hungered, or a-thirst, or naked, did they not know it? were they
ignorant of it? I answer, they did know it, but these words only are
Parabolicall, not that the saints do say so, but it is to teach us somewhat; as
Luke 16. of the speech that passed between the rich man in Hell, and Lazarus,
we are not to think that there was any such speech, but it is Parabolicall, to
teach us that we must not look for one to be sent from the dead to tell us
news, but must look unto the Scriptures, and take warning by them; so be
these words Parabolicall, and are to teach us two things:

First, 1
That Christ has an eye to all the works of Mercy that we do to our
brethren, and takes it as if it were done to himslfe.

Secondly, That the People of God when they have done all the good they can
they will not know of any thing, 2
they carry themslves so humble and so low, when they come to stand before
Christ. So when we have done all the good we can, when we come to stand
before God, let us endeavor to be humbled and carry our selves very low.
Simile.
If a man go in at a low Door, he can take no hurt by stooping low; O but if
he rise one inch above the Door, he may break his head, or dash his brains
out: So by sinking low and by humbling our selves before God, we can take no
hurt; but carrying our selves too high, we may break our heads, or be
confounded. Therefore it is a good thing when men have done well to be humble
and to carry themselves submissively.

SERMON LI. SERMON. LI.

MATTHEW 25. 41, 42. Then shall he say also to them on the left hand, Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his
angels. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat, I was thirsty, and ye
gave me no drink, etc.
HAving spoken of the sentence of Remuneration or reward that all the godly
shall receive at the day of judgment, when Christ shall say, Come ye blessed
of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you, having spoken, I say, of
this first part of the sentence, we are now come to the latter part thereof,
which is the most doleful and heavy sentence that shall pass upon the wicked
and ungodly at the last day. Now there be four pains or punishments employed
in it.

1. An Abdication or Ejection, in these words, depart from me. 2. A
Malediction, in these words, ye cursed. 3. The place that they shall pass
into, or the Estate they shall go into, Fire, and everlasting fire. 4. The
Society and the companions that they shall have; the Devil and his Angels.
These be the four punishments or pains that shall pass upon the wicked and
ungodly at the day of judgment, the least whereof were enough to break any
man's heart to think of. Daniel. 5. 5. it is said of Belshazzer, His
co^ntenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled, so that the joints of his
loins were loosed, Simile.
and his knees smote one against another; when he saw his sentence written on
the wall, and yet he could not read it; much more shall all the wicked of the
world tremble and quake, and their knees smite together for fear, when they
shall hear their own sentence read by Jesus Christ; how shall their ears
tingle, their thoughts be troubled, and their hearts fail them? O that all men
would think of this, and I pray the God of all spirits to grant us grace to
avoid and to fear it. 1


First, An Abdication or Eiection.
and Abdication or Ejection, depart from me: Christ's voice as a clap of Thunder
shall be of force to drive all the wicked out of his presence, so there shall
not be a wicked man left behind; even the sweet mouth of Christ that shall
gather all the godly to him, They shall be shut out of Heaven.
shall drive all the wicked into Hell; for no sooner shall Christ give out the
word, and say, depart from me; but it shall be of force to drive all to Hell,
there is never a wicked man that is able to withstand. Depart from me ye
wicked and ungodly; you that be swearers, liars, deceivers, whoremasters,
drunkards, and covetous persons, such as profane the Sabbath, and spend your
time loosely, and badly; depart (I say) from me, away to Hell with you, to the
Devil, to pains and torments. Now what a fearful thing is this, to be cast
out of Christ's presence, as Psalm. 1. 5. David says, the wicked shall not stand
in the judgment; they come into judgment, but they shall not stand in it, nor
be able to hold up their heads: Simile.
as Hest. 7. 3. when Haman was out of favor with the king, they covered his
face, and carried him out of the kings presence, though once he was greatly in
favor with him; so it shall be with all the wicked of the world, howsoever here
they may be in great favor with Kings Princes and great men, yet they shall
be cast out of the presence of Christ, and expelled. Therefore consider what a
fearful thing it is, when Christ shall cast us out, because in his presence
is all fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore; as it is, Psalm. 16.
Therefore to be cast out of Christ's presence, is to be cast away from the
fountain of all joy and pleasure, and out of the glory of this World: O what a
Hell and a torment will this be at that day? Therefore the Apostle Paul says
of such 2 These. 1. 9. Who shall be punished with everlasting perdition from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power; they shall not be
able to behold the sweet face of Christ, but shall be all shut out: as Exodus
33. when the Lord would not go with the children of Israel, but would send an
Angel with them, they would not put on their costly raiment, but laid it
aside, which made Moses say unto God, Carry us not from this place, unless
thy presence go with us. Now if it were such a grief and terror to want the
presence of God here for a little time in the kingdom of grace; what a grief
and a terror will it be, and worse than many thousand deaths, to be cast out
of the presence of God, for ever and ever? this will be a terror of all
terrors, and it will be the greater, in that we shall be excluded and shut
out when others shall be admitted, and shall see them go to Heaven, as Christ
speaks, Luke 13. There shall be weeping wailing and gnashing of teeth, when ye
shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the kingdom of God, and you your selves
shut out of doors; That is, ye shall see holy and good people go to Heaven,
when you shall go to Hell; they shall go to possess eternal glory, and you
to possess eternal shame: so the terror shall be the greater, that we shall
be excluded and shut out, when others shall be admitted into his presence.

I, but is it such a punishment to be cast out of Gods presence? Quest.
Indeed to a godly and a good man it is, for his delight, joy and comfort is to
be with Christ. Sol.
As we see Psalm. 80. ult. Show us thy face and we shall be saved: O but a
wicked man he does not desire the presence of God. I answer, there is a
twofold presence of Christ, there is a presence of God in grace, and a
presence of God in glory; A twofold presence of God.
now wicked men, although they do not desire to be present with God in grace,
as a number of men do not desire to be in the house of God, or to be near him
in his ordinances, preaching, prayer and administration of the Sacraments; like
the Gargesi^es when they lost their swine, Simile.
they would have Christ depart from them; and in Job, we read that the wicked
say to God, Away from us; therefore the wicked care not for this presence of
God: I, How far wicked men desire the presence of God.
but though they care not for the presence of God in grace, yet there is never
a wicked man but would have the presence of God in glory, they wish and long
for this, as Genesis 4. Cain cared not for the presence of God in grace, for it is
said, Simile.
He went out from the presence of God, but he desired the presence of God in
goodness; he would have God to protect him, he would have a mark set on him:
so likewise Balaam, he cared not for the presence of God in grace, but he
desired the presence of God in glory, he desired that he might die the death of
the righteous; to have that glory and comfort that they have, but he cared not
to lead their life: So Augustine says, Every man is glad of life, but every
man is not glad of the means that leads to life; therefore because they do
not desire the presence of God in grace, they shall want the presence of God in
glory, which they so much desire and long for.

Secondly, 2
they shall not only be shut out of heaven, They shall be shut out of the earth.
but they shall be excluded and shut out of this earth also, for Chrest shall
come to judge this world here on earth, as Job 19. 25. For I am sure that my
Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand the last on the earth: Christ will
call all the godly unto him, but will drive all the wicked unto hell, they
shall not only be debarred and shut out of heaven, but shall also be expelled
and driven out of this earth; so that they shall not so much as gather up the
crummes that Gods people leave behind them; howsoever that the perfection of
the glory of the Saints shall be in heaven, yet here in this world they have
their inchoation and beginning of glory, but the wicked shall not be left here
to gather up the crummes that are left behind them when they go to heaven, O
it were well with them, if they might live here and tarry on this earth, but
they shall nor enjoy the least commodity that Gods people leave behind them.
We read Genesis 3. 23. that Adam was cast out of Paradise, to till the earth from
whence he was taken; Simile.
this was a grievous and great punishment; yet if the wicked of this world were
but cast into the field to till the earth from whence they were taken, or if
they might be put into a cave, a dungeon, a prison, or any strait place, it
were well with them; but they shall not remain in any part of the earth, but
shall be driven all into hell, this is a torment of all torments, not only to
be expelled out of the glorious presence of Christ, but also to be driven out
of this earth into hell.

The use is, Use 1.
seeing all the wicked of the world shall be banished out of the presence of
Christ; this must teach us to love the presence of Christ in grace; for it is a
sure thing, if we love not the presence of Christ in grace, we shall never
enjoy his presence in glory; if we love Gods ordinances, love to be at the
preaching of the Word, love the Sacraments, love prayer, and the society of
Gods people; this is a comfortable testimony that we shall live in the kingdom
of glory; we have heard out of Hester 2. that Abashuerosh had two houses, there
was the house of sweet perfume, and the Kings house, and this was the order of
them; that first the Virgins were perfumed and trimmed in the house of sweet
odors, Simile.
and then were brought home to the Kings house; so the Lord has two houses,
the house of grace, and the house of glory; whereof this is the order, in the
first, we must be perfumed with all the sweet graces of the Spirit; so when
we have lived here a time in the Kingdom of grace, we may be taken into the
second house of the kingdom of glory.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing the wicked shall be cast out of Gods presence at the day of Judgment,
we must be careful to cast away our sins, or else our sins will cast us
out of Gods presence: It is a good saying of one, O man destroy thy sins,
Simile.
or thy sins will destroy thee: If a man had a servant that would rob him at
night of all he had, if he knew it, he would be sure to cast him out of
doors before night came; such a servant Sin is, that it will rob us of all
when night comes, when the day of death, and when the judgment is come, it
will cause us to be cast out of heaven, out of the presence of Christ, and out
of this earth, and will not leave us a bit of bread, nor a draught of drink to
comfort us; therefore let us, before the day of death and judgment come, cast
sin out of the doors, for it will not only take away Christ and heaven from
us, but all our earthly comfort also.

The second punishment or pain is, 2
Malediction or Gods Curse; Punishment, or malediction.
So they shall not only be cast from the presence of Christ, but they shall go
away with the curse of God upon them, even the sweet mouth of Christ that shall
bless all the godly, it shall curse all the vile and wicked people of the
world, swearers, liars, drunkards and bad livers, etc. therefore consider what
an heavy thing it is to go away with Christ's curse upon them, 2 King. 2. 24
we read that Elisha cursed the children that mocked him, and there came two
Bears out of the Forest and devoured them; O, but it is a more heavy thing
to have Gods curse on them; it is not two Bears that shall devour them, but
they shall be devoured in hell with the devil and his angels, if it were to
pass through fire and water, a man might have comfort if he were in Gods
favor, or if he did live in a cave, a dungeon, or a prison; for we see the
three Children went into the fire with comfort, and God was with them, and
there was not the least smell of fire on them; So Daniel, he was thrown into
the Lions den, and was not afraid, because he was in favor with God; and
Jeremy was cast into the dungeon, Paul and Silas into prison, with their feet
in the stocks, yet they sung salmes at midnight and rejoiced; if the blessing
of Christ be upon a man with a persuasion of Gods, love, this will allay all
extremities, but the wicked shall go to hell, and shall have Gods curse upon
them; therefore what a fearful thing will it be at that day?

Now there is good use to be made of this point, first, seeing all the wicked
shall go away with Gods curse; Use 1.
therefore it must be every man's care to rid himslfe of his sins, because it
is they that bring Gods curse upon us; many a man is not afraid of this: we see
Judge. 17. when Micha had stolen his mothers money, and heard her curse him,
though he had the money in his hands, Simile.
which was sweet between his fingers, he was so afraid of his mothers curse
that he durst not keep it; now if Micha were thus afraid of his mothers curse,
much more should we be afraid of Gods curse; seeing we hear that our sins
will bring it upon us; how afraid should we be to sin, though it be sweet and
delightful, yet to rid our hands of it, and expel it as soon as may be, that
so we may be free of Gods curse; we sinde, Simile.
Josh. 7. that Achan had committed an execrable thing, he had stolen a
Babylonish garment, and a wedge of gold, and had hid them in the earth; yet the
judgment of God seized on him, and never left him till it found him out; so we
may have sins secret and close in our hearts that no body knows of them, if
we be not wise to rid our selves of them, the judgment of God will seize upon
us and it will never leave us, till it has destroyed soul and body; and
therefore seeing our sins will bring Gods curse, let us labor to avoid them.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing all the wicked shall go away with Gods curse, we any see what fools
the Papists be, that are afraid of the Popes curse, yet are not afraid of Gods
curse: D^^t. 27. 15. the Lord says, Cursed is the man that makes any carved
or moulten image, and puts it in a secret place; now the Pope contraries the
voice and word of God, and says in the Council of Trent, Whosoever holds not
that Images are profitable to teach, and that they be Laymens books, let them
be accused; they fear the Popes curse, which is the less, and do not fear
Gods curse, which is the greater.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing all the wicked shall go away with Gods curse, therefore every man must
labor to be one of Gods servants and people; as Psalm. 85. 6. says David, I
will hearken what God says, for he will speak peace to his people: howsoever
he will deal with the wicked and ungodly, to afflict and trouble them, yet he
will speak peaceably and comfortably to his people; therefore it must be every
man's care to repent him of his snnes, labor to please God, and to spend his
time well; and then he shall have comfort in life and death: therefore labor
to be one of Gods servants and people, believe in Christ, labor to be found in
him, and then thou shall be blessed, and freed from Gods curse.

Thirdly, 3
the estate that all the wicked shall pass into: they shall not only be
banished from the presence of God, The estate the wicked shall fall into.
and have Gods curse upon them, but shall be cast into fire and everlasting
fire. Now by fire (as I showed you the last day) is meant he greatness and
extremity of pains that the wicked shall be in, because of all Elements fire
is most afflictive, and works most furiously on our bodies making the greatest
impression on them: therefore the torment of hell is termed fire in the
Scripture; as Matthew. 3. 12. it is said, and he will burn the chafe with
unquenchable fire; so Heb. 10. 27. For if we sin willingly after we have
received the knowledge of Go^s truth, there remains no more sacrifice for
sin, but a fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery indignation which
shall devour the adverssaries; and Revel. 14. 9, 10. If any man worship the
beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead or in his hand, the
same shall drink of the wine of Gods wrath, and shall be tormented in fire
and brimstone, before the holy Angels and before the lamb: here we see
because of all other Elements fire is most afflictive, therefore the punishment
of the wicked is said to be in fire. The Schoolmen make question whether it be
bodily fire, or whether it be metaphorically spoken: to this Augustine shall
answer, (says he) this fire of hell of what sort it is, and in what place, or
part of the world it is, no man knows, but him who shall make it known: the
Papists are so bold as to make no question (though it be not a point of faith,
for a man to believe or know what a kind of fire it is) whether it be bodily
and material fire, such as we have here, or whether it be metaphorical; for
(say they) it is most agreeable to the Scripture, Four reasons showing hell
fire not to be natural fire.
and most probable, that it is bodily and material fire. But I will produce
four Reasons to show that this fire cannot be bodily fire.

First, because hell fire is prepared for the devil and his angels to torment
them in; 1
now they be spirits, therefore it must be spiritual fire that must torment
them, bodily fire will do them no hurt; as we see, Matthew. 17. 15. how the
devil cast himself into the fire, and yet was not burned; therefore it is not
bodily, but spiritual fire that must torment them; and Damascene says that
the great devils and the petty devils, Damas. lib. 4. cap. ult.
shall be tormented with fire, but that fire shall not be such fire as we
have, but such as God knows of.

Secondly, Reason 2.
look what the brimstone, the wood, the lake, the smoke and the worm is, the
same is the fire; but the wood, the brimstone, the lake, the smoke, and the
worm are metaphorically and spiritually to be taken, therefore so is this
fire; so we see Esai. 30. ult. Topheth is prepared for the king, he has made
it deep and large, the burning thereof is fire, and much wood, the breath of
the Lord like a river of brimstone does kindle it: now this cannot be taken for
bodily fire, but is to be taken metaphorically, and Saint Jerome says, that
the brimstone, the wood, the smoke, the lake, and the worm is to be taken
metaphorically and so is the fire, for the worm is not an outward worm, but
it is inward in the conscience, nor the fire is not natural such as every man
makes, but is spiritual, and so are all the rest.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
if it be bodily fire, then there are a member of miracles wrought in hell;
for it is a miracle, that fire should burn without fuel, and that men's bodies
should burn and never consume, and that there should be fire and yet
darkness: but hell is no place for miracles, for they are either for
conversion or conviction; and conversion cannot be in hell, because the time of
life is the time of conversion only; and again, they shall not need to be
convicted, because all men shall be sufficiently convinced at the day of
judgment by their own consciences; therefore hell is no place for miracles.
SER. LII.
Now since that we may not speak without ground, we will prove it by
Scripture, as Psalm. 88. 10. says the Prophet: will thou show a miracle to the
dead, or shall the dead praise thee? If a man be once dead there is no need of
miracles.

Fourthly, because we be but yonglings, therefore we will inquire of the
ancient, as ( Bildad says) Job 8. 9. Origin says, Reason 4.
the fire of Hell cannot be such fire as we have here, because our fire
cannot burn unless there be fuel to nourish it, and some body to blow it;
but there is no fuel in Hell, nor no body to blow it, but the wrath of God;
and therefore it cannot be such fire as we have here.

Now there is one Scripture that seems to make for it, as Luke 16. when the
rich glutton was in Hell, says he complaining, I am tormented in this flame.
To this Augustine shall answer, this flame cannot be taken for any bodily
flame; and Durandus, one of their own Schoolmen says, that although it may
seem to be such fire as we have here, yet if we mark the place well, we
may conclude the opposite, for such as is the finger, the drop, the water, the
tongue, such is the flame; but all these are not bodily because his body lay in
the grave, and a soul has no eyes, hands, fingers or tongue. So then it is
not bodily fire, that the wicked shall be tormented with, but it is the fire of
Gods wrath, which is a thousand times more terrible than all the fire in this
world, which is but as Ice in comparison of it: And that for two reasons.

First, Two reasons of the extremity of Hell fire.
because it is kindled by the wrath of God, as Esai. 30. ult. all the fires in
this world that are kindled by men, are the more terrible and the greater, the
stronger and mightier that men be to carry fuel to nourish, Reason 1.
increase, and lay it together: But what is the strength of man to the strength
of God, Simile.
therefore when the Justice of God shall kindle a fire, how dreadful and
terrible will it be, as Revel. 18. 8. says he of Babylon, therefore shall her
plagues come upon her at one time, death, and sorrow, and famine, and she shall
be burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God, that shall condemn her;
therefore when the strength of God shall heap pains and torments together how
terrible will it be. We see Dan. 3. 19. Nabuchadnezzar, full of fury and
rage, caused the furance to be heat so hot as that it did burn those that
came near it; Simile.
how much more terrible fire shall it be, when the Lord shall stur up all his
power to make it? surely surpassing all the fires in this world; we see what
terrible pains and punishments the cruel heart of man can devise; O but when
God, shall set his head a work to devise punishment, how terrible and how
fearful will they be? for (to give you an instance) as long as the Sea keeps
within her Banks all is well, Simile.
but when it breaks over it drownes all; so when the Justice of God shall
break her banks, all the pains and torments and punishments in this world
shall tumble into Hell; therefore how terrible and fearful will it be?

Secondly, Reason 2.
because our fire causes but one kind of pain; and takes away the sense and
feeling of all other pains, let it be what it will heade-ach, back-ach,
toothache, colic, or the gout, but in the fire of hell, there is all the
pains and torments that the torments that the heart of man can think of; for
it shall not be in one part of a man but all over; the eyes shall be
tormented with ugly and fearful sights, the ears with farefull shreeking and
crying, the nose with stinking smells, the tongue with drought and thirst, the
mind with horrors and ghastly fears, and that without any intermission or
rest. The pains that we have here are but in one part, but there in every
part inward and outward; our pains here be but particular, but there they
shall be universal; for (as one says well) as heaven includes all the joys,
comforts and delights that this world can assord; so hell in cludes all the
pains and torments that be in this world, every part shall be tormented. Now
if the pain be so great when it is in one part of a man, Simile.
in the hand, toothe, or belly, that a man would give any thing for ease, what
an intolerable pain will it be when all pains that we have had all our life
time, shall meet together? therefore I pray God give us grace to think of it,
and care to avoid it.

And the pain shall be the more terrible, For ever.
that it shall be ( for ever and ever) everlasting; All the pains and
punishments which we have here are temporary, but the pains of hell are
everlasting. The fire that fell on Sodom lasted but a day; The flood that came
upon the old world lasted but one year; Simile.
The famine that was in Egypt lasted but 7 year; The Captivity lasted but 70
years; but the pains of hell shall be thousand thousands of years, it shall
be for ever and ever; And when they have lain a thousand thousand years, they
shall be as new to begin as the first day they came thither, Revel. 14. 11. It
is said, that the smoke of their torments shall ascend evermore; and they
shall have no rest day nor night, but shall be tormented for ever and ever. If
a sinner in hell might suffer pains and torments but as many years as there
be sands on the Sea shore, Simile.
and stars in the sky, or pikes of grass on the ground, there were some
hope of ease and allayment of their grief; but when they have lain as many
years in torments as there is sands on the Sea shore, or pikes of grass on
the ground, they shall be as fresh to begin as the first day they came into
hell. O how should this break the heart of a sinner to think that the pains
of hell are everlasting? for when they have lien a thousand years, it shall be
as if it were the first day they came thither: we see if a man be on the
rack, or hang by the hand or foot, Simile.
or put his hand into fire, he would not long endure it for the gaining of a
world, much more to lie, in torment for ever and ever; again, if a man lie on
a soft bed, and have his friends to attend him, when he is sick, Simile.
yet he turns himself, tosses, and tells the hours of the night, and wishes
that it were day, and if he could be rid of that pain he would part from any
thing, then consider what a pain and torment it is to lie in hell, where one
shall not have a soft bed to lie on, nor friends to attend one, but shall have
the Devils to torment one, and shall have no allaiment of pains, but be
tormented for ever and ever.

But seeing sin is temporary how does it stand with the Justice of God,
Quest. Sol.
to punish sin eternally? I answer two ways.

First, every sin is eternal according to the intention of the doer, for, if
wicked men should live eternally, How it stand with the justice of God to
punish sin eternally.
they would grieve God eternally, and to this purpose Gregory says well,
wicked men would live ever to weary and to grieve God with their sins;
therefore it is justice in God, that seeing a sinner sins eternally in his
own intenlion, to punish it eternal^y. Use 1.


The second answer is, 2
because we sin against an infinite thing, and therefore it must have
infinite punishment: Now because it cannot be infinite in regard of the
degree, seeing men be but finite and are not capable of infinite torments at
one time; Therefore it is infinite in the continuance of it. The uses are:

First, Use 1.
seeing hell fire is the portion of sinners, therefore, as a man will take heed
of fire and water, and be afraid to go into it, how much more should we be
afraid to meddle with sin seeing it is the cause of it: If a man go to hire
a porter to carry a burden, the porter will first peise it, and f^ele the
weight of it, Simile.
which if he sees he cannot bear, it shall not come on his back for any
money; so before we meddle with sin, we must peyse it, and consider the weight
and burden of it, whether we be able to live in everlasting fire, and if we
feel we cannot, then let us not have to do with sin in any case: If there
should be a law made that for every lie w^e told, or oath we did swear and
for every one we did deceive or slander, Simile.
we should hold one of our hands in scalding lead or in flaming fire but
half an hour, how afraid would men be to break the Kings law? Now the truth
is, that every sin we commit against God, if we do not repent of it, carry
it up into the cross of Christ, and seek reconciliation in his blood, we
shall not have our hand or foot to be in fire half an hour, but every part
of us for ever and ever shall be tormented in hell fire.

Secondly, 2
seeing hell fire is the punishment of sin, and the estate that every wicked
man must pass into; therefore we may see the madness of men to be carried
away with the pleasures and delights of sin as with a stream, which be but
for a season and to lie in hell for ever and ever for it: A sinner compared to
Pharaohs Kine.
One says well that a sinner is like to Pharoahs d^eame, which was interpreted
by Joseph, the 7 fat kine were 7 years of plenty, and the 7 ilfavored, were 7
years of famine, the lean and ilfavored kine did eat up the sat, that is,
Simile.
the 7 years of want did devour all that they had gathered together in the 7
years of plenty, so this is the estate of a sinner, all the time that a sinner
lives here is the 7 years of plenty, and when he goes out of this world then
comes the 7 years of famine: O if it were but so, all were well, but it
shall be 7 hundred thousand years, nay it shall be for ever and ever in hell
fire. One compares the pleasures of sins to the Streams of Jordan that the
fishes are delighted with, Simile.
play and skip in, but at last are carried away not into the dead Sea; so many
are delighted with the pleasures of sin and take their solace in it, but at
last are carried away into the dead Sea, but into the Ocean of Gods wrath, into
the lake of fire and brimstone.

The fourth punishment or pain of the wicked is, 4
their association with the devil and his angels: They are ranked with the
Devil, and his Angels.
one would have thought there had been punishment enough of the other; O, but
they shall not only go to hell, but they shall dwell with these hellish
fiends, the devil and the damned, this is all the company that they shall
enjoy, and does it much aggravate their punishment: Augustine says, if thou
art not afraid of the place that thou shall go to, consider the fearful and
dreadful company that thou shall dwell with: as Dan. 4. Nabuchad^ezzar was
driven from his palace to eat grass, and to live among the beasts; what a
fearful judgment was this to live with Oxen? but what is it in comparison
with the other, to be cast out of the presence of Christ and to dwell among the
devils and damned? It was the custom of a certain country, Simile.
if one had murdered a man, he was taken and tied to the dead man, his hands
were tied to the dead man's hands, and his feet to the dead man's feet, and there
he lay bound till he was poisoned with the stink of the dead man: but alas,
this is nothing, to that which the wicked shall undergo, for if they do not
repent and turn to God while they live here, they shall be bound and tied to
the devils to lie in pains and torments for ever; what heart would not bleed
to consider this? O, that we had grace to think of it, and care to avoid it!
We see Matthew. 15. that there was a woman came to Christ, and said unto him,
Simile.
Have mercy upon me, O Son of David, for my daughter is miserably vexed with
a devil: now if she were vexed thus with one devil here on earth, what will
it be when a man shall be tormented with all the devils in hell fire: we see
what it is for a man to have his dear friend or his child possessed with a
devil, Simile.
though it be but for a time, what a grievous terror then will it be to be
tormented with the devils for ever and ever? So also if a house be haunted
with devils, one would not dwell in it for any thing, Simile.
nay not lie in the house a night; O, but what a torment will it be to be
tormented in hell to dwell with all the devils and hellish fiends for ever:
therefore again and again, I pray God give us grace to fear it, and care to
avoid it.

SERMON LII.
MATTHEW. 25. 42. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty,
and ye gave me no drink, etc.
IT was my purpose to have ended this point with my last days labor, but
because there remains something more of this point, as the reason of the
condemnation of the wicked, to be spoken of, and one thing besides not yet
handled, which is, what Christ shall do after the last judgment, therefore
not I will finish up this Scripture, and so will come the next time to that
point we spoke of. We heard out of the former verse of the heavy sentence
that should pass on the wicked and ungodly: first, that they shall be cast
out of the presence of Christ; secondly, they should go away with the curse of
God on them; the sweet mouth of Christ that shall bless the godly, shall curse
them; thirdly, the place that they shall pass into is fire, and everlasting
fire; fourthly, the companions they shall live with, the devil and his angels.

Now we come to the Reason of their condemnation; Reasons of the wickeds
condemnation.
for fear lest any man should think that it is for some horrible and heinous
sins that they be judged to hell torments, therefore Christ shows in these
words that the people of the world are deceived, for they think that none but
idolaters, thieves, murderers, whoremasters, and such like persons shall go
to hell; and that it cannot stand with the goodness of God, that all these
terrible and fearful judgments should be inflicted for small and petty
sins. Now Christ shows that the world is deceived, and that men shall be
condemned for small sins, as well as the great, if they do not repent for
them. In these words we are to observe three things:

1. That sins of Omission, as well as sins of Commission will damn a man.
2. Not only great sins will damn a man, but small sins will do it. 3.
Though they seem small to us, yet they be great in Gods account.
First, First, sins of Omission as well as Commission damnes.
sins of Omission will damn a man as well as sins of Commission; for
Christ will not say ye have robbed the poor and taken away their clothes,
but ye have not fed the hungry, clothed the naked, visited the sick, lodged
the stranger: the omitting duties of Prayer, of holiness to God, of love that
we owe one to another, this we shall be damned for, as well as sins of
Commission. For (as Augustine says) how many things might Christ say to the
wicked at the day of judgment: If a wicked man should say, Why have thou
judged us to Hell torments? He might say, because ye be murderers, thieves,
deceivers of your brethren, swearers, and because ye be bad livers: But Christ
shall say none of these things to them, but it is because ye have not sed the
hungry, clothed the naked, lodged the stranger, visited the sick: so then the
very omitting of Christian duties, Christ shall charge us with at the day of
judgment, will be of force enough to condemn us. Therefore the World is
deceived, for they think if they do not body harm, and pay every man his,
all is well enough though they do no good, but we see that for the omitting
of good and Christian duties, a man shall as well be damned, as for sins of
Commission: therefore it is good for us to be wise, and to profit by this, lest
we be cast out of the presence of Christ. As a man may spend the day well in
his daily vocation, yet when night comes, if he creep into his bed without
prayer, and wilfully remain in that sin, he may be condemned for it if he
repent not: so likewise a man may eat his meat, come to dinner or supper,
which a man may have because he gets it with his labor, but because he does
not sanctify it by prayer, and draw down a blessing from God upon it;
therefore notwithstanding other performances, he may be damned: so likewise on
the Sabbath day, though a man do no work, though he do not ride abroad, yet
if he lie idle at home, and do not come to public assemblies, and is not
careful to keep it holy to the Lord, he may be damned for it. And this is the
first point, that sins of Omission, as well as sins of Commission damn a
man, if he do not repent of them.

Secondly, Secondly, small sins damn as well as great ones.
Christ shows, that not only great sins damn a man and cast him out of the
presence of Christ, but the small too, if he do not repent them: this is
another thing that the wicked are deceived in, for they think if a man be not
a thief, a murderer, a whoremaster or a great sinner, all is well enough, but
Christ shows us that little sins damn, as well as great: If we do not
feed the hungry, cloth the naked, visit the sick, and lodge the stranger,
the least sin is enough to damn a man, if he do not repent of it. As Matthew.
12. 36. We shall answer for every idle word; So Matthew. 5. 39. Christ says,
Whosoever shall break one of the least of these commandments (and teach men
so to do) he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: So then the
least sin is enough to cast us from the presence of Christ: we see if a Ship
leake water, though the hole be but as big as a man's finger, if it be not
stopped, it will drown the Ship; so the least sin that is will damn a man, if
he do not repent of it; therefore we must take heed that we do not give way
to the least sin; for as Saint Jerome says, there is no sin so little, but
it deserves the wrath of God, and eternal condemnation.

Thirdly, Thirdly, small sins are great before God.
although these sins be small in our sight, yet they are great in Gods
account: For would a man think in the light of nature and sight of reason,
that because a man does not give bread to the hungry, drink to the thirsty,
and cloth to the naked, these were such great sins, with a number of others
that seem small in the eyes of the World, for they think it is a small thing
to tell a lie, to swear an oath, to rail on a neighbor: But Paul tells us 1
Cor. 6. 10. that raylers shall not inherit the Kingome of God; and Revel. 23.
15. For without shall be dogs, inchanters, whorem^ngers, murderers,
idolaters and whosoever loves or makes lies: these although they seem small
in the sight of men, yet are they great in the sight of God. Simile.
As if a man look into a false glass, he can never see true proportion, nor
right quantity, but if he look into a true one, then things will appear in
their true proportion and right quantity; so in the false glass of this
world, and of men's judgment we can never see the true proportion of sin, nor
the right quantity of it, but if we look into the true glass of the Word of
God, there sin will appear in his true proportion and right quantity.

But why is the neglect of doing good to his poor members so great Quest.
a sin? Why neglect of the Poor is so great a sin.


I answer, because in neglecting of them, we condemn Christ, for they be the
members of Christ; Sol.
and so Saint Paul says, 1 Corinthians. 8. 12. Now when ye sin against the
brethren, and wound their consciences, ye sin against Christ; the contempt
of Christ, is lapped up in the contempt of his servants: It is a good thing
therefore for a man to be merciful and pitiful, especially to the poor
Saints and people of God, and to relieve them in their wants and necessities,
so far forth as a man is able, and occasion shall be offered. Saint James
tells us that there shall be judgment merciless to him that shows no mercy;
and Matthew. 3. It is said, Blessed art the merciful, for they shall obtain
mercy: therefore it is a good thing for a man to show mercy to the Saints and
People of God: and thus much of the reason.

Now we come to the last point, and that is what shall become of Christ, and
what be shall do when he be has finished up the last judgment. This Saint
Paul shows us 1 Cor. 15. from the 24. verse, to the 28. the s^mme whereof is
this, He shall render up his kingdom to God, that he may be all in all. In
which two things offer themselves to be observed:

1. What he shall do? He shall render up his Kingdom to God. 2. The End of
it; that God may be all in all.
First, First, what Christ shall do after the last judgment.
what ^e shall do; he shall render up the Kingdom to God. Now this may be
conceived two ways; First, he shall render up the Kingdom, that is, all the
Children of God the Elect and chosen he shall bring them to God, and deliver
them to him, that he may bless them, and receive them into Heaven: that he
may be made partaker of all the glory that is prepared for them, and he shall
present them to God, in the merits of his death, and say, Father, these be
they that I have prayed for in the Mount, swet in the Garden, dyed for on the
cross, and shed my most precious blood for: Therefore Father r^^eive them and
bless them; hitherto have I kept them in thy Name: thus he shall render up
the kingdom unto God, when he shall bring all the godly and holy people to
the contemplation and beholding of the great glory prepared for them. Simile.
We heard out of Genesis 27. 3. how Joseph took certain of his brethren, and did
present them to Pharaoh; so the true Joseph Jesus Christ, shall carry all the
Elect and chosen people of God, present them before him, and desire him to
receive them into glory, and to bestow the best of Heaven upon them; so Christ
shall render up the Kingdom. Simile.
We read in Philemon when Onesimus had run away from his master, Saint Paul
meets with him, and sends him back again to his Master with a letter in his
hand, to the end his Master might receive him; but Christ will do much more
for us, he will not only send us with a letter in our hands to God, but he
will take us by the hand and present us to God in the merits of his death, that
God may receive and bless us.

Secondly, 2
he shall render up the kingdom, that is, his government and office. Now we
cannot come to God without a Mediator, all that we do now is by means of a
spokes-man but when Christ shall bring us home to God, when we shall be
brought to Heaven, then we shall have recourse unto God without a spokes-man,
then we shall not need a Mediator, and thus Christ shall render up the
kingdom; that is, he shall give up his office and his government into the
hands of God: A learned man thus expresses it, there is a number of Rebels
that be up in Arms against the king, who makes his son General, and sends
him out to subdue the Rebels, Simile.
to show mercy to those that would submit themselves to him; and to execute and
put to death them that would not, which when the kings son has done, he
returns home again to his father, and tells him that he had done what he was
sent for, and then renders up his Generalship to live with his father as he did
before; so God has sent his Son here into the World, to reconcile unto
himself all his Elect people, and to subdue his enemies; when Christ has
performed this, then he delivers up his office, and lives with the Father as
before; Simile.
Adam in the time of his innocence and Communion with God, was without a
Mediator; so when we are all brought home to God again into Heaven, then we
shall have communion with God, without a Mediator: Now because this is a hard
point, and that which some Divines stumble at; therefore I will make it as
plain as I can: A man that has sore eyes, he will have silk to hang before
them, or he must have a glass to see by, Simile.
but when his eyes be well, he will take away the glass, and lay aside his
silks; so as long as we were in our sins, we could not deal with God; but
we must have our silks, it must be by a Mediator; but when our sins shall
be healed, then we may lay aside our silks, and we shall see the face of God,
without a Mediator.

But here a question may be made; Quest.
some may may say, How shall Christ render up the Kingdom, seeing it is said,
Luke 1. 33. that of his kingdom there shall be no end: so Daniel 2. it is
said, His Kingdom shall not pass to another.

To this I answer, Sol.
His Kingdom shall continue still, but not in the same form; the form shall
be altered, for now he reigns as Man, then as God; now the glory of the
Godhead is shadowed by the Manhood, SERMON. LIII.
and then the glory of the Manhood shall be darkened by the Godhead; not that
the Manhood of Christ shall no^ remain, or that the glory of it shall be
less than now, but it shall be obscured as it were by a greater light: I will
make it plain by a similitude; Simile.
light a candle in a dark night, and it shines and gives light; but bring it
into the bright Sunshine, and the brightness and splendour of the Sun
darkens the light of the candle, though it have the same light that it had
before: so though there be the same glory in the Manhood of Christ that was
before, yet the glory and splendour of the Godhead, shall so far go beyond
the Manhood of Christ's former manifestation, as it shall darken that glory: and
thus much for the first point.

Secondly, Secondly, the end why he shall render up the kingdom.
The End why he shall render up his kingdom to God, that he may be all in all.
Here God is not all in all, for there are many excellencies in the World;
Angels and Archangels, Principalities and Powers, Kings and Princes. How Christ
shall be all in all at the day of judgment.
Now there b^e many eminencies and excellencies, but at the day of judgment
Christ shall put down all rule and authority under his feet, and then God
shall be all in all.

Secondly, 1
God shall be all in all in the fulfilling of the hearts of his servants with
grace and goodness, 2
God is not all in all now in the hearts of his servants he is but something,
as Chastity in Joseph, Constancy in David, fortitude in Sampson, wisdom in
Solomon; But then God shall be all in all to them; Simile.
we are all like to a bottle that has at narrow neck that is east into the
Sea, and cannot fill all at once, but receive the water drop by drop: but at
the day of judgment God shall fill our hearts and souls with all grace and
goodness. Saint Jerome says well; Now God is by a few virtues in us but then
he shall be all in all, in filling our hearts with graces and virtues: and
Augustine says, out of this place; what is that Paul says, that God shall be
all in all? what^oever the heart of Man can wish or desire, that God will be to
a Christian; therefore do thou desire meat and drink? God will be meat and
drink to thee: do thou desire peace? God will be all in all to thee in
whatsoever thy heart can wish for: and this is the end why Christ shall render
up the Kingdom unto his Father, that God may be all in all.

SERMON LIII.
JOHN 14. 26. But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you.
THe Creed as Tertullian terms it, (...) VIII.
is the rule how to ^rder our Faith both concerning God and the Church of God:
And there are two rules to order our Faith by. First, Two reasons whereby to
rule our ^aith.
that there are three Persons, and but one God, in substance and in essence:
and as there are three Persons and but one God: So we must labor to be all
one, Reason 1.
because we must seek to resemble God as much as may be: although we cannot be
one in substance, yet we must be all one in affection and will: So it is said,
Acts 4. 32. that the number of them that believed were all of one heart, and of
one mind; and Christ prays, John 17. 21. that as the Father and he is one, so
all his people may be one; And Romans 15. 6. the Apostle prays, that they may
with one mind, and with one mouth praise God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus; as there is unity in God, The dev^ll the Author of ^ivision.
so there must be unity in us: It was the Devil that first made division in
the World; he divided Man from his God, and Man from Man, in the most dearest
and nearest society: for the divided Adam from his wife, and so it is the
devil that makes division still in the world; as Revel. 6. 4. it is said of
him, There was power given him to take away peace, etc. So then all division
proceeds from the Devil: God he makes peace, but it is the Devil that
makes division, and therefore it is our duty as God is one, so we to labor to
be one, though we cannot in substance, yet in affection and will.

The second Rule is, that although they be one in Substance and Essence, yet
they be three distinct Persons, Reason 2.
the Father created Man by his power, and he Son redeemed Man by his blood:
the Holy Ghost sanctified Man by his Spirit: So all these three estates in
He^ven concur and work together for the good of Man. And therefore it is a
piteous thing that Man is found to be enemy to himself. Hence then let every
one consider, how worth^ly do Men perish and go to Hell, seeing all the
Divine Persons work for Man's good, and he alone is found enemy to himself.
Now we have spoken already of the first Person, and also of the second, at this
present are come to speak of the third Person, whereto four things are to be
considered.

1. That the Holy Ghost is God. 2. That he is a person having a Real
subsisting, and that he is distinct from the Father and the Son. 3. That he
is not only holy in himself, but he is the Effecter and Causer of Holiness
in others. 4. That as he makes others holy, so he will make me holy, and give
me such a measure of Sanctity, as shall be fit for me.
First, 1
That the holy Ghost is God; it is a ground in Divinity, that he that
believes, That the Holy Ghost is God.
should believe in God, and in no creature; but we are taught to believe in
the holy Ghost; therefore it is a surething that the holy Ghost is God. But for
the truth of this point, because it is one of the grounds of our Christian
faith, I will prove it by Scripture and by reason.

First, by Scripture; Act. 5. 3. says Peter to An^nias, Why has Satan filled
thy heart, Proved first by Scriptures.
that thou should lie unto the holy Ghost? and in the very next verse, Thou
have not lied to man, but unto God: Again, 1 Ioh. 5. 7. There be three that
bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these
three are one; what one are they but one God? The Papist tells us that the
Divinity of the holy Ghost cannot be proved by the Scripture, but by
tradition; but this is erroneous and false, and there are Schoolmen teach to
the contrary, as Thomas Aquinas, who says, A man must speak nothing of God,
or believe nothing but what is found in Scripture, either in express words or
sense; and therefore if it cannot be proved by the Scriptures that the holy
Ghost is God, we are not to believe it, because we are to believe nothing but
that which is grounded upon the Scripture: Another of them says, that he can
bring a whole swarm of testimonies to demonstrate unto us the Divinity of the
holy Ghost: So then we see it may strongly be confirmed by Scripture, that the
holy Ghost is God; and Cyrill says, that it is the holy Ghost that is the
inditer of the Scripture, and therefore he testifies of himself and reveals
himself as much as is fit and needful for us to know of him, that which he
has written of himself, we may be bold to speak of: And Augustine says,
that all the ancient Fathers have labored to confirm this by Scripture, that
there is three distinct Persons and one God: besides, in the Remish Testament,
1 John 5. 7. we find observed upon the note of One, that there be three divine
persons in the Trinity; and therefore this does affirm the Godhead of the
holy Ghost: but here seeing it is so plain by Scripture, and by the
testimonies of the Fathers, and by their own Schoolmen, (as many as be well
advised) that the holy Ghost is God, Four Reasons to prove the Holy Ghost to
be God.
we need not doubt of the truth of it; but for the unbeleevers sake (if any
should be here) I will give four reasons to prove it.

First, Reason 1.
because it is proper to none but God, to be in all places at one time; as
Ierem. 23. 24. Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord? This is the
property only of God, on bodily substance can, because they cannot be but in
one place at one time, and must be bounded in their own essence; but the Holy
Ghost is in all places, he is in heaven and earth, and in the hearts of the
faithful all the world over; therefore the Holy Ghost is God: Object.
I, but some man may say, the light of the Sun is all the world over: Sol.
To this I answer, although the light of the Sun be all the world over, yet
there are diverse parts of it; But the Holy Ghost is all one and the same, and
is not divided, but he fills heaven and earth, and he is in the hearts of the
godly all the world over; and therefore the holy Ghost is God.

Secondly, Reason 2.
Because none but God can create and make things of nothing, none but God
knows all things, none but God can give gifts of grace to his servants; but
the Holy Ghost does all this, and therefore the Holy Ghost is God: 1
First, we may see the Holy Ghost creates as well as the Father and the Son,
as Job 33. 4. The Spirit of the Lord has made me, and the breath of the
Almighty has given me life: So Psalm. 33. 6. By the Word of the Lord were the
heaven and the earth made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth:
2
Secondly, no man knows the things of God, but God the Holy Ghost knows
all, and therefore he is God, as 1 Cor. 2. 11. For what man knows the things
of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in him; even so the things of God
knows no man, but the Spirit of God: Thirdly, none but God gives gifts of
grace to men; 3
but the Holy Ghost does; therefore the Holy Ghost is God. Now that the Holy
Ghost does give gifts and graces it is plain, 1 Cor. 12. 6. There are
diversities of operations, but God is the same that works all: seeing then it
is the Holy Ghost that does create, that knows the things of God, and that
gives gifts of grace into the hearts of men; therefore the holy Ghost is God.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
No man is to be baptized into the name of any creature, but into Gods only;
but we are commanded to be baptized into the name of the Holy Ghost; therefore
the Holy Ghost. Now that no man is to be baptized into the name of any
creature, it is plain by the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 1. 13. where he demands,
Were ye baptized into the name of Paul? I baptized (I thank God) name of you,
but Crispus and Gaius, lest any man should say, that I baptized into mine own
name.

Again. Reason 4.
We that be baptized are grafted into another stock, and so draw spiritual
grace into our selves, but if a man be baptized into any other name, he cannot
draw spiritual grace; and therefore we are to be baptized into none other
name, but into Gods Name; besides, there is an express charge and command to
baptize in no other name, but in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost: Therefore the Holy Ghost is God. Now I spend the more time in this,
that ye might have your Christian faith grounded; for Matthew. 13. we see that
the seed that was sown in the stony ground withered and came to nothing,
because it wanted a root of judgment; so if our knowledge be not rooted and
grounded, it will come to nothing, every temptation will shake it; and
therefore we must labor to have our knowledge grounded: Let us come to make
use of it.

First, Use 1.
seeing the holy Ghost is God: therefore we must take heed we do not grieve
him with our sins, and our corruptions; this is the use Saint Paul makes of it,
Ephesians. 4. 30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto
the day of redemption: Simile.
It is a great fault to grieve man, but it is a greater to grieve God; it is
said in the Law that the people grieved God, and Moses his servant; and Esaias 7.
10. the question is asked, Is it a small thing to grieve man, but ye will also
grieve my God? Now there is never a sin we commit, All sin is a grief to
God.
but we grieve God, every oath we swear, every lie we tell, etc. and
therefore we must take heed, we do not sin to grieve the holy Spirit and to
cause him to depart from us; as Heb. 3. 10. God complains, Forty years long
was I grieved with this generation, etc. Simile.
so it is our sins that grieve the holy Ghost: If a man has a guest that
comes to his house to tarry but a night, he will be wary lest he offend him;
much more we should be loath to offend the holy Ghost, seeing he comes to
dwell with us not a night, but for ever: consider with thy self, Simile.
O man, if thou have a friend that will help thee in all times of extremity,
and releeve thee, will thou offend him? nay, thou would labor to please him;
So the holy Ghost is a friend to us, and will speak comfortably and kindly to
us at the day of death, and in our troubles; therefore, if we grieve him, what
comfort can we look for at the day of death, and in the time of trouble?

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing the holy Ghost is God, we must take heed that we do not destroy the
temple of the holy Ghost: now our bodies be the temples of the holy Ghost,
therefore we must take heed we do not destroy the; So 1 Cor. 3. 16. says the
Apostle, Know ye not that ye are the temples of God, and that the Spirit of
God dwells in you? and if any man destroy this temple, How man destroys the
Temple of God.
God will destroy him; which is done, first by pulling down the walls, and then
by defacing of it, 1
which bloody tyrants do when they kill good people, and deface them: If a
Nobleman have his house pulled down over his head, he will not take it well
at their hands, but he will labor to destroy them who did it; so if tyrants
pull down Gods Temple, he will not take it well at their hands, 2
but will destroy them. Secondly, we may destroy this temple by polluting it,
for though they let the walls stand, yet they may destroy Gods temple, by
destroying the sanctity and the holiness of it by their bad lusts, and vile
sins that they do commit, and then God will destroy them; as John 2. you see
how angry Christ was, that he made a whip and did scourge them out of the
Temple that brought oxen, Simile.
and sheep, and doves to sell there; now if Christ were angry with them that
defiled the material Temple with their oxen, sheep and doves, much more will
he be angry with them that pollute his spiritual Temple with their sins and
corruptions, and vile lusts.

The second thing that we are to believe concerning God the holy Ghost, is,
That he is person really subsisting, and distinct from the Father and the
Son: 1
And here we are to observe two things; First, That the holy Ghost is a Person
or a real subsistence, The Holy Ghost is not a quality or motion in God.
and not a quality or motion in God, as certain heretics hold, but he is a
Person that has real subsistence by himself; which we may see by diverse acts
that he does; as to send the Prophets and Apostles, and give spiritual gifts
and graces; Esaias 48. 16. it is said, The Lord God and his Spirit has sent me;
therefore because the holy Ghost is said to send, he is not a quality or a
motion, but a person: So also Acts 13. 2. The holy Ghost said, Separate me Paul
and Barnabas for the work whereunto I have called them: So then it is plain
by the Scripture that the holy Ghost is person, and not a quality or a motion
in God: Now, two ways the holy Ghost is taken in the Scripture, for the gifts
and graces of the holy Ghost; Sin against the Holy Ghost.
as Matthew. 12. Christ shows, He that sins against the holy Ghost shall not
be forgiven, neither in this world, not in the world to come: A man may sin
against the Person of the holy Ghost, and yet may be forgiven, but the sin
that is here spoken of, is the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost; and in other
places of the Scripture, it is taken for the person of the holy Ghost.

Secondly, 2
the holy Ghost is a distinct Person from the Father and the Son, He is a
distinct Person from the Father and the Son.
Matthew. 28. 19. Christ says to his Disciples, Go teach all nations, baptising
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; and so
also, 1 John 5. 7. he shows there are three that bear record in heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one; furthermore,
Matthew. 3. when Christ was baptized, there was the voice of the Father, saying,
This is my welbeloved Son in whom I am well pleased; and the holy Ghost
descending on Christ in the likeness of a Dove; so it is plain by the
Scripture, that the holy Ghost is a distinct person from the Father and the
Son.

Now the use hereof is briefly, Use
that as we feel the power of God the Father in our creation, and the mercy of
the Son in our redemption, so also we must labor to feel the work of the
holy Ghost in sanctifying of our hearts and quickening of us to all holy duties,
there were some as we may read of in the Acts, that did not know there was a
Holy Ghost; but if we feel our hearts to be sanctified, and the power of the
holy Ghost to quicken us, this is an argument to us against all heretics, to
prove there is a holy Ghost.

The third point that we are to believe is, 3
that the holy Ghost is holy in himself, That the Holy Ghost is not only holy
in himself, but causer of it in others.
and that he is the causer and effecter of holiness in others: So Saint Paul
says, 1 Cor. 12. 3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy
Ghost; that is, no man is able to do any thing that is pleasing to God but by
the holy Ghost; and verse. 11. (says he) All these things works even the
selfe-some Spirit, distributing to every one severally as he will. So the holy
Ghost is not only holy in himself, but he is the cause of holiness, in all
the people of God.

The uses are, Use 1.
first, seeing the holy Ghost makes men holy, there is never a man that has
one deep or dram of holiness in himself, but the holy Ghost must work it in
him; as Ezekiel. 37. we see the dead bones were scattered all the field over,
Simile.
till the Spirit of God came into them, then there was a noise, a clattering
and running together of the bones; so we be scattered all the field over, and
lie like dead bones till the Spirit of God come into our heart, then there is a
noise and a clattering together of the bones, then men begin to stir in the
life of holiness: therefore does any man desire spiritual graces, SER. LIVE.
and is often in prayer? does any man find in himself holy motions to good?
let him comfort himself, for such desires are of and by the Spirit of God; it
is the holy Ghost that works them in him, for no man has a dram or a drop of
holiness in himself, but it is the holy Ghost works it in him.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing it is the holy Ghost that makes men holy, as often as we feel any good
motions, or good desires, we may know from whence they come, that it is the
holy Ghost which is the beginner and worker of them: Simile.
If a man lie in a trance, and neither moves nor stirs, if one lays his ear
to the man and hears him breath, he may say there is life in the man; even so,
although a man be not able to stir in the life of holiness, yet if he do
but breath that there be good thoughts, and good motions, and good desires,
this is a token that there is the life of grace in him, and that the holy Ghost
has begun to work in him, there is the beginning of grace in him.

SERMON LIVE.
JOHN 14. 26. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.
Four points ye heard we are to believe concerning the holy Ghost; first,
That the holy Ghost is God; secondly, That he is a person, and not a motion or
a quality in God, but has a real subsistence, and that he is a distinct
Person from the Father and the Son; thirdly, That he is not only holy in
himself, but he is the Effecter and Causer of holiness in others; and that no
man has one dram or drop of holiness in him, but it is wrought by the holy
Ghost.

The fourth point (which we are at this present to handle) is, Fourthly, the
Holy Ghost will make me holy.
that He is not only the causer of holiness in others, but I must believe
that he will particularly make me holy, and give me such a measure of sanctity
as shall be meet and fit for me: This is properly the faith of a Christian,
which herein goes beyond the faith of all others, the devils do believe that
the holy Ghost is God, and that he is a Person that has real subsistence,
and that he is a distinct Person from the Father and the Son; and they do
believe that the holy Ghost is the causer of holiness in all the faithful
people of God; but they do not believe that he will work holiness in them:
But here is the faith of a Christian to appropriate the holy Ghost to himself;
so they have not faith only in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ their
Redeemer, but also in the holy Ghost, and are persuaded he will work grace in
them, and give them such a measure of holiness as shall be meet for them; here
is properly the faith of a Christian, which goes beyond the faith of the
wicked, for they believe they have their sins, but they do not believe that
the holy Ghost will weaken them, or subdue and abolish their corruptions; when
as the people of God have their sins also, and their great sins too, but
yet they believe that the holy Ghost will weaken, subdue and abolish their
strong corruptions: for what is it to believe that there is a holy Ghost, and
be never a whit the better? the people of God, do believe though they have
their sins yet they shall have grace from God to subdue them; for this is the
promise of God to them, Ezekiel. 36. 25. Then will I power clean water upon you,
and ye shall be clean, yea, from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols
will I cleanse you; So Ephesians. 9. 26. the reason is given, The he might
sanctify it and cleanse it, by the washing of water through the Word; here is
Gods promise that he will cleanse and wash his people from their sins, and
where there is a promise of God, there is the faith of a Christian to apprehend
it: so then it is the faith of a Christian, to believe God will wash away our
sins, and cleanse us from them: but the divinity of the world is quite
contrary, for they believe God made them, and the mercy of the Son in their
redemption, but they do not believe that the holy Ghost will work holiness
in them; 1 John 5. 7.
it is said, There be three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the holy Ghost, and these three are One; and therefore as we have the
witness of the Father, and of the Son; so we must have the witness of the
holy Ghost: therefore as we feel the power of God the Father in our creation,
and the mercy of God the Son in our redemption, so also we must labor to
feel the grace and power of the holy Ghost, in sanctifying and quickening of us
to all duties, for herein the faith of a Christian goes beyond both devils and
wicked men.

Now here is a very profitable point of enquiry to be made, Quest. How the Holy
Ghost works holiness in us.
How does the holy Ghost work holiness in us? as Mary said, Luke 1. 34. to
the Angel, when he told her that she should conceive and bear a Son; How
shall this be, seeing I know (...) ^an? She doubted not of the matter, but of
the manner; so a Christian doubts not of the matter, but of the manner of this
sanctifying: therefore we may with holy reverence say to God, How shall this
be, seeing I am a sinful man?

For answer hereunto the Scripture declares by six means the operation of the
Holy Ghost in us. Sol.


The first is, 1
by reprooving us of our want of holiness, By convincing us of our impuritie.
showing us the impuritie of our nature and that we have not a drop of
holiness in our selves: It checkes us for our sins, and reprooves us for
them, until we feel this, we can have no comfort, that the Holy Ghost has
wrought holiness in us, as John 16. 8. Christ shows; when the Spirit of God
is come into the world he shall reproove the world of sin; so if the Holy
Ghost be come once into a man's heart, he will show him the impuritie thereof,
check and control him for his sins. Simile.
we see if a man come into a house in the dark nothing shows amiss, but if
the light shine in, then we may see all the sluttish corners of it, so as long
as a man is in darkness, all seems well with him, but if once the light shine
in, then all the slutrish corners of his heart will be discovered: This is the
first work that the Holy Ghost works in us to reproove us of our sins and
our want of holiness: as if a man be sick of a dead palsy, Simile.
the way to recover him is by hot oils and bathes, when if once a man come to
feel the stiffenesse of his joints, there is hope that he will recover; so it
is in the work of grace, if a man see his own weakness and wants, how
uncheerefull he is in prayer and in Christ and duities that he cannot repent,
though he desires to repent, that he cannot believe as he does desire to
believe; there is comfortable hope he shall recover and that there is a seed
of grace in him: But if the Spirit of God does not reproove a man of his sins
so as to see the impuritie of his nature and want of holiness, he may fear
that there is not the beginnings of grace.

Secondly, 2
by inlightning of us: for naturally we are all blind and ignorant of the
ways of God, By inlightning us.
therefore when the Holy Ghost comes into us he makes us see, what is
pleasing to God, and what is displeasing; what is right and what is wrong, as 2
Cor. 4. we may see that the Jews had a veyle hung over their hearts in the
reading of the Law, that they could not understand and see heaven and
happiness: Now the holy Ghost takes away this veyle, opens our
understandings, and makes us to see and know the good way that we are to walk
in: So then the Holy Ghost does inlighten us, as 1 John 2. 27. says he, but
the anointing which ye have received of him abides in you; and you need not
that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things,
etc. We see Genes. 1. when God made the world, one of the first things he made
was light; so when the Holy Ghost comes into a man's heart, Simile.
one of the first things that he does is, he inlightneth him it is observed
when a good Tenant comes into a house he will make windows into the same
(if need be) that he may have good light to see how to do his business by;
Simile.
such a Tenant the holy Ghost is, that when he is come into a man's heart, he
will make windows and let in light, that so the man may not do things in
darkness; but by the light of Gods words, giving them heavenly knowledge.

Thirdly, 3
by uniting us to Christ; because Christ is the fountain of all holiness, By
uniting us to Christ.
as Paul says Colos. 1. 19. for it pleased the Father that in him should all
fulness dwell. Christ is the store house and the treasury-house of all riches
to his Church, and the Holy Ghost will never leave a Christian till he has
brought him to the fountain of grace; if a man dig a trench, he will never
leave till he gets to the fountain, Simile.
that it may flow into it and fill it with water; so the Holy Ghost will work
us till he bring us to Christ which is the fountain, and then he will convey
into us spiritual graces, and so fill us.

Fourthly, by mortifying our lusts and sins, as Romans 8. 13. If ye mortify
the deeds of the body by the Spirit, 4
ye shall live: for the Spirit works on the flesh for the wasting of sin
and corruption; By mortifying our sins.
as Romans 7. the Apostle Paul complains (being in the estate of grace) of his
corruption when he had the Spirit of God to work on his rebellion for the
wasting and consuming of sin, therefore men may much more complain being in
the estate of nature when they want the Holy Ghost to work on their hearts for
the wasting and consuming of sin; and indeed no marvel though they are
carried away with the world, and cannot be brought to perform good duties,
seeing sin has such power and rule in their hearts: We see Joshua 10. Simile.
that he shut up 5. Kings in a cave that they should not stir nor escape till
he had time to kill them; so the Holy Ghost gets our sins into a cave (as
it were) and roules a great stone upon it till he take away all the power of
sin and kill and subdue it.

Fifthly, 5
by renewing our hearts and minds, changing and altering of them: whereas
before they were carnal now they are spiritual, By renewing us.
whereas they were worldly before, now they are heavenly and holily affected:
And therefore when we feel this change and alteration, sure it is the Holy
Ghost that works it: we read Math. 8. how Christ says to the Centurion, when
I come I will heal thy servant; I will not be idle, and do nothing: But when
I come I will heal him; Simile.
so when the Holy Ghost comes into a man, he will not be idle and do
nothing, but will heal our sins and give us power and strength against them,
in some measure.

Sixthly, 6
by stirring up holy motions in us: as I showed you even now out of Ezekiel. By
stirring up holy motions in us.
37. in the example of the dead bones: And now will declare it by this
similitude; If a man could put vegetative life into a stone, what would the
stone do? It would grow as a plant does; Simile.
if a man could put sensitive life into a stone, what would the stone do? it
would stir and move as a worm does; if we could put a reasonable soul, what
would the stone do? it would talk as a man does, and discourse of matters of
the world, but if a man could put the Spirit of God and the Spirit of grace
into a stone; what would the stone do? it would speak of God and of Christ,
and of heaven and happiness: this is our estate and condition, as long as
there is nothing but the life of Reason, we talk of nothing but the world, and
worldly things, but if once the Spirit of God and of grace be in us: then we
talk of heaven and heavenly things. Therefore if a man has the Spirit of
grace it stirs him up to holy motions and desires* These be the six means
by which the Holy Ghost does work holiness in us.

Now there be many profitable and fruitful questions to be moved
concerning the Holy Ghost:

1. How we may come by the Holy Ghost? 2. In what measure he is given? 3. How
a man may know whether he have the Holy Ghost or no? 4. What be the benefits
we have by him? 5. Whether a man may lose the Holy Ghost or no? 6. How we may
retain and keep him?
First, how a man may come by the Holy Ghost? But before we come to speak of
this we must make answer to another question; there has been great disputing
amongst the Schoolmen whether a man receives the Holy Ghost: Quest.
or only the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost: To this I answer, Sol.
this question need be no question, seeing we receive the Holy Ghost really
and actually; The Holy Ghost is really and actually in us.
The Scripture is clear for it, as in the 1 Cor. 6. 19. know ye not that your
bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost? this is the exceeding great goodness
of God to give the Holy Ghost to us, to be a root and a fountain of holiness
in us: Simile.
If one give us a fruit tree, it is better than to give us a little, because
the fruit is but for the present, but the tree is for a long continuance, 1
so it is a greater goodness of God to give us the Holy Ghost than to give us
the gifts and graces of his Spirits But the question in hand is, How to come
by the Holy Ghost.
how a man may come by the Holy Ghost? here we are to consider two things:

1. By a remoovall of the false way. 2. By taking the right way.
First, 1
by a removal of the false means; for Acts 8. 18. Simon Magus would have
bought the Holy Ghost with money, A removal of the false means.
but Peter tells him, that his money and he shall perish, Therefore it is mere
madness of any man to think that they may attain to have the Holy Ghost or any
gift or grace for money: we see in earthly Kingdoms that there be some things
that a man may buy because he may give the full value and true price for them,
Simile.
and that in exact Justice, as food and raiment; and there be some things
that a man cannot buy, because they be unestimably good and unvaluable, as to
buy a man's life and the Kings Crown, because no man can give the worth of
these; so it is in the Kingdom of God, all the graces and gifts of the Holy
Ghost no man can buy because they cannot give to the worth of them; for they
be unestimable and unvaluable things; as 1 Pet. 1. 7. It is said of faith that
it is more precious than gold, so Psalm. 19. 10. he shows that the word is
more to be desired than fine gold; even so the graces and gifts of Gods
Spirit, are above price or value, all the wealth in the world cannot procure
one of them; therefore it is good for a Christian to think before hand, that
when he lies on his sick bed he cannot buy faith or repentance or any gift
or grace with money, for they are above value and price: hence we may conclude
this is not the means to come by the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, by taking the right way; for the true means that God has appointed
for a man to come by the holy Ghost are three.

First, 3
by the hearing of the word preached; which is the ordinary means whereby the
Holy Ghost is conveyed into men; Means to come by the Holy Ghost.
therefore S. Paul demands Galath. 3. 2. Received ye the Spirit by the works
of the Law or by the preaching of faith? 1
So Acts 10 44. when Peter preached, the Holy Ghost fell on those that heard
the word: So that preaching is the ordinary means whereby God conveyes the
Holy Ghost to us, therefore it is good for men to attend preaching and to be
hearers, because it is one of the means whereby we may come by the Holy Ghost,
Simile
if a man would have good plants and herbs in his Garden, then he must labor
to have good seeds, so if a man would have the H. Ghost, he must get the seed:
called by S. Peter, the immortal seed of the word; by the which we are
begotten again: It is a good thing to attend unto the word, for howsoever we
do not feel that which we do desire, yet let us hear it still, and in due
time we shall have that which we desire; as John 5. we see the lame man lay
by the Poole of Bethesda a long time, Simile.
when one or other did still intercept him, and yet because he tarried still
Christ came at length and did heal him; so although we cannot find the
blessing of God, upon us as we do desire to day, yet let us come the next
day, If we cannot find it then, yet let us not give over, and at last we
shall feel the blessing of God upon us as we do desire.

Secondly, 2
by Prayer; Means.
for if we pray to God he will give us the Holy Ghost; as it is Luke 11. 13.
If you that are evil can give good gifts unto your Children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father give the holy Ghost to them that ask it? a man may
sow seed in his field, Simile.
and it may perish, the worms may eat it, and the birds devour it, or it may
rot in the ground, but prayer is seed sown in the ears of God, nay it goes
deeper, it is sown in the heart of God; And therefore although our seed
perish that is sown in the field, yet our prayer shall not perish because it
is sown in the heart of God: Says David, All any tears are in thy botle, are
they not in thy Register?

Thirdly, 3
by repentance and reconciliation with God, as Joel 2 Rent your hearts and not
your garments, Means.
and turn unto the Lord, and weep between the porch and the Atar; And then
says the Lord, I will power out my Spirit upon you: So that these be the
three means whereby we may come by the Holy Ghost.

The second question is, In what measure the Holy Ghost is given? The answer
whereto we will lay down in four Conclusions:

First, 1
that God gives but a portion of the Spirit in regard of efficacy and
operation to his servants in this life; Conclusion.
indeed the holy Spirit dwells in us, because the Holy Ghost is God, and
therefore he is undividable and cannot be divided into parts, but in regard
of the efficacy, operation or working of the Spirit he gives but a portion:
So no man living has all the gifts and graces of the Spirit, because God
gives but a portion of the Spirit: and a measure of it according as he sees
fit and meet; 1 Cor. 12. 8.
So 1 Cor. 12. 8. S. Paul says, That to one is given the Spirit of wisdom to
another the Spirit of knowledge, to another faith, to another the gift of
healing, and all these things works the self same Spirit distributing to
every man as he wills; and so again, Ephesians. 4. 7. says he, but unto us is
grace given according to the measure of the gift of Christ: and 1 Cor. 13. 9.
says he, for we know in part and prophecy in part, and a little after, for
now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face, now I know in part,
etc. So the Doctrine is plain, that God gives but a portion of the Spirit in
this life, according as he sees fittest for man. But let us come to the uses
which follow.

First, Use 1.
seeing that God gives but a portion of the spirit in this life, a man may
have the spirit, be a true Christian, and yet want many of the gifts and
graces that another has: thou see another man has the gift of knowledge, of
wisdom, memory, or the gift of utterance, be not perplexed at it, look that
thou have the maine, that thou have the Spirit of God to mortify thy lusts and
sins, and to quicken the to newness of life, then all is well with thee, though
thou have not all the graces of the Spirit, yet thou may be a true Christian:
so S. Paul shows by a comparison taken from the members of our bodies; 1 Cor.
12.
Shall the foot say unto the body, Simile.
I am not of the body because I cannot gather and draw things to me as the
hand does? or shall the ear say, because I cannot see my danger before it
comes near me, (as the eye can) therefore I am not of the body: if all were
handling, where were going? and if all were seeing, where were hearing? so that
every member has a several gift. Will thou say because thou have not the
great gifts which another man has, thou art no member of Christ, or thou have
not the Spirit of God? we see that every member has a several gift: Augustine
says (in his tract upon John) Peter cast out devils, thou have the same and
yet thou can not cast out any: for all this thou art a member of the same
body: Peter was an eye and thou art a little toe, or a little finger in the
body of Christ, better it is for a man to be a toe or a little finger in the
body of Christ, or a little bone, than to have all the excellent gifts of
nature, and perish: therefore though a man have not those excellent gifts and
graces that others have yet labor to have the maine; labor to feel the
Spirit of God to mortify thy lusts, and then thou may be a true Christian
notwithstanding all thy weaknesses.

Secondly, Use 2. No fullness of Spirit in this life.
seeing we have but a portion of the Spirit, therefore there will be a tang and
a taste of the flesh as long as we live here in this world, if there were
fullness of Spirit in us then it would change all into Spirit; as fire changes
all into the nature of fire, Simile.
so if we had fullness of Spirit, it would change all into Spirit, but because
we have but a portion of the Spirit, therefore there will be a tang and taste
of the flesh, howsoever the Spirit works on the flesh for the wasting,
consuming and weakening of it, yet a man shall feel the power of sin
bustling and vexing him while he lives; whereof all the holy men have
complained, as Romans 7. 21. Paul says, he finds by the Law that when he
would do good, Simile.
evil is present with him; and again Gal. 5. 17. he says, The spirit lusts
against the flesh, and the flesh against the spirit, and these are contrary me
to the other, so that ye cannot do the same things that ye would: hence it
is manifest, we have but a portion of the Spirit in this life, and there will
be still a tang and a taste of the old man in us. If a man put wine into a
glass, then there will be a taste of nothing but wine, but if he put water
into it, howsoever it may change the color of the water, yet there will be a
tang and a taste of the water; even so if we were all Spirit, then all we did
would savor of the Spirit, but because there is flesh, therefore all that we
do, will have a tang, and a taste of the flesh. Cyrill does observe that there
is no rock or stone so hard, Simile.
but it has some seames in it, whereby weeds may spring up and grow in it, so
there is no man's heart so filled with grace, but there will some sin or
corruption appear by one occasion or other, as matter to humble us, and yet to
comfort us in that we see and hate it.

The second conclusion is, The second conclusion.
that it is but a small portion of the Spirit, and measure of grace that God
gives at the first to his servants: ART. VIII.
for all the great works of God begin in weakness, all the glory of this
world was but a confused heap, man was made of a lump of earth, and Christ
which is God over all blessed for ever, Amen; he was a little child: for as it
is in the life of Nature so it is in the life of Grace, Simile.
in the life of Nature at the first when a child is borne, it has all the
parts of a man, a face, eyes, hands and feet; which though they be but little
at the beginning, yet after in time they grow to the full growth that God has
appointed; in him at first there are the true parts of a man, though they are
not come to the full perfection: so it is in the life of Grace, there is in a
Christian at his first conversion Faith and Repentance, Love, Zeal, and all
the graces of the Spirit though but in weak measure, yet truly and really,
which afterward will grow up to a greater degree of strength, till they come
to full perfection: and therefore as the man said, Mark. 9. I believe Lord, but
help mine unbeleefe; so may every weak Christian say, Lord, I have faith, but
help the weakness of my faith; I have repentance, but help the weakness
of my repentance; I have love, but help the weakness of my love; so then all
the graces of God begin in weakness.

But here some man may say, Quest. The least measure of saving grace what.
what is the least measure of Grace that God gives to any man that he saves?
I answer, there are two degrees of it.

First, a desire to believe, to repent, and obey; for generally Divines say,
that the desire of faith, Ans. 1.
is faith it self, the desire of repentance is repentance it self, It stands
more in desires than actions.
and the desire that we have to obey God, is obedience it self; not in deed,
and in act, but in Gods acceptance, because it pleases him to accept the will
for the deed; according to that which the Apostle Paul says, 2 Cor. 8. 12. If
there be first a willing mind it is accepted according to that a man has, and
not according to that he has not; so if there be but a desire to believe,
repent, and obey (if they be constant, settled, and fleeting) without doubt it
shall be accepted: and this is the least measure of grace that he gives to any
that he saves.

Secondly, 2
the least measure of saving grace is, to mourn and to grieve that we cannot
repent and believe: in this case one mourns and grieveth that he finds
such hardness of heart in himself whereof the Church of God complains Esai.
63. 17. O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our
hearts from thy fear? when a man finds this, Simile.
there is surely a beginning of grace in him: we see a little Child though it
want power and strength to go to the mother, yet it will cry and moan it
self to her; so although a Christian wants power and strength to go to God,
yet if they can cry to God; and bemoane themselves to him they may have
comfort: and these be the least measures of grace that he gives to any man
that he saves. Now come we to make use of this point.

First, Use 1.
that seeing God gives but a small measure of grace at the first, therefore no
man ought to be discouraged for the small and weak beginnings of grace he
finds in himself; for Matthew. 13. 31. the graces of God are likened to Seed;
now seeds are not trees by and by, but they grow by little and little till they
come to perfection, so the graces of God are small at the beginning, come not
to perfection at the first, but grow by little and little; and therefore no man
is to be discouraged, though he feel but small and weak beginnings of grace.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing God gives but a small portion of grace at the first, no man must
despise any for the small and weak beginnings that he sees in his brethren;
Zech. 4. 10. says the Prophet, Who has despised the day of small things? but
they shall rejoice, etc. so Romans 14. 1 we are enjoined to the contrary; him
that is weak in faith receive unto thee; do not despise him because God is
able to increase and to effect grace in him; and therefore no man must despise
the small and weak beginnings in any of his brethrn.

Thirdly, seeing God gives but a small portion or measure of grace at first,
Use 3.
therefore it must be every man's care to husband his graces well he that had
but one Talent given him should have been the best husband, and ought to have
been so, but indeed he was the worst, so we (contrary to his practice) seeing
we have but a small measure of grace, should labor therefore to increase it
and to be the better husbands: We see young men that have but a little stock
when they begin the world, Simile.
will omit no time for their own good; if any man shall say to them, why do
you labor thus and take so great pains, they reply presently, Alas, I had but
a small stock, and therefore I had need to take the more pains; in like
manner we, because we have but a small beginning of grace, should labor to
increase it.

The third conclusion is, The third conclusion.
that although God give but a small measure of grace yet it does grow and
increase in a Christian: as I told you even now the graces of God are compared
to Seed, Simile.
Matthew. 13. 31. and not to a stone, because a stone grows not but seed if it
be sown, will grow and increase; so if a man have the graces of God in him
they will grow and increase if they be nourished by the use of good means:
therefore if thou find not an increase and a growth of grace, thou may
doubt whether thou have the graces of God or no: we see when a man sowes seed
in his garden, Simile.
if he water them and they grow not; he says, Sure the seed was naught; in
like manner if we find not a growth and increase of grace in us but are as
ignorant, and no more forward now than we were seven years ago in the
practice of knowledge and duties of faith and repentance; we justly may say,
the seed was not good, and truly doubt our selves that our case is bad seeing
we cannot find the graces of God in us; for of a truth they will not lie hid,
but will grow and increase if they be nourished by the use of good means.

But here may be an objection made, Object.
many a Christian complains, he cannot feel there is a growth and an
increase of grace in him: Of such who complain for want of seeling
to this I answer two things:

First, a Christian may grow (though he feel not the growth) in one grace, or
other, even as a tree grows continually till it comes to a perfection and
to his full growth; but it does not always grow in one place, sometimes it
grows in the body, sometimes in the bough, and branches; and sometime close
and secret in the roots; which close and secret growth is as needful for the
tree as that which is sensible and visible; so a Christian grows continually,
but not always in one grace; sometimes in one, and sometimes in another,
sometimes in the body, and sometimes in the branches, and sometimes in the
root close and secret, that is, in humility; which close and secret growth in
a Christian is as needful as that which is visible and sensible.

Secondly, Ans. 2.
I answer, that a Christian sees not his growth, because there be some
impediments that hinder the same: we see in experience that a Child may feed
on good meat, and yet he may not grow nor thrive with it, and the reason is,
because it does secretly eat chalk, or coals, or dirt, or salt, and then it
will not grow; even so it is in a Christian, though he feed on good meat, on
the Word of eternal life, yet because he feeds on chalk, or coals, or dirt,
or salt secretly, that is, he has close and secret sins which he commits
unseene, and this it is that hinders his growth in grace, but if he leave his
sins and repent of them then he shall feel a growth and an increase of grace
in him.

The foruth conclusion, is, The third conclusion.
although the graces of God grow and in crease in a man yet they come not to
perfection in any here in this life, as Romans 8. 23. says the Apostle) and not
only the creatures, but al we which have received the first fruits of the
Spirit, even we which are Apostles and Teachers of the Church do sigh and
groan, etc. Simile.
we see Numb. 13. 23. that the Children of Israel being in the wilderness,
sent certain men to spy out the land, who when they returned home brought with
them a cluster of grapes, that they might taste of the fruit of the land, and
so long possess it; so the Lord has given us a taste of the Spirit and of
heaven here in the wilderness of this world that we might long for enjoying
thereof and be in love with it.

Here an objection may be made; Object. Of fullness of spirit that some had.
is there no man full of the Spirit of God; we see Act. 6. that Steven was full
of the Spirit of God; and Act. 11. Barnabas was full of the Spirit of God? Now
this may be answered three ways.

First, Ans. 1. A fullness comparative.
Comparatively, in comparison of others, they were said to be full in regard
they had a greater measure of the Spirit than others, as Phil. 3. 12. the
Apostle says of himself, that he is not yet perfect, but he striveth to
perfection; and yet afterward he says, as many as be perfect, let them be thus
minded, that is, that are perfect in regard of others; so, they were full of
the Spirit in comparison of others.

Secondly, Secondly, there is a fullness in working different.
they were full in regard of the stirring and working of the Spirit: fill a
vessel brim-full and it will run over, fill a pot with water half full and
set it on the fire, and the heat of the fire will make it go over and fill
the pot; so although a man be not full of the Spirit; yet he may be full in
regard of the working and stirring of the Spirit so they might be full of the
Spirit.

Thirdly, Thirdly, a fullness may be in regard to some particular act.
they might be full of the Spirit in regard of some particular act, as the
Schoolmen say; that is, that they were fitted for the place and office they
were appointed to: and so Stephan was full of the Spirit of God, SER. LV
because he was fit for the office he was appointed; and so likewise of
Barnabas. Now there be two consequents that arise from this Doctrine of which
the next time if God please.

SERMON LV.
ROMANS 8. 9. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that
the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man has not the Spirit of Christ,
he is none of his.
TWo questions have been handled already concerning the Holy Ghost, first, how
a man may come by the Holy Ghost? and secondly, in what measure he is given to
the Faithful? the answer thereunto we laid down in four conclusions; first,
That there is but a portion of the Spirit given to the Faithful here in this
life. Secondly, as it is but a portion of the Spirit that is given; so it is
but a little portion and a little measure, because all the works of God
begin in weakness. Thirdly, though it begin in weakness yet it grows and
increases. Fourthly, though grace grows in a Christian, yet that it never
comes to fullness of spirit, they do receiver but the first fruits and
beginnings of the Spirit. Now follow the two consequents of this Doctrine:

First, That seeing no man has fullness of Spirit in this world, therefore no
man has fullness of joy; The first Consequent.
for all our comfort is mixed with sorrow; like as in the cup that Christ did
drink of at this passion, Simile.
vinegar and gall were mingled together; Matthew. 27. 34.
So the cup of every man comfort here is mingled with grief and sorrow: If we
had fullness of Spirit, then we should have fullness of joy, but because we
have not, therefore our joy is mingled with grief.

Secondly, The second consequent.
that seeing no man has fullness of the Spirit in this world, therefore, there
is no man that is perfectly regenerated or perfectly sanctified in this world,
all the people of God lie under the burden of their corruption groaning, as the
Apostle Paul complains of himself, Romans 7. 22. When I would do good evil
is present with me. Many times when a prisoner is let out of prison his
chains and bolts are not straight knocked off, Simile.
but he is glad to trayle them about with him till he has begged his fees; so
although a man be freed by the Spirit of God, yet he must traile his chains
and his fetters about with him, till he has begged his fees, that is, till
the clogs and fetters of his sins be knocked off by mortality and death:
hence we conclude there is no freedom from this burden till we come to
heaven.

The third Question is, 3
How we may know whether we have the holy Ghost i^ us or no? How to know that
we have the Holy Ghost.
which is a point worthy our learning, because it is the Holy Ghost that seals
us up against the day of redemption; as S. Paul says, Ephesians. 4. 30. Grieve not
the holy Spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of redemption: so
also in this place that I read unto you, If any man has not the Spirit of God
in him, he is none of his: Therefore it is good for a man to know by certain
and unfallible marks and tokens whether he has the Holy Ghost in him or no.
The Papists say we cannot be certain and sure of this by unfallible tokens,
there may be some probability of it and some likelihood, but it cannot be
certain: But this is erroneous and false.

For first, The Papists opinion is contrary: First, to the Scripture.
it is contrary to the Scripture, as 1 John 4. 13. hereby know we that he
dwells in us and we in him, because he has given us of his Spirit; so also
2 Corinthians. 1. 22. who has sealed us and has given us the earnest of the
Spirit in our hearts, and Chapter 13. of the same Epistle, know ye not your
own selves how that Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? so it is
plain by Scripture that a man may know certainly that the Spirit of God is in
him.

Secondly, Secondly, to Reason.
it is contrary to reason; for we see in nature, that a man cannot have life in
him but it will be seen by breathing, Simile.
stirring or moving: so there cannot be the Spirit of God in a man, but it
will be seen by moving or stirring in the life of grace.

Thirdly, Thirdly, to their own Divines.
it is contrary to the Doctrine of their own Divines, not only their old
Schoolmen, but also their late writers, which now I will not trouble you with:
So we see our Doctrine is plain by Scripture, by reason, and by their own
Schoolmen and late writers who disproove them; but we will spend no more time
about it, but do with this question as they did by the body of Amasa, Simile.
spread a cloth over it, that it do not hinder us in the pursuit of better
things. Now the point is how a man may know, whether the holy Ghost be in him
or no: In handling whereof there must be good caution used, that the wicked be
not hardened and the godly discomforted: Therefore we will observe two things:

1. A rejection of the false marks. 2. A declaration of the true marks.
First, a rejection of the false notes and marks, being five in number.

First, 5
that there may be many good things of nature in a man, and yet he may want
the holy Ghost; False marks of the Holy Ghosts being in us.
he may be a merciful man, pitiful to the poor, quiet and peaceable, a
just dealer, a chaste man, and yet he may want the sanctifying Spirit, 1
as Romans Many good parts of nature prooves it not.
2. 14. the Apostle shows, The Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature
the things contained in the Law. Now the Gentiles had nothing but mere nature,
and yet they did many things contained in the Law; they were inclined to love
and to mercy, etc. So Act. 28. 2. when Paul and those that were with him had
suffered a Shipwreck and were come to the shore, the Barbarians kindled them a
fire, and being mere natural men yet they were merciful and pitiful men,
for it is said, they showed kindness to them: so Math. 19. 11. Christ shows
that there were some chaste that were so borne of their mothers belly, they are
not made chaste by the Spirit of God, but they have it by nature. Now there be
thousands deceived this way, because they be peaceable and quiet men, do no
body any harm, are just dealers, and chaste livers, they think the be as holy
as the Spirit of God can make them, and their estate is very good; but they are
deceived, because a man may have good parts of nature and yet want the Spirit
of God: goodness of nature is a good thing, and as not to be condemned, so
not to be built upon; therefore let us see, what is the defect? I answer, the
defect is that there was nothing but nature, and they went no further than
nature would lead them; therefore we must not content our selves with mere
nature, but we must labor to feel some things in our selves above it: Simile.
I will make this plain by example; a man by nature is able lift a hundred
weight or two, but if he be able to lift a thousand pound weight, there is
something above nature in him: so by nature a man may love his friends, but
when he feels this, that he can love God above his enemies, pray for them
that hate him, then there is something above nature in him. So likewise, by
nature a man loves sin and delights in it, now when he feels in himself
that he hates sin and labors to repent it and to believe the Gospel, this
is a comfortable evidence that there is something above nature, that there is
the work of grace in him.

Secondly, 2
a man may have restraining grace, and yet want the Spirit of God: A man may
refrain from swearing, False mark restraining grace.
lying, whoredom, drunkenness, covertousnesse, deceiving, and from a number
of sins, and yet he may want the sanctify of the Holy Ghost, as Luke 18.
11. says the Pharisee, Lord, I am not as other men, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, etc. the Pharisee had restraining grace, he refrained from a
number of sins, and yet he wanted the Spirit of God: for Christ tells us, that
the Publican went away justified rather than he: so likewise Lahan, Genes. 31.
29. says to Jacob, I am able to do you evil, but the God of your Fathers
spoke unto me yesternight, saying, Take heed that thou speak not to Iaakob
ought save good: Laban had restraining grace, and yet wanted the Spirit of God,
for he had a number of other small sins. This deceives a number, for
because they refrain from swearing, lying, whoredom, drunkenesse, and from a
number of gross sins, therefore they think they have the Holy Ghost in
them; But here we see that we may refrain from many sins, and yet want the
Spirit of God.

Now because restraining grace is a good thing, and is that David prays for,
Psalm. 19. Lord keep me from presumptuous sins; that is, Lord restrain me,
or Lord hold me back; where is then the defect? I answer, the defect is in two
things: First, They did labor to restrain their sin and did not kill it:
Two defects in restraining grace.
Secondly, They did restrain from some sins, and did not refrain from all
sins.

First, 1
they did restrain their sins, and did not kill and mortify them: As a man
that comes into his garden, It does not kill sin.
and sees a Moule has cast up and has made a foul racket and stir, if he
treades it only down with his feet and does not kill the Moule, Simile.
within a little while after it will be as bad as it was at first; so when men
restrain sin and do not labor to kill it, upon every occasion it will be
ready to break our again: Augustine shows this by an example, Simile.
if a wolf comes into a flock of sheep, the shepherd is awake and the Dog
barks, so that the wolf goes away and does no harm; yet (says he) a wolf
he came and a wolf he goes away, in like manner a man may come into a Church
amongst Gods people and be restrained from some sins, either for fear of
men, or for fear of the law, or of some punishment; yet still he is a wolse,
he retains his wolvish nature, a wolf he comes and a wolf he goes;
therefore we must not only restrain sin but we must kill and mortify it.

Secondly, 2
they did refrain from some sins and not from all: So we see the Pharisee
did refrain from some sins but not from all, It does not refrain from all
sins.
he was not an extortioner or an unjust man, but he was a proud person, a
hater of the poor, and a contemner of his brethren: And so likewise Laban he
refrained from speaking ought but good to Jacob, and yet he was an idolater, or
else he would not have made such search for his idols: Therefore we must not
refrain from some sins only, but wholly and universally, from all of what
kind soever they be.

Thirdly, 3
a man may be enlightened and have a great deal of knowledge (he may know God
and Christ, False mark some kind of inlightning.
what sin is, and punishment due unto it with many other profitable notions)
and yet want the Spirit of God: Hebr. 6. 4. we read that there may be some that
may be enlightened and taste of the word of God, and of the powers of the
world to come, and yet never be renewed again by repentance, if they fall
away: so Judas was a preacher, had great knowledge and many good gifts, and yet
he was a Devil; therefore he had not the sanctifying Spirit; in like manner
a man may have great gifts of memory and knowledge, have a rare and an
excellent gift in preaching, and nevertheless want the sanctity of the Holy
Ghost. Here because illumination and knowledge is a gift of the Spirit of God,
and a thing to be desired and labored for, Colos. 3. 10.
as S. Paul exhorts the Colossians, to put off the old man and to put on the
new man which is renewed in knowledge; therefore (I say) Quest.
because knowledge is a gift of the Spirit, let us see, what is the defect of
this illumination and knowledge. Ans. Two defects in knowledge.
To this, I answer, There are two defects in it: First, men do not labor for
the right kind of knowledge: And secondly, they do not make a right use of
their knowledge.

First, 1
men did not labor for a right kind of knowledge? For there are two kinds of
knowledge: Such knowledge is not of a right kind. Speculative knowledge.
Practical knowledge.
First, speculative: Secondly, practical knowledge: speculative knowledge is
to know things to discourse of them, and to make table-talke and to speak of
them; practical knowledge is to know things to put them in practice, that they
may be laid to their hearts and to their lives to be reformed thereby. Now
let us all labor for this last kind of knowledge, and not for the first: and
this is the first defect of man's knowledge.

Secondly, 2
that men do not make a right use of their knowledge; they do not apply it to
their hearts and to their lives for the bettering and reforming of them; Such
make no right use of their knowledge.
for it is a sure thing, we can have no more comfort of our knowledge, than so
far as we put it in practice: A man may have a flint stone in his pocket, and
yet be a cold if he does not make use of it to strike fire; so a man may have
knowledge, and have no comfort by it, unless he make use of it to the
bettering of himself. Therefore it must be our wisdom that when we have
knowledge, to be sure to apply it to our hearts and to our lives for the
bettering of both.

Fourthly, a man may have a kind of repentance, he may be humbled for his
sins, 4
cry out against them, confess them, and weep for them, and yet nevertheless
want the Holy Ghost; False mark an unsound sorrow and repentance.
as Pharaoh, Exodus 9. 27. said to Moses, and to Aaron, I have now sinned, the
Lord is Righteous, but I and my people are wicked: Here we see that Pharaoh
saw his sins, confessed them; and yet he had not the sanctifying spirit; so
Saul 1 Samuel 24. 17. where of him it is said, and Saul lift up in his voice and
wept, and said to David, Thou art more righteous than I; for thou have rendered
me good, and I have rendered thee evil; so also of Judas, Matthew. 27. 3. it is
said, Then when Judas, which betrayed him, saw that he was condemned; he
repented him and brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief Priests
and Elders, saying, I have sinned in betraying the innocent blood: So then we
see a man may repent of his sins, confess them, be humbled and weep for
them, and yet want the Holy Ghost.

Now seeing repentance is a good gift of the spirit, Quest.
let us see, what is the defect? I answer, it is, in three things:

First, Ans.
these men did weep and sorrow more for the judgment that was like to come
upon them than for the hatred of the sin: The defects in repentance.
So we see Ahab did weep and cry out when the judgment was pronounced against
him by the Prophet, and yet his repentance was faltie. 1


Secondly, Sorrow more for the judgment than the sin.
they did weep for one and not for all their sins; so we see Judas did, he
repented this one sin of the betraying of Christ, and had a number of other
sins he never repented of; 2
so Pharaoh he repented of this one sin of detayning and holding back of the
Children of Israel, Sorrow not for all sins.
but did not repent of his other sins.

Thirdly, 3
They did weep for their outward sins, and not for their inward corruption:
Therefore thou whosoever thou art must labor of find in thy self whether
thou mournest for the hatred of sin, Sorrow not for inward corruption.
or for fear of Gods judgment, if it be for fear of punishment and for fear
of Hell, thou can not have any comfort; but if it be for the hatred of
sin, because it is displeasing to God, S. Augustines wish.
thou may have comfort: therefore, (as Augustine says) show me the man
first that can weep and mourn for sin though he knows that God will not
damn him; 1
that hell is shut up, and the Devil shall not torment him, 2
this man may especially have comfort: Secondly, that so repents for one sin
as that he draws in all his sins as far as judgment informs him. Thirdly,
that is humbled not only for his outward sins but especially for his inward
corruption. Thus we see Paul did, Romans 7. O wretched man that I am who shall
deliver me from this body of sin? If thou can find these three things in
thy repentance, thou may have comfort in it.

Fifthly, 5
a man may have a kind of love to heaven, False mark, an unsound desire of
heaven and glory.
a desire to be saved, and to behold God in glory, and yet may want the holy
Ghost: Two examples we have of it; first of Balaam, Numb. 23. 10. who desired
to die the death of the righteous; and secondly, Matthew. 19. 16. of the young
man that came to Christ, and said unto him, Master, what shall I do to be
saved? so a man may have a desire to be saved, and to be in heaven and
happiness, and yet want the spirit of God. The defect of unsound desire of
heaven. First, in a fleeting unconstant desire.
Here therefore as before, so now let us see, what the defect is? I answer, it
is in three things:

First, It is a fleeting desire, not constant and settled: Balaam had a good
desire, but it was but in a mood or a fit, he desired he might die the death
of the righteous, and it was but once that he did so, that we read of, and
that also when he saw the glory of the Saints; this is the first defect that
their desires are but for a fit.

Secondly, Secondly, such desires are idle and lazy ones.
they were idle desires; they desired heaven, but were loath to take any pains;
as it is said of the Sluggard, Prove. 13. 4. The sluggard lusts, but his soul
has naught; though he desire such and such things, yet he goes without them,
because he would not take pains for them: therefore we must see that our
desires be such as will put us upon any pains and labor so we may be saved.

Thirdly, Thirdly, such desires are not earnest ones.
Such have not earnest desires, but those that every little matter will put
over; we see if a child asks the breast or meat, the mother sometimes will
give him a book into his hand, when this quiets the child, it shows that it
was but a flight desire that the child had; for if it had been an earnest
desire, nothing would quiet the child till it had the breast or some meat: So
it is with many men, they desire to be saved, and to have heaven, and then the
devil puts (as it were) a book into their hands, matter of pleasure and
profit which quiets them; this shows that their desires were but slight, for
if they had been earnest, nothing would content them till they had had the
thing that they desired: And thus much of the false marks.

SERMON LVI.
ROMANS 8. 9. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that
the Spirit of God dwell in you: Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ,
he is none of his.
NOw the point of inquiry is, 2
how a man may know whether the Spirit of God and the Spirit grace be The true
mark
in him or no, because it is the Spirit of God that seals our redemption, as
Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 4. 30. and all our hope of heaven hangs on the Spirit;
therefore it will be very necessary and profitable for every man to know what
be the true marks and signs of the holy Ghost his being in us. And this we
may discover by considering it two ways: 1


1. Generally: Generally two ways.
2. Particularly.
First, 1
Wheresoever the holy Ghost is, in what man soever, he makes a sensible and a
through change, He makes a great change.
and alters him in his will, affections and in every part, as Matthew. 8. Christ
says unto the Centurion, If I come I will heal thy servant; I will not be
idle and do nothing, Simile.
but if I come I will heal him; so if the holy Ghost come into a man, he will
not be idle, but he will heal him of his sins, and make a sensible and a
through change in him in all parts; So John 3. 7. Christ shows that no man can
enter into the kingdom of heaven, unless there be a second birth of the holy
Ghost in him; and 2 Cor. 5. 17. Paul says, that every one that is in Christ
must be a new creature: So then there must be a second birth of the Spirit,
people must become new men and women: It is a ground in nature, that the
generation of one thing, is the corruption of another; Simile.
as Ice when it turns to water there is corruption of the Ice; so when Christ
turned water into wine, there was corruption of the water: even so it is in the
work of the Spirit, as there is increase of holiness wrought in a man, so
there is a decrease of sin and corruption. Simile.
We see in the Gospel that those that were brought to Christ, who lay and
wanted their feet, went away with them; such as were blind, went away with
their eyes opened; such as were deaf and dumb, went away speaking and
hearing; and such as were dead, went away alive; so, when the Spirit of God
comes into a man, though he were lame and not able to walk in the ways of
God, yet that will enable him; if he were blind and ignorant, that will open
his understanding and give him heavenly knowledge; if he were dead in sins,
that will put the life of grace and holiness into him: thus the holy Ghost will
make a through change; therefore every man must labor to see whether this
change be wrought in him or no, as 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11. it is said, that no
thieves, covetous persons, drunkards, railers, nor extortioners shall inherit
the Kingdom of God; and such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by
the Spirit of our God: Here was a change indeed wrought in these men; So also,
1 Timothy 1. 13. Saint Paul says, Before I was a blasphemer, and a persecuter,
and an oppressor, but I was received to mercy, because I did it ignorantly,
now I thank God; Simile.
it is otherwise with me; when a man can feel this change and alteration in
him, that he can say indeed, I have been a bad liver, I have been a swearer,
and a liar, and a drunkard, but now Lord I thank thee, it is otherwise with
me, I am changed and altered; this is a good evidence that the holy Ghost is in
him, but if a man be not changed and altered, but remains the same man that
ever he was, the holy Ghost is not in him, for where the holy Ghost is, there
he makes a sensible and a through change.

Secondly, Secondly, he stirs and moves to holiness.
If the Spirit of God come into a man, it will stir and move a man to good
things; as Act. 2. when the Spirit of God came down upon the Apostles in fiery
tongues, they began to speak with new tongues; the holy Ghost did work in
their hearts and on their tongues; so Gal. 4. 6. (says the Apostle) God has
sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, which cries Abba Father; even
so, if a man has the Spirit of God in him, it will stir him to repentance,
and to the duties of prayer and holiness: therefore we are to consider no man
can have the Spirit of God, but he shall feel movings and stirrings of the
Spirit; Simile.
for as it is in the natural life, that there cannot be life in us, but it
will be seen by breathing or panting, stirring or moving, there will be
operations of life; so it is in the life of grace, there cannot be the Spirit
of God in a man, but there will be operations and motions of the Spirit, it
will not be idle; A ship on the Sea lies still when there is no body in it,
Simile.
but put mariners therein, then they will weigh up their anchors, hoist up
their sails, and away they go; so men lie idle in the ways of God, but if
the Spirit of God be in them, it will stir and moove them to perform good
duties, to prayer, to repent of their sins, to duties of love, and such like;
therefore when we be idle and do not feel this stirring and moving unto good
things, the holy Ghost is not in us, because he would be sure to stir and
moove us, as Ezekiel. 1. 21. it is said of the wheels, that when the beasts went,
Simile.
the wheels went with them, and when they stood, they stood, and when they
were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up besides them; for the
spirit of the beasts were in the wheels, they had all one spirit; so if the
Spirit of God be in a man, if Christ moves, he will move, and when Christ makes
a stand, he will stand, and when Christ lifts up himself, he will lite up
himself: Hence we may be taught his sure mark, that when a man feels
nothing, is not stirred up to the duties of repentance, prayer, holiness, and
love, feels no operation nor working of the Spirit in him, let not that man
wilfully put out his own eyes, for then of a truth he may see, and there is no
work of grace yet wrought, the holy Ghost is not in him. And thus much of the
general.

Now for the particular, 2
there be diverse degrees, for all have not one measure of the Spirit,
Particularly: diverse degrees of the Spirit.
but some more, some less; therefore every one is to consider of his estate,
whether he be a beginner in religion, or a strong Christian, or whether he be
weakened by sin and temptations, the weaker Christian has weaker motions,
actions, and operations; the stronger has stronger motions, actions and
operations of the Spirit: we see in the life of nature, Simile.
that God gives diverse degrees of life to his creatures; there is not that
degree of life in a little child, that is in a man who is come to his full
growth; therefore the actions and operations of a man are stronger than a
childs. Again, there is no man so strong but he may be weakened by sickness
and distemperature; so it is in the life of grace; there be diverse degrees of
the Spirit, in a weak Christian the actions and operations of the Spirit be
weak, in a strong Christian they be stronger, and yet a strong Christian may
be weakened by sin: therefore if a Christian would give a right judgment of
himself whether he have the Spirit or no, he must consider in what rank he
is, and in what estate, whether a beginner in religion, or a strong Christian,
or whether he be weakened by some sins: If he be a beginner in religion,
then he may look to two things:

1. Whether there be a right work of the Spirit. Two things a weak beginner
must look to.
2. Whether there be a right use of the work.
First, 1
he must look for a right work of the Spirit; and that we may consider in
four things; A right work of the Spirit in four things: First, that there be
humbling.
First, whether they have been truly humbled for their sins, and cast down
in the sense and feeling of them; seeing that they were in an estate of
damnation, and under Gods curse, till they be brought home to Christ: as Act.
9. 6. we see Paul was first humbled, and cast down before God did raise him
and give him comfort; and so Act. 2. 37. the converts were first pricked in
their hearts and cried out, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved?
before they were raised up by the ministry of the Apostles. Simile.
I have showed you heretofore, when a man appoints a tree to build with; he
first takes an Axe and cuts it down by the root, and lays it flat on the
ground, then he cuts off the boughs and branches, and leaves it naked before
he takes it into his building; even so the Lord does, when he does purpose to
take us into his building, he first comes with the axe of his Law, cuts us
down, and lays us on the ground; then he cuts off the boughs and branches,
and leaves us naked without any hope of our own merits or deserts, before he
pluckes us into this same heavenly building. And this is first work of the
Spirit.

Secondly, Secondly, desire of reconciliation.
the work of the Spirit is, an earnest desire to be reconciled to God, to be
at one with him: The hungry man does not more desire his meat, nor the thirsty
man his drink, than he longs and desires in this estate to be in the covenant
of grace; as Act. 9. 22. Paul eat no meat for three days together, but prayed
and cried unto the throne of grace, and could not be quiet till he was
certified by Ananias that his sins were pardoned: Simile.
A poor prisoner, when he is condemned to die, all he does is for a pardon,
say what you will, and do what you will, he regards nothing else; so it is
with a Christian, when he sees he is condemned by the Law of God, and guilty
of eternal death, say and do what ye will, all his mind is for a pardon,
which till he has obtained nothing will quiet him, nothing will content him,
till he has his discharge from God.

Thirdly, Thirdly, it stirs up to lay hold on the Promises.
It stirs up a man truly to lay hold on the sweet promises that God has made
to him in Christ; So as he labors to be found in him, and to renounce
himself, saying, Lord, I am a sinner, but Christ has satisfied thee for my
sins; I am unclean, but Christ has washed me in his blood: I come short of
that which thou requirest, but Christ has satisfied the Law for me; so Act.
15. 11. Peter was bold to stand up and say, We believe through the grace of the
Lord Jesus Christ to be saved, even as they do; so also, Luke 1. 69. Zachariah
blesses and praises God, because he has raised up a horn of salvation unto
us; and Matthew. 8. there was Leper that came to Christ, and said unto him, Lord
I am an unclean person, but if thou will thou can make me clean; in like
manner the Spirit of God drives a man to Christ, and makes him to say, Lord,
though I am a Leper, though I am an unclean person and polluted, yet if thou will thou can make me clean, and therefore Lord wash me in thy most precious
blood, that I may be found unblameable before thee.

Fourthly, Fourthly, a settled walking with God.
It works a settled course to walk with God, so far forth as frailty will
permit; so Psalm. 119. 106. David says, I have sworn and I will perform it,
to keep thy righteous judgments; and Act. 9. 6. Paul newly called says, What
will thou that I do? before Saint Paul was stubborn, and would not bend nor
buckle to the will of God, but now he is ready to yield to any thing; so says
he, Romans 6. 22. But being freed from sin, we are made servants to God: this
is another work of the Spirit, that a man is desirous to please God always;
for Justification and Sanctification still go together, there is no man can
find the pardon of his sins, but in some measure he shall hae strength
against them: these be the four works of the Spirit in a new beginner;
therefore consider with thy self, have thou been ever humbled for thy sins,
not for some one, (as Judas was) but for all sins; have thou drawn in all
thy sins as far as thy judgment can inform thee? then have thou desired
to be reconciled to God, and to be at one with him, to be brought into the
covenant of grace? have thou desired, I say, it as an hungry man does his meat,
or a thirsty man his drink? do thou desire it above life and liberty, and
whatsoever is dear in thy sight? Again, have thou laid hold on the promises
that God has made in Christ? do thou labor to be found in Christ? Lastly,
have thou a settled purpose to walk with God as far as frailty will permit?
if thou feel these things in thee, be of good comfort, here is the work of
the Spirit; but if thou feel not these things in thee, there is as yet no
work of the Spirit, for these things be in a Christian, though he be but a
day old in Religion.

The second thing that we are to consider is, 2
whether there be a right order of the work, There must be a right or^er of
the work.
for the Spirit works in order, God is the God of order; and therefore the
spirit works in order, as Ezekiel. 37. in the raising of the dead bones. First,
there was a voice amongst them, and did forewarne them that they were but dead
and dry bones; Secondly, there was a noise and clattering of bones, a
trembling and a running together of them; Thirdly, there were sinews grew on
the bones, and flesh on the sinews; Fourthly, life came into them and then
they stand up; so it is in the conversion of a sinner; Simile.
First, there is a voice to forewarne them that they are but dead and dry
bones, that there is no life of grace in them, not being able to stir a foot
in the ways of God. Secondly, there is a noise and running together of the
bones; a desire of reconciliation, and to be brought within the estate of
grace. Thirdly, flesh on the bones, that is to lay hold on the promises of God.
And lastly, life comes into the bones, they stand up; then a man is enabled in
some measure to walk with God: And therefore consider with thy self, Have
thou motions and desires, and have not been humbled first in sense and feeling
of thy sin? here indeed is a work, but it is not the right order of the
work; for first they must be humble.

Now as the Spirit grows stronger, so there are stronger motions and actions
wrought in a Christian; Strength of action increases according to the strength
of the spirit.
for as it is in the natural life, so it is in the life of grace: we see the
weaker a man is, the weaker be his actions, and the stronger he is, the
stronger be his actions. As when a man is sick, he may be so weak that he
is not able to go by a staff; but as he grows well, so his strength grows
again; and his actions are stronger; Simile.
so it is with a Christian, although he be weak and not able to creep at
first, yet as he grows stronger, so his Actions will be stronger and stronger.
Now the work of the Spirit is in two things in a strong Christian:

1. In his Mortification. 2. In his quickening.
First, Mortification, and that is in three things: as first, A man that is
strong in the spirit will make strong resistance against sin, The work of
the spirit mortifying in three things.
and will not be easily foiled and put off for every little matter; We see a
weak tree the wind will bend and bow it, 1
as if it would fall down, and make the tops touch the ground, and yet the
tree may be rooted; but if it be a strong tree the wind cannot bend or bow
it: Simile.
so if a Man be a weak Christian, he is carried this way and that way with
every wind (as it were) but if he be strong, he will make strong resistance
against sin; therefore it is said of Joseph, Genesis 39. 15. That he consented
not to his Mistress though she lay at him from day to day: and 1 Pet. 5. 9. it
is said, Resist the Devil, being strong in the Faith. So then a strong
Christian will make strong resistance against sin: therefore when as it is so
with a man that there is a temptation offered, and he makes no resistance,
has no strength against sin, but falls into it, I will not say this man is
no Christian, but I will say he is but a weak Christian.

The second is, That no Man that is strong in spirit, although he sin
through temptation, does fall into it so easily as others or with that delight,
but there is a reluctation and a striving against it: as Peter, Mark 14. 68.
when he denied his Master he crept into the Porch, he would not willingly have
done it. If a Man strike a blow at one, though he cannot keep of the blow,
Simile.
yet he may break it, so that it shall not be so great; so the Spirit of God
does, though it keep not a Man from sin, yet it may break the force of it,
that a Christian shall not so easily commit it, but that there will be a
resistance and a reluctation against it, they will not so easily commit it as
others do.

Thirdly, 3
although they fall into sin, yet they will not lie long in their sin: but
will return to God, upon every little touch. So David, 2 Samuel ult. when he had
numbered the people his heart smote him: and 2 King. 7. the two Lepers their
hearts smote them, and they said, we have not done well in concealing good
news: so it is with a strong Christian, every little touch will make him
return to God, renew his faith, repentance and hope of Heaven, he is never at
quiet, till he be brought home to God: These are the works of Mortification.

The second is works of quickening in a strong Christian, and they are four:

First, 4
He that is strong in the Spirit, the Spirit will enable him to perform
spiritual Service; Works of quickening in a strong Christian.
put him on prayer and other Christian duties, he shall do such things as he
never thought he should have done: as Phil. 1
4. 13. says the Apostle, I am able to do all things through the help of
Christ which strengthens me.

Secondly, A strong Christian has a strong Certificate that his sins are
pardoned: 2
For the weaker a Christian is, the weaker is his certificate, and the stronger
he is, the stronger it is: as a Child in the cradle, the weaker it is, Simile.
the weaker is the cry; and the stronger it is, the more strength has the cry
in the ears of the parents; so it is with a Christian, if he be strong he
makes the stronger cry in the ears of God.

Thirdly, A strong Christian is bold to confess Christ in the time of trouble;
3
as the Apostle did, Acts, 5. so it is said of the Saints, Revel. 12. That they
loved not their lives to the death.

Fourthly, 4
A strong Christian is contented with any thing that God sends, as Phil. 4.
says the Apostle, I have learned in all estates therewith to be contented; to
want and to abound, to be full, and to be empty: so old Eli said, 1 Samuel 3. It
is the Lord, let him do as it pleases him. Now these are in a Christian,
either stronger or weaker, according as he is weakened with temptations And
therefore let us labor to feel these works of the Spirit, for the Spirit is
all the evidence we have of Heaven and happiness: therefore let us look to
have the spirit, that we be not deceived. A man that has house and land would
be loath to have his deeds and his evidences to prove naught, Simile.
and so to lose his house and land: much more should we be loath to have our
evidence that we have of Heaven and happiness to prove naught.

Here it will be worthy our inquiry; SER. LVI.
How a Christian that was strong and is weakened by sin may know that the Holy
Ghost is in him? In all the declinings and fallings of the faithful, How a
strong weakened Christian may know the Holy Ghost is in him.
there is a root of grace left; although the Devil cut off the Boughs and
the Branches, yet the root is safe; as Daniel 4. Nabuchadnezzar is compared to
a tree, which the Angel is sent to cut down the body and the branches, but to
let the stumpe of it remain, and be bound with iron: so though the Devil cut
down the boughs and branches, Simile.
yet the root is fast, which is a comfort to the Church, that in all their
falls, there is a root of grace remaining.

But how may a man know this? Quest.
I answer, three ways:

First, If ever he had the works of grace in him at any time, though he see
or feel nothing, 1
yet there is a root of grace remaining. Sol.
I have showed you, if God give his Spirit, he will never quite take it away;
therefore if he can find this, The root is not gone.
that there has been a work of grace in him, it is certain there is a root
left: if he can find but a few live-coales raked up in the dead ashes, there
is hope of fire and some comfort though he see nothing for the present:
therefore we must look back to see whether ever we have felt the work of
grace or no; if we can find we have, we may assure our selves that the
spirit of God is in us, and that there is a root of grace left in us. This was
David's comfort, Psalm. 77. says he, I thought on the time past, and my soul
received comfort: Simile.
If a man put fish into a Pond, and comes thither again and sees them not, yet
he is persuaded that they are there, though covered with water: so if a man be
once stored with the graces of God, though he sees and feels them not, yet
must he be persuaded that he has them still: it is a corruption in the estate
of weakness, to think the Devil has deceived them, and that all was nothing
that was in them: but we must take heed of this, that we do not belly God. We
read Malach. 1. How* the Lord says, That he has loved the people: and they
say, wherein have thou loved us? Therefore it is a good thing when the Lord
shall love us in our conversion, and in our repentance that we do acknowledge
it.

Secondly, 4
A man may know it by the desires of grace that there is a root left, By
desires of grace left.
which are four in number:

First, 1
to grieve that we cannot grieve for sin; and to mourn that we cannot
mourn: To grieve that we cannot griev for sin.
If we desire to weep as others do, this is a desire of grace, nature will
not do this. So Esaias, 63. 17. The Church of God complains of this, saying, O
Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts
from thy fear?

Secondly, 2
to desire the reconciliation and love and favor of God above all things,
which though he feels not, Desire of reconciliation.
yet he longs for it, and desires it above all worldly things whatsoever, and
would give a world to have the sense and feeling of Gods favor; Thus we see
the Church Cant. 3. when she had lost Christ, she seeks after him, and she
runs here and there to find him: so when we have lost Christ, we long for him
and our desire is after him, this of a surety is a desire of grace: so Matthew.
5. says Christ, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness,
though they have it not, yet they shall be satisfied: A man in the time of his
weakness thinks his case to be but miserable; and yet the Spirit of God
pronounces him a happy man.

Thirdly, 3
a desire to believe; though a man do not believe for the present, yet he
desires to believe, A desire to believe.
and striveth against infidelity; this is a desire of grace; if a man feels
this, he may assure himself there is a root of grace left in him. Mark. 9.
says Christ unto the man, can thou believe? Lord (says he) I believe, but
help my unbeleefe.

Fourthly, 4
a desire to please God in all our courses; though we have some sins and
corruptions, A desire to pleas God in all things.
yet we desire to be rid of them and to walk with God; these desires of new
obedience, do show there is a root of grace left. As Psalm. 119. says David,
O that my heart were directed to keep thy Law: and Psalm. 40. I desire to do
thy will O Lord: indeed Lord, I confess I do not thy will, but I desire to
do it: by these desires we may know that there is a root of grace left.

But here may be an Objection made; Object.
Had not Herod good desires and Balaam, yet these had no root of Grace in
them? To this I answer, Balaam had good desires, Sol.
he desired the end, but not the means that tends to the end; he desired to
be happy, but he did not desire to be holy: The wicked desire grace, but they
do not use the means to come to it: A carnal man may deceive himself in
this, therefore if men desire grace, Heaven, and happiness, they must use the
means to come by it, which is by Prayer, and hearing the Word preached,
receiving the Sacraments, reading of the Word, and such like duties.

The third means whereby a man may know that there is a root of grace left in
him, 3
is, By some workings of the spirit.
If he can find some working of the Spirit, in this estate, the root is fast:
As a man may know the Sun is up though he see not the Sun, Simile.
but a little glimpse of it, so by some little workings of the Spirit, he may
know he has the Spirit. The first work is, That he would not grieve God for
a world; 1
he hates sin, he cannot abide it; he would not swear, nor lie, nor
profane the Sabbath, nor commit any sin willingly: in this case he may
assure himself he has the Spirit of God in him. Secondly, that although he
falls into some sin, yet he holds his care and love to all other holy
duties: 2
as David did in that foul sin of adultery, when he had fallen into it, yet
he came to the Temple, did hold himself to perform holy duties still.
Thirdly, to hold our love to God, 3
and to Gods people: when he loves a Christian as a Christian; says S. John,
hereby we know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren.

First, the Use of this is, that seeing in the falls of the Godly there is
always a root left, Use 1.
therefore we should labor to nourish and to hold this root; that is, to
nourish these good desires, the love of goodness, and the hatred of sin. If
a man has a good plant in his Garden, if bad fellows come and cut down the
boughs and branches, Simile.
what will he do? he will go and dig about the root, dung it, and labor to
preserve and nourish it: so when there is a plant of goodness in a Christian,
if the Devil come and cut down the boughs and branches, nevertheless, we
must labor to nourish the root by the Use of good means.

Secondly, 2
seeing there is a root left in all the falls of the godly, therefore we must
be thankful to God, when we have a desire to please him in all our courses.

Thirdly, seeing there is a root of grace left in all the falls of the godly: 3
Therefore if we cannot find these workings of the Spirit, nor the desires in
us, but perceive our selves to be dead hearted, it is a shrewd sign that there
is no root of grace: yet I say not but that God may in time, and in the use of
means, work grace in such a heart, but for the present, I can give such a
disposition no encouragement of that estate, till God work more in them.

SERMON LVII.
JOHN 14. 26. But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.
HAving spoken of the means whereby a man may know by infallible arguments
that the holy Ghost is in him: in the next place we are to speak what good and
benefit we have by the Holy Ghost: for when we know the great good that comes
by the Holy Ghost, it will make us to prise it when we have it, and to seek
for it when we want it: Therefore, it shall not be amiss to see what this
great good and benefit, is, that we have by the holy Ghost. The Prophet David,
Psalm. 51. 11. prays, Lord take not thy Holy Spirit from me, though thou take
away my peace, my Children, my crown and kingdom, and other blessings, yet
Lord take not thy Spirit from me; David knew the Spirit of God was a greater
blessing than Peace, Children, Crown, Kingdom, than all other blessings, and
benefits whatsoever. It is true indeed that the benefits of the Holy Ghost are
unspeakeable, that no man can see them in the full latitude and extention,
because God is infinite, yet we may see some of them. Simile.
A man who comes to the Sea, stands and looks on it, he joys to see it,
though he cannot see the length nor the breadth of it; so although a man
cannot comprife the number of them yet it is a comfort to see some of them. Now
there are six special benefits that we have by the Holy Ghost.

The first work is to show us our wretched and miserable estate, Six benefits
we have by the holy Ghost.
that we stand in till we be brought home to Christ: for no sooner are we
beginning to enter into an estate of grace, 1
but presently there is kept a mavelous stir, To show us our miserable
estate.
which troubles and disquiets us as long as the strong man holds possession:
Luke 1. 21. Because the Spirit of God once come into us, shows us our sins,
and the wrath of God against them, and that Hell is ready for us, and then our
thoughts cannot choose but be exceedingly troubled, and we are so amazed, as
we know not how to turn us. Thus we see Paul was, Act. 9. three days
together he eat no meat, but prayed in heaviness and sorrow: as Ezechiel 37.
before life came into the dead bones, there was a noise, a rattling, shaking and
trembling amongst them: Simile.
so before the Lord puts spiritual life into us, there is as it were a noise,
and a trembling, and a shaking for sin. This is the worst we shall feel
from the Holy Ghost, which is harsh to the flesh, but comfortable to the
Spirit; because it is as an holy vomit that the Lord gives us to purge out our
sins and corruptions, which though bitter in taste at first, is comfortable and
giving ease at the latter end: So Matthew. 5. Christ says Blessed are ye that
mourn, for ye shall be comforted; and Psalm. 126. They which sow in tears,
shall reap in joy: So that there is no tears more blessed and happy, than
those that are shed out for sin. Therefore in the harshest work of the
Spirit there is comfort: as Matthew. 1. Joseph was sore perplexed about Mary, and
he thought to put her away secretly, Simile.
till the Angel came to him and said, Fear not Joseph to take Mary to be thy
Wife, for that which is conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost: So when a
christian is perplexed and troubled with his sins, let him not be afraid, for
it is from the Holy Ghost: So Genesis 25. 21. when Rebecca had conceived the
Children dashed in her womb, that is, Simile.
they strove together, Why am I thus, says she? and thereupon asked the Lord,
who said unto her, Two Nations are in thy Womb; of whom the one shall be
mightier than the other; and the elder shall serve the younger; So when a
Christian shall feel a striving in him, let him be of good comfort, there are
two within him, the spirit and the flesh, the elder shall serve the younger;
the flesh shall be but a slave to the spirit. So then in the harshest work of
the spirit there is comfort; and if there be comfort in the troublesomest
work, what comfort is there in the rest of the benefits?

The second benefit is, 2
Illumination, to teach us the whole will of God as shall be needful for our
salvation; Illumination of Gods Will.
and so Christ says in this place, But the comforter which is the holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things and bring
all things to your remembrance which I have told you; and John. 6. 45. says
he, they shall all be taught of God: so also 1 Ioh. 2. 27. But the anointing
which ye receive dwells in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but
as the same anointing teaches you all things: this is another benefit we have
by the Holy Ghost, to teach us all knowledge needful for our salvation. A
number of people complain they can learn nothing though they have means and
good means too: the reason is, because they have not got this inward Doctor
the Holy Ghost to teach them: therefore let us pray to God to give us this
inward Doctor to teach and instruct us, and to give us all knowledge needful
for our salvation.

Now by two means the holy Ghost does teach us; Two ways the Holy Ghost
teaches. First, by opening our hearts.
first, by opening our hearts to understand the Scriptures, making us capable
of the high things of God; the Jews had a veil hung over their hearts in the
reading of the Law, as ye may read, 2 Corinthians. 3. 13. so all people have a
veil hung over their hearts, that in seeing they cannot see nor perceive. Now
the Holy Ghost takes down this veil, for as at the death of Christ the veil
of the Temple was rent that a man might see into the most Holy place; so the
Holy Ghost does tear this same veil that we may see into the high things of
God. Simile.
A man that sits in a dark house cannot see to do any thing, yet if one come
and open a window or a casement and so lets in light, he may then see to do
whatsoever pleases him; so we be here as in a dark house, and the Holy Ghost
opens as it were a window or a casement, and lets sin light to us; therefore it
is said, Act. 16. that the Lord opened the heart of Lydia; and so Luke 24. it
is said, then he opened their understanding: So the Holy Ghost it is that must
open our understanding; for we may read and hear, but if the Holy Ghost does
not open our hearts we shall be never the better for that we read or hear.

The second means is, Secondly, by strengthening our memory.
by causing us to remember the good things that has been taught us; through
corruption of nature we are ready to forget the good things that we have
heard. The woman in the Gospel had a flux of blood, but we have a flux of
memory to let slipthe a thing that is good: to repair which infirmity the Holy
Ghost teaches us how to retain and keep them; so we see in this place Christ
says, that the holy Ghost shall bring to our remembrance all things whatsoever
he has taught us. The old Romans had certain men whom they called Amemores,
Simile.
that is, remembrances; when they had any weighty matter to be done, one put
them in mind of it before, there was such a thing to be done; so the Lord does
by the holy Ghost, he makes him our remembrancer to put us in mind that there
is such and such a thing to be done, for there is a number of good things that
we forget, whereof the Holy Ghost puts us in mind. There be a number of
people complain that they cannot remember any thing their memory is so bad,
but let him labor to get the Holy Ghost and he will teach them to remember and
help memory in a man. The Disciples of Christ did not understand but forgot
some things that he had told them of: but when the Holy Ghost was sent to them
he brought it to their remembrance; as soon therefore as he was risen from
the dead, it is said his Disciples remembered that he thus and thus said unto
them, if a man have the Holy Ghost, he will bring a thousand things to our
remembrance which we forget, it is an opinion of some that if a man go to
Church and learn nothing, he were better be at home; for (say they) he were
as good tarry at home and learn nothing as to go to Church and carry away
nothing. To this I answer, do not tarry at home but come still though thou do
not understand them for the present nor remember them, labor to get the Holy
Ghost and he will make thee to understand them, and bring them to thy
remembrance though thou have forgotten them.

The third benefit that we have by the holy Ghost, Thirdly, Holy Regiment and
Government.
is holy regiment and government; that he guides and governs the hearts of the
faithful: as a man that dwells in a house will govern and guide the same,
all shall be subject to his will; Simile.
so the Holy Ghost dwells in the hearts of the faithful, to govern, guide
and to make them subject to his will: therefore Saint Paul says, Romans 8. 14.
That the faithful are led by the Spirit, and Psalm. 143. 10. David prays,
Lord let thy good Spirit lead me unto the land of righteousness. Simile.
The sons of kings and princes though they ride abroad and go here and
there, yet they have a Tutor and a governor to go with them that they do
nothing unseemely or unfitting their place, so the Lord does though he sends us
here into the world, and lets us go up and down, yet he sends the Holy Ghost
with us to be our monitor and Tutor that we should not commit any thing
unbeseeming us in our Christian profession. This is another benefit we have by
the Holy Ghost, for if he did not guide us whither should we run? Now by two
special actions the Holy Ghost does govern us.

The first is, The Holy Ghost governesus two ways. First, by restraining evil.
by restraining and keeping of us back from a number of sins that we should
else fall into; therefore when we are kept from any sin it is the Spirit of
God that does it; so Gal. 5. 17. says the Apostle, For the flesh lusts
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary
one to the other: insomuch that we cannot do the same things that we would,
so Act. 16. 7. Paul would have gone to Bithynia, and the Spirit suffered him
not: so then it is the Holy Ghost we see that keeps and holds us back from
sin. There is no Christian but feels this when his corruption puts him on
sin, it is the Holy Ghost that keeps us back and will not let us take our
swing and sway therein: what a number of sins should we fall into if the Holy
Ghost should not keep us? for we have the seeds and spawne of all sins in
us, therefore that we are kept from the sins and shames that others fall
into, it is because the Holy Ghost keeps us from falling into them.

Secondly, Secondly, by stirring us up to good.
by exciting and stirring of us up to good things, putting holy motions and
good thoughts into our minds, as Act. 7. it is said that it came into Moses
heart to go and visit his brethren: Moses lived in Pharaohs court, where he
wanted not any thing, yet there was a thought came into his heart to go and
look on the poor Church of God, and to pity them; so when there is a motion
comes into our mind to pity our poor brethren and to releeve them as
occasion shall be offered to do them good; it is the Holy Ghost that does put
it in us, as Paul says Galath. 4. 6. he has sent the Spirit of his Son into
our hearts whereby we cry Abba, Father. Hence we see it is the Spirit of God
that stirs us up to the duties of prayer and holiness. The fourth Benefit
is, to give power to perf^orme holy duties.


The fourth benefit is, To give us power and ability to perform Christian
duties and services, for the Spirit of God does not only open our hearts to
understand the Scripture, excite and stir us up to good duties, but does also
enable us to do them; to repent of our sins, to pray to God, to love our
brethren, to rest and rely on God in the time of trouble. In the story of
Sampson, we see that he did shake himself and did think to have done great
matters, Simile.
yet for his life he could not because his strength was gone: in like manner
when we see other men can pray, repent of their sins, when thou can not do
so, know it is the Holy Ghost that does enable thee; for there be a number of
Christian duties, that we are no more able in the estate of nature to do,
Impossible to a natural man.
than a dead man can remove a mountain; 1
as when a man is truly humbled for sin and cast down, that a natural man
should look up to God by the eyes of faith, to rest and to rely on him, for
the saving of his soul; this he is no more able to do than a dead man to
remove a mountain: so likewise for a man to resist a temptation agreeable to
his nature, 2
he is no more able to do it, than a dead man to remoove a mountain: again,
when a man is in want and in need, 3
then to rest and rely on God for the feeding of his body, that as he has
trusted God with the saving of his soul, so he will rely on God for things
needful; a natural man is no more able to do this than a dead man to remove
a mountain, but the Spirit of God inables a man to do that; for that which is
impossible to nature is made possible by the Spirit of God.

The fifth benefit is, Fifthly, comfort in distress.
to comfort in distress; although a Man wants house or land, and a number of
outward comforts, yet if he have the Holy Ghost to comfort and assist him, he
need not care for any thing else; Therefore Christ says to his Disciples, I
will send you a Comforter; in the World ye shall have trouble, but he shall
mitigate and assuage all your troubles: So Acts 9. 31. it is said, Then had the
Churches rest throughout all Judea, Galile and Samaria, and were edified;
walking in the fear of God, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost were
multiplied. Therefore, whatsoever our trouble is, yet it is a great stay, that
we shall have comfort in the Holy Ghost; and not be driven to take up the
complaint which David does, in the Person of Christ, I looked for some to have
pity on me, but there was none; and for comfort, but I found none: for
though it be true of Christians, that in their trouble they look for some to
pity and comfort them but they find none, yet nevertheless in their
extremity the Holy Ghost does comfort them; therefore if men want comfort in
the time of trouble what shall they do? send for fiddlers and merry company to
comfort them, as Saul did, and fall into relapses? no, but we must labor to
get the Holy Ghost to comfort us: for the comfort of the Holy Ghost goes beyond
all worldly comforts:

First, How the comfort of the Holy Ghost ex^^ds (...) other comfort.
because all worldly comforts may be taken from us, let it be in our goods or
friends, or whatsoever else these comforts may fail us, because the ground of
them is not good, we may be taken from them and they from us, 1
but the comfort of the Holy Ghost can never be taken from us, because it is
grounded on Gods Love and favor, For (...)
and hope of Heaven; therefore the Devil and all the World shall never be able
to take away this comfort.

Secondly, because all the comforts in this life be not pure and entire
comforts, but have always some sorrows in them: as we see Hest. 5. when
Haman had all the glory that Ahashuerosh could afford him, 2
yet he was not at quiet, In regard of Purity.
because Mordecai sat at the kings gate: the cup of our comfort here in this
world, is a mixed cup, like to Christ's cup, mingled with wine and Myrrh, Simile.
much bitterness: so all our worldly comfort is mixed with gall; But the
comfort that we have by the Holy Ghost is pure and entire, it comforts us in
all the distresses that befall us; It made Paul and Silas sing in Prison, Acts
16. It made the Apostles go away rejoicing that they had suffered rebuke for
the Name of Christ.

Thirdly, 3
because all worldly comfort fails and leaves us at the day of death; In
regard of Death.
when the more comfort we have had by it, the more grief it will be to part
from it. Therefore Christ says, Luke 12. to the rich man, Thou fool, this
night shall thy soul be pulled away from thee: but the comfort of the Holy
Ghost is most beneficial and refreshing at the day of death, because then we
draw near to the accomplishment of Gods promises: as Paul says, 2 Timothy 4. 7.
I have fought a good fight, and have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
from henceforth is laid up for me the Crown of righteousness, which the
righteous Judge shall give at that day: hence we conclude all worldly comfort
is not comparale to it. And here I think there is none, but will assent with
me to pray to God to give us the Holy Ghost, as David prays Psalm. 4. That God
would lift up the light of his countenance upon him, howsoever others desire
other things, let us pray to God, though we want many outward comforts, yet
that we may have the holy Ghost to comfort us. Now there are three special
times that the Holy Ghost does comfort in.

1. In trouble and affliction. 2. In the distress of Conscience. 3. In the day
of death.
The Holy Ghost does comfort us in trouble and affliction three ways: 1
First, In affliction, by persuading of Gods love.
by persuading us that God is our Father, and that he will not leave us, but
will stand by us in the time of our trouble: as Psalm. 23. 4. David says, Yea,
though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of death, yet I will
fear no evil, for thou art with me: So Psalm. 27. The Lord is my light and my
salvation; whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? this is one means whereby the Holy Ghost does comfort;
therefore if a man have the holy Ghost he need not care, because that will
comfort and uphold him in all the trouble that does befall him. 2


Secondly, 2
by turning all things to our good, By turning all things to our good.
as Romans 8. the Apostle says, All things shall work to the good of them that
love God. There be many things that seem to go against Christians, all which
yet the Lord turns to their good: the Philistians could not resolve Sampsons
riddle, but every Christian can, as honey came out of the dead body of the
Lion, so a Christian draws sweetness from the dead body of Christ, 3
even in trouble and affliction, By comfort that our troubles shall have an end.
by persuading of us, that God will turn all to our good.

Thirdly, the holy Ghost does comfort us by persuading of us that God will set
an end to all our troubles: as it is said, Psalm. 102. That God will arise and
have mercy on Sion, for the time to have mercy thereon is come, even the
appointed time is come, so also Psalm. 62. 2. says he, yet he is my strength,
and my salvation, and my defence^ therefore I shall not much be moved. Now
three ways the Holy Ghost gives us comfort in affliction; First, by
persuading us that God will take it away; Secondly, that if he does not take it
away, he will mitigate and assuage it, 3
as Psalm. 18. David says, by my God, I have leaped over a wall, Ways the Holy
Ghost comforts in trouble.
although God did not take away the wall, or though he does not make the wall
lower, yet by the help of God I can leap over the wall. 1
Thirdly, that though he does not mitigate or assuage it, that yet he will give
us patience to bear and undergo it, 2
as it is in the Psalm, I cried unto the Lord, 3
and the Lord heard me, and has renewed my strength; therefore, we may say
with Saint Paul, Thanks be to God who has comforted us in all our
tribulations.

The second time is, 2
In the distress of Conscience; of all distress there is none like it, The
Holy Ghost comforts in distress of conscience.
(as Solomon says) Proverb. 18. 14. The spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmities, but a wounded Spirit, who can bear? Now it is the Holy Ghost that
does comfort a man in this distress; First, By persuading us that we are the
Children of God; Romans 8. Saint Paul says, The same spirit bears witness
with our spirit that we are the Children of GOD; How the Holy Ghost comforts
in distress of conscience.
whereupon, Chrysostom says, if GOD should send an Angel or an Archangell, 1
and should tell thee that thou art beloved of GOD, and that thou art his
Child, would not this comfort thee in this distress of conscience, but God
has not sent an Angel or an Archangell only, to persuade thee that thou art
the child of God, but he has sent his Spirit into thy heart to bear
witness unto thy spirit that thou art the Child of God.

Secondly, 2
by persuading us that there is a seed of grace in our hearts; as 1 John 3. 9.
Whosoever is borne of God, sins not, because his seed remains in him; and
John 8. Christ says, He that believes in me, out of his belly shall flow
Rivers of living water; therefore seeing there is a seed of grace remaining in
all the faithful, though they go astray and wander, yet they do as the
sheep, cry unto the shepherd, and are not at rest till they be brought home
to God; So we see David did, in the Psalm. 119. ( says he) I have gone astray
like a lost sheep, Lord seek thy servant, for I have not forgot thy
Commandments.

The third special time is, 3
at the day of death, when all comforts fail us, then the holy Ghost comforts
us, At the day of death, the Holy Ghost comforts.
by persuading us that God is our Father, and that we are going home to him,
and are at peace with him. Thus John 17. 11. Christ says, I come to thee holy
Father, keep them in thy Name, even these which thou have given me: 1
And 2 Pet. 3. 12. ( says he) Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the
day of God, Comfort.
So it should be comfort to a Christian, that by death he is going home to God,
and that he cannot be at rest till he come there.

Secondly, 2
The Holy Ghost does comfort us by persuading that Heaven is opened for us,
Comfort.
and that the Angels are ready to receive us; and that the ending of this life,
is the beginning of a better. We read, Genesis 26. 6. when Iaakob was going to
Padan Aram, he laid him down to sleep upon a stone, where he saw a vision, a
ladder reared up that reached to Heaven, the Angels ascending and descending
thereupon, and Christ ready to receive them at the head of the ladder: So Acts
7. Stephan at the time of death, saw Heaven opened, and Christ standing at the
right hand of God, ready to receive him: such comfortable visions shall the
people of God have at the time of death; at least such comforts as shall be fit
to comfort them in this.

Thirdly, 3
By persuading us that although our bodies rot and consume, yet one day they
shall rise again to glory and happiness: Comfort.
so Job says, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand the last
on the Earth; and though after my skin worms destroy my body, yet shall I see
God with my eyes: and John 11. 23. Jesus says to Mortha, thy brother shall
rise again: to whom Martha replies, I know he shall rise in the resurrection
at the last day. Therefore howsoever our bodies rot and consume in the Grave,
yet one day they shall rise to glory and happiness. It is a good meditation of
a learned man, at the time of death, and of thy departure, think of all the
good doctrines that have been taught thee of good Preachers, to comfort thy
self with them; remember that Jesus Christ is the Lamb of God that was
crucified and killed for thy sins, and is ready to receive thee; who took
order in his last Will and Testament for thee, as John 17. Father (says he) I
will that where I am, there they be also: and to the thief on the Cross, This
day shall thou be with me in Paradise: So rest thy self in this hope, and go
thy way to thy Christ, go home to Abraham, Isaak, and Iaakob, and to all the
holy men departed, and such as are behind shall follow after, where we shall
all meet together to behold God in glory, and sing praises to him world
without end: So this comfort that we have by the Holy Ghost, will stand by us,
when all comfort will fail.

The sixth benefit we have by the Holy Ghost is, 6
ability and power to perform any special calling; Benefit.
for there is no man that can perform any special calling till the holy Ghost
has enabled him: as 1 Samuel 10. it is said, The Spirit of God came upon Saul,
and made him fit for government; and Acts 2. the Spirit of God came down upon
the Apostles and made them fit to preach to all Nations; so Exodus 38. 2. it is
said of Bezaleel, that He was filled with the Spirit of God in wisdom,
understanding, knowledge, and in all workmanship, to find out curious works
in gold, silver, and in brass: So there is no calling that a man can take in
hand, that he is able to perform till he be fitted for it by the holy Ghost.
There is a common complaint amongst men in regard of their servants, and many
disorders, the reason of it is, because men want the holy Ghost; for if men had
the holy spirit, he would make a supply of our wants and amend all disorders.

The general Use that we are to make of this doctrine is, Use
that men pray for this blessing of the holy Ghost; when Elias was taken into
Heaven from Elisha, says Elias to him, What shall I do for thee? unto whom
Elisha said, Simile.
I pray thee that thy Spirit may be doubled upon me. And so Christ going to
Heaven says, what shall I do for thee? our request must be, that his Spirit
may be doubled upon us, to comfort us in any distress, but specially in the
great distress of conscience at the time of death, SERMON. LVIII.
and that it may enable us to perform the special calling that we be now
set to perform and live by.

SERMON LVIII.
1 THESSALONIANS. 5. 19, 20. Quench not the Spirit: Despise not Prophesying.
HAving spoken of the benefits that we have by the Holy Ghost, in the next
place we are to consider whether we may lose the Holy Ghost or the grace that
is once given us of God: worldly blessings a man may lose, he may lose riches,
favor of friends, his lands and life, his skin and teeth; he may lose his
riches (as Solomon says) that riches have wings like an Eagle; he may lose
favor of friends, as Job, 5. 15. Christ says to the rich man, Luke 12. This
night will I come and take away thy soul: and so of all other worldly
blessings: but if a man have once the Holy Ghost given him, he shall never
lose the same; therefore to have his comforts is a greater blessing than all
worldly blessings whatsoever; as Ioh. 14. Christ says, I will pray the Father,
and he will give you another Comforter; another manner of Comforter than I am;
For I must leave the world and go home to my Father, I cannot tarry with you;
but this Comforter shall tarry and abide with you to end, and shall not leave
you till you are brought home to God; therefore above all blessings, let us
desire this blessing and pray to God for it. Now for the better clearing of
this, we will lay down these three conclusions:

The first conclusion is, The first Conclusion.
that nature is ready to quench and to expel the Spirit as much as may be; I
mean corrupt nature, as it is tainted and corrupted with sin: and hereof we
have two grounds:

The first is; The first Ground.
in that two contrary things coming together do labor to destroy each other,
as fire and water, the one being hot and the other cold, do make opposition;
Simile.
so the Spirit and our nature are two contraries, flat opposites one to
another, as the Apostle says, Gal. 5. The flesh lusts against the Spirit,
and the Spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other,
so as ye cannot do what ye would: so because they be flat opposites one
against another; therefore they labor to destroy and seek the overthrow one
of another as much as may be: so Romans 7. we may see how the Spirit and the
flesh bustle one with another; for (says he) I delight in the law of God
concerning the inner man. But I see another law in my members rebelling against
the law of my mind, and leading me captive unto the law of sin, which is in
my members; here is the flesh laboring to subdue and weaken the Spirit.

The second ground is, The second Ground.
that nature seeks to return and to recover nature as much as may be; as it
is the nature of a stone to lie below, in a low place; therefore if ye take a
stone and lay it on a shelfe it will abide as long as the shelfe holds it,
Simile.
but take away the shelfe and the stone falls down again, because it is the
nature of it to lie below; in like manner also it is the nature of many fowls
to live in the water; therefore as son as they be hatched almost, they will
run into the water: even so though Grace restrain nature for a little time,
yet it does labor to return again as much as may be: therefore Psalm. 88. 11.
David prays, knit my heart unto thy Law; so prone and apt was he (though a
man after Gods own heart) to be carried away from God to corruption, and to
slip from him, that he prays to God to uphold him: and Paul exhorts
Christians in this place, that they do not quench the Spirit: the Spirit may
be quenched, but take heed that you do not quench it.

Now because the Spirit is compared to fire, The ways to quench the Spirit.
therefore look how many ways a man may quench fire, so many ways a man may
quench the Spirit.

First, First, by withdrawing the matter.
by with drawing the matter that should nourish the fire: when men do not
bring fuel to nourish the fire, the fire will quench and go out: therefore
the Priests in the Law, were commanded to bring fresh wood every morning and
evening, Levit. 5. 12. so the Spirit of God will quench in us, if we withdraw
that which should nourish it; if we do not hear the Word preached, pray and
read the Scripture, and confer of good things: for the Apostle joins these
two together, quench not the Spirit, despise not prophesying, meaning when men
despise prophesying, they take the course to quench the Spirit and to decay it.

Secondly, Secondly, by pouring on water.
by pouring on of cold water: this will quench and put out the fire, so the
contrary motions of the Spirit will quench the Spirit; for every sin we
commit is as a bucket of water flung on the Spirit to quench and to put it out.
Judge. 16. we see that Sampson through looseness and wantonness keeping
company with Delilah, the Spirit of God was decayed in him, and his strength:
for he shook himself and thought to have done as he did at other times, but
could not: thus Sampson did quench the Spirit of God in him by his bad life; so
our sins being contrary motions to the Spirit, do quench the Spirit.

Thirdly, Thirdly, by smothering.
by smothering out the fire; for although a man does not withdraw the matter
that should nourish the fire, or power cold water on to quench it; Simile.
yet a man may quench fire by heaping on of earth and mold, yea, even the bare
weight and burden of green wood will smother out the fire; after the same
manner, though a man does not withdraw himself from the use of good means,
nor does commit gross sins; yet overmuch care for the World and the things
of this life, will quench the Spirit of God; when a man spends all his time
about his worldly business* and has no time to serve God, this is a great
means to quench the spirit. Christ tells us, Matthew. 13. 22. that the thorns
choke the good seed; that is, the thorns suck and draw away the heart of
the ground, that the good seed cannot thrive and prosper: so the cares for the
things of this life and about our worldly business, do suck away the heart
of the Spirit.

Fourthly, 4
by negligence, for if we do not stir up the fire, lay the brands together and
blow it, Negligence.
it will quench and go out, so if men be negligent and do not stir up the
graces of God that are in them, and lay as it were the brands together and blow
them, the Spirit of God will quench in them. Therefore the Apostle exhorts, 2 Timothy 1. 6. To stir up the gift of God in him. Simile.
Origin, Hom. 15. says, if God should kindle a fire to heat thee, and it were
like to go out, would not thou lay the brands together, stir it up, and so
nourish it; so God has kindled a fire in our hearts by his Spirit, therefore
we must not through negligence let it dye and go out, but stir up the
graces of God that are in us, that they do not quench: these be the four
means that will quench the spirit: therefore, corrupt nature is the greatest
enemy to the graces of God in us that can be. Chrysostom says well, No man
has any hurt, but it is in himself; in this case all the hurt that the spirit
of God has in us, is by our selves, by our earthlinesse, and by neglecting of
good things, and for want of stirring up the graces of God that be in us.

The second conclusion is, 2
That a man may have common graces of the spirit, Conclusion.
such as are common to good and bad, to the Elect and reprobate, these a man
may lose: as first, 1
a man may be enlightened and endued with Heavenly knowledge, and talk wisely
of high points, and yet he may lose this, because this is a common grace, as
Heb. 6. 4. there were some that were enlightened and had tasted of the good Word
of God, and of the power of the world to come, who nevertheless may yet fall
away.

Secondly, 2
there may be a feeling of good things, a man may have a desire to be saved,
and to behold God in glory, as Balaam had Number* 23. a man may lose these,
because they be common graces; therefore it is a good observation of one, That
the wicked may taste of the Heavenly power, and of the good Word of God, but
these be not the things they live by; as a Cook that dresses a dinner, he
may taste of the meat, and lick his fingers, Simile.
but it is not that he lives by, he lives by somewhat else: so a reprobate
may taste of the good Word of God, and have feeling of good things, as
quietness of conscience and other of Gods favors, and yet nevertheless he
shall not be saved thereby, they shall not be able to bring him to life
everlasting.

Thirdly, a man may have restraining grace, and be restrained from a number of
sins, or a man may have the spirit of government, as Saul had, and yet he
may lose it; as we see, 1 Samuel 10. 14. The Spirit of God departed from Saul; so
a man may be fitted for a calling, and discharge it wisely, and yet may lose
this, because it is a common grace: for all common graces a man may lose. 3


The third conclusion is, Conclusion.
That there be peculiar graces proper to Gods elect, these shall never be lost,
as Regeneration, Sanctification, and Justification; which may comfort a
Christian, who though he may lose his wife and children, his goods and life,
Four grounds that the Spirit once truly given, is never finally lost.
yet if he has the spirit of God, he cannot lose that; and there is four
grounds for it:

The first is, the promise of God; as that Psalm. 89. 30, 31. says God, But if
his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments, if they break my
Statutes and keep not my commandments, 1
then will I visit their transgression with the rod, The ^romise of God.
and their iniquity with strokes; yet my loving kindness will I not take from
him, etc.

The second is, 2
the Power of God; as 1 Pet. 1. 5. says the Apostle of the Faithful, The
Power of God.
which are kept by the power of God through Faith to Salvation.

The third is, 3
the Prayer of Christ; John 17. 20. I pray not for these alone, but for them
also which shall believe in me through their Word: Christ's Prayer.
so then this prayer of Christ was not only effectual for Peter and for the
rest of the Apostles, but also effectual for all the Elect people of God.

The fourth is, 4
the nature of the Spirit, which is always as a seed remaining in them, From
the Nature of the seed.
1 John 3. 9. so Christ says, John 4. that the water which he should give
them, should be a Well of water springing up to Eternal life. All these four
grounds do confirm unto us, that if a Man has received the grace of God
proper to the Elect, he shall never lose it totally nor finally; and therefore
this conclusion stands good, though a man may lose common graces, yet he shall
not lose them which are proper to the Elect. Yet lest any man should presume,
let me tell you first though such a one cannot lose the spirit, 1
yet he may lose the measure of the spirit, and be brought to a low ebb in
himself* there may be a shrewd abatement of this grace, as Revel. 2. Christ
says to the Church of Ephesus, Remember from whence thou art fallen; why the
Church was not fallen from an estate of grace, but it was fallen from a great
measure of grace to a lesser; from a great degree of it, from a great measure
of Care, Love, Faith, Repentance and Zeal: so a Christian, though he be not
quite deprived of the Spirit, and have a total loss thereof, yet may want of
the measure, may find a great abatement of it in himself.

Secondly, 2
A man may lose the comfort of the Spirit, though he cannot lose the Spirit,
yet he may bring himself into a poor case by his sins, that he may have as
little feeling of the spirit and comfort, as if he had no presence of the
Spirit; Simile.
as a man may have joints, but they may be so benumbed with cold, as a man
cannot feel nor have use of them; so a man may have the spirit, and yet may be
so benumbed with sin, that he may have no more feeling of the spirit, nor
comfort, than if he had not the spirit.

Thirdly, 3
A man may have the Spirit, and yet may lose the working and operation thereof,
he may be overruled by the flesh; as a man may have life in him in a dead
sound, and yet no operations; so a man may have the Spirit, Simile
and yet he may want the operations and workings of it: this is the greatest
extremity that a Christian can be in.

Fourthly, 4
Though a man may lose the feeling of the Spirit, the comfort, operations and
workings thereof, yet it is but for a little time, he cannot lose the ground
or root of the Spirit, In the 6. of Esaias, the Prophet tells us, that though the
trees seem to be dead in the winter, and have no leaves not fruit on them, yet
they have in them Mackselat, as it is in the Hebrew, or Substantia as in the
latin, (that is) that there is a certain moisture or sap, that lies in the
root and preserves it, that it dies not; so it is in all the falls of Gods
people, Simile.
there is a certain sap or moisture of grace, that lies hid in the heart
that preserves them, therefore although a man may lose the operations and
feeling of the Spirit, yet it is but for a little time, for the grace that
lies hid in the heart preserves them.

The Use is, that it is a sweet comfort to a Christian that if once he has
the spirit of grace, Use 1.
the work of regeneration, justification and sanctification wrought in him, he
shall never lose this: A man may lose all worldly friends and comforts, his
skin and teeth, yea life it self, but if a man have the spirit, he shall
not lose that: As Act. 20. Saint Paul says, Simile.
when Eutichus fell out at the window, Trouble not your selves, for there is
life in him; so we may say in all the falls of Gods people, trouble not your
selves, for there is life, there is the spirit of God in them.

The second is, seeing a man may lose the comfort of the spirit and the feeling
thereof, Use 2.
insomuch that one may have as little comfort as a man that is adjudged to
Hell; therefore he must take heed that he do not grieve the spirit, but
labor to nourish it by the use of good means: as Exodus 33. when the Lord was
departed from the Children of Israel, but a little while, Simile.
no man would put on his best raiment, but wept and mourned; so a Christian, if
the Lord takes away the comfortable feeling of his spirit, and is departed from
him, but a day or an hour, he cannot be merry till he feels it again, and
therefore it is good to husband the graces of the spirit, that want of them do
not cause him to depart from them.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing there are some graces that are proper to the elect and reprobate, which
a man may have and perish: therefore every man should labor to bring himself
into such estate of grace as he shall never lose, nor the devil and hell
shall take away from him; it is a pitiful thing that men do not say to
themselves, indeed I have the grace of Illumination, I have knowledge and
restraining grace, I have the graces that are proper to good and bad, to the
reprobate and Elect; but what is this to the comfort of a Christian? I may
perish for all this, therefore why do I not labor for those graces that are
proper to the Elect only, which if he have, he has assurance never to lose
them again; he may lose his goods, friends, skin and life, but he cannot
lose the Spirit: if a castle have three walls about it, and the men that are
within the first wall, Simile.
be surprised, put to the sword and massacred, they will labor to get within
the second wall that so they may be preserved: so if a man be come within the
first wall that he has common graces, where the devil may surprise him, to
escape his danger he will labor to get within the second wall, to get the
graces that are peculiar to Gods people, and then he shall be safe.

The last point is, how we may retain and keep the Spirit? we read Luke 6.
40. when Christ had raised up the Maid to life, he commanded to give her
meat, How we may retain the Holy Ghost.
thereby to teach us that when the life of nature, or the life of grace be
begun, there must be means used to nourish it; hence we infer it must be
every man's care that if he have the Spirit, he must labor to nourish it. Now
there be five means whereby a man may nourish the Spirit:

First, Five means to nourish the Spirit. The first use of means.
by a diligent use of the good means, as preaching, the Sacraments, prayer,
reading the Scriptures, and conferring of good things; this is a special
means to nourish the Spirit. It is a principle in nature, that bodies are
nourished by the same things they were begun; so look by what means the
Spirit comes into a man, Simile.
by the same things it must be nourished. Now we have heard that the Spirit of
God comes into a man by the preaching of the Word, prayer, repenting of our
sins; so by the same means it is continued, therefore let men attend to the
use of good means, to hear the Word preached, receive the Sacraments, pray,
read the Scriptures, and confer of good things; which duties are special
means to retain the Spirit: but if men will not hear the Word preached,
pray, read the Scripture, nor meditate of good things, but spend time idly,
no marvel though the Spirit decay in them: for as a man may kill a tree
although he want a Saw or an axe to chop down the top; Simile.
by picking away the moulds from the root, so though a man lay no violent
hands on the Spirit, yet if he pick away the moulds, take away the use of
good means, the Spirit will decay in him: therefore if men would retain the
Spirit, let them hold them to the use of good means.

The second means to retain and keep the Spirit is, to take heed we do not
grieve the Spirit; Secondly, not to grieve the Spirit.
as Ephesians. 4. 30. Grieve not the Spirit, by the which ye are sealed unto the
day of redemption; it is the Spirit that seals our redemption unto us; all the
hope we have in God, of heaven, and of glory, it is from the Spirit, therefore
let us take heed we do not grieve the Spirit: there are some things in
nature that are ready to put forth themselves to man, Simile.
but let them never so little offend them and they are ready to pull in
themselves: as the eye of a man, a snaile, and shellfish; the eye of a man is
ready to put forth to us, but if you offend it never so little, it is ready to
close and shut up his light; the Spirit of God is of this nature, it is ready
to put forth it self to a man, but offend it never so little, and it will
close against him; therefore we must take heed we do not grieve the Spirit.
And for your information I will show you two ways how a man may grieve the
Spirit:

First, The Spirit grieved two ways. First, sinning against Illumination.
when a man sins against his Illumination and inlightning, when he lies,
swears, commits uncleanness, steals against conscience, and knowledge and
against the first grace of God: other sins grieve the Spirit, but these in a
special manner, they do as it were wound the Spirit, and let out the life and
blood of it; so God complains, Ezekiel. 8. 6. Son of man, scest thou not what
they do, even the great abominations, that the house of Israel commits
here, to cause me to depart from my sanctuary? so the sins we commit against
God, especially when we sin against our inlightning, Simile.
they cause the Spirit of God to depart from us: we see when poor Bees have
gathered a great deal of honey into their hive, a man may drive them out with
smoke; so when the Spirit of God is come into a man, and has gathered a great
deal of honey, has brought a great deal of comfort and joy to his soul; he
may drive him out with his smoke as it were: therefore we must take heed we do
not grieve him with our sins.

The second way that a man may grieve the Spirit of God is, Secondly, by
disobedience to his motions.
by not being obedient to the motions of it, as Psalm. 95. 10. says the Lord,
Forty years long was I grieved with this generation; how did they grieve him?
they would not hear the voice of God, nor be obedient to the motions of his
Spirit: in like manner when men will not hear the voice of God, speaking to
them from day to day, nor obey the motions of his Spirit, calling them to
repent, to believe, to be charitable to their neighbors, they do grieve and
offend the Spirit.

The third means to retain and keep the Spirit is, Thirdly, to mark the
removes of the Spirit.
to mark the removes of the Spirit; for the Spirit does not remove all at one
time but by degrees, by little and little, as Ezekiel. 16. 4. 18. 19. we see the
glory of God did not depart from the Temple all at once, but first from the
Cherub, over the door, and then from the door to the entering in of the gate:
so it is with the graces of God they do not depart all at once, but the
degrees; first a man loses one grace and then another, Simile.
even as the leaves of a tree fall not al off together, but some to day and some
the next day, till all the leaves be gone; so it is with the graces of his
Spirit; therefore when a man finds the first remove of the Spirit, that there
is an abating of his zeal, his care, or of his love, it must be his wisdom
to lay hold of the Spirit, as Luke 24. when Christ had set afoot good things in
the two Disciples, he makes a proffer to be gone from them; do they let him
go? no, but they importune him and desire him to stay with them; so if the
Spirit of God makes a proffer to be gone, we must not let it go, but lay
hold on it and importune it when we feel it about going. Thus David did, Psalm.
51. 11. feeling the Spirit of God, to remoove from him, in regard of the foul
sin he had committed; does he let the Spirit go? no, but he prays to the
Lord that he would not take away his Spirit, and repents of his sin; so when
a Christian has given occasion by his sins, that the spirit of God should
depart from him, he must not let him go, but pray to God, that the Lord would
not take his spirit from him; for if a Christian be not careful when he
feels the spirit of God remove from him, but lets it go if it will, fearful
will the fall of that man be. It is a rule in Physic, Simile.
if a man take it, if it does not stir the humor the party will die: so when
we take Gods Physic, if it does not stir the humor, nor we moved with it,
we are in danger of dying; therefore we must mark the first removes of the
Spirit.

The fourth means to retain the Spirit is, Fourthly, to put the Spirit to
employment.
to use and to employ the spirit; for if men will not use the spirit, and
excuse it to the bettering of their life and well ordering of their courses,
the Lord will take it away from them: as Matthew. 25. We see he that had but one
Talent given him, because he did not use and employ it, the Lord takes it away
from him: so if the Lord give us his Spirit, and we do not use and exercise
it, he will take it from us. Simile.
If a man lend a Saw, or an Axe, and he that borrowed it does not use it, but
lets it ly rusting, if the owner see it so, he will take it away; so when the
Lord lends us his spirit, and we do not use it, but let it lie rusting, if so
that does not stir us up to the duties of Prayer and holiness, what may we
look for, but that God will take away his Spirit?

The fifth means to retain and keep the spirit is, 5
that we take heed that we do not overcharge and burden the spirit; Not to
over burden the spirit with cares.
for if we overcharge and burden it, this will drive it away: I showed you
the last day, that a man may not only quench fire with water, but he may also
quench it by heaping upon it a great deal of Earth and Mould, yea the very
weight and burden of green wood will smother and put out the fire; so we may
quench the spirit not only with our sins, which are like cold water, but we
may quench it by overburthening it with weighty worldly cares: Simile.
we see when a man's heart is drawn away with the World, what a hard matter it
is to draw him to the duties of Prayer and Religion, he is ready to say, he can
have no time for them: Therefore, men must take heed they do not overcharge
and burden the Spirit with worldly cares: Simile.
we see a Ship will not only sink with leaking in of water at a hole, but
also if they overburthen the Ship; So if we overburthen the Spirit with
worldly cares, they will drive away the Spirit. These be the five means by
the which we maintain and keep the spirit, therefore as Christ said to his
Disciples, Blessed are ye if ye do these things; so say I to you: Now ye know
these things, blessed are ye if ye do them. And because the holy Ghost is the
greatest comfort that a man has; Simile.
Therefore above all things let a man labor to retain and keep him: If a man
has an hundred trees in his Garden or Orchard, if there be one that is a tree
of special use to him, his wife and children, friends and neighbors, what
will he do? He will be sure to nourish his tree, and to lay fresh moulds to
the root of it, whatsoever he does to the rest: so the Holy Ghost as a tree
of Life, that he, his wife, children and friends live by, though a man have a
number of other comforts, yet how careful should he be to nourish this
comfort? Thus at last we have heard these profitable questions, concerning the
Holy Ghost, and I pray God we may so live in this life, as that we may live
everlasstingly in the life to come.

SERMON LIX. SER. LIX.

ACTS 2. 47. And the Lord added to the Church from day to day such as should be
saved.
I Have showed before, that the faith of a Christian consists in two things: In
God, and the Church of God: these be two things whereon the faith of a
Christian turns: concerning our faith in God, we believe that there is one
God in substance, and yet three distinct, persons, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost: The Father, who created us by his Power; the Son, who redeemed
us by his blood, and the holy Ghost, who is the inlightner and sanctifier of
all the faithful; therefore after our faith in God, Christian faith informs us
to believe there is a Church of God, because it is a rich storehouse of all his
grace and goodness, and his true Temple, as Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 9. 10.
Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you,
etc? Augustine says well, the right order of believing is first to believe in
the blessed Trinity, and then in the true Church: first, to the Maker, and
then to the House? first, to the Builder, and then to the City: So our faith
must be first in God, and then by and by turn to the Church of God. Now herein
are two things to be observed:

1. Under what form we must believe. 2. What it is we must believe.
First, 1
under what form we must believe: The Papists say we must believe in the
Church, Under what form we must believe.
and the Romish Testament is for it: upon 1 Timothy 3. and Bellarmine is not far
behind: he says* after a sort and after a certain kind we are to believe in
the Church: sundry Divines are contrary to this, and they say that a Christian
is to believe in none but God; not in Angel, nor Archangell, nor in any
creature, but in God; as John 14. Christ says, Ye believe in God, believe
also in me: mark the ground, why we must believe in Christ because he is God:
so 1 Pet. 1. 21. says the Apostle, Which by his means, do believe in God
that raised him from the dead, and gave him glory, that your Faith and hope
might be in him* not in the Church, in Angel or Archangell, but in God only:
And an ancient father says, we believe there is an holy Church, but we do
not believe in the Holy Church: we must believe in none but God, and the
reason is, ART. IX.
because the Church is not God, but the house of God. Eusebius says, we must
believe Paul and Peter, but we must not believe in Paul, nor in Peter, the
reason is, because it is a transferring of the honor that is due to God, to
the creature: and Chrysostom says, it is one thing to believe a Party, and it
is another thing to believe in a party; but it is proper to the divinity to
be believed in: Hence we see the light is so clear in this point as no man
need doubt of it: and Thomas Aquinas, one of their own Doctors says, it is
better for a man to believe there is a Church, than for a man to believe in the
Church, wherein he grounded himself on Pope Leo, in whose power the Church
was to rest themselves. Since that time they have refused this, and say that a
man must believe in the Church, affirming that there be three ancient fathers,
Saint Jerome, Epiphanius, and Cyrill that takes it in the same sense as they
do: As for one of these which is Saint Jerome, there was a chief bishop of
Rome that brings his argument for us, and inferres that this particle in, is to
be remooved, because in his best works we do not so read it: Now for the two
other, their credit is the less, because Arrius was the first that brought it
into his Creed, and Cyrill follows him; as for Epiphanius, though at first he
might be carried with the stream of the times, yet afterward he was
overswayed by a number of ancient fathers at Alexandria, who expound and take
it as we do. Therefore it is out of question, and without controulment, that
we are not to believe in the Church, but the right form of believing is, to
believe that God has a Church, a holy people, a holy company that he will
bless and save eternally.

Secondly, 2
what it is we must believe: What we must believe of the Church.
there are three special things we must believe:

1. We believe that God has a Church. 2. We believe it is a holy Church. 3.
We believe it is an universal or Catholic; that it was from the beginning,
it has been in all ages, and it is all the World over.
First, 1
that God has a Church, That God has a Church.
People and Family here in this world, his number of saved ones, (as I may say)
though we cannot see nor design them out: Paul tells us, Heb. 11. 1. that
Faith is the evidence of things that are not seen; therefore though we do not
always see the Church of God, yet by Faith, we must believe that God has his
people, family, and his number of saved ones: for the same Saint Paul shows us
in the general apostacy of the Jews, Romans 11. That there is a seed and a
little remnant left, this he resolves us of, from an Oracle of God, that there
were seven thousand left, thou had not bowed their knees to Baal, which were
hid and secret, therefore though we cannot see or design them out, ye we
must believe that God has his Church and company of holy people, Use
and his number of saved ones.

The Us;es are: first, to answer to a demand that the papists make: Where was
your Churches before Luthers time? I answer, Quest.
I believe the Church of God, Ans.
has been in all ages and from the beginning, and shall continue to the end
of the World; therefore although we cannot see nor design it out, yet we
believe there is a Church of God: as Genesis 1. the Lord made two great lights,
the one to rule the day, and the other to rule the night; Now although we
cannot always see these lights (because there is some clouds that do cover
them, or some thick mist) yet faith does assure us that those lights be still,
so it is with the Church of God, though it be not patent and visible at all
times, yet Faith does assure us that there is a Church of God still.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing that God has his Church in all ages, and his number of saved people:
Therefore every man must labor to be one of that number; for though God has
his Church and number of saved ones, if we do not appertain to this Church
and be of this number, what are we the better? We see when Noah made his Arc,
all that did not get into it did perish in the waters; Simile.
so though God has his Church and number of saved ones, yet if we do not
labor to be of his Church and people, we must perish. Now for the better
clearing of this point, we will show;

1. What the Nature of the Church of God is. 2. What be the diverse parts of it.
3. The diverse estates of the Church of God here in this world. 4. What be the
true marks and notes of the true Church. 5. What be the privileges of the
Church.
First, 1
what the Church of God is? What the Church of God is.
we are not to think it a material Church composed of lime and stone, an
Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 11. 18. but the Church of God is the company of the
faithful ones, and the Elect people of God; they be the members of Christ's
Augustine says, that the Church of God consists of Men and Angels, but we
believe that the redeemed only be of the Church of God; as Ephesians. 5. 27. says
he, Husbands love your wives, as Christ loved the Church and gave himself for
it that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the washing of water through
the Word: So then the Church of god is the company of redeemed ones, such as be
sanctified, and it may be defined after this manner; The definition of the
Church.
The Church of God is a company of people called out of the condemned
multitude of the World to blessedness and happiness by the means of Christ.
Whence we observe four things appertaining to the nature of the Church:

First, 1
it is a company of holy People; for there is no body either mystical or
natural, The Church a company.
but has many members, as Paul speaks, Romans 12. 5. So the Church of God does
not consist of one, but of many members: It is true, Simile.
it began in one: In Adam, but the Church of God is like a tree that has one
root, but spreads into many branches and boughs; so the Church of God
began in Adam as a root, and from him spreads to all his posterity that be
elect and within the covenant of grace. Thus Matthew. 16. where Christ says, Go
tell the Church; the Papists change the note and say, Go tell the Pope: but
the Pope is not the Church of God, because he is but one, for the Church of God
is a company of people that consists of many members. 2


Secondly, A company of called ones.
It is a company of people called; all the true members are called to partake
of the graces of Christ, they are called to faith, repentance, and sanct
fication: therefore Saint Paul in all his epistles terms the faithful, the
Called of God, as Romans 1. 7. To all you that be at Rome, beloved of God,
called to be the Saints, and 1. Cor. 1. 16. Brethren you see your calling; so 2 Timothy 1. 9. (says he) who has saved us, and called us with one holy calling.
So then all the true members are called; this is a special note and mark of
them. The uses are:

First, Use 1.
seeing that all the true members are called, therefore we must take heed we
do not despise this voice and call of God, seeing he calls us by the voice of
his Gospel and Spirit, to bring us to salvation, and to an estate of grace,
that so we might be saved. Abraham, Genesis 12. was called out of his country,
and from his kindred, and he obeyed God, and did follow him: why now God does
not call us out of our country, nor from our kindred (we may enjoy them still)
but he calls us out of sin, out of blindness and ignorance; therefore do not
thou despise the Call of God nor resist it. We see Matthew. 20. of the Laborers
that were called into the Vineyard, some were called in the first hour, some
in the scond, and some in the third, Simile.
fourth, and last hour: mark (says Augustine) he that was called in the
first hour, did not put off till the second hour; and he that was called in
the fourth hour, did not put it off till the last: so when God calls us, we
should be ready to obey the call of God. As Acts 26. 19. Paul speaking of his
Calling to king Agrippa, says, Therefore O king, I was not disobedient unto
the Heavenly vision; so seeing God does call us from day to day by his Gospel,
let us take heed we do not despise it, but be obedient to it.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing all the true members are called, therefore every man must labor to
find this holy calling in himself, that he has been brought out of sins
to an estate of grace, and that he is one of Gods people. Saint Paul confesses
of himself, 1 Timothy 1. 12, 13. I was a blasphemer and a persecutor, but Lord I
thank thee, thou did show mercy to me, I am now called: so every man must
labor to find this calling in himself; I was such and such a one, I was a
swearer and a drunkard, and a bad liver, but now it is otherwise with me; now
I am Called, and have repented for it.

Thirdly, 3
The Church of God is a company of people called out of the condemned multitude
of this World; for every man naturally is the child of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3.
says he, We are by nature the Children of wrath as well as others, and verse
5. Even we which were dead by sins has he quickened; so the people of God,
are called out of the condemned multitude of this world: as Lot was called out
of Sodom, by the Angel, was haled and pulled out, or else he would have
perished in Sodom: so we should all perish in our sins, with hundreds and
thousands in this World, but that it pleases God to call a number out to be
saved. The use is:

First, Use 1.
seeing the Church of God is called out of the condemned multitude of this
world to be saved, therefore we may see the heavy estate every man stands in
before he is called, that he is no better than in a damnable and cursed estate,
how ever he may in time be one of Gods elect, beloved of God yet for the
present estate he is one of the condemned of the world: O that we had our eyes
open, that we might see the heavy estate we be in till we be brought to faith
and repentance, and to an estate of grace. We read 2 King. 6. 20. that Elisha
did lead the Aramites, Simile.
into the midst of Samaria, and then prayed to the Lord to open their eyes,
and presently they saw they were in the midst of their enemies; so if God
should open our eyes we should see that we were in the midst of hell, and in
the claws of the devils our mortal enemies.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing the people of God, are called out of the condemned multitude of this
world, whereas they might have perished eternally, what cause have men to be
thankful to God, that find this in themselves? whereas they might have been
damned for ever, it has pleased God to call them to the estate of grace, to
faith, to repentance, that so they might be saved; therefore as Mephibosheth
says to David, 2 Samuel 19. 28. When all my Fathers house were but as dead men
before my Lord the King, yet did thou set thy servant among them that did
eat meat at thy table: Simile.
so we may say to God, I and my fathers house were but dead men before thee,
and yet notwithstanding it has pleased thee to bring us to an estate of grace
and to feed us in thine own house, whereas we might have perished with the
world: therefore what cause have we to be thankful to God for so great a
mercy?

The fourth thing that was observed in the parts of the Church is, 4
that they are called out of the condemned multitude of the world to
blessedness and happiness to be saved by Christ: so Saint Paul says in this
place, And the Lord added to the Church from day to day such as should be
saved: there is all the harm the Lord means us, to save and to bring us to
blessedness and happiness: therefore every man must take heed he does not
despise this holy Calling when the Lord invites him to repentance, faith, and
to an estate of grace. Simile.
We see Mark. 10. 9. when Christ calls the blind man he flung away his cloak,
and got upon his legs and followed him; so it should be the care of every
one, when Christ calls him to fling away his sins and corruptions, and make
all have to follow him; for if the blind man did follow him for the curing of
his body, much more should we for the curing of both soul and body.

First, Use 1.
therefore let us take heed we do not despisse this Call of God, seeing all
the harm he means us, is to save us.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing Christ calls us to enjoy blessedness and happiness, and to live in
communion with him, therefore there is no damned man that can be a member of
Christ: it is true indeed that the wicked may live in the Church as bad humors
be in the body, but they are no parts of the body; the Scripture is clear for
it, as 1 Job. 2. 19. they went out from us but they were not of us; for if they
had been of us they would have continued with us: but they went out that it
might be made manifest, that they were not all of us: as if he had said, if
they had communion of grace and of the Spirit with us, then they would have
continued, but because they had not, therefore they went away, The Papists say
that a damned man may be a member of Christ: but we see it otherwise Col. 2.
19. says the Apostle, and not holding the head, from which all the body by
joints and bands having nourishment ministered and knit together increases with
the increasing of God: and Austine says, that there is no damned man can be a
true member of Christ; because; Christ is the Savior of the body, therefore
let us labor to be members of Christ's body and then we shall be saved, but
if we be not, then we are like to perish although we should be the greatest
Princes in the world: but if we be true members of Jesus Christ, then we do
believe that one day we shall be blessed and happy whatsoever our estate be
here; therefore if there be but one or two saved in a town, let us labor to
be one of them; if men should suffer Shipwreck and there should be a boat
found that would hold no more than ten, Simile.
every one would labor to be one of the ten; so we all have suffered
shipwreck by the sin of Adam in the sea of this world; now to save us the Lord
has given us a little boat, which is his Church, that whosoever can get into
it shall be saved, therefore if there be but two in a country or one in a
town that is saved, we must labor to be one of the number.

SERMON LX.
ACTS. 2. 47. And the Lord added to the Church from day to day such as should
be saved.
A Good hearer is like to dry powder, Simile.
that every little spark of fire will make it kindle, but wet powder must be
often touched before it will take; so the unfitter that men be to hear, and
unprepared, the more pains it is to the speaker to work affection in them.

We showed you the last day that the faith of a Christian consists in two
things; in God, and the Church of God; and that the Church of God is a company
of people called out of the damned multitude of this world, whom God will
eternally save with his own self. Whence these considerations offered
themselves unto us: first, What the Church of God is in his own Nature, which
we did then dispatch: secondly, SER. LX.
What be the parts or the diverse estates of the Church of God here in this
world; whereof we are to speak at this present: The Church considered
according to its parts is twofold:

1. The triumphant 2. The militant Church. Secondly, the Parts of the Church.
First, the triumphant Church.

The Church triumphant is that which is blessed and happy with God in heaven;
so called because it is not in conflict and combat as we be warring against
sin, lusts, the devil and the world, but having overcome all, are now
blessed in heaven. Hereof the Apostle speaks, Heb. 12. 22. but ye are come to
the mount Sion and to the City of the living God; the Celesticall Jerusalem;
to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the Congregation of the first
borne, whose names are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to
the Spirits of just men made perfect: so Col. 1. 20. (says he) For it pleased
the Father that in him should all fullness dwell, and having made peace by the
blood of his Cross by him to reconcile all things unto himself, etc. It is an
opinion in the Greek Church that the Saints are nor glorified in heaven till
the judgment day, but this opinion of theirs is false, for it is first,
against the Scripture; and secondly, against reason.

First, The Saints are glorified now.
It is against the Scripture, as Eccles. 12. 7. Dust returns to dust and the
Soul returns to God that gave it: now this must needs be spoken of the
blessed presence of God, Reason 1.
that the soul goes to in regard of power, for God was present with it before:
so Luke 23. 45. Christ said to the Thief, This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise; mark (says Saint Augustine) Christ does not delay the Thief, but
even from this wooden cross he is translated into his heavenly kingdom: so
Paul speaks Phil. 1. 23. desiring to be loosed and to be with Christ; and not
only speaks he this of himself, but also of all the faithful people of God,
as 2 Cor. 5. 8. Nevertheless we are bold and be willing rather to remove out
of the body, and to dwell with God: thus it is clear by the Scripture, that
the souls of the believing and faithful go to heaven, immediately to glory.
So then the Greek opinion is false, it cannot be denied but that some
Scriptures seem to look this way, Object.
as that Matthew. 20. 6. when the evening was come every one had his penny, they
received their hire; so that Col. 3. 4. When Christ which is our life shall
appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory: Now these Scriptures and
the like are to be understood of the glory of the body or else of the
declaration of the glory, Sol.
that soul and body shall have at the day of judgment, at this present the
souls of the faithful are in glory and the world sees it not, but a the day
of judgment there shall be further declaration of it. So then we see the
former opinion is false.

Now it is not only against Scriptures, Reason. 2.
but against reason; and that both natural reason, and sanctified or rectified
reason.

First, First, against natural reason. Simile.
it is against natural reason, because all motions are without cessations till
they come to their proper place unless they be hindered by some violence; as a
stone flung down a hill rests not till it comes at the bottom unless it be
hindered by violence; so the proper place of the Saints is heaven, thither they
move unless they be hindered: now there is nothing can hinder them but sin,
but when they are dead they have no sin, therefore they must needs go to
heaven: that they have no sin it is plain by the Scripture, as Romans 6. 7.
for he that is dead is free from sin; and Augustine says, we live not
without sin so long as we be here, but when we be out of this life, then
sin cease: to this the Schoolmen agree, that all sin cease in a
Christian when he is dead. In the estate of grace, there is no man without
sin, but when this life is ended then sin cease. Object.
Now if any shall say that the decree of God is hinderance enough. Sol.
I answer, there is no such decree set down in the book of God: Secondly, it
might seem injustice in God to delay glory; where there is not cause to keep
them from it, so the Greeks opinion is against natural reason.

Secondly, Secondly, against sanctified reason.
it is against rectified or sanctified reason, for the Lord is more inclined to
mercy than to judgment, as soon as the wicked are dead their souls go into
hell: as Luke 16. the soul of the rich man as soon as he was dead was carried
into hell, while his brethren were alive, and had Moses and the Prophets to
speak to them: therefore it is agreeable to justice that the souls of the
just should go to heaven so soon, seeing he is inclined more to mercy than to
judgment. Augustine says, the soul of a good man goes to God when he is
dead to enjoy blessedness and happiness, and the souls of the wicked go to
hell: therefore it is out of question that the souls of the godly go to
heaven before the judgment day?

Secondly, Secondly, the Church militant.
the Church Militant is that part of the Church, which is a warring and
fighting in this world against sin, the devil, the world, and temptations;
where although it pleases God to give them many victories, conquests and
triumphs in this world (as the Apostle ^aith) Romans 8. In all these things we
are more than conquerers; yet because it is not without pain and labor, toil
and trouble, yea not without blood, as is showed, Heb. 12. 4. Y^^ have not yet
resisted unto blood, the Church of God has a number of these incursions and
conflicts, and (as one says) that the devils follow them like a number of
barking and bawling dogs, and are never at rest, therefore it is called the
militant Church. To this purpose 1 Timothy 6. 12. Paul exhorts Timothy, to fight
the good fight of faith, laying hold of eternal life: and 2 Timothy 2. 3. Thou
therefore suffer affliction as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ: the people of
God be never at rest here, the devil will follow and pursue them; the world
will have a ^ing at them, and their sins will trouble and annoy them;
therefore they must lie in camp against all their enemies.

These are the two maine parts of the Church, A man must be a member of the
militant before ^e can be of the Church Triumphant.
and this is the order between them, that the Church militant is a door, gate
or po^ch to the Church triumphant: for we must be members first of the Church
militant, before we come to be members of the Church triumphant; as Dan. 1.
4. there were certain of the Children of Israel fed with the kings meat, that
at three years end they might stand before the king so it pleases God the
great King of Heaven and Earth, to feed us here in the militant Church, that
one day we may stand before him in the Church triumphant. We have heard
heretofore out of the Book of Ester, that king Ahashuerosh had two houses for
his Maids; there was a house of sweet perfume, Simile.
where they were kept for a season, before they were brought to the kings
house: so God has two houses; there is the militant Church, and the Church
triumphant, whereof this is the order; that first they must live in the Church
militant, being perfumed with the graces of his Spirit, before they can come to
live in the Church triumphant: therefore it must be the care of every man so to
carry himself in the militant church, as that be may come to live in the
Church Triumphant. Thus much of the doctrine, now for the use.

First, Use 1.
seeing the Church of God is Militant here in this world, therefore we must
look for no perfect peace here, although it pleases God sometimes to give the
Church rest, as it is said, Acts, 9. 31. That the Churches had rest: yet
usually it is but a little breathing time, it will not be long, we must prepare
for a new encounter: for 1 Cor. 15. it is said, The last enemy that shall be
destroyed is Death: Therefore till death come, that we may lie down in the
grave, we must look for vexation and trouble; never to be at rest till then:
for when the Devil does cease tempting of us, and the world is at quiet with
us, then we have our own lusts and sins to trouble us. Augustine says well,
the life of a Christian here in this world, is nothing but a warfare, this is
not the place of triumph, for what are these but the speeches of war, The
good things that I would do, that do I not, but what I hate, that do I; and
again, I see a law in my members rebelling against the law of my mind,
leading me captive to the Law of sin and death. Here is nothing but speech
of leading captive and rebellion: and he asks the question, when will this
war be at an end? His answer is, When this corruption shall put on
incorruption, and when this mortal shall put on immortality. Therefore we
must look for no perfect peace in this World; for our sins and corruptions
will trouble us, the world will be against us, and the Devil will bark and
bawle against us; so that a Christian cannot be at quiet while he lives here.

There be some weak Christians, Weak Christians deceived.
who think that because they have many temptations, troubles and afflictions,
that therefore they are no members of Christ, Object.
nor of the Church of God, for if they were, they think they should be at
peace: but here the Devil proceeds against them with false Logic, Sol.
for they ought rather thus to argue, because we live in the Militant Church,
warring against sin, the World, and the Devil: Therefore we must look for
no perfect peace here.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing the Church of God is Militant, therefore every man must stand upon his
guard and watch, armed with Faith, Patience, and with the graces of Gods
Spirit: He must take unto him all the Armor of God that is spoken of Ephesians. 6.
that so he may be armed against the temptations of the Devil, the World, and
his own sins and corruptions, he must not be secure, but he must stand on
his watch. We read, Matthew. 13. 25. Whilst men slept the Devil came and did sow
tares, not when their bodies slept, but when their care, endeavor, and zeal
was asleep: so when men be secure, and stand not upon their watch and guard,
then the Devil comes to surprise them: therefore the watchfulness and
diligence of the Devil, should teach us to be watchful and diligent. We find
1 King. 3. when the true mother of the child was asleep, Simile.
the false mother came and stole away the live-childe, and laid a dead child
in the room of it: so the Devil will do when men sleep in sin, he will
steal away the live-childe, and lay a dead child in the room of it, that is,
he will steal away our lively faith, hope, repentance, and will leave dead
faith, and dead affection in their room: Therefore the watchfulness of the
Devil, must make us watchful to resist him.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing the Church of God is militant, it is clear we cannot escape without
wounds and blows in this life; therefore it must be our wisdom, when we
take any to labor to cure and heal them, that so we do not bleed to death
with them: So Heb. 12. 13. says the Apostle, And make straight s^eppes unto
your self lest that which is halting be turned out of the way, but let it
rather be healed: and Revel. 3. 2. awake and strengthen the things which
remain that are ready to die: here we see the Church had wounds, but it must
be the care of the Church to heal their wounds. It is a fearful thing that
the Devil many times wounds a man in his care, faith, patience, love or zeal,
and yet they have no care to recover again, they do not run to prayer, to
repent of their sins, return to God, get faith, and come to the preaching of
the Word, and to the Sacraments, that so they might recover and be healed. We
read 2 Kings 8. when Iehoram was wounded of the Assyrians, Simile.
he returned into Iezreel to be healed of his wounds; so when the Devil has
wounded us in our care, faith, or in our zeal, it must be our wisdom to
return to the Word and to the Sacraments to be healed of them.

Fourthly, Use 4.
though we have a great deal of toil and trouble here in the Church
militant, yet we may be comforted, because it is the way and the gate to the
church triumphant: as John 16. 2. Christ says, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
that ye shall weep and lament, but the World shall rejoice, and ye shall have
sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. So Revel. 21. 4. says he,
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, neither crying, nor no more pain. So then although the
people of God have a number of troubles and temptations here, yet it may
comfort them, that one day they shall be blessed in the Church triumphant. We
see as long as a man is at Sea in the Ship, Simile.
he is flung here and there, and tossed up and down; and yet it is the Ship
that must carry himsafe to the Haven and Shore: so as long as we live in the
militant Church, we cannot be at quiet, it is a place full of trouble; we
shall have the world, the flesh and the Devil, to vex and trouble us; yet
because the militant Church is the ship that must carry us to the shore, that
is, to Heaven; therefore it must be our care so to live in the militant
Church, that we may be a member in the Church triumphant, that when we have
passed the glassie Sea of this world, we may live in the blessed presence of
Christ, and for ever sing the song of Moses and the Lamb.

SERMON LXI.
REVELATION 1. 20. The seven golden Candlestickes which thou saw, are the
seven Churches.
WE spoke the last day of the parts of the Church of God, SER. LXI.
which generally are two: the Triumphant part, and the Millitant; the
triumphant part is that which is blessed with God in Heaven, and it is so
called, because it is not in conflict and combat as we be, but has
triumphed and overcome temptation, the Devil, sin and lusts being now
blessed in Heaven with God himself: the millitant we showed was so called,
because of that continual warfare we are in, with the flesh, the world and
the Devil, until thereby we are brought home into the triumphant.

Now for the particular there be diverse parts of the Church: Particular parts
of the Church.
as the Ocean Sea is all one in it self, yet by the reason there be many
arms and creekes of it which runs by diverse countries: therefore it is
called by the name of the countries and kingdoms it runs by, Simile.
as the English Sea and the French Sea, and the Spanish Sea; so although the
Church of God be one in her own receipt, yet by reason that it spreads it
self into diverse Countries and Kingdoms, it is called by the name of the
Country or kingdom, it is near as the English Church, and the French Church,
and the Dutch Church, so there are many parts thereof, all which make but one
Church. Object.
There was a Popish convert that made an objection against this: says he, the
Church of God is one, and the reformed Churches are many: therefore the
reformed Churches are not the Church of God; as Cantic. 6. 8. But my Dove is
all alone, she is the only daughter of her mother. To this I answer in this
cavil, Sol.
there is first ignorance of the Scripture: secondly, ignorance of learning.

First, 1
it does show, he is ignorant of the Scripture, for although the Church of God
is but one in it self, yet there be diverse parts of it, which are called
Churches, as in this place which is my Text: The seeven golden candlestickes,
are the seven Churches. So Gal. 1. 21. And after that, I went into the coasts
of Asyria and Cilicia, for I was known by face unto the Churches of Judea; So
1 Cor. 14. 35. for God is not the Author of confusion, but of peace, as we see
in all the Churches of the Saints: so though the Church of God, be but one in
it self, yet there are diverse parts of it.

Secondly, 2
this shows ignorance in learning, the Church of God is but one; How the
Church is one.
but how is it but one? It is one as a great line is one composed of a number
of small lines; so says Cyprian, conceive the Church of God to be one, as a
great line is one, yet composed of a number of small lines, and as a tree is
one, Simile.
which yet consists of many branches; and as from one fountain comes many
Rivers; and as Exodus 25. 37. God said to Moses, and thou shall make the seven
lamps thereof, and the lamps thereof shall thou put thereon to give light:
Simile.
Here were many lights, yet all these made but one light which was composed of
many: So the Church is but one. Thus much of the doctrine, now for use.

Seeing the militant Church of God consists of diverse parts, Use 1.
though it be one in it self, therefore we should pray for the peace of it,
and wish well to the members thereof, and be ready to releeve them if they
stand in need; for there is but one Faith, and one Head that quickneth all:
therefore as one member is ready to help another, so we should be ready to
minister to the necessities of other Churches; as Acts 11. 28. there was a
famine foretold by Agabus that should be all the world over, which came to pass
in Claudius Caesar's time; then the Disciples every man according to his ability
purposed to send succor to the brethren which dwelt in Judea; so it is a
laudible part of this Church of England to send relief to other Churches, and
be ready to minister to their necessities. It is a good meditation that David
has 2 Samuel 7. Behold, I dwell in a house of Cedar, but the Ark of God
remains within these Curtains; So it is good for a Christian to think I
dwell in a house of Cedar; I dwell in a fair house, I stand in need of
nothing, I have meat and drink, and a number of other comforts, but the Ark of God remains amongst the Curtains; there be many of the people of God that
want relief and outward comforts; therefore I will releeve them according as I
am able.

The next point is, 3
that the Church of God is in diverse estates and conditions here in this World:
The diverse states of the Church.
sometimes a gathering, sometimes a gathered and a constituted Church: For the
Church is like a house that is not a house, by and by as soon as a man
begins to build, Simile.
and has got stones and timber, but the stones must first be hewed, the timber
squared, and then set together; so men must be gathered by the voice of the
Gospel; hewed, squared and made fit for the Church of God. Christ did gather
the Church of the Jews, but he left the constitution of it to his Apostles; as
Esaias 2. 5. it is said, The Law shall go forth of Sion, and the Word of God
from Jerusalem; so the Church of God began at Jerusalem, there he laid the
beginning of the Church. Now the means by which Christ gathers it, is the
preaching of the Gospel, there is no man of his own accord will gather
himself into the Church: Beasts and Birds will gather into their nests and
holes, but Men will not gather into the Church, it must be a special hand of
God that must draw them: As it is said, Ephesians. 4. 11. He therefore gave some to
be Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, for the gathering together of the Saints, and for the work of the
ministry, and for the edification of the Body of Chaist, until we all meet,
etc. So also Matthew. 23. says Christ, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the
Prophets and stonest them that were sent unto thee, how often would I have
gathered thy Children together, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wing,
and ye would not? So then the means by the which Christ gathers and draws
men into the Church, is by the preaching of the Gospel? Therefore consider
with thy self, where the preaching of the Gospel is, there Christ has a
people that he means to draw into the Church to save them; do not hang off
therefore from the Lord, but be gathered and brought home: Seeing Christ comes
in the preaching of the Gospel, to draw thee to faith and to repentance, and
to an estate of grace, do not live in thy sins and uncleanness, but be
gathered and brought home to God. If a thousand men should lie in a Dungeon,
Simile.
and should lie in such a manner, as not one of them could long continue
therein; if one should come and give them a key to come forth, O what flocking
and thronging would there be about the Door to get out: so this is our ca^e,
we are all naturally in the Dungeon of the Devil (as it were) so that there
is not one of us, but must die if we remain therein, and not the death of the
body only, but also of the soul: now it has pleased God to send us the golden
key of the Gospel to open this Dungeon door, therefore how should we labor
to get out, to be gathered and brought home to God? Again, as the Church of
God is sometimes a gathering, so sometimes it is dispersed and scattered; as
Acts 8. 4. when Paul made havocke of the Church of God, entered into every
house, and drew out both men and women, and put them in prison; it is said,
Therefore, they were scattered abroad, and went to and fr^ preaching the
Gospel. So we read, Heb. 12. 37. They were stoned, they were howed asunder,
they were tempted, they were slain with the sword, they wandered up and down
in Sheep and in Goats skins, being destitute and forsaken, whom the World
was not worthy of, they wandered in Wildernesses and Mountains, and D^nnes and
Caves of the Earth. And nevertheless though the Church sometimes be thus
scattered, yet it does remain a true Church still; Simile
As a Dog or a Woolfe coming into a flock of sheep, may scatter them this
way and that way, they are notwithstanding a flock still, so though the Church
of God be scattered in regard of persecution, yet it is the Church of God
still.

Sometimes in regard of Tyrants, and through the fury of the world it is hidden
from the eyes of men, that it cannot be discerned: So as it was in Elias time,
when A^ab and Iezabel had broken down the Altars, slain the Prophets, and
sought to kill Elias: also Revel. 12. 14. when the Serpent raged against the
woman and sought to devour her, it is said, There was given her two wings of a
great Eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness into her place, where
she is nourished for a time and times and half a time from the presence of
the Serpent: so it pleases God many times to hide the Church from the rage of
the world. Saint Jerome says, that the Arrians in his time were so overspread
and set with malice against the Church of God as it could hardly be seen; and
therefore we need not marvel and wonder that there be so few of the people
of God seen, for the Church may be hidden for a time because of Tyrants, and
the rage of the world they are feign to creep into Caves, Dens Vautes, and
secret places; neither is it any marvel, though writers have so little spoken
of them, and write of them as they have: For as so Esaias, 26. 20. the Lord
says, Come my people, enter thereinto thy Chambers and shut thy Doors after
thee, hide thy self for a little season until my indignation pass over: So
the Church of God is hidden sometimes from the rage of the world, as that it
cannot be descerned. The Uses are:

That seeing the Church of God is sometimes hidden, Use 1.
and sometimes scattered: Therefore as soon as God gives opportunity, we
should gather together again into one assembly and settled Church: Simile.
We see in a storm, if a Navy suffer some Shipwreck, or be scattered as
soon as the storm is over, they will gather together again; so when a storm
comes, that is, when persecution and trouble comes, and so scatters the Church,
as soon as it is over, that God gives opportunity, he should gather together
again.

Secondly, seeing the Church of God is sometimes a scattered Church, Use 2.
and sometimes hidden; therefore although we be scattered in our bodies, yet
we should be one in faith, the unity of the Spirit, and the acknowledging of
the Son of God. Sometimes the Church of God is visible and constituted in the
way and order of Christ, as were these Churches we read of in this place, and
diverse others that be spoken of in the Scripture. This is a rich blessing, when
the people of God may meet and live in society together one with another, to
call upon God, to hear the Word, and to receive the Sacraments, for the
nourishing of faith and other graces of God in them; whereas the Lord keeps
open School with us, where we may learn his will and ways, and where we may
go to the Fountains of grace to refresh our selves, Therefore, it must be our
wisdom to hold communion with the Church of God, that we do not separate
from it for every light matter, for toys and trifles, David says, Psalm. 26.
8. O Lord, I have loved thy habitation and thine house, the place where thine
honor dwells; so also Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord,
that will I seek after, even that I may dwell in the House of God all the
days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Holy
Temple.

Now what is the reason that it is so great a blessing? David could not be
resolved hereof, in a number of perturbations, till he went into the house of
God: as Psalm. 73. 16, 17. he says, I thought to have found it out and it was
too painful for me, until I went into the Sanctuary of God, then
ununderstood I their end: For between a scattered Church, and a gathered
Church, this is the difference, that the one being scattered stands by their
own strength, and the other gathered stands by the mutual help one of
another: as Acts 27. when Paul was in the Ship in danger, and a number of
others with him, there were some that let down the Boat out of the Ship and
would have stolen away, but Paul tells them, Except ye abide in the ship ye
are all like to perish; so let us know that if we do not hold communion with
the Church we cannot be saved.

Here we are to observe two things: First, it is a mixed company.
First, that this visible Church is a mixed company wherein is good and bad;
and therefore it is compared to a field wherein is wheat and tares, and to a
floor wherein is chafe and corn, and to a flock wherein is sheep and
goats; and because of this mixture we are not to account the Church of God to
be no Church for a number of wicked men under the hope of ease and other
privileges do join with the Church in outward duties, but never partake of
the life of grace, Simile.
and are not true members no more than a wooden leg is a true member of the
body of a man; for though it may be a stay to the body, yet it does not
partake of the life that is in the head, therefore when the body is in safety
the wooden leg may be in the fire; so it shall be with all the wicked men
that join in outward duties with the Church, and do not partake of the life
of grace with them, they shall be cast into hellfire when the true members
shall go into heaven, therefore we must labor to be true members of the
Church, and to feel a derivation of the life of grace from Christ, or else
when the true members be saved, we go to perdition.

Secondly, Secondly, it may be more pure at one time than another.
a visible Church may be in a more pure estate at some times than it is at
other times; even as a man that has health and yet may catch a cold, and
diseases may breed upon him, and may be brought low; so a constituted Church
may lose the former beauty and good beginnings: Simile.
corruption of doctrine, may creep in, and yet the Church be a true Church
still: as were these seven Churches of Asia; wherein were many corruptions
crept, for the which they were reprooved; yea and the Church of Rome once was a
pure Church, but now it is a den of devils. Simile.
Chrysostom says, such a Church may be compared to spendthrifts, that when
they have spent their money and treasure have nothing to brag of but their
purses and chests: so the Church of Rome having lost all her purity, has
nothing to brag of but the name of a Church; it has lost the nature of the
Church, and retains only the name.

Now here may a question be moved, When we may not Separate lawfully from the
Church.
when a man should make separation from the Church? First, I answer, though
there be corruption in manners, yet we are not to separate from it; this is
plain by Scripture, we see the Children of Israel when they were in the
wilderness murmured against God and against Moses, 1
and committed many gross sins, yet Moses did not separate from them: so in
Christ's time there were many corruptions amongst the Jews, and yet Christ did
not separate from them; so 1 Samuel 1. We see that Elkanah and his wife went up
to the yearly sacrifices when the Priests were wicked men, for they lay with
the women that did assemble at the door of the Tabernacle, and yet they joined
with them in the holy things of God.

Secondly, 2
we are not to separate from the Church for some defects and wants: for as a
man may be a true Christian, a member of Christ, and yet have many wants and
defects; so a Church may be a true Church and yet have many wants and defects.

Thirdly, 3
we may not separate though there may be some corruption in Doctrine in the
worship and service of God; we see that there was corruption of doctrine in
Christ's time, for the Scribes and Pharisees had taught false doctrine, Matthew.
5. and yet Christ did not separate from them, or his Disciples, but he wills
them to hear them; so likewise in the book of Kings, the high places were not
then taken away, and yet they did not separate from them.

Now in two cases we may separate from them; first, When we may separate. Ans.
1. Affirm.
when the Doctrine is corrupted in the fundamental points; for there be some
points which are the foundation of Religion; and when they are corrupted the
whole building must needs be overturned; as an house may be an house though
they take away the doors and windows and some posts, Simile.
but if they take away the foundation, then the house cannot stand, it cease
to be an house; so though religion be corrupted in some points, yet it may be
so as the whole body may not be subverted, but if it be corrupted in the
foundation then it overturnes and will be destroyed, in this case we are to
separate from it.

Secondly, 2
we are to separate when the worship and service is corrupted in the substance;
as when a man cannot join with them with a good conscience; so when the
worship of God was brought to the high places, in that Jeroboam had set up
calves in Dan and Bethel to worship, then we see 2 Chronicles. 11. 14. the Priests
and Levites came to Judah and Jerusalem; in this case we are to separate; and
this is the reason why we separate from the Church of Rome, having both erred
in the foundation, and in the substance of Gods Worship.

SERMON LXII.
PSALM 87. 3. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God.
HAving declared what the Nature of the Church is, SERMON. LXII.
and what be the diverse parts and estates of it in this world; in the next
place we are to consider, what be the privileges and dignities of it; for
this assembly God has graced with special dignities above all assemblies,
therefore we should labor to be members of it rather than of any other. 4
Now the dignities and privileges may be considered in five heads: Five
privileges and dignities of the Church.


First, this that David speaks of here that he calls the Church the City of
God, The first dignity of the Church.
or as Paul terms it, 1 Timothy 3. 15. the house of God, because of all other
places it is the special place where God dwells by the presence of his
grace: it is true indeed that God is present with his power in hell, and this
world is full of the presence of God in goodness; as it is Psalm. 119. 64. The
earth is full of thy goodness, but his gracious presence of quickening grace is
to this assembly; therefore because God dwells in a more eminent manner in
this above all other assemblies, it is called the house of God and the City of
God. Now this City excels all other cities in four respects:

First, The City of excels others in four respects.
all other cities were builded by men, as Genesis 4. 17. it is said that Caine
built a city, and called it by the name of his Son Henoch: So also Genesis 10.
11. it is said that Nimrod out of that land sent forth Asher, and builded
Niniveh and the city Rehoboth: but this city is builded and framed by God
himself, Matthew. 16. Christ says to Peter, upon this rock will I build my
Church, etc. and Ierem. 31. 4. says God, again I will build thee, and thou
shall be builded, O virgin Israel: All other cities are builded by men, but
this city is builded by God, and has its high original from him: And
therefore we may infer because God is the builder thereof, he will preserve
and keep it; as Christ says, Matthew. 16. that the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it; so Zech. 12. 3. it is said, and in that day will I make
Jerusalem a burdensome stone; all that burden themselves with it shall be cut
in pieces though all the people of the earth were gathered together against it;
as Genesis 19. 13. the Sodomites did seek to break the door open upon Lot, but
the Lord stroke them with blindness that they groped and could not find the
door; so it has pleased God, to cover the Church though the enemies thereof
have sought to break in upon it, and to destroy it; yet the Lord has struck
them with blindness, that they could not find the means to do it. Therefore
this city has this dignity and roialtie above the rest, because other cities
are builded by men; but this is builded by God.

Secondly, 2
they that live in other cities live in socities especially to preserve and
mainetaine their bodies, This society is to preserve souls especially.
but in the Church of God in this city, they do not so much live therein to
mainetaine their bodies as their souls. Again, in other cities they live in
socitie to strengthen themselves against their enemies, to mainetaine their
lands and livings: but in this, which is the Church of God, they live together
not so much to maintain their bodies and their outward estate, but to
mainetaine the inward graces of Gods Spirit, and their interest unto heaven; as
Philip. 1. 27. says Paul, Only let your conversation be as it becomes the
Gospel of Christ, that whether I come and see you or else be absent; I may
bear of your matters that ye continue in one Spirit and in one mind,
fighting together in the faith of the Gospel: And 1 Pet. 3. 7. He exhorts
married couples to live together as heirs of the grace of life: Simile.
So in this city they live together especially to mainetaine faith and their
comfort in God and their hope of heaven; herein therefore in the second place
this city excels all other cities in the world.

Thirdly, 3
all the commodities of the country go to the city, if there be any thing
better than other it is carried thither all to mainetaine a temporal life: All
commodities go thither for spiritual life.
but in this city which is the Church of God, the Lord keeps public market
where a man may buy (without money) the graces of the Spirit: where he may
have faith, repentance and other graces needful, as Esai. 55. 1. Hoe, every
one that thersteth, come ye to the waters, and ye that have no silver come
buy and eat; come I say, and buy wine and milk without silver and money; so
Revel. 3. 18. I counsel you to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thee
may be made rich: So then here in this city the Lord keeps open market of
spiritual graces that a poor Christian may furnish himself with whatsoever
grace he stands in need of, and therefore it must be our wisdom so to
furnish our selves as that we be not to seek when we should use them.
Augustine says well, in the city thy house is furnished with all good things,
those that be rich amongst you have their houses furnished with a great deal
of plate and pillars of marble, and tapistrie and other fine ornaments; but
thou that art a Christian, away with these, they are but toys and trifles in
regard of spiritual graces, but the house of God is furnished with spiritual
graces, faith, repentance, pardon of sins, feeling of Gods favor, and all
holy and sanctified graces. In other cities there be markets for the body, but
in this city the Lord keeps open market, with spiritual graces to furnish
our souls: and therefore thirdly herein this city excels all other cities in
the world.

Fourthly, 4
in many other cities there be many other liberties and immunities, all these
immunities are but to free them from toil and tribute, Here is spiritual
freedom.
but the Church of God does not thus free men; for Christ himself paid
tribute, Matthew. 17. 27. and Paul exhorts us, Romans 13. 7. Give unto all men
therefore their dues, tribute to whom ye owe tribute, custom to whom custom.
The Church of God does not free men from taxes and tributes, due to earthly
powers and Potentates, but from the bondage of sin, from the accusations of
an evil conscience, from the Devil and from Hell. Thus John 8. 36. says
Christ, If the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed. And Gal. 4. 26.
says the Apostle, But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of
us all. A man may be a citizen of a great city and yet lie in bondage to
sin and the Devil; be a slave to his lusts, and be troubled with the
accusation of an evil conscience. But if a man be a citizen of this city,
he shall be free from sin, the Devil, Hell, the accusation of a bad
conscience, and from his wild lusts; therefore in the fourth place this city
excels all other cities in the world. The uses are.

First, Use 1.
seeing the city of God excels all the cities of the world; therefore we
should account it a mavelous blessing that it pleases God, to make us
citizens of this city, as Ruth 2. 12. Boaz said unto Ruth; the Lord recompense
thy work, Simile.
and a full reward be given unto thee of the God of Israel, under whose wings
thou art come to trust: So happy is the man over whom the Lord does spread the
wings of his love. We see Psalm. 84. David's affection, that he had rather be
a door keeper in the house of God, than to dwell in the Tents of wicked men;
he had rather be a mean man and a true member of the Church, than to be a
great wicked man: Therefore we may be sure that it is a greater blessing to
be a poor man and a member of the Church, than to be a great rich man in the
world, and no true member of the Church.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing the city of God excels all the cities of the world, therefore every
man must have care to hold communion with it; and take heed he do not suffer
the Devil to draw him away from it, because God dwells there by the presence
of his Spirit: Peter could say to Christ, Ioh. 6. 68. Master, to whom shall we
go? thou have the words of eternal life; here is fullness of joy, here is
comfort to be had; and therefore howsoever others start out, let us hold to it.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing the city of God excels all other cities, therefore it must be our
care to live like such citizens: Has God made thee a citizen of such a city,
live then happy man, like such a citizen, conform thy self to the laws of
it, and walk worthy of this heavenly city. The author to the Hebrews makes
the same use of it, Hebr. 12. 22. But (says he) ye are come unto the Mount
Zion, and to the city of the living God, etc. And therefore see that ye
despise not him that speaks, for if they escaped not which refused him that
spoke on earth; much more shall not we escape if we turn away from him that
speaks from heaven. You be of the city of God, and therefore do not you
live like the vild men of the world, in your sins and corruptions, but live
like Saints and citizens of such a city, thus much of the first dignity, that
the Church is called the city of God, because there is the presence of God in
grace.

The second Dignity of the Church of God is, 2
that it is called the body of Christ, now there is a natural body of Christ,
Dignity of the Church.
which has parts and ligaments, as our bodies have hands and feet, etc. And
there is a mystical body of Christ, which are the company of true believers
which are made one with Christ, by faith through the communion of the Spirit,
which mystical body is more dear to Christ, than his natural body, for he
gave his natural body to die for his mystical body, and to redeem it, the
Church is this mystical body, as 1 Cor. 12. 27. now ye are the body of Christ
and members in particular; so Coloss. 1. 14. Now I rejoice in my sufferings,
and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies
sake which is the Church: So then the Church of God is the body of Christ,
whence arises diverse consequents.

First, 1
that he is the only head of the Church, and no other but he: as Ephesians. 1.
22. Consequent.
says the Apostle of Christ, And has made all things subject under his feet,
and has appointed him over all things to be the head of the Church: so Colos.
1. 18. he is the head of the body of the Church; for as the head rules the
body: That Christ is the head of the Church, only three proofs.
so Christ rules his mystical body. Now that Christ is the only head of the
Church, it may be seen in three things: First, because the grace of God is
most eminent in him, for as life is most eminent in the head, so the graces of
God are most eminent in him, 1
he excells all men and Angels, Simile.
therefore the Apostle says, Colos. 1. 19. that it pleased the Father that in
him all fullness should dwell.

Secondly, 2
because of the near conjunction that is between the head and the members, the
natural head may be parted with a blow from the body, but the Devil and all
the damned cannot part Christ and his mystical body.

Thirdly, 3
in regard of ministration: for as the head does communicate life and motion
unto the body, so Christ does the life of grace and the Spirit; So it is a
Royalty only belonging to the head not to Archangell nor Angel, therefore
away with the Pope.

The second consequent is, 2
that seeing Christ is head of the Church therefore as the head communicates
life and motion into the body, Consequent.
so from Christ flows spiritual life and grace into the Church; there is
never a true member but Christ communicates life and grace unto him, therefore
every true Christian must feel a derivation of grace and spiritual life in
him; every one that would have true comfort must feel this, and to say as
Saint Paul does, Galath. 2. 20. Thus I live, yet not I now, but Christ lives
in me, and in that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son
of God, who has loved me and given himself for me. Simile.
We see if a man has any member that hangs dead and numbed, Simile.
so as no life flows from the head to it, he will rubb and chafe it to bring
heat and Spirits into it again; so when we see our selves hang by as dead
members, and that hardly any life of grace flows unto us, we should never be
at rest, but use all the means we can to hear the word, pray, repent of our
sins, get faith in Christ; never to be at quiet till we feel a derivation
of the graces of Christ unto us.

The third consequent is, 3
that seeing Christ is the head of the Church and the Church his body;
Consequent.
Therefore he will preserve all the members of it; There is never a little
toe, finger or a bone in the body of Christ, that shall perish, but he will
preserve them all: We see in nature that the head will labor to preserve the
rest of the members that they do not perish, much more will Christ preserve
his mystical body; Simile.
Hence therefore is our comfort that we stand not by our own power, but by the
power of Christ; and the life that we live in grace we have not by the power
of nature, but by Christ; therefore he will preserve us and keep us, as John
17. 12. says Christ of those that thou have given me have I lost none: We
are all dead by Adam, but we are made alive by Christ, so Revel. 2. 16. Christ
is called the root and the generation of David. It is a Metaphor taken from
herbs in a garden, Simile.
that although the stalk and the leaf die in the winter time, yet they are
preserved in the root, and when the spring time comes they will put forth
again; so though we die in our selves yet we are preserved in the root
which is Christ, although the stalk and the leaf die yet we are safe in the
root. The use is.

Seeing that the Church is the body of Christ, Use
therefore all injuries and wrongs that are done unto the Church, Christ takes
as if they were done to himself: not only the injuries and wrongs that the
world puts on them, but also the disgraces and shames that Christians bring
upon themselves; therefore thou that art a Christian, consider with thy self
thou art a member of Christ, look what disgrace thou bring on thy self,
thou bring on Christ; as 1 Cor. 6. 15. says S. Paul, Know ye not that your
bodies are the members of Christ, shall I then take the members of Christ, and
make them the members of an harlot? God forbid: or shall we abuse them to
drunkenness? look what disgrace we cast on our selves, we bring on Christ,
because we be Christ's Members. Therefore, Chrysostom says well, O man by thy
sin thou do not disgrace thy own self, but another; and the shame does
not rest on thy own body, but it rests on another man's, that is, on the body
of thy Lord and Master Jesus Christ. So Augustine says, if thou have no care
of thine own self, yet have care of Christ; and if thou care not for defiling
of thine own body and disgracing of it, yet take heed of defiling and
disgracing of the body of Christ; rest not on thy self, but on Christ:
therefore how careful should we be, that we do not defile our bodies.

SERMON LXIII.
EPHESIANS 5. 25. Husbands love your Wives, as Christ loved the Church and gave
himself for it.
THere be five things wherein the dignity of the Church consists:

1. It is called the City of God, or the House of of God, because there is a
special presence of Gods Spirit. 2. It is called the Body of Christ. 3. The
Spouse of Christ, or the Bride. 4. It is the Pillar and ground of Truth. 5. It
is like unto Noah, his Arc, that there is no salvation without it.
Two of these we have entreated of already, 3
and now are come to speak of the third, Dignity of the Church.
which is this; That the Church is the Spouse, and the Bride of Christ, because
it has pleased Christ to bestow himself on the Church to marry and to adjoine
himself to it in the most nearest bond that may be; Man and Wife are not
nearer tied one to another by the bond of marriage, than Christ has tied and
bound himself to her by the bond of the Spirit: therefore the Church may well
be termed the Spouse and the bride of Christ: as Cantic. 5. 1. I am come into
my garden my Sister, my Spouse, so John 3. 29. He that has the bride is a
bridegroom, but the friend of the bridegome which stands and hears him
rejoices, because of the bridegroomes voice: So Revel. 21. 9. says he, Come I
will show thee the Bride, the Lambs wife. What a great comfort is this, that
such silly people as we be, should be advanced to this honor: as 1 Samuel, 25.
41. when David sent to Abigall to take her to wife, Simile.
says she, Let thy handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of thy servants of
my Lord: so we may say, what Lord, will thou make me thy Spouse, and they
Bride, it is honor and glory enough for me to be a poor servant to wash the
feet of the meanest of thy servants. Now as many lines come from one Center,
so there may be many points deducted out of this point.

First, 1
seeing the Church is the Spouse and the Bride of Christ, therefore, He loves
the Church: He loves the Church. Three ways.
the love between man and wife is great; but the greatest love is between
Christ and his Church. as it is, Genesis 2. 24. Therefore shall a man leave father
and mother, and cleave to his wife; the greatest bond in nature is between
them, SERMON. XLIII.
and the greatest bond in grace is between Christ and the Church. It is said,
Esaias, 43. 4. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable,
and I have loved thee; therefore will I give Man for thee, and People for thy
sake. So Revel. 3. 9. I will make them that they shall come and worship before
thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee. In my Text we see Christ has
not only loved the Church, but has made declaration of his love: we read
Milac. 1. 2. that the Lord says to the people, I have loved you; and the
people say to God, Wherein have thou loved us? But thanks be to God, we need
not say so, for Christ has not only loved us, but he has made declaration of
his Love, that we may feel it and see it; If Christ should have loved us, and
we should not have known it, it had been a great matter* But the comfort is
the greater, that he makes declaration of his Love to us. Now in three things
Christ makes declaration of his Love to the Church:

First, 1
in that Christ has spared no pains nor labor, nay has given his own life
and blood to redeem it; Sign of Love.
greater love than this could no man show, than to give his life for his
friend; But Christ sets out his love toward us, seeing whilst we were yet
sinners, He died for us: as Saint Paul says, Romans 5. 8. It was love, and a
great love too, that made Iaakob serve seven years for a wife in Syria, Simile.
which he thought nothing: much more it was love, and great love in Christ,
that he would be contented to be borne in a Stable, to be laid in a Manger,
to sweat blood and water in the garden, to die that accursed death of the
cross, and to be laid in the ground for us, Simile.
all which Christ accounts as nothing; so we may be saved and brought home to
God. Esaias, 53. 11. it is said, He shall see the travel of his soul, and shall
be satisfied, so we may be saved and brought home to God, this will satisfy
Christ, he will think all his pains as nothing.

Secondly, 2
Christ has made declaration of his Love, in that he does wash away our sins
from day to day in his blood: Sign of Love.
for whereas nothing in this world can wash away our sins, but his blood, it
has pleased him to dippe a handkerchiefe as it were in his blood, to wipe away
our sins; this is another evidence that he loves us: as Revel. 1. 5. it is
said, that he has loved us, and washed away our sins in his blood: therefore
whosoever does not feel his soul and conscience to be cleansed, and the blood
of Christ to eat out the venom of his sin, Christ has not declared his
love unto him as yet, in any comfortable manner.

Thirdly, 3
Christ declares his love to the Church, in that he sends love tokens unto
her, Declaration of Love.
which are the gifts and graces of his Spirit. A loving husband, if he be in
a far Country, will send love tokens to his wife: Simile.
there is never a messenger that comes, but he will send some Jewel or piece
of gold; so Christ does to his Church send love tokens from day to day: as
Ephesians. 4. 8. it is said, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men; so when he came at the highest top of glory,
he did not forget his poor Church, but sent gifts to it; as Acts 2. 35. it is
said, Since then that he by the right hand of God has been exalted, and has
received of his Father the Holy Ghost, he has showed forth this which you now
see and hear. This is a plain evidence that his heart is upon us, and that he
does not only love us, but makes declaration of his love, that we may see and
feel it from day to day: Hence we may infer, though Christians be despised
in the eyes of the world and not regarded, yet they be dear in the eyes of
Christ, he regards and loves them. Simile.
We see a good wife if her husband love her, she cares not who hates her; so
her husband be pleased, she cares not who is displeased: so it should be
with a Christian, if Christ love him he should not care though the world hate
him; so Christ be pleased, he need not care who be displeased with him.

Secondly, 2
seeing the Church is the Spouse and Body of Christ, therefore he will richly
indue the Church. Deduction.
We see when a man marries with a woman, the marriage deeds be made, he gives
her an interest in his lands, Simile.
and indowes her with his goods: so Christ does indue the Church with his
righteousness, holiness, and with his merits: Thus Phil. ^. 9. Paul desires
that he might be found in Christ, that is, not having his own righteousness
which is of the law, but that which is through faith in Christ: So also 1 Cor.
1. 30. says the Apostle, But ye are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is
made unto us wisdom, righteousness sanctification and redemption; that
according as it is written, He that rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord:
this is another comfort to a Christian, that though he be poor in himself,
yet he shall be rich in Christ; If a poor Maid marry with a rich Husband,
though her father left her nothing nor never a friend, Simile.
yet she thinks her self well provided for; so though we be poor in our
selves, our father Adam having left us nothing but sin, yet if we^ can marry
with Christ, he will richly indow us with all his Graces.

Thirdly, 3
seeing the Church is the Spouse and the Bride of Christ, therefore he will
adorn it with all his graces: Deduction.
It is said Esai. 61. 10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, and my soul
shall be joyful in my God, for he has clothed me with the garments of
salvation, and covered me with the Robe of Righteousness, he has decked me
as a Bridegroom, and as a Bride tireth her self with her Jewels: And to the
same effect we read Revel. 19. 8. unto her was granted that she should be
arrayed with pure fine linen and shining, for the fine linen is the
Righteousness of Saints; so then the Lord will not leave the Church naked, but
will beautify and adorn it with his graces; therefore we must labor to
feel this and see it; for if our conscience shall tell us that we are naked
not having one grace of his Spirit, then we do not belong to him, for without
this golden garment of Christ's righteousness we shall not be set at the
right hand of Christ, as it is Psalm. 45. 9. but as long as we be naked and
have not this golden garment on; we do not belong to Christ, for if we did,
he would adorn and beautify us with all his graces in some measure.

Fourthly, 4
seeing the Church is the body and spouse of Christ, therefore he will
discharge the Churches duties: Deduction.
A woman that is in debt when she is married to a man all her debts are devolved
unto her Husband, Simile.
she shall not answer the debt, but her husband because she is under his
covert; so, the Church shall not answer for her debts, but Christ shall, as 1
Pet. 2. 24. it is said. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on
the tree: and Rom 8. 3. (says the Apostle) for that which was unpossible to
the law in as much as it was weak, because of the flesh, God sending his own
Son in the similitude of sinful flesh and for sin, condemned sin in
the flesh; Therefore seeing Christ has discharged our debt and took it upon
him, it is a comfort to the Church, that they shall not answer for it: Hence
we may learn that when the Devil shall impleade us for our sins and debts,
we must not deny the debt, and say it is not so* but answer him: we be not
the parties that are loiable to the Law: but he must go to our he band
Christ, he has taken our debt upon him, and will answer whatsoever can be
required of us. To make this plain, as we read 2 King 4. there was a poor
Widow that was impleaded for her debt, who comes to the Prophet and tells him of
it. He asks her what she had left, she replies that she had nothing left,
Simile.
but a little cruse and a little oil in it; where upon the Prophet bids her
go and borrow vessels of her neighbors, then shut the doors to her self;
and power into those vessels and fill them: which she did, and so paid her
creditours and lived of the rest. This is the Churches case, the Devil
impleade; her for debt and the Church has nothing left but as it were a little
Pitcher, the body of Christ, and yet out of this there has run out such a
deal of oil as that it has sufficiently discharged all the debt of the
Church: and this is another comfort to her, that he will discharge all her
debts.

Fifthly, 5
seeing the Church is the body and the spouse of Christ that one day we shall
be brought home unto him to live with him for ever; Deduction.
as Psalm. 45. 14* it is said, she shall be brought to the King in ^a^ment of
needle work; and in the next verse, With gladness and rejoicing shall they be
brought, they shall enter into the Kings Palace. Therefore this is a comfort to
the Church, that although she cannot see him because she lives here on earth,
and Christ in Heaven, yet there will be a time when she shall live for ever
with him in glory and happiness: It was Christ's request, John 17. 24. Father,
I will that those which thou have given me, be with me even where I am, that
they may behold my glory, which thou have given me; it was one of Christ last
suits to his father, that we should be brought home unto him. This is another
comfort to the Church, that one day they shall enjoy Christ and live with him
for ever in glory, howsoever they may have a great deal of trouble and
affliction here; as Revel. 19. 6, 7. there was a great voice (like a clap of
Thunder) saying, Halleluiah, for our Lord God Almighty has reigned, let us be
glad and rejoice and give glory to him for the marriage of the Lamb is come;
and his Wife has made her self ready. All hearts should be filled with joy
for this, and all souls should be replenished with gl^dnesse for that one day
the marriage shall be solemnized when we shall be brought home unto him to
live with him for ever.

Lastly, 6
seeing the Church is the Bride and the Spouse of Christ therefore he will not
be ashamed of us; Deduction.
no good man will be ashamed of his wife (though she be but mean) in any
place, nor before any company, no more will Christ be ashamed of us, Simile.
but will confess us before God, though we be but mean: as Heb. 2. 11. For
both he that sanctifies, and they which are sanctified are all of one;
wherefore he is not ashamed to call them brethren: saying, I will declare thy
Name unto my brethren, in the midst of the Church will I sing praises unto
thee: And again, behold here am I, and the children that thou have given me:
so Luke 12. 8. Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of
Man confess before God and his Angels. As Joseph confessed his father and
brethren before Pharaoh, and was not afraid of them; so will Christ one day
acknowledge his Brethren the Elect of God: this is another comfort, that Christ
will not be ashamed of us howsoever we are not respected and regarded here,
yet one day we shall be highly promoted: Christ will say to us, Come ye blessed
of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you, before the beginning of
the World. Therefore, beloved brethren, sequester your thoughts from things
present, and think on the things to come; think upon this joyful meeting of
Christ and all the holy people of God; consider how great will our comfort be
at that time: therefore love Jesus Christ, be careful to pass your time here
in holiness and fear, labor to repent of your sins, and to get faith in
Christ, that ye may find favor with God at that time.

Now there is another thing that I would commend unto you in regard of the
time: That seeing Christ is such a comfortable Husband to us, Simile.
let us take heed we do not displease him: we see a good wife will be loath to
displease her husband at any time, if she has given him any occasion of
offense, she will not be at rest till she be reconciled, and her husband
pacified and pleased with her: so seeing it is manifest at this present, by
evident tokens, that our loving Husband is displeased by taking away the
comforts of the Earth; for what a thing is it, that we should live on the
Earth, and yet not see the fruits of it comfortably, but be strangers from it,
in regard of the multitude of our sins? therefore I say, seeing we see him
displeased with us, let us not be at rest till we be reconciled unto him, let
us repent us of our sins, pray unto him and never give over till he be
pacified and pleased with us.

SERMON LXIV.
1 TIMOTHY 3. 15. That thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self
in the House of God, which is the Church of the Living God, the Pillar and
ground of the Truth.
THe greater the Church of God is, the more is our comfort to be members of it;
therefore I hope it will not be tedious to any to speak further of the
dignities and privileges of the Church: Simile.
for if one have a stately House, or a fruitful Field, he will not be weary
to hear one tell him of the goodly Situation and Commodities that does belong
unto it; so because the glory of the Church is our glory; therefore it shall
not be amiss, nor I hope tedious to any, that I insist to speak of the
dignities of the Church of God.

Fourthly, 4
the dignity of the Church is conspicuous in that it is called the Pillar and
ground of Truth: Dignity of the Church.
A metaphor taken from building, that as a Pillar sustaines and upholds the
house from falling, so the Church of God is a Pillar to uphold the Scripture
and the Gospel, which otherwise the profane multitude of the World would let
fall; and it cannot stand with another Society, but only with the Church of
God; because there God is known; so we see Psalm. 76. It is said, God is known
is Judah, his Name is great in Israel, For in Salem is his Tabernacle, and his
dwelling in Zion: So also, Psalm. 147. 19. He shows his Word unto Iaakob, His
Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any Nation,
neither have they known his Judgments: so then it is an honor peculiar
belonging to the Church of God, to uphold and maintain the doctrine of saving
truth, which otherwise would be extinguished by the profane multitude of the
World: Now two ways the Church is the Ground and Pillar of Truth:

1. Because it does preserve and keep the Tables of Truth. Church ground and
Pillar of Truth, two ways.
2. Because it does deliver the doctrine of Truth to all her Children by the
means of Pastors and Teachers; which the Apostle delivers unto us, Ephesians. 4.
11. where he says, When he ascended up on high, be led captivity captive,
he gave gifts unto Men, etc. He therefore gave some to be Apostles, some
Evangelists, some Prophets, some Pastors and Teachers, for the gathering
together of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry and for the edification
of the Body of Christ; that henceforth we be not Children tossed to and fro,
and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men and
cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive.
For the first, it does keep and preserve the Tables of Truth, in three
respects:

1. It keeps the letters of the Scripture. 2. The true Canon of the Scripture,
that is, the true number of the Canonical Books. 3. The Authority of the
Scriptures.
First, 1
It keeps the letters of the Scriptures, for the Scripture is the chiefest
rich Jewel and Treasure that Christ has left his people, The Letter of the
Scripture.
therefore it has been the care of the Church the Spouse, to preserve and
keep the Scripture, as the chiefest Jewel and Treasure left of her husband
Christ: we see in experience, if a man leave a Jewel or some other treasure
with his wife when he goes into a far country she will be careful to keep
it till he come home again, Simile.
she will lock it up or lay it in some Box or Chest; so because the
Scripture is a rich Jewel left unto the Church by her Husband Christ,
therefore, there can be no doubt but the Church was careful at all times to
preserve and keep it? to this purpose Exodus 25. 16. The Lord commanded Moses
to make an Arc of Shittim wood to put the Tables of the Covenant in: (that is,
the written Law of God) and why should they put it into an Arc, or Chest of
Cedar? But because it is the durablest wood, which will not rot, to teach us
that the Lord would have the Scriptures preserved; therefore S. Paul says Romans
3. 4. That the Lord has of trust committed the Oracles of Truth unto the
Jews, which were the Church of God: so that it is the duty of the Church to
preserve and keep them: None has done it but the Church, which has not
failed in any point: If a tender mother should have a spring that she and her
Children live by to drink of, Simile.
how careful would she be to keep it from all annoyances: so because the
Scripture is as a Spring that the Church lives by, and drinks of, she and her
children: Therefore there can be no question but that the Church has been
careful to keep it from all annoyances. It has been an opinion of the
Papists, that the Scripture was corrupted by the Jews in the Original Text:
but if this opinion were true, it were enough to bring in Atheism and all
prophanenes, for no body can deny, but if that the letters of the Scripture
were corrupted in the Original, then that which is translated cannot be right.
Here then to confute this opinion of the Papists which is enough to bring in
flat Atheism and superstition, I will show you diverse arguments and reasons to
prove that the Scripture has not been corrupted, which because it is a point
of learning, and a high one; therefore as God when he gave the Law to the
People came down upon the Mount as low as might be, Simile.
to deliver it to them: so I will come down as low as I can to make it plain
to your Capacities who hear me.

The first, Is drawn by comparison from a King; There is no King that would
suffer his Statute laws to be corrupted in the fundimentall Points, and his
public Records if he could help it; but God is our King, 1
and the Scripture is the Statute Law of God and his public Records whereby he
makes his Will known to Men, Reason, prooving the letter of ^he Scripture has
been kept uncorrupted.
and governes them, and therefore can we think that the Lord will suffer any
to corrupt it, seeing he has Power in his hand to help it, unless we think
that God has less care, than an earthly king would have of his laws.
Josephus reports, and also Eusebius of a certain Poet that took upon him to
apply a Holy sentence to a wrong end, who was stricken with blindness till he
made confession of his fault: And of another that took a piece of Scripture to
make a jest of it, who was taken with a phreneticall madness, and hardly ever
recovered again.

Now therefore if God do punish those that do profane the Scripture, then how
much more will he punish them that do corrupt it, seeing God has set this
seal to it. This God makes good, Revel. 22. 18. For I testify unto every man
that hears the words of the prophecy of this book, If any Man shall add to
these things, God shall add to him the plagues that are written in this book,
and if any Man shall take away from the words of the book of this Prophecy,
God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life: therefore, who durst
meddle to corrupt it?

The second reason is drawn from the Promise of Christ in Matthew. 5. 18. Reason
2.
For verily I say unto you till Heaven and Earth perish, one jot or one title
of the Law shall not escape till all things be fulfilled; now by the law, he
means the written Law of God: here we have the promise of Christ, that as long
as Heaven and Earth indures, there is not one jot or title of the Law that
shall be corrupted.

The third is taken from the continual practice of the Prophets, Reason 3.
Apostles, and of Christ himself: that still send the People of God to the
Scriptures as the most sincere Judges, as Esaias 8. 20. To the Law and to the
Testimonies, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is
no light in them: so 2 Pet. 1. 19. We have also a most sure word of the
Prophets, to the which ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that
shines in a dark place, etc. and Christ, John 5. 39. says, Search the
Scriptures, for in them you think to have Eternal Life; they are they which
testify of me: So we see that Christ, the Prophets and Apostles call us to
the Scriptures, as to the sincerest Judge. Now if the scriptures had been
corrupted and depraved, they would not have sent us to them; for there is no
man that will send his servant to sea, Simile
but he will tell him the danger of it, and of the Shelves, Rocks and Sands,
and where they be, that so he may avoyde them: so if the Scriptures had been
corrupted, Christ, the Prophets and the Apostles would not have sent us to the
Scriptures, but would have told us where the Rocks and Shelves, and where the
dangers had been, nay if Christ had known the Scriptures had been corrupted,
he would have made it known; or if he had seen that in time to come they
would have been: therefore this practice of Christ, the Prophets and Apostles,
in sending them to the Scriptures, shows that they were not corrupted nor
depraved.

The fourth reason, is drawn from the circumstance of time; which both Saint
Jerome and Bellarmine do approve of, Reason 4.
that if the Scriptures were corrupted by the Jews, 1
it was either before Christ's time, or soon after his time, Argument.
if it had been corrupted before his time, as he did reproove other
corruptions, he would have reprooved this also, but he did not reproove this,
and therefore it was not corrupted before his time; again, it was not after
his time, for as Augustine says, the Jewish Church endured but a while after
his time, and then it did diffuse it self into all the world; then though the
Jews might have corrupted the books that were in their own hands, yet they
could not corrupt all the books that were in so many sundry hands scattered
all the world over; and therefore it was impossible for the Jews to corrupt
any Philo and Josephus report that the Jews lived two thousand years under
the Law, when there was not one word corrupted; nay, they say that the the
Jews would suffer a hundred deaths before they would have corrupted any one
word. So then this reason stands good, that it was not corrupted before Christ's
time nor after his time, and therefore it is not corrupted in the Original.

The fifth reason is taken from the Judgment of the learned: Reason 5.
says Saint Jerome, if we make any doubt of any question in our Bibles, we
straight run to be resolved of it in the Original tongue; if it be in the
new Testament we go to the Greek, if it be in the Old Testament we go to the
Hebrew; likewise Saint Augustine says; if any man make any doubt or question
of this or that in the Scripture, by and by we go to the Hebrew Bible to
clear our controversy, as to the Canon law. Hence we conclude by these
reasons that the Church has preserved the letter of the Scripture without any
corruption. Whereof we should make that use that Paul teaches, Use
2 Cor 6. 1. We as workers together with him, beseech you also that you
receive not the grace of God in vain: so then it is a grace and a great grace,
that the Lord has preserved the Scripture without any corruption in the Hebrew
text: therefore I beseech you that you would not receive this grace of God in
vain, but labor to grow in knowledge and to nourish thy faith, to increase
the graces of his Spirit to the weakening of thy sins and corruptions.

Now here may a question be made, Quest.
indeed the Lord has preserved the Scripture in the Original tongue without
any corruption, but in the Latin and other tongues they have been corrupted,
and therefore what is this to us, we cannot understand Hebrew? Again, there
was a Popish priests who said, that we have no faith, because we have not the
Word of God, for faith is grounded on the Word of God; but the Word of God
(says he) was written in Hebrew and in Greek, which translated into an other
tongue, is not the Word of God; how then shall we in this case know it to be
the Word of God?

To this I answer, Sol.
that the Lord does by us, as Joseph did by his brethren, Genesis Simile.
42. 12. first, he spoke unto them by an interpreter and afterward by his
own mouth; so the Lord does speak unto us by the mouth of his servants, and
afterward by his own: as we know the king makes a proclamation of his will to
his subjects in English, which when it comes into Wales where they cannot
understand it, by one of the kings subjects is taken and translated into Welsh,
Simile.
wherein it differs not a hair from the other; so it pleased God to
proclaim his will to his servants in the Hebrew and the Greek tongue at
first, after which they were translated into all tongues by his servants; so
that there is not a hair difference between them in substance.

I, but how shall we know they be rightly translated? Hereto I answer first,
out of Chrysostom, Quest.
that we need not doubt but whatsoever is needful to salvation is set down
plainly and clearly in the Scriptures; and Augustine adds, Ans. The first
proof of true Translation.
that all those places in the Scriptures which speak of Faith and good manners
be plain and easy; therefore in plain and easy places the interpreters
could not be deceived.

Secondly, The second proof of true Translation.
a man may know it is the Word of God in our tongue by the same means they may
know it in Hebrew; and that is, by the purity, sincerity, majesty, and the
power thereof to work on the souls and consciences of men. Therefore when a
Christian shall feel and see the power of it work on men's consciences and
souls with the same purity and majesty, they may safely say, It is God speaks
and not man; It is the voice of my welbeloved that speaks, as it is in the
Canticles: if one put precious water into a glass, Simile.
and after put it into an earthen vessel, by the taste and virtue of it he may
know it to be the same water that it was in the glass; so we may know the Word
of God which is in Hebrew and Greek, to be the same in our tongue by the
virtue, purity, sincerity and power thereof; therefore the Popish priests
opinion is but a trick of wit and scant that.

I, but there are some differences in the translations. I answer, first,
Object. Sol.
they differ not in sense, but in words and terms; for the Scripture contains
such high wisdom as no one man is able to express it, therefore the diverse
translators go as near as they can to express it, 1
some in one thing, and some in an other; and all to make known the wisdom
of God to us, so that it cannot be denied, but that the difference of
translations is a great help to expound the Scriptures.

Secondly, I answer, that where there is any difference it is not in the
substance or any material point, Sol.
but it is in genealogies and years, and where any do find these differences
they may be satisfied in it by the help of their pastors and teachers; to
instance a few: 2
Matthew. 1. 11. in the ordinary Bibles there is next unto Josias, Iakim: which
in the new translation is left out, now if any man would know which of these
are the better; let him look into the 17. verse. where he may see that all the
Generations from Abraham to David are fourteen, all between David and the
captivity fourteen, and from the captivity to Christ's time are fourteen;
now look into your ordinary Bibles where are fifteen generations between
David and the captivity, therefore the new translation is the better: so Exodus
3. 19. in the ordinary Bibles it is thus read, And I know that the king of
Egypt will not let you go but by strong hand; the new translation has it; And
the king of Egypt will not let you go, no not by a strong hand: now how may a
man know which is the better? I answer, he may know it although he have no
other help than his own; let him look into Exodus 6. 1. there the Lord says
to Moses, now shall thou see what I will do to Pharaoh, for by a strong hand
shall be let them go: so herein the ordinary Bibles are the better: from these
we infer, a wise Christian may help himself by the help of his minister,
in any doubt about the difference of texts of Scripture: and to shut up all in
a word it is plain and manifest by these premises that the true Church
throughout all ages has preserved the letter and text of the Scripture from
all annoiances, taint of corruption, or the least soil that may be. The use
hereof is:

First, Use 1.
seeing it has been the care of the Church in all times to preserve the
letter of Scriptures, therefore it must be every man's care to read it, be
acquainted with it, and to meditate therein, so to profit by it; as Ioh. 5. 39.
Christ counsels us; Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have
eternal life, they are they which testify of me: so 2 Timothy 3. 15. Timothy
was commended for that he had known the Scriptures of a Child, which were
able to make him wise unto salvation; in like manner we must know the
Scriptures and be acquainted with them to make us truly wise. Augustine says
well to this purpose that the two testaments are the two breasts of the Church
that every Christian man must suck, to draw spiritual nourishment from,
Simile.
that he may live eternally by it; and another learned man says, that the holy
Scripture is an Epistle sent from the Creator to the creature: if an earthly
king should send us a letter, what would we let it lie by us, would we not
bestow some time to read, meditate of it and be acquainted with it, to know
what were the kings will with us? so (says he) the holy Scripture is the
letter and Epistle of Almighty God; let us labor to be acquainted with it,
bestow some time to read it, and meditate therein; another learned man says,
Now the Paradise of God is in this world; the books of the Scriptures are the
trees of Life, whereof no man is forbidden to eat, therefore it must be our
care to hear the Scriptures read, and to read them our selves, meditate in
them, and tell the good things that we learn from thence one to another.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing it has been the care of the Church to preserve the Scripture, it must
be our care not only to read and to meditate in it, but also to believe it,
and to put it in practice: as Psalm. 124. David did: where he says, by the
words of thy lips I kept me from the paths of the cruel man; and again
Psalm. 119. 11. I have hid thy promise in my heart, that I might not sin
against thee: See we must learn by the Scriptures to put it in practice, to
sanctify us in our ways, to keep us from sinning against God, and to direct
us in all the things we take in hand; this fruit and benefit we must draw out
from it: says Christ to the Jews, I will not accuse you, but there is one
will accuse you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. Simile.
How shall Moses accuse them? not in his person, but by his Books and
Doctrine, for that they did not believe nor practice, but neglect the things
that were commended to them therein; so Moses shall accuse them, and draw such
a fearful bill against them, as they shall not be able to answer, so we
that be your Pastors and teachers we do not accuse you, but Moses, Paul and
Peter does accuse you, and will write such a fearful bill of indictment
against you as you shall not be able to answer: Therefore labor ye to
repent of your sins, to make conscience of your ways, to put in practice the
good things that have been taught you, that so there be not framed a fearful
bill of indictment against you, which ye shall not be able to answer:
especially remember it, at this time to make use of it, seeing ye see by
evident tokens that God is displeased with us, do not think that time will
wear it out, but search into your hearts and into your lives to see what is
amiss, repent of your sins, and turn to God that he may turn away this
fearful judgment, that is come upon this land: Oh my good brethren, let us
not pass away these things and make no account of them, but let us labor to
put them in practice, seeing we know them, lest there be such a fearful
bill of indictment framed against us, as we shall not be able to answer.

SERMON LXV.
1 TIMOTHY 3. 15. That thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self
in the House of God, which is the Church of the Living God, the Pillar and
ground of the Truth.
WE heard the last day that the Church has three ways preserved the tables
of truth: First, in preserving the Letter of the Scripture, (which I then
dispatched.) Secondly, in preserving the Canon of the Scripture, I mean, the
true number of Canonical Books. Thirdly, in preserving the Authority of the
Scriptures. We come now to the next Point which is, that the Church has
preserved the true Canon of the Scripture, What Canonical Scripture is.
that is, the true number of the Canonical Books without adding or
diminishing: Canonical Scripture is that which is given us of God is be a
rule of faith and good life, by the which ye may be sure we may please God:
The word Canon is a Greek word signifying a Rule, so the Scripture is a rule
to square out our actions by: Simile.
Those which work in curious buildings do not work by aim and guess, but by
rule; so in the spiritual building of a man's soul and conscience, in making a
spiritual house for God, we must not go by aim and guess, but by rule. We
must hold us to our rule, so says S. Paul, Gal. 6. 16. As many as walk
according to this rule, peace shall be upon them and mercy, and upon the
Israel of God: And Exodus 25. 40. says the Lord to Moses, Look therefore that
thou make all after the pattern that was showed thee in the mount: There the
Lord had given Moses a pattern. Such a charge as this comes to every Christian
concerning all his actions; see that thou do it according to the pattern
which the Lord has lest thee in the Scriptures, to be a rule of faith and
good life, and to build up thy soul and conscience in the assurance of thy
salvation and hope of an heavenly life: Therefore it has been the care of the
Church to preserve the true number of the Canonical Books entire: Paul tells
us Gal. 3. 15. Though it be but a man's Testament, when it is confirmed, yet no
man abrogates it, nor adds any thing thereto, therefore seeing the Scripture
is the best will and Testament of Jesus Christ, there is no man that should
add or subtract any thing from it. Now in the New Testament all is Canonical:
It was the wisdom of the first Christians not to suffer any thing to go hand
in hand with the word of God, lest the Lord should take up that complaint
against them, Ezekiel. 43. 8. Albeit they set up their thresholds by my
thresholds, and their posts by my posts, and the wall between me and them, etc.
In the new Testament all is Canonical, but in the old, there are nine Book^s
which are not Canonical, the two Books of Esdras, the Books of Tobit and
Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, the two Books of Macchabees, with
some fragments of Daniel and Hester; as for the second Book of Esdras, it is
very fabulous, as S. Jerome does affirm; And Bellarmine confesses, where he
says, S. Ambrose himself does four times allege it, and yet it is not
Canonical, because no council took it to be so, and it was not wrote in
Hebrew: In the sixth Chapter thereof there are two monsters spoken of that Sea
and Land could not hold Now this is a fabulous thing and a very dream,
therefore (says he) I wonder what came into his mind? so a certain Pope
says, for so much as it was found written in the Greek and not in the Hebrew,
which was the tongue that the Scripture was wrote in, we hold it to be
Apocrypha: Therefore now if any man shall demand, are there some Books
Canonical, and some Apocrypha? I answer, that is called Canonical, which was
written by the chosen Penmen of the Holy Ghost, and has sufficient authority
in it self to confirm our faith, and to persuade us that God is well pleased
in the performance of those things which are required in it; says Augustine,
if were find any hard place, we are not to blame it, and to say it is not
true; but we must say the fault is in the Printer, or in the interpreter, or
it is because I do not understand it.

Now the Apocrypha Books are such as were written by men, not so inspired
though they were learned men, and such as were endued with the Spirit of God,
yet a man is not bound to believe them any further than they have warrant from
the Canonical Scripture. S. Jerome says, though they were good men that wrote
them, yet they be not of weight sufficient to confirm any Point of Doctrine
no further than they have authority from the Scriptures: And Damascen says,
that they were good Books but yet they were not put into the Ark of God, and
kept as the Canonical Scripture was, now here is the difference between them,
the Canonical Scripture is the very word of God, etc. The Apocrypha though
there be good things in it, yet in it there is some taste of humane frailty.

Now if any man shall ask why did not the Church receive this as the
Canonical Scriptures? I answer, there is good cause why they did not receive
it; which has four grounds for it.

First, Why the Apocrypha was not equally received into the Church; four
grounds.
because the Jews which were the Church and people of God did not receive it:
S. Paul says, Romans 3. that to the Jews were committed in trust the Oracles of
God, but they did not receive these Books, therefore they were not the Oracles
of God. But how shall we know that they did not receive them as the Scripture.
I answer: First, because Josephus which was a Jew, tells us in his book
against Appianus, 1
that the Jews had two and twenty books which were written from God by Holy
men inspired by the Holy Ghost, The Jews received them not.
saying, that other books there be which be not of the like authority
because they were written since the succession of the Prophets. And S. Jerome
says, that as the Jews had two and twenty letters, so they had two and
twenty books that they admitted of; and of no other book besides into the
Canon of the Scripture: This is so clear that Bellarmine himself confesses
it.

The second ground is this, 2
they which did write the Apocrypha, were not the Penmen of the Scripture.
Apocrypha writers were not Penmen of the Scriptures.
We see in the speech Luke 16. 27. where Abraham is brought in saying to
Dives, they have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them, so Moses and the
Prophets were the Penmen of the Scripture: But the Apocrypha was not written by
the Prophets: 1
First, because they were not written in Hebrew; which was the tongue that they
wrote in; again, they would not speak and write in an unknown tongue to the
people, because they would not bring that curse upon them which is spoken of 1
Cor. 14. 21. In the Law it is written, with men of other tongues and other lips
will I speak to this people, and yet for all that will they not hear me,
says the Lord. 2
Secondly, because the Succession of the Prophets were ceased at that time when
these books were written (as Josephus says,) for they were written in the
time of the Macchabees: and David tells us, Psalm. 74. 9. (prophesying of the
destruction of the Church and true Religion which was in the time of the
Macchabees) we see not our signs, there is no more any Prophet, neither is
there among us any that knows how long. Therefore seeing it was not writ in
the tongue that the Prophets wrote in, but in Greek; and they were written
since the Prophets, therefore the Prophets were not the Penmen of them.

The third ground is, that they be not in the number of the witnesses that
Christ will stand to, 3
for these be Christ's witnesses, Luke 24. 27. where it is said, and he began
at Moses and all the Prophets, They be not of the witnesses Christ will stand
to.
and interpreted to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself:
so verse 24. and he said unto them, these are the words which I spoke unto you
whilst I was with you, that all things must be fulfilled which was written of
me in the Law of Moses and in the Prophets and in the Psalms. Augustine faith
well, that the Jews do not account of any books save of Moses, the Prophets,
and of the Psalms, to the which our Lord Jesus gave witness; and Chrysostom
says, that the Jews did divide the Scriptures into three parts, the Law, and
the Prophets, and the Psalms, they be the witnesses that Christ stands to.
But these Apocrypha Books are not within this number: therefore the Apocrypha
is not received equally as the Scriptures are of the Church.

The fourth is, 4
Because the Books themselves bewray that they be of man, and not of God: The
wants and imperfections of the Books bewray so much.
as S. Paul says, Romans 3. 4. Let God be true and every man a liar; but these
Books there is none of them but have some taste of humane f^ailty in it, as
Tobit 5. there an Angel is made to lie; but the elect Angels are pure and
Holy, and cannot lie. Now for the Book of Judith, that is a story devised for
the Credit of the Jews, for there was never such a King as is there spoken of,
amongst the Jews, nor such a high Priest, nor so long a time of tranquillity
and peace for so many years together; as is spoken of, Chap. 6. 7, 8. And for
Ecclesiasticus Chap. 24. 12. there the eternal wisdom is said to be a
creature: Therefore hereby it may appear, that although there be some good
things in them, yet they rast of the vessel of earth, whence they came, and
show that they came not from heaven as the Canonical did, therefore the Church
had good reason and ground not to receive these Books as the Scripture, and
also to preserve the true Canon of the Scripture without addition or
subtraction; and indeed it is well when the two Testaments may meet together
without parting, that their lips may kiss each other, to join Moses and
Christ, the Law and the Gospel together, seeing that the last words of the Old
Testament ends with a Curse; and the New begins with a blessing, this is the
generation of Jesus Christ the Son of David the Son of Abraham. The uses
are.

Seeing it has been the care of the Church to preserve the true rule and
Canon of the Scripture without addition or distraction, Use 1.
we should bless God and be thankful that he has not left us without a
rule in so many worldly distractions, where Kingdom is set against Kingdom,
one learned man against another, in such variety of opinions, yet he has not
left us without a guide to direct both our lives and consciences in the right
way, if we will obey it; as it is Esai. 8. 29. To the Law and to the
Testimonies, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is
no light in them; so John 5. 39. says Christ, search the Scriptures, for in
them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me;
to the same purpose also 2 Pet. 1. 19. (says he) We have also a most sure
word of the Prophets, to the which ye do well that ye take heed as unto a
light that shines in a dark place, etc. Therefore we see that God has given
us a rule to direct us by in the time of distraction and danger: If one should
have a long jorney to go, Simile.
and one should put into his hand a glass that would show him every step he
should take, that he might not step one step awry, how thankful would this
man be? such a glass is the Scripture, for we have a long journey to go
from earth to Heaven; wherefore the Lord has put this glass into our hands;
that is, he has given us the Scripture to show us every step which we should
take, that if we set but one foot awry we may see it. Therefore how thankful
should we be to God for it; Act. 17. 11. when Paul had preached the word
there being opposition amongst them, they got to the Bible and searched out the
truth of the matter whether it were so or no, whereupon it is said, many of
them believed. Simile.
So when the learned men and preachers have oppositions there being distraction
and diversities of opinions amongst them, the Lord has given us a rule; We
must to the Scriptures: Therefore thanks be to God, he has not left us to
err and wander, but has given us a direction to guide us: Augustine says
well, concerning this point, if there be any distraction or opposition about
this thing or that thing, let Christ be the Judge, for he speaks in the
Scripture; therefore this is an excellent blessing (which we are to be
thankful for) that God has given us a Rule to walk by.

The second use is, Use 2.
seeing God has given us a rule to walk by, therefore no man can excuse
himself and say, I would have done it if I had known it, or if some body had
told it me, or if I had a rule to go by: Now there is no man can excuse
himself and say he has not a Rule, for God has left him one in his word,
which makes all unexcusable, as John 15. 22. Christ speaks: Simile.
If I had not come and spoken to them, they should not have had sin, but now
their sin abides; so if God had not left us a rule and a direction to guide
our selves by in the Bible, we should have had no sin; but because God has
given us such a rule to walk by, therefore if we walk not according to it
we have no cloak for our sin.

Seeing God has left us a rule to walk by? Use 3.
It must be our wisdom to make use of this rule in our thoughts, speeches
and actions. We see a man is much the better that has a rule to work by,
Simile.
for he will stick it at his back, work by aim and not by guess; so Psalm.
119. 33. says David, Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I will
keep it to the end: As if he should say, let me but know thy will, and I am
contented to do it. If once we know Gods will, we must direct all our
speeches, and actions to be ruled by it: It is a great infamy to any man to
come into an order, and not to hold him to his order, Simile.
as to be a Soldier or a Scholar, but much more to be a Christian, and yet
not to humble ones self to the rules of Christianity, how just shall our
condemnation be; the Rule of Gods Word teaches a man to be temperate and not
to be overtaken with surfeting and drunkenness, to be merciful, to deal
conscionably in our ways, and not to mispend our time; to repent of our
sins, and therefore when men will not hold them to their rule, to live
temperatly, walk holily and to make conscience of their ways; to deal truly
and justly with men, to take heed they do not mispend their time, to repent
them of their sins, if they do not these things they are fallen from their
rule, and shamed in that they hold not to it. Augustine says, there be a
number of things that seem to be straight, but bring them to the rule, and
then we may see their obliquities; so there be a number of things that seem
to be straight and good, but lay them to the Rule, bring them to the
Scriptures, and to the Law of God, then we may see a number of obliquities in
them, and how short they come of the Rule; as 1 King. 17. when Elias applied
himself to the Child's dead body, his face to the Child's, and his hands to the
Child's hands; Simile.
then did appear the dissimilitude between them, and how short the Child came
of him: So when we shall compare our actions with the Law of God, then we
shall see the dissimilitude and disproportions between them; and when we see
how short we come of it, it must be our care to mend it, and to walk by rule.

SERMON LXVI.
1 TIMOTHY 3. 15. That thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self
in the House of God, which is the Church of the Living God, the Pillar and
ground of the Truth.
HOw the Church is called the ground and the Pillar of truth has been in part
declared already, for first, it has preserved the letter of the Scripture;
secondly, the Canon of the Scripture, that is, the number of the holy books;
thirdly, the authority of the Scripture, of which I am now to speak. I say not
that the Church gives authority to the Scripture, but I say it does preserve
the authority of the Scripture, for if the Church should give authority to the
Scripture then, the authority of the Church were greater than the authority of
the Scripture: the Papists say that the Scripture is not authentical but by
the authority of the Church; and another says, to speak absolutely the Church
is of more authority, because it gives authority to the Scripture: this is the
doctrine of the Papists, but the Scripture has not his authority from the
Church, but from God; so Saint Paul says, 2 Timothy 3. 16. For the whole
Scripture is given by inspiration from God, and is profitable to teach, to
improve, to correct, instruct, etc. so 2 Pet. 1. 25. for the prophecies came
not in the old time by the will of man, but holy men spoke as they were moved
by the Holy Ghost: therefore because the Scripture is given by inspiration from
God it has its authority from God: unless we think it cannot be the word of
God, unless men allow of it, so being favorable unto God; that unless God
please men they will give no authority to his word, therefore the Scripture
has sufficient authority from God without any testimony from men, because it
is the Word of God.

Now here comes a question which the Papists make; How shall we know the
Scripture, Quest. Sol.
but by the authority of the Church? I answer, because we may know it by
infallible arguments, and can prove it to be the Scripture. The testimony of
the Church in this regard is, to show and declare that it came from God, he is
the Author of it, it has the Authority from God, not from the Church: the
Church only declares and makes it known to her Children by infallible
testimonies, that it is given by inspiration from God. As a poor man who
carries letters from the king, Simile.
can give no authority to it, but if any man make doubt whether it came from
the king or no, he can show the kings hand and seal to it, and make it known
to be so by diverse testimonies; so the Church can give to authority to the
Scripture, but if any man make doubt whether it be the Scripture or no, the
true Church can make it known by diverse arguments that it came from God? Seven
Evidences of the Scriptures.
and this is the office of the Church. Now there be seven evidences, whereby
we may prove that the Scriptures came from God, the Author of them.

First, 1
The purity of it; so Spiritual and full of holy Matter, of Goodness,
Justice, The Purity of it.
Sanctity; forbidding vice, commending Virtue, void of all Corruption, and so
far remooved from the heart of Man, as that Man must needs think that it
came from God. So Deuteronomy. 4. 8. Moses says, What Nation is so great that has
ordinances and laws so righteous, as this law that I have set before you; So
David, Psalm. 19. The Law of the Lord is an undefiled Law: Hence we infer the
purity thereof does declare that it came from God. It is so Holy and Divine as
no wit of Man could devise the like, all other laws which have been made by
man in time, have been discovered, and their corruptions approved; even
Lycurgus his Law, which was thought to be the best: All other Books which
have been devised by the wit of Man have their corruptions. Amongst the
Philosophers no Rose but had his prickle; no truth, without some mixture of
falsehood; but this Book of the Scripture, the longer it is in the World, the
more it is discovered, the more the purity and holiness of it does appear:
therefore this is an evidence that it came from God.

Secondly, 2
we may know the Scripture is from God, by the majesty of it; By the majesty
of it.
that in so plain words and terms such high wisdom is contained therein,
and so transcending the Nature and wit of Man, as no writing of man was ever
like unto it: As the officers of the high Priests said of Christ, Simile.
John 7. 46. Never man spoke like this Man: so we may say of the Scriptures,
never did any Book speak like this Book: If all men's wits were laid
together, they were not able to gather together one leaf like it; all other
books of other writers, with two or three times reading them over, we may
draw them dry, even the Books of Demosthenes, Plato and Aristotle; But if we
should live a thousand years to read the Scriptures, yet still we should have
one new thing or other.

This does show that all Men's wits have a bottom, but the Scripture has none:
therefore we may say of other books, that they be as a little gold among a
great deal of earth, Simile.
but we may say of the Scripture as of the Pearl, that there is a great deal
of Treasure comprehended in a little room.

Thirdly, by the Power of it: for there is nothing in this world that the
nature of Man can less digest at this day than the Scripture: 3
Men cannot abide to read the Scriptures, By the Power of it.
and yet notwithstanding we see of what power it is, to work on the soul and
conscience of Men, it closes with them and makes them see their sins to
repent for them, and brings them home to God: as Heb. 4. 12. says the Apostle,
For the Word of God is lively and mighty in operation, and sharper than a
two-edged sword, and enters through even to the dividing asunder of soul and
spirit, and of the joins and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and
the intents of the heart: Now this power of the Word shows it is from God.
Again, when a Man's Conscience is on the rack, there is nothing but God can
releeve him, therefore this is an evidence that it is of God: because it is of
power as well to convert, as also to comfort a Man when his Conscience is on
the rack.

Fourthly, 4
By innumerable prophecies and predictions therein that have been foretold and
come to pass in the times appointed* By the Predictions of it.
as Esaias. 41. 22. (says God) Let them bring forth, and show us what shall
happen: let them show the former things what they be, that we may consider
them, and know the latter end of them, or declare us things for to come. Show
the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods: yea,
do good or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold it together. So
none but God can tell future things that are merely contingent: A man may
foretell future things that depend on natural causes, but to foretell things
that are merely contingent, none can do but God. But the Scriptures have
foretold diverse things which have come to pass in the times appointed, and
were merely contingent, therefore the scripture is from God. As Genesis 49. 10.
there Iaakob foretold of Christ's coming in the flesh; (says he) The Scepter
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, till
Shiloh come: this was very unlike that ever it should be, and yet the
government continued in the Tribe of Judah till Herod came (who killed the
San^edrin) in whose days Christ was borne; so likewise David prophesied, Psalm.
72. 8. that the Gospel should go through the World, and all Nations should
yield obedience to it: This has been performed, and so of all the prophecies
foretold they should come to pass in the time appointed. We see the Jews
killed the Prophets, and when they had laid them in the dust, yet they
reverenced the writings and kept them safe; what was the reason of it? they
say, that that which they spoke was true, and that came to pass: therefore
though they could not abide the Prophets but killed them, yet they regarded
their writings, and reverenced them.

Fifthly, 5
by the sincerity of the Writers, that therein have not concealed their own
faults: Evidence, by the sincerity of it.
If Men must write of themselves, they will be sure to write the best, and not
the worst: But those holy Writers have not spared their own faults; Moses
writes of his own faults when he struck the Rock, and tells us that this was
the cause why he could not enter into the land of promise: and David writes
the 51. Psalm, which is a Psalm of repentance, (bewailing that horrible sin
which he committed with Bathsheba) and has left it to all succeeding ages:
nay, there be some of them that no man could have ever known their faults, if
themselves had not disclosed them, as the Prophet Ezekiel in his third Chapter,
I went (says he) but it was in the bitterness and indignation of my spirit;
this shows it came from God. Naturally, men labor to cover their own faults,
to hide them, and speak well of themselves, to gain credit: but the Spirit of
God takes away all from man, and gives it to God. Therefore because these holy
writers take away all from themselves, and give the honor to God, this does
show it came from God. It is a pretty consideration of a Heathen Man, Simile.
He brings a Man and a Lion reasoning which was the strongest; whether the
Lion or the Man; the one said the Lion, and the other the Man; who brings the
Lion to a picture, where the Man was tearing and rending the Lion; so (says
he) Man is the strongest: Nay (says the Lion) the reason hereof is, because
Man made the picture himself; for, said he, if the Lion had made the picture,
then he would have made the Lion tearing the Man, for every Man will be
favorable to himself. In like manner (to apply this) if Man had made the
Scripture, he would have set up his own glory, but because they take away all
their own glory, and give it God, it is an evidence that it is of God.

Sixthly, 6
By the wonderful consent of those which were the writers of it: both in
regard of the matter and manner. Evidence, the consent of writers.
First, for the matter, that it was writ by so many several Men, and at sundry
times, and in diverse Countries and Kingdoms, 1
and upon several Occasions, and yet that they all consented in one thing: In
the matter.
what does this show us but that they were all guided by one God, in this
wonderful consent? Therefore, the Scriptures came from God.

Secondly, 2
in regard of the manner they agree; for Amos being but a shepherd, Manner.
and taken from following the sheep, yet writes as Divinely, Holily, and
Excellently, as Esaias that was of the Kings seed and brought up at the Court;
for he writes against the sins that were then used at the Court, especially
against pride; as we may see, Amos 3. so likewise John and Peter, were poor
fishermen and unlearned, and yet they write as Divinely, Heavenly and
Excellently, as Paul did, that was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel. Let any
man show me any other reason why Amos that was but a shepherd did write as
Holily and Divinely, as Esaias that was brought up at the kings Court, and why
John and Peter which were but poor fishermen should write as Heavenly and
excellently, as Paul that was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and I will
yield to him, but I think there can be no other reason than this, that the
same GOD that did assist the one, did assist the other.

Seventhly, 7
by natural reason, for reason teaches us that God must be worshipped;
Evidence, by Natural Reason.
then every Man's heart tells him, that he must not be worshipped as we will,
but as he will; for the servant must not prescribe the Master, but the Master
the servant; but God has not prescribed his worship in any place, but in the
Scriptures: therefore this reason stands good, That the Scripture is not the
word of Man, but the Word of God. The Uses are:

First, Use 1.
seeing the Scriptures are the word of God, therefore there is nothing more
certain and sure in this world than the says of a Christian; all arts and
sciences are grounded on truth, that is, the truth of the creature which we
call created truth, but the faith of a Christian is grounded on an uncreated
truth, for there is no comparison between created and uncreated truth,
therefore there is nothing more certain and sure in this world than the faith
of a Christian; as 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. says the Apostle Paul, neither stood my
words and preaching in the enticing speeches of man's wisdom, but in plain
evidence of the Spirit and of power, that your faith should not be in the
wisdom of men, but in the power of God; so the faith of a Christian is most
sure, sense and reason may deceive, but faith cannot, because it is grounded on
an uncreated truth; therefore in holy reverence (as one says) we may say,
Lord, Lord, if we be deceived in the hope of glory and in the hope of life
everlasting, thou have deceived us: if we have but the word of a man we will
build rest and rely on it, Simile.
but we have a word and warrant from God, and yet we do not rest and rely on
that, through corruption of man's heart and his nature, although the word of God
is an uncreated truth and the other a created.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing the Scripture is the Word of God, therefore it is the highest Judge
where all questions and controversies may be decided: the Prince and his
letters are all one in law, Simile.
so God and his Word is all one; therefore because the Scripture is the Word of
God, it is the highest Judge. Aquinas says, whosoever brings a letter from
one it is as if he brought the party; so when we bring Gods Word for a thing,
it is as if we should bring God, because it is the voice of God, who is the
highest Judge of all; therefore although a kingdom and a country should
command us to do such and such things, if the Word of God condemn it, we must
not do it. Genesis 3. When the devil came to the Woman to tempt her to eat of
the forbidden fruit, says she, God has said we shall not eat of it; so a
Christian should do when he meets with temptations and is tempted to sins,
he must say, God has said, I must not lie, deceive, profane the Sabbath, be
drunken; I must not misspend my time, because God has forbidden it therefore I
must not do it.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing the Scripture is the Word of God, we must take heed we do not
neglect it: because it comes from God, and is the voice of God that says,
fear God, love your brethren, live in charity one with another, walk holily
and christianly, repent of your sins; therefore we must respect the voice of
God: as it is, 1 These. 4. he therefore that despises these things: despises
not man but God: therefore seeing God has said, Pray continually, in all
things give thanks; we must take heed we do not despise the Word of God.

Fourthly, Use 4.
seeing the Scripture is the Word of God, therefore this will direct us in the
dangerous passages of this world, as Psalm. 119. (says David) thy Word is a
lantern unto my feet and a light unto my path; so Matthew. 2. Simile.
when the Wisemen went to seek Christ there was a star appeared unto them,
which they followed till it brought them to the house whereas Christ was; such
a star is the Bible, the holy Scripture, if we follow it, it will not leave
us till it bring us to Christ: Saint Basil says, it is the manner of Mariners
when they be at Sea, to direct themselves in their voyage safe home, Simile.
by casting their eyes up to Heaven, in the day looking to the Sun; and in
the night, to some bright star; so must thou do if thou will go safe to
heaven, look to the Word of God and hold to it, that it may be a direction to
thee, let not thine eyes slumber nor sleep, but follow on till thou come to a
joyful beholding of God in Christ, and all the holy Angels and people of God
where we shall live for ever and ever.

We have already spoken of four points wherein the dignity of the Church
consists first, that it is called the City of God; secondly, that it is called
the body of Christ; thirdly, that it is called the Spouse of Christ; fourthly,
Fifth dignity of the Church. There is no salvation out of it
that it is called the ground and Pillar of truth. Fifthly, that it is like to
Noah's Arc, that there is no salvation without it; Simile.
for as in the old world all perished that were not gathered into Noah's Arc,
their wisdom, Towers, castles and goods could not save them; so all that are
not gathered into the Church they shall perish, it is not their wisdom, nor
wealth that can save them, for the Church is the Ark of God, there is no
salvation but in Sion, that is in the Church of God: therefore the holy
Scripture says in this place, of those God had a purpose to save, he added to
the Church from day to day: so Ephe. 5. 23. Saint Paul says, that Christ is
the Savior of his body, now the Church is the body of Christ, therefore there
are none saved but the Church, that is none but they which are joined to
Christ, and become members of him, as Josh. 2. 18, 19. Simile.
there we see a covenant was made between Rahab and the Spies, that she
should hang a red thread, or a cord out of the window at their coming, so all
that were within the house should be saved, but if they were out of the house,
though they were her own kindred yet they should perish, their blood should be
upon their own heads; such a covenant God has made with us, that if we will
get into the house where the red thread, the cord hangs, out of the blood of
Christ, we shall be saved, but all that be without this house are like to
perish, their blood shall be upon their own heads. Four reasons why thereis
no salvation out of the Church.
Now there are four reasons why there is no Salvation but in the true Church
of God.

First, because there only the heavenly light shines: the Church is the
Goshen of God, Reason 1.
where the heavenly light shines when all the world over lie in Aeygptian
darkness, as we see in the Scriptures: therefore because the heavenly light
shines in the Church, 1 Ioh. 5. 19. Col. 1. 15. 1 Pet. 2. 9.
there is no salvation without it; so Esai. 59. 10. (it is said,) We grope for
the wall like the blind, as one without eyes, who stumbles in the noone days
as in the twilight, wanting the light, Simile.
they dash here, and there, they grope for the wall and cannot find it, so all
that be out of the Church of God, want this same heavenly light, to shine unto
them, they dash here and there, grope for the wall, lose themselves, and shall
never be able to find the way to heaven, therefore because the light of God
shines in the Church only, there is no salvation without it.

Secondly, 2
because we can have no Communion with Christ, unless we have Communion with
the members of Christ: Reason.
for as it is in the natural, so it is in the mystical body of Christ, in the
natural body we cannot have Communion with the head, unless we have
Communion with the members, for my hand cannot have Communion with my head
unless it be joined to my arm; Simile.
so we cannot have Communion with Christ, unless we have had Communion with
his members, which is the true Church of God: therefore there is no salvation
without it.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
because no where else we can look for a blessing but in the Communion of the
faithful, and society of the godly. It is true indeed (as David says) that
the earth is full of the goodness of God, but the special blessing of God
rests only in the society of the faithful; as Exodus 20. 24. says God, In
all places where I shall put the remembrance of my name, I will come to thee
and bless thee: so Psalm. 113. 3. it is said of the Church, For there the Lord
appointed blessing and life for evermore. Now the mountains of Sion are figure
of the true Church of God; so the blessing of Sion is no where but in the
Communion of the true Church; as John 5. we see a number of Lame men sick and
diseased, lay at the poole side, waiting when the Angel of God should come
down and stir the waters, because whosoever could get in after the waters were
stirred was healed, what disease soever he had; so because in the society of
the faithful, there is not one only Angel that descended, but God himself
comes down by his grace and holy Spirit, to bless us, and to make his word
profitable to us, therefore here we are to wait and to attend for this
special blessing of God.

Fourthly, Reason 4.
because Christ reigns only in the Church of God, all the rest of the world
is under the power of the Devil and sin; so Mich. 4. 7. it is said, there
the Lord shall reign over them in mount Sion, for ever and ever; as also Luke
1. 33. and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his
Kingdom there shall be no end; that is, of the Militant Church: therefore
because Christ reigns in the Church of God, the Devil taking all the rest as
his own, this is the fourth reason why there is no salvation without the
Church: Thus much for the Doctrine. The uses are:

First, Use 1.
seeing there is no salvation but in the true Church of Christ, therefore we
should be thankful to God, that he has made us members of it, for we might
else have perished in ignorance and blindness: this has been the practice of
Gods Children in former ages; for Genesis 9. 27. It was all the blessing that Noah
gave to his Son Iapheth for his goodness in covering of the nakedness of
his Father, (says he) God persuade Iapheth to dwell in the Tents of Shem; and
Joseph become a great man in the Kingdom of Pharaoh might have made his Sons
great men also, but he had more care to adopt them into the true Church of
God, and to have Gods blessing powered out upon them, than to make them great
men in the Kingdom of Pharaoh; as we may read Genesis 43. 13. in like manner
Hebr. 12. 24. it is said, that Moses by faith (when he was come to age)
refused to be called the Son of Pharoahs daughter, and chose rather to
suffer adversity with the People of God; whatsoever Moses did when he was a
Child, yet when he comes to discretion he refused to be called the Son of
Pharoahs Daughter, and had rather live in the Communion of the faithful, than
be called in the princely honors of the unfaithful: Therefore seeing it is
such a great blessing to live in the society of the faithful, Simile.
we ought to be thankful to God that he has brought us out of the belly of
Popery, as Jonas was delivered out of the belly of the whale. It is a
pitiful thing to see a number of men live in the Church of God, who do not
partake of the power of it, they live in the Church as fishes in the Sea which
although they breed live and dye in the Sea, Simile.
yet never taste of the saltness of it; so there be a number of men that are
bred in the Church, live and dye in it, yet never taste of the power of it in
their souls and consciences, nor partake of the holy graces of it. Therefore
has God brought thee to the Communion of the Church? Labor to partake of the
blessings and graces of it, to grow in the fear of God, in the love of our
brethren, in obedience to his commandments, in care to please him, in faith,
in repentance, in knowledge, in zeal of his glory, and so our comfort shall
be great at the day of judgment; but if thou do not grow in these things,
great shall thy terror be at that time.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing there is no salvation but in the true Church of God, therefore we
should hold communion with it, and not suffer our selves to be drawn from the
society of it; as John 6. 68. When many slipped away, Peter himself could
say, Simile.
when Christ said to him, Will you all go? says he, Master, whither shall
we go? thou have the words of eternal life: so when we see others to go
out of the society of the Church and to be drawn away, let us say, whither
shall we go? here are the words of eternal life, here are the means to get
Faith and repentance here are the means of salvation and life everlasting.
John. 9. When there was a question made whether Jesus was of God or no; the
blind man answers, (as if he should say) is it not a strange thing that ye
ask me whether he be of God or no, and yet ye have seen the power of God in
his person; for we read there these words, whether he be a sinner or no I
cannot tell, but one thing I know that I was bl^nd and now I see: so men must
be wise to answer temptations when some shall say to them, your Ministers are
not the ministers of Christ, there is a fault in their Ordinations: We must
answer again, I know not whether there be any fault in their Ordination or
no; but this I know that once I was a swearer, a bad person, and a vile liver,
indeed I once lived in blindness and ignorance, but by their ministry now I
am come to see my sins, be humbled for them, and to lay hold on Jesus
Christ: Therefore whatsoever thou think my belief is they be the ministers
of Christ. Historians report that there is a certain beast called an Hyena
like a Wolf, that comes to the shepherds house, and there mones and bewayles
himself, and if he hears any body named, he calls them out of doors,
Simile.
and then falls on them and makes a prey of them, so a number of such Hyena's
there be in the world, who come and moan and bewail themselves, when they
hear their names, they call them out of the doors, that is, out of the
Church; then they fall upon them and make a prey on them: Therefore we should
be wise to hold the Communion of the Church.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing there is no salvation but in the true Church of God, therefore the
sentence of excommunication is the fearfullest sentence that is, other
sentences condemns us in our bodies, goods, or our liberty, but this declares
us to be of the Communion of the ungodly; by other sentences we are committed
to the Iayle, but by this censure we are committed to Satan; as 1 Cor. 5. 5.
says he, when ye be gathered together and my Spirit, with the power of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that such an one be delivered unto Satan for the
destruction of the flesh: Therefore this sentence is the fearfullest that can
pass on a man. But here I will speak my conscience, it is a pitiful thing
that such a censure should be used for every light and petty matter; there is
never a surgeon that dare cut off the least finger of the King though it were
diseased, but would use all means that might be before he did it, Simile.
so there is never a poor Christian but is as dear to God as a King or the
greatest Potentate that is; and therefore what great caution should there be
used, before this censure of excommunication be pronounced against any man, but
we have now cause to thank God that it is not so common amongst us as it has
been. There is also another fault amongst us, that a poor man many times
stands excommunicated three or four years together; indeed there may be a
fault in the poor man to stand so long, but let us take heed it be not for
want of our help. Therefore as we are ready to contribute to the necessities
of their bodies, so we should be to contribute to them in this case.

But here may a Christian demand, Quest.
whether were a man best to give money or to stand excommunicated still? this
question I will answer by another question; what if a man fall into the hands
of Thieves, were he better to lose his money or his life? Ans.
I answer he were better to lose his money, because his life is the greater,
even so a man were better to lose his money than the means of grace, Simile.
which is the greater. Another may here object and say, Quest.
I, but how if a man cannot be absolved without he should sin against God
and offend his conscience? To this I answer, that if the case be so that he
cannot be absolved but he must sin against God, Ans.
then he were better lose the Communion of men which is the lesser, than the
Communion of God which is the greater; as John 9. we see the blind man whom
the Pharisees had cast out Christ meets with, and said unto him, do thou
believe in the Son of God? as if he should say, notwithstanding this censure
thy cause is good, thou art a blessed man: in like manner although the censure
of excommunication has passed upon thee, if thou beleevest in the Son of
God, thy case is good, this may comfort Christians. Lawyers have a saying that
unjust Laws bind no man; and Bellarmine says, that there is a double
Communion, an external and an internal Communion; the external Communion of
the Church of God is in the word preached, prayer, and in Sacraments; the
internal is in the graces of the Spirit, Faith, love and other graces: Now a
man may be cast out from the external Communion, the word and Sacraments, (as
when a man is put into prison or banished) and yet may have the internal
Communion with the Church; a man may be cut off from his brethren in regard of
outward society, but he can not be cut off from Christ. Simile.
And these be the uses we are to make of this point.

Now that we have spoken of the Nature of the Church, 2
in the next place we are to speak of the properties of it, The Properties of
the Church.
which are two:

1. It is a Holy Church. 2. It is a Catholic Church.
First, The Church of God is Holy, there is a company of Holy People here in
this world, as Zech. 8. 5. thus says the Lord, I will return unto Sion, and
will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem, and Jerusalem shall be called a City of
Truth, and the Mountain of the Lord of Hosts, and the Holy Mountain: so in
D^^iel, the Church is called the Holy People of God; and Revel. 22. 2. (says
S. Ioh.) And I saw the holy City, the new Jerusalem come down from God: so
also 1 Cor. 3. 17. Saint Paul says, For the Temple of the Lord is Holy, which
ye are: Therefore seeing the Church of God is an assembly of Holy People,
accordingly as it is Holy, we (the Members thereof) must labor to be Holy.

Now the Holiness of the Church is opposed unto three things that seems to
take away Holiness from it: 3
First* Things seeming to oppugn the Holiness of the Church.
the judgment of the world; for it thinks that of all societies they are the
vilest and the worst; they think them to be but a company of dissemblers and
hypocrites that profess the Word, but deny the Power of it: but we that are
Christians believe that the Church of God is Holy, though the World think them
a company of dissemblers. David says, Psalm. 13. Yet God is good to Israel,
even to the pure in heart: and in the 14. of Deuteronomy. 2. we read, For thou art an
Holy People to the Lord thy God, and the Lord has chosen thee to be a precious
people to him: Therefore howsoever the World condemns them, yet we believe
that God has a Holy company of People in the World.

The second thing that seems to take away Holiness from the Church is, 2
that it is a united company of good and bad together: for I have showed you
that the Church of God is like to a Flock, wherein are Sheep and Goats; a
Floor wherein is Corn and Chafe; a Field wherein are Tares and Wheat;
Simile.
and yet these bad persons are no true Members of the Church, but like bad
humors in the body. Again, the Faith of a Christian opposes and does believe
that there is a company of Holy People, and that the wicked that live amongst
them, do not defile the Holy things of God; for it is Paul's rule, 1 Cor. 11.
26. Let a Man therefore examine himself, etc. whereupon says Augustine,
Mark, thou that art a good Man, thou may eat and drink with comfort, if
thou do examine thy self: and again, he that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks his own damnation: not so to thee that art a good Man; but
to the wicked, that came like swine without any preparation at all.

The third thing that seems to take away holiness from the Church is the
remainders of sin and corruption; 3
for there is no Man in the estate of Grace, but has complained of this. So
David Psalm. 40. 12. My sins has taken such hold on me, that I am not able to
look up; and Paul complayneth, Romans 7. The good thing that I would do, that
do I not, but what I hate, that do I, etc. so in the best estate there is
some remainders of sin: Therefore, although the World and the Devil should
condemn them, yet we believe the Church of God is Holy.

SERMON LXVII.
1 CORINTHIANS 3. 17. For the Temple of God is holy, which ye are.
HAving spoken of the Nature of the Church, we began to speak of the
Properties of it the last day, being two. First, we believe the Church of GOD
is Holy: Secondly, that it is Catholic, agreeable to that part of our Christian
profession. Now the Church of God is holy four manner of ways:

First, Four ways the Church is Holy.
In regard of the Holiness of their Faith, or by the Holiness of their Faith.
1
All other societies are foully spotted and tainted with error against the
foundation, but this remains unspotted in the foundation: therefore the Church
is Holy, because their Faith is Holy. So Jude 20. But ye beloved, edifying your
selves in your most holy Faith, keep your selves in the Love of God: So Matthew.
7. 6. says our Savior, Give not that which is holy to Dogs. It cannot be
denied but that there may be errors in the true Church; for as they be
subject to all other sins, so are they to the sin of ignorance: as Levit.
4. 3. there was a sacrifice appointed for the Ignorance of the Priests and
People; and Habakuk 3. the Prophet intitles, a prayer for the Ignorances:
Therefore the Church may be ignorant of some things, as the Church of
Jerusalem was. Acts 11. 10. The Church was ignorant of the calling of the
Gentiles, till they were informed by Peter; and in Cyprians time there was
rebaptising held in the true Church: So in Augustines time it was held as a
thing needful to salvation for Children to receive the Lords Supper contrary
to Saint Paul's rule, 1 Cor. 11. Let a Man examine himself; therefore it is out
of question their may be errors in the true Church.

But the difference is twofold: How the true Church may err two ways.
First, that they do not err in the foundation; their errors do not strike
at the heart, and let out the lifeblood of religion, 1
but it is like the scratching of a Thorn, and therefore it remains Holy in
the foundation. Simile.


Secondly, 2
Though it fall into error, it is so assisted by the Power of grace as it does
not rest till it recover again; as mud being thrown into a fountain, rests
not till it works it out and settles again; so though the Church fall into
error, it is so assisted by the power of grace, Simile.
as that it recovers again; as John. 16. 11. says Christ, When he is come,
that is the Spirit, He shall lead you into all Truth, that is, possess them
with all truth, and lead them in all Truth: Peter himself did not know all,
for he was ignorant of the calling of the Gentiles till he saw the vision: And
then it was revealed unto him; so though the Church of God be ignorant for some
time, it shall not so continue, but the Holy Ghost will lead it into all truth.

Now with the holiness of their Faith, they must join holiness of life: as 2
Pet. 1. 5. says he, moreover, join with your Faith virtue, and with virtue
knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, etc. with says, there must be joined
good life: as of 1 Timothy 1. 19. says S. Paul, of some having faith and a good
conscience which some have put away, and as concerning faith has made
Shipwreck; they were not wise enough to join to the holiness of their faith
holiness of life, but cast away a good conscience, made no conscience of known
duties, and so made shipwreck of all the precious graces that they had
embarked. In the 2 These. 2. 10. it is said, Because they received not the love
of Truth that they might be saved, therefore did God send them strong delusions
that they should believe lies: Therefore if men will not receive the love of
the truth, that they may be saved, it is just with God to send them strong
delusions to believe lies: therefore it must be our care that with holiness
of our faith we join a Holy life.

Secondly, the Church is holy by the imputation of Christ's righteousness, as 1
Cor. 2
1. 30. it is said, Christ is made to us of God the Father wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption: so Christ is not only our
justification, but our sanctification, for his holiness is imputed to us. In
the Law as we may see Romans 11. 16. In the first fruits all the rest was
sanctified, though they ^^re not brought into the Temple nor presented Simile.
before God, yet by the first fruits the rest was made Holy, by a certain
power, to the eaten and users of them; so because Christ is the first fruits
that was offered to God in all the purity that might be, therefore the Church
of God is made holy by relation from him. To this the Schoolmen agree, for
says Aquinas, every imperfect thing presupposes some certain thing that is
perfect, that it might be helped: all our holiness is unperfect in our selves,
therefore it must be made perfect by the holiness of Christ. In all
accusations of the Devil, and conflicts of our consciences, we should come to
God and say; Lord, though I am a sinner, unclean, and have infinite wants in
my self, yet in my Head Christ, I am sanctified and made Holy; so that
whatsoever I want in my self, it is made good in him. We see crystal, though
it have no light nor luster in it self, Simile.
yet set it in the Sun, and it receives the Sun beams: so although we
have no light nor manner of luster in our selves, yet if we be brought to
Christ, we receive all the graces of Christ: therefore in the Revelation the
Church is said to be apparelled with the righteousness of Christ.

Thirdly, the Church is holy by inherent holiness: because there is never a
true member of the Church but does labor to be holy, though they be encumbered
with a number of sins: Therefore Heb. 3. they are called holy brethren, and
Esaias 65. 12. It is said of them, and they shall call them the holy People, the
redeemed of the Lord: for it is the care of every true member to be holy though
they be troubled with many encumbrances, weaknesses and sins: Therefore
whosoever thou art, that art not holy at all, for we cannot obtain to be
perfectly holy in the estate of corruption, labor to be holy in some measure,
use the means, and have care to rid and remove thy sins; for otherwise thou
art no true member of the holy Church. A man may live in the Church till his
flesh rot, or his eyes fall out of his head, and yet be no true member of the
Church, no more than a wodden leg is a true part of a Man's body, Simile.
which though it moove and go with the body, yet may be laid in the fire when
the body is in safety, because it is not joined to it, to draw life and motion
from it; in like manner a man may live in the Church, and be no true member
thereof, because he is not joined to Christ; nor can approve himself to his
own conscience, or to the conscience of others; therefore as it is the care of
every true member to be holy, so it must be the care of us that are in the
Church.

Fourthly, 4
the Church is holy, because there be the means of holiness: It is not so
holy, as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram said Numb. 16. 3. to Moses and Aaron, ye
take too much upon you seeing all the congregation is holy: Thus to have no
need of Magistracy and Ministry, were a dangerous error for any to think:
for the Church has need of all the means of holiness, though there be some
beginnings of it, yet they have need of Moses and Aaron, of Magistracy and
Ministry; as Psalm. 77. 20. it is said, that The Lord led the People of Israel,
like Sheep by the hand of Moses and Aaron; the Lord led them with great
tenderness and respect; he led them like sheep, but it was by the hand of
Moses and Aaron, as long as the Church is in her Pilgrimage, it has ne^de of
all means of holiness to guide and direct her to Heaven: in the Church are
the Springs of life and salvation, there are the Scriptures and the means of
holiness, all other companies and societies have not the like. Object.
The Papists say, that they have more means of holiness than we, by their
Fasting, Pilgrimages, Castigations and such like trumperies, but I would have
them to consider what Saint Paul says in the 1 Timothy 4. 8. Bo^ily exercises
profit little; mark, says a good man, he does not say they profit nothing,
but they profit little when they want the maine, (as Augustine says) they
run apace, and the more speed they make, the further off they be from Heaven.

Now the Papists fail in too maine things: Defects of Popish Holiness.
first, in the true ground; secondly, in the true means of holiness: First,
in the true ground, for before our works be accepted, 1
our persons must be in favor; for our works cannot please God till our
persons please him: Failing.
as Genesis 4. 4. But the Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his sacrifice: Some
think to please God with their good deeds, and never seek to have their
persons accepted by the means of Christ, and therefore they fail in the
ground.

Secondly, they fail in the true means, for righteousness and holiness come
by union with Christ, 2
being ingrafted and planted into Christ by a true faith, that the life that
they live, they may live in the Son of God; Failing.
and so Christ derives his holiness to them: but if they be not united and
knit to him, they do not live in him. Wherein they may be compared to a Man
that takes a Siens, Simile.
and binds it to the bark of a tree, then waters it, and bestows great
pains about it; nevertheless it withers, because it is not ingrafted into the
tree; so because they be not planted into Christ to draw holiness from him,
therefore though they take great pains, yet all comes to nothing: so that they
fail in the right ground and true means of holiness.

Now because the true means of holiness is in the true Church, therefore it
must be every Man's wisdom to take his best advantage by the use of good
means to profit by it. Simile.
We see the little Bees though they keep their hives in a wet day, yet when a
storm comes, they will get up so much the sooner, and be the more painful;
in like manner if we be hindered by foul weather or by sickness, when God
offers us occasion, we should be so much the more painful and diligent,
because the true means of holiness is in the Church. Here let us apply to our
selves.

First, Use 1.
seeing then the Church of God is Holy, therefore it must be every man's care
to be holy, for if there be any disproportion or dissimilitude in any of the
members, it makes a deformity in the body, as if one hand be long, and
another short; one hand white, and another black; one cheek red and another
pale; one eye clear, and another thick: Simile.
so when one member is holy, and another profane; when some make conscience of
their ways, and other live in gross sins, this makes a deformed body;
therefore it must be the care of every one as the Church is holy, so to be
holy. We see the wild beasts that were savage and cruel before they came
into Noah's Arc, Simile.
when they were there, they laid aside their ferocitie and wildness, and
became tame and gentle: so though we were called beasts before we came into the
Church of God, yet now when we be once in the same, we should leave all our
wildness and profaneness, Simile.
and labor to be holy. We know what was Th^ma^s speech to Ainmon, such a thing
as this ought not to be done in Israel: so when we are tempted to any sin or
uncleanness, we should say likewise, such a thing as this ought not to be done
in the Communion of the Church, nor by any member thereof.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing the Church is holy, we must take heed that we do not disgrace or
defile it that are the members of it, for the shame, disgrace and blot does not
rest on our selves, but on the Church: as in John we see when the buyers and
sellers had polluted the Temple, Christ makes a whip and whips them out; now if
Christ was thus displeased with them that defiled the material Temple, much
more will he be with those that defile the spiritual Temple: 1 Cor. 5. 1. The
Apostle reproves the Church of Corinth in these words, It is reported that
there is fornication amongst you, such as is not so much as named amongst the
Heathen: whereupon says Chrysostom, Mark, he does not say, such an one and
such an one has committed fornication, but it is reported commonly, that you
have done it, you that be professors and religious; and therefore you have
disgraced the Church of God by your sins and brought a blot on it, you (I
say) that be the members of it, because the Church of God is holy and you be
unholy.

Thirdly, seeing the Church of God is holy, we must take heed, we do not
meddle with it to annoy it, and to hurt it: It is the charge that God gives,
Psalm. 105. 15. Touch not mine anointed and do my Prophets no harm; so Zech.
2. 8. God says, he that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye, and 1
Cor. 15. 9. says S. Paul, For I am the least of the Apostles, which am not
meet to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God: and
Senacherib though he overcame many countries and Kingdoms yet when he came to
besiege Jerusalem, the Angel of the Lord destroyed his Host, so that he was
compelled to go home with shame; So Revel. 20. 9. when Gog and Magog, went to
compass the Tents of the Saints and the beloved city, it is said, fire came
down from Heaven and devoured them, therefore men must take heed how they
meddle with the Church to annoy or hurt it.

Fourthly, Use 4.
seeing the Church of God is holy, it must be our care to keep it so, and to
rid it of drunkards, whoremasters and unclean persons: so we see, 1 Cor. 5.
13. says the Apostle, Put away from amongst you that wicked man; it must be
the care of the Church, to rid out them that be evil: Simile.
( Chrysostom says) if a man should have a fountain committed to him to keep
for a King, would he let Hogs and beasts descend into it, with their feet
to mud and puddle the water? so says he, thou that art a minister, God has
committed a fountain to thee to keep, not a fountain of water but a fountain
full of life and Spirit and the blood of Christ, therefore it must be thy care
to keep the fountain pure, and not to let every beast come in to defile the
same; seeing the Church of God is holy, it must be thy care to keep it holy,
and that no man does defile the holy things of God. Thus much for the first
property.

The second property is, 2
that the Church of God is Catholic, that is, it is generally diffused and
spread all the world over: Property of the Church.
This word Catholic is not found in all the Bible, yet as long as the sense is
there we may retain and keep it, seeing it is not against any point of our
Christian profession. As for the signification of it, the word is the same both
in Latin and Greek, and signifies general: whence we infer, the Church
of God seems to take his name from our Lord Jesus himself, where he says
Act. 1. 8. And ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem and in all
Judea, and in Samaria and unto the uttermost part of the earth. Here the
observation may be this; that if we find new words, as long as the sense is
not new, nor the Doctrine, we may receive them, but if both the words, and the
sense and Doctrine be new, that is, if it be not found in the Scripture, then
they are to be rejected and refused; therefore because transubstantiation is a
new word, and the Doctrine is new, the sense not being to be found in the
Scripture we are to reject it; for before the Lateran Council there was no
such thing heard of, which brought in both the word and Doctrine, and made that
a point of faith which before was never dreamt of. Now the Church is said to
be Catholic in three regards:

1. In regard of Place. 2. In regard of Person. 3. In regard of Time.
First, In three regards the Church is s^^d to be Catholic.
the Church of God is Catholic, in regard of place; for it is not tied to one
certain place, country or Kingdom, but God himself has enlarged and spread
it over all the world far and near: there was a time when it did belong to
the Jews, 1
and to those that did join with them, but now. Christ has broken down the
partition wall, Of place.
and has laid all the world common; now he has enlarged the Church, and
spread it all the world over. This is that Peter speaks of, Of a truth (says
he) I perceive that God is no accepter of persons, but in every nation he
that fears him and works righteousness is accepted of him: so Christ
Matthew. 8. says, That many shall come from the east and from the west, and
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaak and Jacob in the Kingdom of God: so Ephesians. 2.
13, 14. but now in Christ Jesus ye which were once a far off are made
members, by the blood of Christ; for he is our peace which has made both one,
and has broken down the middle wall of partition between us: and it is said
Revel. 7. 9. And after these things I beheld, and l^e a great multitude of all
nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues stood before the throne, and
before the lamb, clothed with long Robes, and palms in their hands. So then
it is plain by the Scriptures that the Church is Catholic in regard of place,
and is not abridged to no one country or Kingdom, but is spread all the world
over. Augustine says well, We are not to think it was enough for Christ to
shed out his most precious blood, for one country or Kingdom, but it was to
win the whole world to himself: and again he says, By that which Christ
gave for the redemption of man, they may perceive the great price and payment,
which was his death and bloodshed, a thing of so great value or price, that it
was not for any one country or Kingdom, but for all: and therefore it is
called the Catholic Church.

The use is first, Use 1.
seeing that the Church is Catholic or universal, and consists of all
countries and Kingdoms, therefore we should be thankful to God, that has
reserved us till this time, for we might have been born when the light of the
Gospel shined only amongst the Jews, and then we might have perished in
unbeleefe; therefore thanks be unto God in that he has brought us forth in
a time when the Gospel is preached. And seeing it has pleased God to do so,
let us be wise to lay hold on the good means that is laid before us, come out
of our sins and corruptions, that so we may be saved from them: if fish in
a pond should be nigh poisoned with stinking mud and water, Simile.
and one should come and cut a sluice through into fresh water, what would they
do but go out into the fresh water? This is our case, we are like to fish in
a pond that be poisoned in the mud and stinking water of our sins and
corruptions, therefore seeing it has pleased God to cut a sluice and trench
through, and to open the bosom of the true Church to us, where the fresh water
is, (the waters of life and salvation) it must be our wisdom to come out of
our sins and to lay hold of the good means that are set before us.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing the Church of God is Catholic, wherein there is the means of grace,
therefore it must be our consideration to apply our selves to lay hold on it in
our life time while we live here: It is S. Paul's exhortation, 2 Cor. 6. 5. I
beseech you brethren that you receive not the graces of God in vain: It is a
great mercy that God does offer in the true Church, where the means of grace
are used, preaching, prayer, the use of the Sacraments, therefore let us apply
our selves to lay hold on it and to get good by it. You your selves know that
if earthly Paradise were to be recovered, and the Cherubins with the shaking
sword removed, Simile.
so that we might go in without any danger, would you lie down and sleep,
would you idle out the time? no; I dare be bold to say that you would fly to
the trees, gather of the fruit and eat of them, especially of the tree of
life, that you might live for ever. This is the grace that God does offer to
us, (for the militant Church is the Paradise of God where there are trees of
all sorts;) therefore what should we do, not lie down in the dust and idle
out the time, but apply our selves to eat of the fruit, especially of the tree
of life, to feed on Christ by faith, to draw out all his graces that so we may
live for ever.

Secondly, 2
the Church of God is Catholic in regard of the persons; for it includes all
sorts of persons, Of Persons.
rich and poor, high and low, noble and ignoble, wise and foolish, bond and
free, and excludes none. To this purpose says S. Paul, Gal. 3. 28. There is
neither Jew nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male
nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus: and S. Peter Act. 10. says, I
saw a vision of all sorts of birds and beasts, and there came a voice too, that
bad him kill and eat; by which vision he did understand that God had then
sanctified all sorts of men in the blood of Christ; there was a time when
diverse men were excluded from the Congregation of the Lord, as Number. 22. the
Ammonites and the Moabites, because they did not meet the people of the Lord
with bread and water; but now it has pleased God to take in all sorts of men,
so that no man is excluded unless he will exclude himself; as it is said,
Esai. 65. 25. That the Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lion
shall eat straw like the Bullock, and to the Serpent, dust shall be his meat;
the sense is, that in the time of the Gospel the Lord will alter the
naughtiness of men's hearts and bring them to join in holy sweet communion one
with another, but if they would not attend him, but desire rather to live in
their sins still, than they should live in Gods curse, the Serpent shall eat
dust; hence we are taught seeing God does exclude no man, we must take heed
we do not exclude our selves. If a man comes to a Kings Court in mean
apparel and have no good attendance, Simile.
he can have small hope of access to the King: oh but let him come to Gods
court, though he come never so meanly and basely apparelled, if he be well
attended with faith and the graces of his Spirit, then he shall have access
into the presence Chamber of Almighty God, therefore seeing no man is excluded
do not thou exclude thy self: If a gift, grant or pardon should come from the
King to certain persons that would claim it; there is no man that would
exclude himself, and say it does not belong to me: but every man would labor
to have his part in it: so the Lord has given a gift and a grant to bestow
pardon of sins, the love and favor of God, Simile.
heaven and happiness to all that will repent and believe in Christ: Therefore
no man must exclude himself and say, it does not belong to me, but labor to
have his part in it. Thus the Church is Catholic in regard of the persons.

Thirdly, 3
the Church of God is Catholic in regard of time; for it has been in all
ages and so shall continue to the end of the world; In Regard of Time.
it began in Adams time, and shall continue to the last man that shall live, it
has bin in all times and it shall continue so long as the world does last. For
this world was made for the good of the Church, therefore God lets it stand for
their sakes, and as soon as the people of God be gathered home then this world
shall have an end; as the Prophet David has it, Psalm. 48. O God, according to
thy Name, so is thy praise unto the worlds end: so also Psalm. 89. thy seed will
I establish for ever, and set up thy Throne from generation to generation; and
Dan. 2. 44. it is said, And in the days of those Kings shall the God of Heaven
set up a Kingdom that shall not be destroyed, a Kingdom that shall not be
given to another, but that shall break and destroy all those Kingdoms, and it
shall stand for ever. Here we may see the honor that God brings us to, to be
of that Communion and fellowship that all the Saints are of, to be of that
Church that Adam, Abel, Henoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and all the rest of the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself were of, and all the holy
men that have lived; as Ephesians. 1. 11. says the Apostle, Now therefore ye are
no more strangers nor forrenners, but citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God, and are builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, so Heb. 12. 17.
Saint Paul says, for ye are not come to the mount that might be touched,
etc. but ye are come to the mount Sion and to the city of the living God, the
celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the
congregation of the first borne whose names are written in Heaven and to God
the Judge of all men, and to the Spirits of just and perfect men: So then we
see that this is the honor that God has brought us to, to be of the same
Church and company that the Prophets, Apostles, holy men, and Christ himself
were of.

Therefore (to apply it) first, Use 1.
let us not lose the graces of God, like a slight huswife that keeps the
empty caske, and box, and loses the Jewel; but let us labor to partake of
the same graces with them, Simile.
seeing we are of the same Church that they be of.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing the Church has been in all times past and shall continue to the
worlds end, therefore it may be our comfort in all the troubles that do
befall it, when we see men conspire against, and labor to destroy it, yet
notwithstanding all that they can do, it shall stand and continue to the
worlds end. It has bin in all times and it shall continue for ever; as Psalm.
48. 8. David says, As we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the
Lord of Hosts, in the city of our God, God will establish it for ever;
Therefore seeing he has established the Church, it shall stand though all the
world were set against it. Augustine says well, The enemies of the Church
though they come and gather themselves together to destroy and root it out;
yet this is the comfort, Christ will keep it, he has a sword to defend it,
he will tie up the devil and shut up hell, that they shall not trouble the
Church; therefore though we do not see the Church visbile, it not being
patent and openly seen, but sometime hidden, as it was in the time of Elias
from the fury of the world, ye we must believe that the Church of God is
Catholic or Universal, that it has been in all times, and it shall continue
to the worlds end.

Now the Papists add somewhat unto this Article, Object.
and say, that we must believe in the Catholic Romish Church, but this is
first absurd in Religion: Ans. 1.
and secondly, absurd in Reason: it is absurd in Religion, because the Romish
Church must fall in the time of Antichrist (as the Scripture shows) and as
the Papists themselves say; but the true Catholic Church, that shall ever
continue; therefore it is absurd in religion to believe in the Catholic Romish
Church.

Secondly, Ans. 2.
it is absurd in Reason; because that Rome when it was at the best, could but
be a part of the Church, and a part cannot be the whole Church (as Scholars
know) therefore it is absurd in Reason. But they say that the name of Catholic
does properly belong to them: to this I answer, as Christ did to some that
lived in the Church; Simile.
Revel. 2. 4. that said, they were Jews, but says Christ, they are the
Synagogue of Satan: so I may say of them, though they term themselves to be
true Catholics, yet they be but a conspiracy against Christ. Now by three
reasons I will prove that they cannot be true Catholics.

First, Three Reasons proving that Papists cannot be the true Catholics.
because always the true Catholics have taught that divine worship is to be
given to God only and to no creature else, as Christ says, Matthew. 4. to the
devil, thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve; so
likewise Revel. 22. John fell down to worship the Angel, 1
but the Angel said unto him, See that in no wise thou do it, for I am thy
fellow servant; and Saint Jerome says, that we Christians do not worship any
creature, neither Angel nor Archangell, but God only: now because they teach
that we should worship stocks and stones, and the works of men's hands,
therefore they are no true Catholics.

Secondly, 2
because true Catholics teach that there is but one Mediator between God and
man, and that is Christ only; according to the Apostle, For there is but one
God and one Mediator between God and man, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
the man Christ Jesus; so Heb. 13. 15. says he, Let us therefore by him offer
the Sacrifice of praise always to God: so Origin also, we Christians offer up
all our prayers to God by the means of Christ: but the Papists teach that
there are a number of Mediators and that we may pray to the Virgin Mary, to
Peter and Paul, therefore they are no true Catholics.

Thirdly, 3
because the true Catholic Church has taught for sixteen hundred years
together, that men should not equivocate, should not speak one thing and
think another, but should speak the truth from their hearts: as Ephe. 4. 25.
says the Apostle, Wherefore cast off lying, and speak the Truth every man to
his neighbor: so Psalm. 15. He that speaks he truth in his heart, is one of
them that shall inhabit Gods holy hill: therefore we cannot say one thing and
mean another, for the oath is according to him that takes the oath, and not
according to the mind of him that swears: but the Papists teach that a man
may equivocate, swear one thing and mean another, and therefore they are not
true Catholics.

Now the use of this is, Use
seeing in this world is the true Catholic Church and the means of Grace, let
it be our wisdom to lay hold on the good means that is set before us, before
we remove hence. I have showed you heretofore if a man should send his servant
into the Indies with a ship to fill with gold, Simile.
and there might have it, but fills it with rubbish, stones and gravel; when
this servant comes home, he may look for a cold welcome home, so the Lord
has sent us into this world (as it were into the Indies with a ship,) with our
souls and bodies, and into the Church of God, there we may have gold to fill
our ships with, that is, the graces of his Spirit, therefore if we shall
fill our ships with rubbish, gravel or dirt, that is, with sins and
corruptions, we may look for a cold welcome home, for in the Church of God
there are the springs and fountains of grace, therefore why do we not apply
our selves to fill ships with the purest gold; to get faith, repentance,
prayer and all the graces of the Spirit, that so we may have comfort at our
return to God?

SERMON LXVIII.
1 JOHN 1. 3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye
also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father,
and with his Son Jesus Christ.
HAving spoken of the Church in the next place we are to speak of the
special benefits and blessings that God does bestow on it, for the Church is
Gods peculiar and chosen people that he has drawn out of this world;
therefore it pleases him to bestow greater blessings and more special favors
on them than on all other societies and assemblies whatsoever. It is true
indeed that there be common blessings that he bestows upon others, as it is
said, Psalm. 119. 69. that the earth is full of thy goodness O Lord: and so
Matthew. 5. 45. For he makes the Sun to shine on the evil and on the good,
and sends rain on the just and on the unjust: these common blessings all the
people of the world partake of. O, but there are a peculiar blessings and
favors that belong to none but to Gods servants, wherein none of the wicked
have their parts; and therefore as David says, Psalm. 31. 19. How great is thy
goodness O Lord, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, and done to
them that trust in thee, etc. the prophet does not say positively much
goodness is laid up for them that fear God, but makes a question and says,
how much goodness? and so Psalm. 147. ult. he has not dealt so with every
nation, neither have they known his judgments; so there be special favors
and blessings that none of the world have part in: for howsoever the wicked of
the world may have common blessings as riches, favor amongst men, wisdom and
learning, and be enabled to mainetaine Arts and Sciences, yet notwithstanding
there are special blessings that none of the wicked have their parts in, that
do belong to his children only to enjoy by the means of Faith: so Genes. 17.
18, 22. Abraham prays to God that Ismael might live in his sight: the Lord
told him, that he had heard him concerning Ismael, and that he would make a
great nation of him, but my covenant will I establish with Isaac: even so now
God blesses the wicked in this world, he makes great men of them, and rich,
gives them wisdom, children and such like, but his covenant he does establish
with Isaac, his special blessings and favors he bestows on none but his
own children to be enjoyed by Faith. Now there be two reasons why the Lord
does so, and it is not unprofitable for a man to consider of them.

First, Two Reasons why God withholds worldly things from his Children.
because the godly may see what a goodly and rich portion the Lord has
appointed for them, that so if any ways either through the falsehood of the
devil or other provocations they be pulled out from the enjoying thereof they
may labor to recover it again, knowing no where to have better entertainment
than in the house of their father: 1
this it was that brought home the Prodigal son to his fathers house, Simile.
when he considered the happy estate of those that lived therein; that they had
bread, and bread enough, and not only the sons, but the servants, and such
as were hired but for a day, even the meanest of them; so when Christians shall
consider the rich and happy estate of all the people of God, what a deal of
comfort and joy they have in the house of God, that they are comfortable in
their life, and blessed at their death, when they sleep in the dust, and when
they shall be raised up to glory; that is no small allurement for them to
return again unto the house of God: Simile.
so we see Hos. 2. 7. it is there written of Gods people, to whom he will show
a special favor; Though she follow after her lovers, yet shall she not come
at them, though she seek them, yet shall she not find them; then shall she
say, I will go and return to my first husband, for at that time was I better
than now: in like manner when we are gone from God and fall from him by our
sins, this will be a great means to recover that we may return again, when
we consider it was better with us when we walked with God, and made
conscience of our ways, than now when we in vain labor in sinful vanity;
so that then we return, when we see we can find no where better
entertainment than in the house of God.

Secondly, it is not unprofitable for a man to consider what great blessings
and benefits God bestows particularly on the Church, 2
that the wicked of the world may see what goodly things they have lost, and
what rich blessings and benefits God has given and granted out to the Church;
to such as be poor sinners and strangers: that the consideration of these
blessings and benefits may provoke them to come home to God, and to have
communion with the people of God, that so they may have their parts in these
blessings and benefits; as Hest. 3. 17. We may see that many of the land became
Jews, for the fear of the Jews fell upon them. But what is the fear of an
earthly King to the fear of God? and what are the privileges of an earthly
kingdom, to those blessings and benefits that God bestows on his people?
therefore if such a small matter provoked them to be Jews, how much more
should such great matters provoke the men of this world to become Christians,
and to be of the society of Gods people?

Now there be two sorts of blessings given unto the Church, 2
some whereof appertain to this life, Sorts of blessings given to the Church.
some to the life to come: those that he has given us to enjoy in this life
are the communion of Saints, and the forgiveness of sins: Some in this life,
some in that to come.
those that appertain to the life to come, are the resurrection of the Body,
and the life everlasting: Such therefore is the goodness of God to us, that he
does not only lead us in the hope of future things, but he has given us
something present in hand, till he bring us home to Heaven, to the enjoying of
all the rest of his blessings. The Lord promised to the Children of Israel to
bring them to the land of Canaan, and to put them in possession of it; but
first they were a long while led in the wilderness: when Moses sent spies into
the land, which did bring home unto them of the fruit thereof, Simile.
to taste of it; as it is Numb. 12. 18. that so they might have comfortable
hope that one day they should enjoy it: even so it pleased God in the
wilderness of this world to give us a taste of Heaven and Glory, and of the
Life, to come, that we might long after the full possession of Heaven and
happiness: therefore we may admire at the kindness of God, who gives us
somewhat in hand present, so that all our happiness is not laid up in hope; as
Tertullian says, the Lord has given us a pawn and pledge, that one day he
will render the whole to us. Now of the blessings that God does bestow on his
People in this life;

The first is the communion of Saints; The first blessing God bestows on his
people in this life, is the Communion of Saints.
for we do believe that there is a blessed and holy Communion of Saints in
this world, and that there is no communion like it. There be diverse communions
in this world, there is a communion of thieves, spoken of Prove. 1. 14. Cast in
thy lot amongst us, we will all have one purse. So there is also a communion of
darkness, as Esaias, Communions of the wicked.
5. 12. say they, Come I will bring joy, and we will fill our selves with
strong drink, 1
and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant: so likewise there
is a communion of the enemies of God: as Psalm. 2. 1. Why do the Heathen rage
and the People murmur in vain, 2
the kings of the Earth band themselves together, 3
and the Princes of the Earth are assembled against the Lord, and against his
Christ: so we see that there be diverse communions in this world, but fearful
and heavy shall the end of all these be; for as they have had communion
together in sin; so shall they have communion in pains and torments. So as
you heard out of the Parable, Matthew. 13. Christ says, The tares shall be bound
together in bundles, that is, all the wicked, such as hinder the growth of the
corn. Augustine thus expounds that part of the Parable, where Christ says,
The tares shall be bound together in bundles; that is, every kind of sinner
shall be bound up together; the Adulterers together, the Thieves together, the
Drunkards together, and perjured persons together; they shall be bound together
in bundles for the further increase of their torments: for as many strawes or
sticks being bound together in a bundle, Simile.
serve to set one another on fire and to increase the flame; so the number of
the wicked being bound together shall increase one another torment and grief:
so that it shall not be (as the World says) the more the merrier, but the more
the greater torment; fearful and heavy shall the end of all such Communions
be: therefore let us labor to have Communion with the Saints, in Faith,
Repentance, the graces of the Spirit; and then we shall have Communion with the
Saints in glory. As Mat. 8. Christ says, that They shall come from the East
and from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham and Isaak and Iaakob in the
Kingdom of God. So Genesis 25. it is said that Abraham when he died, was gathered
to his people: Abraham was a holy and a faithful man, and therefore when he
died, he was gathered to his people, that is, to such as he was, to holy and
faithful people: so likewise in the same Chapter, Ismael when he died, was
gathered to his People, he was a bad man, and was gathered to such as himself
was; for look of what communion a man is, to the same he shall be gathered:
If thou art an adulterer thou shall be gathered to such; if a Thief, to
Thieves; if a Drunkard, to Drunkards; if a Swearer, to Swearers: for look what
communion thou art of, to the same thou shall be gathered: Therefore if thou
would not then have communion with such as thieves be, etc. have no
fellowship with them in their sins; but labor to have communion with the
Saints in Faith and Repentance, and in the graces of the Spirit in this life,
and then thou shall be gathered to such, and enjoy with them glory in the life
to come.

Now the communion of Saints consists in three things:

1. That we have Communion with God. 2. That we have Communion with Christ. 3.
That we have Communion one with another.
First, 1
we have Communion with God; whereas before we were strangers by nature,
Communion with God.
and had not to do with God: nay, there was none that could bring us into
favor with him but by Christ: so S. John says in this place, and it is said,
Ephesians. 2. 13. But now in Christ Jesus ye which were once afar off, are made
near by the blood of Christ: so also Heb. 12. 23. says the Apostle, But now
ye are come to Mount Sion, and to the City of the living God, the celestial
Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the Congregation of
the first borne whose names are in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all.

This communion is the comfortablest communion that is in this world, therefore
above all things let us be thankful to God for it; because other communions
of this world, though the best, are not fit to compare with this: for to have
communion with kings, princes and great men in the world, with Angels,
Archangels and Saints, and not to have communion with God, all this were
nothing; because In his presence is fullness of joy, Simile.
and at his right hand pleasures for evermore. We see holy Ruth was contented
to forsake her Country and kindred, and to live a poor life, to have
communion and fellowship with the People of God; so much more we should be
contented to leave our sins and corruptions, and to endure some hardship to
have communion with God; as David, Psalm. 84. had rather be a mean man in the
Communion of Saints, than to live in great estate without it: the Queen of
Sheba pronounced them happy and blessed that did stand in the presence of
Solomon, but how blessed and happy may they be pronounced that stand in the
presence of God, and have communion with him; therefore above all things labor
to have communion with God by his Spirit, and do not deprive thy self thereof
by thy sins, but nourish it in your selves by all good means.

Now this communion that we have with God stands in two things; Our Communion
with God stands in two things.
first, He communicates to us his Wisdom, Power, Justice, Mercy, and Glory:
so that there is not a drop or dram of goodness in God, but it is for the
good of his servants and people; as his Power to defend them; his Wisdom to
direct them; 1
his Mercy to save them; and his Glory to impart to them: so Psalm. 23. David
says, The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want; and elsewhere, The Lord is
my light and my salvation, the Lord is the strength of my salvation, whom shall
I fear, the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? so
Hannah says, 1 Samuel 2. He has raised up the poor out of the dust, and
lifted up the beggar out of the Dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to
make them inherit the seat of glory: for the pillars of the earth are the
Lords, and he has set the World on them: so then the People of God have
Communion with him, in that he communicates all good things to them.

The second thing wherein our communion with God stands is, 2
that we may communicate all our griefs, sorrows, troubles, wants and
necessities unto him, and lay them down in his lap: therefore in all our
wants, sorrows and griefs, let us go to God and he will ease and releeve us:
as David says, Psalm. 34. 4. I sought the Lord and he heard me, yea, he
delivered me out of all my fear: so we are exhorted 1 Pet. 5. 7. Cast all
your care on him, for he cares for you. And therefore do thou want food to
feed thy body, or clothes? seek to God, he will releeve thee: do thou find
troubles, Simile.
art grieved? go to God, he will ease thee: when a man has any grief or
trouble in his mind, it is an ease to him if he have a trusty friend to
break his mind to; and many times there is somewhat that troubles a man that
he dares not tell his friend, lest he should upbraid him with it, or cast it
in his teeth: and again, a man may make his mind known to his friend, who
cannot ease him nor supply his wants; but if we communicate our griefs to God,
he will not cast us in the teeth with them, but will ease us, and supply all
our wants, and he is not only able, but willing also to help us in what thing
soever we stand in need of; therefore it is a blessed thing to have communion
with God, in that a man may communicate all his griefs, sorrows and wants to
him. We see that Adam had communion with God, but when he had sinned against
him he lost it, and hid himself from God: therefore when we have communion
with God, let us take heed that we do not sin against him, and lose our
Communion with him; but if we be overtaken, let us labor to repent, and so
recover our selves again: this is the first part of our Communion.

The second part of our Communion is with Christ; 2
and indeed we can have no communion with God, Communion with Christ.
but it must be by means of Christ; for we are all sinners and great
offenders, so that we are become enemies to God, and there is no way to
reconcile us, but by a Mediator; that is, by Jesus Christ. Philosophers say,
that things that be in extremes cannot be brought together but by some middle
matter; so God and sinful Man are two extremes, whom none but Christ could
bring together. Iaakob saw in a vision a Ladder that reached from Earth to
Heaven; this Ladder (Saint John tells us) that brought Heaven and Earth
together, Ioh. 1. vlt.
is Christ; so all our communion with God is by means of Christ.

Now in our communion with Christ, Christ communicates four things to us.
there are some things that Christ communicat's to us, and there are some
things that we communicate to him. Four things Christ communicates to us:

First, 1
Himself; not his Spirit and his graces only, but Himself also: therefore
seeing that Christ gives Himself, Himself.
let us be ready to receive him, for this is the greatest blessing that can be
given us: as Esaias, 9. 6. For unto us a Child is borne, Quest.
and unto us a Son is given: But some man may ask by what means is Christ
given? I answer, by our willingness in receiving him offered in the preaching
of the Word, Sol.
and in the use of the Sacraments. Even as a father that means to give his
child house and land, Simile.
the father is willing to give it, and the child to receive it; in both there
is a mutual agreement: so God for his part is willing to give us Christ, if we
be willing to receive him; and by this mutual agreement, Christ becomes ours;
and then we may say, I thank God Christ is mine, even as sure as the meat I
eat, or the Coat I put on my back, or any lands or livings my father has
left me.

Secondly, 2
the right of his death and merit; so that whatsoever is due to Christ in
regard of the right of his death and merit we may claim at Gods hand: The
right of his death and merit
the favor of God, the pardon of our sins, and the glory of Heaven is due to
us in regard of the merit of his death, as Peter says, By his stripes we are
healed: so a Christian may be bold to say, Christ is mine, and his death mine,
his life is mine, and his cross mine, and his pains mine to my eternal
comfort: therefore in the troubles of conscience, and accusations of the Devil,
we may go to God and tender before him the death and merits of Christ: if we
should tender our own righteousness, this would shame and disgrace us: If a
man should be imprisoned for a debt, which was paid by a surety, if he could
find the surety, he would bring him to the Judge, and say, here is the Man
that did discharge my debt; Simile.
here are the empty bags that the money came out of that paid my creditor;
surely any Judge would acquit that Man: so when the Devil shall implead us for
our sins, we may go to God and show him Christ, and we may quiet and stay
our selves here, saying, This is he that has paid my debt, here is the empty
purse, here are the empty veins that the blood came out of, and then without
all doubt God will acquit us: Therefore we must tender the merits of Christ to
God, spread them before him, and stand to them. To this purpose says
Chrysostom, Christ has taken away the handwriting which was against us, and
has given us another bill, bond, or new writing, whereby we may claim Christ:
Simile.
He has not done by us as the unjust Steward did by abatement, but he having
quite wiped out all, has given us a new bill, and has made God a debtor to us.

Thirdly, 3
the power of our spiritual life; We indeed are able by nature to move and
stir, Power of spiritual life.
and to do the duties of our calling, to buy and sell, etc. but are not able to
stir a foot to Heaven to look after that, nor move toward it, till Christ
communicates a spiritual life unto us. So 1 John 5. 12. says he, He that has
the Son has life, and he that has not the Son has not life; as 2 King.
12. 21. the dead Soldier was not able to move or stir, till being laid in the
Sepulcher of Elisha, he touched his loins, and then he revived and stood upon
his feet: so we are dead by nature, and not able to move or stir a foot in
the ways of God, till we touch the Body of Christ by Faith, then we revive and
stand up, life comes into us again.

Fourthly, 4
the dignity of his own estate, for by nature Christ is the Son of God, The
dignity of his own estate.
and he makes us the Sons and Daughters of God by Adoption and Grace, and
draws us into the same dignity and honor with him to be called the Sons of
God. But it is a harder matter for us to be made the Sons of God, than for
Christ to be made the Son of Man.

Now as Christ communicates something to us; 2
so we something to him: We communicate to Christ three things.
We communicate to him three things: first, our Nature; secondly, our sins;
thirdly, our troubles and afflictions. Here we see what an exchange we make
with Christ; He communicates to us himself, the right of his death, merit and
spiritual life, and the dignity of his own State; and we communicate to him
our nature, our sins, and troubles.

First, 1
we communicate to him our Nature, and that not in the best estate, Our Nature.
when it was in integrity, but since it was disgraced, and subject to
sicknesses, diseases and troubles; this is the change we make with Christ:
like Hiram and Solomon; Hiram gave to Solomon gold and silver, and Fur trees,
and what the heart of the King could desire; and Solomon gave to him a few
dirty Cities. Simile.
In like manner Christ gives to us what our heart can desire, his own self,
the right of his death, merit and spiritual life, the dignity of his own
estate, and we give him a few dirty clothes, our bad nature disgraced with
sin, subject to troubles and afflictions: If we would have communicated any
thing, it should have been of the best, because He is God blessed for ever,
Amen; it should have been when our nature had been in the best estate: but we
communicate to him our sins and troubles; therefore we should admire Christ's
love and goodness to us, that will accept of this exchange.

Secondly, 2
we have communicated a worse thing than this, our sins: as 1 Pet. 2. 14. Our
sins.
who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, etc. all the wicked
shall carry their own sins on their back to Hell with them, but the sins of
the godly, are laid on the back of Christ, he bare them; the cruel Soldiers
laid the Cross on Christ, and made him to bear it, but we laid a greater
burden than that on him, the burden of our sins; for the weight of the cross
is nothing to the weight of our sins.

Thirdly, 3
we communicate to Christ our troubles and dangers; as Esaias, 63. 9. Our
troubles and dangers.
In all their troubles he was troubled: and Col. 1. 24. Now I rejoice in my
sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the sufferings of Christ in my
flesh for his bodies sake: so Christ suffers still in his members by
compassion and fellow feeling. And these be the goodly things that we
communicate to Christ, nothing but our nature and sins, our troubles and
dangers; as I told you a little before out of 1 Kings 9. 11. Simile.
there was an exchange between king Solomon and Hiram, he gave Solomon gold,
silver, Fur trees and Cedar trees, and all that the heart of the king could
wish; and Solomon gave Hiram twenty dirty cities in the land of Galile: but it
is a better exchange that Christ makes with us, for he gives all that the
heart of a Christian can wish; his wisdom, righteousness, himself, his
merits and death, a spiritual life and the same dignity and honor with him;
but we again repay him with our nature sins and dangers: therefore hence let
us learn to admire this great kindness and love of Christ to us that will be
content therewith.

Now as the Saints have communion with God and with Christ, The Saints
communion one with another.
so have they communion with one another by means of love: as Exodus 25. Simile.
We see the golden Cherubim did so look toward the Arc, and the Mercy seat,
as that they looked one toward another: So we must look to God, and to
Christ by the eye of faith, as we must have one eye also to one another by
love. This society is comfortable, for Genesis 2. 18. God says, It is not good
that man should be alone: therefore if it were a good thing for man to have
communion and society in the life of nature, much better is it in the life of
grace. We see in a house, the posts that are compact together are a great stay
against the wind and weather; Simile.
so the Communion and society of the Saints one with another, is a great stay
and strength against the temptations of the Devil. It is a good saying that
Chrysostom has; Naturally a Man has but one head to advise him, one tongue
to speak for him, two eyes to foresee dangers, two hands to work with, and
two feet to go with: now (says he) if a man had this skill and cunning that
he could make that head a thousand heads to advise him, that tongue a thousand
tongues to speak for him, his eyes a thousand eyes to foresee dangers, his
hands a thousand hands to help him, and his feet a thousand feet to go for
him, he would hardly be circumvented by any policies: Therefore, it is a good
thing to labor to have communion with the Saints, and to be gathered into it.
Now the Communion of Saints one with another stands in three things:

1. Of the living with the living. 2. Of the living with the dead. 3. Of the
Dead with the Dead.
First, The communion of Saints with the living stands in five things.
the communion of the living with the living; which stands in five things:
first, in communion of affection, for they love and desire the good one of
another, and wish well one to another, they rejoice for the welfare and grieve
for the troubles and dangers that befall one another: 1
they wish well to those that be a thousand miles off them, Communion of
affection.
and love them they never saw. To this purpose David says, Psalm. 16. 3. All my
delight it with the Saints that be on the earth; so Colos. 2. 1. says Saint
Paul, For I would ye knew what great fighting I have for your sakes, and for
them of La^dicea, and for as many as have not seen my person in the flesh? We
see in nature, that if one member suffers, all the rest suffer; so says Saint
Paul, 1 Cor. 12. 26. Therefore if the Communion of nature work such affection
in one member toward another, much more there should be the same affection
amongst the members of Christ in the Communion of grace: Ezekiel. 1. 24. it is
said, when the beasts went, the wheels went; and when the beasts were lifted
up, Simile.
the wheels were lifted up; the reason whereof is there given, because the
spirit of the beast was in the wheels: so because the same spirit that is in
one Christian; is in another, therefore there is the like affections to procure
the good of one another as much as may be. Now I do not say they be all of one
judgment, for there is diversity of judgments; but they be of like affection
and good will one toward another, there is difference of judgment: as Romans
14. 5. This man esteems one day above another, and another man accounts every
day alike: so verse 2. One believes that he may eat of all things, and
another which is week eats herbs: so we may see that there is difference
in judgment amongst them; but this I may be bold to say, though there be
difference in judgment, yet there is unity of affection: so that they desire
the good, and wish well one to another. It is Paul's rule, Romans 14. 5. Let every
man be fully persuaded in his own mind; and else where he says, Let us
therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded, and if any be otherwise minded,
God shall reveal the same things unto him. Aquinas says that the effect of
charity is not concord in judgment, but in men's wills and affections, that
wish well one to another; as diverse Physicians be sent for to a sick person,
some of them think that the best way to cure the party, Simile.
is to take away all the corrupt blood at once; others think that it is better
not to take it away all at one time, but by a little and little: now here is
difference in judgment, but yet unity in will and affection, in that all of
them intend the good of the sick party: so it is in the sins and corruptions
of the Church; some think that it is best to take away all the sins and
corruptions of the Church at one time, but the sober minded think that it is
best taken away by little and little: here is a difference of judgment, but
unity of will and affection all intend the good of the Church: Therefore when
men for every little matter and diversity of judgment shall part brotherly
love, we may suspect that they do not belong to the Communion of Saints.

Secondly, 2
in communicating of their gifts and graces one to another: as 1 Pet. 4. 10.
Community of Graces.
Let every man as he has received the gift, minister the same one to another,
as good disposers of the manifold grace of God; so then such are exhorted as
be the people of God to be ready to communicate good things one to another:
so Matthew. 2. when Christ was risen and had appeared to Mary, she could not
hold, but she tells it to the Disciples; so also John 20. when the Disciples
had seen Christ, they could not hold, but as soon as they saw Thomas, say
they, Oh, We have seen the Lord: in like manner when we have any good thing
made known to us, we should not hold it to our selves, Simile.
but make it known to our friends and acquaintance. We see in nature, if a
Bird find but a worm, she will carry it to her young ones and make them
partakers of it; so when we have got any good thing we should carry it home
to our wife and children, and make them partakers of it; as Luke 5. the
Disciples were partakers in fishing, and there was a compact and league between
them, that what one did get in fishing it should tend to the common good of
that whole society, Simile.
so whatsoever we get out of the preaching of the word, it should go to the
common good of those that we are over: a man should not keep it to himself,
but impart it to the common good of his friends and acquaintance, or wife and
children; Simile.
as in the law the shelled fishes were unclean, because though the meat was
good yet a man had much ado to come by it; so when men have good things and
are not ready to impart and communicate to one another they be so far unclean
men.

Thirdly, 3
in spiritual Sacrifices; the Saints be free men, and yet they be every
bodies servants as far as their ability serves; In spiritual Sacrifices.
as Colos. 5. 13. says he, by love serve one another. We have heard out of
Exodus that if one household were too little for the eating of the Paschall
Lamb they should join with another house; Simile.
so if we be not fit for Prayer and conference and other holy duties, we
should desire the help of our brethren that have better graces than our
selves. Now these spiritual Sacrifices that we owe to the Saints, stand in
four things:

1. In Exhortation. 2. In Admonition and good Counsel. 3. In Consolation. 4.
In Mutual Prayer.
First, 1
In exhortation: for the People of God must exhort one another to fear God,
Exhortation.
and to make conscience of every holy duty commanded; as Heb. 3. 13. says S.
Paul, Exhort one another daily whilst it is called to day, etc. so Heb. 11.
24. Let us exhort one another to provoke one another to love and good works. So
it is not enough for a man to bring himself on in Religion, but he must stir
up the care of other; as Zech. 4. 2. the Prophet saw a vision of a golden
Candlestick with a boule on the top of it, and seven Lamps thereon, with seven
Pipes to the Lamps, which were on the top thereof, and two O live trees right
over it to drop down fatness to nourish the lights with; so every Christian is
a shining Lamp, and we must be as Olive trees to drop down fatness or oil
into the heart of our brother, Simile.
to nourish the light of God that is in him, therefore it is woeful thing, to
see that men do neglect this duty, that they do not exhort one another and
yet meet many times in the week and on the Sabbath day, and pass away the
time with a deal of idle talk and let this duty slip; so that they cannot
say as the Disciples said, did not our hearts burn when we talked with such a
man?

Secondly, 2
Admonition and good counsel when they be fallen, so to recover and restore
them again, Admonition.
as Gal. 6. (says S. Paul) Brethren, if any man be fallen by any occasion
into any fault, ye which are spiritual restore such a one with the Spirit of
meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted; The word in the
original is a metaphor taken from a Surgeon, Simile.
that is to set a joint, who uses it with great tenderness to bring it to his
right place; so we must do when we see our brethren fallen into any fault,
use them gently to restore them again, and we must labor to recover them
with the Spirit of meekness considering lest we also be tempted. It is not
the manner of the world to do so, but they make table-talke of it, and speak
to the disgrace of others; but we must consider that we our selves may be
overtaken, and therefore as we would have others to deal in meekness and
love with us (when we are fallen) so we must do to our brethren. We see in a
shipwreck that those that escape and get to the shore first, Simile.
get up to the top of a high tower, mountain or rock, and hang out lights and
Lanthornes, that so they may direct the rest of their company to the same
harbor: So we must do when we have suffered shipwreck in our consciences and
are recovered again, we must hang out as it were lights and lanthornes,
advise and admonish others and give them good counsel, that so we may bring
them to the same harbor, that we are arrived at.

Thirdly, 3
we owe to our brethren Christian consolation and mutual comfort, because
that ordinarily the cross does follow them and accompany the people of God,
Consolation.
for if a man be a sincere Professor of the Gospel through the malice of the
Devil and the fury of the world, always the cross does accompany him, and
therefore the brethren had need to comfort them, as 1 These. 4. 18. says S.
Paul, Wherefore comfort your selves with these words: and Prove. 31. 6. it is
said, Give ye strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto
him that has grief of heart: As in a sick family where they are given to
fainting they have bottles of Aquavitae and Rosasolis to refresh and comfort
them; Simile.
so the Church of God is a sick family, and therefore must have bottles of
Aquavitae and Rosasolis to comfort and to cheer them; that is, we must have
comfortable words to cheer and refresh them: but we see Job 6. 14. He
complains of this (says he,) He that is in misery ought to be comforted
of his neighbors, but men have forsaken the fear of the Almighty: so David
complains, Psalm. 69. 20. Reproach has broken my heart and I am full of
heaviness, and I looked for some to have pity on me, but there was none, and
to comfort me, but I found none. Therefore we must take heed that this be
not laid against us at the day of judgment.

Fourthly, Mutual Prayer, to pray for one another, as James 5. 16. it is said,
4
Pray one for another; so that the Prayers of the Saints are for the common
good of the whole body of them: Mutual Prayer.
this is a great comfort to be one of the people of God, in the time of danger
and temptation; for one cannot be the least member of the Communion of Saints,
but he shall have his part and portion in all the Prayers of the Saints. We
see in one Country there are diverse ships go to the Sea, some traffic in
one thing and some in another, some for gold and silver, some for other
commodities, but all such as they bring home is for the common good of the
whole country: So the Prayers of the Saints are like unto a number of ships
that go to Sea, some of whom make request for this thing, and some for that;
but whatsoever they bring home, all tends to the common good of all the body.

Fourthly, Fourthly, the Saints Communication in Riches.
the Communion of the Saints consists in Communicating of Riches and goods to
one another: Gal. 6. 10. it is said, while you have time do good to all,
especially to the household of faith: so Hebr. 13. 16. To do good and
distribute forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased: so also 2
Cor. 8. 7. Therefore as you abound in every thing in faith, and utterance, and
knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love toward us, see that ye
abound in this grace also. There is no one duty that men come more short in
than in this, men are contented to pray, and advise others, but this they
stick at, they cannot be contented to communicate of their goods to them;
neither can they abide to part with any of their Riches, this they stick at:
But Matthew. 2. 11. we see the wise men came to worship Christ, and presented to
him gifts, gold, frankincense and myrrh: They did not only worship him, but
did also impart to him of their treasure and goods. It is the manner of the
world that they can be contented to worship Christ, but they will not let any
thing come from them to refresh the Saints; they will not part with any of
their goods to them. Augustine says well, It is not meet that in a Christian
commonwealth, one should surfeit and another starve, that one should live in
plenty and another in want; for we have all one master and are redeemed with
one blood, we came into the world all after one sort, and shall all inherit
one Kingdom of glory; therefore we should not think it much to make our
brethren partakers of our Riches and goods: and again, (speaking out of Psalm.
68. says he,) men lay up for their Children, and their children keep it for
their Children; but what have thou laid up for Christ? if thou will not give
him thy whole estate yet let him have a Child's portion: Matthew. 21. Simile.
we see when Christ came riding to Jerusalem on an Ass, some strewed
garments in the way, some cut down boughs and branches; so do thou if thou be
not able to strew thy garments in the way, that is, to take the poor members
of Christ and feed them, yet cut down branches at least; that is, speak
comfortable words to them and pray for them; and then at the last day how
comfortable will it be to thee that Christ shall say in the sight of men and
Angels; Here is the man that has fed me, clothed me, etc. Therefore we
should love this part of the Communion of the Saints.

SERMON LXIX.
GALAT. 6. 2. Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.
WE see in experience that if a man has a timber SERMON. LXIX.
tree he may have out of it a great deal of good stuff fit for building;
Simile.
so out of one part of our Christian faith (though the words be few,) there
may (if it be well handled) run out a great deal of good matter. We showed
the last day that as the Saints have Communion with God and with Christ, so
they have a blessed and happy Communion amongst themselves. Which is threefold:
First, Of the living with the living: Secondly, Of the living with the dead:
Thirdly, Of the dead with the dead: Now the Communion of the living with the
living consists in five things, which I will not now repeat, but go on where
we left; which was to excite and stir men up to the putting in practice of
the duty of Communicating to our brethren in things of our temporal estate:
and to that end I will now insist on these three things following.

1. That there ought to be such a Communion of our goods and riches. 2. The
true bounds and limits of it. 3. The Reasons that should move us to it.
First, there is such a duty to be performed; as Deuteronomy. 1
15. 11. the Lord says, because there shall be ever some poor in the land,
That there ought to be a Communion in goods.
therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shall open thy hand wide to thy
brother, to the needy and to the poor of the land; so Eccl. 11. 1. says he,
Cast thy bread upon the waters, for after many days thou shall find it: Give
a portion to seven, and also to eight, for thou know not what evil shall
be upon the earth: If the clouds be full they will power forth Rain, etc. so
Gal. 6. 11. while we have time, do good unto all men, Simile.
especially to the household of faith. We see in Nature that the hand receives
not meat into it self, but puts it to the mouth, the mouth to the stomach; and
the liver cannot hold the blood, but conveyeth it into the veins; 2
now if there be any such Communion in the parts of nature, much more should
it be in the mystical body of Christ. The bounds and Limits of this Communion
of goods.


Secondly, what the True bounds and Limits are? herein we will show you first:

1. The Excess. 2. The Defect thereof.
The Excess is, to give too much; the Defect is, to give too little, so both
be faulty; the Excess is, rare, and few there be that offend that way.

The Excess is; 1
when men give away all, and leave nothing to themselves to maintain wife and
children with, The Excess of giving.
according as the Anabaptists teach, who ground themselves on Act. 4. 32.
where it is said, And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and
of one soul, neither any of them said, that any thing that he possessed was
his own, but they had all things common. To whom I answer first, that the
Communion that is here spoken of, is a communion of love only, as Phil. 16.
all things were common by love; and yet, Paul would not dispose of his servant
without his leave; so Act. 5. 4. Peter says to Ananias, Whilst it remained in
your hands appertained it not to thee, and after it was sold was it not in
thine own power? So this was a Communion of love. Secondly, the Church of God
at that time was in extremity and in one place, so that there is not the same
measure to be used in the time of the peace and enlargement of the Church, as
is in the time of want and extremity: Therefore when the Church was in
extremity and want they did well to sell their portions and to impart them to
the common good of all; but in the enlargement of the Church, Paul shows, 1
Cor. 16. 1. Every first day of the week, let every one of you lay by him in
store as God has prospered him, etc. And the Disciples did not contribute all
their goods to the Saints; therefore in the Communion of Riches and goods,
there may be an Excess. The Papists teach also the same, that we ought to
give all to the poor and to leave our selves nothing, and say, this is an
estate of perfection: But I demand of them, if a thorn should be a fruit
tree, that should be common whereby the poor might be releeved by it,
whether were it better to cut down the tree and impart it all, Simile.
or to let it stand to let them have the fruit of it to releeve them from time
to time? I do not doubt but every man that has discretion will say it is
better that the tree should stand stll and the poor be releeved by little and
little, than to cut it down and give away all at once; so it is better for a
man to retain his wealth and to releeve his poor brethren by little and
little continually, than to give away all at one time and none at another: so
Aquinas says, It is not the part of a liberal man to give all away from
himself at once to releeive the poor, but to retain the greatest part to
himself, to play the good husband with it, that he may be giving continually.
Object.
But the Papists Object, and say, that Christ commanded the Rich man to go
sell all that he had, and to give to the poor. Ans.
To this I answer, that that commandment or precept was personal to that man
only in a special service: as John 15. Christ told Peter that unless he did
wash him, he could have no part in him; why was it such a great matter to have
Christ to wash one. I answer, it was a great matter if he should have despised
or contemned it, he might have justly perished, Simile.
because it was a personal precept to him only; so because this precept to
the rich man was a personal precept, it was his sin that he did it not.

Secondly, Another kind of Excess.
It is an excess to give above a man's ability, so Act. 11. 18. where there was
a famine throughout the world foretold by Agabus; which came to pass in
Claudius Caesar's days, then the Disciples every man according to his ability
purposed to send succor to the brethren that dwelt in Judea: So there must be
a rule, and bounds used that we should not give above our ability: as I said
even now out of 1 Cor. 16. where the Apostle says, so do ye also every first
day of the week, let every one put aside by himself, and lay up as God shall
prosper him; therefore when men be so ready to help others, as that they
undo themselves, this is not the Communion of Saints but a Communion of
fools. Therefore every man must give according to his ability; as Psalm. 12.
5. it is said, A good man is merciful and lends, and will measure his
affairs by judgment; that is, he will so help others as that he will not
undo himself, but that which he does he will do in discretion. The
Schoolmen have a saying, charity is especially to give to ones self first,
and then to show it to others: A good man in doing of charitable duties, ought
to do so much good as that he do not undo himself; therefore if any do so
give to others, as that they leave nothing to maintain their wives and
children, and such as belong to him; these men want discretion: for it is S.
Paul's Rule in the 1 Timoth. 5. He that provides not for his own, (namely for
his household) denies the faith and is worse than an infidel.

Now as there may be an Excess in giving, 2
so there are Defects, as when men give too little: The Defects of giving.
This is that sin which is common in all places, to sin in the Defect; not
only in it is the sin of the common people, but also of Christians;
therefore men must so deal with them that be in need and want as they desire
that other men should do to them in the like case.

First, 1
men sin in the Defect, when they will part with nothing let the occasion and
need of the party be what it will be. Defect.
Little do these men know what S. James says, Judgment merciless shall be
to him that shows no mercy; and Act. 8. Peter says to Simon Magus, thou and
thy money perish; whereupon says Gregory, It had been well with him if
nothing but his money had perished; but there comes an extent against all, he
and his money perishes. So if men will not part with their money upon good
occasions, let the need and the want be what it will they and their money are
like to perish. We see in the Gospel, the man that had a talent given him and
did not use it well, there came an extent; first, upon the talent, which was
taken away, and then upon the person; take away (says the Lord) the
unprofitable servant, etc. so when men do not use their wealth and money well,
there will one day come an extent against their wealth and money; and then
against themselves. Therefore as Christ has showed mercy to us, so we should
be ready to show mercy to one another in the time of need and extremity.

Secondly, 2
men sin in defect, when they have but one measure of giving whatsoever the
occasion, Defect.
the time or the man is: the contrary practice whereof we see Acts 4. 25. where
it is said, They sold their possessions, and brought the money, and laid it
down at the Apostles feet, and distribution was made unto every man according
as he had need; so the more need a man has, the more we must give; and the
less need, the less we may give. In the Law the Lord commanded, Numb. 15. 5.
that in their sacrifices they should offer the seventh part of a hin of wine
for a Lamb, and for a Ram the third part of a hin of wine, and for a
Bullock half a hin of wine; In which was a mystery included to teach us a
moderation in the giving; that where we see most need, we should give more;
where least, we should give less. Therefore when men upon all occasions have
but one stint to give, they sin in the defect.

Thirdly, 3
some men are contented to give, but they take such exceptions against the
person, Defect.
that it is a rare man that shall make way into his purse; yet it should not
be so, for in extremity we must not look to the man, but to the need and
want that the man is in: as Luke 10. 29. Christ showed us whom we should
releeve, by declaring a Parable of a man that went down to Jericho, and fell
among thieves, who robbed him of his raiment, wounded him, and departed,
leaving him half dead: and there came by a Priest that same way, who when he
saw him passed by: likewise also a Levite, when he came near to the place went
and looked on him, and passed by on the other side: at last a certain
Samaritan as he jorneyed, Simile.
came near, and when he saw him, had compassion on him, went to him, bound up
his wounds, and powered in oil and wine in them: the application Christ makes
to the man, go thou and do so likewise: so if we see a man in want and
need, there is matter for thy charity to work on: as Esaias 22. it is said,
Blessed are they that sow on all waters, that take every occasion to do good;
whatsoever the person be, yet we must show compassion in the time of need.
Christian charity is compared to seed sown in two sorts of ground, in the
bosom of the poor, Simile.
and in the hand of God: Now it may perish in the first ground, in the bosom
of the poor: men may be unthankefull and unkind to us, but it cannot perish
in the hands of God, but shall bring forth a plentiful increase: Therefore do
not thou look to the bosom of the poor, thence to have increase, but to the
hands of God. There is a question amongst the Schoolmen, Quest.
whether a man were best to give to a good man that is in some want, Ans.
or to a bad and a wicked man that is in extremity? To this I answer, that if
the case be alike, we are bound rather to give to a good, than a bad man; but
if the wicked man be in greater extremity and need, then we should give to
the bad man rather; as when a man has a sick child, Simile.
if one come and tell him that he has a sheep like to be drowned, whereupon
he leaves the child and goes to save the sheep, because the present need
required it, yet there can be no question but that the man loves his Child
better than the sheep; so though we be bound to love a good man best, yet
when there is such a difference in the necessity, he is bound rather to
releeve a bad than a good man. 5
Bearing with one another.


The fifth thing in the Communion of the Saints is the mutual bearing one with
another in their weaknesses and infirmities; seeing all the People of God are
subject to weakness and infirmity, being partly flesh and partly spirit; the
flesh many times having the better of the spirit. As wine and water being put
into a glass, How the flesh may overcome the Spirit.
the water takes away the good taste of the wine; so the flesh takes away the
good taste of the spirit, insomuch that many times the best men have many
frailties and weaknesses; Simile.
therefore there must be a mutual bearing one with another, which is that
which holds together Christian communion: as Romans 15. 1. Saint Paul says, We
which are strong ought to bear with the infirmities of the weak; and in this
place, bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ; again
says he, Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, even as God for
Christ's sake forgave you: so then there must be a mutual forbearing one of
another; as we would have others to bear with our weakness and infirmities,
so we should bear one with another; for if we do not, we cannot hold
communion one with another, which is out of want of true love: We see a mother
will bear with the frowardness of her child, Simile.
though it cry and be disquiet all the night, yet she sings and dances it, and
in the morning smiles on it, and is as good friends with it as she was before;
the reason whereof is, because she loves her child: so if there were true
love amongst us, the husband would bear with the weakness of the wife, and
the wife with the weakness of the husband; the Parents with the Children, and
the Children with the Parents, and one good neighbor and friend with another;
for because men want true love therefore they cannot digest the least matter
that is.

Now this mutual bearing one with another consists in three things: In three
things Christians must bear with one another.
First, they be ready to hide and conceal the faults one of another; they will
not blaze them abroad and make table-talke of them, but they will hide them; 1
and if there be but one grace or virtue in them, that they will take notice
of, They hide infirmities.
but their infirmities they conceal: contrariwise is the practice of the
world, if they see a great many graces and virtues, and but one infirmity and
weakness in one, they will conceal all his virtues and take notice of that
weakness and infirmity, being like to the fly, Simile.
that passes over all the whole parts of a man, and lights on the sore place
chiefly.

Secondly, 2
if they cannot hide and cover them, they will be ready to excuse them; When
they cannot cover, they excuse them.
as Acts 3. 17. Peter told the Jews that they had killed the Lord of Life: And
now brethren ( says he) ye did it of ignorance as did your fathers; so Joseph,
Genesis 45. 5. says he, I am Joseph your brother, whom you sold into Egypt; now
therefore be not sad and grieved in your selves that ye sold me thither, for
God did send me before for your preservation.

Thirdly, 3
when the fault is so great that they cannot excuse it, and so open and
manifest as that they cannot hide it, They can endure the party, when the
fault is open and unexcusable.
yet still they can endure them, wish well to them, and pray for them. As 1
King. 12. 23. when the people had sinned against God in asking a king, and had
cast off Samuel, and rejected him; says he, God forbid that I should sin
against God? and cease praying for you; but I will show you the good and right
way: I will not fail in duty to you, though you fail to me. This is a rare
example, that when we cannot excuse the matter, nor hide it; that yet we can
pray for the party.

The use is, Use 1.
seeing the communion and society of the Saints is such a great help to
further us to Heaven, and to comfort us here in this world, let it be our
wisdom to nourish this holy communion one with another, and to strengthen one
another in our faith, repentance, and holy graces, as also to nourish holy
meetings, for the further instructing one of another. But these Christian
communions are now much decayed; we have seen what meetings in many towns
there has been in former time to confer and pray one with another, and to
speak of good things; do Christians think there is no need of help this
way, can they go to Heaven without the help one of another? The strength of
Sampson lay in his hair, which when Dalilah had cut, he became as another
man: Simile.
so a great part of the strength of a Christian lies in Christian communion,
and in the use of good means, from which if the world can entice thee, and cut
off these good helps and means, thy strength will decay, and thou shall become
as another man; therefore it must be our wisdom to nourish this holy
communion. There is another communion now adays that has eaten out and
overrun this, to wit, the communion of good fellows that meet together to
swill, swagger, drink, carouse, mispend their time, abuse the good creatures,
and dishonor God; but there is as great difference between these two
communions, as between light and darkness; and therefore it is a pitiful
thing, that on this day in which men should get knowledge, faith and
repentance, and be the better for it all the week after, they come to swill,
swagger and mispend their precious time, which I trust all good men that hope
to enjoy the communion of Saints, will shun, detest and abhominate.

Now the Papists do further enlarge this point, Object.
and say, that the Saints may communicate their merits one to another: for they
say that the Saints can merit enough for themselves, and give the overplus to
their friends; this is a monstrous opinion, and yet the doctrine of that
Church, which by three reasons I will disproove.

First, Ans. Three Reasons that no man can merit for another.
because no man can merit for himself; so if he cannot merit for himself, he
cannot merit for another: and no man can merit for himself, because merit is a
work that is not due, seeing all that we can do to God, Reason 1.
is but our duty. Now all the service that we do to God is but our duty, for
it is said, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy might; so then when we have done all
we can, we do but our duty: so also Christ says, Luke 17. 10. when ye have
done all you can, say, We are but unprofitable servants; therefore if no man
can merit for himself, then much less can he merit for another.

Secondly, Reason 2.
No man can merit for another, but he must he his Savior; but no man can be a
Savior but Christ only, according as the Angel told Mary, Matthew. 1. 21. And
then shall bring forth a Son, and shall call his name Jesus, for he shall
save his people from their sins. Now there is no man can be a Savior,
unless he can give grace, but no man can give grace, unless he first take
away the bar and stop that hinders grace. As a River being stopped cannot
run, unless the stop that did hinder it be removed: so it is in grace; now
that which is the bar and stop that hinders grace, is the guilt of sin: but
no man can take away the guilt of sin, but it is Christ only that must save
his people from their sins, as the Angel said: therefore if no man can take
away the guilt of sin, no man can give grace; if he cannot give grace, he
cannot be a Savior; if he cannot be a Savior, he cannot merit for any man.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
all that the People of God can do is little enough for themselves; and if it
be little enough for themselves, then they have no overplus for others: that
they have little enough for themselves, it may appear by the speech of the
wise Virgins to the foolish: Matthew. 2. 5. And the foolish said to the wise,
Give us of your oil, for our lamps are out: But the wise answered, saying,
Not so, lest there be not enough for us: Saint Hilary in that place says, Get
oil in your lamps, for no man can be helped by the good deeds of another:
therefore, if good men have little enough for themselves, then they can have no
overplus for others. Moreover, it is a strange thing that the same men deny the
imputation of Christ's righteousness; for they say, that Christ's righteousness
cannot be imputed to us; and yet they hold that the righteousness of the
Saints may be communicated; so then they attribute more to the Saints, than
unto Christ. Would any man think that a man of judgment, discretion and
knowledge, should fall upon such rocks and sands? but no marvel, for when men
will not believe the truth, then God gives them up to strange delusions to
believe lies. Now though the Saints do not communicate their merits one unto
another; yet thanks be to God they do communicate their graces and gifts one
to another; they do exhort, admonish and pray for one another.

The use of this is, Use 1.
first, that seeing there is a communion of Saints, therefore it must be our
care to uphold good things, to encourage one another, and to quicken them in
the life of Jesus. We see what communion there is amongst the drunkards of our
age to swill and swagger; how much more should Christians have communion
together, to strengthen and help one another to Heaven? Therefore we should
do as poor people do, lay all the ends together to nourish the little
sparks that be in us.

Secondly, seeing that there is a Communion of Saints, therefore we must desire
to appertain to that body and society, that so we may partake of those
Royal Privileges with them: naturally a man has but one head to advise him
and give him counsel, Simile.
one tongue to speak for him, two eyes to forsee dangers, two hands to releeve
him in any need, and two feet to go for him, but by the Communion of Saints,
a man has ten thousand heads to advise him, and give him counsel; ten
thousand eyes to forsee dangers; ten thousand tongues to speak for him;
therefore it must be every man's care to repent him of his sins, to remove
them, and to get faith in Christ, that he may appertain to them. We see in a
great city there be diverse companies, and some there be that have greater
Privileges than other, whereof men desire chiefly to be free; so in the
spiritual city the invisible Church there be many immunities and privileges
above other companies, which Gods dear children should labor to enjoy and
have society and fellowship therein.

We are now come to the second thing, 2
The Communion of the living with the dead, The Communion of the living with
the dead.
which consists chiefly in two things; first, That the Saints departed wish
well to those that be living, and desire their consummation in glory; for it
is the nature of charity to wish well to others. Now in the Saints it is not
diminished but increased; as S. Paul says, 1 Cor. 13. 12. For we know but in
part, and we prophecy but in part, but when that which is perfect is come,
then that which is in part shall be abolished. So then in general, they wish
well to us; indeed they do not know our particular estate, as Job 14. 21. thou
changest his face and sendest him away, and he knows not if his sons shall
be honorable, neither shall be understand any thing concerning them, whether
they be of low degree: and so Esai. 63. 16. Doubtless thou art our Father,
though Abraham he ignorant of us, and Israel know us not, yet thou O Lord, art
our Father and our Redeemer; hence it is manifest, that though the Saints
departed know not our particular wants, yet in general they wish well unto us,
and dsire that we may come to the same glory that they enjoy, and may arrive
at the same Haven of Happiness, and do also look every day for us, till the
final consummation shall come: this is comfortable to consider, that the whole
body of the Saints in Heaven wish well unto us, and look every day when we
shall come to them; as men in a Shipwreck when some be escaped and gotten to
the shore, they remain longing and looking, Simile.
when the rest of their company shall arrive; so the Godly having escaped
Shipwreck in this world, stand upon the shore of their own happiness, and
every day look when the rest of their brethren shall arrive at the same place
with them; therefore why should holy people be afraid to die? though they lose
their earthly friends, yet they shall go to all the Saints departed, to such
as wish well to them, and look every day for them, they shall go to Abraham,
Isaak and Iaakob, and to all the holy men departed: this is the first thing
that the living with the dead have Communion in.

Secondly, 2
the living and the dead have Communion in the same hope, faith and love,
conversing with them in Heaven, We have the same faith and hope and love.
even with Abraham, Isaak and Iaakob, and all the holy people and Saints: so S.
Paul says; Now therefore ye are no more strangers and forreners but citizens
with the Saints and of the household of God: and Heb. 12. 22. but ye are come
to the mount Sion and to the city of the living God the celestial Jerusalem,
and to the Company of Innumerable Angels, and to the congregation of the first
borne, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the
Spirits of just and perfect men. This is the honor of a true Christian, that
he shall not only have Communion with weak and frail men (such as we be)
but also with Angels and Archangells and all the Saints departed, conversing
with them in their faith, hope and love: We see in a great house there be
many Rooms and lodgings, there be some that lodge in the upper, some in the
lower Rooms, and yet they be all one house and family, and appertain to one
Lord and master, many times they all meet together, and when they be parted,
there is but a floor or a loft between them; so the Church of God is a great
house wherein there be many lodgings, some lodge in the upper Room, that is
in Heaven; and some in the lower, the earth, and yet they have but one Lord and
Master, and be all of one family; there is but a floor as it were between
them, and that is, the veil of this flesh, which shall be taken away one day,
and they shall come together one day. They that are in the upper Room shall
come down into this lower, to receive their bodies; and they which are in this
lower, shall go up into the upper Room to receive their glory and
immortality. The People of God in old time dwelled in Tents, the husband had
his Tent, and the wife had hers, as we see Genesis 18. that Abraham had his Tent
by himself, and Sara had her Tent, and yet there was Communion between them,
they met sometimes and conversed together, and when they were asunder, there
was but a thin canvase or cloth between them: so the Saints departed, live
in one place apart by themselves, and the living Saints by themselves, and yet
there is a near conjunction between them, because they all meet together in
the adoration of the true God; when they are asunder there being as it were but
a thin cloth between them, the veil of this flesh. Therefore little do men
know what they do deprive themselves of by their sins, for they do not
only lose Communion with weak and frail men (such as we be) but with
Angels and Archangells and all the Saints departed and blessed People of
Heaven above. Therefore pity the madness and folly of men, to deprive
themselves of so great a blessing.

Thirdly, 3
the Communion of the dead with the dead, consisting in two things: First, The
Communion of the Dead with the Dead in two things.
in desire that they may be buried, and lie together in the grave, that they
may rise together in glory and happiness. We see Genesis 23. that Abraham might
have buried Sarah when she was dead in the best of the Sepulchers of the
Heathen people; 1
but he bought a piece of ground of them to bury her in. Of in regard their
bodies.
And Genesis 49. 29. Jacob gave a charge to his Sons concerning the place of his
burial, saying, I am gathered unto my people, bury me with my Fathers in the
cave, that is, in the fields of Ephron the Hittite; in the cave, that is, in
the field of Machpelah besides Mamre in the Land of Canaan; which Abraham
bought with the field of Ephron the Hittite, for a possession to bury in:
there they laid Abraham and Sarah, and there they buried Isaak and Rebecca his
wife, and there I buried Leah; and let me lie amongst Gods Saints: so 1. King.
30. 31. the old Prophet said, When I am dead bury me also in the Sepulcher
wherein the man of God is buried, lay my bones by his bones, and my body by his
body, etc. So it is the desire of the Saints to lie together in the grave; to
have their ashes mingled together, and their dust never separated, that so they
may rise to eternal glory together. Some think it is no matter where a man
is buried when he is dead, and indeed all is one in regard of salvation; but a
man would be loath to rise with whoremasters, drunkards, thieves and villains;
therefore he would he loath to lie amongst them.

Secondly, 2
In that they shall meet together in the communion of the mystical body of
Christ: Simile.
for as in a circumference there are many points and lines, all which come to
one center; so there be many bodies of the Saints scattered and severed, some
in the land, some in another, some in the Sea, concavities and hollow places of
the Earth, yet all these shall meet at the Center in the body of Christ: for
howsoever the body may be sundered by death from the soul for a time, yet
soul and body cannot be sundred from Christ. Object.
Some think that the dead bodies of the Saints do truly belong to Christ,
and are under the care of God, because Christ says, that God is the God of
Abraham, Isaak and Iaakob; but they do not think that they have communion
with Christ when they be dead, because they have communion with Christ by
means of the Spirit only: but to this I answer, Ans. 1.
that the dead bodies be not only members with Christ, but they have
communion with him; for look how it was with the material body of Christ,
Simile.
when the soul and body was sundred by death, yet it was always united to the
Godhead: so the faithful people though they be dead, yet are united to
Christ. Again, Ans. 2.
I answer, that all communion we have, is by the Spirit of Christ; for our
dead bodies do communicate by his Spirit; not according to all the effects of
it, but some, namely that he does preserve and keep their dust, and one day
will raise and quicken them again to live in glory and happiness: so Saint
Paul says, Romans 8. 11. But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the
dead dwells in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also
quicken your mortal bodies, because his Spirit dwells in you.

Secondly, 2
the dead have communion one with another in regard of their souls; They have
communion in regard of their souls.
for all the souls of the Saints when they leave this world, shall be
gathered to the Saints that be departed: so Genesis 15. 15. says God, But thou
shall go to thy fathers in peace, and shall be buried in a good old age. Now
it could not be meant of the bodies of his fathers, for they were buried in
another Country; nor could it be meant of the souls of his fathers, (for they
were idolaters) but it was meant of the fathers of his faith, to such as he
was, to holy and good men: for look what a man is, to the same he shall be
gathered to; and such as a man converseth with, whilst he lives here on the
earth, unto such he shall be gathered in the life to come. Therefore, (to shut
up all) if thou would not be gathered to whoremasters, drunkards,
murderers, thieves, villains, and such like, do not converse with them, nor
partake with them in their sins; but if thou have repented of thy sins, got
faith in Christ and made conscience of thy ways, conversing with good men,
then thou shall be gathered to Abraham, Isaak and Iaakob, and all the holy
men: therefore every man must so live in this life, as that he may live for
ever in the life to come.

SERMON LXX. SERMON. LXX.

HEBREWS 10. 24, 25. And let us consider one another to provoke unto love,
and to good works: Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the
manner of some is: but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye see
the day approaching.
IN Christian communion two things are to be looked unto; First, that we have
communion with Christ, and then with his members: that we may have communion
with Christ, we must labor to get the Spirit of Christ; for as Saint Paul
says, Romans 8. 9. If any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his:
Now the means to come by it is by the Word and Sacraments, which be the
conduits and channels to convey the Spirit into us; therefore we must apply
our selves to the hearing of the Word preached, and to the receiving of the
Sacraments; and so often as we use these means, we should labor to feel the
Power of Christ in us, that we may say with Saint Paul, Gal. 2. I live not,
Simile.
but Christ lives in me. If a man take Physic, the next question that uses
to be asked, is, what does the Physic work? for if it does not, it is very
dangerous to him that takes it; and if he mend not speedily after it, and
gather strength, they do suspect the man to be but a dead man; even so the
Word and Sacraments are Gods Physic, which when we have received, the next
thing that we should enquire into, is, whether they work upon us or no? if
they do not stir our bad humors (as it were) and be a means to remove our
sins, and to get strength against them, that we may be quickened in our souls
with holy graces, if we do not mend (I say) upon it, our estate is full of
danger: Therefore it must be our care to profit by the use these good means,
that we may feel the Power of Christ in us, to kill sin, and to quicken up
all the graces that are in us; for the more we increase in communion with
Christ, the less we shall have communion with our sins. To explain this to
you, give me leave to use a familiar similitude; ART. X.
A certain man there was that had a foul yard, who got gravel and stones to
mend it, yet still his yard was foul; Simile.
then having a little spring in it, he opens that and turns the stream
through his yard, which carried away all the rubbish, filth, and dirt; so when
we feel and see our hearts to be unclean, the way to mend them is not to
put gravel and stones upon them, but there is a little spring of the blood of
Christ, which we must labor to turn into them; and this will be sure to carry
all the filth, rubbish and corruption that is in us: Again, Simile.
those that make opticke glasses, they say can gather all the Sun beams so
together, as by reflecting them on a ship, they can set it on fire; in like
manner if we can gather all the gracious beams of the graces of Christ into
our hearts, though it do not burn the ship, yet it will burn up all our
sins and corruptions: therefore it must be our care by the use of good means
to nourish this holy Communion, that we have with Christ by the Spirit.

Now as we have communion with Christ, so also with his Members by love; I
showed that there is a threefold Communion: of the living with the living; of
the living with the dead; and of the dead with the dead: which was twofold, in
their bodies and souls.

But of this sufficiently before: for of the several Communions of Saints one
with another, I have at diverse times spoken; my intention at this present is
only to prosecute such necessary consequences as depend upon this Doctrine:
which, also I do reduce chiefly to these three heads: First, That the soul of
man dies not; against Atheists: Secondly, That the soul sleeps not with the
Body; against Anabaptists: Thirdly, That the soul goes not to Purgatory;
against Papists.

Of these in Order; 1
and first, That the soul dies not.
That the soul of a man dies not; against the Atheists of this time, who say
that the soul dies together with the body: indeed it were well with them,
that their souls might die with their bodies, as a beast dies, for it goes
but to the ground and there is an end of them, but their souls (I mean
Atheists) shall go into pains and torments. Now because this is a weighty
point, and of some importance, I will prove it to you first, by the Scripture
and secondly, by Reason: by the Scripture for your sakes, for they care not for
the Scriptures; and by Reason for their sakes, because they may be left
without excuse.

First, 1
by the Scriptures; Proof by the Scripture.
Eccl. 12. 7. Then shall the dust return to the earth, and the Spirit to God
that gave it; likewise Christ says to the thief, This day shall thou be with
me in Paradise, Luke 23. Now this could not be spoken of his body, for that
was in the hands of the Soldiers to bury; therefore it was spoken in regard
of his soul.

Secondly, 2
by Reasons, By Reason.
which are chiefly three: First, That which is corrupted, is corrupted by the
contrary of it; but there is nothing contrary to the soul but sin; as 1
Pet. 2. 11. S. Peter exhorts the brethren, Dearly beloved, I beseech your as
Pilgrims and strangers abstain from fleshly lusts that fight against the
soul: Now sin is not contrary to the substance of the soul, but to the
purity and sanctity thereof; therefore though sin destroy the purity of
the soul, it cannot destroy the subtance of the soul; and consequently the
soul still lives.

Secondly, Reason 2.
That if the soul may do any action in the body, that depends not of the body
without the help of it, then it may subsist without the body: which we may
easily perceive as well by demonstration out of the rules of Philosophy, as by
evident notes and marks proceeding from the operation of our soul within our
selves, as the several operations of the intellectual faculties, that do not
depend at all on the body: even so it is in existing; but the soul may do
some action in the body that does not depend on it, as the judgment, and the
will; therefore it may exist without the body.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
a thing that corrupts must corrupt to something or to nothing: If they say
it does corrupt to some thing, then it will dissolve to the same thing that it
was made of, 1
but it was not made of the four Elements, for then it would be some thing;
nor of the temper of the Elements, for then it should be compounded; but all
Divines hold, that the soul is not a compound thing, but a thing undividable;
therefore the soul does not corrupt to something.

And it does not corrupt to nothing; 2
for, of nothing nothing can be made by the power of nature; but by his own
power God is able to make something of nothing. So this opinion is false;
therefore if the Atheists cannot tell us what becomes of the soul, and
whether it dies or not; Gods word can tell, that the soul does not dye, but
that it is immortal.

The Use is, Use
seeing the soul lives when it is out of the body, therefore all our care
must be for the salvation of our souls; whatsoever becomes of our bodies,
our care must be for our souls; yet we see what a-doe there is about the
body, all our care is for to cloth and feed it, and yet that shall come to the
dust for a while, and the soul shall live for ever in glory or in pain;
therefore our chiefest care must be for that. We see the thief on the cross
makes his Request to Christ, that he would remember him when he comes in his
Kingdom, Simile.
all his care was for the saving of his soul; he does not pray Christ to pull
the nails and the splinters out of his hands and feet, to assuage and
mitigate his bodily pains, but all his care is for saving of his soul; in
like manner when we come to die our request must be, that God would save our
souls whatsoever becomes of the body: I did show you the other day that if a
house were burnt down, and the men in it should escape; Simile.
we use to say, thanks be to God for it; so though our bodies go to the
dust, yet praise God that our souls go to heaven, into eternal joy and
glory.

The second thing that I will demonstrate is, 2
that the soul does not sleep in the body when it is dead; That the soul
sleep not in the body.
this is against the is Anabaptists, who say that the soul sleeps in the
body, when it is in the grave: but I know no ground for this opinion; for
whereas Christ says John 11. our friend Lazarus sleeps, etc. that cannot be
meant of the soul, but of the death of the body; so Matthew. 27. it is said,
that the Saints that slept arose: so then they have no Scripture for their
opinion, but against them.

Now we will see what Reason we have against them: First, Reasons against it.
see what is the cause of sleeping, for it is by reason of certain vapors
that arise from the bottom of the stomach, Cause of sleep.
and ascend into the head where they bind the senses: Now this cause is not in
the soul, and therefore that cannot sleep. 2
Again, if the soul should sleep, it must sleep in the body; for cast out
of the body it cannot sleep, because as long as the soul is in the body there
is life in a man, as S. Paul says, Act. 20. 9. of Eutichus; Trouble not your
selves (says he) for there is life in him; when he fell out of the window,
Object.
and every one thought he had been dead. If they say that the soul sleeps
out of the body, it must sleep in Heaven or in Hell, Ans.
or in this world, or in the grave: It can not sleep in Heaven, for there is
joy, nor in Hell for there is pain, nor in this world, for there is labor and
pain, nor in the grave, for there is corruption; therefore away with this
sleepy opinion. Now there is another kind of sleep of the soul in the body,
which S. Paul speaks of, Ephesians. 5. Awake thou that sleep and stand up from
the dead, and, Christ shall give thee life: therefore it is good for men to
awake while they be here out of this sleep of sin, lest they be fearfully
awaked, at the dreadful day of judgment with this fearful sentence, Go ye
cursed into Hell fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

The third thing that I will demonstrate unto you is, 3
That the souls do not go to a middle place, That the souls do not go to
a middle place.
as the Papists say: if men have done well then they go to Heaven presently,
but if they have committed great faults then they rest in a middle place: The
Scriptures show otherwise Eccle. 12. it is said, that dust goes to the earth
and the soul to God that gave it: and Christ said to the thief, This day thou
shall be with me in Paradise: Origin says that that which Christ spoke to
the thief on the Cross, he spoke to all his people; that when they died,
their souls go presently to joy: and S. Paul shows the same where he says,
2 Cor. 6. 7. Therefore we are bold and love rather to remove out of the body,
and to dwell with God. Hence then we see it plain in the Scripture, that so
soon as a man dies his soul goes home to God, to glory and happiness if
he be a true believer. Therefore seeing the soul does not die, neither with
the body as the Atheists say, nor sleep in the body, as the Anabaptists say,
nor rest in a middle place as the Papists say it is a certain truth that the
souls of the Godly are gathered presently after death into the Kingdom of
Heaven. O then what a joyful meeting will that be when my soul and thy soul
and all the souls of Gods Children shall be gathered to Angels and
Archangels, to the Patriarchs and Prophets; to Abraham, Isaak and Iaakob, and
all the Holy men of God that are departed in the faith of Christ; therefore
above all things (my brethren) labor to have Communion with the Saints here in
the Kingdom of Grace that thou may have Communion with them in the Kingdom
of glory; for if it be a sweet thing to have Communion with the Saints here
in this life, much more it is a sweet and joyful thing to have Communion with
them in the Kingdom of glory.

Now there are four things in this life that hinder and allay the comfortable
Communion that the Saints should have one with another.

1. The mixture of wicked men. Four lets of the communion of Saints.
2. The Imperfection of good men. 3. The Distance of place. 4. The narrowness
of their love.
The first thing that takes down and allaieth the comfortable communion of
the People of God in this World, 1
is mixture malorum, Let the mixture of evil men.
The mixture of evil men: and that in two respects:

First, In wronging the Saints.
because they hurt and vex them with their wrongs; 1
of the People of God be as Lambs amongst Wolves, innocent and harmless; and
the wicked Ezekiel 34. 21. They are called Rams that thrust with side and
with shoulder, and push at the weak with their horns, until they have
scattered them: Therefore David complains of the wicked, Psalm. 144 That they
eat Gods People as a man eats bread; so also Psalm. 41. 9. (says he) Yea my
familiar friends whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, have lift up the
heel against me: they that were of the same communion with him did much wrong
him. Simile.
Saint Basil observes that a ship in the Sea is in more danger of those rocks
that are hidden with water, than with those that may be seen a great way off;
so (says he) the close and secret enemies of the Church, and such as live
amongst them, are more dangerous than they that be open and apparent to be
seen.

Secondly, 2
they grieve and offend them with their sins; They vex them with their fine.
though they do not wrong nor hurt them otherwise, yet with their sins and
their uncivil conversation they do vex and grieve them; as 2 Pet. 2. 8. it
is said, that Lots soul was vexed every day with the unclean conversation of
the Sodomites dwelling amongst them, and yet they did not hurt with their
hands. If one man should set up a number of goodly lights, Simile.
and one should come and make a smoke in the room, it would dim the lights;
so the Lord has set up a number of Saints to shine as lights in this World,
and the Devil he thrusts in a number of vile and wicked men to make a smoke to
dampe their light, which although they cannot quite quench, yet they much
dim: this does hinder and allay the sweet and comfortable communion that the
Saints should have one with another. Now in the Kingdom of Heaven there shall
be no such matter: as Matthew. 13. 41. It is said that Christ will thrust out of
his kingdom all things that offend: so there shall not be a wicked man left
to hurt nor offend them: so Esaias 11. 9. it is said, They shall not hurt nor
destroy in all my holy mountain: and likewise Revel. 21. 27. it is said, And
there shall enter into it no unclean thing, neither whosoever works
abomination, or tells lies: again, Revel 22. 15. says he, For without shall
be dogs, inchanters, whoremongers, murderers, Idolaters, and whosoever
loves and makes lies: So all the wicked shall be excluded and shut out of the
kingdom of God, there shall be no body to hurt the Saints nor to grieve and
offend them; O how comfortable will the communion of Saints be in Heaven?

Secondly, Imperfectio bonorum, the imperfection of good men; for they be not
perfectly sanctified in this world, 2
they are regenerated but in part; The imperfections of good men.
partly flesh, and partly spirit: so by reason hereof there be many jarres and
brangles that do arise amongst them; as Gregory says out of Psalm. 10. that
many times friends have much ado to agree: for we see Abraham and Lot were
both sanctified and holy men, and yet there was a jarre between them, they
were glad to be parted, Genesis 13. 8. so Paul and Barnabas we both good and holy
men, and yet they were so at odds one with another, that they parted company.
Acts 15. 39. Damascen observes, Simile.
that as there is no rose (since the fall of Man) but has his prickles; so
there is no man, even the best that is, but has some thing or other in him,
that is distastefull: but in Heaven all these infirmities shall be taken away,
and then there will be infinite matter of comfort. As Genesis 21. 10. ye see
that there was a jarre between Abraham and Sarah, about the bondwoman and her
child, who when she was cast out, all was at peace: so many times there is
contention and strife between Christians, all being about the bondwoman and
her Child; that is, the relics and remainders of corruptions in the flesh,
but when they shall be taken from us, then we shall have sweet agreement:
therefore if the communion of Saints be comfortable here, how much more
comfortable will it be in Heaven?

Thirdly, 3
distantia locorum, that they live in remote places one from another; and yet
there is a providence of God in it, The distance of Place.
For the People of God are said to be the salt of the Earth: Salt must not be
laid all in one place, but it is sprinkled and scattered in every place to make
meat seasonable and savoury, Simile.
that is, unto many; so the Godly, do not live all in one Town, Country, and
Place, but are scattered and sprinkled all the world over to season the hearts
of their brethren, and their souls; to make them savoury unto God: so because
they be thus scattered and hindered one from another, this does hinder and
allay the sweet and comfortable communion that they should have one of another.
It is said, Judges 5. 16. For the divisions of Reuben were great thoughts of
heart; for Reuben was placed on the other side of Jordan, Simile.
so that they could not get mutual help from them, because there was a River
between them; In like manner because there is a Jordan, between the People of
God in this World; some living in one Country, and some in another, so that
they cannot lend their mutual help one to another; this makes great thoughts
of heart, and allayeth the comfort that they might have one of another: but at
the day of death they shall all go into the kingdom of God, and live in one
place. As Matthew. 8. Christ shows that they shall come from the East, and from
the West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaak, and Iaakob, in the Kingdom
of God. We see how comfortable it is when a few Christians are met together to
confer, pray, and sing Psalms, who notwithstanding have their weakness and
frailties: and if it be so comfortable here, Simile.
what will it be when all the People of God shall meet together in Heaven. If
one see an infinite number of godly Diamonds shinning, scattered here and
there, and they be all brought into one room, what a light and luster would
there be? So the People of God are as a company of shinning Pearls or
Diamonds, that are seated here in this world, but one day when all they are
gathered together and brought into Heaven, then what a wonderful glory and
shining will there be?

Fourthly; 4
Angustia amorum, the narrowness of their love: Narrowness of their Love.
for the People of God are bound to love as brethren, and to tender the good
one of another. Now there is such a narrowness in our love, that we have much
ado to love our friends, much less all the Saints; for there be a number of
Saints that we know not, neither do we love all we know, as we should do;
but at the day of death when we shall all meet together in Heaven, then our
love shall be enlarged, and we shall love the whole Israel of God, no brother
loves his brother so dearly as we shall love one another; yea, though we
never saw them before, nor heard of them; then consider how great will our
comfort be at that day, when we shall part from this world, and live together
in Heaven?

Now besides all these, there is a double communion we have with the Saints:

1. A communion with them in Grace. 2. A communion with them in Glory.
Therefore it must be every man's care to labor to appertain to the communion
of saints in grace, that so they may come to have communion with them in the
kingdom of glory. Indeed all men desire to appertain to the communion of
saints in glory, to go to the kingdom of Heaven; like Balaam that desired to
die the death of the righteous, to be in glory and happiness with the People
of God, but cared not to live godlily here: But if ever we expect to have
communion with the Saints hereafter in the kingdom of Glory, we must be sure
to have communion with them here in the kingdom of Grace. And therefore let us
labor to repent us of our sins, to get faith in Christ, to walk before God
in newness and holiness of life, and then after this life, we shall live in
all blessedness in the kingdom of Heaven for ever.

SERMON LXXI.
LVKE 1. 77. To give knowledge of salvation unto his People, by the remission
of their sins.
AT length we are come to the second maine blessing and benefit that God
gives unto us in this life, the forgiveness of sins, wherein two things are
to be considered. First, That the forgiveness of sins is one of the greatest
blessings that God gives to his People here in this World. Secondly, That this
blessing appertains to this life only; if we have it not here, let us not
look for it in the life to come.

For the first, 1
That the forgiveness of sins is one of the greatest blessing that God
gives to his People in this world. Pardon of sins, one the greatest blessing
of this life.
We see Esaias 33. 24. it is said, The People that dwell therein, shall have
their iniquity pardoned. So Esaias 40. 1. Comfort ye, comfort ye my People,
says God, speak ye comfort unto Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her
warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned, for she has received
of the Lords hand double for all her sins: and Psalm. 32. David pronounces
the man blessed, that has his sins pardoned; therefore, Matthew. 1. the Angel
said to Mary, and thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his People
from their sins: so then it is clear by the Scripture, that the pardon of
sins is one of the greatest blessings that God gives in this life. It is a
great blessing indeed to have food and raiment, with things fit and needful
for this life: but the pardon of our sins is a greater blessing than that,
for take any man abounding in all these things, riches, goods, honors and
credit, yet if he want the pardon of his sins, he is a miserable man, and
stands in a woeful condition, for he stands not on clear grounds. The
prisoners in the Tower are in a worse estate and condition, Simile.
than the poorest waterbearer is; for though he have all good diet, attendance,
fine rooms, and a soft bed to lie on; yet in his own sense he is miserable,
because he looks every day for his arraignment, when sentence shall be given
against him; so if a man flow in all the wealth and deliciousness the world
can afford, and yet be unreconciled to God, and has not repented his sins,
he is in a worse condition and estate, SERMON. LXXI.
than the poorest of Gods Saints, though they have but bread and water, because
that every day he may look when he shall have the final sentence pronounced
against him, to the woeful confusion of him for evermore. When every thing goes
well with us, it is an hard matter for us to see the pardon of our sins to
be one of the greatest blessings; but if the Lord should open our eyes, to see
our sins, and to feel the burden of them a little, being touched in
conscience for them; then if the world were set on the one hand, and the pardon
of our sins on the other, we would choose the pardon of our sins before all
this world.

The use hereof shall be, Use.
seeing the pardon of sins is one of the greatest blessings that God gives
in this world, therefore though God give us food and raiment, things needful
and necessary for this life, yet we should not be at rest, till we find the
pardon and forgiveness of our sins; most men now a-dayes labor for these
outward things and never seek for the pardon of sins, but every one should
check himself and say, I have labored a long time for these outward things,
for a little bread and cloth, yet the time is to come that ever I sought for
the pardon of my sins, the greatest blessing of all. Exodus 8. 8. we read how
Pharaoh came to Moses and Aaron, saying, Pray ye unto the Lord that he may
take away the frogs from me: He desired not him to pray to take away his
sins, Simile.
which was the cause of them; Just the same is the case of the men of this
world, they cry out, take away this judgment, this sickness, this lamenesse,
take away this poverty, but never pray to God to take away their sins, which
are the cause thereof. Genesis 15. God made to Abraham great and large promises,
who replies to God, Simile.
Lord, what is all this seeing I go childlesse? so, when God has given a man
Riches and goods, and what the heart of a man can wish for, yet he should say
unto God, Lord what is all this seeing I want the pardon of my sins?
therefore above all things, Lord forgive me my sins, and pardon them.

The second thing is, 2
that, pardon of sins appertains to this life only: for there are two
sorts of blessings; Pardon of sin is only for this life.
some that appertain to this life, some to the world to come; those that
appertain to this life are: First, The Communion of Saints: Secondly, The
forgiveness of sins. Here a man must seek it, for so Christ shows, Matthew.
5. agree with thine adversary whilst thou art in the way. Now Augustine
says, that the time of life is the way to the judgment bar; and therefore
while we are in the way we must labor to seek peace with God and the pardon
of our sins; lest our adversary accuse us to the Judge, and the Judge
deliver us to the jaylour, and the jaylour cast us into prison, whence we
shall not come out until we have paid the uttermost farthing: And Solomon
says, Eccl. 9. 10. All that thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy
power, for there is neither work, invention, nor knowledge in the grave
whither thou go. So S. Cyprian says, when a man is once out of this world,
all opportunity of doing good, is gone: So Chrysostom, here in this world one
must find the pardon of his sins, in the world to come it will be too late
to find it: And so Augustine, there is a twofold Repentance, a fruitful
Repentance; which is in this life; and penal or unfruitful Repentance in the
life to come; so the wicked in Hell, may repent them of their sins; the
whoremonger of his whroedome, swearers of their swearing and the drunkard of
his drunkenness: but this kind of Repentance is unfruitful, because they have
no good by it, but it serves to increase their further torment. But the
fruitful Repentance is in this life only; therefore we are taught hereby to
make it our wisdom to lay hold on the good time that God gives us to repent
us of our si^nes, to be reconciled unto him and seek favor at his hands; for
if we be once dead and laid in the grave, all opportimitie of doing good, is
taken away If a man sends his servant to the market to buy such things as they
stand in need of, Simile.
when the market bell rings he must apply himself to buy the things that he
comes for, whilst the market lasts; for if the market be once over, the
opportunity for that time is lost: so the time of life is the market of the
soul, whilst this lasts, a man may have any sanctified Grace, he may
faith, Repentance, favor with God, and pardon for his sins; but if he
tarry till the market be done, and this life ended, he cannot have faith,
Repentance, nor any sanctified grace; nor one drop of Gods favor though he
would give a world for it. Therefore let us be exhorted to lay hold on the
good time that God gives us.

Now for the further enlargement of this we are to consider two things:

1. What we are to believe in general. 2. What we are to believe in
particular.
In the general we are to believe that, if we can repent there is forgiveness
of sins; and in particular, I do believe that my sins are pardoned and
forgiven me. for what shall I be the better to believe there is pardon of
sins, unless I can believe that my sins are pardoned? now in general
there be six particulars to be believed:

1. That all men be sinners both in the estate of Nature, and in the estate of
grace. 2. That there is no way to find release, but by the forgiveness of
them. 3. That there is forgiveness of sins if men will seek it. 4. There is
forgiveness of sins without limitation of Number, be they never so many: or
Quality, be they never so great. 5. That God only forgiveth sins. 6. That
God does not absolutely forgive, but it is upon condition, if men repent them
of their sins.
First, 1
We believe that all men be sinners both in the estate of nature, and in the
estate of grace, That all men be sinners.
for in our Christian faith we believe the forgiveness of sins; now there
can be no forgivensse where there is no sin; and Christ teaches us to pray
daily for the forgiveness of our sins, to show, that the pardon of them is
as needful as our daily bread; even in our best estate, Job. 9. 3. it is said,
If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand; and
Psalm. 143. 13. David says, enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord;
for in thy sight no flesh is justified: so Solomon shows, 1 King. 8. 4. That
there is no man that sins not; and James 3. 2. it is said, In many things
we sin all: so also 1 John 1. ult. If we say we have no sin, we deceive
our selves and there is no truth in us. Hence then it is plain by the
Scriptures that all men are sinners both in the estate of nature and in the
estate of grace. And it is plain by Reason also, for, look where the
punishments of sin be, there is sin; for by order of divine Justice where
there is sin there is the punishment of it. Now all men have in some measure
tasted of the punishments of sin, some in one kind, some in another;
therefore there is sin in all men. We see in experience, that if the
Bayliffes be busy about a man, Simile.
and they arrest him and strain him in his goods, they will say, surely this
man is in debt, he is but in a poor estate; so when the Lords Bayliffes be
left about a man, that is, when the judgments and punishments of God distraine
us in our goods, and arrest us, we may say, surely we are in the Lords debt,
our estate is but mean and poor.

The use is, Use 1.
seeing all men be sinners both in the estate of Nature and grace; therefore
every man must labor for the forgiveness of his sins. We see that David
when he came to the sight of his sins, by the Prophet Nathan, he was not at
rest till he had repented of them: so when we are brought to the sight of our
sins by any occasion, we should not be at rest till we have repented of them.
If a man has committed such an offense against the king that he is in danger
of death, he cannot be at rest till he has gotten a pardon from the king
sealed; Simile.
which when he has, he lays it up in his chest, and looks on it many
times to his comfort; so when we have sinned against God, and are in danger of
death, let us not be at rest till we have got a pardon from God, sealed with
the blood of Christ, which a man must lay up in his heart and look on it at all
times for his comfort.

Secondly, 2
there is no way to find release of our sins, but by forgiveness;
therefore, No way to have release, but by forgiveness of sins.
when we have sinned against God, there is nothing that can release us, neither
Angel nor Archangell, but it must be by forgiveness: our case is like the
servants, Matthew. 18. 24. that ought a thousand talents, a great deal, and had
nothing to pay it withal; so we have a great deal to pay unto the Lord,
Simile.
and have not one halfepenny to pay him with: we have nothing, and therefore,
we are never able to satisfy for it, neither is there any other way to release
us, but by forgiveness. The Church of Rome says, that a man may satisfy God
for many of his own sins, Object.
and that according to justice, and needs not at all forgiveness. Ans.
But this is contrary to the doctrine of their own schoolmen, and Reason is
against it.

First, Reasons against Man's satisfaction.
every man that does satisfy for any thing must do as much good to the
party, as be has wronged him by his offense; as Aquinas says, that
satisfaction implies a certain equality: Reason 1.
But when we sin against God, we offend an infinite thing, therefore there
must be infinite satisfaction for it; but all the actions of men be finite, and
therefore no man can satisfy God for any sin.

Secondly, Reason 2.
no man can discharge one debt by paying another debt: But all we do is due
debt to the Lord; for as Christ says, When ye have done all that ye can, say
that We are unprofitable servants; therefore because all that we do is due
debt unto the Lord, therefore we cannot satisfy for any sin.

Thirdly, Reason. 3.
sin hinders the virtue of satisfaction; for if a man be a sinner he can do
nothing that is pleasing and acceptable to God; and if a man cannot please God,
he cannot satisfy for any sin: but there is no action we do, but we sin
in it; therefore we cannot satisfy God for our sins. This is clear by the
Scriptures, and therefore their doctrine of the Church of Rome is not to be
believed. For we must acknowledge when we have sinned, that there is no way to
satisfy God, but by free pardon and forgiveness.

But how is it free pardon and forgiveness? I answer, Quest.
It is free in regard of us: It is due in regard of Christ, for it cost him
three and thirty years travel in this world, Ans.
it cost him his life and his blood; many streams of pure blood issued from
him, to obtain a pardon from God for us. O that we could consider this great
goodness of God! It is true indeed that we have pardon and forgiveness free
to us, but it is due to Christ.

Let the use be, Use 1.
first to exhort us to take heed how we sin against God: If a man had a
curious glass, and it should fall and get a cracek, which no man in the world
save one, could make whole again, who would not be hired for any thing in this
world to mend all that should break, Simile.
though he did some few out of his love and good will, how afraid would a man
be to let it fall? such a curious glass is the soul of man, that if it fall,
if it sin against God, it will catch a crack, and then there is not one in
all the world that can make it, or repair it again, but God only, and he
will not be hired to do it, for silver or gold, or for any thing in this
world, but all he does is out of his love and of mere mercy and good will to
some few; therefore how should men take heed that they do not fall into sins
and corruptions, so to crake their souls and deface them.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing there is no way to have release and pardon for our sins, but by
forgiveness, therefore we must labor to keep God our friend, and to take heed
that we do not offend nor grieve him with our sins. If our life should
depend upon any man in such sort, as that he might take it away at his
pleasure, Simile.
how careful would we be to please him? we would not speak a word, nor do
any thing that should offend him; the salvation of our souls depends on the
Will of God, to save or condemn us, it is his mercy to save us, and his
justice to condemn us; therefore we should be careful to keep God our
friend, howsoever the world do little regard it now; yet when we shall come
before him, every man would be glad at that time to have him his friend, when
he shall be our Judge, and then we shall stand or fall, all according to his
sentence.

Thirdly, 3
we believe there is forgiveness of sins, if men will seek it: It is true
indeed, That forgiveness of sins, is to be had, if sought for.
that all men's sins are not pardoned, yet we believe if men will seek
forgiveness, they may have it. So David says, Psalm. 32. 5. I confessed my
sins, and thou forgavest the punishment of them; so Esaias 55. 7. Let the
wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon them, and to our God, for
he will abundantly pardon. So also Micah 7. says the Prophet, Who is a God
like unto thee, that take away iniquity, and passes by the transgression of
the remnant of his Heritage, etc. So then it is clear by the Scripture, there
is forgiveness of sins if men will seek it. The uses are.

First, Use 1.
seeing there is forgiveness of sins if men seek it, therefore it must be
our wisdom to seek it, and not rest till we have found it; as Esaias 55. 6.
(says he) Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he
is near, and the Lord will have mercy and forgive: therefore do not live in
thy sins, for then thou shall perish, but seek unto God, and then they shall
be forgiven thee. If a man be in danger of the kings writ, Simile.
if he be wise, he will labor to compound the matter as soon as may be; so if
we are in Gods danger, and stand not in clear terms, Gods writs coming out
against us from day to day, if we be wise, we will seek to God to compound the
matter so soon as may be; as 1 King 20. 31. when Benhadad was shut up, his
servants said unto him, We have heard that the kings of Israel are merciful
kings, Simile.
we pray thee let us put sackecloth about our loins and ropes about our
necks, and go unto the king of Israel, it may be he will save thy life; in
like manner when we hear that God is merciful and ready to forgive, why do
we not seek to him, and humble our selves, that so we may find mercy and
favor with God.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing there is forgiveness of sins, if men will seek it, therefore we
must take heed we fall not into the same sin again; the Prophet David says,
There is mercy with thee O Lord, that thou may be feared; it is a strong
conclusion that David gathers, because God is merciful, therefore David is
loath to offend God, and afraid to do evil, he has found such mercy and
goodness at his hands; but the world frames another conclusion clean
contrary to this, because the Lord is merciful, therefore they will sin the
more. Blessed therefore are the People of God, who the more merciful God is,
and the more he loves them, the more they labor to please him, and are
afraid to offend him. If a man did lie in prison many a cold winter, and a
friend should come to him and knock off his fetters, Simile.
open the Prison door for him, and let him out, and if any should lay hold on
him after that to carry him to the Prison again, O how would he cry out, and
be afraid to come there any more? So we were locked up here in the
prisonhouse of sin, and have been a long time, the Lord has knocked off our
bolts and fetters, unlocked the prison door, and let us out; therefore if
sin should lay hold on us, to carry us back again, O how should we cry out
for mercy and favor at Gods hands, and be grieved that we have offended so
good a God.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing that there is forgiveness of sins if we seek it; therefore as God
is ready to forgive us, so we should be to forgive one another the injuries
and wrongs that are done us: This is Saint Paul's admonition, Col. 3. 15. (says
he) Forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel to another, even as God
forgave you, so do ye; Matthew. 18. we read that there was one that ought a
thousand talents, whose master forgave him, but his fellow owing him but an
hundred pence, He took him by the throat, and said to him, Pay me that which
thou owe me: to whom he said, Appease thine anger toward me, and I will pay
thee all; yet he would not, but cast him into prison: but when his master
heard of it, he was wroth with him, and cast him into prison also. Now there
is no man offends us so much as we do God; therefore as God is ready to
forgive us, so we should be to forgive one another.

Fourthly, 4
We believe there is forgiveness of sins without limitation of the number,
That there is forgiveness of sins without limitation.
or greatness of them; so that let the number be never so many, or never so
great, if we can repent of them, they shall be forgiven us. So 1 John 2. 5.
These things I write unto you that ye sin not, but if any man sin, we
have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the just: therefore let our sins
be what they will, if we can repent of them, God will forgive them without
limitation of the number or the greatness of them. There is but one sin only
that shall not be forgiven, the sin against the Holy Ghost, which is spoken
of Matthew. 12. 31. Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but
the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto them. So 1
John 5. 16. says he, there is a sin unto death, I do not say that thou shall
pray for it: and Heb. 6. 6. it is said, If a man has tasted of the Word of
God, and of the powers of the world to come, if he fall away, it is impossible
he should be renewed again by repentance. Now the reason why the Lord will not
pardon it is, not because his mercy cannot reach it (for his mercy is
infinite) but because there is a defect in men that they cannot repent of it;
for this sin is against all the beginnings of grace in them, therefore they
cannot relent for it nor repent: so the defect is not in God but in men, for if
it were possible that men could repent this sin, God would forgive it.

The use of this is, seeing God will forgive our sins, though they be in
number never so many, Use.
and in measure never so great, if we repent truly; therefore we should repent
and humble our selves before God that he may forgive us. We see that David had
committed two gross and great sins, yet he says, Psalm. 32. I said, I will
confess against my self my own wickedness, and thou forgavest the
punishment of them: and Saint Paul was a great sinner, who faith of himself, 1
Cor. 15. 9. I am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the
Church of God; and 1 Timothy 1. 13. (says he) I was a blasphemer, a persecuter
and an oppressor, but I was received to mercy, etc. Therefore let no man
despair, though his sins be never so many or so great, if they can repent,
they shall find mercy at Gods hands: Augustine says well upon Psalm. 81.
(speaking of the Jews, how that they killed and crucified Christ, and yet many
of them were saved;) this (says he) is left for an example for us, that no man
should despair, though his sins were never so great and so many, yet if he can
repent of them God will forgive them: for if the greatest sins were forgiven
that were committed in this world which was the killing of Christ, then do not
doubt but the Lord will forgive thee thy sins, if thou can repent of them.
This is the condition (as we shall hear more hereafter) if we will repent our
sins, God will forgive them; but if we will not accept of this condition, but
still live in them from day to day, and nourish and keep them in our bosoms,
then do not marvel though God will not forgive us.

The fifth thing is, 5
That none but God can forgive sins, he that raises up our bodies at the day
of judgment, That none but God can forgive sins.
and gives everlasting life, he it is that must forgive us our sins; and
therefore they are placed together in the Articles of our Christian faith: we
do believe that God will forgive us our sins here, that he will raise our
bodies at the last day, and give us life everlasting; so it is God only that
must forgive us our sins: this is clear both by the Scripture, and by Reason.

First, by Scriptures; as Esaias 43. 25. I am he that puts away thine
iniquities for mine own sake, and will remember thy sins no more; so
Jeremiah 31. 34. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and
every man his brother, saying, Know ye the Lords; for they shall all know me
from the least of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord; for I will
forgive their iniquities, and will remember their sins no more: and 2 Samuel
12. 13. Nathan says to David, the Lord also has put away thy sins, thou
shall not die. David Psalm. 32. says, I confessed my sins and thou forgav^st
me the punishment of them: so there can be no question about this, but that it
is God only that does forgive sins. This was a known truth amongst the
Pharisees as we see Luke 5. for say they, None but God can forgive sins. A
learned man speaking of this place says, that the ground was good that none
but God can forgive, but they failed in their application, for they took
Christ to be but a bare man: And it is Augustines assertion, The Donatists say,
that men may forgive sins, but, says he, in this they are worse than the
Pharisees, for they say none but God can forgive sins.

Secondly, Reason 1.
by Reason; and that first, Because sin is an infinite offense against God,
That none but God can forgive sins.
therefore it must be an infinite power that must take it away; for as the
Schoolmen say, The thing that works must be of greater power and virtue than
the thing that is wrought upon, but all the power that is in man is finite, and
has his bounds and limits, therefore no man is able to forgive sin. For as a
pecke cannot hold a thousand bushels, so man being finite cannot have infinite
power; Simile.
and threfore no man is able to take away sin, but God only.

Secondly, Reason 2.
it is clear from the doctrine of their own Schoolmen, who say, that no man
can take away sin, unless he be able to infuse grace: so Aquinas faith, that
there is no forgiveness of sins, but there must be therewith infusion of
grace; but there is no man that can infuse grace into any; therefore there is
no man that can take away sin: or we may frame a reason thus, He that
justifies a man, he only it is that can forgive sins; but there is none but
God that can justify a man, therefore none but God can forgive sins.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
He that takes away the punishment of sin, He it is that must take away
sin; as Christ promised to the man sick of the Palsy, Matthew. 9. 6. for when
Christ forgave him his sins, he forgave him the punishment of them also; for
says he unto him, Take up thy bed and walk: this he gives him as a token,
that his sins are pardoned; so if a man can take away the punishment of sin
with a word, and say to a blind man, receive thy sight, to a lame man, go,
then a man may pardon sins; but there is no man that can take away the
punishment of sin, therefore he cannot take away sins: For if Man cannot
take away the effect which is the lesser, he cannot take away the cause which
is the greater: hence then it is manifest that none but God can take away sin.

Some object, Object.
if there is none but God that can forgive sins, why then does S. Paul exhort
to forgive one another their sins? Col. 3. 13. To this I answer, that in
every sin of injustice there are two parties offended, God and Man; Ans.
now man may forgive his part, but it is God only that must forgive his part.
Levit. 6. 5, 6. it is said, Whatsoever one has sworn falsely, he shall even
restore it in the principal, and shall add the fifth part more thereto, and
give it unto him unto whom it appertains the same day he offreth for his
trespasses: Also he shall bring unto the Lord a Ram without blemish out of
the flock, in thy estimation worth two sheckles, for a trespass offering to
the Priest: Hence I infer, it is not enough to make satisfaction to man, but
when we have done with him, then we must make our peace with God also.

Again, Object.
it is Objected the Ministers may forgive sins in the Gospel; As John 20.
23. says Christ, Whosoever sins ye retain are retained: I answer, there is
two courts that sin has to deal in, Ans.
In foro mundi, the Court of this World, and In foro Coeli, the Court of
heaven: In the Court of this World the Minister may forgive, and one Man may
forgive another; but in the Court of Heaven, there is none but God that can
forgive our sins. Ans. 2.
Moreover there is the power of remission, and the ministry of remission: the
power of remission that belongs to God, for none but he has power to forgive;
but the ministry of remission, that belongs to the Minister, he may pronounce
the forgiveness of sins. As we see Levit. 13. In the cleansing of the
Lepers, it was God only that made them clear, the Priest did but pronounce
them clean: So then this point is clear, that it is none but God that can
forgive sins.

For use, Use 1.
first let us consider what a grievous thing sin is, that none but God can
forgive and free us from it. Simile.
We see how afraid men be to break a leg or arm or to hurt themselves
because they would not fall into the Chirurgions hand, and yet many of them can
set a joint and help us again; but when a man has sinned, there is none in
Heaven, nor in Earth, that can help him, but only God: therefore we should
be afraid to sin against Him. We see in nature that there are some
diseasses that are hard to cure; Simile.
as the Stone, the Gout, the Strangury and many others; notwithstanding, the
great difficulty of curing it, yet there be some that can cure these; but when
a man has sinned against God, he has done that that no man in the world can
cure, but God only: therefore how afraid should we be to commit sin?

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing there is none but God can forgive sins, therefore, when we have
sinned, we should cast our eyes from this World and worldly friends, and seek
to God for the pardon of them: Great men may do us some good when we be
well, and our friends may comfort us when we be sick, but when our
consciences are dejected for sin, there is none but God can give us comfort.
A man may look upon his gold and silver, his goods and his lands, as a sick
man looks on his meat, not taking delight in any thing, Simile.
because he looks for the judgment and sentence of God to pass upon him;
this whole world cannot release him nor give him comfort, but it must be God
that must do it: therefore we must seek to him for the pardon of our sins,
for howsoever a man does not feel his sins in the time of security and
peace, yet when his sins shall come upon him and accuse him, then he shall
feel them, then is the time that they shall stand in need of God: as Judges
10. 14. the Lord says to the people, Go and cry unto your gods which ye have
chosen, let them free you in the time of your trouble: so the Lord will say to
us in the time of our distress (if we despise him in the time of our health
and peace) Go and cry to the Gods that ye have served, Simile.
and see if they can help you in the time of your need; go to your pleasur's
and profits, and see if they can help you; we see that such a time will come
that we shall stand in need of his help: therefore let us seek for it in
time, while we may have it. We say at this time, we have need of rain, but
can your Kings and Queens give it? can your Princes and Nobles? no, none can
do it but God: therefore we must have recourse to him for it, Simile.
and seek it at his hands. If a man dwell by the Sea side, where there is a
great bank between him and the Sea, the Ships pass by and all the
commodities, none whereof can be brought unto him, but if he can dig down
the bank and cut a sluice through into the Sea, then he may bring the
commodities home to himself; so we dwell by an infinite Sea of Gods goodness,
there being a great bank between us and that, which is a bank of sin; so
that all the commodities, goodness and mercy of God passes by us, therefore
we must dig down this bank of sin and make a sluice through by prayer and
repentance, so to draw Gods goodness and mercy home to our selves; and seeing
there is none but God can forgive us our sins, let us keep God our friend,
and if we have at any time offended him, let us not be at rest till we have
sought his favor again, and feel the comfort of the pardon and forgiveness
of our sins.

Sixthly, 6
God does not absolutely forgive men their sins without any condition, but it
is upon condition, if they will repent: Gods pardon is conditionally, if men
repent.
It is such a condition, that we cannot have pardon of our sins without it;
It is not the cause of it, but it is a necessary condition, whereby we are
made fit and capable of Heaven and Heavenly things: these two go together,
repentance and forgiveness of sins; these Christ has conveyed together here
in this Scripture that I read unto you, that repentance and remission of sins
should be preached in his Name: so Acts 3. 15. Peter says, Amend your lives
therefore and turn, that your sins may be put away: If we will repent of
them, renounce them, and labor to get strength against them, then God will
forgive them; but if we will not repent of them nor renounce them, but live in
them and nourish them in our bosoms, then we can look for no forgiveness:
there are thousands that do deceive themselves selves this way, who think
that forgiveness of sins is absolute, though they do nothing but live as
they list, yet God will forgive them; but we are to know it is conditional, if
we do repent of them. And therefore let all men take heed that they do not
deceive themselves in this. Thus much of the general.

Now we come to the particular; for we are not to rest in the general, Of
particular forgiveness of sins.
to be persuaded that there is forgiveness of sins, but we must believe in
particular that my sins are pardoned; for what confession is it for a man to
believe there is forgiveness of sins in general, unless he be able to say,
I do believe that my sins are pardoned. This is that Christ says in the
Gospel to the poor man, Be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee: in
like manner if a man know that his sins are pardoned, here is matter of
comfort; as 2 Samuel 12. 13. Nathan says to David, The Lord has put away thy
sins, and thou shall not die; so Psalm. 32. 7. David says, I said, I will
confess my sins unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the punishment of mine
iniquity: so Ananias says to Paul, Acts 22. 16. Arise and be baptized, and
wash away thy sins in calling upon his Name. Therefore a man must not rest in
the general, but he must bring it home to himself, and be persuaded that his
sins are forgiven him. It is the doctrine of the Church of Rome, to believe
that there is pardon and forgiveness of sins in general, but not in
particular; but in this their faith is no better than the faith of Devils; for
they do believe that there is a God and Christ, and that there is forgiveness
of sins, but they do not believe that their sins are pardoned. Now the faith
of a Christian must go beyond the faith of Devils, and apply it to his own
conscience and heart, being persuaded that his sins are pardoned: a man is
not so to believe that his sins are pardoned in any estate whatsoever, as when
he is an infidel, before a man is brought home to God and has repented of his
sins; but when he is brought home to God, and in the state of grace, by holy
prayer and repentance for his sins, when he has been humbled and cast down
in the sense and feeling of them, and grieved that he has offended God, then a
man may be persuaded of it.

But here a great question may be moved, Quest.
how a man may know that his sins are pardoned, seeing it is not an act of
ours, but it is in the heart and mind of God. Ans.
I answer, that the work of Creation was an act in the heart and mind of God,
General.
and not in Man; yet it was made known to us by his works, and by the effect
of it: so though forgiveness of sins is an act in the heart and mind of
God, yet a man may know it by the comfortable effects that does follow it,
Simile.
so that a man may have unfallible testimonies that his sins are forgiven him.

Now there are four means whereby a man may know that his sins are pardoned.
In Particular. Four ways to know our sins are pardoned.


First, to consider whether ever we have been cast down and humbled in the
sense and feeling of them, First, if humbled for them.
and if we have repented of them, and bin grieved and displeased with our
selves, not so much for the punishment that has fallen on them, as that we
have grieved and offended God by them; if we can find this in our selves this
is a sure testimony to us that our sins are pardoned, and that the Lord
says to us (as he said to the lame man) Matthew. 9. Son, be of good comfort,
thy sins be forgiven thee: We see the woman that was a great sinner, Luke 7.
37. coming to Christ, fell down at his feet, wept and washed his feet with
her tears, and did wipe them with the hair of her head, to whom Christ said,
thy sins are forgiven thee; Simile.
so although we be great sinners, yet if we can fall down at the feet of
Christ and weep, because we have sinned against God, who has been so good
and gracious unto us, then the Lord will say to us, as he said to the woman,
Thy sins are forgiven thee.

Secondly, 2
to consider with our selves, whether ever we have prayed unto the Lord for the
forgiveness of them: If prayed heartily for forgiveness.
if we have cried unto God, and besought him to pardon and to pass by them; if
thou can find this, then doubt not but thy sins are pardoned: As Mark 11.
22. Christ says, Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have
it and it shall be done unto you: and 1 John 5. 5. This is the assurance that
we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his Will he hears us:
therefore, if we have prayed unto God, and sought unto him for the pardon of
them, let us not doubt, but be persuaded that our sins are forgiven us. As
Matthew. 18. the servant that was indebted to his master, and had nothing to pay,
his master forgave him all because he prayed him; so if we can pray unto the
Lord and seek unto him for the forgiveness, the Lord will forgive us; but if
we have never sought unto him, nor prayed for the forgiveness of them, then
we cannot be assured of the forgiveness of them.

Thirdly, 3
to consider with himself whether he has got grace and strength to resist
it; Whether we have got strength against them.
for the Lord deals with us, as he did with the lame man, when he had
forgiven him his sins, in token of it, he bids him take up his bed and
walk; and withal he gives strength to carry his bed: so if the Lord have
pardoned our sins, and forgiven them, Simile.
he will give us strength to carry our bed home; as a good man says, he will
give us strength to carry our bodies in a holy course to Heaven; he will give
us strength and grace to resist our sins: Therefore if we do not find
strength and grace to resist sin, but live in it and like it, then we may
doubt whether we have pardon of them or no? Some man will here object and say,
Simile.
if a man have committed Treason against the the king, and be cast into the
Jail, Quest.
how shall a man know whether his friend has got a pardon for him or no? I
answer, If the Iaylor come and unlocke the prison door, Ans.
knock off his chains and fetters, and let him out, then he is sure his
pardon is procured; but if he lie still in prison, then it is likely there is
no pardon: so when we have sinned and committed treason against God, and he
cast us into the prison house of sin, how shall a man know whether he has a
pardon procured for him or no? I answer, If a man see that the chains and
fetters of sin are taken off, and the Prison door opened, that is, if a man
finds that he has got strength and power against his corruptions, and can
shake them off, he may assure himself that his sins are pardoned; but if he
lies in his sins, and still his corruptions be strong upon him, neither has
he got power and strength against them, nor made God his friend, then as yet
his sins are not pardoned.

The fourth means whereby we may know that our sins are pardoned is, 4
to conside with ones self if his heart has been set at peace by the use of
good means, If we have attained a peaceable Spirit.
whereas before he has been troubled in conscience for his sins; if he
has repented of them and prayed unto God for the pardon of them; if his heart
has been set at peace in the use of these means, he may assure himself
that his sins are pardoned; this is Paul's Reason, Romans 5. 1. Then being
justified by faith, we have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ;
therefore if a man can find peace in his conscience upon the use of good
means this is an evidence that his sins are pardoned. If a man be run in
debt and danger, Simile.
and the kings writs be out against him, the Bayliffes lying in every bush to
take, arrest, and carry him into prison, so that he cannot be at rest nor quiet
for them: now if this party has a friend to go to London to compound the
matter and to agree it; the question is how a man shall know whether his friend
has composed the matter or no? I answer, if the Bailiffes be gone home again,
and the man at rest and quiet again, by this he may be sure that his friend
has composed and agreed the matter. In like manner when we are run in the
Briers of debt and danger, and hear that Gods writs are out against us, the
judgments of God lying in every bush (as it were like Bayliffes) to arrest us
and carry us to prison; if we can send a friend to compose the matter, and
agree it; that is, if we can send our prayers up to Heaven, to compose the
matter with God; if upon this* one find his conscience to be set at peace,
and the judgments of God to cease and be removed from him, this is a
comfortable evidence that his sins are pardoned: therefore although a man may
be a sinner, yet if a man can repent of them, and find by comfortable effects
that his sins are pardoned, he shall have comfort both in life and death;
and when he has lived here a few days in this world, shall go home to God,
to live with Abraham, Isaak and Iaakob, in the Kingdom of Heaven.

SERMON LXXII.
JOHN 11. 23, 24. Jesus says unto her, Thy Brother shall rise again. Martha
said unto him, I know that he shall rise again in the Resurrection at the last
day.
IT was my purpose to have spoken no more at this SERMON. LXXII.
time of Forgiveness of sins, but upon further meditation, there is
something more that I must impart unto you, which is, To know what that comfort
is, that a Christian man may have, Quest.
when he believes his sins are pardoned, and that he is acquitted and
discharged for them before the judgment seat of God. Ans.
I answer, that the comfort is exceeding great: First, because if a man knows
by infallible evidence that his sins are pardoned, Three comfortts of
forgiveness of sins.
then he knows he shall be saved, and death shall be as no death to him; and
that after this life he shall go into Heaven to glory and happiness. 1
Seeing nothing can hinder a man from Heaven but sin; Knowledge of Salvation.
as it is Revel. 21. ult. And there shall enter in no unclean thing: Therefore
if we know that our sins are pardoned, we may be comforted; for as soon as
we leave this world, we shall go to God. As Luke 23. as soon as the good
Thief had obtained pardon for his sins, the next thing that Christ says to
him, is, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise; and therefore if we know
that our sins are pardoned, then we know we shall be saved; and we shall
go into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Secondly, 2
if our sins be pardoned, then we know that all that God ^^nds unto us,
comes of Love, Then all that God sends us, comes of Love.
and that all our crosses and troubles he will turn to our good; so that they
be not the wounds of an enemy, but the love tokens of a friend; like the
arrows that were shot by Jonathan, not to hurt, but to forewarne: Simile.
so all crosses and troubles of this life, shall turn to his good. As soon as
David had found the pardon and forgiveness of his sins, he could say, Of
very faithfulness the Lord had afflicted him: Simile.
As a loving father gives a bitter potion to his child, he will put a piece
of sugar into his hand secretly to allay the bitterness of it; so though the
Lord give us a bitter potion, that is, a number of troubles and afflictions
here in this life, he puts into our hands as it were secretly a piece of sugar,
that is, an assurance that all the troubles and afflictions of this life are
sent in love to us, and that they shall not hurt us, but shall turn to our
good.

Thirdly, ART. XI.
Then we know that as God has taken away our sin, he will take away the
tail which follows it, 3
that is, the punishment of sin: for the punishment of sin follows the
act of it, That with the pardon of sin the punishment of them is removed.
as the shadow does the body, for if we would remove the shadow, we must
remove the body: so God when he does remove the body of sin, then the shadow
must needs follow it. We read Matthew. 5. that when they brought a lame man to
Christ, the first thing that he says to him is, Son, thy sins are forgiven
thee; after which the next words are, Take up thy bed and walk: So when the
Lord takes away our sins, he will take away the punishment of sin.
Therefore in all the crosses and troubles that befall us, we are not to deal
with the shadow, but with the body of sin; if we remove that, we may be sure
the shadow will be removed. These be the three comforts that a man may have by
the knowledge of forgiveness of his sins; therefore it is a good thing for a
man to know in particular that his sins are forgiven.

Now we come to speak of the other two blessings and benefits which the Lord
does give and grant to the Church in the life to come: 2
and the one is, Benefit of the Life to come.
The raising of our bodies at the last day; the other, Life everlasting: The
Resurrection of the Body.
and these two blessings he has reserved till the day of judgment, closing up
and making an end of all with them; yet not a final end, for they shall have
no end because the Lord will bestow eternal happiness on them; so that that
day (though it be a doleful day to others) yet it shall be a joyful day to
the Church of God, and a day that they have many a day looked for and desired.

Now in handling of it we are first to consider, The order of Gods distribution
that he gives us, The Order that God takes in giving us blessings.
First, the benefits and blessings of this life, and then those of eternal
life. Hence we are instructed that that which is the order of Gods
distribution, must be the order in our intention; for we must labor to have
communion with the saints here in this life, and to have our sins pardoned,
and then the Lord will raise up our bodies at the last day, and give us life
everlasting: but on the contrary if we have not communion with the Saints in
this life, and have not our sins pardoned, we can never look that God will
raise up our bodies at the day of Judgment, and give us life everlasting.
Therefore, beloved brethren, be exhorted to labor to have communion with the
Saints here in this World, with the forgiveness of sins, and then God will
raise up our bodies at the day of judgment, and give us life everlasting. As
Revel. 20. 6. it is said, Blessed and holy is he that has his part in the
first Resurrection, for on such the second death shall have no power: He is a
blessed man that rises out of his sins and his corruptions in this life, on
such a one the second death shall have no power. Simile.
If a man make a bargain, and gives somewhat in hand, some earnest, then he
expects the performance of covenants about the bargain; but if he has no
earnest given him, then he looks for no bargain: so the Lord has made a
bargain with us to give us Heaven and happiness, after which if he has
given us earnest (somewhat in hand in this life) that is, the communion of
Saints, and the forgiveness of sins; now then we may look to have our
bodies raised and to have life everlasting. We may expect the rest, but if we
have no earnest in hand in this life, that we have not our parts in the
Communion of Saints, nor the forgiveness of sins, then when we come to die,
we cannot look for the blessings in the life to come.

Moreover, 1
in this Article we are to consider diverse particulars. First, We believe that
although we shall be laid into the grave and dissolved into dust, We believe
to rise again.
yet that one day we shall rise again by the power of Christ: this is the
property of a Christians faith. The Heathen do believe that they shall all dye
and be dissolved to dust, but not that they shall rise again: now this point
of the Resurrection is clear by Scripture, and by Reason: First, we will prove
it by Scripture, 1
as Esaias 26. 19. Proof by the Scriptures.
Thy dead men shall live, even with my Body shall they rise; that is, when I
rise all the dead shall rise: so Dan. 12. 2. and many of them that slept in the
dust shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual
contempt: so also Paul Acts 24. 15. says, And have hope toward God, that the
Resurrection of the dead which they themselves look for, shall be both of the
just and unjust: and so Revel. 20. 12. says he, I saw the dead both great and
small stand before God: so then it is clear by Scripture, seeing all other
things are come to pass which the Scripture has foretold: then we may be
sure that this shall come to pass also, in the time that God has appointed.
Now the Reasons to prove that there is a Resurrection, Reasons proving the
Resurrection.
are five in number:

1. From the Power of God. 2. From the Justice of God. 3. From the Mercy of
God. 4. From the End of Christ's coming. 5. From the Resurrection of Christ.
First, 1
From the Power of God; for (as Tertullian says) it seems a harder matter for
God to make a man being nothing, From the Power of God.
out of the dust of the Earth, than to raise and repair him out of the dust
being something; and no question but that the Power of God is able to raise the
dead at the resurrection; as our Savior reasons against the Pharisees, Matthew.
22. 29. says he, Ye err not knowing the Scripture nor the power of God, etc.
as who should say, the Lord has Power to raise the dead.

The second Reason is drawn from the Justice of God, 2
for it is agreeable to Justice, that those that be partakers in good and
evil actions, It is clear also from the Justice of God.
should be also partakers in rewards and punishments; but the bodies of men are
partners in good and evil actions with the soul; therefore the Lord will
raise up the bodies of men to reward them that have done well, and punish them
that have done evil. Tertullian says well, We must not think that God is
unjust or slothful: First, 1
we may not think that God is unjust, that he will reward the soul, and
destroy the body; and that he will punish the soul and not the body: therefore
he will raise up men's bodies to reward them that have done well, and to punish
the evil. 2
Again, secondly, we must not think that God is slothful, that he will not
put himself to that pains, to raise up the dead bodies of men, to punish them
for their sins and offenses; therefore he will raise our bodies to punish or
reward them with our souls.

Thirdly, From the Mercy of God: for mercy extends as much as may be to all, 3
and this mercy is in men, that if they could, they would raise all the dead
bodies of their friends; From the mercy of God.
but the mercy of God is infinitely greater than the mercy that is in men,
whose mercy extends in goodness to all the bodies and souls of men:
therefore he will raise them and do all the good he can to them he loves; as
Christ says, Matthew. 22. He is the God of Abraham, Isaak and Iaakob, He is not
the God of the dead, but of the living: So he will raise their bodies, or else
he were God but to one part of Abraham, but his mercy extends to both parts:
therefore he will raise the bodies of dead men.

Fourthly, 4
From the end of Christ's coming, which was to dissolve the works of the
Devil; From the end of Christ's coming
as it is said, John 3. 8. For this purpose appeared the Son of God, that he
might dissolve the works of the Devil: for the Devil first brought in sin,
and sin brought death; this was his end: for he brought in sin to bring
death upon us. And therefore because he aimed at this, Christ came to dissolve
this great work of the Devil which is not done, except there be a
resurrection of the body: therefore the dead shall rise again.

Fifthly, 5
From the Resurrection of Christ; for he did not rise like a private Person,
From the Resurrection of Christ.
as the Widows Son did, and as Lazarus; but He rose as the public Head of
the Church. Saint Paul says, That He was the first fruits of them that slept:
so in the rising of Christ, all the People of God did virtually rise; that
which went before in the Head, shall follow in the Members (as Augustine
says;) and Cyril says well that Christ entered into Heaven by the narrow
passage of his sufferings and death, to make a wide passage for us into Heaven:
so in Christ's rising, we rise.

I, Object.
but some say, It was an easy matter for Christ to rise, because He was God: I
answer, Ans.
it was a hard matter for Christ to rise again after he was laid into the
grave; I do not mean it was hard because they had laid a great stone upon Him
(as the woman said) Who shall roll away this stone? but it was hard in regard
of another thing; for when any man is laid into the Grave, he has but his own
sins to keep him down, but Christ had the sins of all the Elect People of
God upon Him: Therefore it was a harder matter for Christ to rise, than for a
private man, yet notwithstanding, for all this Christ did rise again:
Therefore do thou never doubt but that He will raise thee again; only our
care must be to have Communion with Christ in his life and death, to live as
He lived; to die and to lie in the Grave with Him, even to lay our bodies as
near His as may be, with desire to make our bodies as it were a pillow for
Him: and then when He rises, we shall rise with Him to glory and happiness.
But if we do not live the life of Christ, and die with Him, and lie in the
Grave with Him, and make our bodies a pillow for Him; then Christ shall rise,
and raise us to torments. It were well with the wicked if it might be so, that
they should never rise again, but Christ shall raise them again not as a
Head, but as a terrible and fearful Judge; and shall send them into endless
torments. For when a man has lived a thousand years in it, he is as new to
begin as ever he was; therefore do thou labor to have communion with
Christ in his life and death, that so thou may rise and go into glory with
him.

Now there are diverse objections that the Atheists make against this Article to
be answered:

First, 1
they say, How is it possible that men that have lien rotting in the Grave a
thousand years together, Objection of the Atheists.
should rise again? I answer, Though it be above reason, it is not against
reason; for we see that the flies that be dead all the Winter time, Ans.
when the Summer comes, with the heat of the Sun they revive again: Simile.
if this may be done by the power of Nature, much more is the power of God
able to raise dead men that have lien dead in the Grave many thousand years
together.

Secondly, Object. 2.
say they, It is impossible for men to rise again, because their dust is
mingled one with another, and with the dust of other Creatures: as let one come
into the Churchyard, and the dust is so mingled one with another that a man
cannot say, this is the dust of my father, or of my mother; for (to make it
plain) take a pint of milk, and a pint of water, and put them into the Sea,
there they remain in their substance, but are so mingled together, as that
they cannot be parted one with another: so say they it is with dead men, whose
dust is so mingled one with another, as it is impossible to sunder them. To
this I answer, that although it is impossible for man to do it, Ans.
yet (as God says) All things are possible to God; it is an easy matter to
him to give to every man his dust again, and to sunder them one from another:
As a man that has a handful of diverse seeds in his hand, Simile.
can take one seed from another; so the Lord is able to take one dust from
another, and give unto every man that which belongs to him. I have heard
there be some men that have this cunning and skill, Simile.
that they can draw out of an Herb the four Elements, Fire, Air, Earth and
Water; if this cunning and skill be in man to draw this out of an Herb, and
to sunder the four Elements, much more is God able to sunder every man's dust,
and to bring them together again.

Thirdly, Object. 3.
the Atheists object and say, no man may eat the flesh of another man, for
then the man's flesh is become one with the other man's flesh, and then if the
one rise the other cannot. To this I answer, that it is true indeed, but yet he
was a perfect man before he ate him, Ans.
for it is a truth in Divinity, that every man shall rise again with his own
flesh; but, a man shall not rise with every thing that was once a part of him;
as if a man have a tooth beaten out, and another come in the Room of it, he
shall not rise with both these; so likewise a man has a piece of flesh
stricken off with a Simile.
sword in place, whereof new flesh comes, he shall not rise with all this, but
he shall with so much as shall make him a perfect man; so one man eats another
man's flesh, and it becomes one with his; yet he shall not rise with that flesh,
but with as much as shall make him a perfect man again.

Fourthly, Object. 4.
they bring Scripture against us, that flesh and blood cannot enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Ans.
I answer, the meaning is not that the substance of flesh and blood shall enter
into the kingdom of Heaven, but that flesh as it is corrupted and sinful,
clothed with infirmities, and subject to mortality and death, shall not enter
into heaven; so Paul takes it Heb. 2. 14. Forasmuch then as the Children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part with them,
that he might destroy through death him that had the power of death, etc.
therefore the meaning is, that flesh and blood in this transitory estate,
(subject to infirmity) shall not enter into the kingdom of God; thus we see
that notwithstanding all the objections of the Atheists this Article stands
good, the dead shall rise again.

The use is, seeing the dead shall rise again, therefore though we dye as
others do, Use 1.
are laid into the grave and dissolved to dust, yet we believe that we shall
rise again. This is the worst that the world can do to us, to take away life,
yet when they have done so, we shall have it again, that must comfort us in
all our troubles and distresses, which did comfort Job in his distresses and
troubles, Job 12. For I am sure that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand the
last upon this Earth, and though after my skin worms destroy my body, yet
shall I see God in my flesh, etc. and David did comfort himself thus, Psalm.
16. Wherefore my heart is glad and tongue rejoices, and my flesh also rests
in hope, for thou will not leave my soul in the grave, neither will thou let
thy holy one to see corruption; so Christ says to his Disciples, Matthew. 20.
19. The Son of man shall be delivered unto the chief Priests, and unto the
Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death, and deliver him to the Gentiles
to scourge and to crucify him, but the third day he shall rise again. Now
that which was Jobs, David's and Christ's comfort must be ours in all the
troubles and distresses that befall us: it was a comfort to old Iaakob, Genesis
46. 3. that the Lord said unto him, Fear not to go down into Egypt, etc. so
the Lord says to his people, fear not to go into the ground, Simile.
into the dens of death; for I will raise you up again: death deals no
otherwise with us, than David did by Saul (when he was asleep) he took away
his spear and water-pot, and when he was to awake he restored it again: so
death takes away our spear, our water-pot, our strength, and when we do awake
at the day of Judgment he will give it us again.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing the dead shall rise again, this therefore must comfort us in regard of
our dead friends that be departed, that although death has sundred them for a
time, yet they shall all meet together again: so we see here in this place
Martha says to Christ, I know that my brother shall rise in the resurrection:
and Saint Paul says 1 These. 4. 14. Them that sleep in Jesus will God bring
with him. Again, the Apostle says in the same Chapter, Comfort your selves
with these words. Chrysostom says, if a man take a long journey, his wife and
his children do not weep and take on, Simile.
because they know he will come again to them; so (says he) a man that dies
in Christ, takes but a long journey, and therefore we should not weep and
take on for our dead friends, because they know that we shall meet again.

Thirdly, seeing that the dead shall rise again, this must make us careful to
spend our time well while we live here: Use 3.
if there were an utter destruction of nature that a man died as a beast, then
a man might live as he list; SERMON LXXIII.
but because we shall rise again with these bodies, wherewith we have sinned
and offended God; therefore we should be careful to pass our time here in
holiness before God. This was the use that Saint Paul makes of it, Act. 24.
16. says he, And have hope toward God that the resurrection of the dead
(which they themselves look for) shall be both of the just and unjust: and
herein I endeavor my self to have a clear conscience toward God and toward
man; therefore let us labor to spend our time well and in the fear of God,
that so we may then stand with comfort before God. We read Ioh. 21. 7. When
Simon Peter heard it was the Lord, he girded his coat unto him (for he was
naked) and cast himself into the Sea; Simile.
One would have thought that rather he should have put off his garment and have
laid it aside, but Peter had this consideration that (when he came on the
other side) he should stand before his master, therefore he girded himself
that he might stand seemly and comely before him: so seeing when we have
passed the glassi^ sea of this world, we are to stand before God, therefore we
are to have this consideration that we gird our selves and make every thing
ready that we may come seemly and holily before God at the last day. To this
purpose it is a good meditation that Saint Bernard has, O my body (says he)
do not hinder thy reconcilement with thy God, be not a means to hinder thy
own peace, be contented always to labor with thy soul and to obey the
motions of it, be ready to assist it in any Christian duties; and then say unto
thy soul when it is ready to depart from thee, and to go to God (which is thy
guest) as Joseph said to the Butler; Make mention of me to Pharaoh; so
remember me to God, for I obey thy good motions, I join with thee in holy
duties, and then when thy soul is come home to God, it will say, O my Lord, I
had a poor body which led me in Christian duties, and was ready to obey thy
good motions, O my Lord, I pray thee remember this poor body of mine, and then
what will be the issue? surely that which is set down Psalm. 145. 19. He
will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he will also hear their cry
and will save them; therefore let us labor to pass our time in holiness and
fear before God in this life, that we may come to peace and happiness at the
last day.

The second point is, Secondly, we shall rise again^ with the same bodies.
that we believe that we shall rise again at the last day with the same
bodies, as Job 19. 25. I know that my redeemer lives, and he shall stand the
last on the earth, and though after this life worms destroy this body, yet
shall I see God with my flesh: so Ezekiel. 37. to the same dead and dry bones life
came, sinnewes and flesh grew on them. But some will say, that is a parable; I
answer, the Prophet uses not this parable for nothing, but it is to show that
that which falls shall rise again; so Revel. 20. 12. I saw the dead both
great and small stand before God: Tertullian says, the same body shall rise
again by the new resurrection; for the resurrection is not of another body,
but of the same that falls; so it is not a new Creation but a raising up that
which is fallen: Saint Jerome says, it cannot stand with equity and right that
one body should sin, and another be punished; neither will a just Judge let
one body obtain the victory and shed his blood, another crowned for it, but
the same body that sinned shall be punished; the same that has gotten the
victory, shall have the Crown; the same body shall rise again. In the
Resurrection of Christ, the same body that was wounded did rise again: He
could (if it had pleased him) have healed his wounds in three days, seeing
that he could heal all diseases and sicknesses with a word or a touch of his
finger; but he let them alone, to confirm his Disciples that it was the same
body that was crucified: therefore Luke 28. When his Disciples thought that he
had been a Spirit, he bids them handle and feel him, for a Spirit has not
flesh and bones; and therefore the same body that died, did rise again: so it
shall be with us, for that which is true in the Head, is also true in the
Members.

Here some few objections shall be refelled, Object. 1.
and then we will proceed; that 1 Cor. 15. 44. the Apostle says, It is sown a
natural body, it is raised a spiritual body; therefore it is not the same
body that was laid down.

To this I answer, that it is not spiritual in regard of substance, Ans. 1.
but it is a Spiritual body, in regard of estate and condition that they be
in: for a natural life is maintained and upheld by the use of meat, drink,
sleep, Physic and rest, but then our bodies shall be upheld by the Power of
God without the use of these means; our bodies now are heavy, but then our
souls shall fill them full of agilitie and nimblenesse to move upwards and
downwards; so it is a Spiritual body, not in regard of substance, but in
regard of quality and operation.

Secondly, Object. 2.
(say they) If the same bodies rise then they rise with a number of needless
parts* for what shall a man need teeth seeing they shall eat no meat, and
what shall they need a stomach, seeing there is no concoction or digestion,
and what shall a man need bowels, seeing there is no redundance to fill them.
Ans. 2.
Augustine shall answer this; (says he) concerning the teeth they be
needful, for a man has two uses of them, they serve to eat with, and they
are to help our speech; therefore though we have no need of teeth in regard of
eating, yet we shall have need of them to speak with, for in Heaven we shall
praise God and sing the song of Moses and of the Lamb; so then all our teeth
are needful. Now for the other parts of the body, they are (says he) for
sight and comeliness; for though there be no need of the stomach to concoct,
or of bowels (because there is no redundance) yet these shall be as ornaments
to the body to adorn and beautify it: for even in this life there are some
things which a man has that are not needful, as a man's beard, it is not a
needful thing, for a man might live without it, he might speak without it,
yet nature has given us it for an ornament and comeliness: So likewise a
woman she has breasts necessarily for to nourish and feed her child
therewithal, but why a man should have the like, that seeing he has no use or
need of them, we see no other reason, but they are for an ornament and to
beautify the body: In like manner though we shall not need after this life a
stomach to concoct, nor bowels to receive and disperse, yet they shall be for
ornament to our bodies.

Thirdly, (say they) the same bodies do not rise, because they be heavy and
ponderous bodies; for how shall heavy and ponderous bodies stay above the
Clouds, in the pure Heaven, Object. 1.
which is more pure and thin than the Air. To this I answer, that if a man may
fill a great vessel of lead and make it swim above water by drawing the Air
into it, Ans.
why then may not God draw his Spirit into us, and fill us therewith, Simile.
so making our heavy bodies abide above the Clouds, as well as a man can make
a vessel of lead to swim above the water?

Secondly, I answer, that every thing abides in his own proper place at Gods
appointment: 2
As the Clouds which are heavy and full of wet would fall down to the ground,
if God had not appointed the Air to be the proper place for them; so likewise
the water would be above the land, but that the Sea is the place that God has
appointed for the water: so it is Gods assignement that makes the proper place
of a thing: And therefore because Heaven is the proper place of a glorified
body, as the Earth of a mortal body, therefore I say our bodies shall remain
here till the day of judgment in this Earth; and then when our bodies are made
glorified bodies, they shall abide in the Heavens: As Psalm. 115. 16. David
says, The Heavens, even the Heavens are the Lords, but He has given the Earth
to the Sons of Men: so then the proper place of our mortal bodies is the
Earth, but when our bodies are glorified, then they shall be as naturally in
Heaven, and live and abide there as they do now on the Earth. The uses are
three:

First, Use 1.
seeing we shall rise with the same bodies, therefore we must be careful to
keep them well, that they may be pure and unspotted without sin. It is
Paul's conclusion, 1 Cor. 6. 18. Fly fornication, every sin that a man does
is without the body, but he that commits fornication sins against the body:
so because we shall rise again, let us fly every sin and corruption, and
keep our bodies unspotted; that so we may be presented pure and holy before
him at that day: for what a shame will it be to stand before God in judgment
when we have wronged God by our sins, grieved and offended him, and when our
heavenly Judge shall say unto us, Are not these the eyes that ye have let in
lust with, and looked after vanity? Are not these the tongues that ye have
told so many lies with? Are not these the mouths that ye have sworn and
blasphemed my Name with? Are not these the hands ye have wrought wickedness
with? Are not these the feet that have carried you to sin and vanity, to
places of disorder, and then how shall we be able to answer the Lord?
Therefore beloved how careful should we be to live well, to keep our bodies
unspotted, that we may have comfortat that day. We see 2 Chronicles. 36. 8. when
Iehoiakim was dead, Simile.
there was found the characters, marks and prints of his ^orcery, howsoever he
could bear it out (because he was a King) and smother up the matter and keep
it close, yet when he was dead, there was the marks and prints of his forcery
found on his body; so howsoever sinners may hide their sins and bear them out
while they live, yet when they be dead, there shall be found the marks and
prints and Characters of their foul sins that they have committed: therefore
let us keep our bodies pure and unspotted that we may have comfort at that
day.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing the same bodies which we lay down shall rise again, therefore we
should depose and lay them down well at the day of death, and make a holy
close of our lives to die in Faith and Repentance, that so we may go to God.
If a man put off his garment, and means to put it on again, Simile.
he will not rend it off his back and tear it, but will put it off tenderly
and lay it up safe, that so it may do him service again, and grace him before
his friends; so seeing our bodies are as garments for our souls (when we put
them off) let us labor to depose and lay them down well at the day of death,
to die in Faith and Repentance, that our bodies may grace us and do us credit
at the day of judgment before God. To this purpose 2 Pet. 1. 14. says Saint
Peter, I think it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle to stir you up by
putting you in mind, seeing I know that the time is at hand that I must lay
down this my Tabernacle even as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me; so also
S. Paul 2 Cor. 5. says, for we know that if this earthly house of our
Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building given us of God, etc. Simile.
There is great difference between a soldier destroying of an house, and one
that dissolves a house; he that destroys an house, will pull down the timber
and stones, and cares not where he flings them, nor what becomes of them,
because he does not purpose to use them again: But a man that dissolves an
house, he will take it down piece by piece in parts with great care and
diligence, and will lay it up safe, because he means to build with it again;
so because we know that our bodies shall rise again at the last day,
therefore we must not destroy our bodies, but labor to repose them and lay
them down well at the day of death.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing the same body shall rise again that we have here in this world, and
the same that we lay down at the day of death; therefore here this great
question may be answered, Quest.
whether we may know one another at the day of judgment? Of knowing one
another at the Resurrection.
This question need be no question, seeing we shall rise again with the same
bodies that we lie down with here; therefore surely we shall know one another
in Heaven: and we have reasons to confirm us in it.

First, Reason 1.
because our knowledge shall be more perfect at that time than ever Adams was
in the time of innocence; for if Adam did know his wife as soon as she was
brought him, though he never saw her before, therefore much more we shall
know one another seeing our knowledge shall be more perfect, and we shall rise
with the same bodies that we lived with here.

Secondly, Reason 2.
On the Mount his Disciples had but a taste of the Heavenly glory, and yet
Peter knew Moses and Elias, although they were dead many thousand years
before; if he knew them when he had but a taste of glory, much more we shall
know one another when we shall have fullness of glory.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
Our happiness shall be greatly increased by means of the mutual society
one with another: Matthew. 8. 11. But I say unto you, that many shall come from
the East, and from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaak and Iaakob
in the Kingdom of God: therefore seeing our happiness shall be greatly
increased then by mutual society, we are not to think that we shall go to
a strange people where we know no body; but we shall go to our godly friends
and acquaintance, and to such as we know.

Fourthly, Reason 4.
We shall hear the indictment of the wicked at the day of Judgment; there we
shall here them arraigned and condemned for their vile facts; Cain, for killing
of Abel; Pharaoh, for oppressing the Israelites; Judas, for betraying of his
Master; Nero, for killing of Christians: when we hear them indicted and
condemned, we shall know them. And as we shall know the wicked, so we shall
know the Godly too, when they shall be rewarded; which me thinks may be a
motive to quicken us in our care to live holily and Christianly here in this
World, seeing we go not to a strange Country or people, but to our friends
and acquaintance, and to such as know us.

Thirdly, 3
The Time when we shall rise, that is, at the day of judgment, then and never
till then: so Martha says in this place; The Time when we shall rise.
I know my Brother shall rise again in the Resurrection at the last day; so
also S. Paul says, 1 Cor. 15. 51. We shall not all sleep but we shall all be
changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye at the last Trumpet; for the
Trumpet shall blow, and the dead shall be raised up: so then we shall rise at
the last judgment, and never till that time. Now there are four reasons of
this delaying:

First, Four Reasons why the Resurrection is delaid.
Because there might be a proportion between Christ and his members: for,
Christ when he was dead, did not rise again by and by but lay a time trampled
and trodden underfoot of death; 1
so also that we might lie a time under the chains and fetters of death, God
suffers us not to rise till then. Simile.
Ireneus shuts up his Book with this saying, Even as our Heavenly Master did
not fly to Heaven by and by, but did remain under death and in the Grave for
a time, so all his servants must be contented to lie in the Grave, 2
and to be trampled and trodden underfoote of death for a time, before they go
to Heaven.

Secondly, Because that the bodies of all the faithful that are gone before,
and those that come after might have their full consummation of glory together:
Therefore they shall not rise to prevent one another in glory, but they shall
all go together. As Saint Paul says, 1 These. 4. 15. For this say we unto you
by the Word of the Lord, that we which live and are remaining unto the coming
of the Lord, shall not prevent them that sleep: so we shall not get the start
of them, but we shall arise all together to glory. This is a sweet comfort to
us that live in the last age of the world, that all the Saints that are
departed shall not rise to this Heavenly glory till we be ready, Simile.
but lie waiting in their Graves for us. We read 1 Samuel 16. 11. When Samuel
came to Ishai to anoint David, Ishai called all his Sons before him, to whom
Samuel said, Are there no more children but these? there remains (said Ishai)
yet a little one behind that keeps sheep; unto whom Samuel said, Send, and
fetch him, for we will not sit down till he come hither: so the People of God,
they lie waiting in their graves, and are kept from their honor and glory, 3
and will not sit down in the Kingdom of Heaven (as it were) till we all
meet together.

Thirdly, For the further declaration of the Power of Christ; for it is a
greater matter that Christ should raise men that have lien rotting in the Grave
a thousand years together, than for to raise men when they are newly dead:
therefore Martha said to Jesus, My brother stinketh already, for he has been
dead these four days: Therefore it is not so easy a matter to raise him as
it was Iairus daughter, and the widows son: so Ezekiel. 37. 3. the Lord said
unto him, Son of Man, can these dead and dry bones live? and I answered
(says the Prophet) Lord thou know it is a hard matter to do it: therefore
this declaration is for the further manifestation of the Power of Christ.

Fourthly, 4
For the further confirmation of our faith; for look how many there are of the
dead bodies of the Saints amongst us, so many pledges and pawnes there are of
our Redemption: for although we might doubt in our selves of our own bodies
rising, in regard of the badnesse of our lives, and in regard of our vile
sins; yet because there be so many bodies of the dead Saints amongst us, we
need not doubt but that he will raise them up one day to glory.

There are three bodies already ascended into Heaven; Henoch, in the time of
Nature; Elias, in the time of the Law; and Christ, in the time of the Gospel,
and for these three bodies he has left many thousand bodies of the dead
Saints remaining under death, and in the grave, to be pledges and pawnes to us
of our Resurrection; one says well; we have here in this world many pawnes and
pledges of our resurrection; therefore let us not doubt but that the Lord one
day will raise our bodies. Saint Paul speaks hereof, Heb. 11. ult. God (says
he) providing better things for us, that they without us should not be made
perfect: so we shall not prevent one another, Use 1.
but shall all go together. The use is:

First, seeing the bodies of the Saints do* not rise till the day of
Judgment, therefore we must be contented to lie under affliction and trouble,
till God deliver us. We see all the bodies of the Saints be trampled and trodden
underfoot of death till the day of judgment, and therefore we must be
contented to wait with patience for a time, til the Lord deliver us out of
trouble, seeing there will be a day of deliverance.

The second use is, that seeing the bodies of the Saints rise not till the day
of judgment, Use 2.
therefore we should wait for it, desire it, and long for it: as Romans 8. we
read of two sorts of groners; the Creatures groan by the instinct of Nature,
and the People of God groan by the instinct of grace; so that there is never a
Creature that is well ordered, sensible or unsensible but does groan and long
for that day: therefore much more should we long for that time and desire it. If
a man has broken an Arm, or put a Leg out of joint, Simile.
if one has promised him that he will come to set and put it into joint again
at such an hour, he will every foot be looking out of his window for his
coming: so seeing at the day of judgment the Lord will restore us again to
our former integrity, we should long for that day and be looking for it.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing the Dead shall not rise till the day of judgment, therefore why do
men so pamper their bodies to cloth them so fine, and to feed them so
daintily, who cannot endure the wind to blow upon them, seeing they must go
to the dust, be companions with the worms, and dwell in the house to
rottenness; therefore all our care must be to save our souls, to get faith in
Christ, to repent of our sins, and so to shut up our eyes in this world, as
that they may be opened in the Kingdom of glory for ever.

SERMON LXXIII.
JOHN 11. 23, 24. Jesus says unto her, Thy Brother shall rise again. Martha
said unto him, I know that he shall rise again in the Resurrection at the last
day.
HAving showed that our bodies rise again, and that the same bodies shall rise
that we lay down; in the third place we came to consider the Time when we
should rise; At the day of Judgment, then and never till then. As Job 14. 11,
12. says he, As the Waters fail from the Sea, and the Flood decays and
dries up: So Man lies down, and rises not; till the Heavens be no more;
they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep: and also 1 Cor. 15.
52. it is said, For the Trumpet shall blow, and the dead shall be raised up,
so then we shall rise, and never till then. Some reasons then I named, why we
shall not rise till then, which now I will not repeat, but go on where we left.

Here a question may be asked, Quest.
seeing we must lie so many years and ages rotting in the grave, What may
comfort in our lying in the grave.
what may the mean while be our comfort to uphold and sustain us? I answer,
that there are some things to comfort us and sustain us, in this case. Ans.


First, 1
that God will be present with us, that he will not leave us nor forsake us; no
not in the grave: this is a sweet comfort to us our wives and friends bring us
to the grave, lay us, in and there leave us, for there is none of them that
will go down with us to the place of rottenness: but here is comfort that
the Lord will not leave us there but he will go to the grave with us, and
will watch over our dead ashes by the eye of his providence to keep them: till
the day come in which he will raise them up again; as Genesis 46. 4. says God
to Iaakob, I will go down into Egypt with thee, and I will bring thee up
again; so the Lord will go down with us into the grave, and tarry with us,
and will watch over us with the eye of his Providence to keep our dead ashes
and bring us out again: Rizpah is condemned for that she kept the dead bodies
of Saul's sons, 2 Samuel 21. 10.
that she did spread a tent over them, Simile.
and kept them that the fowls should not devour them by day, nor the beasts by
night; but much more may we admire and wonder at the goodness of God to us,
that he goes down into the grave with us, spreads his tent over us, and will
keep our dead ashes which one day he will bring out again; this is a sweet
comfort to a Christian, that the Lord will not leave us nor forsake us, no not
in the grave, though our wives and friends leave us, yet God will not.

The second comfort is, 2
that although our bodies lie rotting in the grave, yet our souls shall be
blessed and happy: this was Paul's comfort 2 Cor. 5. For we know that if this
earthly house of this Tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building given us of
God, etc. and so Revel. 6. 11. The souls that lay under the Altar cried, How
long Lord? and it is said, that long white robes were given them, that is, that
they were comforted with the glorious and blessed estate of their souls.
Indeed if our soul should not go to glory presently, but should lie as the
body in the pain of rottenness; then we might say (as Solomon says) Proverb.
17. 22. the hope that is deferred is the drying of the bones, etc. but because
the soul goes presently to God, and is in an estate of glory and happiness
(though the body lie in the place of rottenness;) therefore this may comfort
us: a good soul is like the good spies we read of Numb. 13. Simile.
that were sent into the land of Canaan to search the land; when they came
back again to the children of Israel, they tell them that the land is a good
and pleasant land; that they have tasted of the fruits thereof, and therefore
let us not be slothful to enter in: so the good soul that goes before into
the heavenly Canaan, and has a taste of the fruit of it, when it returns
again into the body to live in communion and fellowship with it, will say to
the body, Here is a good and pleasant land, I have tasted of the fruit of it,
therefore let us not be slothful to enter in and possess it.

Thirdly, 3
this may comfort us in that although we lie in the grave a long time, yet
Christ has sanctified and sweetened the grave unto us, by lying in it himself,
and has perfumed it; as Chrysostom says, That of a loathsome prison house
Christ has made the grave to be a storehouse to keep all the bodies of his
servants till the day of resurrection, and has made the grave as a sweet bed
to rest on: so we see Esai. 57. 2. it is said, Peace shall come upon them, they
shall rest in their beds every one that walks before me: One says well, that
Christ has made the grave a beaten and a plain way to heaven, for he himself
went no other way thither but through the grave and dens of death, therefore
we must look to go no other way than this, seeing we may find in this way
the footsteps, marks and prints of our Lord Jesus Christ and our dear
friends, and therefore also we may be bold to venture, the Children of Israel
went through the wilderness, a place of stinging Serpents and endured much
hardship; yet because this was the way to Canaan, this made them bold to
venture; so though the grave be a dreadful place, yet Christians know that it
is the way to the Heavenly Canaan, and in which Christ has gone before us;
therefore we should be bold to venture this same way.

The fourth comfort is, 4
That although we lie a long time in the Grave, yet we have assured hope that
one day we shall rise again. This was David's comfort, Psalm. 16. 9. (says he)
Wherefore my heart is glad, and my tongue rejoices, my flesh also rests in
hope; for thou will not leave my soul in the Grave, neither will thou suffer
thine holy one to see corruption: This is not only true of Christ, that he
would not suffer himself to lie in the grave for ever, but it is true also of
all his members, that God will not suffer them for ever to dwell in the Grave,
but will one day raise them up again. We see when Jonas was cast into the Sea,
Simile.
there was a Whale that did swallow him up; one would have thought that there
had been an end of him, and that he had been utterly consumed, and no man
should have heard any more of him, yet the Lord did but speak a word to the
Whale, and he cast him up on the dry land: so when a man is put into the
Grave, some think there is an end of him, we shall never hear more of him,
yet let the Lord speak but a word, and the grave shall give up his dead: This
is comfort to a Christian, that although one may lie a long time in the grave,
yet he may have assured hope that he shall one day be raised up.

The use is, Use.
seeing that there be these comforts, notwithstanding that a man may lie a long
time in the grave, why then should a Christian be afraid to die? for when the
world thinks that he is at the worst, then he is a blessed and happy man,
because the Lord will never leave him, nor forsake him; but he will be
present in the grave with him, and though his body be in the place of
rottenness, yet his soul shall be blessed and happy (for that is an estate of
blessedness) and the Grave (that was a loathsome prison house) is made as a
store house to keep the bodies of Gods People in, and as a beaten way to
Heaven. Indeed life is an excellent blessing, because the time of life is the
time of Grace and of Repentance: Therefore we should labor to preserve this
candle of our life, but when the time comes that God has appointed, and
death approaches near, why should we be afraid to die, seeing that we may
have such comfort, that notwithstanding all our enemies, we shall rise again.
Christ when he drew near his death said, he thirsted; and the cruel soldiers
presently gave him vinegar to drink; but Christ does not so by us, he has
tempered us a cup of comfort; He says to us (as he said to the Thief) This
day shall thou be with me in Paradise, this day shall be a blessed day to thee:
therefore our care must be to repent our sins, to get faith in Christ, and
to live holily here; and then when death comes, our souls shall go to
Heaven, and though our bodies lie in the grave a long time, yet one day they
shall rise at the time appointed.

The fourth point is, Fourthly by whose power we shall rise.
By whose power we shall rise: the Scripture shows, by the Power of Christ; no
man can rise by his own power, it cannot be done by the power of nature: So
Job. 14. 14. (says he) If a man die, shall he live again? meaning that if a
man die, he cannot rise of himself, the power of nature cannot put life into
him again: no man can raise himself, nor no body else can do it, it must be
by the power of Christ only. So says David, Psalm. 49. 7. None of them can by
any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him: and the
Scripture elsewhere makes it plain unto us, that it must be by the power of
Christ that we shall be raised; for he is said to be the resurrection and the
life: and further 1 Cor. 15. 22. says the Apostle, For as in Adam all died,
even so in Christ shall we all be made alive: so Psalm. 49. 15. But God shall
deliver my soul from the power of the grave, for he will receive me: so then
all shall rise by the power of Christ, but there is great difference in their
risings for he will raise the godly as a merciful Savior and Redeemer, as a
Head to give life to his Members and quicken them. Thus all the People of God
shall be infinitely made glad of the power of Christ, but the wicked of the
world, and such as have despised God and goodness, they shall rise with fear
and astonishment, and shall wish that the Sea or the Grave might have retained
and kept them, yea they shall desire the hills and mountains to fall upon them
to cover them.

The use is, Use 1.
first, seeing all shall rise by the power of Christ, we must learn to
magnify this power that shall raise us from the power of the Grave, and out of
the belly of rottenness. In the story of Joseph, Genesis 40. 13. when he lay in
the prison house, he said unto Pharoahs butler, Remember me to Pharaoh, that
thou may bring me out of his house, for I was taken out of my Country and
sold, etc. Simile.
So the body should say to the soul, remember me to Jesus Christ, that he may
bring me from this prison house and place of rottenness, that he may raise me
out of the dust and bring me to Heaven.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing all shall rise by the power of Christ, therefore let all labor to
feel the power of Christ here in this life to their conversion, or else they
shall feel the power of Christ to their terror at the day of judgment:
Therefore labor thou here whosoever thou art, to feel the power of Christ to
raise thee out of thy sins and corruptions, to quicken thee up to newness of
life; or else thou shall feel the power of Christ to raise thee at the last
day to thy confusion.

Thirdly, Use 3.
seeing all shall rise by the power of Christ, therefore let us not doubt but
that the Lord will raise us out of our troubles whatsoever they be; seeing he
will raise our bodies at the last day. We read, Ezekiel. 37. that the Lord said
to the Prophet, Son of Man, can these dead bones live? and so bade him
prophecy upon the bones, till bone ran to his bone, flesh and sinews grew on
them again; and there was a great army that stood up, verse 11. says the
Lord, Son of Man, these bones are the whole house of Israel that did lie in
captivity and bondage: therefore the Lord did show the Prophet, that as he
was able to raise these dead bones to life, so he was able to bring them out
of trouble and bondage again. Therefore do not thou doubt but that the Lord
will raise thee out of thy troubles whatsoever they be. As Psalm. 86. 13. David
says, great i^ thy mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from the
lowest grave; Therefore if thou do not believe that God will raise thee out
of thy troubles (whatsoever they be) then blot this article out of thy Creed,
and search it out, for it he can raise thy body out of the grave, then do not
doubt but that he can raise thee out of thy troubles whatsoever they be.

Fifthly, 5
In what estate our bodies shall rise in; in an estate of glory: Now they are
mortal and mutable, In what estate our bodies shall rise in.
subject to a number of infirmities, to hunger, nakedness, cold, sicknesses,
diseases and pains: now they are dull and heavy in the service of God, but at
the last day (when we shall rise again) our bodies shall be made immortal
and shall be subject to no infirmities of nature, sicknesses or pains: then
they shall have strength to perform their own actions, in so excellent and
perfect an estate our bodies shall rise. Simile.
If a Physician should out of his Art and skill give us such a potion that we
should never hunger nor thirst after it, and should be free from sicknesses,
diseases, pains and griefs, a man would give many a pound to procure it; such
a potion the Lord will give us at the last day, he will give us a cup of
immortality, that we shall have no more pains and sicknesses; therefore how
should we long and desire for that day. Matthew. 18. 8. our Savior Christ
says, It were better for a man to enter into life hurt and maimed, than having
two hands and two feet to be cast into Hell fire: It were better for a man to
go to Heaven wanting his parts, than for a man to go to Hell with all the
glory that this world can afford him; and yet we may have this assured hope,
that we shall not go deformed to Heaven; but we shall have all our parts, and
glory put on them; but whosoever cares not for Christ, or for religion, they
shall see this glory put upon the People of God, and shall not taste of it. Let
us therefore be exhorted to labor to have communion with Christ, to repent us
of our sins, and to fear God, that when death comes, our eyes may be so shut
up in this world, as they may be open in the Kingdom of God for ever.
Chrysostom says, that the Goldsmith puts into a pot his silver or his
gold, Simile.
then he sets the pot into the fire and melts it, where he forms a bowl or a
cup to set before the king; so the Lord melts us by death, and then out of the
dead ashes and cinders of the bodies of his servants, he frames and will make
them goodly vessels of honor to stand before him in his Temple. One says
well, It is a good thing to think of the future glory of the body, especially
in the time of sickness, and in the hour of death against the crawling of the
worms, and the place of rottenness; Job comfort himself with this, for I
am sure that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on the Earth, and
though after my skin worms, destroy this flesh, yet shall I see God with my
flesh, Job. 19. so we must comfort our selves in the like time of extremity.
Now this glory shall not be from the redundance of the spirit only; but in
regard of the blessed and happy estate that the body shall be in at that time.
As 1 Cor. 15. 42. says the Apostle, It is sown in corruption, and is raised
in incorruption, it is sown in weakness, and it is raised in power: The glory
of the body consists in six things at the Resurrection.
so the glory of the body shall be in regard of the blessed estate that it
shall be in at that time.

Now in six things the glory of the body consists: First, the glory of the
body consists in that there shall be all the parts of the body perfect and
entire, 1
they shall want nothing, howsoever a man may be maimed or deformed, want a
hand or an eye, a leg or a finger, or an eye here, yet all shall be supplied
to him at that day: Entireness of parts.
and that for two Reasons:

First, Reason 1.
Because all things shall be reduced to their former estate: for as Peter
shows Acts 3. 21. speaking of Christ, whom the Heavens must contain and
keep, until the time that all things shall be restored: in the beginning the
body of man was made perfect and entire, wanting nothing either for beauty or
comeliness; therefore to this estate it shall be restored again.

Secondly, Reason 2.
Tertullian raises it from another ground, Revel. 21. 4. where it is said,
there shall be no more death; always (says he) in the greater is inferred the
lesser; therefore if death be expelled from the whole man, then it seems to
be expelled from every particular member: and therefore for conclusion, the
bodies of the Saints shall rise perfect and entire again with all the parts.

The use is, Use 1.
seeing all our parts shall be perfect and entire at that day, we must comfort
our selves with this; though we want an eye, a hand, or a foot; for we know
by faith that they shall all be restored again at the last day: Simile.
if a man should want a member, an eye, a leg, or an arm, and there were one
could restore it to him again, he would give many pounds to have it supplied;
but better by many degrees is the estate of Gods children; for let a man fear
God, make conscience of his ways, repent his sins, and labor to please him,
and he may be assured the Lord will restore to him all his parts, and that
not only to himself, but also to his family and friends.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing at the day of judgment all our parts shall be restored again by
Christ, we should not be afraid to forgo any of them for the Name of Christ:
for he that did restore the ear of Malchus, which was his enemy, Simile.
sure it is therefore that he will restore any part that his friend should lose
for his names sake: as Heb. 11. 35. it is said of the holy men that they would
not be delivered from those pains and torments (which the wicked had devised
against them) that they might receive a better resurrection; and in the story
of the Macchabees we read a strange and worthy narration, recorded also by
Josephus, that when one of the seven Children of the mother, came to suffer,
and was to have his tongue and other parts to be cut off, he says, These have
I received from the Heavens, but now for the Law of God I despise them, and
trust that I shall receive them again: so because we know that if we lose
any part for the Name of Christ, he will restore it to us at the day of
judgment: Therefore we should not be afraid to lose it, but contented and
willing to part with all for Christ.

Now if any man should object, Object.
that we shall not then have all our parts restored again, because Christ
says, Matthew. 18. that a man were better to go halt and lame into the Kingdom
of God, than having two hands and two feet to be cast into everlasting fire.

To this I answer, Ans.
That Christ does not speak positively, but by supposition; for he does not
say, ye shall go halt and lame into life; but he says, it were better for a
man to go in any mean and base condition to God, as blind, lame, naked and
poor, than to go into everlasting fire, with all the glory that this world
can afford.

Secondly, Ans. 2.
I answer, It is to be understood of the estate of the soul, and not of the
body: for if a man were to lose his hands or feet, yea all the parts of his
body for this end only to have his soul go to Heaven, it were better than
that he should have all the parts of his body, and go with the wrecke of his
soul and conscience into everlasting fire.

Secondly, 2
the glory of the body consists in this, that it shall be beautiful and
lovely: The body shall be beautiful and lovely.
howsoever now our bodies may be rotten, deformed and ill-favored, especially
when we be dead, at which time the bodies of the best and beautifullest are
ill-favored to look on. We see good Abraham when Sara was dead, desired to
have a place to bury her out of his sight, so loathsome and ill-favored we be
when we be dead; but at the resurrection, then our bodies shall be made
beautiful and lovely; no man or woman is now so beautiful as we shall be
then, and that for two Reasons:

First, Reason 1.
Look what estate Adam was in, in the time of innocence, in the same estate
shall the bodies of the Saints be at the resurrection: but the body of man was
so beautiful and glorious, so full of brightness and spendor which issued
from it, as all the Beasts of the field stood gazing and looking on him: in the
same estate shall all the bodies of the Saints be at the resurrection.

Secondly, Reason 1.
all deformities, blackenesse, ill-favourednesse and crookedness are
punishments and penalties for sin; but when our sins and our corruptions
shall cease, then the penalty and punishment shall cease. Oh how should this
quicken up our care to repent of our sins, to get faith in Christ, to walk
holily here, that we may have our portion with the Saints. We see here when
men and women's bodies be crooked and deformed, Simile.
they wear iron bodies, and will endure any thing to make them straight
again; besides if they be not well-favored they will send into Spain and
Italy, to buy complexion, which when they have, it does not help nature, but
they be the worse for it, because it eats out their favor: But if men will
fear God, repent their sins, get faith in Christ, and walk holily here, our
Lord Jesus Christ will repair all and make our bodies beautiful and lovely:
Simile.
when Solomon had built the Temple, the Chaldeans came and destroyed it;
afterward when it was built again, it came not to the former glory that it
had: but it shall not be so with the bodies of the Saints, for they shall be
restored to a more beautiful and glorious estate, than ever they had before.

Thirdly, 3
the glory of the bodies of the Saints shall consist in this, In brightness
and splendour.
that they shall be filled with brightness and splender. now their bodies are
dark and obscure, but then they shall be like so many bright stars and
shining Lamps, when all the bodies of the wicked shall gather blackenesse and
darkness, and shall look like filthy scroules; all the bodies of the Saints
shall be like so many bright Stars: as Daniel 12. 3. it is said, And they that
be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn
many to righteousness shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever: this
Christ does further enlarge Matthew. 13. 43. The Just shall shine as the Sun in
the Kingdom of their Father: the Sun did never look more glorious upon this
world, than the bodies of the Saints shall shine with glory at that day;
therefore what a comfortable estate shall our bodies be in at that time. We see
when Moses had talked with God forty days (by the reflection of Gods glory upon
him) his face did shine so that the children of Israel were not able to behold
it: how much more will the glory of Saints be, when they shall abide with God
not forty days, but for ever and ever; if there shall be such glory and
brightness in the bodies of the Saints, how superexcellent shall the glory of
the Soul be then?

The use is, Use 1.
that a Christian should solace himself in the meditation of this, and not
think his time lost in the Service of God, but abstract his heart from the
love of this world and worldly things, to think on the future glory that God
has prepared for the Saints, and cheer up thy heart with it: as Genesis 13. the
Lord makes an excellent promise to Abraham concerning the land of Canaan,
bidding him Arise and walk through the land in the length and breadth thereof;
so the Lord makes goodly promises to a Christian concerning Heaven. Therefore
though he has not put us in possession of it hitherto, yet we should arise
and walk through the land in the length and breadth of it; that is, meditate
and think on the glory and goodly delights of it, and solace our souls
therewith.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing the Lord will honor our bodies then with such a deal of glory, we
must be careful to spend our time well, to live in all holiness and
righteousness while we live here: for how can we look that God should
honor us, when we are not careful to keep our bodies holy, Simile.
and labor to honor them our selves? It is a rule in Art that they that would
finish their colors in brightness, must lay grounds suitable; so, if thou
would have Christ to finish up thy life in glory and brightness, lay no sad
grounds, no black colors of sin and corruption for a foundation: therefore if
we would have Christ to honor our bodies, it must be our care to repent us of
our sins, to get faith in Christ, to keep our bodies pure and clean, to
possess them in holiness, and then we may have comfort that God will honor
them at the day of judgment with brightness of Glory.

Fourthly, 4
It shall be immutable and immortal: in this life our bodies are subject to
changes and alterations; In that they shall be immortal and immutable.
as Job 14. it is said, He shoots forth as a flower and is cut down, he
vanishes away as a shadow and never continues in one stay; here our bodies
are subject to hunger and thirst, to nakedness, cold and diseases; but then
they shall be brought to an estate of permanencie that they shall rest in, so
that they shall not hunger nor thirst, nor be naked: as Revel. 7. 16. They
shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on
them, neither any heat; and so also Revel. 21. 4. it is said, And God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain, so then
their bodies shall be free of all vexations, and then they shall be at rest:
this we see is clear by the Scripture; and manifest also by reason; for it is
a ground in nature that all things labor to attain to their last perfection,
and so to rest in it; but the bodies of the Saints are not yet come to their
last perfection while they live here, therefore here they cannot be at rest:
but at the last day when our bodies shall be brought to an estate of
perfection, then they shall rest in it, and shall not be subject to change or
alteration: Simile.
we see in nature if the shipmans needle be touched with a load stone it
turns and turns and is not at rest till it stands against the North Pole, and
if it be hindered with any thing, it stands trembling as if it were
discontented, but when it comes there, it is at rest and quiet; so it is with
the bodies of the Saints, that are touched with the lodestone, that is, that
have touched Christ by faith, they be not at rest and quiet here, but subject
to many infirmities of nature; but when they come to the estate of perfection,
there they rest contented and are brought to live with Christ, then our bodies
shall be immutable and unchangeable: In this world our bodies are subject to
sickness and diseases, to pains and aches; to the stone, gout, and to the
crampe, etc. by which death does enter within our walls, and labor to take the
castle of our hearts; but at that time our bodies shall be made immutable and
unchangeable, immortal, free from all these exigences; therefore what must we
do when we feel these decays in nature, and these infirmities? I answer, it
is good to take Saint Peter's counsel, Act. 1. 19. That we should repent and
turn unto the Lord, that our sins may be put away when the time of
refreshing shall come, from the presence of the Lord: Simile.
If a Physician should give you such a diet that after a few days taking of
it, ye should never be sick again, should feel no pain, nor be subject
to any disease, and have thy body brought into so good an estate, that you
should not hunger or thirst any more, or be naked, this were an excellent
state; but there is no Physician in the world can do it, none but our Heavenly
Physician Jesus Christ, and that by this means: We should get faith in
Christ, repentance for our sins, and walk in holiness a few days while we
live here, and then he will set our bodies in such an estate, as we shall never
be sick nor feel any more pain, never be a hungered or a thirst, naked, or
cold; here in this life time we must seek it, therefore let us labor to
repent our sins, to get faith in Christ, and to walk holily here, and then our
bodies shall be brought to such an estate, as shall not alter and change.
Simile.
It is a world to see what means men use to keep their bodies from
putrification, they will keep them up in lead, imbalme them with sweet spices,
and lay them in marble; yet none of these will serve, but the bodies of Kings
and Queens must yield to it. But do thou labor to repent of thy sins, to
get faith in Christ, to please God, and to make conscience of thy ways, and
then thy body shall be brought to such an estate, as it shall not be subject
to alter and change, but shall be made immutable and immortal.

Fifthly, They shall be spiritual Bodies.
They shall be spiritual bodies; In this life our bodies are natural, but
then they shall be spiritual; so S. Paul says in 1 Cor. says in 1 Cor. 15.
44. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. A natural
body in this life; a spiritual body in the life to come. Now, it is not a
spiritual body in regard of substance, for it shall have breadth and length
and thickness; it shall have parts and dimensions as our bodies have; so Luke
14. when Christ entered into the house and stood amongst them, they thought it
had been a Spirit; but he tells them, that a spirit had not flesh and blood
and bones, as we have. Now in two Respects our bodies are said to be
spiritual.

First, Our Bodies shall be spiritual in two Respects.
Because they shall be sustained and upheld by the Spirit; In this life our
bodies are sustained and upheld by meat, drink, sleep and Physic; but then
the Spirit of God shall quicken them, 1
and they shall have no need of these helps. Because upheld by the Spirit.
We see Moses was forty days in the mount, where he was so filled with the
Glory of God that he was neither an hungered nor a-thirst, neither did he (as
far as we know) desire to sleep or rest all that time; if Moses was thus
upheld with the Glory of God without the use of meat and drink in the estate
of mortality, much more surely shall the bodies of the Saints be upheld in
the estate of glory; so that there shall not be no need of the use of meat,
drink, sleep and physic, but God shall be all in all to us.

Secondly, 2
The body shall be subject to the Spirit, and be ready to attend the Spirit in
all good things. Because subject to the Spirit.
Augustine says, it is not called a spiritual body, because (as some men
think) the substance of the body is turned into a Spirit; but (says he)
because it shall be subject to the Spirit, and shall attend it; and some of
the Schoolmen, namely Thomas Aquinas says, that it is an evident truth that
in the state of glory, the Spirit shall not depend on the body, but the body
shall be led by the Spirit, and attend it. For in the best there is such
reluctation between the Spirit and the flesh as they cannot do the good they
would; so Matthew. 26. 40, 41. The Disciples, when they should have watched and
prayed, Christ found them a-sleepe: and Romans 7. 22. Paul says, I delight in
the Law of God, concerning the inward man, but I see another law in my members,
rebelling against the Law of my mind, and leading me captive to the law of
sin, which is in my members; so Ezekiel. 3. 14. (says the Prophet,) So I went,
but it was in the bitterness and indignation of my Spirit: hence we see that
in the best there has been reluctation between the flesh and the Spirit, that
the flesh labors to resist the Spirit; but here is comfort to a Christian
that one day it shall attend the Spirit, and be led by it in all holy duties.
We see when Rebekah had conceived, Genes. 25. 22. she felt such struggling and
striving in her that she was amazed, and says in that agony, Seeing it is so,
why am I thus? as if she should say, seeing there is such a striving and
struggling in me I were as good be barren; but there was an Oracle of God that
did answer her, Simile.
that two Nations were within her, of whom the elder should serve the younger so
many times a Christian finds such striving and struggling in him, that it makes
him amazed; the Oracle of God tells us that then there are two within us, the
flesh and the Spirit; and that the flesh shall serve the Spirit: if one come to
a great heap of Gunpowder, and bring but a little spark of fire and put to it,
it will dissolve and bring it to nothing* so although there be a great heap
of sin and corruption in us, Simile.
yet if a man get but a little spark of the Spirit of God in him, it will
dissolve and bring it to nothing; therefore we must comfort our selves with the
hope of this, howsoever now our bodies are not subject to the Spirit, that yet
one day they shall be ruled and guided by the Spirit.

The sixth thing wherein the glory of the body consists, 6
is, that it shall be a powerful body: It shall be a powerful Body in
three things.
as S. Paul says, 1 Cor. 15. 43. It is sown in weakness and it rises in
power.

Now the power of a glorified body is in three things: 1
First, Because it shall have power to perform its own actions without
defatigation or wearisomnesse; To act without weariness.
now we cannot do any action, but in time we shall be weary of it, weary
with going, sitting, standing or doing of any thing. We know, Christ as he was
man was weary, John 4. for it is said, that he being weary sat him down on
the well: so Exodus 19. Moses hands were so weary with holding up, insomuch
that Aaron and Hur did stay them up; so the best Christians sometimes are
weary with doing the best things. Weary with kneeling at prayer, with
standing to hear and confer and such like; but at the last day we shall
have such power in our bodies that we shall never be weary of standing
before God or kneeling in Prayer for ever and ever; there shall be such power
and such strength in the body: therefore as often as we be weary in prayer, or
with doing any good thing in the labors of our callings, we must comfort our
selves with this, that one day we shall have power and strength to do any
good duty and service that God requires at our hands without defatigation or
wearisomnesse.

Secondly, 2
In that the body shall move it self any way with ease, Because it shall be
able to move it self nimbly in the air.
and shall be able to walk in the air and on the water; as now we can walk
on the ground. Though our bodies be weighty and ponderous, yet then they shall
have such power and strength as they shall be able to move upward and
downward, forward and backward, with as much ease as a man lifts up his hand,
there shall be such strength and agilitie in our bodies: now they are subject
to one motion only, to go forward, but then they shall be able to move any
way.

Thirdly, 3
In that they shall be able to pass through any thing, as a man's finger
passes through soft cloth: In that they shall be p^ircing.
and therefore John 21. 15. of Christ it is said, He came into the place where
the Disciples were met, the doors being shut. The Schoolmen say, that the
Creature gave way to the Creator, but there was such power in the body of
Christ that if it had been shut up in a chest of steel, Iron or marble, it
could have passes through; in like manner it shall be with a glorified body,
it shall be able to pass through any obstacle whatsoever; therefore seeing it
is so, that the Lord will bestow on the bodies of Christians such goodly
indowments, let us think of these glorious things, and comfort our selves with
the hope of these, and let us be contented to walk a few days in holiness
and fear before God: and then we shall have our part in them. Pliny reports
of the little Bees that in a great wind or tempest they catch up little stones
in their claws to balance themselves against the wind that they be not
carried away by it; so should Christians do in wind and tempest; Simile.
that is, in the time of temptation and trouble, they should catch up stones in
their claws, that is, they should balance themselves with the Promises of
God, and with the hope of blessedness; that so they be not carried away with
the wind of temptation and trouble.

Now we come to speak in what estate the wicked shall rise; In what estate
the wicked shall rise.
this we will show in two things:

First, 1
In an estate of shame and disgrace, the bodies of the Saints they shall be
beautiful and lovely to look on, In a disgraceful estate.
but the bodies of the wicked shall rise deformed, ilfavoured and loathsome to
look on; as Esai 66. it is said, And they shall go forth and look upon the
carcasses of the men that have transgressed against me, for their worm shall
not die, neither shall their fire be quenched and they shall be an abhorring
unto all flesh: The bodies of the wicked shall be as ugly and loathsome
carkases to look on, and their faces shall gather darkness and blackenesse:
As in this life when a man is sick a little and has pains upon him, it
changes his favor and makes him look pale: O but what will it be when bodies
and souls shall be tormented for ever? and therefore all the glory of the
wicked is in this world.

Secondly, 2
the Godly shall be free from all necessities of nature, they shall not
hunger, They shall be clogged with all misery, necessity and want.
thirst, be naked, nor subject to diseases and pains, but the wicked shall
be in hunger and thirst, in all extremeties that may be; subject to headache,
toothache, back-ach, belly-ach; all the pains that may be shall come upon
them. They shall not be free in any one part of them, but be in so great
extremity that although they should desire but a drop of comfort, Luke 15. 19.
they shall go without it. We see the rich Glutton fared delicately every
day, lay soft, had rich apparel, and had a knot of knaves to attend on him,
but when he was in Hell, he could not have so much as a drop of water to
refresh him; this extremity all the wicked shall be in, they shall be subject
to necessities of nature and to all pains and torments. A number of men do
not believe us now, but one day they shall see and feel it, for if we live
not holily in this world, I that am the Preacher, and you that are the hearers,
we shall all see it, and our hearts shall tremble at it. The Godly they shall
be in an estate of glory, but the wicked in an estate of shame then how shall
they cry out against the other and say; ye would not be ruled by us, nor
hear our counsel and advice. We have heard what S. Paul said to the men that
were in the ship, Simile.
Act. 27. 21. Had you hearkened to me, you might have escaped this loss, saved
your ship and your goods. So good preachers shall stand up in that day against
men and say, if you had hearkened to us, you might have shunned this loss, if
you had repented of your sins, gotten faith in Christ and walked in a Holy
course, you might have saved your bodies and souls.

SERMON LXXIIII. SERMON. LXXIV.

JOHN 10. 27, 28. My Sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow
me. And I give unto them eternal Life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any man pluck them out of my hand.
THe sacred Story shows, 2 Samuel 6. 13. after David brought the Arc from
Obed-Edoms house, when they had gone six paces, they stood still and offered
Oxen and fatlings, Simile.
to give God thanks for their good beginning which they had made; so should
Christians do in any labor that they go about, stand still (as it were) and
give God thanks for the good entrance they have made on their labors: At this
time therefore amongst other holy duties which we are to perform to God on
the Sabbath, let us be thankful to him for the good entrance we have made in
our harvest labors, that so by this harvest we may remember that great
harvest wherein we shall all reap that which we have sown in the time of
life.

Now having finished the Doctrine of the Resurrection, yet there remains some
questions to be answered, although for mine own part I could be contented to
pass them over, because as David says, Psalm. 131. 1. I have not exercised my
self in great matters, or in things too high for me: Exodus 19. 24.
and to observe the order expressed in the Law, where the Priests as well as
the People had their bounds set them, which they might not pass beyond:
Nevertheless, I purpose to answer your desires and expectations in making
supply of them, as far as (by the light of Gods Truth) I can, and as I gather
by the grace of God given me.

The first question is, Quest. 1. whether monsters borne, shall rise monsters.
whether such as were borne monsters and misshapen, shall rise monsters at the
last day? To this Augustine answers, that they shall not rise monsters, but
shall rise corrected and amended in all the parts: Because (says he) if a
workman should make a thing ill-favored and deformed, Simile.
he lets it not alone so, but will melt it again till it be most excellent
and beautiful, Ans.
much more can the Lord when he has made them deformed, melt them by death,
and so make them glorious bodies fashioned like to the Saints. Now to his
Judgment I assent thus far, that all the bodies of them that are godly, and
holy people and his chosen, their bodies shall rise glorious and beautiful,
though they were borne monsters and misshapen but they that be wicked shall have
the same deformities upon them at the day of Judgment that they had in this
world; That the deformities of the Saints, shall only be repaired.
for deformednesse and to be misshapen, is a punishment for sin, but at the
day of Judgment, the punishment of sin to them shall not be lessened, but
further increased as the Schoolmen say: If a wicked man have a hand cut off,
or lose an eye justly for his offense by the Magistrate, they shall be
restored to him at the day of Judgment to his further increase of torment;
unto which I assent, because there are two courts, the Court of men and of God;
the Court of men extends but to this life only, and there cease, they
cannot make them lose their members for ever; but the Judgments of God begin
in this life to a wicked man, and are perfected in the life to come, and
therefore if a man be borne a monster and misshapen and a wicked man, he shall
rise so again: so we see here in this world, what a man that is misshapen and
deformed would give to have it redressed, and amended, and yet they do not
consider, to live in their sins is a means to bring all deformities upon
them.

The second Question is, Quest. 2. In what Sex all shall rise again.
in what Sex we shall rise again, whether or not men shall rise men, and women
women as they be? I answer, they shall rise in the same Sex they lived in; as
we see Matthew. 22. 28. the Sadduces came to Christ saying, Ans.
There was a woman that had seven husbands, and at last she died, therefore in
the resurrection whose wife shall she be of the seven, for seven had her to
wife? whereunto Christ does not say there shall be no woman at the
resurrection, but that they shall not marry, but shall be as the Angels of
God in Heaven; the Sexes shall not cease: and S. Jerome says upon that place,
that Christ gives us to understand where he says, that they shall not
marry, nor give in marriage, that both shall rise again, men shall rise men,
and women shall rise women, and the Greek words will bear it though the
Latin will not; so 1 Peter 3. 7. he exhorts men and women to live together as
heirs of the grace of life; and Matthew. 12. 42. it is said, The Queen of the
South shall rise up in Judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it,
etc. Hence it is manifest, both Sexes shall rise again.

The third Question is, Quest. 3. Whether Children and old men shall rise so
again or not.
In what age we shall rise, whether Children shall rise Children, and old men
old men? Augustine answers, that they shall all rise at the age of Christ, that
is, at 33 years of age, whereunto the Schoolmen agree, but I dare not assent
unto it; because there is no warrant out of the Scripture for it, Ans. 1.
for, whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and that which has not his warrant
from the word of God, cannot be of faith, which must be grounded on the
Scripture: And Augustine himself says, whether little Children shall rise
Children, we do not find in the Scripture, or in what age men shall rise:
indeed there is one place that seems to confirm his opinion, Ephesians. 4. 13.
Till we all come in the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son
of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. Now by a general consent the Fathers do expound it otherwise.
Chrysostom says, that by the fullness of the age of Christ, in this place is
not meant the full age of Christ, but the Gifts and Graces of Christ. So
another Father affirms, that by a perfect man in Christ, is not meant the
temporal age of the Son of God; so S. Jerome says, of the same place, that
by the age of Christ is not meant the grounds of the bodies of the Godly; but
the inward man, the gifts and graces of his Spirit, of his soul, and not of
his body.

Secondly, 2
Tertullian is of another judgment (says he) let Christians remember this,
that our souls shall receive the same bodies from the which they departed, and
therefore look in what stature and in what age and years we were of, in the
same we shall rise again.

Thirdly, 3
Augustine does much rely on his own opinion, for (says he) every age is
capable of blessedness; and therefore I do not purpose to contend of strive to
know in what age we shall rise in.

Fourthly, 4
there are some reasons to prove the contrary: First, that there is nothing in
a Child more than in a man, Reas. 1. against the former opinion.
to hinder them from the Kingdom of God, for Christ says, Suffer little
Children to come unto me and forbid them not, for unto such belong the
Kingdom of God: And therefore seeing there is nothing in a Child that may
hinder him from the Kingdom of God, why may not Children rise Children again?
A Child may be blessed; for if a Child could not have been blessed, what
shall we say if Adam had had Children in the time of innocence, should they
not have been blessed? most certainly, they should* Now if Adams Children
should have been blessed in the time of innocence, much more shall Children
be blessed in Heaven.

Secondly, 2
Children may perfectly perform the chiefest act that the people of God are to
do in Heaven, namely to praise God; as we see Psalm. 8. Out of the mouths of
Babes and sucklings have thou ordained praise.

Thirdly, 3
all those Christ raised in this life were raised in the same age and stature,
that they were in when they died, as the Maid, the widows Son, and
Lazarus, and those that were raised at the Resurrection of Christ; or else how
should they been known to their friends again so perfectly.

Now against this there is one Objection of some weight to be answered; Object.
A Child is not in an estate of perfection, and there is no imperfect thing
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Ans.
To this I answer, that a Child is imperfect only in regard of labor and
travel, but not imperfect for the life of glory, and a spiritual life; and
therefore it must be our wisdom and care to spend our time well in the fear
of God, in repentance for our sins, and to get faith in Christ, and then let
our age, sex or estate of our body be what it will, we shall be blessed and
happy when we dye, and we shall rise to a glorious estate. It is a good
saying of Chrysostom, if a grave senators should bring thee into his house,
and show thee a number of grave senator, Simile.
sitting on Thorns richly clothed, with chains of gold about their necks and
crowns on their heads, and should tell thee that after a few days he would
bring thee thither, and make thee one of them; how careful would thou be
to please him, and fearful to offend him in any thing? This (says he) is
our case, Jesus Christ has showed us by the eye of faith, Heaven and the
blessed estate and condition of the godly, and has promised to bring us
thither after a few years, if we will repent our sins, get faith in Christ
and walk holily before him; therefore how careful should we be not to
offend him; what fools are men to lose eternal things for earthly, for if men
would live holily here, they should live eternal in the life to come.

Thus at last we are come to speak of Everlasting life, for the Lord does
raise the dead out of the grave, and out of the dens of death, to give them
everlasting life: and this is that which Christ has promised to his people,
John 10. 27.
as we see John 10. My sheep hear my voice, they follow me, and I give them
everlasting life: and John 6. 47. says Christ, Verily, verily, I say unto you
he that believes in me has everlasting life: so also Psalm. 21. 4. says the
Prophet, He asked life of thee and thou gave it him; even length of days
for ever and ever. So then everlasting life is the great blessing that he has
promised to his people that none partake of but they, it being the Center of a
Christian man's desires, all whose labors, pains and endeavors tend to this
and no further; Simile.
for as we know things when they be at the center there they rest, stay and
go no further; so if once the people of God come at this, there they stay and
go no farther; with thoughts hereof they comfort themselves in the troubles
and afflictions of this life; Simile.
Genes. 28. 11. Jacob being weary in his journey, took stones and laid them
under his head, and slept, where he saw an heavenly vision, a ladder carried
up to heaven, and Angels ascending and descending thereupon, which comforted
him in all his troubles and labors; so Christians must comfort themselves in
all the afflictions and travels of this life, with this that Christ has reared
up a Ladder in his death and bloodshed that reaches unto heaven; therefore if
Christians will be contented to walk Christianly and holily here, but a few
days and years, he will bring them to everlasting life.

I, Object.
but some may say, why do ye speak of everlasting life now, seeing every man
is busy to get some thing to maintain this life? I answer, a man does well to
be busied in his honest labors to get some thing to maintain this life, Ans.
because (as we shall hear afterward) this life is the way to eternal life
and the seed time of a Christian: But o how miserable a thing is it for a man
to provide for this life and neglect eternal life? and therefore our care must
be to provide for this life so as it may further us to everlasting life; In
the Law the people of Israel were commanded to keep the feast of
reconciliation, which was in the end of the year, when harvest was done, and
their barnes and wine-presses full, which was to teach us that in the midst
of our joy and plenty we should seek for eternal life, and should labor to
have the pardon of our sins, and to reconcile our selves to God, so to be
fitted for eternal life: therefore let every man so attend to the things of
this life as that he may labor for everlasting life, which is the blessing of
all blessings.

I, Object.
but is everlasting life so great a blessing, seeing the wicked shall be
raised to everlasting life? I answer, that the wicked shall be raised up to
everlasting life, Ans.
which life shall be a continual death to them, for look in what extremity
any man is in when he is a dying, grieving and groaning as though his Spirit
were departing; in the like extremity shall all the wicked be in; Simile.
dying and never dye, breathing out their last breath, and yet never breathing
it out; If a man for an offense should be adjudged to lie in such a hot furnace
as was prepared for the three Children by Nebuchadnezzar but two years, Simile.
he would think he were better die a thousand deaths than to lie in such
extremity. But what is temporary fire to Hell fire? It is nothing comparable
to it: what is the wrath of man to the wrath of God? nothing; there is no death
to the death of the wicked, and no torment like the torment of Hell; for their
death is continual. If a man were put to his choice, no doubt he would die a
thousand deaths temporary, before he would dye that death. For though the
deaths of men's devising be terrible, yet they are nothing compared to the
death and punishments that God can devise for the wicked? And yet we see how
men labor to avoid and to fly temporary death, they will run, ride, take
physic, endure any pains to shun it; which is but a flea biting as it
were, if compared which eternal death* and never fear, never labor to shun
this latter which is the most woeful of all other. We see how afraid men be of
the plague, so as they will labor by all means to avoid it, which yet brings
but temporary death; how much more afraid should we be of sin, because
that is the cause of eternal death? Here we see the madness of the world
which labors to avoid temporary death, and yet will not strive to avoid sin
which brings eternal. But let us pray to God to avoid sin, that so we may
avoid eternal death: for the wicked shall rise no to live eternally, but to
dye eternally; nay, their life shall be worse than death, (if any thing can be
worse:) but it is otherwise with the people of God, they shall rise to
everlasting life, for he bestows that of none but his people and Church.

Now here we are to consider two things:

1. What it is that God does promise. 2. The Continuance of it.
First, 1
he promises to his People Life: now Life is twofold:

1. Natural. God promises to his people. Life twofold.
2. Spiritual.
First, 1
the Natural life is upheld by the use of meat, drink and physic, Natural
Life.
wherein both the good and bad have their part; for this is proper to both: but
that is not the life that our christian faith (here) speaks of. For to speak
exactly, it is but the way to life, whereof Christ speaks, Matthew. 5. 25. Agree
with thy adversary quickly whilst thou art in the way with him, etc. where
Christ shows, that this life is but the way to everlasting life: Therefore it
must be every man's wisdom to pass this life so here, as that he may make
it the way to everlasting life.

Now our spiritual life is upheld by having Communion with God, 2
for as the soul is the life of the body, Our spiritual Life.
so God is the life of the soul; because as the body cannot have life but by
Communion with the soul, so the soul cannot live unless it have Communion
with God. Which life is spoken of Psalm. 16. 11. Thou will show me the path of
life, in thy presence is the fullness of joy, at thy right hand are pleasures
for evermore: And John 5. 40. Christ says, But ye will not come unto me that
ye may have life: And this is the life which Christ promises here; for it is
nothing to live the life of nature, to eat, drink and sleep, which does but
nourish the body, and never look to the life of grace; but the special care
of a Christian must be, (for that a number of men think if they can live the
life of nature, they care not for living the spiritual life, for faith, or
repentance, or to live holily here,) the special thing, I say, which we should
look to is, to live hereafter. We find Genesis 17. 18. Abraham says unto God,
Oh that Ismael might live in thy sight; so this should be the request we
should make to God: Oh that I may live the life of the Spirit, indeed I live a
natural life, but I desire to live the life of grace; so David, Psalm. 119.
175. says, Let my soul live and it shall praise thee; my body lives and I
go up and down with it, but let my soul live and then I shall praise thee;
which is the blessing of all blessings to have Communion with God, to draw
near to him, and be acquainted with him by prayer, repentance and amendment
of life. Now there are two degrees of spiritual life:

1. The Life of Grace. 2. The Life of Glory.
First, 1
in that the soul has Communion with God by faith, Degree of Spiritual Life,
The Life of Grace.
which Communion is many times darkened and eclipsed by sin, when yet in the
interim it has many a glimpse of it, as the Sun being under a cloud is kept
from our sight that we cannot see it until it breaks out: so it is our sins
which hinders this sweet Communion, Simile.
that is, between God and the soul. As it is with the light and the eye; as
long as the eye is well it dare boldly look on the light, but if it catch a
blow or an hurt, it must have somewhat to hang before it, Simile.
because the light offends it. So it is between God and the soul, as long as
it stands in good terms with God, so long it dare with boldness come unto
God: but if once it catch a blow, have a hurt and a wound, it is afraid to come
before God. This is the life of Grace.

Now the Life of Glory is, 2
to live in the blessed presence of God, The Life of Glory.
in the Kingdom of Heaven, where the sweet face of God shall shine on us, and
where we shall have the Company of the Angels and Holy Spirits. But this is
the order: First, we must live the life of grace, and then the life of Glory,
and therefore every man must acquaint himself with God by Prayer, and in
repenting for his sins, that so we may look to have Communion with him in
the life to come; but if we do not acquaint our selves to prayer, and in the
use of holy means, then we are as strangers to him, and must not look to have
Communion with him in the life of Glory.

But to enlarge my self further in the point of Eternal Life; let us consider
of it a little more, as Philosophers say, the end of a thing is the first thing
in intention and the last in execution, which does order the rest of the
actions, and is like the stern of a ship that comes behind but yet does
order and guide it this way and that in all the turnings; so eternal life is
the first thing in a Christian man's intention and the last thing in execution,
Simile.
which must order all our actions; for to what end do we pray, repent us of
our sins and walk holily and obediently here, but to this end that we may
come to everlasting life. We see when the Merchants have been trading a long
time at Sea, at last they put their ship into the harbor to rest and stay
there; Simile.
so when Christians have been in the Sea of this world a long time trading,
they must put their ship into the harbor, that is, come to life everlasting,
there to rest and stay themselves. Great is the folly of the men of this world
who dote and think upon the things of this life, which the Devil knew well,
when he said, Job 1. all that a man has he will give for his life, etc. even
the very skin, and yet this life is but a shadow of that life and a way unto
it. Therefore brethren, let us be in love with eternal life, let it be our
wisdom, so to spend our time here in the fear of God, as that we may come
to life everlasting.

Which is the next thing we are to speak of but here man's wisdom becomes
folly in that the deepest reach of any created understanding, is too shallow to
comprehend the imme^sity of this life; for as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3. 9.
Eye has not seen, neither ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart
of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him: so says
David also, Psalm. 31. 19. O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up
for them that trust in thee; which thou have wrought for them that trust in
thee before the sons of men: 2 Cor. 12. 5.
S. Paul also says, That he was taken up into Paradise, and heard words which
cannot be spoken, which are not possible to be uttered. This is so great a
matter as the tongues of Angels are not able to express it; and therefore
when I or any other am to speak of life everlasting, we are to consider that
no man is able to express it; Simile.
for if a man stand on the Seashore, and look on it, he cannot see the
length, breadth and the extension of it, yet they may see that it is an
infinite great thing; so though life everlasting be a thing, that no man can
see the full extension of, yet we may conceive it to be an exceeding glorious
thing; therefore whatsoever we hear any man to speak of eternal life, we
are to conceive it is more than any man can express. It is not (as David
says) Psalm. 48. 8. As we have heard, so we have seen in the city of our
God; But as the Queen of the South, said of the wisdom of Solomon, that the
one half was not told me which I have seen: So we may say when we come to
possess everlasting life; it was a true saying that Gods Preachers told me of
Heaven and of everlasting life, but they have not told me half that which I
find; and therefore oh that God should show such mercy to poor sinners here
in this life, to give them hope of Heavenly things, and make them partakers of
everlasting life; of whom we may say with David, 2 Samuel 7. 18. Who am I o Lord
God; and what is my Fathers house, that thou have brought me hitherto? And
this was yet a small thing in thy sight o Lord God, but thou have spoken also
of thy servants house, for a great while to come, etc. So we may say, Lord
what am I, and what is my Fathers house, that thou should bestow this great
mercy and goodness on me so vile a creature? Now we are to consider of this
in two heads:

1 In the things we shall be freed from. 2 In the things we shall enjoy.
First, the things we shall be freed from are six: first, from all necessities
of nature: here are a number of things we stand in need of, an house to put our
heads in, meat and drink to nourish us, clothes to cover our nakedness, we
have need of fire to warm us, and a bed to lie on and sleep, and physic and
a number of things; but in the life to come God shall be all in all to us,
music to our ears, Manna to our taste, we shall drink of the Rivers of his
pleasures, and the kingdom of God shall be a house for us to dwell in, and the
arms of God a bed for us to lie in; we shall be fed with Angels food, with
the contemplation of God, for Christ we know told the Jews, I have meat that
ye know not. Now if the contemplation of God be so great here in the estate
of Grace, much more it will be in the life of Glory; where we shall no more
hunger nor thirst, nor be subject to nakedness or infirmities of nature, we
shall have need of nothing, for God shall be strength to our bones, and rest to
our eyes, etc. therefore think of this thou that art a poor Christian to
comfort thy self with, when thou art in want and necessity, when thou want
food to feed thee, clothes to keep thee warm, that one day thou shall be
freed from all the necessities of nature: but the wicked shall be subject to
hunger and thirst, and to all the miseries of nature, if they do desire but
the least drop of water to refresh them, they shall not have it. The people of
God shall be free from all these things, which now kings and queens are
subject unto, for God shall be all in all to them: At thy right hand there are
joys and pleasures for evermore, as David says, Psalm. 16. 11. then we shall
not need house, food, raiment, or sleep, but shall be freed from all these
things.

Secondly, Secondly, from all the labors of this life.
from all the labors of this life; here we are subject to sore labor, for it
is the sentence of God upon us all, Genesis 3. 19. that in the sweat of our face
we must eat our bread, till we return to dust again; and Psalm. 128. 2. It
is the blessing of Gods people, that they shall eat the labor of their hands;
so we see all are subject to labor, as it is Job 5. 7. Man is borne to labor,
as the sparks fly upwards: but here is the comfort of it, if a man fears God
and repents him of his sins, gets faith in Christ and walks holily here, he
shall one day be freed from all labors; even so says the Spirit, Revel. 14.
13. Blessed are they that dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors,
and their works follow them; and Saint Paul lays it down as a ground, Heb.
4. 9. that there remains a rest for the People of God: here in this world they
have a great deal of trouble, therefore Habbak. 1. 13. the Prophet
complains, Wherefore do thou look upon the transgressour, and hold thy
tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than himself?
so Psalm. 34. 19. David says, Many are the troubles of the righteous but the
Lord does deliver them out of all: so here is the stay of a Christian, though
he has a great deal of trouble and affliction, yet there remains a rest for
the people of God. One says well, all Gods works were good, who when he had
labored six days, rested the seventh day; so (says he) if thy works are
good which thou do, then after thy labor thou shall have rest, when the
wicked shall have neither rest nor peace. The Children of Israel when they were
in the wilderness endured sore labor, but here was their comfort that their
labor tended to Canaan, to give rest unto them, as it is Ier. 30. 2. He walked
before Israel to cause him to rest: so though the People of God have sore
labor forty years together, yet because they be in the way to Heaven, and to
the kingdom of God where they shall have rest, endless comfort, and be free
from all both bodily and spiritual labors, they should be comforted: now it
is a labor for me to preach, to get learning, but then all these things shall
cease and we shall be infinitely endued with all heavenly knowledge, as 1 Cor.
12. 9. says Saint Paul, Now we know but in part, prophecy in part, but when
that which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect shall be abolished;
so the Prophet Esaias says, We shall be all taught of God, therefore who would
not but endure a little labor here, seeing he shall have eternal rest?
Philosophers say, that All things rest when they come at their proper place,
but heaven is the proper place of Gods people where they shall have rest;
therefore let us be contented to take a little labor and pains that we may
have rest in the life to come. Simile.
If a king should say to us, go walk in such a high way, cole-pit, or, in
such a mine, but a few days, after which ye shall be free from all labors,
then I will keep and maintain you for ever, who is there but would be
contented to take any pains and labor for a little time, that so he may be
freed from everlasting torment? so seeing the Lord will one day free us from
all our labors, if we will be contented to labor here in this world, and to
do that which the Lord commands us, we shall one day be free from all
labors and shall rest in the kingdom of God. Simile.
It was the manner of the ancient Romans, that if any man had gone out to
wars, and had returned safe home again, he should ever after be kept
without laboring any more: so the Lord has sent us out to war against our
sins, lusts, and the devil, after which when we return home to heaven we
shall be freed from all our labors.

Thirdly, Thirdly, from Original sin.
we shall be freed from original sin, and the fruits of it; in the time of
this life, what is it that a Christian would not give to be free from
original sin and the fruits thereof; indeed a profane man is loath to part
from his sins, which he cannot live without no more than a fish can live
without the water, as we heard in the forenoone; but Christians will part with
their meat and drink, with any thing to be rid of it, for they desire above
all things to be rid of corruption; so Paul cries out, Romans 7. Oh wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of this death? After this
life we shall no more displease God but be free from original sin, which is
the corruption of nature, now it may be repressed, but not quite abolished till
the day of death; as the Child was rent and torn by the devil, when he
departed out of it; so sin will deal with us; but here is the comfort that
in the life to come we shall be freed from it, and the fruits of it, and shall
no more grieve God: Simile.
as Josh. 10. 25. when he had discomfited the five kings, he did not kill them
by and by, but put them into a cave, and rolled a great stone on them to keep
them in, until he had made an end of killing of his enemies, then he
commanding them to roll away the stone from the Caves mouth, they brought out
these kings, that the chief of his men might set their feet on their necks ere
he killed them; in like manner our great captain Jesus Christ will do by
original sin and the fruit thereof in us, which shall not be quite killed in
this life, but subdued, brought under, put into a cave (as it were) and great
stones rolled upon it: that is, by repentance, obedience, and prayer it shall
be subdued here, and then at the day of judgment, Jesus Christ shall abolish
it, when he shall make us set our foot on the neck of it; then the people of
God shall say as it is, 1. Cor. 15. 55. O death, where is thy sting? O grave
where is thy victory? the sting of sin is death, and the strength of sin is
the law, but thanks be to God that has given us victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, Fourthly, from all worldly power and authority.
we shall be freed from all worldly authority and power, then there shall be no
king but God shall be all in all, as it is 1 Cor. 15. 27. And when all things
shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son himself likewise be subject
unto him, that did subdue all things under him, that God may be all in all: so
then all the kingdoms of this world shall give place to it, therefore how
joyful shall it be when God shall reign over us? we see when Solomon was
crowned king, 1 King. 1. 40. how joyful the people were, it is said, that they
rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rang with the sound thereof: but how
much more joyful shall it be when all kings shall come and lay down their
crowns at Gods feet, when God shall reign over the house of Sion? Psalm. 91.
it is said, The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice, etc. therefore what a
comfort will this be to the people of God when God shall reign over them? so
Esai. 24. 23. it is said, When the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Sion and
in Jerusalem, and glory shall be before his ancient men; so Esai. 52. 7.
(says he) How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of them that declare
and publish the glad tidings of peace and salvation? saying unto Sion, Thy God
reigns; so the people of God shall be freed from all worldly powers and bad
government, when God shall be all in all.

Fifthly, Fifthly, from all society with the wicked.
we shall be freed from all society with the wicked, as Psalm. 9. 17. David
says, The wicked shall be turned into hell and all the nations that forget
God; so Matthew. 13. 41. says Christ, The Son of man shall send forth his
Angels and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend it, and
the^ which do iniquity: here the wicked do trouble, annoy and vex Gods people
with their sins and uncleanness, as it is said of Lot, That his righteous
soul was vexed with the unclean conversation of the Sodomites; but at the day
of judgment there shall not be left one wicked man to grieve or offend them:
of which time I may say as Moses did of the Egyptians Exodus 15. 13. Simile.
to the Children of Israel, Fear ye not but stand still, and behold the
salvation of the Lord which he will show you this day, for the Egyptians whom
ye have seen this day, ye shall never see any more; so the Lord will say to
us, stand still and behold the salvation of the Lord which he will show you
this day, for these your enemies who pursue you, you shall never see again: so
that all the wicked shall be turned into hell and there shall not be one left
to grieve or offend Gods people.

Sixthly, we shall be freed from all pains, sicknesses and diseases; as it
is, Revel. 21. 4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there
shall be no more death, 6
neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: Now we are
subject to the headache, We shall be freed from all sicknesses and diseases.
back-ach, toothache, gout, stone, and to a number of diseases, but in the Life
to come we shall be freed from all. We see how men can be contented to
endure any pains to be freed from these diseases and other charges; much more
should we be contented to have the Law of God to search our consciences and to
try us, so that we may be freed then from all pains and sicknesses: these be
the things we shall be freed from. Here therefore think what a life it is that
God has called a Christian to; and it must be our care to make all things
light unto us, in comparison of those things we shall enjoy hereafter, and be
contented to let go all our pleasures and profits to lay hold on eternal life
whereunto we are called. Let us part with all things which may hinder us; as
our lusts, sins, corruptions, with all our pleasures and profits to lay hold
on eternal life: As Chrysostom says, Simile.
if a man should be called to the honor of the kings court, how lightly would
he pass by all things that may hinder him from thence: the pleasant Meadows,
Towers, Castles, and all the fair houses to hasten to the kings Court: So thou
that art a Christian (says he) art called to a far greater honor, to the
Court of Heaven; therefore, how lightly should such an one pass by all things
that may hinder him from this honor where we shall live with God for ever and
ever. So much for the things we shall be freed from; What things we shall enjoy
in life everlasting.
we proceed:

Secondly, The things we shall enjoy may be drawn into five heads:

First, 1
We shall have immediate society with God himself; as it is, 1 John 3. 2.
Dearly beloved, Immediate society with God.
now are we Sons of God, but it does not appear what we shall be, and we
know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as
he is: so Psalm. 36. 9. says David, In thy light, shall we see light, etc. So
Revel. 22. 4. it is said, And they shall see his face, and his Name shall be
in their foreheads. Divines say, that the essential happiness of the Saints
consists in the beholding of God; as in nature, the more excellent and of the
more higher nature any object is, the more affected a man is with it, and the
more delight he takes in the beholding of it; as a pleasant Meadow and goodly
Fountain, a heap of gold and silver, etc. But what is the bounty of the
Creatures, to that which is in God? And therefore if a man delights in any of
the Creatures, much more he shall delight in the beholding of God: Simile.
so the comfort that we shall have by the beholding of God, is like the light
of the Sun that dimmes the light of the candle; for our comfort in God shall
be so great, that all the comfort of the Creatures is nothing to it; as Saint
Paul says, 1 Cor. 15. 28. That God shall be all in all. In this life (I dare
boldly speak it) God is not all in all to the best of his servants; Indeed he
is somewhat, and a good somewhat to them in this life, to a comfortable
portion; as Jeremy says, Lament. 3. 24. The Lord is my portion says my
soul, therefore will I hope in him, and Psalm. 63. 5. David says, For thy
loving kindness is better than life. So then God is somewhat to his servants,
but not all in all to them here; but in the life to come he shall be all in all
to them, Manna to their taste, Music to their ears, Light to their eyes, Joy
to their hearts, and Rest to their loins, because the perfection of all
creatures are in God; for if there be any creature that gives contentment to
any man, it is a thousand times more in God. In this life God gives out his
goodness by parts and peece-meale (as it were) in his Creatures, but then we
shall have immediate society with God himself: Now he does reveal himself
to us in his Word and Sacraments, but in the life to come he shall be all in
all. Revel. 21. 22. it is said, that John saw no Temple in Heaven, for the Lord
God Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple, and the city has no need of the
light of the Sun, nor of the Moon to shine in it, for the glory of God did
light it, and the Lamb is the light of it: Moses we know put a veil on his
face, because the Children of Israel could not behold the glory of it: so the
Lord puts a veil before him in his Word and Sacraments, but in the life to
come he will pluck away the veil, and reveal Himself as He is. Therefore
let us labor to clear our eyes, and to cleanse them from all sin, that so
we may look on him to our comfort. We see Esaias, 6. 5. when the Prophet saw
the Lord in a vision, how he cries out and says, I am undone, I am undone,
for I have seen the Lord of Hosts, I am a man of polluted lips, and I dwell
amongst a People of polluted lips: Now if Esaias cried out thus when he saw
but a glimpse of him, how shall all the sinners of this world cry out when they
shall look upon him, and behold him in terror and wrath?

Secondly, 2
We shall enjoy the eternal presence of Christ, The Eternal presence of
Christ we shall enjoy.
which next unto God himself is the loveliest and most delightful object or
sight that is; and it is that that Christ prays for, John 17. 24. Father, I
will that they which thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they
may behold my glory which thou have given me: so also Revel. 14. 4. it is said,
These are they which are not defiled with women, for they are virgins; these
follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes. Hence it is plain we shall enjoy the
eternal presence of Christ, which how comfortable will it be to a poor
Christian, even the chiefest, even the only thing which he desires? As Saint
Paul says, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of
all: And the Wisemen Matthew. 2. 10. when after a long journey, and a great deal
of travel, Simile.
they found Christ, it is said, that they rejoiced exceedingly, and thought all
their pains and travel well bestowed in that they had found him: so when a
Christian has found Christ, not poor and mean lying in a manger, but
gloriously sitting upon a Throne, what a comfort will this be to him, when he
shall think all his labor and pains well bestowed? what a comfort was it to
Joseph's brethren, Genes. 45. 4. (in their great distress) when he said, I am
Joseph your brother, etc. so what a comfort will it be to a poor Christian in
that great distress, when Jesus Christ shall say, I am your Brother, your
Savior and Redeemer, that have lost my life for you, and shed out my precious
blood to redeem you, and gave my life and soul for your sakes? Now enjoy me
to your comfort. How comfortable (I say) will this be to a poor Christian in
the perplexity and great amazement which shall then come on the world.

Thirdly, 3
We shall enjoy the society of all the holy Saints, of Angels and Archangels,
Prophets and Patriarchs; The society of all Saints, Angels and Archangels, etc.
as Christ says, Matthew. 8. 11. Many shall come from the East and West, and
shall sit down with Abraham and Isaak and Iaakob in the Kingdom of Heaven: It
was the end of Christ's death to bring us to Heaven, as it is John 11. 52. where
speaking of his own death, he says, And not for that Nation only, but that
he might gather together in one the Children of God which were scattered
abroad: so that we must first be gathered into the kingdom of grace, and
then into the kingdom of Glory. We see what a comfort it is when a few friends
meet together at a feast, when they have been absent a long time; but much
more will our comfort be when we shall meet together in heaven. We see how
Peter was rapt with joy when he saw but two Prophets with Christ in the
transfiguration; Matthew. 17. 4. (says he) It is good being here, Let us make
three Tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias: if he were
thus rapt with joy, when he saw but two of the Prophets only, what will it be
when we shall not only have a sight of two, but we shall have society
together with Angels and Archangels, Patriarchs and Prophets, and all the holy
men of God, to live with them for ever and ever? Think what a comfort it will
be, that after a few days spent here in the fear of God, Repentance for our
sins, and new obedience, we shall enjoy Heaven for ever. Therefore think (if
thou can think) how comfortable it will be; and do not lose heavenly
things for earthly, and for society with sinners do not lose society and
fellowship with the People of God in the Kingdom of Heaven for ever.

Fourthly, 4
We shall enjoy Lordship over this whole world: So we see Psalm. 49. 14.
Lordship over all the world.
where it is said, The upright shall have dominion over them in the morning:
though the People of God be kept low in this life, and have but little comfort,
yet when the great morning shall come the day of judgment, then the People of
God shall reign over this whole world, and have dominion and Lordship over it.
So Revel. 21. 7. He that overcommeth shall inherit all things; that is, He
that overcommeth his lusts and his sins: this may be a comfort to a poor
Christian, though his estate be but mean and poor. It may be thou want a
house to put thy head in, or have but a poor one: Be of good comfort, if thou
labourest to repent thee of thy sins, and to overcome thy lusts and
corruptions, then thou shall possess the new Heaven, and the new Earth, and
may say, as it is, 1 Pet. 5. 3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again
unto a lively hope by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead to an
inheritance immortal and undefiled, and that fades not away reserved in
Heaven for us. If a man has but little in possession, and great matters in
reversion, he will comfort himself and say, I thank God though mine estate
be but mean and poor now, Simile.
yet one day I shall have somewhat that will keep me like a man: so a
Christian may comfort himself, and say, I thank God, although my estate be
but mean and poor, so as I have but little in possession, yet I have a great
reversion, I shall be Lord over this whole world.

Fifthly, 5
We shall enjoy a continual Sabbath to the Lord; In this life we keep but
every seventh day a Sabbath, A con^inuall Sabbath to the Lord.
which day to a Spiritual man is the comfortablest; but to a Carnal man,
heavy and irksome: Here we keep but one of seven, but there every day shall
be a Sabbath to them. As we see Esaias 66. 23. And it shall come to pass as
from one new Moon to another, and from one Sabbath to another shall all flesh
come to worship before me, says the Lord: so Heb. 4. 9. he says, there
remains therefore a rest to the People of God. Now we keep but one day of
seven, but then we shall keep every day a Sabbath unto the Lord, which is
exceeding comfortable, as it appears, Revel. 15. 2. where we see how those
that passed over the glassie Sea, did sing the song of Moses and the Lamb:

So all the People of God when they have passed the glassie Sea of this world,
shall sing songs of deliverance, and praise the Lord who has delivered them
from the power of sin, the Devil and Hell. The Prophet David, Psalm. 84. 4.
says, Blessed are they that dwell in thine house, they will ever be praising
thee: and Augustine speaking of this place (says he) what is that which makes
a man blessed? Every man who is blessed, is blessed either by possessing, or
doing of some thing; but then we shall possess the house it self, and
therefore shall be blessed. For a man may dwell in these houses, and yet be a
poor man, but he that dwells in the House of God is rich. Simile.
One may dwell in these houses and be afraid thieves; but if we dwell in the
houses of God, we need not be afraid of any such things, for God will be a
defense to such. How shall a man be blessed in doing any thing? our works
which we do here there is necessity in the doing of them, but there is no
necessity in Heaven, where all shall be done willingly. For take away jarres
and brawles, and there is no need of Lawyers; take away wounds and hurts, and
there is no need of a Surgeon; take away diseases, and there is no need of
a Physician; take away hunger, and we shall not need to plow nor sow; take away
thirst, and we shall not need drink: Nay, let us come to things of a higher
nature, as to feed the hungry, cloth the naked, visit the sick, they shall
do none of these things, but shall sing praises unto God, and give thanks to
him for his mercy and goodness to them: so they shall be every way blessed.

And therefore think (if thou can think) what a happy and blessed life this
will be: First, that we shall enjoy God, and have immediate society with Him:
Secondly, that we shall have the presence of Christ: And thirdly, that we shall
have society with all the holy People of God: Forthly, that we shall have
dominion and lordship over his whole world: And lastly, that we shall keep a
continual Sabbath to the Lord, where we shall continually praise him, and
spend all our time in lauding of him.

Now the next thing is the continuance of this life, The continuance of Life
everlasting.
how long we shall enjoy it. It shall not be for days, months, years and
ages only; but it shall be everlasting as the Scripture tells us; not for a
few days and years, but it is for ever and ever. For when a man has lived so
many thousand ages as there are piles of grass on the ground, piles of sand on
the shore; Stars in the Sky, they shall be as new to begin again, Simile.
as the first day; and therefore think (if thou can think) what a life it
is that God will give us.

Now it is called everlasting life, in opposition to the frail and fickle life
that we live here, which is not everlasting, but a dying and a decaying life,
whereof one says well: as soon as a man is borne, he is a dying, and the
further we grow into this life, the nearer we are to death. As a man that has
taken a Lease, Simile.
as soon as it is taken it begins to expire, and never rests till it comes
to an end; so this life, as soon as we enter in it, it begins to expire, and
never cease wasting till it is run to an end: So the life which we live
here is a decaying life, which every little disaster may take away, a slip with
a man's foot, a fall off an horse, a stone out of a wall, a tile off an house,
a crum of bread going awry, etc. But the life which God gives us in Heaven
shall be everlasting, as long as there is God and Christ who gives it, whose
glory shall not be greater at the first, then afterward. But the same as
great for ever, and the joy and comfort which we shall have (when we have been
there 1000. thousand years) as great as it was the same day we came thither.
All the things in this life, though we take delight in them, yet in time we we
shall be weary of them. Simile.
As when a man comes into a fine Garden, being delighted with the pleasant
walks and flowers, yet when he has been there a while, he becomes weary of
it; so likewise when a man is weary, and goes to bed, he is delighted with it a
while, and in time he is weary and loves to rise, though it be never so soft:
But the joys of Heaven and the glory thereof we shall never be weary of them,
but when we have been there as many years as there is sands on the Sea
shore, it will be as comfortable as it was the first day we came thither. 1.
Pet. 1. 4.
And therefore as Saint Peter says, seeing we are borne anew, not of mortal
seed, but of immortal by the Word of God, to an inheritance incorruptible and
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for us: let us so love
and serve God in sincerity, as we may come thither; for the life that we shall
live in Heaven, shall be everlasting, the glory whereof shall never decay.

And therefore stand still ye people of God, and behold the great things that
God has prepared for you; let go all the pleasures and profits of this life,
and lay hold on eternal life, and be not slothful to come and possess it.
Augustine says well, All men can be contented with life everlasting, to see
God and to behold him in glory, but they are not careful to walk in the way
that leads to life. Therefore it must be the care of every Christian to
repent of his sins, to get faith in Christ, to pass his time in holiness
and fear before God, that so when he comes to die, he may make a happy
exchange, to pass from Earth to Heaven, from Men to God, from an estate of
misery to an estate of happiness and glory, from a temporal life to a life
eternal. And now that we are ready to dismiss this assembly, and finish this
long work, the Lord knowing whether ever we shall meet together again all in
this place; (seeing upon the least occasions we see such examples from time to
time of our mortality, and shortness of life) therefore let us so pass our
time here in holiness before God, so, as that we may meet together in glory
and happiness in the life to come; which I beseech the Lord to bring us to for
Christ's sake.

FINIS.
The Table, Containing all the chief and remarkable Doctrines and Uses of the
whole Treatise, together with some of the queintest Similies, exquisitely
illustrating the matter, Alphabetically disposed for the case and furtherance
of the Christian Reader: wherein the figures direct you to the Page, the marks
to what part of the Page where the Notes are wanting; so that if you turn to
any of the leaves to find the matter you desire, where you see this * look to
the upper part; where this look to the middle; where this look to the lower
part of the Page.
A
NO place good to abide in where Christ is not. 135. None ought to abuse the
creatures seeing God has made them. 67. Our accounts must be given to Christ
our Lord. 98. The acceptance of our actions depends on our willingness. 265.
Acknowledgement due to God for all his gifts. 65. Our estate better than Adams
in his innocence. 243. * 450. Christ free from sin, though the Son of
Adam. 107. Adoption in Christ, brings comfort to a Christian. 53. Christians
should comfort one another in affliction. 229. No Man's afflictions equal to
Christ's. 204. Gods mercy in that he sends not all afflictions at once. 169. The
three afflictions that Christ suffered. 153. The behavior of Christ in his
afflictions. 158. The effects of Christ's afflictions. 160. Christ was afraid
To stand be fore God in Iudgemens, clothed in our sins; of death Not as a
dissolution of Nature, But as Gods curse. 155.

Christ's agony the cause of his sweat. 161. All things made for man's benefit.
71. How Christ shall be All in all at the day of Judgment. 477. Almighty, see
God. The amazement of Christ on the Cross proceeded from Gods curse. 157.
Angels Ministers unto Christians. 297. The Angels service to Of Christ's
anointing. 78. Men. 430. Christ. 122. What meant by anointing in the Law. 16.
Christ by being anointed, was designed, enabled, made acceptable for the work
of redemption. 78. With what, By whom the end, why Christ was anointed. etc. 81.
The benefit of Christ's anointing, participation of His Graces, the dignity of
his Person. 89.
We must anoint Christ's Head, Body, and Feet, with the Oil of Devotion,
Compassion, and Contrition. 82. In the Law were anointed Prophets, Priests,
Kings. 83.
No injury must be done to the Lords anointed. 82. Apocrypha, see Scripture.
Of Christ's appearing. 305. Application of Christ to the heart, better than
Simeons holding him in his arms. 141. The wicked can do no more than God has
appointed. 213.. 268. Whatsoever betides a man, is by Gods appointment. 214.
The Place, Time, Manner and Preparation of Christ's apprehension. 177. etc. That
apprehension of impenitent sinners worse than that of Christ's in the Garden.
186. * Comfortable words like Aqua-vitae. 589. Christ's arms his messengers.
342. Christ's arraignement frees us from arraignment and condemnation. 194. * Of
Christ's ascension. 353. The Necessity, Time, Place from whence Manner, Fruits
and benefits of Christ's asscension. from 353. to 365.

Christ ascended to Prepare a place for us. Send down the holy ghost. Lead
captivity captive. Give gifts to his Church. Make intercession for us. 354
Difference betwixt Christ's ascension and others. 363. Christ's ascension a
pawn of ours. 315. Trials to know whether we have ascended from sin or no.
365. Of the great assembly to Judgment. 428. Gods assistance in troubles makes
men confident. 194.
B
CHristians ought to bear with one another, in Hiding the infirmities,
Excusing them, Loving the party. 595. Christians ought to begin all their
works with prayer and thankesgiving. 645. Not to resist beginnings in sin
dangerous. 181. Why the Shepherds went to Bethlehem. 126. * By Christ's binding
we are loosed from the chain of condemnation and corruption. 188. Christ's
birth the greatest Joy of the world. 125. The Place, 116. Time, 113. Manner,
117. of Christ's birth.

The manifestation of Christ's birth. 120. Four reasons of Christ's mean birth.
118. God bestows on his Children blessing of this life, and the life to come.
581. The wise order God takes in giving us blessings. 622. The communion of
Saints an earthly blessings. 581. In the blood of Christ that issued out of his
side, is something natural and miraculous. 268. Christ's blood purifies us from
the guilt and filth of sin. 269. The blood of Martyrs and Christ cry unto God
for revenge and mercy. 85. Body, see Resurrection. As a Goldsmith melts gold to
make a cup for the king, so God melts our bodies to make vessels of honor for
himself. 637. The perfection of our bodies compared to a Shipmans needle
touched with a Loadstone. 641. * Our bodies spiritual because Vpheld by
Subject to the spirit. 642. Chris rose with the same body he was crucified
with. 340. The power of a glorified body. 643. What use of stomach, teeth,
etc. in a glorified body. 628. Christ saves not our souls only, but our
bodies also. 230. Two Books opened at the day of Judgment. 439. Christ borne
when Herod was king, Augustus taxed the world. why, 115 Christ borne in a base
place, to show 10. the guilt of sin: 2. to procure us a better place: 3. to
make us content with any estate. 116. Christ borne after the common and poorest
manner. 117, 118. Christ was bonnd in regard of God To sanctify the bonds of
his servants. To teach us the desert of sin. That we might be loosed. 187.

Men for Pain and punishment. Caution and security. Shame and disgrace. 186.

Against the Papists giving the bread only. 334. * What meant by Christ's
breaking of bread with the Disciples that went to Emmaus. 334. Christ's
breathing on the Disciples, was a sign of giving the Holy Ghost. 345. Christ
was buried, To give us assurance of his death: that he might conquer death in
his strongest hold: to sanctify and sweeten the grave for us: that we might
have strength to bury him. 273.

Of the burning of the world. 410. A Story of two Protestants in king Edward
the sixths days touching burning for religion. 277. The burden of sin. 158.
* Every sin adds to the burden of Christ. 159. * The benefit of Christ's
burial. 281. Four ways to bury sin: to kill it: hate the loathsome face of
it: remove it out of our sight: and to rake moulds on it. 282.
C
CHrist comes when a man is at his calling. 122. Calvin's speech, Dominus cum
venit, inveniet me laborantem. 122. Moderation in worldly cares, seeing God is
our Father. 55. What the word Catholic means. 574. The Church said to be
Catholic in respect of Place, Persons, and, Time. 575. etc. The Papists
believing in the Catholic Church absurd in religion and reason. 578. * Reasons
proving the Papists no true Catholics. 578. A twofold chain on every natural
man, of corruption, sin: of condemnation, and guilt of sin. 188. The wicked
compared to chafe. 434. A great change and alteration after conversion. 499.
We must commit the seed of our charity into the bosom of the poor, and hands
of God. 594. All chastisements came from God our loving Father, and shall turn
to our good. 56, 57. Gods Children why withheld from worldly blessings. 580.
Gods Children never totally and finally forsaken of him proved by four
grounds. 172. What Christ shall do after the last Judgment. 475. see
Judgment. The word Christ what it signifies. 77. see Anointed. Christ and
Messiah all one. 77. Christ the Son of God. 90. Christ proved to be God from
the Names, Attributes, Works, and Worship of God ascribed to him. 91. Why
Christ must be both God and Mun. 92. Christ borne when Augustus Caesar taxed
the world; to fulfill a Prophecy; to be under the tax of Gods wrath for our
sakes. 116. * Christ the Head of the Church; three proofs. 542. The love and
willingness of Christ to die for us. 208. Every little means is to be laid
hold of to bring us to Christ. 131. Three things required in him that would be
found in Christ. 693. The infinite comfort after finding Christ. 312. No
condition can hinder a man from Christ 121. * How a strong Christian weakened by
sin, may know whether the holy Ghost be in him or no. 505. Christians of all
men most happy, because Christ is their Lord. 99. Good is to be done to
Christians, as they are Christians. 461. What the Church of God is? 525. The
Church Triumphant. Militant. 520. 530. No member of the Triumphant, that is not
of the Militant Church: 530. The great blessing it is to be a member of the
Church. 566. We must believe a, not in the Church. 523. The Church, a mixed
company of good and bad. 537. How the Church is one. 534. The diverse estates
of the Church here in this world. 534. The Church sometimes hidden. 535. The
Church power at one time than another. 537. Of cleaving to the Church. 537. The
blessings that proceed from the peace of the Church. 536. The dignities of the
Church. 539. The Church (as the City of God) excels all other cities in four
respects. 539. The Church the Body of Christ. 542. * Christ Loves, Indoweth,
Adorneth, Acquitteth, Brings home, Glorifieth, the Church his Spouse. 544.

Universality a property of the Church. 574. The Church, the pillar and ground
of truth. 549. The Church preserves the Letters, Canon, Authority, of the
Scripture. 550.

Holiness a property of the Church. 569. Judgment of the world, mixture of
good and bad, remainder of sin, seem to take away the holiness of the
Church. 569. The Church said to be Holy, by 1. Faith and good conversation. 2.
Imp^tation of Christ's righteousness. 3. Inherent holiness in the true
members. 4. Having the means of holiness. 570. Reasons why there is no
salvation without the Church. 565.
The Church Bet^lehem, thither we must go to find Christ. 126. * All things
tend to the good of the Church, as cross wheels in a clock. 88. The come
unto me in glory, depends on the come unto me in grace. 446. Christ comes to a
man when things be at the worst. 115. The comfort of the Holy Ghost excels all
other comforts. 511. To appropriate Christ's merit, a great comfort. 124. Two
times to commend our souls to God, In danger, every day. 258. 3. grounds of
commending our selves to God, because he is the Father of Spirits. our Father
in Christ. has afforded us former favors. 258. Why Christ gives signs of his
coming. 402. God communicates his wisdom, etc. to us; we, our griefs to him.
583. Christ communicates to us Himself. right of his death and merit. Power of
Spiritual life. Dignity of his own estate. 584 We communicate to Christ, our
Nature, Sins, Troubles and dangers. 383. Christ communicates his graces to
his Church. 341. Of the communion of the Saints. 579. By the communion of
Saints, a Christian has a thousand helps. 597. The communion of Saints
consists in communion with God, with Christ, one with another. 582 Four lets
of the communion of saints. 605. The communion one with another consists in the
commmuion of the, 1. Living with the living. 587, etc. 2. Living and the Dead,
in wishing well to conversing with one another. 598 3. Dead with the dead, in
1. Lying together in the Grave. 2. Being members of Christ. 3. Being gathered
to the Saints departed. 599. The communion of the living with the living stands
in community of Affection. 587. Graces. 588. Spiritual sacrifices. ibid.
Temporal blessings. 590. Bearing one with another. 594.

The community of goods is limited in the Excess. Defect. 592. Communions of
the wicked. 579. Christ's company a great comfort. 243. Christ's complaint on the
cross. 168. Christ conceived of the flesh of the Virgin. 105. by the power of
the holy Ghost, how. 106.
Christ conceived by the Holy Ghost, that he might be pure and without sin.
107. The stir that was at Christ's conception. 108. * Of the condemnation of
Christ. 197. Conscience compared to a Book wherein all things are written.
207. To sin against conscience a fearful thing. 205.. 207. The property of a
good conscience to be moved at Gods judgments. 206. Bad consciences troubled
at Christ's coming. 132. Wicked men's consciences may be sealed for a time, but
one day they shall be opened. 184. No flying from an evil conscience. 205. An
evil conscience the worst accuser. 207. A Christian though contemned in his
life, is honored in his grave. 278. Constancy in a good course requisite,
though without success. 199. * Of the conviction at the last day. 437.
Conversion makes men labor to draw others to the same estate. 238. *
Confession of sin, Clearing the Justice of God, Zeal for the honor of God,
a sign of conversion, 238. No man knows the instant of his conversion. 305.
No cost to be spared for Christ. 280. Covetousness moved Judas to betray
Christ. 181. The works of the Creation not to be looked on but with due
consideration. 65. The Author, Substance, Manner, Subject, Estate, Time, Order,
End, of the Creation. etc. 64.

The motion multitude of the Creatures prove a Deity. 43.

The Creature, not God, cause of sin and defect. 67. We ought not to abuse
the Creatures, seeing God made them. 65. We ought to pray for restoration to
the creatures. 68. * Christ died the death of the Cross, because it was most
Accursed. Shameful. Painful. Apparent. 211.

Christ's behavior on the Cross. 224. The seven last words of Christ on the
Cross. 224. etc. The scandal of the Cross weakens faith. 321. Christ's
Disciples must be carriers of the Cross. 214. No man must make a Cross to
himself, but be contented if God lay it on him. 214. All Crosses must be
borne. ibid. The place where Christ was crucified. 215. Why Christ was
crucified aloft. 213. * How Christ was led to be crucified. 213. What torments
are expressed in the word crucified. 219. Uses from Christ's crucifying. 220.
etc. Five falsehoods in Popish crucifixes. 223. Christ's Cup what it is. 160. *
Sin brings Gods curse upon (...). 467. *
D
ALL needless dangers are carefully to be shunned. 338. Whether the darkness
of the Sun at Christ's passion was all the world over? 165. The horrid
darkness of wicked men at the last day. 165. The holy Ghost illuminates as a
window in a dark house. 509. Dead bodies members of Christ, having communion
with him. 600. Incertainty of death, should stir us up to conscionable
walking. 237. At the day of death most care is to be had of our souls. 238..
257. 258. * Death but a departing. 143. * The good change a Christian makes by
death. 242. The greatest extremity befalls Christians at the time of their
deaths. 169. We ought to prepare for death. 179. Christ's Death, 261.
Voluntary. 265. The manifestation thereof. 266. The Power thereof. 269. The
fruits of Christ's Death are to us freedom from the Eternal Death, Seeing of
Death, Curse of Death, Power of Death, Power of the Devil, Sin, etc. 272.

How Christ defends his Church. 380. God deferres not good tidings from man.
123. * Sin has made us so deformed, that God does not acknowledge us. 150.
Deformities are punishments for sin. 639. Deformities in the member of the
Church as bad as that in the members of the body. 573. Pilates endeavor to
deliver Christ, better than Peter's. 200. Of Christ's descension into Hell. 283.
Christ's Body, Soul, did not descend into Hell. 285. ^. 287. Against the
Papists, Christ did not descend into Hell, to Preach to the damned. 285. Suffer
pains there. ibid. No Skirts of Hell. 286. Places of Scriptures alleged by
the adversaries for Christ descension into Hell, answered. 289. The descension
of Christ into Hell, nothing else but the captivating of him under death for a
time. 289. Two descents of a Christian. 290. Christ's desertion on the cross.
164. Spiritual desertion what it is. 170. Trials of good desires. 28. Defects
in unsound desire of Heaven. 498. How the wicked desire grace. 506. see Grace.
No man ought to despair of Gods mercy. 233. The Devil the Author of all
division. 478. Why Christ died no ordinary death. 212. It was needful Christ
should dye, 1. To satisfy Gods Justice for Man's sin. 2. That our sins
might dye in his death. 3. To seal to true bileevers Gods promises in the
Gospel. 261, 262. Why Christ dyed a painful death. 264 We must be willing to
dye, when we have done Gods work. 263. We should labor to dye the servants
of God. 143. in peace of conscience. 144. * Ill success, Bad example, in holy
labors, should be no discouragements. 134. What it was that Christ drank on
the cross. 217. God draws man out of sin. 379. Perseverance in good duties
never fails in obtaining a reward. 488. * Duties to God, must not abridge our
duties to men. 231. *
E
WIcked men get up early to follow their lusts. 193. How the earth shall be
renewed. 413. The Earth shall be renewed in regard of Christ, the Godly, the
wicked. 414. The wicked can lay no claim to the Earth when it is renewed. 415.
Ecce Homo, a good memento for a Christian. 203. Of the Disciples that went to
Emmaus. 316. Actions determined by their ends, as a ship governed by the
Stern. 407. Good endeavors shall find Gods blessing. 136. * We ought so to
live, as our enemies may have no just cause of exception against us. 195 Love
to our enemies a Christian duty. 225. *. Five Motives thereto. ibid. The wicked
always enemies, to the friends and followers of Christ. 191. How the true
Church may err. 570. The comfortable estate of a Christian, never to be
forsaken of God. 173. God able to raise from nothing to great worldly estates.
The exaltation of Christ. 291. Christ's humility, our example. 164. * Christ's
example our i^itation. 245. How examples are most fit to move. 138. Bad
example. 135. Bad example should not transport us from Christ. 234. No
exception to be taken against the two Books that shall be opened at the day
of Judgment. 440. Excommunication a most fearful sentence. 568. * Whether
better to sin against God or stand excommunicated. 568. Why the Disciples
eyes (that went to Emmaus) were held. 319. God must open our eyes, before we
can discern Christ. 335.
F
THe great Object of Faith God. 41. Two rules to govern our Faith concerning
God. 478. Faith Historical. 16. Temporary. 18. Miraculous. 19. Justifying. 20.
Two reasons why Faith aloue justifies. 31 What required to a justifying
Faith. 20. Seven trials of true justifying Faith. 22. Five companions of true
justifying Faith. 25. etc. Degrees of true justifying Faith. 26. Effects of
true justifying Faith. 37. There weakenings of Faith, The scandal of the
Cross. Too much have to have our desires. Tying to our eyes and hands. 322.

Wherein weakness of Faith consists. 27. Trials to distinguish a weak Faith,
from no Faith. 28. How to find out weakness of Faith. 30. Reasons why our
Faith is sh^ke^. 32. True Faith may be shrewdly shaken 321. Comforts in
weakness and want of feeling of Faith. 34. Full assurance of Faith. 36. He
that takes away one main point of Faith, takes away all. 20. True Faith lays
hold on every little word of Christ. 311. True Faith breaks through all lets.
126. True justifying Faith assures of salvation. 31. 33. Wherein Faith is
necessary to salvation, though judgment be according to works. 457. * Our
Faith must be grounded on the Scripture. 329. Faith that is visible saves.
457. Faith must be in particular. 77. * Faith useful in the life of a
Christian. 3. Two ways Faith stirs up holy motions in (...). 4. All things
must be done in Faith. 7. Comforts from doing things in Faith. 9. Faith upholds
(...) in Spiritual desertions. 11. Worldly crosses. 12.

The least Faith after a temptation must be cherished. 337. How to die in
Faith. 14. After a fall in sin, a Christian must endeavor to rise. 337. ^
The fall of GODS Children not final. 173. Careful provision for our families
necessarily commanded. 230. ^ Caesar's favor preferred before Gods. 210. Want
of the fear of God occasions men's running into all disorder. 236. Christ's
fear on the cross a dreadful fear. 153. The causes of Christ's fear, Gods
judgment. Death. 144.


The extremities of Hell fire. 469. Hell fire eternal. 470. Hell fire is not
natural fire. 468. The extreme torments of the wicked me meant by fire. 4^7.
The Spirit quenched as fire. 516. How the flesh may overcome the Spirit. 595.
The manner how Christ took flesh. 105. Christ took flesh. in his Conception.
Birth. 105.


How Gods people are said to flow. 125. A man may fly in persecution when he
has not A calling to stay. Sufficient strength to suffer. 1^2.


None can forgive sins, but God. 615. How men may forgive sins. 616. * God
forgives sins with condition of repentance. 617. How a man may know his
sins are forgiven in particular. 618. A Minister forgives sins two ways.
346. Forgiveness of sins a great blessing. 608. belonging to this life only.
609. Forgiveness of sins in regard of V^^ free. Christ, due. 612.

Forgiveness of sins is without limitation of their Number. Greatness. 614.

Comforts from forgiveness of sins. 621. God forsakes not his Children
proved from the Promise, Nature, Power, Virtue of Christ's Prayer. of God. 172.



Gods forsaking a man the greatest grief. 164. God may be said to forsake his
Children in the life of nature, but never in the l^fe of grace. 173. A
Christian forsaken of God in the sense and feeling of his grace, must carry
himself Mournefully. Patiently. Holily. 175.


Christ is forsaking a man when he Grows idle in the use of the means. Lives
in known sins. Feels a decay of grace. 330.


Forwardness and intrusion into b^sinesse, needlessely a great fault. 78. We
ought to keep God our friend in this life, if we expect to have him so at o^r
death. 256... Fullness of time. 113. Christ came not till the fullness of time,
114.

G
CHrist apprehended in a Garden, because 1. Sin began in a Garden. 2. Christ
prayed in the Garden. 3. It was a place known to Judas. 177. etc. The calling
of the Gentiles in the wise men's coming to Christ. 129. That the Holy Ghost is
God, proved by Reason. Scripture. 479. The holy Ghost a Person really
subsisting. 481. distinct from father and Son. 482. The holy Ghost really and
actually in us. 487. The holy Ghost Teaches Governs Comfort us. 509. etc.
The graces of the holy Ghost inestimably good. 487. The benefits we receive by
the holy Ghost. 508. How the holy Ghost may be lost. 515. The means to come by
the holy Ghost. 488. The true marks to know whether the holy Ghost be in us or
no. 489. Discovery of the false marks of the holy Ghosts being in us. 494. The
Defect Excess of giving. 593. Christ gave gifts personal, to the Ministers;
royal, to every man. 367. The life of Glory. 650. The Saints Glory by Christ's
pronouncing them blessed at the end of the world. 447. * Differences of Christ's
and Moses Glory. 419. Four properties of Goats. 436. That there is a God,
proved by The works of God. The place where God is. The nature of the
creatures. Our conscience. Our experience. 42. etc. That there is but one God.
46. How God is said to be Almighty. 59. Things that imply Incapability,
Weakness, Contradiction. God cannot do. 60. Uses of Instruction, Comfort,
from Gods being Almighty. 61. God is a true God, inregard of his Nature.
Properties. 48. We must believe God is our God in particular. 49. God the
Father of Christ. 52. Union with Christ makes God our Father. 53. Comforts that
arise from Gods being our Father. 56. Some men make their bellies their gods.
46. A distinction of the Persons in the Godhead. 50. The Father the fountain
of the Godhead. 51. Golgotha, why so called. 216. Many hindrances when we go
about any thing that is good. 340. How God the Father communicates his
goodness to the Son and holy Ghost. 52. * The Church the Goshen of God,
therein light only, all the world besides being dark. 565. The Gospel like a
Vine in his growth. 122. * The Gospel compared to a great glass. 219. Christ
more glorious in the preaching of the Gospel, than in his bodily presence on
Earth. 130. * The wicked disobedient to Christ's government. 87. Christ governes
his Church, by 1. Drawing them to himself. 375. 2. Guiding them the right way.
377. 3. Exercising them with trials for their good. 378. 4. Defending them from
their enemies. 380. Four grounds that the true graces of Gods Spirit are never
finally lost. 518. In all Gods People, a root of Grace remains to be discerned
three ways. 505. * Common graces of the Spirit may be lost. 517. Five means
how to nourish the graces of the Spirit. 520. No power in man to do any thing,
unless God give him grace. 445. Two things a weak beginner in grace must
look to. 501. Grace at first small, increases, like seed^ sown. 490. *
Degrees of grace. 490. Growth of grace imperceptible. 491. If grace be in the
heart, it will show it self. 190. * When we rise in grace, we must leave the
sins of nature behind us. 298. * The Papists opinion of the incertainty of
grace, confuted. 494. Two defects in restraining grace. 495. The graces of the
Spirit compared to Oil. 81. Desire of grace fourefold. 505. Comforts in the
lying in our graves. 633. Christ's grave why new. 279. Every man though he have
no house, has a grave to be buried in. 278. * Christ at first made known to
the poorer sort, not great men. 120. All sin is a grief to God. 481. * The
sins of Gods People do more grieve Christ, than of the prophaner sort. 18.
The Spirit grieved by sin against knowledge and disobedience. 520.
H
THe right hand of God signifies, 1. His Power. 2. The glory of Heaven. 3.
Propinquitie of place to God in dignity. 371. By Christ's sitting at Gods right
hand is implied, His enobling our nature. His government of the Church. 372.
Christ sits at Gods right hand, 1. To show the work of man's redemption is
finished. 2. All judiciary power is committed to him. 3. He is in continual
act of judgment. 374. Never can a man make too much haste to come to Christ.
126. A good hearer like dry powder. 528. How to know whether Christ be
conceived in the heart. 105. The great stir that is at the conception of
Christ in the heart of a Christian. 108. The heart hardened in sin, nothing
will do good upon. 185. Pilate an Heathen, goes beyond most Christians in
fearing to sin against God. 209. * God the maker of Heaven and Earth. 64, 65.
Of the re^^ing of the Heavens and the Earth. 412. All that come to Heaven, must
come by Christ. 286. Heaven promised to sinners upon repentance. 242. * Heaven
prepared for the Elect before they were borne. 451. Gods Children must be
content to stay from Heaven, for the good of those they live amongst. 359. In
Heaven we shall be freed from 1. All necessities of nature. 652. 2. All labors
of this life. ibid. 3. Original sin. 653. 4. All worldly power and
authority. 654. 5. All society with the wicked. ibid. 6. All sicknesses and
diseases. 655. The Heavens shall be new in regard of Use. Disposition. Effects.
413. In Heaven we shall enjoy 1. Immediate society with God. 655. 2. Eternal
presence of Christ. ibid. 3. Society of Saints and Angels. 657. 4. Lordship
over the world. ibid. 5. A continual Sabbath to the Lord. 658. Christ suffered
the pains of Hell, but not in place of Hell. 242. * Women when good helps.
206. * Christ borne when Herod was king, to show His Kingdom was not of this
world. The Jews kingdom was at the lowest. 115. Why Herod was troubled at
Christ's coming. 132. Herod desired to see Christ not for love, but for his
miracles sake. 201. The holy Ghost the only Author of holiness. 482. Six
means whereby the holy Ghost works holiness in us. 484. Two defects of
Popish holiness. 572. All our hope and comfort must be in Christ. 140. * We
ought to be humbled seeing Christ was humbled for us. 101. Christ's
humiliation, the first degree. 100. The humility of Christ in his birth. 117.
None can hurt us but from power given from God. 60. 179. *
I
THe Valley of Iehoshaphat not the place of the last judgment. 398. Christ
will deal with good men as Iehu with Iehonadab. 447. Humane reason brought the
wise men to Jerusalem; divine, to Bethlehem. 130. Why the Jews were troubled
at Christ's birth. 132. In the Name Jesus, is implied Christ to be our Savior.
No other Jesus but he. He is our Jesus and will save us. 72. Sins of
ignorance less than sins of knowledge. 228. * Commission of sin after
illumination dangerous. 193. Impenitence worse than wormwood or ^all to
Christ. 250. * Importunity prevails with wicked men to any thing that is bad.
210. * Impossibilities in nature are possibilities in the power of God. 109.
Our Heavenly Inheritance comes from God our Father. 57. Our title to Heaven is
by inheritance. 452. Four testimonies of Christ's Innocence. 195. We ought to
beware of wronging the Innocent. 206. Joseph's grave in his garden, why. 279.
How Christ makes intercession for us. 457. It is finished, Christ's song of
gratulation. 250. Of Iudas's betraying Christ. 181. Christ only the Judge at
last day. 394. Comforts from Christ being our Judge. 394. Two things required
in a Judge, sufficient Knowledge to know all things. Power to punish all
offenders. 391. Of Christ's coming to Judgment. 385. The glory of Christ's
coming to Judgment, consists in His train. Brightness of his Body.
Eminency of his sovereign Power. 422 There shall be a Judgment day. 386. The
day of Judgment not far off. 400. The Earth the general place where the last
Judgment shall be. 395. * The Time, Certainty, Signs, of the last Judgment.
399. etc. Two signs yet to come of the last Judgment. 403. Reasons of the
delay of the day of Judgment are Gods, 1. Patience in waiting for man's
redemption. 2. Goodness to his creatures. 3. Care of the Elect. 404. The
persons that shall be Judged. 405. The manner of the last Judgment. 409. The
sentence of the last Judgment. 443. The last Judgment shall be according to
good works. 458. Difference in Judgment may happen to the Saints, but not in
affection, as in Physicians about a sick Patient. 585. Gods Children must be
affected with his Judgments. 168. All that desire to see Christ and to depart
in peace, must be Just men. 139. Justice and Religion must go together. 139.
K
NO doors or iron gates can keep out Christ. 339. * Christ has two keys, 1.
To lock the wicked into hell. 2. To open heaven to the godly. 423 Christ a King,
to Gather, Govern, Do good to Defend his Church and People. 86. etc. The
Kingdom of Heaven prepared only for the Elect. 451. Three properties of the
Kingdom of Heaven. 448. Gods attributes set aworke to furnish the Kingdom of
Heaven. 448. Four excellencies of the Kingdom of Heaven. 449. Gods goodness
to his people to bring them out of the devils kingdom into Christ's. 87.
Christ's Kingdom not of this world. 115.. 198. Some kiss religion at Church,
as Judas did Christ, and betray it at home. 184. That we shall know one another
at the Resurrection. 630. Two defects in knowledge, or illumination. 496.
Christ must be made known abroad, no^ conceald in private. 127. We must make
conscience of known truths. 284. *
L
NO labor too great to come to Christ. 129. If we continue in sin
unrepentant Christ has lost his labor. 151. A Christian a shining lamp. 589.
* The Canon Law makes it unlawful to sell Spiritual things What belongs to
another. 182. God sometimes leaves us to see how we love him. 332. A man loses
the Spirit, as leaves fall off a tree. 521. An evil member of the Church
compared to a wodden leg. 537. * Why Christ's legs were broken. 266. No lets
should binder Christians from coming to Christ. 126. Christ's Letter to his
Father. 74. How a man may be busied for provision for this life. 648. Man's life
compared to Weavers warpe. 45. Life twofold, of Nature. Grace. 171. * The time
of this life the time of mercy and grace. 444. This life compared to a
drawbridge. ibid. Of life everlasting. 648. God promises to his People life
Natural in this world. Spiritual in the world to come. 649. Two degrees of
spiritual life, of Grace. Glory. 650. The continuance of life everlasting.
669. Life everlasting no blessing, but torment to the wicked. 648. Christ by
his life as well as death wrought out our salvation. 254. As the Soul is the
life of the body, so God is the life of the soul. 649. Sinners deserve not to
have the light of the Sun or Moon to shine on them. 167. Christ Lord of the
world in regard of Soveraigntie. Service. 95. Christ as Lord will dispose all
to the good of his Church. 96. Christ our Lord by right of Creation.
Redemption. Donation. Voluntary service. 97. The abatements of the graces of
the Spirit in a man, whereby he thinks them lost. 518. Love bears with a
number of faults, as a mother with her child. 595. The mavelous love of
Christ to die and suffer for us. 151. * True love to Christ Endures no holding
back. Follows Christ in bonds. 190. True love to Christ stoopes to the
meanest service for his members. 276. Christ loves his enemies, much more his
friends. 226. Every man, like the Jews, prefer their lusts before Christ.
203.
M
IF Christ restored an Ear to Malchus his enemy, much more will he be
merciful to his friends. 638. God had rather abate of his Service, tha^ Man
w^nt his comfort. 459. Gods fitting a Man to his Kingdom, compared to a
Carpenters hewing of timber. 500. The meandness of Man's beginning. 67. God
made Man last of all creatures, to Honor him. Teach him. Further him in the
best. things. 70. Christ was made Man in regard of Necessity. Equity.
Fitness. 103.
The Manhood of Christ darkened by the Godhead, as a candle by the Sun. 477. *
The manner of the manifestation of Christ's birth. 123. Three reasons why Christ
was manifested first to the poorer sort. 120. The Virgin Mary more blessed for
bearing Christ in her heart than in her womb. 112. Notes of Mary Magdalens
love to Christ are her seeking him Continually when others gave over. With
tears for loss of him. With diligence. With complaint for not finding him.
With publishing her sorrow. With proffer of any pains to enjoy him. 306. etc.
Why Mary could not see Christ. 310. Why Christ appears first to Mary. 313.
Constant using the means a sure way to find Christ. 307. The means are to
the Spirit, as would* to the nourishing of a tree. 520. The conscionable use of
the means gives us comfortable hope of a blessing. 538. * The office of a
Mediator ceases when Christ renders up his Kingdom. 476. The Mediatorship
compared to silk before sore eyes. 476. All men are sinners. 610. See Sin,
and Sinners. Mercy in the midst of wrath. 58. Three reasons that no man can
merit for another. 596. Man can merit nothing. 252. Watchfulness requisite to
the members of the Church militant. 531. GOD the Author of all Ministry. 342.
Christ's Spirit attends the Ministry of his Word. 345. The authority of the
Ministry is to forgive sins. 346. All true Ministers are sent to Seek that
which was lost. Call sinners to repentance. Preach deliverance to the captives.
342. Why mention is made of Christ's sufferings, and not of his miracles. 145.
Money ill come by, will one day lie heavy on the conscience. 184.
Mortification wherein it consist. 503. How Moses may be said to accuse us.
554. Why Christ drank mirth mingled with wine. 217. The mystery of God spoken
of Revel. 10. 7. the end of the world. 251.
N
REverence due to the Name of God. 208. We are naturally naked in the sight of
God. 222. A good nature no sign of grace. 494. Nature hardly restrained by
grace. 516. * Christ took on him both the whole Nature of man, as soul and
body, and the infirmities thereof. 102. Christ took on him such infirmities of
man's nature as were not sinful, but unblameable passions, and those not
personal, but common to all men. 102. Christ took the infirmities of man's
nature, 1. For satisfaction sake. 2. To strengthen faith in the incarnation. 3.
For our example. 4. To compassionate us. 103. etc. Christ took man's nature
inregard of Necessity. Equity. Fitness. 103. The ends why he took it are to
Redeem man. Restore the lost Image of God in man. Advance man's nature. Make it
dreadful to the devil. Declare thereby the Wisdom Goodness Justice Power of
God. 164. Man's nature and sin hardly parted, but by the power of the holy
Ghost. 107. Impossibilities to a natural man. 511. * Better not to speak at
all than ill of our neighbors. 195. We may not hurt our neighbors though it
be in our powers. 200. * Noah left all to save his soul. 38. Christ's words,
Noli^e tangere. 312. God is able to make a man somewhat, when he is nothing.
66.
O
THe mavelous obduration of the Jews. 185. Obedience due to God that Made,
Can destroy, Disposes, all things. 64, 65 Obedience due to Christ as Lord. 97.
A man that has nothing to offer to God, must offer his sins. 137. The
threefold office of Christ. 83. Oil of gladness why so called. 81. Difference
in opinions has been in all ages. 283. The danger of letting slip an
opportunity. 348. Christ over-heares every word we speak. 351.
P
THe Papists fear the Popes curse more than Gods. 467. Christ borne of mean
Parentage, to Sanctify the meanest births. Pull down the pride of the world.
Teach us contentment. Declare the greatness of Gods love. 111. Christ's care
extends not only to all in general, but to every one in particular. 347. We
must believe in particular. 77. * Christ the true paschall Lamb. 266. 268.
Christ's Passion twofold, of Necessity, Arbitrary, this he Underwent. Refused.
218. No perfect peace on earth, whilst the Church is Militant. 531. *. Christ
brings peace whithersoever he comes. 339. True peace of conscience is only to
be sought in the death of Christ. 340. Gods People are sensible of their own
wants. 248. Perseverance obtaines the Crown. 255. Why Peter girt his coat unto
him, when he cast himself into the Sea, and swim to Christ. 627. Philip of
Macedonia his daily memento. 407. God as a Physician gives his people such a
potion, as shall free them from all diseases. 641. Pilate sought to clear
Christ. 197. Pilate labored to deliver Christ Loquendo, Mittendo, Iungendo,
Flagellando 200. Of Pilates laboring to deliver Christ. 205. In four respects
we must be Pilgrims here. 40. The places of trouble, God will make places of
comfort. 360. What to plead against Satan. 152. We ought to remember death in
the midst of all our pleasures. 279. Neglect of the poor a great sin. 475.
Christ the poor man's portion. 121. Christ not to be despised for his
poverty. 137. * What Christ prayed for in the Garden. 160. * Christ prayed for
his enemies. 225. Prayer is seed sown in Gods ears and heart. 488. As
Christ's, so our prayers must be limited to Gods good will. 160. The stronger
conflicts, the more earnest our prayers. 161. Prayer should take place, where
admonition will not. 227. Ground of prayer. 240. * Hearty prayer shall not want
its due fruit. 242. * Praising of God must follow holy Services. 127.
Preparation to Heaven illustrated by a Simile of a Traveller. 447. A personal
precept binds not every man. 492. No man must prescribe conditions to God.
349. We must labor to be in the presence of Christ. 98. * A twofold presence
of God, 1. General, to sustain us in the life of Nature. 2. Particular, to
assist us in the life of Glory. 170. 465. Christ a Priest, to Reconcile us to
God. Intercede for us. 84, etc. The longer we live here, the nearer we draw to
the accomplishment of Gods Promises. 114. Gods Promises accomplished in the
fullness of time. 113. Patient waiting for Gods promises commended. 114. *
Christ a Prophet to declare the will of God. 83. The soul goes not to
Purgatory, or a middle place. 604.
Q
HOw the Spirit is quenched. 516.
R
AS the Rechabites observed their father Ionadab, so we must observe and obey
God. 54. * Reconciliation to God is by Christ. 152. * Our reconciliation to
God, cost Christ thick blood. 163. Our reconciliation no easy thing. 212. The
difficulty of recovering out of sin, if long lain in. 350. The work of
redemption greater than of creation. 68. The great and long labor of our
redemption. 253. * The consummation of our redemption, in the words, It is
finished. 251. The power of grace in the heart makes Gods people to rejoice.
136. It Is nothing to be religious, if not just withal. 139. Two remembrances of
God in Judgment. Mercy. 241. Repentance cannot save without faith, for three
reasons. 1. 2. Repentance. Fruitful, only in this Unfruitful or penal in the
other life. 609. Defects in unsound repentance, as in Ahab, etc. 497. The
danger of late repentance. 235. No repentance in Hell. 285. Christ always
comes to repentant sinners. 306. No resisting Christ the Lord of the world. 96.
Of the resurrection of the body. 623. Reasons proving it drawn from the Power,
Justice, Mercy, End of Christ's coming. Resurrection of Christ. of God. 623.
Objections of Atheists against the resurrection answered. 625. The glory of the
body at the resurrection consists in 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Entireness of parts.
638. Beauty and loveliness. 639. Brightness and splendour. ibid. Immortality
and immutabilitie. 640. Spiritualitie. 642. Power. 643. Of Christ's
resurrection. 292. Christ's resurrection of necessity, to Assure us of pardon of
sins. Apply salvation. Assure our resurrection, out of the Grave. Trouble.
292. etc. The companions of Christ's resurrection. 300. The manifestation of
Christ's resurrection. 304. Reasons that we shall know one another at the
resurrection. 630. Why the resurrection is delayed. 631. The dead bodies of
the Saints, pledges of our resurrection. 632. Our resurrection shall be only
by the power of Christ. 635. Our bodies at the resurrection shall be as
glorious as Adams in innocence. 639. There must be no return to sin. 137.
The hope of reward must carry us through afflictions. 451. Rich men have as
much need of God as poor. 128. In what estate our bodies shall rise. 637. As
Christ is risen, so we must rise to newness of life. 302. We shall all rise
with the same bodies. 627. Objections against it answered. 628. In what estate
the wicked shall rise. 644. The difference of the rising of the godly and the
wicked. 300. Whether monsters shall rise monsters. 645. In what sex all shall
rise. 646. Whether children and old men shall rise so, or not. 646, 647. Christ
rose the third day First, no sooner, 1. To evidence the truth of his death to
the Jews. 2. To evidence the power of his death to the Disciples. 3. To teach
Christians patience. 294. Secondly, no later, 1. Lest the Jews should not
think him Christ. 2. Lest the Disciples faith should stagger. 3. To apply his
resurrection. 4. Because God had so appointed. 295. Christ rose in power. 296.
When Christ rose, he left the graveclothes behind him, why. 298. Multitudes
of rose with Christ to Show the benefit of his resurrection appertains to
many, not a few. Be witnesses thereof. 301. What was done by What became of
th^se that rose with Christ. 303. Room for swaggerers, etc. in the June, but
none for Christ. 119. Christ the root of David how. 543. *
S
CHrist instituted the Christian Sabbath. 305. Spiritual Sacrifices due to the
Saints on Earth are Exhortation. Admonition. Consolation. Mutual prayer. 588,
etc. A Kingdom assigned to the Saints. 447. The Saints are now in glory. 529.
No salvation without the Church. 565. All men naturally out of the estate of
salvation. 73. But one means of salvation. 47. Christ a Savior. 72. No
Savior but he. 75. Differences between Christ and other Saviors. 76. * Noah
left all to save his Soul. 38. Christ saves His own people only. By
suffering. From sins. 73. Nobilitas objecti. Debilitas subjecti. The reasons
why we believe not the Scriptures. 325. The Scripture the jewel and treasure
of the Church. 550. Reasons proving the purity and perservation of the letter
of the Scripture. 551. Of the true translation of the Scripture. 553. How to
reconcile the different translations in the Scripture. 553. Canonical
Scripture what it is. 555. Reasons why the Apocrypha was not received for
canonical Scripture. 557. The Scripture is a rule left us to walk and examine
all things by. 559. The Church gives no authority to the Scripture, seeing GOD
is the Author of it. 560. All that Christ did, was to fulfill the Scripture.
247. * In the Scripture, the Purity, Majesty, Predictions, Power, Sincerity,
Consent of writers and Natural reason, prove them to have God their Author
561. etc. Consent of writer in the Matter Manner if the Scriptures. 663 The
Scripture is to be Relied on, Judge in questions, Not all neglected, Directer
of ^ur lives, because the Word of God. 564. The unsearchable goodness of the
Holy Ghost expressed by the similitude of a man's looking on (...) Sea. 507. Ill
success, Bad example, T^o discouragements in the wisemens search for Christ.
134. To see Christ in the Gospel, a blessing worthy to provoke unto praise GOD
for. 142. The Word of God ^e seed, breeds Christ in our hearts. 106. *
Strangers seek christ sooner than the children. 130. We must seek C^^ist
because He ^keth us. His g^aces are precious. He g^eth salvation. 131. It is
in vain to se^ke Christ in this world, or worldly thing. 360. We sell our
souls t^the Devil for pleasures and profits. 183. * Of Christ's sendin his
Disciples. 342. Diverse opinions by the sentence at the day of judgeme^^ is
pronounced first to the godly, then the wicked. 444. Of the dreadful seen of
the last judgment. 445. The woeful separa^on of dearest friends at the day of
judge^ent. 431, 432. Separation from ^he Church Vnlawfu^^ Lawful 537. Gods
Service ough^ be preferred before all things. 249. God had rather a^e of his
Service, than Man lose his comfort. 459. A twofold Service to Christ Voluntary
of the godly. Unwilling of the wicked. 69 * Our friendship by reconciliation in
Christ alters not the condition of Servants. 454. Distinction of sheckles. 183.
The properties of sheep. 435. Christ's manifestation of the sheepheards. 120.
Under shows of law and justice the innocent destroyed. 195. * Signs of the
last judgment. See judgment. Of the sign of the Son of Man. 417. What it
is. 419. The Cross no sign of the Son of Man. 418. The strange silence of
Christ. 208. Silence in Christ's cause will make him silent in ours. 201. * The
manifestation of Christ to Simeon. 138. Simeon A just man. A devout and
religious man. One that waited for the consolation of Israel. 138 etc. Our case
worse than Simeons, because if we see not Christ by faith, we perish. 140.
Sins of omission, will condemn a man as well as sins of commission. 473.
Small sins will condemn as well as great. 474. Small sins great in Gods
account. 474. How it stands with Gods justice to punish sin eternally. 470.
The brightest sins have a dark shadow. 422. The private acting of sin
compared to writing with the juice of a Lemman. 438. In sin Guilt. Power. 75.
The sins of the Godly shall not be remembered at the day of judgment. 468.
The burden of sin pressed Christ down down to the ground. 158. Christ the
sinne-offering of the Church. 215. How to deal with sin. 5. The
horriblenesse of sin, that could not be done away otherwise than by the blood
of Christ. 76. 93. Why the weight of sin is no more felt. 442. Sin seems
light to wicked men because It is in its proper place. Of the insensibility of
their consciences. They look on the face not the tail thereof. 159. Great
sins, if falls of weakness and repented of, Christ will pardon. 315. By
sin we become strangers to God. 150. Sin make GOD forsake his Servants.
174. Our sins merit deprivement of all Gods blessings. 222. * No release from
sin but by forgiveness. 611. Man unable to satisfy for sin. ibid.
Continuance in sin makes Christ lose his labor. 151. He that gives place to
small sins, will afterward make no conscience of greater. 181. The harboring
of a secret sin eats out of the heart all good affections. 202. * Seasonable
stopping of sin. 206. Of Christ's sitting at the right hand of God. 370. Men
in their naturals no better than slaves in the sight of God. 184. * Christ sold
for wealth, because men know not his worth. 182. Things of inestimable price,
a^ the Graces of the spirit Kingdom of heaven. Souls of men. Favor of God.
unlawful to be sold. 182, 183. The great dignity to be the Sons of God. 46.
Christ the Son of God, not by creation as Angels, nor by adoption as men, but
by communication of nature and essence. 92. We should labor to become the
Sons of God. 93. * Christ's sorrow on the cross a dreadful sorrow. 155.
Three causes thereof. 156. The immortalitle of the soul. 257. * 602. The
souls of the faithful go to Heaven immediately after death. 243. 260 * Our
souls ought to be rendered up in as good a case, as they were given us. 99. *
Christ's Soul a pledg^ and pawn for ours. 259. Christ sometime is ^ound of
them that sought how not. 316. Idle speeches like the ^aste water of a Conduit.
310. God speeches must ^t be quenched but cherisht. 320. God gives but a
portie of the Spirit in this life. 488. No fullness of the Spi^^^ in this life.
489. Fullness of Spirit is ^even, etc. what. 392. etc. Degrees of the Spirit.
501. The right work of the ^irit in a Weak Strong Christian, wherein it
consists. 501. 503. As fire by too much w^l^, and a Ship by too great a
burden, so (...) Spirit quenched by too many worldly ^res. 522. Of the Star
that appe^ed to the Wisem^n. 135. The Scriptures and fa^^full Ministers (...)
Stars to direct us (...) Christ. 136. A Christian should de^e God to stay
with him in time of Trouble. Death. 33. Stirring up one anot^ to good duties.
125. * Reasons the^of. ibid. Wicked men's hearts ^rder than stones. 271. Ill
success sh^ld be no hindrance in our search for Christ. 134. * Of Christ's
su^^rings in general. 145. Christ suffe^d. from (...) The cup of malediction.
Desertion on the Cross. 153. Apprehension. Arraignement. Condemnation.
Execution. 177. God suffere In humane Not divine nature. 147. Of Christ's
^^ferings, Duplex necessita Pretii, or paying the price of man's redemption.
Exempli, or good example. 146. 327. The utilitie Christ's sufferings. 329.
Christ's (...) more admirable, his sufferings not profitable. 145. Christ su^^ed
that me might not suffer. 146. Whatsoever^ fell Christ in his sufferings, not
due (...). 149. * From Christ sufferings we must learn (...) of our salvation.
^e griev^^snesse of our sins. suffer our selves ^or sin. 148. Christ suffer
to bring us (...) to God. 150. The (...) of Christ's sufferings, was to
R^^^ncile us to God. (...) sin. 152. We must suffe^^ to Be (...) to Chr.
Purge ^ sin. Prev^^^nt. 328. The end of al^^r sufferings must be to abolish
sin. 152. Reasons to enable us to suffer from men, are, because All is by
Gods appointment. We have deserved all of them. All shall tend to our good.
176. As too much sumptuousness, so too much sluttishnesse is to be avoided.
281. Of the Suns darkness at Christ's passion. 165. No natural cause
thereof. 166. Of Christ's sweat in the Garden. the Cause, Carriage, Manner, End.
161. etc.
T
IN worldly business our talk should be of Christ. 317. Men abstain from
talking of God and goodness, because they Cont^^^^ GOD and desire to have as
little to do with him as may be. Are not watchful over their ways. Want
love to their Brethren. 318. He that has once tasted of the goodness of
Christ, will not let him go upon any terms. 333. * All men under the tax of
Gods wrath. 116. Christ teaches (...) by his Word. Sacraments. 84. Christ
found no where but in the Temple. 141. * How men destroys the Temple of God.
481. Two times the Devil chiefly tempts a Christian, at His entrance into
grace. His going out of the world. 161. The stronger the temptations, the
earnester our prayers. 161. Christ exercises his Church with trials and
temptations, to Set aworke their graces. Pull down spiritual pride. Keep
them from sin. The great terror and torment of the wicked, when they shallbe
shut out from the presence of Christ. 464. Thankfulness due to Christ for our
redemption. 254. Thankfulness due to Christ that has freed us from the
curse. 95. * The conversion of the thief on the cross. 233. Why Christ
suffered between two thieves. 222. All men good and bad figured in the two
thieves. 240. Of Christ thirst on the cross, the natural causes, Long
abstinence. Exi^cation from loss of blood. Extremity of grief. 246. The
moral causes of Christ's thirst, That we might not thirst. To fulfill a
Scripture. That we might thirst for the Spirit of grace. 247. The good thirst
of a Christian. 248. Of Christ's appearing to Thomas. 347. There is a fullness
of time for the accomplishment of Gods promises. 113. Why Christ would not be
touched. 312. Reasons against transubstantiation. 319. * Trials to know whether
Christ's will be gone from us or no. 330. Christ sold for a trifle. 183. Christ
the joy of the world, a trouble to some. 132. Of the Trumpet sounding to
judgment. 426. Christ condemned for the Truth. 196. The Holy Ghost a Tutor to
us. 510. *
V
THe Veil of the Temp^rent to Make an entrance in^^ Heaven. Abrogate the
cere^^iall Law. Show Christ had ta^n away the separation between God and us.
Show the veil of ignorance in the Law was ^^ken away. 270. How the Kingdom of
Heaven suffers violence. 253. Christ did not pass through the Virgin Mary as
water through a^^nduit pipe. 105. Christ conceived of a Virgin, at he might Be
free from si^^. Fulfill the prophe^s of him. Awaken the ^ld by the strangenes
of ^ birth. 108. The Virgin Marie considered her Stock, of the Lineag^ David.
Estate, poor and mean. 110. Vivification wherein it consist 504. Actions done
voluntarily in^bedience to God are most acceptable. 265. Thomas's unbeleefe.
348.
W
WE ought to wait ^atiently for Christ's commi^ 140. Weak brethren not to be
dis^ed. 277. Weakness of Faith, see (...). Christ yields to man's weak^esse,
though on unequal terms. 251. The wicked sparing for go^^ses, prodigal for
bad. 182. We must be content to suffe^ the hands of wicked men. 177. The wicked
hurt the Sai^by their Wrongs. Sins. 60 The wicked labor to ge^^ of their
troubles by bad means. 133. The wickeds ^dition worse than Nabuchadnezzar
among the Oxen. 472. * The wicked li^ fishes in the Sea, live in the Church ^ut
are neither seasoned by it, nor taste the power thereof. 567. * A terror
a^confusion to the wicked when they (...) be separated from Christ to the
Div^nd his angels. 433. The wicked a^r the resurrection shall be subject to
^^ecessities of nature. 644. The wicked (...) be shut out of the Earth at the
end the world. 465. The wicked (...) be shut out of Heaven at the present
(...) Christ. 464. The wickeds ^^panions hereafter the Devil and h^^ngels.
471. The wicked ^ ares shall be bound together in bu^es for the greater
increase of torment. 582. * How far ^^ed men desire the presence of God. 465.
The wicked thing the better for Christ's resurrecti^ 300. The punish^^ of the
wicked shall be Gods curse. 466. Reason of th^icked their condemnation. 473.
Gods Will t^^fold. of his ^^ree. comandment. 198. The wills of dead must be
performed. 232. Witnesses (...) might have been found for Christ^^^cencie,
none against it. 196. * False witne ^er scapes unpunished. ibid. Fine wits
a^litike pates must be employed for Chapter 202. Christ's ma^tation to the Wisemen.
128. The reasons ^^of. ibid. The Wisem^^ their search for Christ discourage by
Bad ^esse. Ill ex^e. 134. Wives ought ^^y and stop their husbands in ^^urse
of sin. 206. * God made all^^ by his Word. 66. All Creatures save man yield
obedience to Gods Word. 66. All Christ's last Words holy and good. 255. Works
not the cause of our obtaining heaven, but only signs who be the Persons.
454. Reasons against the merit of works. ibid. A difference between for
works, and according to works. 457. * To work out our salvation what it is.
253. * The last judgment shall be according to our works. 456. The reason
thereof. 459. All good works shall be remembered and rewarded. 458. Gods
works were done by degrees. 69. God made the world exceeding good. 67. What
time God made the world 68. In what order God made the world. 70. The Jewish
prophecy that the world should continue 6000. years. 401. * The world made of
nothing. 66. God is able to dissolve the world to nothing. 67. * The world
shall be burnt. 409. None worse than they that have had a taste of religion and
have lost it. 180. * A threefold worship due to God, Adoration. Invocation.
Faith. 92. Whether Christ's wounds remained in his glorified body. 452. Christ
takes all wrongs done to his servants, as done to himself. 461.
Y
OF the young man that followed Christ. 189. Young Men ought to look after
Christ. ibid.
Z
Zeal for the honor of God a sign of conversion. 138. Zerxes sorrow, when
he looked upon 100000. Soldiers. 210. *

