THE Blacksmith. A SERMON PREACHED at White Hall before the Kings most
excellent Majesty, the young Prince, the Council, etc. On Loe-Sunday. 1606.
and by commaundment put to print.

By W. S. Doct. in Divinity Chaplain to his Majesty.

LONDON Printed by Ed. Allde for Martin Clarke. 1606.

TO THE MOST Puissant and most mighty Monarch, our most dread and Sovereign
Lord James by the grace of God, King of great Britain, France and Ireland,
defender of the Faith. etc.
MAy it please your Majesty to take a second Survey of this sillye Sermon. When
it was first uttered, you did not only hear, but hearken, and incline your
ear: as it were with your gracious attention to help out my bad elocution.
Pity so bad a voice should ever offer so great a wrong to the most learned
and judicious ear of so good a King.

Howbeit, volenti non fit iniuria. And, if we were not all deceived, you were
as willing to bear, as I could be unwilling to offer either this or any such
injury to a person so sacred. But now I fear me, if it should please you to
take it into your hands it will prove but tapestry work, fairer a far off
then near at hand.

The great difference between divine and humane wrightings. Of those the more
we drink, the more we may: the deeper the sweeter. Of these to sippe it is
sufficient, Gustata magis quam potata ^^^ant. Howsoever it be, it was the
commandment of our most Reverend Metropolitan that I should put it in
Print, which I would more willingly have put to fire ere ever it saw light. But
being as it is, if to this his pleasure it shall please your Majesty to add
your favorable aspect, under the conjunction of two Planets so great, so
gracious, I nothing doubt but the Blacke-Smith will thrive If no use else be
made hereof, yet shall the world abroad, that thinks there is nothing but
gilding in the Court, hereby take notice of your exceeding patience, and my
great boldness, for the further imholdening of better Orators in this
heavenly business: to think how great a God they serve, before whom all the
Gods of the earth throw down their Scepters and yield that obedience, as best
beseemes such subordinate Sovereigns, to the great Lord Paramount. Whose
pleasure it is notwithstanding, that as we come from him with all boldness,
so we should stand before them, as his Leiuetenants, with all reverence. This
was then my meaning to reform al, without offense to any. And if any thing
were wanting in my duty, sure I am it was supplied by your goodness. The
Lord of heaven increase and multiplye these heavenly blessings upon you and
yours, to your and our eternal comfort in the Lord.

Your Majesty's Most humbly and intierly devoted Chaplain: W. S.

Genere, virtute, doctrina Nobilissimo Domino H. Howardo Comiti Northampton:
Baroni de Marnhil, Praecipuorum 5. Portuum Praefecto, ex illustri periscelidis
Ordine Equiti, and Iacobi Monarche potentissimi Consiliario, fidelissimo
aeternam in Do nino faelicitatem.
SCientiae duo sunt sensus, auris and oculus, aure non contentus hic
Faber-ferrarius, oculorum sese offerre voluit iudicio. Praemonueram, aures
plerumque hebetiores esse, oculos fere semper acutiores; multu^que interesse
inter operatione^ suhito tra^sitiua^, and opus ad diuturnitatem stabile and
permanens, nec oculis solum legentium, sed et animis impressum. Sic enim vsu
euenire, vt quae primo oblectant intuitu, eadem obtutum sisubierint quotidianum
ilico deflorescant. Sic cihoru^, licet iucundissimoru^, assiduitate gustus,
colo^u^, licet florentissimorum crebritate visus, vocu^, licet suauissimaru^
familiaritate fatigatur auditus. Excepit ille, vocis nostrae sono, tonoque ta^
agresti, and absono multum de ipsius (sic sibi adblanditur Rusticus) detractu^
venustate. Nam venere^ iactat, nescio qua^, proauam suam. Itaque, qui antehac
semper ab Aulae refugere solebat aspectu, nunc ea, qua^ dudum expertus est,
humanitate factus audacior (nescit enim erubescere hic color faligineus)
officinam sordidam aspernari, nihil nisi Aulam Regiam cogitare, nihil aliud
somniare videtur. Mirabar qua spe fretus. Omnia peruestigans, tandem intellexi
ab Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, Metropolitano mihi multis nominibus colendissimo
inuitatum, vt typis ornatus typographicis rediret denuo. Huius imperio no^
ausus obluctari dimisi homine^. Sed ea condition, vt cum Hovardos omnes,
genere and virtute Nobiles, tum Comite^ imprimis Northamptoniensem, Literatorum
nobilissimum, nobilium literatissimum meo nomine salutaret humiliter. Huius
opera et fauore, been si se gereret, aditum fore ad ipsus Rege^ (quandoquide^
ita voluit) faciliore^. Multa insuper cumulaui. Sed quid multa? Hoc vnum erat
in mandatis praecipuum, pede vt cum claudicet altero proles vulcania, genu
flexo se submittat Aulice. Atque ita and claudicationis tegumentu^, and
Aulicationis argume^tu^ non vulgar adepturu^. Promisit Faber affabre se
facturu^ omnia. Sed quia rust citaite^ hominis inueterata^, no^ ignoro a tergo
insequor exploraturus and quid agat, and quid patiatur. Faxit Deus fauorem vt
inueniat qui meretur flagrum. Sed ego praeter votum nihil iam amplius praestare
possum. Precor igitur deu^ immortalem vt hunc homuncione^ miserum fauore qui
dignetur suo, fauorem ipse Diuinum et hic assequatur ampliorem, and in coelis
amplissimum.

Illustrissimae amplitudinis tuae Studiofiseinous Guil. S.

THE Blacksmith.
1. Samuel 13. 19. Then there was no Smith found throughout all the land of
Israel.
IF all Scriptute inspired from above be profitable to teach, to correct, to
improve, and instruct (as 2. Tim. 3) good for informatio^ and reformation,
confirmation, and refutatio^, correction, and direction, life and learning,
doctrine and manners: then needs there as I hope no Apology, why I at this time,
and in this place should specially make choice of this Text, as before so great
a King to entreat of so base a subject: the Smith and the Anuile. Where all is
good, and all as gold seuentimes refined, the choice of any cannot be amiss.
For who can say this might be better, where all is best, and al suparlatiue?
except it be paraduenture in respect of circumsta^ce of time, and persons. Now
for the time, you see it is Loe-Sunday, and therefore me thinks this low
subject may best beseem it. And for the persons here present, they are
speakers or hearers.

Howsoever this Theme may be thought too base for so high an Auditorie, if it be
well considered it may well be thought most fit for so base an Orator. Tractent
fabrilia fabri. I knew none I might be bolder with then the Smith. And if
Solomon a King of that greatness vouchsafed to write of the least of his
fellow creatures, even from the Caeder to the shrub: and our heavenly Solomon
with his own hands to create the Smith, and by his spirit to treat, as here, so
else where of him; it shall not seem tedious or too base of our gracious Solomon
to vouchsafe to hear, where his god has vouchsafed to speak. And I do not
doubt, but that the same God, that gave water out of the flint, and honye out
of the hard Rock, can also out of this dry Theme draw the water of life, far
more sweet then the honye, or honye comb. Upon this presumption of his good
grace, and your gracious patience, I proceed to the further unfolding of this
present text, touching the want of a Smith throughout all Israel, and the
reason thereof. Then there was no Smith to be found throughout all Israel,
(there is the want:) For the Philistims said, least the Hebrews make them swords
and spears: there is the reason; and the reason of this reason, is in the
premises of this Chapter, whereto if it please you to cast back your eyes, you
shall see how Saul seeking by preposterous zeal to salve one fault with
another, and by unsanctified sacrifice to please and appease his angry God,
more deeply displeased. In vitium ducit culpae fuga si caret art. For this
his offense he was reproved of Samuel, rejected of God, forsaken of his people,
oppugned of his enemies; who now with 3. bands (a threefold cord not easily
broken) had beset and beseeged him. (A perilous parenthesis) even at such a
time as he was clean disarmed, his Armor taken away, and his Armourers (the
Smiths) removed out of the land. Miserima priuatio quae omnem tollit ad
habitum regressum. Which killes the young ones with the damme, and with one
crack, as it were, takes away all present possession, and future possibility.
Spem and re^. And such was at this time the state of Israel, for want of a
Smith. Which is here amplyfied, as you see, as by crcumstance of time when, and
place where, so also the reason why. For had it bin of any other Artisan the^
the Smith, their armorer; or at any other time, the^ the time of arms and the
day of battle; or in any one city of Israel; and not throughout Israel; or at
the appointment of their own king and his officers, upon some general weapon
take the better to keep the^ in peace amongst themselves, and allegiance to
their sovereign, and not by inforceme^t of the Philistims their utter enemies,
the more to affeeble and inthrall them: it had been neither so grievous for
the^ to bear; nor so notorious for us to hear; and hearing to observe the
enemies policy, their misery and Gods great mercy. Who having thus brought
them into most imminet danger, and unavoidable fear without any merit, or
means of theirs wroght their deliverance. For so we shall see in the sequel of
the story, where misery abounded, there mercy surper-abounded, and whereas in
their misery at the day of battle, they had in all the camp, against 3. bands
of their enemies, all armed with all manner of weapons for offense, but 2.
swords of defense: It so pleased God, those 2. were enough. Ecce duo gladij, but
2. swords for so many, and against so many a word of extrem want. satis est,
those 2 shall suffice a word of supreme mercy and yet no greater mercy to them,
then comfort to us all, that have such a God, as able to save without means as
with means; with a few, as with a multitude. For the foolishnes of God is
wiser then men, and the weakness of God is stronger then me^ And therefore fear
not thou worm of Jacob, thou have ever, more with thee, the^ can be against
thee. And thus much in general of the sum and substance of these words. Now
if it please you more particulerly, let us examine them as they lie in order,
and first of the circumstance of time as it is here offered. Then there was no
Smith; for so as yet we read it: and though the original may perhaps
otherwise be translated, yet has it hitherto gone for current, and shall for
me (being without the compasle of my commission, pass uncontrolled. The rather
at this time, for that the notation of the time designed in the first verse of
this Chapter, has wonderfully perplexed, if not plainly posed all the
Cronologers that ever have labored in vnknitting this knot. Who seeking to set
down some certainty of time, and to give the corollary, a when to this then,
have indeed entangled themselves and their Readers with greater incertainty.
Infinite and endless are their conjectures. I will only touch some 3. or 4.
of the likeliest and so leave you to your choice. The words are these. Saul now
had bin King (...) year, and he reigned two years in Israel. If he now had
reigned two years, how is he said to have been King but one year? when this
was done (filius vnius anni) if but one year King, how is it true, that he had
reigned two yeares' 1. One says, when he had been King one year full,
currente secundo the second incompleate for so wright Kings, the first day for
a year: Yet even in the style of Kings, it cannot be justified, that he that
is now in the second year of his reign, has reigned two years. The second
year begins as soon as the first is ended, but two years are not to be
reckoned, til the third year begin. 2. Another, seeing this shift will not
serve, reads it thus. When Saul had been one year King of Israel, and then
with a parenthesis, (for he reigned in all two years,) that is lawfully (as it
were with a trick of aequiuocation) before he was rejected of God, (as Chap,
16.) and yet we know that after ye he held the kingdom many years, being
deprived by Samuel not of the present possession in himself, but of future
succession in his offspring. The third would have it thus, that he had been
King de iure 2. years, but defacto one year, for so long only had he taken
the state of a King upon him: a wonder he should be so slow, where others
are so swift before they come at it. But this crosses the plain text of the
10. and 11. Chapters, and is again crossed of the fourth opinion. For that
clean contrary, imagins that though he had now been king defacto 2. years,
yet deiure indeed he had been but one year of that account, so soon he
began to degenerat from the nature and office of a King. So that it should
seem soon gotten: soon forgotten, lightly come by, lightly set by. Seeking
for his Fathers asses, he stu^bled on a kingdom before he knew what it meant,
and we know the common saying, Asperius nihil est humili cum surgir in altum. A
verse in Church and Commonwealth found commonly too true. And therefore God
grant us always Kings of this kingly race to sit upon this Throne of great
Britain. To play the King aright, it is a thing not easily learned by
nurture, except it be originally im-bred by nature. But for this point, it
should seem, as Seneca said of one that was counted an old man of many years.
Non ille tam diu vixit, sed ta^ diu fuit, as one that had out-liued himself: so
they thought of Saul, though he had now had a being in the kingdom for the
space of two years, yet had he lived as King but one year. To be a King (say
they) is not to eat and drink, disport, and play: But to manage the affairs of
the estate with care and diligence, and with an ever waking eye to sway the
Scepter. Sceptru^oculatu^. This should be his meat and drink, his sport and
play.

To whom we answer, though these greater works of the law must specially be
observed, yet may not those lesser utterly be neglected. Na^er haec quoq fieri
oportet. These also are lawful, and necessary recreatio^s, though no ordinary
or usual occupations. For I hope they are not of Lacta^tius mind, that thought
the Hawk, the Hou^d, the Hare and the Partrich (with such like) were things
ordained of God, rather to try and exercise our abstinence, then feed our
delights, As though that good God, that tempts no man, had inverted so many
creatures as temptations to ensnare us, and not as repasts to delight us. As if
he had made the world, as it is thought Willam Co^queror made the new Forest,
not so much with the game thereof to disport himself, as with the laws and
penalties to entangle the English Nation.

Surely this was never the meaning of our merciful God and therefore in this
point I must needs condemn Lact antius as a man more stoicall, tha^ the Stoiks
themselves, for they said all things were made for man, and man for god, and
therefore might by gods leave by man be used for his good, and gods glory. But
by no means to the dishonor of god, the hurt of others, the mispending of
time, which as it ought in all men to be most precious, so in public persons
of much more account, being much more accomptable.

These cautions observed long may our Princes enjoy those princely harmles
pleasures, so far forth as it may be without harm to others, hurt or
hazard to themselves, hindrance to the state, and offense to god. God grant us
always chaste Hippolitus chasing the wild and savage Beasts to that end
ordained, rather than those beastly Nimrods, bloody and hungry Hunters, that
hunt after men with nets, seeking to pray upon their neighbor-Nations, and
homeborne Subjects: such as sometimes this land has seen, we have hard of us,
and others feel.

England was wont to be counted the Popes Ass. Now it has long since cast
both Fool and Rider, God grant it never be so ridden again. But so it should
seem that Saul mistaking the subjects he found, for the Asses he sought began
to lay heavier burdens upon them tha^ they were able to bear: and that might
be the cause they were so soon weary of him, and that they made so little
reckoning and so short account of his reign.

For as Gregory says of him, though he were a man of great groath, higher
than them all, and of many years, yet is he reckoned but Filius vnius (...)
(So read Vatablus, and the Chaldea^ Paraphrase, and manymoe) Illis solum annis
regnasse dicitur, quibus innocens and humilis putabatur. And therefore as there
he adds, in his Commentary upon this very place; Illo solum tempore nos
vixisse gaudeamus, quo innocenter and humiliter viximus. Nam quae in vanitate
consumuntur, quasi per dita non memora^tur. Yet was not this the fault that is
here most special and properly noted to have been his overthrow, but rather
the sparing where God bid strike. Crudelis and Stulta misericordia, as Samuel
tells him, and reserving the fatlings unto himself. Dat venia^ coruis, vexat
ce^sura columbas. But because this note came but in by the way it shall draw me
no further out of the way.

This may suffice to show the diverse opinions of our distracted Chronologers;
well it is with us, that our faith is no way founded on these fond
Braughtonists. Josephus Scaliger the mender of ^imes, and learned of them
all, confes^^th that of 2000. there are not two to be found in one mind. And
therefore well may we marvel, not as of old, Quod aruspex aruspicem sed quod
Chronologus chronologum videns arisu abstineat. They are not able to give a
when to this then. But for the matter it self, howsoever the time be
uncertain, yet that the State of Israel at this time was most miserable, it is
most certain, and all for want of a Smith; which it may be before they needed,
they would never have deemed. But Carendo magis quam fruendo. It is the want,
that shows the worth of every thing; the full belly loathes honey, the
thirsty soul would wring water out of the flint.

If our wanton Professors were forced (as in former times) to run from East to
West, to fetch the water of life through fire and water, with peril of life,
were it out of the meanest Cisterne, they would swear they never drunk
sweeter licor. Or if they were now driven to seek to the Philistims for a file
to sharpen their Goads and Mattockes, as sometimes the Hebrews, and not long
time since their Forefathers were glad, how glad would they be of any piece
of the Bible (never so meanly translated) or any poor catechism in their
mother tongue (never so plainly penned) to whet their zeales, and arm their
souls against the day of Battle. Whereas now when their Smiths are
multiplied, the armories enlarged, the Forges open, every Shop full f^aught,
every man's Gomer, that will vouchsafe to stoop and take it up, either at home
or the next door filled with Manna; Man-h^ what is this, but light bread? the
hearing and reading of the word of God as a thing of nothing. Our Smiths
unskillful (except a few of our own (...)) our prayers unsanctified, our
Sacraments superstitious, if not idolatrous; our Bibles no Bibles; so corruptly
translated. If any one quirke can be found by all the caueling heads in the
Land, away with all; it is all too light, so soon have we forgotten those days
of want; and so soon has peace and plenty taught us to wantonize. God grant
this wantonness bring us not back to our former want. That thereby we may be
taught, (which otherwise we will not learn) to acknowledge how great and
unspeakable are these blessings which we have so long, and so unworthily
enjoyed under our governors the Lords anointed, too too good for people so
ingracious and ungrateful. But I fear me whilst I follow too far this
circumstance of time, I shall have the less time for that which most concerns
the substance of our text, that is, the want of a Smith, and whereto I have
already made my entrance, but no further, than I find the worth of the Smith,
employed in the want of the Smith, and amplified by reason of the time (when) he
was wanting.

Then there was no Smith, for so is Charash, I think of all translated, though
in his original and native signification it may stand as well for faber
lignarius, as ferrarius, a Carpe^ter as a Smith, or any other laboring in the
cunning fabrike or framing any such like mechanical work. Yet is it here
agreed, as I take it, by the grand Jury of all that have been impanneled upon
this point, to signify the Smith, the Blacke-Smith, who is indeed the root
and the stock of them all, another Adam, in whom were tythed all other
mechanistes as yet unborn. No Smith in Israel? No great loss; the less
hammering, tho less noise, a base mechanist, the Cyclops offspring, and at the
best, base Vulcanes brood.

What use of the Smith, or what need of the Son of Tubalcain? What wisdom
can there be in him that fryeth in the fire, and keeps the Forge? Bona verba
quaeso. Noliquos singulos contemnis, eosdem vniuersos putare nihili. For as
Saint Hierom says to Laeta, Non sunt ea contemnenda quasi parua sine quibus
magna nequeunt consistere. Base is the foundation where the building is
brauest. But we see in a great building of stone it is hard to move, any one
that is of the building, but it inda^gers all. I say of the building, for that
I know in most buildings there are many superfluities, for show rather then for
substance; such as may be spared without loss or danger: and yet perhaps they
set a face on it, as though allay on their necks. Like the little Images, and
Angels on the roofes of many churches, that bend their backs and brows, as
though all the burden lay on the^, where as indeed they are borne, they bear
not at all. So surely in the politic buildings of states and kingdo^ms, many
stones a loft, might easily be spared. Many warts and swellings in the body,
rather diseases the^ parts of the body, that might be welspared, and paired
away. And hereby they may be tried whither they be parts integrall or
essential, or mere superfluities. We see the poor Blacksmith, no sooner
gone, but he was missed, and his want found dangerous.

Would it be so think you, with a sight of lewd and idle professors that make a
trade of sin? as Tiplers, Tauerners, Pipers, Plaiers, Pandars, Marcha^ts of
needles wares: but above all those, scribbling brokers, and their Masters the
Usurers. The very Vermin of the earth; never made by God, but bred as mo^sters
of the error of nature, the corruption of the earth, or earthly me^, and
corrupt ma^ners: never in the Catlogue of those creatures that came under the
Survey (Genesis 1.) and being seen and allowed, received the sentence of
approbatio^. But being of a latter brood, they were all once swept away with
the flood, they never came within the Arc. But when the flood fell, they rose
up, as other Vermin of the slime of the earth, and have ever since held by
intrution. But the time will come when they will be cast out, with a nesciovos,
away from me, I know you not for any of my creatures. In the mearle time, if
they will needs hang on like counterfeit Gibeonites, it were well they were
used in their kind for bearing of burde^s, from which most commonly they are
most exempt. Sure I am, of all the subjects in this land, there are no fitter
subjects for Subsidies, tasks, and loanes, then they that make a profession of
lending and a gain of their uncharitable charity, to the utter ruin of many
young Gentlemen, that come often times to their lands, before they come to their
wits, or years of discretion. Assuredly, if those rank unnatural boughs were
well pruned and pared, the natural branches might be the more spared, and grow
the better. For of those that are natural indeed, there is not one, but would
and should be cherished even from the root, be they never so mean. It was the
error of the epicure, to think that the Gods were careful of the greater
things only, and careless of the less Sure I am, our God (the great God of
heaven and earth) beholdes, maintains, supports, and protects the smallest
with the greatest: the hairs of our head, the sparrowes of the air, the
lillies of the field, the grass of the earth; so has he appointed that
glorious carbu^cle of the heavens his sun, to shine upon his basest creatures,
and the Son of rihhteousnes his only begotten and dearly beloved, to die for
the sins and salvation of the poorest soul: and the soul of man to in spire
not only the heart, and the head and principal parts, but even the least joint
of the little finger. Anima est totain toto, and tota in qualibet part, as
wholly in every part as in the whole. Now kings and princes, they are as the
soul in the body, the sun in the heaven, the gods of the earth, by whose sweet
influence equally, yet proportio^ably is derived from the circu^ference of
their greatness to the lowest of their Subjects, the center of their grace both
life and living, and therefore they no doubt in all their laws and co^sultations
(wherein many things by many private persons upon private respects, and
partialities are cu^ningly carried) with an even eye, will provide, as well for
the poor Artisan and such as live all of the penny, as for the rich landlord and
his farmer, that gain by dearth, and raise their plenty out of others penury.
Sapie^tis est, says the wise Orator, sic curare vniuer sam Re^p: vt nullam
partem negligas. It is wisdom so to provide for the whole kingdom, that no
one part (though never so mean) may seem neglectd, much less any principal
part, because less in number, of the rest contemned. For, how can the head say
to the foot, or any part natural, I have no need of thee? when as it is
certain, he that treads on the toe, grieves the heart, and he that trips at
the heel, intends to bring the head to the ground. S. Basil in one of those
sermons that he wrought against the covetous cormora^ts, and cornuorants of his
time, that often times drove the poor that had nothing else, to sell the^-selues
or their children as dear as themselves to buy the refuse of their corn; the
more to mollify the hardness of their hearts, if any way it might be, sets
before the^ a poor soul for mere need, in extreme dearth driven to starve
all, or sell one of his children, and as it were with Thyestes to feed on his
own flesh, transubsta^tiated into a kind of course bread. Hereupon with heavy
heart coming home to his wife, wills her, after some short and sorrowful
consultatio^ to bring before him all his children, that thereby he might advise,
which of the^ al might best be spared And beginning at the eldest, and with
watery eyes beholding him, he co^siders, that he was the beginning of his
strength and excellency of his dignity. The first that ever called him father, by
birth right of doble honor, but in the market, of equal price, and therefore
not to be sold without some loss. On the otherside, the youngest yet to young
for servitude unable for service, and to himself as yet of least charge and
greatest comfort. The third like the Father, the fourth the Mothers own child,
the fifth the very express picture of the Gra^dfather, who though he were gone,
might not so soon be forgotten, the sixth like to prove a soldier, the
seventh a scholar, and one of these (howsoever the world went) were like to
be a staff and stay of their old age. And so of all the rest (if he had never
so many) he had none to spare.

Thus or to this effect, Saint Basil. and S. Ambrose has the very like storye
of a poor debtor, driven by the hardness of his creditors, either to part with
one of his Children, as a Bond-slaue, by a certain hour, or to yeald himself
to bo^ds and prison. When he had considered the time expired, he rather chose
to go himself then send any of his Children. Even so I doubt not, every kind
King, being Pater patriae, the father of his country, and great Grandfather of
all his people, if he were put to his choice, which of all his children, the
necessary parts, and natural members of his body politiquelis might best
spare, whether Clergy, Como^ns, or Nobles: or of the Commons; Artisa^s,
Soldiers, or husband men: or of his Artisans; Cooks, Tailors, Carpenters, or
Smiths. Where all are necessary, I think he would find it hard to spare
any. Assuredly if any were wanting, it would seem most needful.

And so of diverse Kingdoms, though great difference, yet in the impartial
affection of his fatherly mind, all aequally prised. If any less dandled,
perhaps it is the elder, as better able to go alone, and shift for it self.
It is the wisdom of our burrow English to respect the youngest that had most
need, as well as the eldest that has most right. Yet not all to the eldest, nor
al to the yo^gest, but where all are children, to give every one his childs
part, as well the Black Smith as the Goldsmiths.

Howsoever gold be more for ornament, sure we are it is iron must serve for
muniment and many good uses in peace and war, In peace no question, in war it
has been sometimes questionable, but is now (as I take it) past all
controversy. For howsoever Phillips Asle has gone very far, with some
vendable Traitors, yet sure it is, a little Spanish iron has gone much
further, inuading the mines of India, surprising the golden Ass, and bringing
him and his people into extreme servitude, and slavery. But what need we roue
so far to show the force of iron in conquering men, when as at home we may
behold the might thereof, in throwing down the mighty Oaks and great woods
of England? So powerful is iron, the blessing of Assure.

But what were iron without the iron Smith, by whose Art and arm the
stubborn mettell is to be incountred, and made as pliable as wax, for every
good purpose?

So necessary an Artisan, that the Epicure thought the world could never have
been made without a Smith; and it is the conccipt of Hillarie in his 18. Canon
upon S. Matthew, that if not God the Creator of the world, yet Christ the
redeemer, was a Smith, and not a Carpenter, as is commonly thought, because by
the wood of the Cross he was to repair the world: a wodde^ reason Sure it is
if neither God the creator, nor God the redeemer were a Smith, yet the Smith by
the heathen was made a God. On whom were feign to depend all the rest of their
Gods. Ceres for Sythes, Bacchus for pruning knives, Pan for Sheepe-hookes, Mars
for sword and Spear, and Jupiter him self for fearful thunder-boltes.

If this be fabulous, it has his meaning, and without all fables, it is most
true, that if neither the world were formed, nor the Church reformed, nor the
Gods maintained by the Smith, yet could none of all these, long have continued
without the Smith. His Antiquity shows his necessity. Antiquiora sunt
necessitatis inuenta quam voluptatis. Now we know that as the Logician amongst
the Philosophers is counted and called Instrumentum instrumentorum, the
instrument of instruments and hand of Philosophye, so much more may the Smith
be esteemed as the hand of all ha^dicraftes whatsoever. And therefore if
Adonibezek in cutting off the Thumbes of 70. Kings so greatly disabled them;
there is no doubt but the Philistims in cutting off the hands of all Israel,
utterly disarmed them. For what were the head for invention, if there were not
also an hand for execution?

Howbeit, this hand has had not the praise for inuenting it self, (if I may
so say) and many other Arts and Sciences, out of it self. The cunning and
sweetsounding musition (as Josephus thinks, and diverse others) came out of the
same Forge. And he that now so shines in every corner, the Goldsmiths, or
rather the gilding-smith (for all is not gold that glisters) he is but the
younger brother, howsoever he has now gotten the start and out-stript his
elder. It is but the error, and blindness of this old world in her dotage, to
give the brith-right to the yo^ger. Certain it is, that golden age of the
Primitive world, had more gold and less gilding. As Pope Boniface said of the
Church when it had wodde^ chalices, it had golden Priests. So sure I am, when
in the world there were fewer Goldsmiths, there was more golden dealing. Then
was the Temple full of gold, and all therein of pure gold, which now by a
strange kind of Alchymie is turned to lead, and lead to straw. But it may be
Coruptio vnius est generatio alterius; though the Church go down disrobed,
and Church-robbers thrive, they are warmed with her fleeces and glister with
her gold, And that makes so many golden patrons, leaden Churches, and wodden
Priests in so many parts of this Land. And can they marvel when as there are
so many that serve at the Altar, and starve at the Altar? that feed the flock,
and are fleeced of the Wolf: Honos alitartes. If they will allow but Michaes
wages, they must be content with Michaes priests. For we have of al prices,
Cruel Pharoes, that set us to fry in the surnace, and send us to seek out
straw where we can get it, and yet find fault with our taskmasters if all
be not well, when as we are not allowed so much as should serve for necessity.
But of necessity I must leave them, or rather reserve them awhile, for a place
more proper; for this time this may suffice literally to have spoken by way of
explication of the Blacksmith. Now if it please you, morally a word or two by
way of application, touching the Spiritual Smith; who labors no less in a
Forge as painful by the hammer of the word, and fire of the spirit, to work
(if it be possible) the hard heart of man, which in this iron age wherein we
live, is become as hard as any iron; nay as intractable, and vnmalleable as the
stones of the earth: the stony brood of Ouids Deucalion.

Bonauenture upon those words of God by the Prophet, where he promises to take
away their hearts of stone, and instead thereof to give them hearts of flesh,
Nay Lord (says he) rather hearts of stone, then hearts of flesh. For when
thy Son my sweet Savior suffered, the Sun was darkened, the earth
trembled, the veil rent, the graves opened, and the stones claue a sunder;
only man, the fleshly heart of man, more hard then the stones, showed neither
sense nor simpathy. Solus homo non co^patitur pro quo solo Christus patitur. In
the first of Kings and 13. Chapter, at the voice of the man of God, the stones
of the Altar went asunder, the heart of Ierobeam no whit moved. When the
hearts of men are grown so hard, had they not need of hammering? Surely the
word of God it is the hammer, which he to this end has put into our hands,
only God grant we have the art, and heart and courage to use it aright. But
as Scanderbee said of his enemies, that taking him captive, had taken his
sword from him: they had Scanderbees sword, but not his arm; so I fear me
though we have the word, the sword, and the hammer of God, yet we want the
arm of God, and that authority which they were wont to take unto the^-selues
that went on his message. Else what were he in court or Country that should
dare offend in any open and enormious sort, and we not dare to tell him of it?
but petlike it is not now the fashion to set out sin in his colors, nor strike
at impiety in the highest: that's Scandalum Magnatum, rude and barbarous,
fitter for the forge; then the Princes palace. Go preach thus in the country,
but prophecy no more in this manner at Bethel, for it is the kings Court, and
it is the kings Chapel.

Thus are you willing to sleep and sink in your sins, and have no man awake
you. If any man speak, he must speak Placentia. That's the cause, you have
somany goldsmiths, and so much gilding. Well I wot; we are by God and his
Majesty, called to this place, for another purpose; not with sweet words to
salve the sores of Zion, nor with vnte^pered mortar to daube up her breaches,
nor to sow soft pillowes under the elbowes of such as Satan has lulled
asleep in carnal security, but with the loud sounding trumpet to rouse and
araise the^. And such I am sure has God raised and sent unto you many a one.
Your selves shall say, your hearts shall tell, and consciences shall testify,
that as you are of al sorts, you have had of al sorts, if by any means
possible we might win any unto God.

Now therefore take you heed, when as there is nothing wanting on Gods part,
that you be not found wanting unto your selves; that you reject not the
hammering of the Blacke-Smith because it is hard and harsh. Use your
goldsmiths for ornament of your housen, your tables and cup-boards, and backs
also, if your purse and place will bear it: but for your souls, beware of
gilding. It is as easy for us, and perhaps for the present, more pleasing to
you: but the time will come, when as you shall say, why ever had we pleasure in
it? Dulciora sunt vulnera corigentis, quam oscula blandientis. O let the
righteous rather reprove me frie^dly, but let not their precious balmes of
smoothing and flattery break my head and wound my soul. For that in the end
will bring but destruction. And therefore in the bowels of Jesus Christ, I
boseech you, and in the name of the almighty God, I exhort and require you, as
ever you think to answer it to him that sent us, that with all mildness and
meekenes, you receive the word of exhortation, which is able to save your
souls, if only you be willing with pliable patience to submit your selves to
those that are set over your. If you receive them, it is for your own good; If
their salues be sometimes sharp, you shall find them the more sovereign if
you abide them. If not, the greater their grief. And if you grieve them, who
shall glad you in your greatest diseo^fortures, but they that are grieved by you?

It is hard with the Patient, when through his impatiencie the Physician is
provoked with tears to leave him.

If they that watch over your souls, and must give an accouut thereof, be
driven to do it with grief and sorrow, and not with joy, it will be little
for your joy, in that dreadful day of the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whose Emassadours we are, and your poor servants for his sake. At whose
appointment we labor and travel in this fiery Forge night and day, by
continual meditation, the tyring of our souls, and endless reading, the
weariness of our flesh, to work the fleshly heart of man, more hard that
iron. Never any Yron-Smith, with greater care, less consideration, and more
contempt.

For proof, I cite no other Text then the threescore and fourteenth Canon of
this present Convocation. In the end thereof, it is permitted to poor
beneficed men and Curats, not able to provide themselves long gowns, to go in
short gowns of the fashion aforesaid, the meaning is plain, priests-cloaks. I
find no fault with the Canon (it is of necessity that we cut both coat and
cloak according to our cloth.) But I note the miscrie of the times wherein we
live. They have used us as the King of Ammo^ used David's Ambassadors 2. Samuel.
10. they have cut our garments off by the hammes, and now that we want matter;
we must distinguish our selves by the manner of our garment, and that which
comes short of a long cloak, must be helped on with the name of a short gown.
This has precising proceeded to circu^cising And whereas the Popish priests had
th, super fluity of their hair shaued, we have the substance taken from our
beards; we are the right shauclings: woe worth such shauers Let them choose
whether they will, the blessing of Midas, or the curse of Geh^zi upon them and
theirs. But blessed be our gracious David and his posterity, that had pity
on our nakedness, and provided at length a counterpoise to their mort-maines.

So are the times altered; Moses was feign to cry hoe, and the Kings of former
times by statutes of Mortmaine, to provide they should give no more to the
Church. And was it not now high time to provide on the contrary that they
should take no more from the Church? As that act of Parliament would be written
in Letters of gold, to his eternail glory, that of himself has done it. So
should the rubric of that canon be written with blood (the blood of the
Church) to serve as a testimony to God and the world as long as it shall
endure, against those sacrilegious blood-suckers that cut off their
impropriations and simoniacal improuements, have not left so much as to cover
our nakedness, and their shame.

But I know their answer, some have too much, and that's the cause that others
have too little. If they may be admitted to vmpeir the matter, they will find
enough for all, by taking from some and adding to others. Thus their fathers
have played the thieves, and now come they to compound the matter. Four men
passing over New Market heath were set upon, 2. escaped with 2. hundred pounds
apeece in their purse, the other 2. are robbed of all they have: but see the
honesty of those robbers; they wish them to go after their fellows and take
of them an hundred pound a piece, and then al shall be equal. But with what
equity? or who made them judges of this equality? You read the Story in
Xenophon, how Cirus the young prince was used. His master took two coats from
two men, the greater coat belonged to the lesser man, the lesser to the
greater, and willing him to dispose them according to right: Cyrus gave the
greater coat to the greater and the lesser to the other. Now though this were
a point in the Prince of beseeming equity, to fit every one according to his
stature, yet was he reproved by his master, who told him in a case of decency
it had not been amiss, but in a case of justice, he must give every one his
own, be it little or much. That which we have we hold as our own, as we are
able to justify by all good laws both of God and man. And if they mistake so
much of all popish practices, and stand so much indeed, as in show they will
seem for the law of God, let them indeed renounce all popish impropriatio^s,
and allow us as much and no more, for our part and portion, then we can euict
by Gods own ordinance and appointment to be due unto us, and tha'ts the tenth
at least.

If they refuse this, (as hitherto they have done) let them make what show and
semblance they will of Religion or conscience, in restoring the deprived to
their possessions, I shall hardly believe them, but that they have some other
respect then outwardly they pretend. It may be, they think those young Cubber
will houle as the old Wolves do: down with the Church, away with Byshopricks,
what use of Chathedral Churches, so many Prebends, so many Chaunters; but I
hope if their Presbyteries were up, they would desire their young masters to
make restitution. Between the designements of the Lay-puritane and
Churchpuritane there was ever great ods, howsoever they seem to look one way,
their aiming is not all at one end. But sure I am, their meaning for the
means is all alike, the ruin of the Church, the imbasing the ministry,
decaying of learning, and exposing the Ministers to utter contempt, as by
others experience it is too well known. And thus much of this.

The third point follows, the generality of this want, even throughout all
Israel. Then there was not a Smith to be found throughout all Israel. So
powrefull were the precepts of the Philistims, they commanded and it took
place, they spoke the word and it was done, even throughout the Land. A good
resolution though in a bad matter, and fit for governors to use, fair words
(as he said) and straight Laws, advisedly published, and thoroughly executed;
that's the life of the Law, which otherwise is but a dead Letter, and a leaden
dagger in a painted sheath. Had the Persians been as advised for invention, as
they were peremptory for execution of their Laws; or were England as resolute
for execution, as it is absolute for constitution of all good orders and
ordinances for church and commonwealth; England and Persia, might be endless in
their bounds, and eternal in their fame.

When Ahab had long traveled for Naboaths vine yard and could not compass it;
what says Iezabel, art thou a King? and she said not much amiss for the
general, howsoever she erred in that particular. Surely where these co^curre,
wise Laws, peremptory Commanders, and due xecutioners, there is the state
like to stand, and the Kingdom to flourish, even from Dan to Bersheba, as
Corpus homaeomero^, no party colored coat, without seam or rent: al of one
cut, one color, one God, one King, one religion, one discipline, unity of
faith and uniformity of Ceremony, with out sect, Schism, or Heresy.

In this body of ours, it cannot be denied but that there have bin diverse
divisions, and the diuisors have bin specially three: the Papist, the Atheist,
and the Puritan. The one impugning our doctrine, the other our Manners, the
third our Discipline. The first, most perilous or the State Public: The
second, no less pernicious for private corruptions: The last, most idly
cutious in points of least itmportance, concerning neither life nor learning;
doctrine, nor manners; yet so obstinately urged, as though they had sworn
never to be satesfied, though never so often and fully satisfied, by the King
himself: (Exemplum sine exemple) his Nobles, Bishops, Judges, Clergy: by
writing, printing, conference, and all means possible, or likely to give
satisfaction. As no doubt they have done to diverse howsoever the rest (like
busy flies often beaten off) still return to light in the self. same place,
seeking to suck out matter where they find none. And by importunity to extort
what by argument they could never evict. Yet has it been greatly meruailed
by many of their complyces; that of these three the last, and least enemies,
(as is thought even of many good men) to God and the state, should be the
first that should feel the edge of the laws under this his Majesty's most
mild and easy government: and so many Cannons set out and shot out against
them and so few against others? To whom we answer, and that out of the
Smithes Forge, it is not good to have too many yro^s in fire at once. Ad duo
quitendit non vnum, nec duo prendit. But if but one, why must this be that
one, that is hot enough, and has more need of water then fire?

In the first of Liuies Decades, we reed of a Combat appointed to end, and
vmpiet a great quarrel between two Nations, undertaken by three Horatij
against as many of the Curiatij.

Now in fortune of fight, it so fell out (as you know) that of the Horatij two
were slain, and then remained but one to three. Three to one he should be
conquered. For as we say. Ne Hercules quidem contra duos. He had need be
stronger then Hercules that should think himself strong enough for two. And
therefore the young Gentleman went to it, virtute non vi, rather by fine fraud
then plain force. If there can be any finenes in running away, and not rather
Good luck, as Demosthenes left written on his Targette, when he left the
field, and betook himself to his heels. But so fled Horatius, as it should
seem, that he had animu^reuertendi. He fled for a va^tage: for by this means,
he drew his enemies the combatants to follow the flight. And when he espied any
one before his fellows, he suddenly turned and dispatched him, and so singling
out these three brethere^ one after another, he easilye conquered each of
them, whereas against them, all at once, he could never have had any hope to
prevail.

The bauen when the band is broken, stick by stick is easilye knapt asunder.
You see the similitude, and the reddition is not obscure. Of our three Horatij
two are gone not conquered by the Curiatij, (mauger all the might and spite of
hell it self, of Rome, it self) bull transported by God from this militant
Church to that tryumphant Jerusalem. The third remains for whom no doubt
remains the victory on earth, and triumph in the heavens, which never shall
have end. But during the fight if he seem to fly, or give a foot, let him
take heed that follows fastest. In the second of Samuel and second Chapter, if
Asahel had not been so swift of foot, and so eager in pursuit to out-runne
his fellows, he had not run so hastily on his own death. And so surely, if
these men more furious then Nimshi, more swift the^ Asahel to outrun
themselves, their Soueraign and his laws, could have bin entreated either
finally to desist, or a least for a while to have turned aside to the right
hand, or the left, or to have diuerted the heat of their zeal, and edge if
their pens against papist or atheist; as they have escaped with their lives,
so mght they in all likelihood have kept their livings.

Of the which they are now some few of them most justly deprived. I dare say
with greater grief to us all, then either loss to themselves, or hazard to
the Church. Howsoever it has bin formerly given out, that if they were
silenced, the Church might soon shut up her Shop windows. There would not
be a Smith left in all our Israel that could skill indeed of the right
hammering, and handling of the word of God: yet I hope matters will be so
handled, that if they all stand out, they shall not be much missed. God we
know, is able of stones to raise up those that shall serve his turn, if men
should fail, or upon every tryfling coffeehouse, so wilfullye abandone
that sacred vocation whereunto they are by so many bonds so strictly obliged.
And without any such miraculous work, (if it please him to afford but his
wonted graces to the two Universities) I nothing doubt, but from time to time,
they shall be able to supply more sufficient Ministers, then all their
accomplices will be content to allow sufficient livings.

And now that they are thus dealt with by Law, we all expect that the like
order, or rather much more sharp and strict be taken, as for the Atheist, so
specially for the Papist. Else must we needs confess, Reduuiam curauimus,
Capiti cum mederi debuissemus. But I hope they shall, ere it be long, have
just occasion to think and speak otherwise; when they shall see their Swords
and Spears, and Smithes, their Armor and Armorers, their Priests and
Jesuits and cunning seducers, with all their Syren-Songes, their Books,
Pamphlets and Printers, and all means and ministers thereto tending, clean
cut off by the Sword of Justice, and the laws of the land. A most just and
necessary weapon-taken to keep them from hurting themselves, and others, as
children and madmen.

That it will be so, I make no doubt that it should be so, I seek no other
arguments against the^, then their own practice against us. and Bellarmines
own proofs in his third book, de Laicis, and 20 chapter for the abolishing
of all heretical books. For I will not press that which follows in the next
chapter for the burning of Heretics. Howbeit well we know, and they must needs
acknowledge (if their case and cause were equal) better kill then be killed. If
they will needs threaten, they may perhaps provoke others to begin. I will
inuert the old saying, Pereant omnes potius quam pereat vnus; For is not he
alone worth many thousands, on whom so many thousands po depend?

Surely, it is high time to take the peace of them all, and bind them to
their good abearing, when as so openly and presumptuouslye they shall dare to
threaten the disturbance of our peace, and destruction of the chief Pillars
and preseruers thereof; whom the Lord in mercy long preserve. But for this
point, if we had no other Schoolemaisters, we need no other then these
Philistims a people in their generation wise enough to set us to School.

And so I pass to the fourth and last part, the reason why they removed the
Armourers, (and that was) least again they should renew their Armor. For so
they said: Least the Hebrews make them Swords and spears.

The dint of the Sword, and push of the Pike; two sorts of weapons very
powrefull, especially in those days, for offense or defense; Comminus or
Eminus, far, or near. But this was (as it should seem) in the worlds
childhood, the infant-age of hell, and hellish Smiths, but Nouices as yet, and
Prentises in their Trade: they had not as yet proceeded masters of their craft.

Anon after, in Solomon his time we read of a generation, whose teethe were
Swords, and their jaws as Knives. Whose offspring, here aamo^gst us (the
cursed offspring of the Anakims) have bent their tongues like Booes, and
shot out their words like arrows, sharp, and swift, and full of poison,
even as high as the heaven, and as far as from one end of the world to the
other. Sure I am, at one flight from Rome to England, have flown their firey
thunderbolts.

These men not content with dagger, dagge, and poison for their privy plots,
(which God for heaven so often has detected and dejected) nor with swords, and
spears, Gunnes and Cannons, for open Rebellion, (which God in mercy so many
years has stayed in this Land) but as he speaks of the Greekish Stratageme,
Instar montis aequum; they had devised a Cannon as big as an huge big house,
full rammed and charged with a storehouse of powder, to the which if all the
fire of hell and Purgatory could have lent and sent but one spark, we had all
been consumed. Wonder it was not set on fire, with the sulphurous blast of
their hellish breath. Then there was a deal of dead powder (so it pleased God)
without fire; since, that a false fire (the Lord be thanked) without powder.
If the one affrighted us, and the other amazed us being both but a fallax, (God
grant they always so deceive, and we be never worie deceived) but if they
had argued indeed a Diuisis ad Coniuncta, putting fire to powder; or powder to
fire, where then had we been? Surely, they had swallowed us up quick, or sent
us up quick to the heavens, at least our souls. Howsoever our bodies having
accompained the^ as high as they could, had descended again to the foot of the
mountain; and there (as Abraham's servants) expected their return, or waited
for the time when they should be called up unto the^, never again to be
disseuered: but for the present, they had been most lamentablye deuorced, had
not the Lord been on our side, (then might Israel say, now and ever may
Israel fing) Had not the Lord himself been on our side when men rose up
against us. May I call them men, being in the shape of men, more then devils
incarnate? then beware of men as says our Savior. Homo homini Lupus, Man to
man is become a wolf, a bear, a lyo^, a leopard, a tygre, a devil. Not all
those strange mixtures of so many beasts in (...) Prophecy able to express
the thousandth part of those beastly minds. (...) praised be the Lord, who has
not give (...) over for a pray to the teeth of those cursed Cannibals, who
seeing they cannot satiat their mawes with the blood of Christ, in their
unbloody Sacrament, have sought to ingorge and imbrewe themselves with the
blood of Servants, for no other cause or quartel in the world, (...) that they
are his servants. True it is, they cannot say worse of us, then we think on
our selves; our sins we confess (...) deserved such a punishment, but though
we for our sins are most worthy to suffer it, yet are they of all men most
unworthy to inflict it. I date be bold to give the Challenge, let him that is
guiltles amongst them, (I except not the holy of holiest) throw the first
stone, or put fire to the powder.

But Lord if it be thy will according to our deserts to plague and punish us,
let it be thy pleasure to take the rod into thine own hands. Liceat
periture viribus ignis igne (...) tuo, clademque authore leuare. For why
should thou sell us into the hands of these uncircumcised Philistims, that
will never therefore be thankful unto thee, but give thine honor unto
stocks and stones, and sacrifice thy praise to the Shrines of (...) dead?
whereas thou know all our help stands in thy Name only. Thou only art
our God, thou only art our Creator, our Savior our Redeemer, and only
Protector. By thy means only we acknowledge our soul is escaped, as a bird
out of the snare; past danger (as we hope) but not past fear. And therefore
no marvel though we start at ^^ery bush, although we see the snare (...)
broken, we are escaped, and they are fallen into the pit they prepared for
(...). O so let thine enemies perish, O Lord, so let them all that plowe
iniquity, and sow affliction, reap the same. But let thy mighty hand (...)
still at hand against them all, to defend and protect our King, our Queen, our
Prince, their Offspring Counsel, Clergy, Nobles; Commons, and all their
Realms and Kingdoms, that in sincerity and truth still call upon thy name.

So shall we thy people, and sheep of thy pasture (thus preserved from blood
and slaughter) sing always unto thee the Blessed Trinity, three persons and
one God, all honor, laud, and glory now and for ever.

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

