THE ANTIQUITIES OF CANTERBVRY.

OR A SVRVEY OF THAT ANCIENT CITY, WITH THE SVBVRBS, AND CATHEDRAL.

Containing principally matters of Antiquity in them all. Collected chiefly
from old Manuscripts, Lieger-bookes, and other like Records, for the most part,
never as yet Printed. With an Appendix here annexed: Wherein (for better
satisfaction to the learned) the Manuscripts, and Records of chiefest
consequence, are faithfully exhibited. All (for the honor of that ancient
Metropolis, and his good affection to Antiquities) Sought out and Published By
the Industry, and Goodwill of WILLIAM SOMNER.

Cic. in Oratore.

Nescire quid antea quam natus sis accider^, est semper esse puerum.

London, Printed by I. L. for Richard Thrale, and are to be sold at his Shop at
Pauls-Gate at the sign of the Crosse-Keyes. 1640.



TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, WILLIAM, BY THE DIVINE PROVIDENCE, LORD
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBVRY, PRIMATE OF ALL England and Metropolitan, one of the L
L. of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Chancell or of the
University of OXFORD.
May it please Your Grace.
AS without the concurrence of diverse good reasons to induce me, I had not
presumed to present unto Your Grace the following Discourse: So I conceive it
very fitting, and my bounden duty, to give Your Grace, and the world, an
Account in brief, of the inducements whereby I have been animated to appear
in this kind before Your Grace. The chief whereof has been, and is, Your
Graces interest both in the Author, and in the Work. In the Author, as
subsisting in his place and profession, under God, chiefly by your Graces
favor and Goodness. In the Work, in a double respect: the one, as it is a
Discourse of Antiquities; Your Graces extraordinary care and cost for the
Collection whereof, of all sorts, from all parts, Crowned by Your singular
Piety and Nobleness in disposing them to the good and service of the public;
as they are thankfully acknowledged and worthily celebrated by all the Lovers
of Antiquities; so do they give Your Grace an especial interest to all their
Labors who are that way inclined. The other; as it handles more especially
the Antiquities of two such Particulars as are of very near relation to Your
Grace, the Church, and City of Canterbury. These reasons (may it please Your
Grace) not to trouble You with more, in all Humility I hope, may prevail with
Your Grace for Your patience and pardon of this presumption: and though not
procure Your Graces acceptance and protection of the Work, yet Your excuse of
the Authors boldness, who most humbly craves it at Your Gracious Hands: and
with his hearty Prayers, both for the long continuance of Your Graces Health
and Happiness here, to Gods Glory and the good of His Church, and for Your
endless bliss hereafter, prostrates both Himself and His Labors at Your
Graces Feet with that reverence which becomes

The meanest of Your Graces Servants, William Somner.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT is the observation of some ancient Philosophers (who also prove it by
diverse good arguments) that all men, for the most part, have a natural desire
to immortality. But this we all know by common approved experience, that Man
that is borne of a Woman is of short continuance. He commethforth like a Flower
and is cut down, he flies also as a shadow and continues not. Some therefore
who knew not of any other world after this, in defense of natures ways and
providence, maintained, that she had in some manner satisfied the desire of man
in making him generative. Nam quodammodo ipse putatur vivere, cujus progenies
vivit, (For that man in some sort may be thought yet alive, whose progeny is
living) as I may say in the words of Cassiodore with little alteration. But if
there be any immortality in this, it can be but an immortality of the body, not
of the mind, the best and chiefest part of man. The immortality of the mind
(all that it is capable of in this world, which though it be not immortality
properly, yet may certainly much conduce to allay the complaints of mortal
men concerning their shortness of life) does, as I conceive, especially depend
from that Memoria praeteritorum, and Providentia futurorum, (Remembrance of
things past, and Foresight of things to come) which the Latin Orator speaks
of.

As for the first, he certainly that knows no more of the world (the time of a
man's life being so short as it is) then what has happened in his time, though
he may be in years, and perchance very old in regard of his body, yet in
regard of his mind and knowledge, he can be accounted but a very child. Which
is the very answer that an ancient Egyptian Priest and Antiquary gave to Solon
concerning the Grecians of his time: that they were all, the best and
ancientest of them, but very babes and children. And his reason was, because
none of them could say any thing of the state of their own country beyond
their own and their fathers memory: whereas the Egyptians, out of their
ancient holy Records, could tell them many memorable things, both concerning
Greece in general, and the state of their then famous Athens in particular,
for many hundred, if not thousand, of years before. If therefore a man living
in a place of note, can by his industry, out of undoubted Records and Monuments
(if such be the happy condition of the place, that it afford them) certainly
find, what have been the several both material alterations (as in respect
of buildings, and the like) and historical events, that have happened to it
for diverse ages before, and can derive the present times and places that he
lives in, by a continual series of chances and alterations from such or such a
beginning, I do not see (if knowledge be granted to be the life of the soul,
as the soul is the life of the body) but he may reck on his years according
to the proportion of his knowledge, accounting himself to have lived so many
years, as he is able truly and historically to give an account of.

Now for that other part of immortality, which is Providentia futurorum, even
this has such dependence of the former, as that he that is well versed in the
knowledge of things past, may probably foresee what will happen in time to
come. As for example; It was no difficult thing for one of the ancient Grecians
(who lived in the days of Pythagoras, and was one of his Auditors) having
observed the course of the world, and what had already happened to Greece it
self, and to other places in that kind, to foretell of old Greece, then
flourishing, that the time would come when it should be the seat of Ignorance
and Barbarism; as it is at this day. Upon the same grounds of former ages
experience, did another of the ancients both foresee and foretell, above a
thousand years before any such thing happened, the discovery of a new world,
in these remarkable words of his: -- Venient annis
Seculaseris, quibus Oceanus
Vincularerum laxet, and ingens
Pateat tell us, Tiphysque novos
Detegat orbs: nec sit terris
Vltima Thule.


As the knowledge of ancient things is pleasant, so is the ignorance as
shameful, and oftentimes exposes men to the scorn and contempt of strangers.
Tully relates of himself, that being sent with authority to Syracusa, a
quondam renowned City of Sicilia, for his own private satisfaction, he
enquired of the chiefest of the City about the sepulcher and monument of their
famous Archimedes; who (through shameful ignorance of their City-Antiquities)
denied that he had any. But Tully knowing the contrary by what he had read, and
by good luck remembering some certain verses that mentioned some particulars of
his monument, whereby it might be known from others, taking along with him
those venerable blocks (who, as ordinary worldly men, had no care but for their
profit, no curiosity but for their belly) he repaired to the place, being near
the City-gates, where ancient sepulchers and monuments were most frequent, and
so neglected (whereby you may judge of the temper of the Inhabitants) that they
were almost all overgrowne with thickets and bushes. But the place being
cleared by men that were on purpose set on work, he found at last by help of
the fore said directions, the monument that he sought, with the very marks (a
Sphaera, and a Cylindrus) and the inscription (though now half worn out, more
through neglect then age) that he looked for. And so, to the great shame of
that City, and the inhabitants thereof (noted abroad for their luxurious life
and great excess in all worldly things) concludes with these upbraiding
insulting words: Ita nobilissima Graeciae civitas, quonda^ vero etiam
doctissima sui civis unius acutissimi monumentum ignorasset, nisi ab homine
Arpinate didicisset. As if a man should scoffingly object to us here of
Canterbury, that he was feign to come out of Wales or Scotland, of purpose to
show us the monument and place of burial of some one of our famous Abbats, or
renowned Archbishops, whose credit, and bounty, when living, had redounded much
to the honor and benefit of the City.

For these and the like reasons, my thoughts and affections having ever much
inclined to the search and study of Antiquities, (to which also my particular
calling did in some manner lead me) I have more particularly, as bound in duty
and thankfulness, applied my self to the Antiquities of Canterbury, the place
of my birth and abode. And to me this was a sufficient motive why I should of
all other places desire to know the antiquities and former estate thereof. But
why any man else, that is an Englishman, should have the same desire, other
reasons may be given, very considerable, if I be not much deceived; as first,
the Antiquities thereof. Antiquities due and proper Epithete is, venerable. Now
the interest which our City has in that venerable badge and cognizance is not
unknown: it being acknowledged for one of the most ancient Cities in the
Kingdom. Quiacivitas Cantuariae est una de antiquissimis urbibus Angliae, is
no other language then is frequently found in the Charters, and such private
Acts of Parliament, as (making that a maine motive to the grant) have conveyed
any Favor, or Franchise to the City or Citizens. Secondly, the great fame and
repute that it had abroad, for reasons that will appear by this Treatise: and
thereupon the great resort of strangers from all nations under heaven, (which
in probability gave occasion to the proverb of Canterbury-tales) to the
number sometimes, as shall be showed, of a hundred thousand at once. But the
chief reason, in my judgment, ought to be, because from thence first the
faith of Christ was propagated and derived unto other parts of the Realm of
England, after the Saxons our forefathers were become Lords and possessors of
it. When the Romans had conquered Greece, they did not use them as they did
other nations commonly by them subdued, but with all love and respect, Athens
especially, which they had in honor (say ancient Geographers of those times;)
and, in token of their respect, suffered them to enjoy their ancient laws,
liberties and form of government, as though they had not been conquered.
Tully gives the reason. Cum ei hominum generi praesimus non modo in quo ipsa
sit, sed etiam a quo ad alios pervenisse putetur humanitas: certe iis eam
potissimum tribuere debemus, a quibus accepimus. And do not all
piously-affected English owe so much honor and respect to the place, from
whence the light of Christ's glorious Gospel first shined unto their fore
fathers, as to desire to be acquainted with the present and past estate of it?

I have spoken of religion only, but I might add humanitatem, learning and
good literature too. For with religion came learning: and in the days of
Theodorus the seventh Archbishop of Canterbury, (if public schools wherein
all good Arts and Sciences, philosophy especially, are learnedly taught and
professed make an University) Canterbury was a famous University: yea, and was
afterward a pattern (as some have written and published) for the erection and
foundation of a famous University in this land.

This work is chiefly collected from old Manuscripts, Leiger-bookes and other
Records of credit, exhibited to me for the most part by the Treasury of our
Cathedral; which, as it exceeds most of the Realm, if not all, in beauty,
stateliness, and magnificence of building; so in this particular kind of
unvaluable treasure, is, as I conceive, inferior unto none. With the help of
Spots History of Canterbury mentioned of Balaeus, and of John Twine's
collections of the Antiquities thereof spoken of by him in his Commentaries, de
rebus Albionicis, etc. could I but have gotten them, I should perchance have
brought the work to more perfection: but with the helps I have had, I have
done my best endeavor that nothing might be strange or unknown that carries
with it any show of Antiquity, either in the Church, (as the most eminent place
of all) or in the City and Suburbs thereof.

If the Work may not deserve thine acceptance (courteous Reader) for it self,
let then the Authors love to Antiquities, his thankful intentions toward the
place of his birth, education and present abode, and the encouragement of
worthy friends serve for his Apology. If otherwise it give thee some content,
and mine endeavors prove acceptable unto thee, I shall desire thou would be
thankful to them, without whose help, as I had not been able, so without
whose encouragement I had neither been willing, thus to have adventured forth
in public, as namely Doctor Casaubon, one of the Prebendaries of this Church,
and Thomas Den Esquire: to whom, for their great and ready favor and
furtherance herein, I were conscious of much ingratitude and want of ingenuity,
if I should not acknowledge my self exceedingly beholden. Such as it is I
commend it to thy favorable acceptance, (friendly Reader) and shall add no
more but the best wishes and respects of

Thine to serve thee, William Somner.

A Table of the Chapters contained in this Book.
1 THe Antiquity of Canterbury. Page.1. 2 The Wall about the City, and Gates
therein. Page.6. 3 The Ditch encompassing the City-Wall. Page.31. 4 The Castle.
Page.33. 5 The River serving the City, called Stoure. Page.37. 6 The Suburbs.
Page.45. 7 The division of the City into Wards. Page.96. 8 Westgate- ward.
Page.99. 9 Newingate- ward. Page.127. 10 Northgate- ward. Page.132. 11 Worthgate-
ward. Page.136. 12 Ridingate- ward. Page.144. 13 Burgate- ward. Page.146. 14 The
Cathedral, and Parochial Churches. Page.150. 15 The Ecclesiastical Government
of the City. Page.349. 16 The Temporal Government thereof. Page.363. 17 The
Appendix. Page.376.


Ex Aedibus Lambethanis. October. 23. 1639.
Imprimatur.

Guil. Bray.



THE MAPP OF CANTERBURY
map of Canterbury

THE ANTIQVITIE OF CANTERBVRIE.
SO great and Universal is the respect that is worthily given to venerable
Antiquity, that not any one ornament sets off any place, whether City or other,
with greater luster, or more proclaims and applauds their Judgment that first
selected the place for Habitation, then the true and known Antiquity, and long
duration of the place.

Now no one thing almost of this nature that discourse shall offer to the
consideration of an English man, especially a Kentish man, shall find more
vulgar belief, nor is better grounded in tradition, then (my maine motive to
the ensuing treatise) the Antiquity of this our City. And then it, what more
celebrated in (the living Monuments of their deceased Authors) our stories and
other like works of English Writers? For brevity sake (which I shall study
throughout my whole discourse) the Testimonies only of two, Mr. Cambden
Britannia. In Kent.
, our modern Chorographer, and Henry of Huntington Hist. lib. 6. De An. Dom.
10 11.
one of our elder Historians, as sufficient to justify so known a verity,
shall suffice for instance. Who, in the places here marginally quoted, have set
and left the note and mark of Antiquity upon the place. And no marvel, when
as in the English-Saxons time, and even in the beginning of their Heptarchy, it
was the head or chief City of the Kentish Kingdom, and the Kings seat.
Imperii Regis Ethelberti Metropolis, so Bid. Caput imperii, etc. so others
call it. Florileg. ad An. Dom. 596.
In civitate Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 25.
famosa, quae antiquo vocabulo Dorovernia dicitur: is the close of a Charter of
Kenulph King of Mercia, in the year 810.

As for the further discovery of the yet greater Antiquity of the place, if any
shall desire it; let him consider with me in the next place, the names that
former times have known it by. As the Saxons of old Cambden in Kent.
called Kent, (...) (i. the Country of the men of Kent:) So the name which
they gave to this our City was (...) (i. the Kentish men's City, Court, or
Borough:) A name well agreeing with that of Cair-Kent, or Caer-Kent (the City
of Kent) as Nennius and the Britains called it. What time the Roman Empire
extended it self hither, it was of them called Durovernum; happily from the
British, Durwhern, rendered by my Author Cambden ubi supra.
, a swift River, such as our Stoure is: or else (as one Twyne. De Reb. Abion.
lib. 1. page 113.
will) from Thorowbourne, because of the Rivers running through the City. With
very little variation from which Roman name, you may find that our elder
Historians, Bid, and others called it Dorovernia, and Dorobernia: and that you
see before, in the year 810. was called Antiquum vocabulum; and yet long
afterward in use, even until that of Cantuaria, better answering to the
English-Saxon, Cantwarabyrig, and from about the Normane Conquest hitherward,
more frequently then the other; and in time altogether taken up and used, made
it give her place. But of our Citie^ names see more if you please in the
Antiquit. Britan. page 34.

Clearly then Canterbury had an existence in the time Canterbury in being in
the Romans time.
of the Romans Empire here. Let me add, and before, in the preceding
Britains time too, as to me seems somewhat evident from hence, that the
Roman Durovernum, is seemingly no other then the Latine-rendring of the
Britain Durwhern; by which or near a like name (most probably) the Romans
found it called by the Britains at their coming. However the mention of it in
the Emperor Antonines Itinerary, more I take it, then fourteen hundred
years old, and the many pieces of Roman Coin, both of his, and also of
preceding, and succeeding Emperors, found almost in all parts of the City;
(some whereof are come to my hands) are evident tokens of the places great
Antiquity. A thing not doubted of a far more learned, and judicious Surveyor
of our City, Mr. Cambden Britannia. Of Canterbury, in Kent.
, in whose opinion it was famous in the Romans time.

One strong argument whereof amongst the rest, are the present remains of a
double Military way of theirs; the great Stone-causeys, I mean, directly
leading from two of their famous havens, Dubris and Lemanis; unto this our
City, the former by Barham-downe, the latter by Stone-streete.

But (will some say:) what make I loytering here? It is neither in the Saxon,
nor yet the Roman, neither the intervening Britain's time, that we are to
expect the finding of our Cities Original. It Is much elder: Rome it self
Elder then Rome.
not so old. Indeed I read that one Rud-hudibras or Ludrudibras a King of the
Britains almost nine hundred years, before our Saviors Incarnation, was our
Cities Founder. Of whom founded.
So says the Author of the British story, a Writer, though by the best of our
Antiquaries (Cambden especially) for the generality of his History exploded, as
fabulous; yet in this particular followed by diverse men of Judgment, and good
Antiquaries too Author Antiquit. Brit. Lambert. Holinsh^ad. Stow. Speed.
: with what warrant, as I cannot determine, so neither will I examine, but
leave it as I find it to the scanning of others. So much for our Cities
Original and Antiquity.

Now what was the general state and condition of it in either the Britains,
Romans, Saxons, or Danes times: no man may exact or expect any account of me,
in regard no History, or other Record enables me to show it. The Survey taken
of it in the Conquerours time, and recorded in the book of Doomesday, is the
first and most Why so called see Sir H. Spilmans Glossary, and the interpreter,
in hac voce.
ancient description of it any where extant. A transcript or extract whereof,
here presented; read if you please.

Cheuth.
In civitate Cantuaria habuit Rex Edwardus l. and 1. burgenses reddentes gablum
and alios cc. and xij. super quos habebat sacam and socam. and iij. molend. de
xl. sol. Modo Burgens. gablum reddend. sunt xix. De xxxijobus. aliis qui
fuerunt, sunt vastati xj. in fossato civitatis, and Archiepiscopus habet ex eis
vij. Et Abbas scil. Augustini alios xiiij. pro excambio castelli. and adhuc
sunt cc. and xij burgens. super quos habet Rex sacam and socam and iij. molend.
reddt c. and viij sol. and thelonium redd. lxviij sol. Ibi viij. acrae prati
quae solebant esse legatorum Regis mo. reddt de censu. xv. sol. and mill acrae
silvae infructuosae de qua exeunt xxiiij sol. Inter totum Idest Tempore Regis
Edwardi.
T. R. E. valuit lj. lib. and tantundem quando Hamo vicecom. recept. and mo. l.
lib. appreciat. Tam' qui ten' reddit xxx lib. arsas and pensatas, and xxiiij
lib. ad numerum super haec omnia habet Vicecom. c. and x sol.

Duas domos duorum Burgensium unam foris aliam intra civitatem quidam Monachus
ecclesiae Cantuar. abstulit. Hae erant positae in Regis call.

Burgenses habuer. xlv mansur. extra civitatem de quibus ipsi habeb. gablum and
consuetud. Rex autem habet sacam and socam. Ipsi quoque Burgenses habebant de
Rege xxxiij acr. terrae in gildam suam. Has domus and hanc terram ten'
Rannulfus de Columbeis. Habet etiam quater xx acr. terrae super haec quas
tenebant Burgenses in alodia de Rege. Tenet quoque v acr. terrae quae just
pertinent uni ecclesiae. De his omnibus revocat isdem Rannulfus ad protectorem
episcopum Baiocensem.

Radulfus de Curbespine habet iiij mansur. in civitate quas tenuit quaedam
concubina Heraldi. de quibus est saca and soca Regis. sed usque nunc non habuit.

Isdem Radulfus ten' alias xj. mansuras de episcopo Baioc. in ipsa civitate
quae fuer. Sbern Biga. and reddt xj sol. and xi den. and i. obolum.

Per totam civitatem Cantuariae habet Rex sacam and socam excepta terra
ecclesiae S. Trin. and S. Augustini. Eddevae Reginae. and Alnod's Cild. and
Esber Biga. and Siret de Cilleham.

Concordatum est de rectis callibus quae habent per civitatem introitum and
exitum quicunque in illis forisfecerit Regi emendabit. Similiter de callibus
rectis extra civitatem usque ad unam leugam, and iij perticas and iij pedes. Si
quis ergo infra has publicas vias intus civitatem vel extra foderit, vel palum
fixerit; sequitur illum Praepositus Regis ubicunque abierit and em'da' accipiet
ad opus Regis.

Archiepiscopus calumniatur, forisfacturam in viis extra civitatem ex utraque
part ubi terra sua est. Quidam praepositus Brumannus nomine T. R. E. cepit
consuetud. de extraneis mercator. interra S. Trinit. and S. Augustini, Qui
postea temp. R. W. ante Archiepiscopum Lanfranc. and Episcopum Baioc.
recognovit se injuste accepisse. and sacramento facto juravit quodipsae
ecclesiae suas consuetud. quiet as habuer. R. E. tempore. Et exinde utraeque
ecclesiae in sua terra habuer. consuetud. suas judicio Baronum Regis qui
placitum tenuer.

The City wall, and Gates therein.
When Canterbury was first enclosed with a wall, I think, is no where to be
found in story, or other record, either private or public. Tokens of the walls
good antiquity are the British bricks, to be seen at Ridinggate, at the gate
also now done up, sometime leading from the Castle-yard to Wencheape, and at
Queningate, or rather (if you will) at the place in the wall, where once the
gate so called stood, and is now also made up. But in greatest plenty, upon the
bank on either side the River behind S. Mildreds Church in the remains of the
wall there. And that the City was walled in before the Norman conquest, is
evident by the testimony of Roger Hoveden Annal. Par. prior.
, who relating the siege and surprisall of the City by the Danes, in the time
of King Etheldred, Anno Christi 1011. tells us, that (amongst particulars of
the Danish cruelty, wreaked on the poor English people of the City) many of
them being by the Danes cast headlong from the wall of the City met with death
in the precipice.

This may be further proved by several Records of our Cathedral, making
mention of this wall in the English-Saxons time In Archivis ecclesiae Christi.
Cantuar.
. But that I may not seem to loyter, I purposely pass them by, and proceed to
elder evidence. Now the first and most ancient mention of our City wall (I
conceive) offers it self in King Ethelberts charter of the site of the
Monastery called (from him, for whose sake it was founded of King Ethelbert) S.
Augustines, dated Anno Christi 605. The ground therein set out for that intent
being described to lie, sub orientali muro Civitatis Dorob^rniae. A plain
argument of the Cities walling at that time, and (as I conjecture) Archbishop
Parker's warrant for his Hanc muro cinctam Antiq. Brit. page 34.
, etc. where he reports the donation of this City, with the Royalty thereof by
King Ethelbert to Augustine. And that it was then walled, may hence be further
argued, that as Edward the Confessor long after, is said to build S. Peter's
Church in Westminster without London-City-Wall, purposely for the place of his
own Sepulture Post aleos vide Cambd. in Middlesex.
: so one maine end of the work of that Augustinian Monastery, was (as both
Ethelb. and Aug. in their several Charters intimate) that it might be a
Cimitery or place of burial for them and their successors; the Kings and
Archbishops of the place for ever. And why? but even because of the then
unlawfulness of burial within Cities, and other walled Towns, a thing, by
that Though the Saxons in likelihood regarded not that Roman law, yet Austine,
being a Roman did.
Law of the twelve Tables (Hominem mortuum infra urbem ne sepelito, neve
urito.) flatly forbidden. So have I briefly traced our City Walls to the
furthest of their known Antiquity.

But, by the way, I may not conceal from you, what suspicion there is of
(these Heralds of our City Walls Antiquity:) the Ethelbertine Charters to be
fictitious and counterfeit. Sr. Henry Spelman, that learned and worthily
admired Antiqua^y has that opinion of them. And indeed, there is a note to be
found in the Records of our Cathedral Vide Dom. Hen. Spelman. Tom. 1. Council.
page 125.
: which confirms the suspicion. It tells us, that until Withred (King of Kent)
about the year of grace 700. that Church did peaceably enjoy it lands and
liberties, only by custom, ex antiquo more, without any charters or other
written muniments. Could it now be truly added that Withreds is the first and
most ancient muniment of that Church, judging of the one by the other, this
would give great cause of suspicion of the truth of those Ethelbertine
charters. But in regard, that several muniments of elder times then Withreds,
as one of King Edbald son and successor of Ethelb: and two of Cedwalla the
West Saxon, made to this very Cathedral, are to this day extant, being
registered at length in the Leigers of that Church (I speak ex proprio visis)
and, if judgment may be given by the agreement of the hands, even by the very
pen of the author of that note, there is more cause in my judgment to suspect
that note, of falsitie, then those charters, which it may seem to question, of
forgery.

But the noble Knight sets before you (if you please to peruse them) other
reasons for his opinion. I refer you to them, and them to your consideration:
and so pass on to further discourse of our City wall. Which I conceive
carries yet greater antiquity, then hitherto has been spoken of. For (if as
Huntington affirms it was) Canterbury were one of the 28 Cities infamousing
this Island in the Britains times, and of them called Kair-Chent, taking this
note along with us, that Kair Caius de Antiquitate Cantabrig. lib. 16. 1
with them signified a walldefenced town or City, we need not doubt but it was
walled in their times. And so much for the walls antiquity, now I pass to
after-accidents that have betided it.

The City (as I have given you a former touch) being by the Danes, in the days
of King Etheldred, besieged, taken, and with the Cathedral (as all our
Chronologers agree) burnt and utterly wasted; the City wall (no doubt) being
the Cities best security against a like surprisall, if it should still have
stood, was not spared by that all-wasting enemy.

I read that Archbishop Lanfranc, in the Conquerours time, was a great
benefactour to the repair of it. So says Mr. Lambert Perambulation of Kent.
In Canterbury.
, and so Stow, followed by Speed. But no other story mentions it, no not that
of his life and acts written by (his successor) Archbishop Parker. But so they
say. Take it as I find it. When or by whom soever it was repaired, it is plain
by the Monk of Malmesbury, that in his time, which was about the year of grace
1142. in the reign of King Stephen, it was walled round. For he says it was De
gest. Pontif. lib. 1. in Prologo.
then a City much renowned (amongst other things) for the walls whole and
undecayed enclosing it round about. Which being so, and no violence offered
them afterward that we read of, I marvel somewhat that there should be need
of that fortification of the City with walls in Richard the first's time, as it
seems there was: For the King being (it should appear) taken prisoner in his
return from the holy land, his Mother Q. Alianor, out of her care in her absent
sons behalf, of this amongst other (as it seems) weak parts of the kingdom,
takes order for the fortifying of it: as by her letters In Archivis Ecclesiae
Cant.
of the following tenor may appear, written (itseems) at the instance and for
the security of the Cathedral Monks, fearful that this one act of their
assistance in the work of the Cities fortification, might infringe their
liberty of Burgbote, and being drawn in consequentiam become a prejudicial
example, effectual to compel them to the like in future time, as of the
nature of a leading case.

Carta Alianor. Reginae quod homines nostri non tenentur facere fossat. vel
murum circa Civitatem Cantuariensem.
A. Dei gratia humilis Angliae Regina, omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos
literae praesentes pervenerint, salutem in vero salutari. Audito quod
karissimus filius noster Rex Angliae Richardus detentus est ab Imperatore
Romano, vovimus ad memoriam beati and gloriosi martyris Thomae, ut liberationem
Domini Regis filii nostri possemus ejus intervenientibus meritis and precibus
obtinere. Cum autem ob terrae turbationem Cautuariae Civitas fossatis and muris
and aliis propugnaculis muniretur, omnesque ad hoc compellerentur; quidam
homines Prioris and Conventus ecclesiae Cant. non de jure, non de consuetudine,
sed ad nostrarum precum instantiam ibidem operati sunt. Nos itaque diligentius
attendentes libertates and immunitates ad praefatam ecclesiam and ejus homines
ubicunque fuerint pertinentes, monachis ejusdem ecclesiae concessimus and
promisimus, quod operatio illa quam urgens necessitas and nostra interventio
inducebat, eis vel hominibus eorun in posterum non noceret, eorumque cartis and
libertatibus, quae illis a multis Regibus confirmatae sunt, pr^judicium non
afferret. In huus rei testimonium praesentes literas sigillo nostro fecimus
communiri. Test. H. Archidiac' ejusdem ecclesiae, and magistro P. Bless.
Bathon. Archid. apud London.


With like caution I find the same Monks, a while after help forward the
Cities defense another way. For in King John's time, Rich. 1. immediate
successor, the Citizens after much suit to the Monks, prevailed with them at
length, to sell them of their wood to make hurdles or wattles withal, for the
defense of their City. They are indeed (as I am informed Vide Gloss. D. H.
Spelman in verbo Hurditium.
things of especial good and known use for such a purpose, in diverse respects,
but chiefly serviceable, rightly used, for the securing of a wall against
Rams, and such like engines of assault and battery. Consider of this further,
after you have read these letters In archivis ecclesiae Cant.
, which I may call the Monks acquitance, or protection.

Omnibus ad quos praesens scriptum pervenerit, Hubertus de Burgo Iustitiarius
Domini Regis, salutem in Domino. Noveritis quod ad magnam petitionem meam and
civium Civitatis Cant.Monachi ecclesiae Christi Cant. vendiderunt civibus Cant.
de bosco suo ad faciendum Cleias ad defensionem Civitatis Cant. Et quia
constabat nobis plene per cartas Domini Joannis Regis nostri, and antecessorum
suorum quod praedicti Monachi ad munitionem praedict. Civitatis non tenentur,
ne praedicta venditio possit in posterum praedictis Monachis vel ecclesiae
Cant. praejudicare, literis praesentibus cum sigilli nostri appositione jus and
libertates dictorum Monachorum and Cant. ecclesiae protestamur super praedict^
venditione. Val^.


The prototype is yet remaining in the Cathedral, where I have seen it with
the seal appendant. The like to that (of the Authors) represented in figure in
the last edition of the Remains page 209. and in the map of Kent.

I read nothing of our walls afterward till Rich. 2.

days, who (as Thorn reported by Mr. Lambert Peramb. of Kent in Canterbury.
says) gave 250. marks toward the ditching, and enclosing of the City, and
in whose reign, Regis ad exemplum, that renowned Patriot Archb. Sudbury is
said to have built the Westerne-gate of the City, together with the Wall, lying
between that and the North-gate, commonly called the long Wall, and was
purposed (some say) to have done likewise about all the City ^ver of ancient
funeral Monuments. page 225.
, if he had lived. The rest of the Wall (it seems) either tottering, or being
quite decayed at that time. Insomuch as Simon Burley (Warden of the Cinque
Ports) advised that the Jewels of Christ-Church and Saint Augustines, should
for more safety be removed to Dover-Castle Lambert. Peramb. in Cant.
.

What cost in reparation it had afterward bestowed on it, was chiefly raised
by the general tax of the City. For it appears by the Book of Murage in the
City-Chamber, that the whole City in the time of Hen. 4. was taxed and assessed
to the repair thereof: toward the sustaining of which both for the present
and future, and the Citizens encouragement to proceed in that worthy
undertaking, that King, by his writ of Privy Seal, gives them both a license
of Mortmaine, for the purchasing of twenty pound land per annum to the City for
ever; and also grants them all wast grounds, and places lying within the City
to use and dispose of for their best advantage, likewise in perpetuity. For
your better satisfaction, take here a translated Copy of the Writ, as I have it
from the Records of the Chamber.

Henry by the Grace of God King of England, and of France, and Lord of Ireland,
to all people to whom these present letters shall come, greeting. Know ye that
where Motives.
our welbeloved, the Citizens of our City of Canterbury, (as We hear) have
begun to fortify and strengthen the same City as well with one Wall of stone,
as with a Ditch. We considering the same City to be set near unto the Sea, and
to be as a Port or entry of all strangers into our Realm of England coming by
the same parts; so that it has need of the more strength. Of Our especial
Grace, and for the honor of God; and by the assent of Our Counsel have
granted and given license to the same Citizens, that they may purchase Lands
and Tenements to the value of twenty pound by the year within the said City.
Grant.
To have and to hold to them and their successors, Citizens of the foresaid
City, in help toward the building and making of the same Wall and Ditch for
ever. The stat. made of Lands and Tenements not to be put to Mortmaine, or for
that the said City is holden of Us in Burgage notwithstanding. Provided that by
inquisitions thereof, in due form to be made, and into the Chancery of Us or
of Our Heirs, duly to be returned, it be found that it may be done without
hurt or prejudice to Us or to Our Heirs aforesaid, or to any other. And
moreover, in consideration of the premises of Our more special Grace, We by
the assent of Our said Counsel, have granted and given license to the foresaid
Citizens, that they all Lands and places void and waste within the foresaid
City may dress up, arrent and build up. And the same Lands and places so
dressed up, arrented and builded, they may have and hold to them and to their
Successors aforesaid, in help and relief of the same Citizens, and in
maintenance of the premises and other charges to the same City happening for
ever: without let of Us or of Our Heirs or Ministers whatsoever they be, the
stat. aforesaid; or for that the said City is holden of Us, in Burgage as it is
abovesaid notwithstanding. Saved always to Us and to Our Heirs the Services
thereof due and accustomed. In Witness whereof We have caused these Our
Letters Patents to be made. Witness Our Self at Westminster the fifth day of
May, in the fourth year of Our Reign.


The better and more easily to estimate and judge of the charge of which work,
I find that the year before (3. Hen. 4.) the compass and circuit of the Wall
was measured, and a note thereof taken and registered in the Records of the
Chamber. Let me present you with the Copy of it, in the identity of words and
language that I find it.

Mensuratio murorum circa Civitatem Cant' per Thomam Ickham honor ablem Civem
Civitatis praedict' fact. Ann. Reg. Hen. tertio.
Primo a parva porta de Quyningate usque ad Burgate xxxviij. perticat, and
porta de Burgate continet unam. Item, a dicta porta de Burgate usque ad
Newingate xxxvij. perticat, and porta de Newingate continet unam. Item, a dicta
porta de Newingate'usque ad Ridingate xlviij. perticat, and porta de Ridingate
continet unam. Item, a dicta porta de Ridingate usque ad Worgate lxxxiij.
perticat, and porta de Worgate continet unam. Item, a porta de Worgate usque ad
aquam quae est a retro S. Mildredae, lxj. perticat, and riparia ibidem
continet, iiij. perticat. Item, a riparia usque ad Westgate. cxviij. perticat,
and dimid', and porta de Westgate continet unam. Item, a porta de Westgate
usque ad finem muri qui vocatur Long-wall continent', lix. perticat, and
quartam partem perticat. Item, aqua quae vocatur Stower ab illo muro usque ad
murum qui vocatur Waterlocke continet, xviij. perticat, and dimid. Item, and
murus ab illo loco usque ad Northgate continet, xl. perticat, and porta de
Northgate continet unam. Item, a porta de Northgate usque ad Quyningate
continet lxix. perticat, quae est versus Prior' ecclesiae Christi Cant. Summa
^otalis (but it is miscast) vclxix. perticat, and quarta pars perticat.
This Thomas Ickham, by the way, the Wall measurer, was Alderman of Burgate in
the fourth year of Hen. 4. and dying the twenty six of May. 3. Hen. 5. was
buried in Christ-Church. Liber Ms. in Archivis Ecclesiae Cant.
Others of his name and family, (I take it) lie buried in Saint Peter's Church
in Canterbury, as I shall show hereafter.

By this Record you may perceive that the whole Wall between Westgate and
Northgate was not then built, as now we see it is. For on either side the
River, the Wall, by this Record, clearly breaks off, so that there is an
interjected distance of eighteen perches long between the one, and the other
Wall. And indeed it will easily appear to be but a slight observation; that so
much of the Wall as stands and is made up in that then un-walled part, namely
between the Posterne and the Waterlocke, next Northgate, through which in
Arches, with a Portclose, the River now passes from Abbots Mill, is in the
stoneworke much different from the rest of the Wall, and shows not in any part
the least wrack or decay, as the other does. It seems then that Archbishop
Sudbury built not all the long Wall.

But enough of the Wall, unless the City of latter time had more tendered her
own credit and safety in keeping it better repaired. In pity and just reproof
whereof (whether in this City, or any other) I crave leave here a little to
enlarge my self. A Cities aspect is much blemished by ruinous edifices:
especially public, and in places most obvious to the eye. Now what more
public and obvious then the City Wall? Against this deformity the Civil law
very carefully provides, which says: Civitas ruinis non debet deformari. Fin.
ne quid in loc. pub. lib. 43. ff. (...). 8.
As likewise do the laws of this land: Statutes being made 27. 32. and 33.
Hen. 8. to remedy such deformities in many of our Cities, and this in
particular. If this move not, know then that our English Towns and Cities are
taxed, and have a note set on them published to the World in Print, for their
notorious defect of Walls and Bulwarks. Expositae sunt nationes (says the
French Th^losanus) De Repub. li. 1. cap. 3. nu. 5.
praedae exterorum, quae non habent muratas aut munitas Civitates, ut de
Anglia, and Scythicis liqu^ nationibus: Cito enim expugnatis portubus, ingressu
and aditu patefacto, omnia cedunt reliqua, etc. Thus he, and leaves it not so,
but a while after has it up again. Eod. lib. cap. 5. number. 3.
Estque res notissima, Angliam aliasque regiones toties mutasse Reges and
Dominos, quod null^ aut paucissimae sunt in eis urbes and arces munitae: ut sit
axioma certissimum, ingressis in eas Regiones obtento, statim dominationem
earum sequi. Thus he, much to the discredit of our Nation: but deservedly I
doubt, and suspect our particular neglect and defect in this kind, partly gave
the occasion. As we tender then our own, and our Countries credit; as we
respect our particular commodity in point of security and beauty, both which it
will at once bring unto our City, let us with our forefathers, as good
Patriots, look better to our Walls.

But I fear I speak too late. Sero medicina paratur, etc. The malady is of
that growth by the want of applying timely remedies, that, I think, it is now
become incurable. Such danger, such detriment attends, and is begotten by
delay. Yet let me not seem tedious, whilst I remember what some yet living
cannot have forgotten; that not long since the cure was in part worthily
attempted by a noble Citizen, Mr. I. Easday by name, sometime one Ann. Domini.
1586.
of our Aldermen, who in the time of his Maioralty, well hoping his Successors
in the place, would likewise have succeeded him in this his exemplary piety and
commendable endeavor for the repair of the City wall, to his great cost,
being a man but of an indifferent estate, began the repair thereof at
Ridingate, and therein proceeded so far, as where you may find his name
inscribed on the Wall. A work left for future ages to follow, now having
hitherto vouchsafed it their imitation. But I forbear, because I list not to
be satyricall.

In this Wall are to the number of twenty one Turrets, or small watch Towers
orderly placed, the most of them (thanks to God) of no use now adays; but in
many men's judgments, such, as with no great cost, if it might stand with the
wisdom of the City, might make, what we much want, convenient Pest-houses, and
Receptacles for the poor visited people of the City, many times either
indangering the public safety by their stay in their houses, or else
hazarding their private welfare abroad for want of such or like accommodation.
I have done with the Walls.

The Gates.
The Gates of the City come next to be considered of. The Wall at this day
admits of only six (except the three Posternes) answering to the number of
the Wards, Burgate, Newingate, Ridingate, Worthgate, Westgate, and Northgate.
Anciently we had another, a seventh gate, which was called Queningate, whereof
mention is made in the foregoing note of the measurement of the City Wall. I
will briefly speak of them all, beginning with that whereof I find eldest
mention, Burgate, or Burrough-gate.

The first of King Ethelb. Charters dated in the year of our redemption 605.
tells us of this Gate: bounding out Burgate.
the intended site of Saint Augustines Monastery, South to Burgate-way. In
meridie via de Burgate, says the Charter. It was afterward, and still is
otherwise called Saint Michaels-gate, from the Church so called sometime
neighboring to it. About the year of Grace 1475. This Gate was new builded,
at whose charges is to be seen upon the Gate, without, where you may find the
principal benefactors, worthy Citizens in their times, thus memorized. Per
Iohannem Franingam, Iohannem Nethersole, and Edm. Minot.

By this Gate lies the Road between the City and Sandwich, A common foot-way
some ^ime through St Augustines Churchyard.
and the bordering parts, and that only by Longport at this day: whereas in
former time there was also a common foot-way lying through St Augustines
Churchyard, by the Gate at either end, the one yet standing against St
Pauls-street, called Church-street: at the one end, and the other directly
oppositeto it, where a new Gate was lately made opening into St
Martins-streete. Besides tradition which retains the memory of this common
way, the wills Penes Registrum Consistor' Cantuar.
of some of our Townsmen buried in St Augustines said Churchyard, make
mention of it, by appointing and laying out their burials in Cimiterio St
August' in alta via, and the like. And in, or about the beginning of Hen. 6.
reign, I find there arose a great debate, ending in a suite in law, between
the City and the Abbey concerning Limits; occasioned chiefly by the Citizens
challenge, and the Monks denial of this way, to lie and be within the liberty
and franchese of the City. The quarrel happened in the time of the Bailiffes,
who in their passage to and from St Martins by that way, with their Maces, the
ensigns of their Magistracy borne up before them, so distasted the Monks,
that on a time meeting them and their company upon the place, and not
prevailing with them verbis; or by force of argument to desert their, and the
Cities claim in that behalf: impatient of the affront, they attempted it vi,
or by force of arms, endeavoring by strong hand to force them from the place,
but being the weaker party, were put to the worst. To suit then they go, but
the issue what it was I cannot learn, only I have seen (and have a Copy of)
an argument drawn and framed on the Monks part, and in defense of their
limits and liberties, to the doing whereof the premised difference gave the
occasion. However the way continued and lay common till our memory. And here,
in all probability, lay the most ancient rode between Burgate and St Martins,
it meets in so straight a line, the rodes at either end; whereas Long-port rode
lies wide of them both, more south from the Abbey: the rode being so turned of
purpose (as I conceive) to make more way, and give larger scope for St
Augustines Churchyard. And (which moves me most) the first site of the Abbey
is bounded South to Burgate way, and not to Long-port Vide C^r. 1. Ethelberti.
. But leaving this Gate, come we now to the next.

Newingate, otherwise from the Church so called standing Newingate.
hard by it, St Georges-gate. This Gate was new built much about the time that
Burgate was. For thus I read in the will of one William Bigg of Cant. In
Archivis Registri Domini Archidiaconi Cantuar.
a benefactor to the work, 1470. Item, I give ten pounds to the making, and
performing of St Georges Gate, to be paid as the work goes forward. But it
took not the name of Newingate, that is Newgate, from this new building of it;
but was much more anciently so called. For about the middle of the eleventh
Century, in a Bull of Pope Alex. 3. to the Monks of Christ-church, I read
this; In civitate Cantuar. Ecclesiam scil. Georgii de Newingate: Yet by the
name of it, it should not be of any great antiquity. And indeed I conceive it
to be of a latter foundation then any of the other five, and that it was built
(as Newgate in London was upon an occasion not much unlike Survey of Lond^n.
page 35. ult. Editionis.
) chiefly for a more direct passage into the heart of the City from
Dover-rode. Whereas the more ancient rode and passage into the City from Dover
lay by the next Gate, whither I am going.

Ridingate, an ancient Gate, and mentioned in the Records of St Augustins Abbey,
in Ann. Dom. 1040. thus: Ridingate.
E^dsinus Archiepiscopus dedit Sancto Augustino quinque acr as terrae Rudingate
and unum pratum pertinens ad terram praedict': hac condition interposita, ut
monachi St August. haberent ejus memoriam in orationibus suis specialem Thorn
in vitis Abbat. St Augustini. Cant.
.

By this Gate (I say) anciently lay the Dover-rode, or rather the Roman
port-way, or military way between Dover and Canterb. the like whereof lay
between Cambd. in Kent of Portas Lenanis, and Stone-street.
Limen and the City. (As probably also between it and the rest of the Roman
ports, to wit Reculoer, Richborow, and Newenden, places all where the Romans
planted their Castra Riparensia, as I may not unfitly call them, for the
defense of the Saxon shore:) Of the which formed two, one upon Burham-downe,
and the other upon the Downs by Horton and Stowting, is in ancient evidences
called Dunstrata. 1. The street way on the hill or down. The Vestigia of the
latter, is that long continued hard-way, called Stone-street, and of the other
the abrupt pieces of a fair causey upon Barham-downe, a way more straight and
direct then that now used, lying by Whitings-way, or rather White-way (for King
John's Charter to St Rudegund's Abbey by Dover calls it Alba via Liber. Ab^. St
Rudegundis.
;) whither the rode was turned (as is probably conjectured) for the frequency
of robberies and murders committed in Woolwich-wood, through which the former
way lay and lead. But to our Gate again, which I suppose took it name from
this Port-way or Rode-way. Ridingate, being no other but the Rode-gate. Which
conjecture is made much more probable, if not the matter put out of all doubt,
partly by the tokens of Antiquity, the Roman or British-bricks as yet to be
seen about it, and partly by the name of the street leading from it into the
City, called to this day Watling-street, one of the four famous ways or
streets which crossed and quartered the Kingdom. Erming-street, Ikenildstreet
and Fosse being the other three, which Mulmutius Dunwallo is by some storied to
have made; I know not how many hundreds of years before Christ. So Holinshead.
But of Mr Cambden, who has a large discourse of them Britannia. Romans in
Britain. page 63. 64, 65. English edition.
, much more probably attributed to the Romans. I proceed.

By this gate was sometime standing a Church, called the Church of S. Edmund S.
Edmunds Church.
the King and Martyr, otherwise from the Gate by which it stood, S. Edmunds of
Ridingate, built by one Hamon the son of Vitalis, one of those who came in
with the Conqueror Lib. H^sp. S. Laurentii prope Cant.
. This Church was standing near within the gate, for I have read an old deed
bounding out an house one way to the street leading to S. Edmunds Church from
Tierne-Crouch (that is the Iron cross, which sometime stood at the East End of
Castle-street, at the meeting of the four weuts) But the Church is now so
clean gone, that the least vestigium of it appears not. I read Lib. Eccles.
Christi. Cant.
, that upon the declining of it, iu the year of our Lord 1349. it was united
to S. Mary Bredne, by the then Commissary of Canterb', specially authorized
thereto by the Ordinary, who were then the Prior and Count of Christ-Church in
the vacancy of the Sea by Archbishop Bradwardines death, with consent of the
Nuns of Sepulchers, who were Patrons of it, it being given them long before
by the Abbot and his Covent of S. Aug. whereof their domestic Chronicler
Thorn In ^itis Abbat. S. Augustini.
has these words. Anno Dom. 1184. Rogerus Abbas and Conventus hujus Monasterii
concesserunt ecclesiam beati Edmundi de Redingate in puram and perpetuam
elemosynam Monialibus S. Sep. Cant. Ita tamen quod Moniales praedictae in
recognitionem Iuris quod S. Aug. habet in praedicta ecclesia de red. 12.
denarios de ipsa ecclesia singulis annis reddent super Altar S. Aug. in die
ipsius scil. ad organa reparanda, and super hoc tam Priorissa and Suppriorissa
in Capitulo nostro fidelitatem juraverunt multis testibus praesentibus. Thus
he. Let me only acquaint you that over this Ridingate, was sometimes, and that
in the memory of many yet living, a Bridge lying upon the underprops or
Buttresses yet standing on either side the Gate; Bridge over Ridingate.
by which when it stood, a man might have continued his walk from the lesser to
the greater Dondgehill, and e contra, but it is decayed and gone. And so I walk
on to Worthgate.

Of which I can say but little, and the rather because I am not as yet
persuaded to be of their opinion who think that Winchep-gate, that now is, and
so called, is the ancient Worthgate. For my part, I rather conceive the gate
now disgated sometime leading out of the Castle-yard into Winchep to be
Worthgate, because it is both the more ancient gate in all appearance, carrying
a show of greater Antiquity then the castle it self in the perfect Arch of
British brick which it has, not sampled of any other about the City; and in
its ruins retains the vestigia of a gate, both for strength and beauty of
good respect. Besides, by it the road is continued, directly from Castle-street
into Winchep, and e contra: whereas Winchep-gate carries no show of the least
antiquity; and beside stands wide of Winchep, making the passenger wheel
about, and fetch a compass to come to it. Besides observe the name, which I
suppose taken up and given it since the building of the Castle, Worthgate, that
is (as I conceive) the Castle-gate, or gate by the Castle: Worth (as some
interpretit Remains of Surnames in verb. Worth. page 93.
) signifying a Fort: or else VVorthgate, quasi VVard-gate, from the constant
watch and ward (commonly called Castle-guard:) anciently kept in the Castle and
Barbican, for the safeguard of it and the City, whereof some ancient evidences
have taken notice, as (amongst other) one of S. Radeg. Abbey Lib. Rad^gund.
, made in Ric. 1. or King John's time, concluding thus. Haec emptio facta fuit
illo tempore quo VV^us de Hesheteford habuit wardam Castelli Cant. and eodem
temp' Theoricus le Vineter fuit pr^fectus.

But leaving this matter, let me tell you, that, according London rode.
to traditionall report, London rode lay anciently by this gate, until
Boughton way, as the more direct, came into request; which it did but lately as
they say, how truly I know not, but not improbably, (if for no other reason)
because of the prison kept of old first in the Castle, and afterward at or
near S. Jacobs (whereof more anon) places most likely of the greatest
through-fare. But as a thing uncertain I leave it with a Fides penes lectorem
esto, until further enquiry shall enable me to give him better satisfaction.
But for certain, of old, in perilous times of hostility, all strangers coming
by Dover, and those eastern coasts from foreign parts, being denied the common
throughfare of the City, were put to seek London-rode, by a lane leading to it
not far distant from this Gate, of some called Strangers way, of other
Out-aliens way, which crosses Strangers way.
the rode at S. Dunstans Cross a little on this side of Cockering ferme. Of
this Gate I have nothing more to say in this place, because I shall have a
second occasion for it, when I come to the Castle. I pass therefore from it to
VVestgate.

But first will it please you to hear my second thoughts, touching the rodes
lying by this Gate, to and from London?

Some happily will more readily adhere to this opinion, because Mr Cambden
Britannia in Kent.
seems to be in a manner of their mind, by making Lenham (in his
interpretation) the same with the Emperor Antoninus his Durolsuum mentioned in
his Itinerary, as one of the mansions or stations upon the rode lying in his
time between London and Richborough.

But therein (I take it) Mr Cambden is mistaken, If you Mr Cambdens opinion
touching Lenham examination.
will hear my reasons, first let me give you the Stations or Mansions which
the Itinerary mentions lying in the rode between London and Richborough, with
the distances between the stages, and the total sum or number of miles in
the whole journey, taking beginning from London.

Noviomago. m. p. x. In toto lxxiiij. Vaginacis. m. p. xviij. Durobrovis. m. p.
ix: Durolevo. m. p. xiij. Duroverno. m. p. xij. Ad portum Ritupis. m. p. xij.

Let me add also the stages (and their distances) between London and Dover,
and between London and Lin, with the totals also of their miles, as the same
Itinerary sets them down.

Item, a Londinio ad portum Dubris. M. P. 66. sic. Durobrovis. m. p. xxvij.
Duroverno. m. p. xxv. Ad portum Dubris. m. p. xiiij. Item, a Londinio ad portum
Lemanis. M. P. lxviij. sic. Durobrovis. m. p. xxvij. Duroverno. m. p. xxv. Ad
portum Lemanis. m. p. xvj.
Now the first of these stages between London and Richborough (Noviomagus) Mr
Cambden conceives to be that which is now called Woodcote, a little village
near Croydon in Surrey. The next (Vagniac.) he takes for Maidstone, a Town
well known in Kent. The third (Durobrovis) for Rochester City. The fourth
(Durolevum) for Lenham in Kent. The fifth (Durovernum) for Canterbury City, and
the next and last (Portus Ritupis) for Richborough near Sandwich.

As for the third and two last of these stages, there is no cause of doubt (as
I conceive) but he hits them aright: the Quaere rests then only upon the other
three. Now it will, I think, be easily granted that the Roman-roads between
Port and Port; and between one great Town and another, were made and laid out
as direct and straight as might be Hae viae summa rectitudine tanquam prot^nsa
linea, per quaecunque locorum incommoda, tanta latitudine ductae sunt. Twyne.
De Reb. Albionic. lib. 2. page 152.
: and that for the Posts and other Travelers both better direction, and also
more swift and speedy dispatch of the journey; to facilitate whose passage they
invented, and made those causeyes, whereof we have in many places the remains
to this day. And that the rode or Port-way between London and these
Port-Townes was straight and without much winding, appears plainly by the
total of the miles, not only between them (especially between London and
Dover being reckoned but at 66. a distance which it holds almost to this day,
though the English be longer then the Italian miles:) but also, if you mark it
between London and Rochester, and between Rochester also and Canterbury, the
former being 27. the latter 25. If this be so, the Traveller goes much awry and
out of his way, that setting out of London, and bound for Richborough, goes
first eight or ten miles wide of London, to Woodcote: from thence to Maidstone
some 24. miles asunder: and from Maidstone makes to Rochester (obliquely all
the way, without gaining a step nearer his journeys end, when he is there: and
then quatering again returns into Maidstone rode, and salutes Lenham, and so
makes forward. He that takes his way thus shall find it little less thrn 80.
of our miles between London and Richborough.

The case thus standing, suffer me to give my weak conjecture how the Rode
might lie in the Romans time; and to tell you whereabout I guess these
Stations, Mansions or stages that the Itinerary speaks of, were severally
seated, and may now probably be found.

As for the first then, being Noiomagus, or Noviomagus, and that seated ten
miles from London; I cannot conceive Noviomagus.
how it should be a stage for this rode, and lie wide of London, as Woodcote
does, so many miles, and consequently set the Traveller at as great a distance
from the place whither he is bound (Richborough) as when he first set out of
London. Considering this, and the distance between London and Rochester, by
the Itinerary, I should rather place it about Crayford, much about ten miles
from London, upon or along some Hill or Down, since it is otherwise called
Noviodunum.

As for Vagniac^, the next stage, 18. miles from Noviomagus Vagniacae.
(says the Itinerary, not without a mistake, I believe of 18. for 8. miles, it
being by the same Itinerary, but 27. between London and Rochester) I suppose
it might stand about Northfleet, distant about 8. miles from Crayford, and
about as many miles from Durobrovis or Rochester, the next stage upon the rode,
and which I think Nennius rather intends by his Caer Medwag, in his catalogue
of Cities, then Maidstone.

The 4th and next stage after Durobrovis, Durolevum, Durolevum.
13 miles (by the Itinerary) distanced from Durobrovis, I take to have been
seated not far from Newington a village on the rode between Rochester and
Canterbury: In this particular not a little strengthened and upholden in my
conjecture by the multitude of Roman urns lately found in digging there, at
such place as is already discovered and discoursed of by the learned Meric.
Casaubon, then Bachelor, now Doctor in Divinity, my ever honored friend
Notes upon Marcus Aurel. Antoninus his meditations. page 31. etc.
.

If any shall stumble at the disproportion of miles between it and Durovernum
(Canterbury) let them know there is even as great between Lenham and Canterbury.

Why it should be called Durolevum, I am altogether ignorant. What if I
conjecture (because the Itinerary lays out the rode from London to
Richborough, and not e contra) from having the river or water (of Medway) on
the left hand of it, as by the inhabitants tradition, Newington sometime had,
and within about 2 miles of it yet has?

If any looking for better Remains of a Roman station, shall object the mean
condition of the present village, such may know that Newington has been a
place of more note in time past then now. I read of a Nunnery there of ancient
time, whereof and of the pristine estate of the place, please you to read what
Thorn has written In vitis Abbatum S. Aug.
.

Apud manerium de Newington (says he) fuerunt quondam Moniales quae tenuerunt
manerium illud integre, scilicet id quod Dominus Abbas S. Augustini tenet, and
id quod haeredes Domini G. de Lucy tenent, and id quod haeredes B. de Ripariis
tenent, praeter id quod Richardus de Lucy adquisivit de Brunell de Middelton,
and tunc defendebat illud manerium pro uno sullingo terrae versus Regem apud
Middelton. Postea contingebat quod Priorissa ejusdem Monasterii strangulata
fuit de conventu suo nocte in lecto suo, and postea tracta ad puteum quod
vocatur Nonnepet: quo comperto, cepit Dominus Rex manerium illud in manum suam,
and tenuit illud in custodia sua, caeteris monialibus usque Scapeiam ind^
amotis. Postea Henricus Rex Pater substituit quosdam canonicos seculares, and
dedit illis illud manerium integrum cum xxviij pisis casei de manerio de
Middelton. Subsequenti vero tempore unus occisus fuit inter eos, de qua morte
quatuor fuerunt culpabiles, and duo reliqui culpabiles non inventi, per
licentiam Domini Regis portionem suam dederunt sancto Augustino, quinque
partibus remanentibus in manu Regis usque dedit illas parts Domino Richardo de
Lucy Iustitiario suo. Vnde Abbas S. Augustini tenuit praedictas duas parts
quousque per concambium, ut supradictum est, una cum xj sol. vd annui redditus
in hamleto de Thetham fuit sibi satisfactum, qui quidem Hamlet postea devenit
in manus Abbatis de Heversham, ex dono praedicti Richardi de Lucy, qui Abbas de
praedicto redditu ecclesiae beati Augustini respondet in praesenti. Alia
quaedam scripta tradunt illos praebendarios tempore Regis Willielmi
conquestoris sic deliquisse, per quorum delictum omnia sua ibidem in manu Regis
fuerunt forisfacta, qui quidem Dominus Willielm' Rex duas parts saepe
nominatas dedit Abbati S. Augustini. Quae vero istarum opinionum sit verior, in
effectu ad eligendum relinquo optioni legentis.

Craving pardon for this digression, and leaving Worthgate, I come now as I
promised erewhile, and as the order of my method requires, to Westgate.

Edmerus the Monk of Canterbury shortly after the Conquest, Westgate.
names unto us this and the Northgate of the City, telling us of Archb.
Lanfranc's founding a double Hospital, the one for leprous, without the
former, and the other for aged and impotent without the other gate Edmer. Hist.
Nov^rum. lib. 1. page 9.
. This of Westgate being decayed (as I have told you) was reedified by
Archbishop Sudbury in Rich. 2. time. It has its Church by it called Holy
Cross (with this addition, from the Gate:) of Westgate.

The same gate the surest and largest about the City, Prison there.
and therefore, and in respect also of the chief through fare under it, is at
this day the common Jail or Prison of the City, both for malefactors and
others, and has been so (as I suppose) almost ever since the new building of
it: but certainly from the 31. of Hen. 6. For then (as Edw. 4th in his Charter
recites) he granted it to the City by his Charter, in these words. Custodiam
Gaiolae suae de Westgate praedict Civitatis suae Cantuar. ad prisones tunc
incarceratos and extunc incarcerendos infra eandem Civitatem and suburb. pro
quocunque crimine seu causa cuptos seu capiendos, detinendos in eadem per se
vel Ministros suos etc. The Town Prison being immediately before its remove
thither kept in another place, to wit before the now Town Hall or Court-Hall
(whereof more hereafter:) as formerly it was at another place, to which I am
copiously directed by the Records of Christ-Church, which show it to have stood
in the heart of the City, hard by S. Andrews Church, on the North-side of the
street, even where since and now our corn-market is kept; which the boundary of
a house of Christ-Church situate thereabouts anciently thus discovers. In
parochia S. Andreae, inter venellam per quam itur ad carcerem Civitatis quae
est versus East. And another thus. In angulo sicut itur ab ecelesia St Andreae
versus carcerem Civitatis Rental. vet. eccles. Christ. Cantuar.
. This latter house I take to be that where Mr Tailor the Linen-draper lately
dwelt, which is a Church-house, and it seems was anciently, a corner-house,
that being but lately put up which now stands between it and the Corne-market.

This Prison in those days was known by the name of the Spech-house.
Nicholaus de Wilt-shire Priso in Gaola Civitatis Cant. vocat Spech-house
moriebatur, etc. say the Crowne-Rolls, 11. Ed. 2. And whilst it was kept
there, the lane now called Angell-lane, to which toward the East it abutted,
called parvus vicus juxta Spech-house, and Spech-house-lane. For a Townes-man
in his Will, dated 1404. proved (according to an old Custom of the City)
before the Bailifes of the place, devises his Tenement in St Mary Magdalens
Parish in Spech-house-lane Liber. Civitat. Cant.
; which of necessary consequence, must be this, there being no other lane in
that Parish that leads to the Spech-house.

The same records of the Cathedral inform me of a yet more ancient common
Goal or Prison then this, belonging Another Prison.
to the City, which in the time of Prior Benedict, about 450. years ago, they
call Novum Carcerem Civitatis. It stood (say they) in a part of that which was
afterward the Augustine Friars seat, since the dissolution become the
dwelling house (after many others) of Captain Berrye's heirs, having then a
lane leading to it, from Saint Georges street, called Lambertslane, afterward
Brewerslane, and Vicus qui ducit ad veterem Gayolam. For the composition made
in the year 1326. between those Friars, and the then Parson of St George
(whereof more hereafter) bounds out their seat in this manner. In parochia St
Georgii Cant. Iuxta quandam venellam vocat' Brewerslane, viz. inter praed.
venellam, and tenementum Thomae de Bonynton versus North, and quendum locum
vocat' Eald-gaole, and tenementum Ceciliae at Gayole verse. West etc. To which
add the boundary of the house, then of the Monks of Christ-Church, now the
dwelling house of Mr Peter Piard and some others, which in the same records is
thus laid down. Inter Regiam stratam versus North, and veterem Gayolam verse.
South. This note added to the former plainly points out the situation.

And now in callem regredior, hoping this digression is neither in point of
Antiquity impertinent, nor in point of method preposterous, being ushered in by
so fit an occasion. Our forefathers, whose wits the frequency of invasion
prompted to all manner of warlike invention, used to secure their City-gates
against assailants, not only with a Port-close to let down before it, but
also with a warlike device built over it, through which they could let down
any offensive thing against the enemy approaching to assail it. A Gate so
fortified was called Porta machecollata, from machecollare, or machecoulare,
which (says my Auther Coke upon Litt^on. lib. 1. cap. 1. Sect. 1. page 5.
) is to make a warlike device over a Gate or other passage like to a Grate,
through which scalding water, or ponderous or offensive things may be cast upon
the assailants. Thus he. After this manner were and are our two principal
Gates built, this of Westgate, and in imitation thereof that of Newingate, with
each of them a Port-close, like as Burgate: now to Northgate.

This Gate stands under apart of Saint Mary's Church, N^gate.
which is built over it upon the Wall, and to distinguish it from the other
Mary's of the City, has this addition from the situation (of Northgate). Under
the Quire or Chancell whereof is a Vault, with an open space or lope-hole in
the Wall fashioned like a Cross. It was sometime an Hermitage, but is now
belonging to the Parsonage.

Come we now to Queningate. But where shall we seek it? Thereis none of the
name at this day, and few know Queningate.
where it stood. I sought as narrowly for it as for Antspaths, and at length
having found it will show you where it was. It stood against the Priory of
Christ Church, says our Wall-measurer, distanced from Northgate (says he) 69.
perches, but says an Elder record of Christ Church, 71. perches. By these
descriptions it must needs have stood near the place of the now Posterne-gate,
against St Augustines. And indeed a remanent of British brickes laid and
couched Arch-wise at a place in the Wall, a little Northward of the Posterne,
shows the very place. A small Gate it was (Parva porta de Queningate, says
Ickham;) but I will assure you a very ancient one, as not only the
Bricks-betoken, but the records of Saint Augustine prove it, which tell that
one Domwaldus (as I told you on a former occasion) gave to that Abbey certain
land within Queningate. The very name has antiquity in it, signifying the King
or Queens gate, being happily Ethelbert and his Queen Bertha their passage from
their Palace near adjoining to the several places of their diverse devotions:
the one (if Thorn say true) at Saint Pancrace (so afterward called;) the
other at Saint Martin, whereof more hereafter In S. August.
.

Where the Church or Chapel stood, that had it name from this Gate, being
called Saint Mary of Queningate, St. Mary of Queningate Church.
I cannot well tell. That such a Church it had, is most certain. I trace it in
many records (some 450 years old and more) of Christ-Church, which had the
Patronage of that and Saint Michael of Burgate, confirmed to them in and by a
Bull of Pope Alex. 3. and in many like Bulls since. The Parson thereof in the
year 1381. as those records inform me, made an exchange of it and Burgate to
which it was an annexed Chap. for Portpole Chantery in Paul's. This being
certain, it is no less sure that it stood not far from the Gate, by the
name of it; yet not very near, it is like, because the bounders of the
City-Wall and ground under it, between Northgate and Queningate, and between
it and Burgate, granted to Christ-Church, neither of them mention it: and
Ickhams measurement says Queningate stood versus Prioratum ecclesiae Christi,
not versus, nor juxta ecclesiam or capellam de Quening. I must leave it, until
I am better instructed where to find it. And so I have done with both Wall and
Gates, and come now unto (my next Particular) the City-Ditch. Only let me but
name unto you the Posternes, which (as erewhile I told you) were three. One
against Posternes.
Saint Augustine, a second at Saint Mildreds, and the third by the Sconce
running from Abbats-Mill.

Of what antiquity this Ditch is (I confess) I cannot well tell. In the Survey
of our City in Doomsday Book, Ditch about the City how ancient.
I meet with Fossatum Civitatis, but in what sense I do not well know. For
whether the City-Ditch be there intended, or some siege rather or beleaguering
of the City (for that sense the word Fossatum also carries:) it is to me some
question. Eleven of those Burgeses (says Doomsday) that were in Canterbury in
the Confessors time, Vastati sunt in Fossato Civitatis. If it had been said
eleven Burgeses houses or mansions were so laid wast, it had been somewhat
plain. It might have been supposed their Vastation had been to make way for
the Ditch. But you see what the words are. Either there is a figure in them, or
the Ditch is not so old. If so old, neglected afterward. For Queen Alianor's
letters before presented, speak of fortifying the City, not only muris, but
fossatis too, as in want of both.

This our Ditch (it seems) was originally of a great Breadth of (...) Ditch.
breadth, 150. foot over, as I find by the records of a suite commenced by the
City against Archbishop Peckham, in the reign of Ed. 1. the 18. year, who
charging upon the Archbishop (but erroneously, the Jury finding it not his, but
his Tenants fact) for incroching upon the City-ditch, and streightning of it
with houses built upon it about Westgate, to the Cities great damage and
annoyance, in regard that the River running through that part of the ditch,
many times overflowed the banks, to the great detriment of the Town-wall, make
challenge to a ditch of 150 foot broad in these words. Praeterea dicunt quod
ubi Dominus Rex habere debet and antecessores sui habere consueverunt fossatum
circuens murum Civitatis praed. quod quidem fossatum debet continere extra
murum illum centum and quinquaginta pedes latitudinis etc. A breadth which the
Liber Camerae) ^atis Cant.
present ditch, I think, in no part shows. But no marvel; for, as the wall, so
the ditch too is in these days much neglected. Little more then half the wall
is now in-ditched, the rest being either swerved, or else filled up, and in
many parts builded upon; nay, the wall it self in some places easily scalable,
what with piles and stacks of wood in some, what with housing and the like in
other parts of it; a thing fatal unto some by the fall of the wall (Robert
Quilter, Denis Tiler and Ioane London, being killed by the fall of a part of
the wall in Ridingate-ward, as they sat in the said Ioanes house Crown-rolls.
Anno 17. Ed. 1.
(and both very unseemly and dangerous also for the City. What says the Civil
law in this case? Aedisicia (the words of the law) quae vulgo parapetasia
nuncupant, vel siqua alia opera moenibus vel publicis operibus ita sociata
cohaerent, ut ex iis incendium vel insidias vicinitas reformidet, aut
angustentur spatia platearum, vel minuat' porticibus latitudo, dirui ac
prosterni praecipimus, etc. Aedisicium 13 deoperibus publicis. Pooe^ium.


Every well contrived city should have a Pomoerium. And what is that? The law
Lexicon shall tell you. Pomoerium locus erat, tam intra, quam extra murum
urbis, quem antiqui in condendis urbibus augurato consecrabant, neque in eo
ullum fieri aedificium patiebantur Calvini Lexicon in verb. Pomoerium.
etc. Felinus the Canonist more succinctly defines it thus. Pomoerium (says
he) est locus ad intra and extra, quo aedificare non licet DER scriptis c.
Rodulphus number. 23.
. But what respect we a Pomoerium? were it a Pomoerium, happily it would be
better looked unto. Witness the so much planting of the ditch in diverse parts.
What a shame is it for us in the mean time, that a little profit should banish
all our care in this kind, and to see the greediness of a small advantage to
be a means (as it is) to betray the City at once both to danger and
deformity? But I may forbear Censure: for I despair of its regard in these
days, wherein Meum and Tuum, the private profit of some few, is with too many
more considerable then bonum and interesse publicum, the common good of many;
which if it find any regard, it is but base and secundary, like that of
Virtue, post nummos. So much for the Ditch.

The Castle.
COme we now to the Castle, to which our passage from the City lay of old by a
Bridge, and beyond that a Castle-ga^e and Bridge.
fair Gate built at the entrance of the Castle-yard or Court, which I will
prove unto you by an ancient deed recorded in the Lieger Book of Estbridge
Hospital, concerning a piece of land lying (says the deed) in the parish of
St Mary-Castle: juxta Ianuam Castri ad caput pontis ex part West. Afterward in
the same deed thus described. Inter Regiam stratam versus Est, and fossam dicti
Castri versus South, and quandam placeam terrae pertinent' ad ecclesiam beatae
Mariae de Castro praedict' verse. North, etc. This Gate had it usual Porter or
Keeper. For I read that one William Savage, Ianitor Portae Castri Cant. was
questioned for taking the daughter of Hamon Trendherst, vi and armis, ex
opposito Castri Cant. in Cant. and carrying her into the Castle, and there
holding her eight days and upwards Crowne-Rolles. A^. 15. Ed. 2.
.

To approach nearer to the Castle it self, whose entrance (seemingly) was by
an ascent of Steps porcht over on the Castles Antiquity.
West Side. Some there are will tell you that Julius Caesar; other that
Rudhudibras, or Ludrudibras, long before built it. You may believe them if you
please. For my part I subscribe herein to Mr Cambdens opinion. It carries
(says he) no show of any great antiquity Britannia. In Kent.
, and very probably. For in all the sieges of our City, and the harrowing and
sacking of it by the Danes, at large related by our Historians, especially that
most remarkable (because most lamentable) one in King Etheldreds time,
copiously storied by Roger Hoveden, and our Countryman Spott, telling us first
of the siege of the City, with the continuance of it, the treachery by which
the enemy surprised it, and diverse other particulars thereof; what is there of
any Castle, but altum silentium? It was builded by the Normans, says Mr
Cambden. Indeed both he and Speed Hist. in vita Conquest.
inform us, that the Conqueror, for his better subduing and bridling of the
Britannia. In Cambridgeshire.
suspected parts of the Kingdom, builded Castles at such places, namely at
Cambridge, Lincoln, Nottingham, Stafford, and elsewhere. A piece of policy,
which I find practiced abroad. In Marchia Brandeburgensi, cum Cives
Berlinenses in suum tumultuarentur Magistratum, Fridericus Marchio
interveniens, imposuit urbi arcem frenum libertatis Tholosanus de Repub. lib.
2. cap. 5. number. 3.
. Might not this be one of the Castles so built by the Conqueror? I conceive
not: for I take it to be somewhat, but yet not much elder. Because it appears
by Doomsday-Booke, that the Conqueror had this Castle by exchange made with
the Archbishop, and the Abbot of St Augustines; who had for it, the latter 14.
the former 7. Burgenses. I suppose it built in the interim of the Danish
massacre, and the Norman conquest. Clearly Doomsday Book has it; but before,
it occurres not any where. Shortly after (as I find) certain of the Monk of
St Augustine, quitting the Abbey in the broyle between Archbishop Lanfranc and
them, about Guido or Wido the 42. Abbat, sheltered themselves under, or within
this Castle. For, of them some for their rebellion being committed to the City
Prison, by Lanfranc's command, nunciatum est ei caeteros abire jussos sub
Castro (ad ecclesiam St Miltrudis posito) consedisse Antiq. Britan. in vita
Lanfranci. page 114.
. The next thing that I read of it is, that Lewis the French Dolphin (Stow is
my Author) arriving in the I Will of Thanet, and afterward at Sandwich, and
landing his forces, without resistance, comes to Canterbury where he re^eived
both Castle and City into his subjection Stow. Annals in King John. Common
prison in the Castle,
.

Within this Castle in former time there was a common Prison kept. For proof
whereof I could muster up many Testimonies from records of good credit. But
because tradition keeps it yet in memory with some, one shall suffice, which I
have from the Crowne-Rols. Evasio (says the Record) Walteri de Wedering, and
Martini at Gate de Lamberherst. Prisones Domini Regis in Castro Cant. sederunt
ligati in quodam loco vocat' Barbican juxta idem Castrum pro pane suo
mendicando. Contigit quod die Martis in Carnisprivio A^. R. R. Ed. Fill. Reg.
Ed. ante occasum Solis, praedictus Walterus fregit seruram cathenae cum
qualigatus fuit, and attraxit secum praedictum Martinum contra voluntatem
ipsius Mart. ad ecclesiam beatae Mariae de Castro, ubi remansit and abjuravit
Regnum Angliae, and praed. Mart. rediit in prisonam ex bona voluntate. The
Prison continued here a long time after, even (as I take it) until the
ordinary passage through the Castle-yard, by making up the further Gate, was
debarred, to the end in likelihood the better to secure the Castle. Which was
done (some say) upon Wiats rising in Queen Mary's days; others, upon a former
insurrection in Ed. 6. time, called the Commonwealth; but I think before them
both, because I meet with the Prison by Saint Jacobs, whither (it seems) the
Castle-prison was removed in Hen. 8. time: diverse of our Townsmen about that
time, distributing their Testamentory, or dying alms, incarceratis prope locum
St Iacobi. It had yet a second remove, and that even in our memory, to
Westgate-street, where it continues. A few words now of the Barb^can, and I
shall have done with the Castle.

The Castle, it seems, ad majorem cautelam (as the Civilian Barbican.
speaks) for the more security both of it and the City was anciently
fore-fenced with a Barbican or Barbacan. Which exotic word S. H. Spelman (...)
in verb. Barbaca^
thus interprets. Barbacan (says he) munimem a front Castri, al^ter
antemurale dictum; etiam for amen in urbium Castrorumque moeniis ad trajicienda
(...): necnon specula, and locus ubi excubiae aguntur. vox Arabica. So he,
Minshew thus. A Barbican (says he) or out-nook in a wall, with holes to
shoot out at the enemy. Dictionar. (...) hac voce.
Some take it for a Sentinell-house, a Scout-house. Chaucer uses the word
Barbican for a Watch-to were. Of the Saxon Ber-ic-ken. i. I ken or see the
Borough, etc. Here I will briefly prove unto you two things. 1. That there was
Barbican. 2. The place where it stood. In a record of the City Chamber, showing
how the Fee-ferme of the City in Hen. 3. time was to be raised, occurres the
name of the Barbican, in these words. De Barbicane, 5s. qui debentur in comp'to
super S'ccum. I find also in the elder Rentals of Christ-Church, frequent
mention of it, as a boundary to certain of the Churches Demesnes lying near
it without Worthgate, in these or the like words. Extra Worgate juxta fossatum
del Bail, sed nunc Barbecan appellatur: and the like. Now that it was, is
plain enough. The place where it was, comes next to be inquired. I have seen
a record of the 6. of Ed. 2. purporting that the City-Coroner coming to do his
office upon the dead Body of a murdered servant of the Prior of Christ-Church:
he was not permitted, but the body being conveyed to the Barbecan, extra
Castrum Cant. was there set upon and searched by a foreign Coroner. Now it
must of necessity follow that this place where the inquest was taken (the
Barbecan) was without the Cities liberty: but there is not near the Castle any
place, save the Castle-yard, that is so. The Record (if you please to see it)
is extant in my Appendix, page 298. The Castle-yard, and Wall then now much
impaired with age; but sometimes set with diverse Watch-towers, four at least,
and which was otherwise called the Bulwark, being the fore-fence to the
Castle, was undoubtedly the Barbican, or the place and structure, which former
ages knew and called by that name. I collect and conclude it also from that of
Fossatum del Bail, etc. which cannot otherwise be understood then of the Ditch
about the Castle-yard-wall, which (until of late that the piece of Wall was
made between Winchep-gate and it at the one side, and the like at the other)
compassed the same. Now for the better understanding of the use and condition
of this military structure, I refer you to Stowes Survey of London, page 62.
where he speaks of the like sometime standing without Creeple-gate. And now I
come to the River.

One commendation that our City has (and worthily) from Malmesbury, De gestis
Pontific. lib. 1. in Prologo.
is the Rivers watering of it. This River we call Stoure, as did our Ancestors
long ages. Inter geminales Rivos fluminis quod dicitur Stour, are the words of
a Codicill or Landboc of King Cenulph the Mercian made to the Archbishop, and
his Monks of Christ-Church, Anno Domini 814 In archivis Eccles. Cant.
. Long before this, a Charter of Edric King of Kent, in Anno Domini 686. made
to the Abbey of Saint Augustine, giving certain land in Stodmersh, mentions
this River, bounding out the same to lie one way to a place called Ford-street,
and on the other part to have Flumen quod nominatur Stur Thorn In vitis Abb.
S. Aug.
. And yet more anciently occurres the name. For Sturrey which takes it name
from this River running by it, is by that name together with Chistelet, granted
by King Ethelbert himself (his Charter tells me so) to St Augustine.

What the name signifies, or whence it was taken, certainly River when^e called
Stour.
I know not. Happily from the constant and continual stirring and swift course
or motion of it, to difference it from standing waters, whence probably the
Britain name of the City, Durwhern. i. a swift river, or else from Store, for
the plenty of water, and the many streams falling into it: as the river Stura,
arising in the Alps, one of the 30. which of the river Po are carried into the
Adriatic Sea, whereof Pliny speaks, lib. 3. c. 16. is vulgarly called Store.
Certes Stour is a name taken up, and given it since the Britains time. For Dur
or Dour was with them the common name for all waters Cambd. Britannia. In
Dors^shire page 209. Engl. edition. Antiq. Brit. page 34.
, (whence, as erewhile you heard, our Cities name of Durobernia and Dorob. and
I take it, the name of Dover sprang) as happily Stour was with the Saxons for all
greater rivers. Dour or Stour, says Hollinshead speaking of the Cambridge
river, as if they were all one, or that the latter were the proper name for
that river to which the former had been given. I can but rove at uncertainties,
and therefore quit the point.

For the sourse and course of this river I refer you to Hollinshead Chronicle
fol 20.
and Lambert P^rambul. of Kent.
, who will copiously herein give you satisfaction. Commodity has ever her
opposites attendance. The great commodity and convenience of our Cities
plantation by this river is attended by and with the discommoditie and
annoyance of inundation. But our Ancestors, the Cities first Incolae, weighed
not the inconvenience of the one, for the benefit and accommodation of the
other. And it is an inconvenience in these days scarcely considerable, because
seldom happening; or that can happen in regard the City lies higher now then
at thefirst, having in all parts of itbeen much raised at several times, as
cellar-diggers, and such like, who are much hindered in their work by old
foundations which they meet with in their digging, daily find: occasioned (as
I conceive) by the many vastations of the City in the Danes time, and lastly
about the year of our Lord 1160. by casual fire.

The greatest channel of this our river, ran anciently through the midst of
the City, to the Kings-mill. For I find Archbishop Pickham charged by the
Citizens with the diverting of it, by certain cuts or trenches, for the
bettering of his mill at Westgate: which the Jury found to have been done
before partly in Archb. Kilwarby, and partly in Archb. Boniface times Liber
Camerae Civitatis.
. The channel to Westgate then (it seems) became enlarged. But the first
division of the stream was not then made. For, that Stour had it course that
way much more anciently then those times, is most clear. For I find it to
give name in the Conq. time, to the Archbishops Manor, since and at this day
called Westgate (from the situation of it near that gate:) but then, from the
standing of it by the Stour-side, Stour-seat, the seat by the Stour; as that
other part of her divided channel gave name to the street it runs by, called
to this day Stourstree, that is, the street by or nigh the Stour.

The accommodation of the City by the scowring and Projects for the Rivers
enlargement hitherto frustrate.
enlargement of this river has been a thing at several times attempted, but
sine fructu, or without success worthy the design. About the beginning of
Hen. 8. reign it was projected to have made that part of the river between
Fordwich and Canterbury answerable to Fordw. river, that is, so to have
cleansed, deepned and enlarged it, that lighters and boats might be brought to
both alike. The matter proceeded so far, and with such probability of a good
issue, that the project was allowed and authorized by act of Parliament 5 Hen.
8. c. 17.
, of this tenor (which I here insert verbatim and at large, because, being
private, the ordinary edition of the Statutes does not afford it.)

IN most humble wise showing the Kings Highness his true and faithful
Subjects, the Mayor, Aldermen, Citizens Act. of Parliament about it.
and inhabitants of the City of Canterbury, that where the said Canterb. one of
the most ancient Cities of England.
City is one of the ancient Cities of this Realm, and through the same has
been and yet is great recourse of Ambassadors, and other strangers from the
parties of beyond the sea, where also the bodies of the holy Confessor and
Bishop of S. Austin the Apostolic of England, and also many other holy Saints
been honorably humate and shrined, is now of late in great ruin and decay,
and the inhabitants thereof impoverished, and many great mansions in the same
desolate; which ruin, decay and desolation, of like cannot be reformed, ne
amended, unless the river that goes and extends from the town of great
Chart in the County of Kent to the said City, and through and fro the said
City unto the haven of Sandwitch, may be so deeped, enlarged, and of mils and
dams, and other annoiances, now being in and overthwart the same river, between
the said City and the common crane in the town of Fordwitch, be avoided,
scowred, and taken away: which river between the said City and crane,
contains in length two miles, so that carriages by lighters and boats may by
the said river be conveied between the said crane in the said town of
Fordwitch, unto the said City, which deeping, enlarging and scowring of the
said river, as is before said, shall not be only to the profit and avail of
the said City, and inhabitants of the same, but also shall cause the haven of
the town and port of Sandwitch to be deeper and larger, to the great commodity
of great number of the Kings Subjects: in consideration whereof it may please
the King, with the assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the
same, to enact and establish that the said Mayor, Aldermen, Citizens and
inhabitants of the said City, and their successors, with the advice, assent
and agreement as well of the Reverend Father in God William Archbishop of
Canterbury, or his successors, and of two or three Knights being Justices of
peace of the shire of Kent, for the time being, as of the Mayor of the town and
port of Sandwitch aforesaid, to the said work, at the request of the said Mayor
of the said City for the time being, desired and called, may lawfully at all
and every time hereafter, in such places of the said river, as to the said
Knights, Majors, and Aldermen shall seem convenient, deep, enlarge, cleanse,
inhance and scowre, and cause to be deeped, enlarged and cleansed the said
river, with all things thereunto requisite, between the said town of Chart, and
the said City, and through the same, and fro the said City unto the said
crane, in such manner as lighters and boats may have by the same river their
full passage and course for carriage by the same to be conveied, and without
let, interruption, impeachment, disturbance or denial of any person or
persons. And after such deeping, enlarging, inhancing, cleansing, scowring (as
is before said) done, the said Mayor, Aldermen, Citizens and inhabitants of the
said City, with the assent and consent (as is before said) obtained, may
lawfully as well stop ditches, and make and inhance bays, brinks, dams, and
walls, for the advancing and inhighing of the said river, as to take down,
abate, and put away all mills, bridges, dams, walls, and other whatsoever
impediment lying over or overthwart the said river, between the said town of
great Chart to the said City, and through the same, and fro the said City to
the foresaid common crane, and other things thereunto requisite, whereby the
concourse of the said lighters and boats should be let: and that no action
nor suit therefore be maintainable, or to be had against the said Mayor,
Aldermen, Citizens, and inhabitants, or any of them, or their Assigns, for the
premises or any of them in manner aforesaid.

Provided always, that every person that shall be damnified by putting away or
abating of his mill; bridge or dam, or mils, bridges or dams, shall be
reasonably satisfied therefore, for such damages, as he or they shall have by
reason of the same, by the said Mayor, Aldermen, Citizens, and inhabitants of
the said City, and their successors, as the said Archbish. of Canterbury that
now is, or his successors, and the said Knights shall award, consider and
adjudge.

Execution, which is said to be the life of laws, was wanting here. This law,
this Statute Law (it seems) was never so inlivened. For notwithstanding this
fair way made, I cannot tell by what infortunacy, nothing was done to any
purpose at that time. Too likely it is that the difference between the
Archbish. and the City, as it diverted him from building here, what he built at
Lambert Peramb. of Kent. in Otford.
Otford, a stately Palace, did the mischief, and nipt the project in the bud,
so that it came to nothing then, as neither did the like project afterward.

For albeit it was revived, and in part put in practice with hopes of good
success, through the great furtherance of one Mr Rose an Alderman, and
sometime Mayor of the City, in the late Queens time, who was an especial
benefactor to the work while he lived, and dying ere the perfection of it, but
well hoping it would be accomplished, by his will In Registr^ Consistorii Cant.
, gave 300 libr. toward it (a most pious act:) yet not being so well followed
as behooved, through whose default I know not, succeeded now little better then
before. It is now a third time undertaken, and by the good endeavors of
industrious men in that forward, as not unlikely to succeed: Gods blessing be
upon the enterprise, and in due time crown it with perfection. Is qui principio
medium, medio adjice finem.


I have no more to say of our River in this place, only a Mills upon the River.
word or two of the mills standing by or upon it, in and about the City, which
are now but few in number, only 5. 1. Kings-mill. 2. Abbats-mill. 3.
Westgate-mill. 4. Shaffords-mill. 5. Barton-mill: whereas about King Stephen's
time, I find Liber ecclesiae Cant.
, that besides these miles, were 7. other standing all upon this river, in or
not far from the City; and belonged to the Monks of Christ-Church, whereof
the Cellerar of the place had the charge: to wit, the mill at Sameletes ford
(now vulgarly Shanford) Gudwoldsmeln, Munechemeln, Hottesmeln, Crinesmeln, and
the mills of Saliford, (now Shulford) and S. Mildreth. All which mills (I take
it) are long since down, and so quite gone (except that of Shanford) that it is
scarce known where they stood, nor has Christ-Church any one mill left her at
this day. Touching these quondam mills of the Church, I find in their records
letters of Hen. 2. written at the suit and in the behalf of the Monks, and
directed Praepositis Cant. of this tenor. viz. Vt omnia molendina infra
Civitatem and extra admensurentur.
atttemperentur, sicut fuerunt tempore Reg. Hen. avi mei. Et ea quae levata
altius sunt postea ad damnum Monachorum Cant. ad eam mensuram ad quam erant
tempore Regis Hen. 1. demittantur, ut molendina Ecclesiae Christi ita been and
plenarie molere possint, sicut molebant temp Reg. Hen. and damnum quod inde
Monachi habuerunt just eis restaurari faciatis ab illis per quos damnum
contigit, and nisi feceritis Vicecomes meus de Kent faciat fieri, ne in amplius
clamorem audiam pro penuria pleni Recti, etc. But leaving these, let me speak
of the present mills.

As for the first, Kings-mill. It was and is so called because Kingsmill.
it sometimes was the Kings: and was otherwise called both Eastbridge-mill, and
Kingsbridge-mill, from the near situation of it to that bridge. Thorn In
vitis Abbat. S. Aug.
the Chronicler of S. Augustines reports that King Stephen, being in a great
straight at Lincoln, where he was surprised and taken prisoner by Robert Earl
of Gloucester, and put to a great fine for his ransom; toward his relief in
that necessity, borrowed of Hugh, the 2. of that name, Abbat of S. Augustine,
one hundred marks, and in consideration thereof, by his charter, gave to the
monastery this mill. The effect of which Charter (says he) was this. Stephanus
Rex Angliae Archiepisc. Episc. Abbatibus, etc. salutem. Sciatis quod pro salute
animae meae etc. dedi and concessi Deo and ecclesiae S. Augustini molendinum
quod habui infra Civitatem Cantuar. juxta Eastbrigge, and totum cursum aquae
illius molendini in restaurationem vadimonii centum marc arum quas ego pro
necessitate mea ab eadem ecclesia cepi, praesentibus Baronibus meis; quare volo
and firmiter praecipio, quod praefata ecclesia S. Aug. teneat and habeat
praedict molendinum cum omnibus eid' pertinentibus ad servitium altaris illius
ecclesiae, ita been and in pace libere and quiet and honorifice sicut ego aut
aliquis Rex praedecessorum meorum melius liberius and quietius tenuit etc. From
thenceforth the Abbey enjoyed the mill until the time of Abbat Clarembald, who
made it over to King Hen. 2. whereof the same author has these words savouring
of his dislike of the act. Et nota quod istud molendinum per Clarembaldum
superius nominatum, cum aliis rebus and possessionibus per eum nequiter
distractis Domino Regi Henrico and successoribus suis alienatum, and ad opus
suae Civitatis rehabitum. Iste tamen Hen. Rex ad recompensationem hujus
injuriae isti Monasterio multas libertates scribitur concessisse, etc.
Afterward when the City was granted in Feeferme to the Bailiffs, by Hen. 3.
this mill, as parcel, was Vbi supra
expressly included in the grant. Whereof the same Thorn has this note.
Concessit (says he) idem Rex Henricus istis temporibus Civitatem suam Cantuar.
civibus ejusdem, sub gubernaculo duorum Ballivorum regendam, ad feodi firmam
lx. librar. ad errarium suum annuatim solvend. cum omnibus consuetudinibus ad
eand. Civitat. pertinent' cum molendino de Eastbrigge, vel aliter Kingsmill
dictum. Et hic nota quod praed' molendinum per Stephanum Regem ecclesiae beati
Aug. ut dict' est extitit datum, per Clarembaldum intrusorem Henrico Regi tum
Anglorum alienatum, and a successoribus Regibus adopus Civitatis injuriose
detentum, and per istum Hen. praed' Civibus una cum Burgo in forma praedicta
resignatum. Thus he.

In a cause of tithes brought by the Parson of All Saints, against the miller
of this mill; I find Lib. Eccles. Christ. Cant.
the miller brought to his answer. Who, requisitus an fuerat Firmarius dicti
molendini, dixit quod non, sed fatetur ipsum fore servientem Majorum Civitatis
Cantuar. per eos ibid. deputatum. Item requisitus, fatetur quod omnes pistores
villae totum bladum pro albo pane faciend. debent molere sine tollo, vel
receptione aliqua in blado vel alio modo. Item oneratur, and fatetur, quod de
farina bladi pistorum pro pane nigro, debent solvere pro mulctura tollum. Item
omnes alii ibid. -- The rest is wanting.

This suit happened in the year 1366. however this passage of it mentions the
Majors of the City, which came not into being, by name, until almost a 100.
years after. Since these times, the case is altered with this mill. For (I
take it) the City bakers of these days, neither are tied to grind their corn
at this mill (as by this note they seem to be:) nor yet have any such
privilege of grinding at that mill tollfree, as then, for white bread. I have
but one thing more to acquaint you with touching this mil. And it is that one
William Bennet a Citizen and an Alderman of Cant. about the year 1462. in his
will, appoints his executours to buy 300 foot of Asheler or Folk-stone to make
a wharfe about the Kings mill Lib. Testamentor. p^es regist. Domini Ar^hid a^
Cantuar.
.

I come now to Abbats-Mill, the next upon the Stream Abbats-Mill.
to Kings-Mill. It was called so because it did heretofore belong to the Abbey
of St Augustine. Whereof I find mention in King Stephens time. For then (as
Thorn In vitis Abb. St Augustini.
has it) Hugh, the second of the name, Abbat of the place, distinguishing or
setting out the offices of the Monastery: Molendinum de Abbottestnelle quod
ipsemet proprio labor adquisivit, ad Sacristiam deputavit, hac interposita
condition, ut tota annona Curiae scil. Aug. ibidem libere absque thelonio
molatur, decimam praedict. molendini elemosinariae scil. Aug. solvatur,
residuum quoque profectus illius molendini in usus sacristiae convertatur. This
Mill is now the Towns.

I pass next to Westgate-mill. A very old one. Doomsday-Booke Westgate-Mill.
mentions it as the Archbishops: but then in the hands of the Canons of St
Greg. The Tithe of it was by Archbishop Hubert in King John's time, granted
(amongst other things) to the Hospital of Eastbridge, and that grant was
confirmed by the Prior and Covent of Christ-Church Lib. Hosp. de Estbridge.
. It is (the Mill) since returned to the Archbishopricke, and continues a
parcel of the demeasnesse of the same.

As for Shaffords-mill; it is but little I can say of it: yet Shaffords-Mill.
I take it to be that, which I find anciently. i. about Rich. 1. time called
Scepeshotesmelne. Extra Westgate ab aquilonari part versus Scepeshotesmelne,
as in a deed of Eastbridge. The composition between the Prior and Canons of St
Greg. Parsons of Holy cross of Westgate, and the then Vicar in the year 1347.
calls it molendinum de Shefford, and in express words reserves the Tithes
thereof from the Vicar to themselves Vide Composit, page
; which clearly shows it to be a tithable Mill, and not within the exemption
of the Stat. of 9. Ed. 2. Cap. 5.

Barton-mill was sometimes, and that ab antiquo belonging Barton-Mill.
to Christ-Church, where the Monks Corn was ground for their own spending
within the Court. But it is now alienated, and so has been ever since the
Dissolution. So much for the Milles. And now have I done with the River. Only
let not my silence smother, or suppress that due praise and commendation well
known to appertain unto it, for (what, but for the common pochers it would
much more abound with) the plenty of singular good fish, which it breeds and
yields of diverse sorts, Trouts especially; whereof those at Fordwich bear away
the bell, a place of note (as Cambden says) in that respect. Fordwich Trouts.


According to my proposed method, coming now to the Suburbs: my Survey thereof
shall take beginning at the East part; and therein at Saint Augustines.
Concerning which I will limit my discourse, to these two heads or particulars.

1. The first foundation and following estate of it. 2. A Survey of the present
Remains of it.
FOr the first. Augustine the Monk, the Apostle of the 1. Particular.
English, (as the ancient Charters of the Abbey call him) Pope Gregory the
Great's Nuncio, his Alumnus, coming over hither with this com-monachall
associates, and being admitted first into the presence, and eftsoons into the
favor of Ethelbert (the This is meant of the Saxons, who entered this Kingdom,
and were formerly Idolaters: but the Britains were Christians almost from the
time of our Saviors death, and so they continued, though at this time, living
with their Bishops in the remote parts of this Island of Britainy.
first Christian Kentish King. Rex Ethelbertus inter Reges Anglorum Christicola
primus, as it is in the bordure of the Quire-hangings of Christ-Church:) and
having by his and his fellow laborers preaching, both by life and doctrine,
with Gods cooperating Grace, at length wrought his conversation to
Christianity, was so well affected and thankfully handled of him, that, for
reward of his service, amongst many favors, he obtained of the King his
Patron, a certain piece of ground on the East part of the City of Cant.
Whereon afterward, with the Kings help, he built this Abbey, dedicated when
so first founded to the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, and so known a
while, but afterward not (as Lambert Peramb. of Kent. in Cant.
will) only in memory of his benefit; but from the new dedication of it by
Archbishop Dunstan, in honor Sanctorum Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, sanctique
Augustini, in the year 978 Thorn. In vitis Abb. St Augustini.
: from thence (I say) his being added to the former Tutelars, and after that,
until the dissolution, called St Augustines.

It may not be forgotten that one maine end of setting apart this Suburbian
plot of ground, and of the erecting the Abbey upon it, (according to the
meaning of both Ethel. and August.) was that it should be a common Sepulcher
both for them and their successors, as well in the Kingdom, as in the
Archbishopricke, for ever after. For it was not then, nor long after, the
manner to bury within Unlawfulness of burial within Cities.
Cities (the City being a place not for the dead but the living, as it is in a
Charter of Ethelb. which shall follow anon:) and it being a thing defended. i.
forbidden to bury Anno Dni MCCXL istud altar de dicat. in honore^ Aplor Pet.
et Pauli et sci Augustim v. kal. Nou. An. Dni MCCC XXV. istud altar dedic.
fuit in honor Apost. Pet. et Pau. Sci Augustini Anglor Apli et Sci Aethelberti
Regis kal. Marc^. a Petro Epo Corhaniensi Place. between page 46. and 47
within Cities by the law of the 12. Tables: Hominem mortuum infra urbem ne
sepelito, neve urito. A law (it seems) standing till then; and long after in
force here, yet more for the reason sake of it (as I conceive) fitting it to
all Nations, which was the prevention of fire by burning, and other annoyance
by burying the carcass within the City, then as being any otherwise a binding
law to this kingdom, long before deserted by the Romans, and no way now
dependent on that Empire, or in subjection to it.

The further discovery of this Abbeys foundation and original; I leave to you
to make and take (if you please) from the ensuing transcripts of the Founders
Charters, four in number, whereof the three former are of Ethelbert, and the
other of Augustine, closed and fenced (as you shall see, according to the
manner of former times) with such solemn and dreadful imprecations upon the
violaters of their Piety; that (if the Charters themselves prove true and not
counterfeit, as some suspect them) I for my part (how light soever some do,
and will make of them) would tremble to be liable unto, for all the good, for
all the gain, were it near so much, that might accrue unto me by
intermedling. But to the Charters, which I have taken from Reyners Copy, in his
Apostolatus Benedictinorum, writing of this Monastery.

Char. 1.
IN nomine Domini nostri Jesus Christi: omnem hominem qui secundum Deum vivit,
and remunerari a Deo sperat, and optat, oportet ut piis precibus consensum
hilariter ex animo praebeat; quoniam certum est, tanto facilius ea, quae ipse a
Deo poposcerit, consequi posse: quanto et ipse libentius Deo aliquid
concesserit. Quocirca ego Ethelbertus Rex Cantiae, cum consensu venerabilis
Archiepiscopi Augustini ac Principum meorum, dono and Donalio situ^ Abbatiae.
concedo Deo in honorem sancti Petri aliquam partem terrae Iuris mei, quae
jacet in orient civitatis Doroberniae, ita duntaxat ut Monasterium ibi
construatur, and res quae infra memorantur in potestate Abbatis sint qui ibi
fuerit ordinatus. Igitur adjuro and praecipio in nomine Dei omnipotentis, qui
est omnium rerum Iudex Iustus, ut praefataterra subscripta donatione sempit
enaliter sit consirmata, it a ut nec mihi nec alicui successorum meorum Regum
aut Principum, sive cujuslibet conditionis dignitatibus and ecclesiasticis
gradibus de ea aliquid fraudare liceat. Si quis Imprecatio.
vero de hac donatione nostra aliquid minuere, aut irritum facere temptaverit:
sit in praesente separatus a sancta communione corporis and sanguinis Christi:
and in die judicii ob meritum malitiae Metae Abbatiae.
suae a consortio sanctorum omnium segregatus. Circumcincta est haec terra his
terminis, in Orient ecclesia sancti Martini, in meridie via de Burgate, in
Occidente and Aquilone Droutingstreet. Datum in civitate Doroberniae, anno ab
incarnatione Christi. 605. indict. 6. ^. Ego Ethelbertus Rex Cantiae sana mente
integroque consilio donationem meam signo crucis propria manu roboravi
confirmavique. Ego Augustinus gratia Dei Archiepiscopus testis consentiens
libenter subscripsi. Edbaldus. Hamigisibus. Augemundus Referendarius. Hocca
Tangil. Pinca. Geddy.

Char. 2.
IN nomine Domini nostri Jesus Christi. Notum sit omnibus tam praesentibus quam
posteris quod ego Ethelbertus Dei gratia Rex Anglorum per Evangelicum genitorem
meum Augustinum de Idololatra factus Christicola tradidi Deo per ipsum
antistitem aliquam partem terrae juris mei sub orientali muro Civitatis
Doroberniae, ubi scilicet per eundem in Christo institutorem Monasterium
Donatio.
in honorem principum Apostolorum Petri and Pauli condidi; and cum ipsa terra,
and cum omnibus, quae ad ipsum monasterium pertinent, perpetua liberate
donavi, adeo ut nec mihi, nec alicui successorum meorum regum, nec ulli unquam
potestati sive ecclesiasticae sive saeculari quicquam inde liceat usurpare; sed
in ipsius Abbatis sint omnia liberaditione. Si quis vero de hac Imprecatio.
donatione nostra aliquid imminuere aut irritum facere tentaverit, authoritate
Dei and B. Papae Gregorii, nostrique Apostoli Augustini simul and nostra
imprecatione sit hic segregatus ab omni sancta ecclesiae communione, and in die
judicii ab omni electorum societate. Circumcingitur haec terra his terminis: In
Orient ecclesia S. Martini, and inde ad Orientem by Sibben-downe, and sic
Termini.
ad Aquilonem be Wykingesmerk, iterumque ad Orientem and ad Austrum be
Burgaweremarka, and sic ad Austrum and Occidentem be Kingesmearke, iterum ad
Aquilonem and Occidentem be Kingsmerke, ad occidentem to Rederchepe, and ita ad
Aquilonem to Drouting street. Actum est hoc in Civitate Doroberniae Anno ab
incarnatione Christi. 605. indictione octava.. Ego Subscriptiones.
Ethelbertus Rex Anglorum hanc donationem meam signo sanctae crucis propria
manu confirmavi.. Ego Augustinus gratia Dei Archiepiscopus libenter
subscripsi.. Edbaldus Regis filius favi.. Ego Hamigisilus Dux laudavi.. Ego
Hocca comes consensi.. Ego Augemundus Referendarius approbavi.. Ego Graphio
comes benedixi.. Ego Tangisilus Regis Optimas confirmavi.. Ego Pinca consensi..
Ego Gedde corroboravi.

(...) meae, and spem retributionis aeternae, obtuli ei etiam villam nomine
Sturiag alio nomine dictam Chistelet, cum omnibus redditibus Sturiag. Chistelet.
ei jure competentibus, cum mancipiis, sylvis cultis vel incultis, pratis,
pascuis, paludibus, fluminibus and contiguis ei maritimis terminis eam ex una
part cingentibus, omniaque mobilia vel immobilia in usus fratrum sub regulari
tramite and monastica religione inibi Deo servientium, missarium etiam
argenteum, sceptrum aureum, item sellam cum fraeno auro and gemmis ornatam,
speculum argenteum, armigausa oloserica, camisiam ornatam, quae mihi de Domino
Gregorio sedis Apostolicae directa fuerat: quae omnia supradicto monasterio
gratanter obtuli. Quod etiam monasterium ipse servus Dei Augustinus sanctorum
Apostolorum ac martyrum reliquiis, variisque ecclesiasticis ornamentis ab
Apostolica sede sibi transmissis copiose ditavit, seseque in eo, Locus
sepulturae Reg. and Archiepisc.
and canctos successores suos ex Authoritate Apostolica sepeliri praecepit,
scriptura dicente, non esse civitatem mortuorum sed vivorum; ubi and mihi and
successoribus meis sepulturam providi, sperans me quandoque ab ipso Apostolici
ordinis principe, cui Dominus potestatem ligandi atque solvendi dedit, and
claves regni coelorum tradidit, a peccatorum nexibus solvi, and in aeternam
beatitudinis januam introduci. Quod monasterium nullus Immunitas monasterii.
Episcoporum, nullus successorum meorum regum in aliquo laedere aut acquietare
praesumat: nullam omnino subjectionem sibi usurpare audeat: sed Abbas ipse qui
fuerit ordinatus, intus and foris, cum consilio fratrum secundum timorem Dei
libere eum regat and ordinet: ita ut in die Domini dulce^ illa^ piissimi
redemptoris nostri vocem mereatur audire, dicentis, Euge serve bone, etc. Hanc
donationem meam in nomine patris and filii and spiritus sancti largitate
divina, ut mihi tribuatur peccatorum remissio per omnia cum consilio
reverentissimi patris Augustini condidi, idque ad scribendum Augemundum
presbyterum ordinavi. De his igitur Interminatio.
omnibus, quae hic scripta sunt, si quis aliquid minuere praesumpserit, sciat
se aequissimo judice Deo, and beatissimis Apostolis Petro and Paulo rationem
esse redditurum. Confirmata est haec donatio, praesentibus testibus,
Reverentissimo patre Augustino Doroberniae Testes.
ecclesiae Archiepiscopo primo, Mellito quoque and Iusto Londoniensis and
Roffensis ecclesiae praesulibus, Eadbaldo filio meo, Hamigisso etc. and aliis
pluribus diversarum dignitatum personis. Actum sane 45. Anno regni nostri, Anno
Domini 605.

Char. 4.
Privilegium St Augustini huic coenobio suo concessum.

AVgustinus Episcopus Doroberniae sedis famulus, quem superna inspirante
clementia beatissimus Papa Gregorius Anglicae genti Deo acquirendae legatarium
misit, ac ministrum, omnibus successoribus suis Episcopis, cunctisque Angliae
Regibus, cum suis posteris, atque omnibus Dei fidelibus, in fide and gratia
salutem and pacem. Patet omnibus quod Deo amabilis Rex Ethelbertus primus
Anglorum regum Christi regno sanatus nostra instantia, and sua prodiga
benevolentia inter caeteras ecclesias quas fecit and Episcopia, monasterium
extra Metropolim suam Doroberniam, in Doroberniam Regis Metropolim vocat.
honorem principum Apostorum Petri and Pauli regaliter condidit, and regalibus
opibus amplisque possessionibus ditavit, magnificavit, perpetua liberate and
omni jure regio cum omnibus rebus and judiciis intus and foris illi
pertinentibus munivit, suoque regio privilegio, and superni judicii
imprecatione, atque Apostolica sanctissimi papae Gregorii interminatione
excommunicatoria contra omnem injuriam confirmavit. Ego quoque ejusdem
libertatis adjutor and patrocinator omnes successores meos Archiepiscopos,
omnesque ecclesiasticas vel saeculares potestates per Dominum Iesum Christum
and Apostorum ejus reverentiam obtestor, atque Apostolica memorati Patris
nostri Papae Gregorii interminatione interdico, ne quisquam unquam ullam
potestatem aut dominatum aut imperium in hoc dominicum vel Apostolicum
monasterium, vel terras vel ecclesias ad illud pertinentes usurpare praesumat,
nec ulla prorsus subjugationis, aut servitutis, aut tributi condition, vel in
magno vel in minimo, Dei ministros inquietet aut opprimat. Abbatem a suis
Abbatis electio and conditio.
fratribus electum in eodem monasterio, non ad sui famulatum, sed ad dominicum
ministerium ordinet; nec sibi hunc obedire, sed Deo suadeat; nec vero sibi
subjectum, sed fratrem, sed consortem, sed collegam in comministrum in opus
Dominicum eum reputet. Non ibi missas, quasi ad suae ditionis altar, nec
ordinationes, vel benedictiones usurpative, sine Abbatis vel fratrum petitione
exerceat: nullum sibi jus consuetudinarium vel in vilissima re exigat, quatenus
pacis concordia unum sint in domino uterque, nec quisquam quod absit dominandi
dissidio in judicium incidat Diaboli, qui superba tyrannide corruit de coelo.
Reges gentium (inquit Dominus) dominantur eorum, vos autem non sic; cumque ab
alienigenis, non a filiis accipiantur tributa, sic ipse Dominus concludit, ergo
liberi sunt filii: qua ergo irreverentia patres ecclesiarum in filio Regni Dei
sibi vendicant dominationem? maxim autem in hanc ecclesiam sanctorum the
saurariam, in eujus materno utero tot Pontificum Doroberniae, Regumque ac
principum corpora speramus Pontisices and Reges hic sepeliendi.
alma refovenda sepulturae requie, ex authoritate scilicet Apostolica, and hinc
ad aternam gloriam resuscitanda. Tales supremi Iudicis amicos si quis offendere
non metuens hujus privilegii statuta violaverit, vel violatorem imitando vim
suam tenuerit, sciat se Apostolico B. Petri gladio per suum vicarium. Gregorium
puniendum, nisi emendaverit. Haec igitur omnia, ut hic sunt scripta, Apostolica
ipsius Institutoris nostri Gregorii comprobatione and authoritate Confirmatio.
servanda sancimus, suoque ore confirmamus, praesente glorioso rege Ethelberto,
cum filio suo Eadbaldo, and collaudante cum ipso, and omnibus Optimatibus
regiis atque ultro volentibus reverendissimis fratribus nostris a sancta Romana
ecclesia huc mecum, vel ad me in Evangelium Domini destinatis, scilicet
Lawrentio, quem nobis Deo favente, successorem constituimus, and Mellito
Londoniarum Episcopo, and Iusto Roffensi Episcopo, and Petro venerabili ejusdem
monasterii principum Apostolorum Abbate primo cum caeteris in Domino
adjutoribus meis; obnixe postulantibus, simulque in eos, qui haec fideliter
servaverint, benedictionem; aut in impaenitentes, quod volumus, transgressores
damnationem exercentibus.

These auspicious beginnings had answerable proceedings. For the foundation of
the Abbey thus laid, it became in process of time much advanced, both in the
enlargement of her buildings, and augmentations of her indowment. For the
first. After the death of King Ethelb. Eadbaldus (his son) at the instance of
Lawrence the Archb' builded a fair Church in this Monastery which he called S.
Mary's. After Eadbaldus, King Canute (the great Monarch of this Realm:)
Egelsine (the Abbat that fled for fear of the Conqueror:) Scotlandus (whom
the same King put in Egelsin's place:) Hugh Floriac (that was of kindred to
King William Rufus, and by him made Abbat:) were the persons that chiefly
increased the building: some bestowing Churches and Chapels; some Dortors and
Refectories or dining places, and others other sort of edifices Lamb. peramb.
of Kent in Canterbury.
.

Now for the latter, her increase in possessions and indowment, it would be too
tedious a matter to particularize but the one half of the donations and grants
of lands and revenues that were made and given by the multitude of benefactors
of all sorts, who out of the heat of their devotion to the place, for the
double founders sake, the one the great instrument of Christianisme brought and
wrought amongst the Saxon people of those parts, the other (by Gods blessing on
his endeavors) the first Christian King of the English-Saxon race, strived of
holy zeal, according to their knowledge to outstrip one another in an open
handed liberality to this Abbey. The Royal benefactors (for I shall Royal
benefactours to S. Augustine^ Abbey.
omit the rest) after Ethelb. (as Thorn informs me) were chiefly these. King
Eadbald his son and next Successor, who gave the manor of Northborne,
consisting of 30 plough-lands. King Lothaire, who gave 3 plough-lands in
Stodmersh. King Withred, who gave the manor of Littleborne of 5 plough-lands.
King Eadbert his son, who gave 6 plough-lands in Little-Mongeham. King
Edmund, whose gift was 2 plough lands in Sybertsweld. Kenewulf King of Mercia
and Cuthred King of Kent, who gave the manor of Lenham, consisting of 20
plough-lands and 13 Denes. King Ethelwulf the West Saxon, who gave 40 Caslatos
(Mansions I take it) in Lenham. King Ethelhert the West Saxon also, who gave
the manor of Merton in East Kent, of 3 plough-lands. King Canute, who together
with the body S. Mildred the virgin of Thanet, gave unto the Abbey all the
indowment of that late Monastery. King Edgar who gave Plumsted, of 4 plough
lands. Edward the Confessor, who gave all the land he had in Fordwich.

The succeeding Kings, for the most part, were rather confirmers or restorers
of the old, then contributers of new possessions to this Abbey. Whose Charters
(as the others) are many of them already published partly in Reyner's
Apostolatus Benedictinorum, and partly in Wevers Funeral Monuments. Wherefore
I spare their recital here. Neither will I wade or enter far into discourse
of the once flourishing estate of this ancient Abbey, lest I find it (as I may
justly fear it) even endless. For so many were the privileges, so wide the
possessions, and so very great the estimation of this Abbey, in many respects
(that of it being, of old, the selected place for the Royal and
Archiepiscopall sepulture, not the least:) as few other in the Kingdom did or
could in all points parallel it.

Only let me, ere my cloze, acquaint you from Mr Lambert Peramb. of Kent. in
Cant.
, that the house, before the dissolution, had five Covents, consisting (says
he) of 65 Monks, Benedictines, or of the order of the Black monks of S. Benet,
which began here in England with their Founder, (the nature hereof see
hereafter in Christ-Church:) And, as he adds (beside Jurisdiction over an
whole lath of 13 hundreds) it had possession of livelihood to the value of 808.
l' by year. Herein, (I suppose) following the estimate of her temporalties,
taxed at that sum by the Popes Delegates, the Bishops of Winchester and
Lincoln, John and Oliver, in the year 1292. authorized to tax and rate the
temporalties of all the Clergy both religious and secular throughout the
Kingdom, for the levying of a tenth thereby, which the Pope had granted to the
King (Ed. 1.) in subsidium terrae sanctae. But it seems Lib. Eccles. Christi
Cant.
that upon the surrender and suppression of the Abbey, which happened 4. December.
29. Hen 8. that estimate was well near doubled. For (as Speed and Wever both
have it) it was then valued, as the Record in the Kings Exchequer shows, at The
Abbey of what value.
1412. lib. 4s. 7d. ob. q.

Briefly this Abbey, and the Abbat thereof in right of his Abbatie, had Cuneum
monetae, allowance of mintage and coynage of money, by the grant of King
Athelstan Leg. Athelstani in Archaeon. Gul. Lamb. page
, which continued until the time of K. Stephen, and then was utterly lost,
Silvester the 45 Abbat, who died Anno 1161. being the last that enjoyed it.
Whereof Thorn writing his life has these words. Memorandum (says he) quod
iste Silvester Abbas and multi praedecessores ejus Abbates habuerunt Cuneum
monetae in Civitate Cant. sicut per inquisitionem factam per Arnoldum Far,
Wulfinum Mercere and alios qui jurati dixerunt quod quidem Abbas S. Aug.
Silvester nomine habuit in Civitate Abbat of S. Austins had coynage of money.
Cant. unum cuneum monetae and Elumdus Porre custodivit cuneum illud ex part
illius Abbatis, and quando ille Abbas obiit seisita fuit Abbatia in manu Domini
Regis una cum praedicto cuneo, nec unquam aliquis Abbas qui ei successit,
illius cunei recuperavit seisinam. Et fuit ista inquisitio facta temporibus
Hen. secundi Regis, and Regis Richardi filii ejusdem. The Abbat moreover was
Abbas intratus, first made so by Pope Alex. 2. as the same Thorn (in the life
of Abbat Egelsin) relates. Who says Dignified by the Pope with Mitre and
sandals.
that the same Egels. being sent on some Embassage to Pope Alex. 2. in the
year 1063. was there the first Abbat of this Monastery, to whom it was of the
same Pope permitted with his Successors, the Abbats of the place, to use the
Mitre and sandals, in manner of a Bishop, the Pope thus then pronouncing and
saying, Hunc apicem habere perpetuo rectorem decrevimus Augustinensem, ob
ipsius scilicet Romanorum alumpni and Anglorum Apostoli dignitatem. He was I
say a mitred Abbat, that is by Cowels interpretation Interpret in verb. Abbat.
page 2.
an Abbat Sovereigne, exempt from the Jurisdiction of the Diocesan, having
Episcopal Jurisdiction within himself. He had place and voice not only in
Parliament as a spiritual Baron, but also in the general Council, where, by
the gift of Pope Leo ixth, his place was to sit by the Abbat Montis Cassini
Reyner in appendice ad Apostolat. Benedictin. page 53.
A Catalogue of these Abbats and others, who living, by their learning and
piety; or dead, by the relics of their mortality, their deceased bodies,
some honorably intombed, others gloriously inshrined there, have enfamoused
the place, I refer you to find in Pitseus his Catalogue, and Wever's ancient
Funeral monuments. And hitherto of the flourishing estate of this Abbey.

It neither may, nor will (I know) be imagined but that this Abbey tasted of
both fortunes. Wherefore as you have heard somewhat of the weal, so now give
me leave with what brevitie I can, to acquaint also with the woe; the detriments
I mean and dysasters, that have at any time abated, and at last fatally
obscured and finally extinguished the glory and Majesty of this once famous and
opulent Abbey.

Whereof the first in time and not of least regard was her loss of the long
enjoyed right and interest to the burialls of the Kings and Archbishops, of
which, the former, in Archbishop Brightwald's, and the latter in Cutbert's
days were first taken from it Lamb. Peramb. of Kent in Canterbury.
.

Another was the grievous and frequent infestation of Abbey infected by the
Danes.
the place by the Danes: which (however their Chroniclers, for their Abbeys
greater glory, sometimes ascribe their safety, defense and deliverance from
those Invaders to a miraculous preservation:) yet doubtless either suffered
their violence, or at the least, and at the best, purchased their peace (and so
prevented their greater calamity) at a dear rate, and with costly redemptions,
especially in that lamentable spoil and devastation of the City under King
Etheldred, in the year 1011. The recorders of the tragical story whereof, the
elder Monks, Henry of Huntington, Roger Hoveden, and others, (whose pens a
miracle so mainly tending to the advancement of Monkery, in all likelihood
could not have escaped) tell of no such miracle as Thorn will have the Abbey
then rescued and saved by, which was, that when a Dane had taken hold of S.
Augustines pall or cloak (wherewith his tomb was covered) it stuck so fast to
his fingers, that by no means possible he could lose it, till he came and
yielded himself to the Monks, and made sorrowful confession of his fault.
Which thing so terrified the rest of the Danes, that they desisted and ceased
from invading the Monastery, and became chief protectors and defenders of it.
Cum Dani (as Thorns own words are) C^tuariam ferro undique and flamma
vastantes saevirent, quidam illorum sacrilegi, non causa orandi, sed
depraedandi malitia monasterium istud ultro introierunt: moxque unus eorum ad
malum proclivior, ad sepulchrum Apostoli nostri Augustini (ubi tunc jacebat
tumulatus) improbe accessit, palliumque, quo illud pretiosum Augustini
mausolaeum operiebatur, furtim rapuit, atque sub axilla sua illum abscondit:
sed divina ultrix miseratio raptorem mox rapuit, palliumque illud sub axilla
furis absconditum, quasi connativum cutis axillis furis inhaesit; nec unguibus
nec ulla violentia aut art deponi poterat, donec reatum suum coram sancto
praedicto, and loci fratribus, veniam poscendo de commissis, fur ipse
prodiderat. Quae ultio ita caeterorum Danorum multitudinem terruit, ut hujus
Monasterii non solum fieri timerent invasores, sed magis ejus praecipui forent
defensores. Thus he. But (as I said) our elder stories have no mention of this
miracle. Hoveden (I confess) naming the then Abbat of the place, says that he
was suffered to escape or go his way, happily (and as it may be reasonably
thought) because he had ransomed himself and his Abbey, by composition with the
enemy. But that your belief may not rest upon my bare and singular opinion of
this Abbeys partaking with the neighbor City, and Cathedral in their Danish
pressures, I will stand by, whilst Reverend Archbishop Parker gives you his,
who thinking it incredible that the City should so often suffer, by the Danes,
and this Abbey escape, thus expostulates the matter. Quid dicam (says he) de
Monasterio Sancti Augustini, Doroberniae, omnium primo and antiquissimo,
Romanorum Pontificum, atque Regum Cantiorum privilegiis adeo superbo, quibus
fretus ab omni subjectione and obedientia sui Archipraesulis, immune se
putarit? etc. Credibilene est inter tantas procellas hoc insolens coenobium
tutum and a Danorum impetu liberum esse potuisse, cum ipsam Deroberniam urbem
inclytam, it a misere depopulati sunt, ut supra retulimus: Thus he Antiq. Brit.
In vita Celnoths. page 72.
.

A 3d and 4th great dysaster to this Abbey was, the firing of it Abbey fired.
one time, and the almost drowning of it another. The former (by fire)
happening in the year 1168. (Anno Dom. 1168. says Thorn) die decollationis
St. Ioannis Baptistae combusta fuit ista ecclesia pro maxima part, in qua
combustione multae codicillae antiquae perierunt, atque ipsum feretrum S.
Augustini and multorum sanctorum hujus loci flebiliter sunt deformata; nec
mirum cum ipsa pene tota ecclesia igne fuerat c^nsumpta. Cujus infortunio
misertus Alexander Papa ecclesiam de Feversham ad reparationem ecclesiae sic
igne consumptae confirmavit; and ecclesiam de Menstre and Middelton ad
^acristiam pro reparatione istius ecclesiae deputavit.) The latter (by water)
in the year 1271. Abbey almost drowned.
(Eodem anno (says the same Author) die translationis St. Aug. facta fuerunt
tonitrua and coruscationes and tanta inundatio pluviae, ut Civitas Cant. pene
submersa esset. Occupaverat vero Vide Antiq. Brit. in initio vitae Kildwardby.
Mortmaine.
aqua totam istam Curiam pariter and ecclesiam, ut prope submersae essent, nisi
virtus Sanctorum ibi quiescentium obsisteret.)

The next great cross which befell this Abbey, but common to it with other,
was the restraint of the Laity from any longer extending the hand of their
bounty, in passing over their fee to the Abbey, without special license of the
King, by the Stat. of Mortmaine, or the law of Amortization; which timely to
moderate the before unlimited liberty of (...). Ed. 1.
the Laity in that kind, likely in time to give all to God, and leave nothing,
or but little, for Caesar and themselves, by their over forwardness and
extreme excess in that kind of operative devotion (a thing considering their
full persuasion of the meritorious nature of it, nothing strange) provided a
convenable restraint, tying and manacling the hands of the subject for the
future from that kind of overactive charity, without the foregoing privitie
and consent of the Prince. But this cross, this loss, was in part supplied
and made less sensible unto the religious, by a piece of policy which they
quickly put in ure, and that was the procuring not only of privileges and
immunities from payment of tithes, but also of Impropriations or Annexions
Impropriations.
of Churches, Parsonages I mean, to their houses; which though invented, and on
foot long before, upon what pretext see Hay in his Astrum inextinctum. quaest.
2. number 9. and seq. fol. 98. 99. yet now, the other current of their gain being
stopped, much more abounding then ever before Downings Discourse Conclus. 3. 5.
. All of them, but especially the latter, things improperly enough in the hands
of the Religious, and with cause enough reckoned among the 100 grievances of
Germany Fox. Acts and Monum. vol. 2. page 85.
, but much more improperly in the possession of mere laymen, as now they are
most what; but generally like the gold of Toulouse, not without a curse, a
cross at least, either real or personal, upon the person of the invader, or
his estate, or both, which though he either cannot or will not himself, yet
others both can and do see and observe to follow such profaners of the Churches
Patrimony the improper Layproprietaries of Parsonages and Church Livings.
Amicus Plato, Amicus Socrates; sed magis amica Pietas. Pardon this digression,
and I proceed.

By the way would you be further satisfied concerning the grounds, upon which
Impropriations of Churches to Monks and Monasteries first began, I find them
briefly to be these. Illud inprimis agebant Episcopi, dum ecclesias Monachis
attribuerent, ut paci ecclesiasticae subservirent. Quod enim pleraeque earum
ecclesiarum in ipsis Monachorum fundis conderentur, and ab eorum servis, qui
terram extirpatis silvis novarunt, frequentarentur; ne quid inter Clericos and
Monachos sereretur dissidii, postulabat aequitas, and concordia, ut Monachis
traderentur gubernandae. Ea causa cum deerat, aliam Episcopis suggessit
charitas, ut Monachorum sustentationi caveretur. Postremo id quoque causae
accessit, ut ecclesiae melius regerentur, tum ob accuratiorem institutionem
plebium, quibus Monachi ad omnem difficultatem praesto erant doctrinae per ea
tempora fere principatum habentes, tum ob Presbyterorum, quos fere tunc
erudiebant Monachi soli, delectum faciliorem. Itaque non paucae do^tiones ejus
generis signate cavent ut in Monachorum potestate s^ Presbyterorum electio,
atque Ecclesiarum gubernatio, etc. S. Roverius in his Illustrations upon the
History of the Monastery of S. John's at Rheimes. page 606. But to S. Austins
again.

I do not remember that I have read of or met with any other much considerable
loss, cross or misfortune to have befallen this Abbey afterward, until that
fatal blow of utter dissolution was given it by Hen. 8. Little had all the 29.
Hen. 8. 24. Decembris.
former casualties been to the ruin of this goodly Abbey, had not that sudden
and tempestuous storm (which bare down before it all the religious structures
of this kind throughout the kingdom) falling upon it, brought this with the
rest, to irrecoverable ruin: whose uncovered walls stood so languishing in
time, and storms of weather, that daily increased the aspect of her ruins,
till now lastly they are made subject to other public uses, and the whole
tract of that most goodly foundation in the same place no where appearing etc.
as it is in Speed Hist. page 294.
. Yet thither let me lead you, and have your patience whilst I survey the
present Remains of the place, which is my second Particular touching this Abbey.

Amongst which, I find scarce any of note beside Ethelberts (...). Particular.
Tower and S. Pancraces Chapel. But ere we enter the Sept, a word or two of
that. The sept or site of the Monastery yet appears and may be traced by the
circuiting walls, within the compass whereof the Elemosinary, by the
Court-gate (a place where the alms of the Abbey, the Almnery.
remains of their food being sent thither, were distributed as a main part of
their subsistence, to certain almes-people consisting of a society of Brothers
and Sisters, having had a Chapel to it now desolate, and rotting in it own
ruins) was included long ago, as it seems by a Composition Liber Eccles.
Christi Cant.
, in the year 1237. (four hundred years ago) made between the then
Archbishop and his Archdeacon of the one part, and the then Abbat, of the
other: (amongst other things) touching Jurisdiction, and right to the coertion
of criminous persons of the Monastery delinquent in the Diocese of Cant. extra
septa sui Monasterii, quae continent elemosinariam extra portam eorum, as the
composition wordeth it. Hugh the Abbat, of that name the second, when he
divided and distinguished the offices of his Monastery Thorn in ejus vita.
, assigned the Church or Parsonage of Northborne, with the Chapells annexed to
this Almnery.

Now enter we the sept, where the first thing in our eye Refectory.
observable (except the fair Hall, the late Refectory of the Monks) is
Ethelb. Tower. Not so called (as vulgar Ethelberts Tower.
tradition will fabulously tell you it was) from the building of it, either by
him, or by others in his time. In honor and memory of him I will grant it was,
but yet long since his days, being not built (I take it) until about the
year 1047. For (as it is in the private Chronicler, Thorn) the then
Archbishop Eadsin, beside some other acts of his bounty to the Abbey, gave 100.
marks, ad turris aedificationem, quae tunc fuerat in construendo, meaning this
Tower, as I conceive. Other certainty of the age of it, I cannot give, and so
leave it with the words of Speed Hist. page 294.
, who in the close of his discourse touching this Abbey, thus speaks of it.
Only Ethelberts Tower (says he) in memory and honor of the man, as yet has
escaped the verdict and sentence of destruction, whose beauty, though much
defaced and overworne, will witness to succeeding Ages the magnificence of the
whole, when all stood complete in their glory together.

The next thing (and what else only is observable amongst St Pancrace Chapel.
these heaps of ruins) is the Chapel of St Pancrace, built (as the private
Chronicler makes report) before Thorn.
Augustine came; and used by the King, before his conversion to Christianity,
for the place of his Idol-worship, but after it, the first that Augustine,
after he had purged it from the worship of the false, consecrated to the
service of the true God, and dedicated to St Pancrace. Wherewith the devil all
enraged, and not brooking his ejection from the place he had so long enjoyed;
the first time that Augustine celebrates mass there, furiously assaults the
Chapel to overturne it. But having more of will then power to actuate his
intended mischief, all he could do was to leave the ensigns of his malice,
the prints of his talons on the South-Porch-Wall of the Chapel, where they are
visible to this day. Thus Thorn tells the tale. And no better then a tale can I
conceive it to be. I will grant that a Chapel of that name, of no small
antiquity there was sometime standing, where a good part of her ruins are yet
left, built almost wholly of British or Roman brick (infallible Remains of
antiquity:) That on the Walls outside of the South-Porch, such tokens as the
Historian will have to be the marks of the Beast, are visible enough: That of
latter time this Story became vulgarly received. (Hamon Beale, to instance in
one for many, Anno 1492. gives by his Will Penes Registrum Domini Archid. Cant.
to the reparation of St Pancrace his Chapel within the precinct of St
Augustines Churchyard, and of the Chapel where St Augustine first celebrated
mass in England, annexed to the former, 3l. 6s. 8d.) But that either this was
the place, where Saint Augustine first said mass in England (St Martins was
it, as Bede Ecclesiastic. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 26.
will tell you:) or that the story is further true then I have granted, I
cannot believe.

To give you my reasons. Consult venerable Bede's preface to his
Ecclesiastical Story, and you shall find he there acknowledges his
intelligence for these parts received chiefly from Albinus the then Abbat of
St August. who with diligence instructed him in all things that either by
written record, or tradition of his Elders, had come unto his knowledge, any
way memorable. But take his own words. Auctor ante omnes (says he) atque
adjutor opusculi hujus Albinus Abbas reverendissimus, vir per omnia
doctissimus, extitit. Qui in ecclesia Cantuariorum a beatae memoriae Theodoro
Archiepiscopo and Hadriano Abbate viris venerabilibus at eruditissimis
institutus, diligenter omnia quae in ipsa Cantuariorum provincia, vel etiam in
contiguis ejusdem regionibus a discipulis beati Papae Gregorii gesta fuere, vel
monumentis litterarum, vel seniorum traditione cognoverat, and ea mihi de his
quae memoria digna videbantur per religiosum Londoniensis Ecclesiae presbyterum
Nothelmum, sive litteris mandata sive ipsius Nothelmi viva voce referendo,
transmisit. Thus Bid. Add hereunto that this was a matter so remarkable, an
occurrence, so much in itself, but in respect of the circumstances of time and
place, much more memorable. Of time: It happening so in the very infancy of the
English-Saxon Christian Church. Of place: Being such as from an Idol temple was
become, and that but newly a Christian Oratory, that, then it, there is not a
thing more worthy to be kept in memory in the whole story of the times: and
therefore could not have escaped the one, the intelligencers (Albine's)
knowledge, nor consequently the other, the Historian (Bede's) pen. But, for all
this, look and you shall find, that Bid is so far from making mention of
it, that he remembers not so much as the Chapel. This is much. But let me add
yet further. The following Chronologers, for the most part Monks all, pass it
over in deep silence. Could fame have been (think you) so sluggish, or so
confined, that so famous a matter as this should fall from no Authors pen till
(in comparison) but yesterday, till Spott and Thorns days? The case so
standing for me, credat Iudeus apella. And so I leave it.

Now being upon taking our leave of the Abbey, and Church yard.
making our retraict, let me lead you (as the next way out) over the forgotten
Sepulchers of the dead; the ancient Cimitery ground of the Abbey, and so out at
the gate before Burgate. Which great and fair Gate, with a battlement, and
that warlike invention of machicollation, called Porta occidentalis Cimiterii
St Augustini Sic in Compositione inter Abbatiam and Civitatem, de qua page 275.
, heretofore lead from Church-street (for so the street before it has usually
been called) into St Augustines Churchyard. A burial place not private and
proper only to the Abbey, nor only free to the choice of any that desired
burial there; but with all until the Dissolution, the proper and only
Cimitery belonging unto diverse Parish-Chuches of the City, destitute of such
Dormitories of their own, of which the Abbey had the patronage: such as were
St Mary Magdalen, St Andrew, and (as I verily believe) St Paul too; however
because of late some question has been made of it, I will not contend. But
what if it shall appear, that for more then 100. years together, next before
the Dissolution of the Abbey, not one of the many testators of those Parishes
have once mentioned any Churchyard of their own, either in appointment of it
for the place of their burial (as in other parishes that had Churchyards it
was usual to do) or otherwise; though of their Churches often? That scores,
if not hundreds of them have from time to time pitched on this common Cimitery
of St Augustine for the place and purpose aforesaid? that after the
Dissolution, and that Cimitery withdrawn and taken from them, not yet a
testator of succeeding times wills to be laid in any Churchyard of their own;
but, as now to seek of a resting place for their bodies after death peculiar
to them, betake themselves for burial to the Churchyards of
Neighbour-Parishes? That as the situation of two of these Parish-Churches will
not admit of any adjoining Churchyard: the one, like Fan-Church in London,
standing in the midst of the street, the other in a throng of contiguous
houses; so the the third needed none in regard of the neerenesse of it to this
Churchyard of the Abbey, which in right and title (I take it) of foundation, had
the patronage of it? That it was the known Monkish policy, for the gain sake,
to draw all the burials they could to their Abbey, and for that end probably A
piece of Monkish policy.
at the Churches foundation, wittingly debarred the people of a Churchyard, to
their Church: and lastly that this Abbey and Cimitery was built and set a part
for a burial of old, when as yet it was not lawful to bury in Cities. If
these things (I say) shall be made appear and proved, as they easily may, what
judicious and indifferent man then will conceive, against the strength of so
much probability and presumption to the contrary, that these Churches had their
proper Cimiteries adjoining to them, however there may be some who (in
confidence of not being gainesaid, because of their somewhat extraordinary age)
shall say they had? But videant quorum interest. And so I leave this Abbey.

The next thing after this Abbey, in the Suburbs, which I shall servey, is the
Church of St Martin, much celebrated St Martin.
both for the great antiquity of it, and also for the resort of Augustine and
his fellow laborers thither to their devotions at their first arivall Bid
Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 25.
, by the license of King Ethelbert, imparted to them in favor of Queen Berta
his wife (a Christian, and descended of Christian parentage, being the daughter
of Chilperike King of France) to whom this Church built long before, to wit (as Bede says) by the Romans, as some say in King Lucius days Vide Britanniar.
Ecclesiar. Antiquitates. cap. 6. page 130.
, and dedicated to St Martin, was permitted for the place of her public
devotions. The Church indeed seems very ancient, being built (the Chancell
especially) mostly of British or Roman brick, the noted relics and tokens
of old Age in any kind of building whether sacred or profane.

At this place afterward. i. from Archbishop Theodores until Lanfranc's time
by the space to wit of 349. years, there was a Bishops See Ms. in Archivis
Eccles Christi Cant.
, who always remaining in the Country, supplied the absence of the Archbishop,
that for the most part followed the Court: and that as well in governing the
Monks, as in the performing the solemnities of the Church, and exercising the
authority of an Archdeacon. So Lambert Peramb. of Kent in Cant^b.
. But the Chair happening void in Lanfranc's time: he whether because that
two Bishops were too many for one City (the very reason which as some say, he
gave for what he did) or by color of that ordinance of the Council of London
holden An. 1075 De qua vide Malmesbur. de g^st. po^t. lib. 1. page 2^3.
. requiring the remove of Bishops Sees from obscure rural villages to Cities,
or for that this Bp. was a Chorepiscopus, a kind of Country Suffragan, an
order (he well knew, no doubt) for just reasons, abolished abroad Canon
Chorepiscopi. 68. distinct.
: or for what other cause it is not certain. He I say (Lanfranc) refused to
consecrate any other. Nevertheless, because he needed the help of a
Substitute, he created in his place and stead, one of his Chaplains,
Archdeacon of Canterbury Lambert ubi supra.
.

In Ed. 2. time, to wit in the year 1321. the Parson of this Church, and the
Master of the Free-Schoole of the City fell at odds about the rights and
privileges of their several Schools: the Parson aforesaid, in right of this
Church, and by concurrent Custom, challenging a liberty to the keeping of a
Free-Schoole there, which the other would not admit of, but with a limitation
of the number of his Scholars; of which more hereafter when I come to
Christ-Church, within the modern precinct whereof the City Free-Schoole (as I
shall there show) was kept. And so I leave St Martins. Only I wish that for
the venerable antiquity of the Church, and sometime Espicopall estate of the
place, things that have much dignified both, it might better flourish in the
maintenance of its due rights and respects then I hear it does.

My Progress next invites you to (my Lord-cheife-Iustice Finch his Seat or
Mansion house) the Mote. So called Mote.
now and of latter time; but formerly, and that of old, Wyke: deriving it name,
either from that neighbor Wic, or Vicus, called Fordwik, upon which it borders
at that place (I take it) which in the second of King Ethelberts Charters is
called Wykingsmerke. Or else being named Verstegan.
Wyk, because (as the word imports) it has sometimes been a place of refuge
or retreat, as it were a hold or fortress in some time of hostility: a
derivation not improbable nor improper, if we add and take this along with us,
that there is a hill hard by it in the same Charter of Ethelbert, called
Sibben-downe. i. The Down (or Hill) of peace, or the Down where the peace was
made, intimating some battle or field there away fought, and afterward a truce
entered, or a peace made there with the enemy. Lukedale.


Here or near this place sometime lay the Chantery-Lands of Lukedale, in our
Cities perambulation called Lokindale, which being deserted and left desolate,
because of the smallness of the means not sufficing to the maintenance of a
Chantery-Priest with competent livelihood, was passed over to the Hospital of
St John's without Northgate, where once I saw the deed of conveyance thereof,
and thence took the following brief. The revenewes of the Chantery of
Lukedale, (called Contaria in Well vocat' Lukedale) consisting of thirty two
Acres of Land, 16s. 5d. ob. eight Cocks and nineteen Hens of annual Rent
with the appertanances at Wyke near Cant. (which Chantery was forsaken for the
smallness of the means) were alienated and transferred, by Thomas of
Garwynton the Patron, with license of the King and the Lord of the Fee. i. The
Abbat and Covent of St Augustine (within whose Manor of Lang-Port they did
lie) to St John's Hosp' without Northgate, An^no 1384. and 38. Ed. 3. Vt orent
and celebrari faciant pro animabus Reginaldi de Cornhelle quondam fundatoris
ejusdem Cantariae, Thomae patris dicti Thomae, and others, etc. The Chanteries
foundation shall be exhibited to you in my Appendix. Page 288.

This place our City perambulation fetches within her bounds and liberty. Here
(or hereabouts) the Hospital of St Lawrence had (happily still has) a portion
of tithes. For thus I read in the Hospitals private Leiger. Item praedict.
Hosp. percipit totam decimam de campo vocat' Wikesfield, cum 2. crofts ibid'
scil. Pitetokkyscroft and Homiscroft juxta Fishpole, and jacet inter regia^
Strat' verse. South, and Wyke verse. North. and viam quae ducit a cruce quatuor
capitum ad Trendels verse. West, and viam quae ducit a Fordwich usque Fishpole
verse. East.

Now let me lead you back from the Mote to Long-port Long port.
the ancient and first* Manor of St August. Abbey, whose bounds and limits are
still the same that you shall find and meet with in the second of King
Ethelberts foregoing Charters. Lxx Burgenses erant in Cantuaria Civitate huic
manerio pertinentes, says Doomsday Book. From this Long-port thus glanced at,
let me lead you next by Chantery-lane, anciently called Nova-strata
(New-street) to survey the Quondam Chantery there, called Doge's Chantery,
built Doge's Chantery.
by an Official to the Archdeacon of Canterb. and the last Parson of St Paul
(for in his time, and with his consent the Vicarage there was erected and
endowed) one Hamon Doge, in the reign of Hen. 3. in the year of our Lord.
1264. The foundation whereof Thorn records, thus.

Anno Dom. (says he) 1264. Magister Hamo Doge suae novisssimae memor ordinavit
Cantariam pro anima sua parentum suorum, and pro anima Domini Rogeri de
Cicestria Abbatis S^ Augustini, and pro animabus Successorum suorum, and pro
conventu ejusdem loci, and benefactoribus suis, and eorum successoribus, de
toto capitali Mesuagio cum omnibus ad idem pertinentibus in Nova strata in
parochia sancti Pauli sit. cum quinquaginta and septem acris terrae and quatuor
lib. sex solid. and novem den. annui redditus. Habend' and tenend' omnia
praedicta, scilicet in terris, redditibus, messuagiis, viis, planis, pasturis,
releviis, curiis; sectis, escaetis, wardis, maritagiis and omnibus aliis
libertatibus. Et ordinavit in praedicta Cantaria duos Capellanos in perpetuum;
and unus celebret in praedicto mesuagio in libera Cantaria, and alius ad altar
Sti Iohannis Baptistae in ecclesia Sti Pauli Cant. nisi infirmitate ve aliqua
necessitate rationabili fuerint praepediti. In creatione vero cujussibet novi
Capellani and perpetui ad praedictam Cantariam admissi idem Capellanus solvet
Abbati and Conventui Sti Aug. Cant. xiij. sol. iiij. den. nomine relevii pro
omnibus terris and tenementis quae de ipsis tenuerit. Ius vero conferendi,
instituendi, in corporalem possessionem inducendi and inductum tuendi Abbati
and conventui and little successoribus dedit and confirmavit, etc.

Steering our course Southward we come next to the ruins of the late Nonnery,
called Saint Sepulchers, founded Nonnery.
(not as Wever will, by one of the Abbats of St Augustines, nor yet I believe
to the end that Lambert says. i. to serve the necessity of the hot Monks of
that Abbey: but as Thorn reports) by Archbishop Anselm, upon a part of his
soil there: The same (I take it) which his predecessor Wlfhelem (long before)
purchased, described to lie juxta locum qui dicitur Rethercheap, extra portas
Doroberniae Charta Eccles. Christi Cant.
. But let me give you Thorns not of the foundation. Harum fundator (says he)
fuit Anselmus Archiepiscopus, and quanquam infra limits feodi beati Augustini
sint constitutae, tamen in solo Archiepiscopatus sitae sunt. Erat namque ibi
ecclesia parochialis in honor Sancti Sepulcri, de patronatu Archiepiscopi
exiguis terris circumcincta, ubi in presenti constat eas esse fundatas. You
have the foundation. Amongst the rest of the benefactors, that afterward of
their Charity endowed this house with revenewes, William Calvell a Citizen of
Cant. (of whose name there was of ancient time a flourishing family in the
City) carries the name and fame for the chief. After that King Rich. 1. had
given the Wood or Forest of Blean to Christ-Church, W. the Prior and Covent of
the same, granted to this Nonnery, and the Prioresse and Covent Liber Eccles.
Christi Cant.
thereof as much Wood as one Horse going twice a day could fetch thence, where
the Church Wood-Reeves stould appoint (summarium [summagium] unum in boscis
Summarium. Summagium.
nostris bis iturum [habendum] singulis diebus ferialibus, sumendum ubicunque
ministris nostris ad custodiam Boscorum nostrorum visum fuerit, etc. as the
words of the grant are:) Which uncertainty in the year. 1270. the Nonnes
releasing, had in lieu, and by way of exchange for it, a certain part or
portion of the said Blean-Wood assigned, and made over to them, to wit (as the
words of the deed are) Octoginta and december acras bosci, cum solo terra, fossis
and fossatis in bosco Prioris and Conventus in Blen, jacent' in longitudine
inter boscum Abbatis de Faversham, quod dicitur Bosindenne verse. West. and
boscum Prioris and Conventus verse. Est, and in latitudine inter boscum eorundem
Prioris and Conventus, versus North. and regalem viam versus South Liber
Memoratus. Minchen-Wood.
. The which Wood retains to this day the name of Minchen-Wood, taking it name
from the Nonnes, which our Ancestors, from the Saxon Mynecena called Minchens.
Or if any man choose rather to derive it from the Latin Monacha, I shall not
contend. For as in Egypt in times past, they used to call a Monk, or any man
that became noted for his singular Sanctimony of life, Nonnus; so was it then
and since, as ordinary for a Nonne or any like holy professor of that sex, to
be called Monacha, as it were a shee-monke Lexic. Philolog. in v^rb. Nonnus.
.

In this Blean-Wood (as having this fit occasion I crave leave to observe) the
Priory of Saint Gregory's, and the Hospital of Herbal-downe, sometime had the
like summarium bosci granted severally to them. The former by Hen. 2. in these
words. Vnum summarium bosci in Foresta de Blen, ad usus fociin ipsa ecclesia,
and in domibus eidem ecclesiae continentibus in ipsa Civitate Can^uar' Lib.
eccles. Cantuar.
: The latter by Rich. 1. in the like, to wit these: Vnum summarium in bosco de
Sorotte, (which was a part of Blean-Wood, and is now called Shoorth) ad
attrahenda ligna ad opus fratrum Charta vctus Hospit.
. In lieu and stead whereof they had severally the like quantity of 90 acres of
wood in Blean, afterward made over to them, as the Nunnery had Liber Eccles.
Bant.
.

To which I return. In the year 1184. the Church. i. the Parsonage of St
Edmund of Ridingate was granted to it by the Abbat and Covent of S. Aug. as I
have showed before more at large in my survey of that gate. The which Church
was afterward. i. in the year 1349. with the Nuns consent (being Patrons)
united by the then Commissary of Cant. to the Church of S. Mary Bredin, as I
there also have noted.

Time and Superiors indulgence bringing their corruptions, Nuns enclosed.
Nuns were not in process of time such Recluses as their order required;
whence, and upon the command of Pope Boniface the 8. by his letters written to
Archbishop Winchelsey and his Suffragans in that behalf Vide Walsingham. Hist.
Angl. de Ao 28 Ed. 1. and Anno Dom. 1301.
, as well as by that Decretall of his Cap. vic'. de statu regularium. in sexto.
concerning the confining of Nuns to their Cloy ster: the same Archbishop, in
the year 1305. enclosed these Nuns of S. Sep. according to that Constitution
Liber Eccl^s. Cant. Elisabeth Barton
.

At this place sometime one Elisabeth Barton, more vulgarly known by the name
of the Holy maid of Kent, that great Impostor of her time, was a veiled Nun
and Votarisse. Whose pranks and practices, or rather the Monks and other
Papalius, by her agency are obvious both in our Statutes and Stories. It would
prove tedious to repeat the whole matter. Accept therefore of this compendium
of it in Speeds words. The Romanists (says he) much fearing that Babel would
down, if Queen Anne might be heard against wicked Haman The Pope.
, sought to underprop the foundations thereof, with certain devices of their
own; and that the same might pass without note of suspicion, they laid their
forgery upon Heaven it self; whose pretended oracle Elizabeth Barton (commonly
called the Holy maid Elisabeth Barton the false oracl of the Romanists.
of Kent) was made to be; and the pillars of this Godless fabric were Edward
Bocking, a Monk by profession, and Doctor of divinity, Richard Masters parson
of Aldington, the The assiste^ of this false Prophetess.
town wherein she dwelt, Richard Deering a Monk, Hugh Rich a Friar; John
Adestone and Thomas Abell Priests, put to their helping hands, and Henry Gould
Bachelor of Divinity, with John Fisher the Reverend Father of Rochester,
employed Read Statute in Anno 25. H. 8.
their pains to dawb these down-falling walls, with their untempered mortar.
The Scribes that set their pens for her miracles, were Edward Thwaites
gentleman, and Thomas Lawrence Register, besides Hawkherst a Monk, who writ a
letter that was forged to be sent her from Heaven; and Richard Risby and Thomas
Gould, were the men which dispersed her miracles abroad to the world. This holy
maid, Elizabeth, made a Votarisse in Canterbury, was taught by Bocking her
ghostly father, and suspected Paramour, to counterfeit The counterfeiting of
Elizabeth Barton.
many feigned trances, and in the same to utter many virtuous words for the
rebuke of sin, under which, more freely she was heard against Luthers
doctrine, and the Scriptures Edw. Hall. John Stow. Hollinsh.
translation, then desired of many: neither so only, but that she gave forth
from God, and his Saints, by sundry suggestive relations, that if the King
proceeded in his divorce, and second marriage, he should not reign in his
Realm one month after, nor rest in Gods favor the space Cranmer. Cromwell.
Latimer.
of an hour. But the truth discovered by Gods true Ministers, this oracle gave
place as all other such did, when Christ by his death stopped their lying
mouths: for her self and seven Elisabeth Barton. Edward Bocking. Richard
Deering. Richard Risby. Richard Masters. H^y Gould. Two Monks.
of her disciples were executed for treason at Tiburne, and the other six put
to their fines and imprisonment. Thus he.

Shortly this Nunnery was a corporation consisting of a Lady Prioresse and five
black veiled Nuns, whose habit or apparel was a black coat, cloak, coul and
vail. It had a common seal and all other requisites of a complete Nunnery. All
which at length tasted of the common calamity and ruin of religious houses in
her utter dissolution by Hen. 8. At what time the estimate of her revenues
arose unto 38. lib. 19s 7d ob. per annum.

It seems the Parish Church of S. Sepulcher was born down S Sepulchers Church.
in the same fall with the Nonnery. For however frequent mention may be found,
both of Parish, Church, and Churchyard also before, yet since the suppression,
the place of the two latter is unknown, the limits of the other uncertain, and
the memory of all three almost extinct. Only that Stonegate by the turning on
your left hand to Dover-ward, seems to have been the Western door of the
Church, as I collect by this boundary. De terra quae jacet contra Ecclesiam
Sancti Sepulchri juxta vicum quo itur versus Dudindale, ex part australi
dictae ecclesiae Rentale vetus Ec^lesie Christi Cantuar.
. The boundary of the piece of ground directly over against it. The last Lady
Prioresse of this house, by name Dame Philip John, lies buried in the North I Will
of S. Georges Church, which in her will she calls Capella beatae Mariae Lib.
testamento^. penes reg^st. Dom. Archid. Cant. S. Lawrence.
.

Having done with the Nonnery, let us make next to S. Lawrence; an hospital
hard by, dedicate to the broyled Martyr S. Lawrence, when first built; (which
as the private Lieger of the place shows) was in the year 1137. by Hugh, of
that name, the second, Abbat of S. Aug. Hospitale S. Laurentii juxta Cant. fuit
fundatum per Dominum Hugonem secundum quondam Abbatem Monasterii S. Augustini
Cant. and conventum ejusdem loci 7. kalend. Feb. anno ab incarnatione Domini
1137. and anno regni Regis Stephani, secundo pro 16 fratribus and sororibus,
and pro uno Capellano and uno Clerico in eod' Hosp. servien. Thus the Lieger.
This Hosp. was intended Wever of ancient funer. Monum. page 255.
for the leprous of the Abbey: viz. that if it should so happen that any
professed Monk of that Monastery should be infected with any contagious disease,
but above all with the Leprosy, by reason of which sickness or infectious
malady, he could not live within the precincts of the Abbey, without prejudice
and scandal to the rest of the fraternity, that then he should be provided
for in this Hospital of a convenient chamber, of meat, drink and apparel, in
as full a measure as any one of his brethren living in the Monastery.

Also if it should so happen that the Father, the Mother, the Sister or brother
of any Monk of this Monastery should come to such great want and indigency, as
that (to the reproach of any of these brethren) he or she be forced to ask at
the Gates, the alms of the Fraternity, that then such of them so asking should
be provided for in this Hospital of sufficient sustentation, according to the
ability of the house, by the advice and consideration of the Abbat of Saint
Augustines, and the Master of this Hospital for the time being, as further
appears by his Charter (which I have seen in the Hospitals private Leiger)
confirmed by many of his successors.

After the founder himself (who gave to the maintenance of the Hospital, nine
Acres of ground upon which it was to be erected, and all Tith-corne of the
Lordship of Langport, by his Charter of the following lines.

Notum sit omnibus Dei fidelibus tam praesentibus quam posteris, quod ego
secundus Hugo Dei gratia Abbas sancti Augustini ejusdemque loci conventus pro
redemptione animarum nostrarum, praedecessorum nostrorum at que successorum
concessimus ac dedimus in elemosinam novem acras terrae de dominio nostro
precio quondam adquisitas, ad faciendum Hospitale in illis novem acris supra
memoratis juxta viam quae a Canterburia ducit ad Dover, in dextra part viae.
Contulimus etiam illi loco ad sustentationem infirmorum aut pauperum decimam
totius annonae de tota terra illa quam habemus in dominio in dextra part viae,
and omnem decimam frumenti and pisarum totius terrae quae adjacet ad Langeport
de dominio nostro in sinistra part viae. Quicunque igitur pro amore Dei
benefecerint insirmis illic habitantibus, and locum illum manutenuerint,
benedictionem Dei habeant, and gratiam simul and commune beneficium loci
nostri.

The revenewes of this Hospital were in process of time much improved by the
benevolence of many devoute people, that became benefactors unto it The whole
revenewes at the Collection were rated at 131^. 7^. 10d.
. Amongst the which one both of the first and most liberal was the Lord of
Dodingdale, a neighbor, by name R. de Marci, who by his deed or Charter, gave
unto this Hospital in Frankealmoigne, the Tithes of that his whole Manor. The
Charter you shall have anon when I come to Dodingdale. Of these Tithes shortly
after, the Canons of Saint Gregory's endeavored to despoile the Hospital. For
I find a petition Lib. dict. Hosp.
directed to Herbert the Archdeacon of Canterb. by R. de Marci the foresaid
Donor, to this effect, viz. That he would reseize the Hospital of them as in
former years, whereas they were that year, vi and armis, taken from it by the
Religious of Saint Gregory's, that he might have no cause of complaint to
Richard de Luci, cujus homo sum (says he) de tota terra mea. Concluding thus:
Et certum sit vobis quod illa decima and plures aliae de terra mea sunt de
Capellaria mea, etc. This Herbert (to whom the petition is directed) that you
may know the Age of it, was Archdeacon of Canterb. in Hen. 2. days Vid. Cat.
Archid. page 200.
, as Richard de Luci (whom it mentions) was chief Justice of the Realm about
the the same time Gloss. D. H. Spelman. page 411.
.

It seems this Hospital, and Saint Gregory's did not well agree together. For
after this, to wit in the year 1225. the Proctor and brothers of this
Hospital, sued the Prior and Canons of Saint Gregory's, before the Abbat of
Feversham, and the Prior and Archdeacon of Rochester (the Popes Deligates, it is
like) for the Tithes of Molonde besides Hepyntone, to wit (says the Leiger
Liber. Hosp. Sti Lawrentii.
) of 80 Acres of Land of the Earl of Glocesters Fee; but with what success I
do not find.

Now to Dodingdale Tithes again. Afterward in the year 1320. Robert de
Malling, the Commissary of Canterb. gave sentence with this Hospital for the
Tithes both of the same Manor, and also of 300 Acres and more of Land of
Thomas Chich and his Tenants, lying within the limits and bounds of Saint Mary
Bredin's Parish, upon clear evidence of the Hospitals right to the same by
ancient Muniments and otherwise Liber. Hosp. Pauperum Sa^dotum.
. For these last named Tithes of the 300. Acres and upwards, there lay a tie of
regratulation upon the Hospital. For thus I read in the Leiger: Item
praedictum Hospitale percipit totam decimam de 300 acris terrae and ultra
Iohannis Chich, de quibus 50 jacent apud Havefeld, and residuum jacet juxta
curiam suam, and in Mellefield juxta Stum Lawrentium. Et idem Johannes
percipiet de praedict. Hosp. in autumpno pro famulis suis quinque panes
frumenti and 2 lagenas and dimid. cervisiae, and dimid' caseum quatuor
denarior. Idem etiam percipiet unum par cirocecarum ferinarum pro seipso and
unam libram cerae in candelis, and pro famulis suis percipiet tria paria
cirocecarum Lib. S^ Lawrentii praed.
.

Many benefactors I could reckon up unto you which this Hospital has had: but
let these suffice. For, it being now dissolved, and in private hands, I suppose
there is little of the Revenewes now remaining to it: although it seems
(because an Hospital) the general Dissolution took no hold of it. For in an
ordinary visitation of the place in Cardinal Pooles time, Anno 1557. (long
after the common Dissolution) this Account of the then state of it is given up
to the Visitors, by the Sisters of the place Lib. in Registro Domini Ar^ chid.
Cant.
.

Md. they being examined did say that Mr Christopher Hales had a lease of their
land, and since his death from one to another till it came to one Tipsall of
London, who did make all the spoil of the House. And they say there should be
seven Sisters, and a Prioresse, and a Priest found out of the profit of their
Lands. The value of their Lands they esteem at xxl. Nomina sororum.
Iohanna Francis Prior.
Elizabeth Oliver.
Florence Young, nondum soror.


The chief Governor of this (as generally of all Hospitals) was called Custos
Hospitalis. And he was ever one of the Monks of St Augustines Abbey.

Leaving now this Martyr (or rather martyred) Hospital; Dodindale.
and coaftng still Southward, we will next visit Dudindale or Dodindale, (now
called Morton) a Manor lying within our Cities liberty, known anciently and a
long time together by the former of these names, whether because a Valley
seated between Hills bearing out in that form, or (as Dudley-Castle in
Staffordshire Cambden ibidem.
) from one Dudo or Dodo, an English-Saxon of that name, that might be Lord of
it, or from what other radix or original derived, I know not: but a name (I am
sure) by which the ancient residentiaries of the place (as places were wont to
give names to their Inhabitants) the family of Dudindale or Dodindale were of
long time known, until that of latter times (as I am credibly informed) the
place became the seat of the Mortons, and so lost it former name. The Tithes
of this Manor (of Dodingdale) Richard de Marci (as I told you before in St
Lawrence) between four and five hundred years since, gave unto that
Hospital, by his deed or Charter of this Tenor Lib. Sti Lawrentii.
.

Richardus de Marci omnibus suis hominibus Francigenis and Anglicis tam
presentibus quam futuris, Salutem. Sciatis me concessisse and dedisse decimas
terrae meae de Dodingdale Hospitali Sti Lawrentii quod est juxta Cant. in
perpetuam Elemosinam, pro salute animarum praedecessorum meorum, and mei, and
uxoris meae, and meorum infantium: quare volo and praecipio quatenus praedictum
Hospitale decimas praed' habeat and possideat been and in pace and libere.
Praecipioque ex part Dei and ex part mea ut fratres and sorores praedicti
Hospitalis habeant decimas illas nominatim ad lineum pannum emendum in festo
Sancti Iohannis Baptistae, quia credo quod tunc mei and meorum memores eru^.

The Church of Rochester has, or at least sometime had, a portion of Tithes at
or near this place. For as M^ Seldom (from the Chartulary of that late
Monastery) relates Hist. of Tithes. cap. 11. number 1. page 316.
. Haimo silius Guidonis de Dudindale, confirms, in puram and perpetuam
elemosinam; the gift made by his Ancestors, Gerold his Grandfather and Guy his
Father, of all the Tithes of his Land in Dudindale; which was afterward
confirmed also by his son and heir John. This Tithery at this day passes by
the name of Dodingdale Tithery. Of which all or some part (it seems) lay
within the limits of Saint Mary Castle Parish in Cant. as I collect hence, that
(as I have it from Doctor Tillesley Animadversions. 2. Edit. page 123. and ^24.
) a cause was brought in the year 1231. by Richard Vicar sanctae Mariae de
Castello, against the Prior of Rochester, for the Tith of an Acre of Land,
which was given, by the predecessors of John of Dudindale, to the Priory: as by
the sentence afterward appeared.

Near unto this place lies another Dale or Valley called Monkesdane.
(because it was parcel of the Monks demeasnesse of Christ-Church) Monkesdane.
It lies by the place, from the dark vaults (dungeon-like) which the much
digging of chalk there has occasioned, called the devils Court-hall. At this
place there once happened a very sad dysaster, which stands upon record. For
(as I read in the Crowne-Rolles) Simon filius Adae de Colynham, and Hen. filius
Hen. Thetchere de Cant. sedebant die sabbati in crastino Sancti Marci, Anno R.
R. Ed. filii Regis Ed. 17. in quodam loco subterraneo apud Monekesdan' in
Suburbio Cant. qui cedebant lapides, pro calce ibidem faciend': quos per
infortunium terra supercecidit, ita quod corpora eorum conquassabuntur, unde
moriebantur incontinenti.

Having done with this place and Dodingdale; let us Saint Jacobs.
wheel about and come to Saint James, or to Saint Jacobs, as we now call it.
An Hospital for Leprous Women, dedicate to the blessed Apostle Saint James. It
lies not (I must confess) within the tether of our Cities perambulation: but
yet borders upon it, the bounds of the City lying along the Hospital Wall;
wherefore I knew not how to balke it. It was built by Queen Eelanor wife to
King Hen. 3. says Lambert Peramb. of Kent in Cant.
, followed by Wever Ancient funer. Monum. page 238.
. Upon what ground I know not. Surely erroneous. For of certain it was an
Hospital before Hen. 3. reign. In King John's time, and that toward the
beginning of his reign (for as it appears by the Sigle, which is H: it was in
Archbishop Huberts days, who dyed in the sixth or seventh of King John) the
Monks, that is the Prior and Covent of Christ-Church, by their letters (as I
may call them) of protection, took it into their custody, charge and
patronage; and for the future engage themselves to a perpetual form of
reiglement thereof, as you may see by what here follows Liber Eccl^s. Christi
Cant.
.

OMnibus Christi sidelibus ad quos praesens scriptu^ pervenerit G. Prior and
Conventus ecclesiae Christi Cant. in Do. salutem. Sciatis quod intuitu
caritatis and pietatis, de consensu and voluntate Domini nostri H.
Archiepiscopi and ad petitionem magistri Firmini custodis domus sancti Iacobi
extra Cant. recepimus in custodiam and protectionem nostram praedict. Domum Sti
Iacobi extra Cant. sitam. Et tenebimus in eadem domo semper tres sacerdotes hic
per nos instituend. Qui erint professi in eadem praedicta domo in forma and
habitu religionis. Quorum unus cotidie celebrabit missam de beata virgin,
alius cantabit requiem pro benefactoribus ejusdem domus, tertius dicet commune
servitium, and isti tres sacerdotes habebunt unum clericum. Et erint in
predicta domo. semper xxv mulieres leprosae per nos instituendae. De ecclesia
de Bradegate and aliis redditibus and terris and substantiis and elemosinis and
obventionibus ejusdem domus providebimus tam sacerdotibus illis quam leprosis
praedict' necessaria. Et ut haec supradicta firma and inconcussa permaneant
imposterum presenti carta nostra and sigilli nostri appositione roboravimus:
salva dignitate Domini Archiepiscopi. His testibus Gilberto Roffensi Episc' H.
Cant. Archidiac' Rogero Abbate sancti August. Algaro Abbate de Faversham, etc.

Afterward Hen. 3. toward the augmentation of the Hospitals indowment gives
to it the personage of Bradegate, in these words Ibidem.
.

HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Dux Normanniae and Aquitanniae and Comes
Andegav' Archiepiscopis, Episc', Abbatibus, Prioribus and Comitibus, Baronibus,
Iusticiariis, Vicar. Ministris and omnibus fidelibus suis Angl' Salutem.
Sciatis me dedisse in liberam and perpetuam elemosinam and presenti carta mea
confirmasse leprosis mulieribus Hospitalis sancti 1. apud Cant. ecclesiam de
Bradegate cum omnibus pertinentiis suis. Ita quod Mr Firminus libere omnia
teneat and possideat tota vita sua, and post decessum ejus libera remaneant
praedictis mulieribus leprosis. Quare volo and firmiter precipio quod eedem
leprosae mulieres eandem ecclesiam habeant and teneant in libera and perpetua
elemosina sicut predeterminatum est, been and in pace, libere and quiet,
integre and plenarie and honorifice cum omnibus pertinentiis suis and
libertatibus and liberis consuetudinibus suis. Hiis testibus, etc.

It had much other revenewes, as appears by the Inventory thereof taken and
presented to the Commissioners authorized to examine such matters by the Stat.
37. Hen. 8. cap. 4. Amongst the which, one, both of the principal and first,
was the Ferme in the Parishes of Hakynton and Blean, for Firmin's Barton (as
the forecited Inventory calls it) vulgarly miscalled Infirme-Barton, and of
some, misconceived to have appertained to Saint Augustine. Probably so named
from that Mr Firmin or Feramin, the quondam Master of that Hospital, whereof
mention is before made in each of the Precedent Charters, the Donor thereof (I
take it) and (I believe) a chief agent in the Hospitals dotation, if not first
erection also. The rest of the revenew lay at Egerton, Charing, Mersham,
Bleane, Hakynton, Natindon, Thamington, Shadoxherst, Kingsnoth, Rokinge, and in
and about the City; altogether in the Inventory summoned up, de claro, at 46l.
6s. 3d. If any think it worth their labor to peruse the Survey of the State
of this Hospital in every particular as it was presented to those
Commissioners, it is in my custody, at their service. It pays now no Tith at
all (nor by law ought to pay any de hortis et animalibus Cap. 2. de eccles.
aedificand. Cui adjungas velim Statuta Huberti Archiep. in Hoveden. page 809.
edit. Francof.
:) but by that Survey it evidently appears a consideration in money in lieu of
Tith of the site of the Hospital, paid to the Parson of Thanington, viz. 18d.
per annum.

However the general Dissolution spared this Hospital, (as I think it did:)
yet it seems it did not long survive the same. For what says the Record Liber
Registri Domini Archid. Cant.
taken of the State of it in Cardinal Pooles Visitation, holden Anno 1557?
Memorand' (says the same) that Young the Fermor says that Freeman, and one
Dartnall caused the Sisters to surrender the house to the King, and from the
King this same came to the said Dartnall, by the Kings Letters Patents, and
says that their Lands were worth a hundredth marks by the year, and says
that it is in diverse men's hands, whereof Sr Edward Walton has bought a great
part of the lands which lies about him, and he himself has the Mansion house
and a part of the land, and says that the sisters have xlvjs. viijd. by the
year pension, and there is but one alive that he knows.

I will now cross the meadows and river and make up to Herbaldowne Hospital.
Herbaldown, to take a survey of the Hospital there. It lies also (I confess)
out of the liberty of the City. Yet, for neighborhood sake, and in regard it
was built for the benefit of leprous people of the City (as I conceive:) and
continues a harbor to the aged poor (chiefly) of the same, I have thought it
worthy our survey.

Before I enter upon which (because this was also a Lazar Leprosy.
house) let me take a little notice of the wondrous commonnesse of that
loathsome disease, the Elephantiasy, or Leprosy in this kingdom of old time:
which Mr Cambden Britan. in Leicestershire.
thinks entered this Island with the Normans. A rare disease amongst us (thanked
be God) in these days, and from what cause so much abounding as in our
forefathers, is not now of us easily discovered. It seems to have been a
national malady, and accordingly in all parts provision made for receipt and
relief of such persons as that (as I may call it) comitiall disease had marked
out for sequestration from public commerce. Whereof there were no less then
three about this City, this of Herbald one, S. Jacobs another, and S. Lawrence
a third. The chief for wealth in the whole kingdom, and head to all the rest,
was that called Burtonlazars in Leicestershire Idem, Ibidem.
. The privileges communicable to the benefactors (and those of the
fraternity) of which Spittle (the baits they laid to take devout people
withal) the following instrument will show, if you peruse it.

VNiversis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis ad quos praesentes literae
pervenerint, Frater Willielmus Sutton Magister de Burton Burton Lazars.
sanc' Lazari ordinis Ierlm' in Anglia and ejusdem loci confratres, salutem ac
utriusque hominis incrementum. Quum quanto magis spiritualia dona erogantur,
tanto ut credimus potentiora aeternae salutis praemia consequantur. Igitur
verae dilectionis vestrae innotescimus per praesentes qd' sanctae Romanae
ecclesiae Pontifices ex eorum plenitudine potestatis nobis gratiose indulserunt
ut omnibus qui de facultatibus and bonis suis eisdem a Deo collatis
subvenerint, seu ad benefaciendum nobis alios exortati fuerint, vel in nostram
fraternitatem extiterint assumpti toties quoties unum annum de injuncta eis
poenitentia misericorditer relaxarunt, et ad plenam participationem omnium
missarum matutinarum et aliarum orationum et devotionum in singulis ecclesiis
nostri ordinis per orbem Dei offerendarum admittunt, ac singulis annis die
Veneris majoris ebdomadae proprio Curato plenam concedunt potestatem eisdem
absolvendi ab omnibus peccatis et criminibus nisi talibus super quibus seeds
Apostolica sit merito consulenda. Vota igitur abstinentiae et peregrinationis
quaecunque commutandi in alia pia subsidia et dona caritativa domui sive
hospitali nostro de Borton sancti Lazari Ier'lm' eroganda, Votis ad terram
sanctam et ad limina beatorum Apostolorum Petri et Pauli et voto castitatis in
vita duntaxat exceptis: In articulo vero mortis omnium peccatorum suorum plenam
remissionem. Personis autem ecclesiasticis in nostram fraternitatem assumptis
qui propter notam irregularitatis sententia^ a canone vel homine contractam ad
Sed. Apostolicam pro absolutionis beneficio deberent accedere, ut id a proprio
Curato valiant recipere misericorditer concesserunt. Ac etiam ab eodem Curato
proprio de horarum canonicarum aut servitii divini omissione pro recompenso
plenam remissionem accipere valiant. Insuper si ecclesiae ad quas pertinent qui
in nostram fraternitatem sunt assumpti ab officiis and servitio divino fuerint
interdict' ipsosque mori contigerint eisdem sepultura ecclesiastica non negetur
nisi vinculo excommunicationis majoris nominatim fuerint innodati. Nos igitur
Magistri and Confratres Hospitalis praedict' auctoritate Apostolica vigoreque
privilegiorum in nostram fraternitatem sanctam Iohannem Dyg and Iohannam
consortem devote recipientes nostrorum privilegiorum, Indulgentiarum and
aliorum pietatis operum participes in omnibus facimus per praesentes sigillo
nostrae fraternitatis signat'. Dat' apud Borton Sancti Lazari praedict' in domo
nostra Capitulari, Anno Dom. Millesimo cccco octogesimo quarto.

Thus endorsed.

AVctoritate Domini nostri Jesus Christi and ex spirituali gratia mihi concessa
a sanctissimo Domino nostro Papa. Ego absolvo te ab omnibus peccatis tuis quae
contra Deum and teipsum fecisti, necnon ab omnibus sententiis, interdictis and
suspensionibus concedo tibi plenam remissionem si in hac infirmitate decesseris
and in mortis articulo existas, alioquin ex misericordia Dei salva sit tibi
gratia donec fueris in mortis articulo constitutus, Amen.

But enough of this. Come we now to the Hospital it self. Whereof let me first
give you the foundation, as Edmerus has it Hist. Novor. lib. 1. page
. Remotius vero (says he, having immediately before mentioned the foundation
of S. John's Hospital without Northgate) quam a Boreali ab Occidentali porta
Civitatis ligneas domos in devexo montis latere fabricans, (meaning Lanfranc)
eas ad opus leprosorum delegavit, viris, quemadmodum in aliis, a foeminarum
societate sejunctis. His nihilominus pro qualitate sui morbi omnia quibus
egerent de suis ministrari constituit, institutis ad hoc peragendum talibus
viris de quorum solertia, benignitate ac patientia, ut sibi quidem videbatur,
nemini foret ambigendum. Thus he. By which it appears who was the founder, the
time also, and end or intent of the foundation of Herbald. Hosp. My Author you
see specifies not the indowment settled upon it by the founder. With your leave
I will supply that omission and show you both what the original indowment was,
and how afterward improved.

Archbishop Richard, Beckets immediate Successor in a charter Iuter chartas
Hosp. S. Iohannis extra Northgate.
(which I have seen) of his to this, and S. John's Hosp. relating first their
erection by his predecessor Lanfranc, shows that he endowed them with
sevenscore pound per annum, to issue and arise out of his Manors of Reculver
and Bocton, that is, to either Hospital after an equal division, 70 lib. per
annum. This now was the original indowment of both these Hospitalls. With
which the same Richard, finding them scarce well able to subsist, in
augmentation, added 20 lib. per annum more to their former means, payable out
of Reculver Parsonage. Which 160 lib. continued afterward constantly paid unto
them, and un-altered, until Archbishop Kilwardby's days. For so it appears
by an exemplification made of certain Charters of those Hospitalls, under the
seal of Thomas Chicheley, D^ of the Decrees, Archdeacon of Canterbury, and
Prothonotary to the Pope, and signed by his Registrorum Custos and Actorum
S^riba: namely, that from Beckets time downward until Kilwardbyes, these 2
Hospitalls had and received by equal division yearly 240 marks or 160 lib. of
the Archbishops Chamber, saving that 20 lib. of it was paid them of the Parson
of Reculver. This, Kilwardby misliking, withdraws their stipend, and in lieu
assigns and appropriat^ over to them his Parsonage of Reculver, with the
Chapels annexed. But for some inconveniences (that of the leprous condition of
the people of this Hospital, the main, rendering them both unable and unfit to
attend and intermeddle in a tithery, especially so remote:) his next Successor
John Peckham alters and revokes what he (Kilwardby) had done, and redintegrates
the Hospitalls into their former estate. Archbishop Stratford afterward gets
the King (Ed. 3.) of whom this Parsonage held in capite, by his Charter, to
appropriate it mensae Archiepiscopali, to the Archbishops table, yet charged
with that old payment or stipend, which Simon I slip afterward, with consent
of the Chapter, the Prior and Covent, confirms unto them, and that (for the
better strengthening of their title, maintainable as yet only by customary
right, having no sufficient jus scritpum to show) by his charter in writing,
whereby to recover it, if at any time denied or detained. Ever since which time
they have peaceably enjoyed the same. These things I thought good the rather to
deduce, that I might vindicate that false aspersion wherewith some of the old
people of these Hospitalls, ignorant altogether of the premised passages, are
wont to deprave some of the Archbishops of former times, for depriving them of
this and that Manor, and I know not what other means, revenues and indowment,
wherewith they say and will tell you their houses were at first so richly
endowed, as they cannot think their Prior of old time, any less man forsooth
then a Lord Prior, I wot. But thus others have told them, and they think they
may take it up upon trust, and say as much after them.

I shall not insist on the specification of the other revenues of this
Hospital, whereof, by the charity of former times, it has a pretty
competency: Eilgar at Bourne and John of Tonford neighbors to the place in
their time being the prime (I take it) of the secular benefactors, as King Hen.
3. was of the Royal, who gave to the poor here 20 marks a year, out of of
the City Fee-ferme, payable by the Chamber.

This Hospitalls ancient governor, now called a Master, was a Deane. For to a
very ancient deed of the Hospital (amongst other witnesses) one Benedict in
the first place subscribes, with this addition of tunc temporis Decani de
sancto Nicolao. Pope John 23. Inter Chartas Hospitalis.
by his bull, discharged this Hospital of payment of tithes de hertis,
virgultis and animalium nutrimentis.

Hitherto and enough of the care taken for their bodies, and the furnishing of
them with the necessaries of this life. Next, of the provision made for their
souls, and their Christian instruction that might prepare them for that better
one to come.

Adjoining to this Hospital is an indifferent fair Church, lately (as the
Hospital) by the cost of the reverend Master, S. Nicholas Church.
Dr Iackson, much beautified, which sometimes was a Parish Church, and has in
it a Font (an ancient one) and to it a Churchyard (the badges and characters
of a Parochial Church:) and in the account of the state and condition of the
Hospital given to the Commissioners upon the Stat. 37. H. 8. c. 4. it is
avouched to be a Parish Church, and to have parochial rights; and Archbishop
Stratfords appropriation of it to Eastbridge (whereof anon) calls it ecclesiam
parochialem (the Parish Church.) It was indeed the Church of the Parish of S.
Nicholas at Herbaldowne: the bounds, extent and continent whereof I have not
hitherto met with: only once I saw a deed registered in the Lieger of Eastb.
Hosp. 400 years old and upwards, mentioning a piece of land, abutting Eastward
to the highway leading to the Barton of Westgate (.i. Westgate-Court) from
Tonford, therein said to lie in the Parish of S. Nicholas of Herbald. A
Parsonage it once was; pays Procurations to this day, as a Parsonage, and by
the same name was in the year 1292. at the general valuation made of all
ecclesiastical livings in this Diocese Lib. Eccles. Christi Cant.
, valued at 9 marks per annum, (more then most of the Parsonages in and near
about the City were rated at:) and accordingly the tenths set at xijs. And the
ancient Incumbent thereof (as a Parson and Parsonage are relatives) was a
Rector, or in the phrase of our Municipalls) a Parson Anno 37. Hen. 3. one
Thomas Walsham, by his charter granted Prout in Charta quad. hujus Hosp.
to William the brother of Gilbert, of S. Nicholas of Herbald. a certain croft,
unto which deed one Luke the then Parson of St Michael of Herbald. (amongst
others) was a witness. To this Church, and the then Presbyter thereof (the
Parsonage and Parson, (as we since phrase it, of St Nicholas) Theobald the
Archbishop, by his Charter attested by Walter the then Prior of Christ-Church
(amongst others) granted the tithes of his and his Sees Manor of Westgate Lib.
de Eastbridge.
. The Parsonage thus improved, a Successor of Theobald, John Stratford, in the
year 1342. 15. Ed. 3. upon his novell ordination of the Hospital of
Eastbridge in Canterbury, and in and by the same Charter, annexed and
appropriated to that Hospital (the Deed or Charter whereof I purpose shall
follow in my Survey of Eastbridge:) But because it should seem that Church had
been the Hospital Church of St Nicholas, wherein the poor there had the
Sacraments and Sacramentals ministered unto them, by the Incumbent for the time
being, (it was built for them, as Archbishop Parker says, by Lanfranc their
founder) the appropriator, Stratford, to prevent and provide against all damage
and detriment which that appropriation might occasion to St Nicholas Hospital,
obliges Estbridge Hospital to the finding (not of a Vicar, the living was too
slender to maintain one, but) of a Chaplain who should officiate and minister
to them in divinis (as the foresaid Instrument will show:) In this, Archbishop
Wittlesey afterward finding some inconvenience, Harbal down Chantery.
Anno 1371. erects a perpetual Chantery, the Chantery-Priest whereof (because
of the danger of conversing with the Hospitallers, being leprous people many of
them) seated and housed a part, viz. over against the Hospital gate, and
endowed with a competency of revenew, partly from the one, partly from the
other Hospital; was charged with cure of souls, and to that end tied to
perpetual residence upon it, as the instrument of that Chanteries erection and
dotation (to be sought in my Appendix Vide page 241.
) more at large will show. In this wise things stood with the Church of Saint
Nicholas afterward until the latter end of Hen. 8. or beginning of Ed. 6.
reign. About which time the Chantery and Chantery-Priest vanished. Since when,
the Church continuing to the Hospital, the poor are served there in divinis,
by one in orders, a member of the house.

I was willing to enlarge my self in this matter the rather, because the state
of this Church inquired into by some, but unknown of most, I would make as
evident as my reading and observation had enabled me. And so I have only a
tale to tell you from Erasmus touching an old ceremony used heretofore in this
Hospital (as Wever has abridged it:) and I shall take leave of it. In this
house (says Wever Ancient suner. Monum. page 259.
) was reserved the upper leather of an old shoe, which had been worn (as
they gave it out) by Saint Thomas Becket: this shoe, as a sacred relic, was
offered to all passengers to kiss; fair set in Copper, and Crystal.

What he there adds of a Priory of black Canons, which (as he says) was
originally annexed to this Hospital by Lanfranc the founder, is but a tale.
The man was mistaken in this, as he is much out in many other things about this
City. The Priory, I wot, by him intended is that of Saint Gregory without
Northgate, over against Saint John's Hospital there of Lanfranc's foundation,
to which it was not annexed neither, much less to Herbald. but an injunction
only laid upon the Canons of the place to minister unto the poor of Saint
John's in things appertaining to their souls health, and in rites of burial,
as in proper place I shall further show.

My progress being circular I am bound next for Saint Stephens or Hakynton.
Whither my next way lies (by Beausherne, Hakynton. Bea^sherne.
anciently as still a parcel of the Demeasnesse of Poor Priests-Hospitall in
Cant.) over Saint Thomas-hill. St Thomas. hill.
Where I will stay you no longer then whilst I may give you the derivation of
the Hills name. The Inventory of Rents and Revenewes of Esbridge Hospital
presented to the Commissioners upon the Stat. 37. Hen. 8. cap. 4. calls it
Thomas Becket's Hill. And that (I suppose) either because the greatest part of
the demeanes or endowment of that Hospital, built by Archbishop Becket, and to
this day called Hospitale sancti Thomae martyris de Eastbridge, lay, as it does
still, about that Hill; or else from a Chapel sometime standing thereaway,
called Saint Thomas Chapel, whereof in a deed of Eastbridge-Lieger of diverse
quit-rents extra Westgate, I read as follows: Iuxta campum in quo nova
capella beati Thomae Martyris fuerat. So much of that. Now for Hakynton.

I might here enter into a large discourse of the fierce quarrel that happened
between Baldwin the Archbishop, and his Monks, the Prior and Covent of
Christ-Church about a college by him intended to have been erected at this
place, which (the cause of their opposition) would mainely have damnified the
Monks, had the project succeeded. But the story is delivered by so many hands
already, and that so fully and at large, that (not desirous to make my book
swell with other men's labors) I purposely spare the recital of it, and
refer the Reader, for satisfaction, to the Antiquitates Britannicae, the
Catalogue of Bishops, to the Acts and Monuments, and Lamberts perambulation. I
my self also shall have occasion to give a touch upon it hereafter, in the
life both of the same Baldwin, and of Alanus the Prior.

I pass from Hakynton, and crossing the Meadows and Barton.
River at Barton (sometime a Manor of Christ-Church, and that which Doomesday
Book calls Northwood, from it may seem the sometime woody condition of some
part of the soil; in speaking whereof Lambert Perambulation of Kent in Norwood.
commits some errors, especially in saying the Manor was long time in the
possession of certain Gentlemen of the same name, etc.) I come next to the
Suburbs without Northgate. Where, after we are past Jesus Hospital, a Spittle
for the Iesus-Hospital.
poor served there with good annual allowance by the Founder, Saint John Boys
Knight deceased, (whose Monument placed by his Tomb against the North-wall of
the Body of Christ-Church, further sets forth what he was:) the Priory of Saint
Gregory's, and the opposite Hospital of Saint John's minister unto me much
matter of Survey. I shall first, from Edmerus Hist. Novor. lib. 1. page
, give you their foundation jointly, and then treat of them in several.

Extra aquilonalem denique portam urbis illius lapideam domum decentem and
amplam construxit, and ei pro diversis necessitudinibus hominum and
commoditatibus habitacula plura cum spaciosa eurte adjecit. Hoc palatium in duo
divisit, viros viz. variis infirmitatum qualitatibus pressos uni; parti vero
alteri foeminas se male habentes instituens. Ordinavit etiam eis de suo
vestitum, and victum quotidianum; Ministros quoque atque custodes qui modis
omnibus observarent ne aliquid eis deesset, neque viris ad foeminas, vel
foeminas ad viros accedendi facultas ulla adesset. Ex altera vero part viae
Ecclesiam in honorem beati Gregorii Papae composuit, in qua Canonicos posuit,
qui regulariter viverent, and praefatis infirmis quae saluti animarum suarum
congruerent cum Sepultura ministrarent. Quibus etiam in Terris, in Decimis, and
in aliis redditibus tantae largitus est, ut ad sustentationem eorum
sufficientia esse viderentur.Thus Edmerus.

The Priory (to begin with that) was you see a house of regular Canons,
otherwise called (from their habit, Saint Gregory's.
which was a white coat, and a linen rochet, under a black cope, with a
scapular to cover their head and shoulders Tolyd. Virg. de Invent. Rer. lib. 7.
cap. 3.
) black Canons: of the order of Saint Augustine, as appears by the Catalogue
of the Monasteries of that order (among which it is reckoned for one:) which
coming in and compounding with the King (Ed. 1.) about a subsidy (for denial
whereof by the whole clergy, regulating themselves by the Popes constitution,
and their Archbishops example, they were by Parliament excluded from the Kings
protection, and their goods pronounced confiscate to the King) obtained letters
of protection Reyner Apostolat. Benedict. in Appendice. page 66.
.

It was (I take it) the first house of Regular Canons in the whole Kingdom.
Sure I am it was erected long before the Priory (of the same order) at Nosthill
in Yorkshire, which Reynor Apostolat. Bened. page 158.
says was the first the Kingdom had, being built (as he delivers) by Adelwold
or Ethelwolph, Hen. 1. his confessor, that first (if we may believe him)
brought the order into this Land.

What number of Canons here were required by the foundation, I know not, but in
a visitation Lib. Registri Consistor. Cant.
of the Priory by Cardinal Bourchier, only five give up their names with the
Prior, who indeed then complained of the paucity of his Canons, which (as he
lays the fault) was occasioned by the diminution of their revenewes, or (in
his own words) their Lands, Tents and Rents. Which their revenew what it was,
or where it lay, I can say but little; because I could never as yet get a sight
of the Leiger.

Concerning this Priory, in the Book of Doomsday, in the Archbishops Manor of
Stove-saete or Westgate (as we now call it) thus I read. Et inibi sunt iterum
xxx. and ij. mansurae and unum molendinum, quae tenent clerici sancti Gregorii
ad eorum ecclesiam. Ibique manent xij. Burgenses qui reddunt eis xxxvs. and
molendinum reddit us. The same Doomsday in another place, under the Title of
the City mentions the same thing, but with some little variation, thus.
Archiepiscopus habet infra Civitatem Cant. xij. Burgenses, and xxx. mansuras
quas tenent clerici de villa ingildam suam, and reddunt xxxvs. and unum
molendinum reddit us. This Priory had other indowment, consisting (as Edmerus
shows) as well in Tithes as Temporalties. As for their Titheries, in the year
1292. (at what time their Temporalties in Canterbury, Natyndon, Hugevelde,
Chertham, Tanintone, and Herbaldowne, were together valued at xxxl. xvs.) they
were these, the Parsonages of Taninton, Westgate, Northgate, St Dunstan,
Natindon, Livingsborn, Waltham, Elmested, Betrichedenne, Stallesfield. Together
with certain Titheries in Goldstaneston, Berham, Plukele, and Risseburne Lib.
eccles. Christi. Cant.
. The whole revenew every way Mr Lambert reckons up to but 30l. falling much
short of Speeds estimate, which is 166l. 4s. 5d. Whether of them is mistaken, I
leave it to them to inquire that please to search the Record.

As for any remarkable matter or occurrence concercerning this Priory until
the suppression, I read of none Lambert Peramb. of Kent in Canterbury.
beside the firing of it in King Stephens days.

As appertaining, so also adjoining to this Priory, before and until the
Dissolution (yea and after too) was a Coemitery or Churchyard, not proper
only to the Priory, for the burial of the Domestics, but which was (whether
of right, or by courtesy only, I know not) common to others also with them,
and those not the Hospitallars only (the reason why they were till very lately
destitute of any Churchyard within themselves) but also the Parishioners of
Northgate, their neighbors, of which Church this Priory had the Patronage, who
did constantly, by their Wills, appoint their Burials in that Churchyard, and
never mention other of their own: it faring with them as with those other
Parish Churches of the City, which belonging some to Christ-Church, some to
Saint Augustines, had their want of Churchyards supplied by those Monasteries.
This at Saint Gregory's continued to the Parish of Northgate after the
dissolution, until (as the tradition goes) Sir John Boys the late Tenent to
the Priory obtained to appropriate and enclose it upon exchange of the modern
Churchyard ground for it with the Churchwardens of Northgate for the time
being. It continued (I say) till then to the Parish, for a burial place; de
facto, but was not acknowledged theirs of right. For at a visitation Lib.
Consistorii Cant.
holden in the year 1560. it is from Northgate, by the sworn men (inter alia)
thus presented viz. That Mr May does withhold part of the Churchyard etc. This
Mr May (it seems) was then tenent to the Priory. Who in defense of himself
being convented upon this presentment, exhibuit literas Regias patentes (as the
act of court runs:) per quas patet cimiterium esse jus hereditarium
Reverendissimi, etc. Afterward, viz. anno 1573. at another visitation Lib.
ejusdem Consistorii.
, it was from the same place thus presented, to wit, That their Churchyard is
not decently kept, neither can they bury in it unless they pay 2d. for an old
body, and a penny for a child.

It has been a thing much controverted between the Controversy between the
City and S. Gregory's.
City and this Priory, whether it be of the Cities liberty or not. Now not out
of any desire I have to stickle in the matter, but for manifestation and
maintenance of a truth herein the^ best I am able, unto which by occasion of
the places survey, I am in a manner engaged, I shall without partiality
deliver what, in matter of fact, I know may conduce to the clearing of this
doubt and quieting the debate. In the year 1269. anno 53. Hen. 3. I find Vide
postea page 187.
the Prior of St Gregory's, by the same writ with the Prior of Christ-Church,
the Abbat of S. Augustines and others, after a legal discussion of the case by
enquiry and verdict of select men of the City, and voicinage, acquitted by the
Kings writ of tallage,.i. of being within compass of tallage with the City.
Besides in the Argument drawn up by the Abbat of St Aug. in defense of himself
and his Abbey against the City, challenging the Abbey and some of her
neighboring demaines to be of and within the liberty of the City in Hen. 6.
time, amongst other heads thereof (that it might not seem strange, that the
Abbey being in the Suburbs, and so near the City wall, should nevertheless be
exempt from the Franchise of the same, by showing how the matter stood in same
state with other like places about the City: this Priory is pleaded to be as
without the walls, so without the liberty also of the same City in these words,
viz. Ac etiam quod sunt aliqua loca adeo prope muros Civitatis praedictae sicut
sunt loci in praedictis articulis ballivorum praedict etc. contenti quae semper
fuerunt extra praedictam Civitatem, praecinctum, libertatem aut suburbia
ejusdem, viz. vicus de Westgate, vicus Sancti Martini, Prioratus Sancti
Gregorii, Hospitale Sancti Ioannis de Northgate etc. In H. 8. time certain
articles were concluded between the Prior of this house and the Covent of the
same on the one party, and the Major and Commonalty of the City of the other
party, for the composing of this difference about the temporal Jurisdiction of
the place. Which composition, from the records of the chamber, I shall in my
Appendix present the Reader with. Vide. page 246.

But leaving these things, and the house, I come next to St Thomas Chapel.
the ground lying behind it, sometime the Canons orchard or garden: where are
yet standing or rather falling (and yielding to time) the ruins of an old
chapel, a barn I wot of late, dedicate to that once reputed holy Martyr St
Thomas of Cant. and called (as I find by the will Penes registrum Consistor.
Cant.
of one William Harry of St Martin, anno 1461. who gave a legacy unto it)
Capella fraternitatis sancti Thomae Martyris existen' in orto sancti Gregorii.
I will close this discourse of St Gregory's with the following memorandum,
touching the watercourse of Christ-Church running through this part of it.
Christ-Church Watercourse.
Memorandum (says a book of Christ-Church) de carta Prioris and Conventus
sancti Gregorii Cant. specialem mentionem faciend. and expressum quod
aquaeductum Prioris and Conventus ecclesiae Christi Cant. per pomarium suum
transeuntem salvum and illaesum quantum in eis est conservabunt, and permittent
operarios dictae ecclesiae Christi Cant. quotiens necesse fuerit ad eundem
aquaeductum emendandum per Curiam and portam suam liberum habere ingressum and
egressum, etc. Dated anno 1227.

I return now to the Hospital, whose foundation being St John's Hospital.
premised, her dotation should follow: but what I might here say of it, is
already said and may be seen in that of Herbaldowne, the other twin as I may
call it, for their parity as well in time as manner, both of their erection and
original endowment. This of S. John's time was fired in Ed. 3. time, as I find
by certain letters of the Hospital under their seal, framed after the manner
of a brief, and directed to all prelates in general, wherein they in pitiful
manner deplore their miserable estate occasioned (as they say) by a late
lamentable fire happening in their house, which had wasted their Hospital and
adjacent edifices, in the which were more then an 100 poor people sustained,
with desire of their charitable relief, letting them know (as the most
persuasive Rhetoric of that age) what indulgences had been granted to their
benefactors by several Archbishops and Bishops of former times.

This Hospital has a fair Chapel to it decently kept, Chapel.
wherein divine service is said, the Sacraments administered, and Gods word
preached to them of the house. Their present Chaplains stipend is the same with
his predecessors of old, 8 lib. per annum. The Chapel has had some domestic
benefactors. Amongst others, one William Garnar, who in the year by his will
Penes Regist. Consist. praedict.
gave xls to the mending of the steeple, and 4 lib. for a new bell. John Roper
another, who in the year 1526. by his will Ibidem.
took order with his Executour for the new building of the side Chancells
Eastern window (being the window, as he calls it, of our Ladies altar)
proportionable and correspondent to that of the quire. The Chapel affoords
these Monuments of some note.

Orate proanima Aliciae Ashburneham filiae and heredis Willielmi Took armigeri
and Aliciae Woodland uxoris ejus and antea fuit uxor Thomae Roper Gent. quae
obiit xvij die April. Anno R. R. Hen. 8. xv. and Anno Domini 1524. Cujus animae
etc.

She lies in the same side Chancell: in the said Eastwindow whereof these
words are yet legible.

Orate pro -- Rooper and probono -- Thomasinae uxoris ejus -- Domini 1529.

In the quire-window.
Orate pro bono statu -- Hyllys fratris istius Hospitalis and Prior, qui ab hoc
seculo migravit, qui fenestram istam fieri fecit, Anno Domini 1474.

It is a very brave window, having in so many panes, every of the twelve
Apostles pourtrayed, with the several articles of the Creed that they are said
to make.

In the South-window.
Orate pro animabus Domini Willielmi Septvans and -- consortis suae.

Archbish. Stratford erecting and endowing the Vicarage of Northgate-Church,
expressly reserves and excepts from the Vicar thereof the tithes of this
Hospital, in these words. Oblationibus and obventionibus Hospitalis de
Northgate, duntaxat exceptis. In what case and estate the Commissioners upon
the Statute 37. H. 8. c. 4. found the present Hospital, were it not too
tedious of recital, I would here subjoyne. I suspect a fleecing ofit as of
other like places by the sacrilegious pilferies of those ravenous and wretched
times set upon the spoil even of (what the Proverb might have stav'd them from)
the very spittle it self. I could instance in some particulars wherein it
suffered, but my haste will not permit me.

I have now surrounded the Suburbs, yet having hitherto said nothing of
Westgate-street, the Suburbs (I mean) lying Westgate-street.
without Westgate, exempt from the liberty and Franchese of the City, give me
leave here to give it a place apart, and therewith to finish my survey of the
Suburbs, and then I shall enter the walls.

I have seen a presentment in Eire, enrolled in the Kings Exchequer of the 21.
of Ed. 1. wherein (inter alia) this street (Westgate-street) is presented and
avouched, how truly I know not, to have anciently belonged to the Citizens of
Canterbury, subject with the City to tax and aid; but in King John's time to
have been taken from the City by Hubert the Archbishop, to the Cities great
damage, in regard merchants and men of worth and estates withdrew themselves
thither, and there housed themselves, and were defended of the Archbishop
against the Cities impositions. But whether this part of our Cities Suburbs,
were not from all Antiquity, as now it is, clearly exempted from the Franchese
and Liberty thereof, because part of the Archbishops Manor (and Hundred) of
Westgate, as we now call it, or of Stoursaete, as of old it was named, distinct
from the City-Hundred (as it seems it was no other of old) may deserve inquiry
and consideration, and the rather (since Doomsday Book Records, that the
Archbishop then challenged to have Forisfacturam in viis extra Civitatem ex
utraque part ubi terra sua est) because the Archbishop, in right of his See,
is Dominus Fundi (Lord of the Soil) on either side this Street. It makes much
for this what Edmerus Hist. Novor. lib. (...).
said upward of 500 years agone, that in the Lands of the Archbishopricke
throughout the Kingdom, by an ancient custom and usage, the Archbishop has
the sole mannaging of things as well humane, as divine. But enough of the street.

Somewhat I have heard of a Ferry sometime at this place, Ferry.
belonging, as I am told, to the Archbishop, who did arrent it out for 16d. per
annum. But I have seen no record to warrant the relation, and therefore no
more of that until I be better instructed.

The Archbishop and the Citizens, both (as bound by oath, if I mistake not)
standing in the defense and maintenance of their liberties, the one of his See,
the other of their City, have anciently much differed about liberties here, but
now and of a long time all such matters have been well accorded and settled
between them; wherefore, and because I much desire they should ever so
continue, ex professo, I decline the discourse of their quarrels, least I may
seem to rub up old sores.

Having now done with Westgate-street, I will take the next way into the City,
and that is by Westgate. But ere we pass or enter further then the Gate, I
must, according to my purposed method premise and say somewhat of the Wards of
the City.

Division of the City into Wards.
THe Wards of our City at this day are, as (I take it) Number and names of the
Wards.
they ever were, nor more nor less then six in number. In name distinguished
and differenced from each other, by the names of the six principal Gates,
that is. 1. Westgate-ward. 2. Newingate-ward. 3. Northgate-ward. 4.
Worthgate-ward. 5. Burgate-ward, and 6. Ridingate-ward. Of that number at
first, happily in imitation of the Shires division into 6. Lathes, whereof it did
of old consist.

Of the first division made of the City into Wards, neither written Record, nor
unwritten Tradition makes any Their original.
mention. But I conceive it very ancient. The whole City (it seems) in the
Conquerors time, was but one entire hundred. For Doomsday Book speaking of the
Churches Manor of Barton, which it calls North-wood, says it was de
hundredo de Cantuarberia, as the very words are. If so, it was not long ere a
sub-division made of it, happily for more easy and good Government, into diverse
several hundreds, namely into the six Wards or hundreds now under our Survey.
For the more ancient appellation and term given to those our Cities modern
sub-divisions of Wards, was Hundred, as almost all our eldest deeds and other
like evidences do witness, which generally, close with a memorandum, that
they were first made and recorded in the hundred of that Division (as in the
hundred of Westgate, Burgate, and so alike for the rest) and afterward in the
Burgmote of the City. Another term they had somewhat varying from the other in
sound, but of synonymall sense and signification with it, which was Bertha, a
frequent phrase in our ancient evidences.

These Divisions, Fitz-Stephens, in his description of London, endeavoring to
parallel it, all he could, with old Rome, calls Regions. Every of these
Divisions, Hundreds, Wards, Regions, was committed and entrusted, for
reiglement, to an Alderman, one in office and authority, the same (I take it)
with Praepositus Hundredi, or the Hundreds Ealdor, as our Ancestors would
phrase it.

I will spare all discourse touching (what many men's interpretation has made
of vulgar knowledge) the word, Alderman, both name, and office, in general,
derived, traduced and descended unto us from great antiquity, and confine my
self to speak of those only set over our City Wards. Whose antiquity I
conceive to be from about Rich. 1. time; the generality of these Aldermen being
said to be of that ages production Vide Dn. Hen. Spelmanni Glossar. in hac
voce.
(four hundred years old and upwards.)

These Aldermen, every of them, had and kept within their Ward, and happily (as
the Jews held theirs Deuter. cap. 21 ver. 19. and cap. 16.
) at their several Gates, a Court holden every three weeks, which was called
of our ancestors sometime the Hundred-Court, sometime the Wardmote, that is,
the meeting or assembly Wardmote.
of the Hundred or Ward, or the Portmote, as the Jurisdiction was called
Port-soka.

Their office, from their name, was called an Aldermanrie; Aldermanrie.
which it seems was not (as now) elective, but as freehold either demiseable
or deviseable, ad libitum of him or her that held the same: or if neither
demised, nor devised of him nor her in life time, but indisposed of at death,
then as inheritance and fee, descended to the next heir at law; and thence it
was that (as I find) most of the same Aldermanries continued in a name and
family, through many descents and successions, as that of Burgate to the
Chiches, of Northgate to the Polres or Pollers, as we now write it, of
Newingate to the Digges, of Worthgate to the Cokyns, afterward to the Tiernes,
of Westgate to the Brownes, and so of the rest.

This last of Westgate, was in 10. Rich. 2. given by the Will Lib. Camerae
Civitatis.
of Henry Garnate to Sara his wife. It sometimes was in the Abbat of Saint
Augustines possession, who (as Thorn tells me) Anno 1278. gave it to Mr
Nicholas Doge, tenend'. and habend' eandem cum omnibus appendiciis tam in
civitate Cant. quam extra in suburbio ejusdem vel alibi, de praefato Abbate and
Conventu in perpetuum, reddendo inde annuatim in thesaurario nostro. xl.
sterlingorum pro omnibus servitiis, salva secta Burgmoti Cant. quam ob eandem
causam facere tenet. As Thorns words are. Before this. i. in the beginning of
Hen. 3. time, I find Lib. eccles. Christi Cant.
it enjoyed by one William (as he writes himself) Cissor Domini Regis, the
Kings Tailor, I take it. But of late days it was the Brownes. Whose then seat
and inheritance (before the Septvans) was the Manor of Milton, or Middleton by
Canterbury (from whence so called is of vulgar conjecture:) and continued to
the name of the Brownes, until of late the inheritrix married to Robert
Honywood Esquire, son of that famous Mary Honywood (of whom I leave you to
take further information, if her fame save you not the labor, from her
Monuments Inscription or Epitaph in Dr Hakewill Apology. lib. 3. cap. 5. Sect.
7. page 224.
) and father of Sr Robert Honywood of Charing, and Sr Thomas Honywood of
Marks-Hall in Essex, whose it now is, the ancestor of whom Sr George Brown, in
Rich. 3. days, taking part with Lancastrian Hen. 7. was, by Parliament,
deprived for it of this Aldermanry, but his heirs soon after. i. in the 1.
Hen. 7. repossessed of it.

I insist the more upon this Aldermanry, because I conceive it to have been,
if not absolutely the chief, yet one of more respect and consequence then the
rest; which were all bought or otherwise gotten into the City, and made
eligible by the Mayor and Commonalty early to that this was, which (it seems)
came not in until about the time of the New ordination made by Hen. 7. which
appoints two Aldermen to every Ward. In some respects also it differed from the
rest, which (I take it) were held only by Freemen and inhabitants of the
Franchise, whereas this was holden neither by one nor the other, a great
inconvenience to the City, as in the forecited act of Parliment (1 Rich. 1.)
in the preface of it, is suggested. So much of the Wards in general. Which, it
seems by an ancient Record Record. de An. ^9. Rich. 2. You shall find a copy
of it in my Appendix. page 298.
, were annexed and appertaining to the Fee-Ferme paid by the City to the King,
of whom they held in capite.

Now of each of them in several; beginning, because I staid you (as you may
remember) at Westgate, with Westgate-Ward; and observing and surveying such
things (as I shall do likewise afterward in the rest) as occur therein any
thing worthy of note or memory: saving that I shall reserve the Churches to a
future mention by themselves.

Westgate-Ward.
MArching on therefore from the Gate into the City, by the high Street (that, I
mean, terminated by this Gate at the West, and by the opposite Newingate at
the East End) we have on this side Kingsbridge, on either hand of us a Gate
that leads us to a several ruined Monastery. That on the right hand late the
barefooted Franciscans, or the Minorite-Observant-mendicant-Gray-Fryers. The
other on our left, late the Minors also, or the Praedicant-black-Fryers.

I will begin with the Gray-FF. or Franciscans. So called from Seraphicall St
Francis (Wevers Epithete) the institutor Gray-Fryers.
of their order. The legend of whose life and miracles, because too tedious for
my intended short method, and too too fabulous most what, I doubt, for your
belief, for mine I am sure; I have thought good rather to overpasse in
silence, then to trouble either my self to write, or you to read the rabble of
fopperies (if no worse) that are written of it and them, legible in Matt.
Paris. Polyd. Virg. but more largely in Owens genealogy of Monks etc. the
Chronicon Minorum, and elsewhere.

Leaving therefore (I say) their Founder and Patron, I come to the Friars Qui
dicant^r Monachi, and qui Praetres, item and quo dislent vide Pa^or. sup. cap.
Causam quae. vt. De judic. l. 2 Decretal. and consil. 28. part secunda.
themselves. They were called Minors or Minorites, from the humility and low
liuesse of mind which by the prescript of their Founder they ought ever to
have: Observant, to distinguish them from a looser sort of Franciscans, then
whom these were more careful and observant to keep the strict rules and
orders of St Francis, and were therefore also called Regular Franciscans:
Mendicant, because pretending to Evangelicall perfection, and therefore
professing wilful poverty, they subsisted chiefly upon alms, which they
used, with the Predicants, Augustines, and Carmelites, to ask and receive
ostiatim, from door to door; whereby chiefly Friars were differenced from
Monks, who kept home, and lived upon their own in common: Gray, from their
habit, which (in imitation of their Founder Polyd. Virg. de Invent. Rer. lib.
7. cap. 4.
) was a long gray coat down to their heels, with a Cowl or Hood, and a cord or
rope about their loins in stead of a girdle. Their governors proper name and
style was Guardianus. Monachi olim (says one Barthol. Cartagena. in expo.
(...). jur. Canon. lib. 3. (...). 35.
) non omnes simul commorabantur, sed domunculas sparsim per montes and saltus
structas habebant: quo derelicto, inceperunt postea ad modum Reip. in
communitate habitare, uno eorum electo velut principe and gubernatore, qui eos
regeret and gubernaret, praeesset Monasterio, quem Graeci appellabant
archimandrita and coenobiarcha, nos vero communiter vocamus abbatem, licet
temporis lapsu factum sit, ut, multiplicatis monachorum ordinibus illorum
nomina etiam multiplicata sint: unde apud Domnicanos vocatur Prior, apud
Franciscanos Guardianus, apud Trinitarios minister.

These Franciscans came first into England about the year 1224. in Hen. 3.
reign, as did the Dominicans. How or Harpsfield. (...) Hist. Eccl. Angl.
sa^ul. 13. cap. 11.
where they were afterward entertained with provision, and accommodation of
housing, I find not until the year 1270. By which time, it seems (whether by
their piety, or policy, I know not) they had so insinuated themselves into the
favor of a devout and worthy Citizen, and of a flourishing family then in the
City (as still in the County) one John Digg, or Diggs, then an Alderman, and 12
years before (1258.) and also 3 years after (1273.) one of the Bailiffs of
the City, whom Wever miscalls S^ John Diggs, that he purchased for them the
Island in Canterbury, then called Bynnewith, and shortly after translated them
thither. Emit Insulam vocatam Bynnewight in Cantuar. and locum Portae super
Stour-street ad opus Fratrum Minorum, and tempore opportuno transtulit Fratres
ad illam, as Wever Ancient funeral Monum. page 134.
from Leland. Whence the place, this Island, might derive the name of Bynnewith,
Binnewith.
if I may conjecture, I shall tell you, either from a composition of two Saxon
words, Binnan which signifies within, and With, an Island, as it were the Island
within, in distinction of it from an Island sometime lying without the City, by
Westgate, Northward, called simply With, whereofin the elder rentalls of
Christ-Church mention is made thus. Parva Insula extra Westgate, versus
Aquilonem, vocata With. Or else Binnewith quasi Bine-with, the double Island;
indeed it is no other, and an ancient rentall of Christ-Church (which once had
ground, houses, and fee here) speaks of rent in St Peter's Parish payable de
duabus parvis Insulis ubi fuit Crinemilne. For thereabout sometime stood a
milne of Christ-Church, so called, unto which the lane in St Peter's called
Mead-lane, and of Speed in his Map of the City miscalled Maiden-lane, did
lead, and from thence was called Crinemelne-lane. For in an exchange anno
1294. made between Christ-Church and S. Austins, three tenements in St Peter's
Parish in Canterbury being granted to the Abbey, and of them is thus described
and bounded, viz. quoddam tenementum jacens in magno gardino dicti Abbatis,
juxta terram fratrum Minorum Cant. ex part Australi, in venella quae dicitur
Medlane, and quae olim (says the deed In Lib. eccles. Cant.
) vocabatur Crinemelle-lane. But may it not more probably be called Binnewith
(that is Binney-Iland) from the same radix with the mead, or meadow-ground by
it, called to this day Binney-meads; as the bridge thereaway, which we call
Bingley-bridge, is rightly called Binney-bridge, from the Saxon, binnan ea
signifying (as I said) within or between the water, because lying and enclosed
within or between our Stour or rivers double channel, bounding it on either
side: whence the Codicill or Landboc of Cenulph the Mercian that gave that
ground to the Church copied in my Appendix page 301. thus describes it to lie.
Inter duos gremiales rivos fluminis quod dicitur Stour. Which Mr Lambert reads
thus. Inter duos genitales rivos etc. and accordingly would send us further up
the stream, to find out this ground about our rivers spring-heads; whereas the
very name yet remaining shows it to lie here.

I may not so leave the places name. For though ancient A Family of Binnewiths.
and even obsolete with us, yet of so much note with our Ancestors, as it
served to give name to a family of Citizens, sometime the residentiaries of the
place, and from thence called the Withs, or (as more frequently) the
Binnewiths, whereof one John Binnewith about the beginning of H. 3. reign was
a benefactor to Herbaldowne Hosp. where I have seen his charter with the seal
appendant, in the circumference of it thus circum-inscribed SIGILL. IOHANNIS DE
WITH. And one Arnold Binnewith was, anno 1221. and also again about the year
1227. one of the Bailiffs of the City Lib. Hosp. de Eastbridge.
. The Friars having gotten possession of the place, both the Island and her
former Incolae or inhabitants, soon after lost their names. But leaving that, I
proceed.

The Friars being here seated, and many houses and much ground of the fee of
Christ-Church Monks lying within the Ambitus or precinct of their Monastery,
they (it seems) made bold to usurp them as their own, because within the
confines of their seat, and so de facto, made themselves absolute Lords and
possessors of the Island. The Monks seeing the common people much inclined to
favor them, and not willing to incur theirs, lest it might bring with it the
peoples displeasure also, make a virtue of as it were a necessity; and to show
themselves as forward in charity toward them, as the common people, after the
Friars (by their connivence it is like) had been a pretty while in possession
without paying or yielding to the Monks their accustomed rents and services,
which their quondam tenants were bound to pay, viz. anno 1294. by composition,
remit unto them all arrerages and duties past gratis, or intuitu charitatis, as
they phrase it, and for the future make them an abatement of almost the moiety
of the rent: as the Composition will show, which (because it sets forth in some
sort the state of the Island, and how it was peopled before the FF. time) I here
propose, transcribed from the Records of the Cathedral. NOtum sit omnibus
praesentibus and futuris quod in festo Natalis Composition between
Christ-Church and the Friars.
beati Ioannis Baptistae Anno Dom. Mccxciiijo. Regni vero Regis Edwardi xxijo.
Ita convenit inter Priorem and Conventum ecclesiae Christi Cant. ex part una,
and Gardianum and Conventum fratrum minorum Cant. ex altera, viz. quod cum
diversa tenementa continerentur infra ambitum ipsorum fratrum de feodo
praedict' Prioris and Conventus, viz. tenementum quod quondam fuit Samuelis
Tinctoris pro quo debebatur eis annuatim vijd. quad. Item pro tenemento quondam
Beringeri in With prquo xijd. Item pro tenemento ejusdem in Ottemed. pro quo vd
Item pro tenemento quondrm Seronae de Boctone pro quo vjd. Item pro redditu
Wiberti quondam Prioris ecclesiae Christi praed. juxta Ottewell, pro quo xijd.
Item pro tenemento Stephani filii Lewini Samuel pro quo xviijd. Praefati Prior
and Conventus remiserunt and quietum clamaverunt in perpetuum praedictis
fratribus and eorum Successoribus omnia arreragia sibi debit' de tenementis
praed. intuitu caritatis. Ita viz. qd' iidem fratres and eorum Successores de
cetero per suos procuratores fideliter solvi facient annuatim praedict. Priori
and Con. in Thesauraria sua iijs. anuui redditus pro omnibus tenementis
praedict. viz. medium ad Pascha and aliud medium ad festum Sancti Michaelis pro
omnibus servitiis and secularibus demandis ad ipsos Prior. and Con. de eisdem
tenementis spectand. and si contingat praefat. procuratores post viginti dies
postquam super hoc praemuniti fuerint in solutione praedicti annui redditus
deficere, been licebit praed. Prior. and Conventui and eorum ministris
distringere omnia tenementa praed. pro arreragiis quae a retro fuerint de annuo
redditu supradict. In cujus Rei testimonium Sigillum ecclesiae Christi praed.
and sigillum commune fratrum praedict. huic scripto chirographato alternatim
sunt appensa. Acta sunt haec apud Cantuar. die and anno supradictis.

How this might stand with their Founders rule and their own vow, I see not.
For consult their rule delivered articulately in Matt. Paris, and you shall
find them clearly debarred and disabled, both by their vow of poverty, and
by express prescript beside from all peculium and propriety. Fratres (says
the rule) nihil sibi approprient, nec domum, nec locum, nec aliquam rem. Et
tanquam peregrini and advenae in hoc saeculo, in paupertate and humilitate
Domino famulantes, vadunt pro elemosyna confidenter etc. Whence that of Durand
Specul. jur. de monach stat. Lib. 4. Part. 3. n. 7. Gray-Friers privileges.
, and others. Mendicantes sunt possessionum incapaces.

These Franciscans or Minorite Friars being a great prop to the Papacy were
prosecuted by several Popes with many privileges, immunities, indulgences and
what not graces, that might assure them the Popes fast friends, and faithful
sons and servants. Beside their exemption and immunitie from Episcopal and
all other ordinary Jurisdiction; in matter of tithes, they were privileged
from payment of any, either of their house, their orchard (or garden) and the
nutriment. i. the herbage or agistment of their Cattle, as in the Decretalls
Nimis prava. 12. de excessib. praelat.
. They had withal in matter of burial liberam sepulturam (paying the fourth
part of the obventions to the Parish Church:) whosoever would, might elect and
have their Church or Coemitery, for his place of burial Cap. Dudum. de sepult.
in Clementin.
. And that was a thing whereof multitudes were ambitious, and the rather
because they were made believe, that who so was buried amongst them, especially
ifin the holy and virtuous habit of a Friar, should not only be secured from
evil spirits that would else happily disturb the quiet of his grave, but also be
as sure to go to heaven. There is authentic record of many worthy personages,
and of worshipful families that have been here interred: the Catalogue of whom
Wever Of ancient funeral Monuments. page 238.
has collected and delivers, but under a wrong title, saying they were buried
in the White, whereas he should have said the Gray-Friers: as I can make good
to the satisfaction of any that makes a doubt hereof.

As for benefactors to this Monastery, I find these. One William Woodland of
Holy cross parish anno 1450. by his will In Regist. Cons. Cant.
gave 5 lib. toward the reparation of their Church, and 5 marks beside to the
repairing of their Dortor. Hamon Beale, a Citizen, and in his time twice Mayor
of Canterb. choosing their Church for the place of his burial, as Isabell his
wife had formerly done, gave 40s. in money to the Covent. 1492.
Indeed (to be short) almost every testate dying man of the City and
neighboring parts of any worth, remembered these FF. The Dominicans also and
the Augustines of this City, in their wills with some legacy more or less. One
domestic benefactor I meet with, one Richard Martin, the Guardian (I take it)
of the house, who in the year 1498. by his will In Registro memorato.
gave liberally both to the Church and Covent. He was (as it seems by his will)
Parson also of Ickham, and Vicar of Lyd in Kent. But what may he mean by
writing himself (as he does) Bishop of the universal Church? a title so cried
down and condemned as Antichristian by Pope Gregory the Great; I conceive he
was a titular Bishop, a Bishop in name and title only, endued with the Order,
but not with the Jurisdiction Episcopal, having no particular charge to
intend, but generally officiating as Bishop in any part of the Christian
Church. These titular Bishops were frequent with us in those days. About the
same time one Thomas Wells, the Prior of S. Gregory's by Canterbury, in his
will In eod. Regist. Titular Bishops.
writes himself Bishop of Sidon. He was a titular Bishop likewise: an order as
excepted against by some, so defended by other of the Trent Council; whereof I
leave you to inform your self further (if you please) from Tholosanus Syntag.
in universi Lib. 15. cap. 12. n. 44.
and others. The use made of them (I take it) was to supply the
Diocesan-Bishops absence in such affairs Episcopal as these, to wit,
Consecration of Churches, and Churchyards, and their Reconciliation,
conferring of orders, Confirmation of children, and the like.

But to our Friars again. Hugh Rich, the Guardian, or (which is all one) the
Wardein (as the Statute Anno 25. H. 8. cap. 12.
calls him) of this Covent, was one that conspired and suffered with Elisabeth
Barton, the holy maid of Kent, whereof before in my survey of the Nonnery.

This Monastery had, as the place still has, a double gate and way to it, the
one called Porta Orientalis, the other Porta Borealis; that in Stourstreet, in
All Saints Parish, this in High Street, in S. Peter's Parish.

Let me but acquaint you, that John Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury in Ed. 1.
time, was first a Friar, and the Provincial of this order, and I have done
with the Franciscans, or Gray-Fryers.

Leaving these then, I come next to the other sort of Minors, Blackfriars.
the Dominican, Black, Preaching FF. Preaching, because they were the only
Preachers of all the Friars: Black, because of their habit Polyd Virg. de
Invent Rer. lib. 7. cap 4.
, which was a black cope and cowle over a white cote: Dominican, because St
Dominicke was their founder, a holy man (they say) contemporary with Saint
Francis, and whose disciples (the first Friars of this Covent) were even
coaetaneous with the Franciscans of this City, coming both hither much about
the same time. It is said of them, that King Hen. 3. at their coming received
them kindly (so did Stephen Langton also the then Archbishop Harpsfield. Hi.
Eccles. Anglic. Saec. 13 cap. 11.
:) and placed them at Canterbury, where (it seems) he built them this late
Monastery, which was the first that the Kingdom had of that kind. Hence and
from this ground I suppose Wever takes his warrant for attributing the erection
of this house to Hen. 3. The title proper to the governor of the Dominicans,
was Prior. Like the Franciscans, they and the Monks of Christ-Church, in the
same year with the other (1294) came to composition about diverse houses and
lands lying within their precinct.

The Churchyard of this Monastery was the place of Rendevous designed by the
Citizens of Canterbury conspiring a revenge to be taken of the Monks of
Christ-Church, for refusing them their aid, and to join with them in the
finding and furnishing of twelve horsemen imposed on the City by the King (Ed.
1.) for his expedition against the Rebellious Lewslyn Fitz-Griffin Prince of
Wales, which Stow Annals in Ed. 3. Vide ^ti quit. Brit. in vita Rob. Kilwardby
Archiep.
(much mistaken in the time, and some other circumstances) thus relates. About
this time (says he, speaking of the 1. of Ed. 3.) the like stir was made
against the Monks of Canterbury: whereof I find recorded as follows. King
Edward preparing an Army into Scotland, commanded the Bailiffes and Citizens of
Canterbury to furnish him twelve horsemen, and send them to New Castle, toward
which charge, the Citizens required aid of the Monks: who answered them that
without the assent of the King and their Archbishop they would not agree
thereunto, for so much as the Kings of England had founded their Church in free
and perpetual alms. Whereupon William Chilham Bailiffe, and many Commons of
the City assembling themselves in the Preaching Friars Churchyard, conspired
and swear against the Monks as follows.

1. That they would overthrow the pentises, windows and milne, belonging to
the Monks. 2. That no Citizen should dwell in any house belonging to the Monks.
3. That all rents belonging to the Monks of Canterbury should be gathered to
use of the Commons. 4. That no man should send or sell to the Monks any
victuals. 5. That they should seize all the horses, and beasts that came into
the City with carriage to the Monks. 6. That all such Monks as came forth of
their house should be spoiled of their Garments. 7. That a trench should be
cast, to stop all men from going in or coming out. 8. That every Pilgrim should
at his entering swear that he should make no offering. 9. Also that every of
those Commons aforesaid should wear on their finger a ring of gold that
belonged to Thomas Becket: Thus he. This Churchyard is in part now become the
Campus Martius for our young Artillery of the City. Wevers collection of
ancient funeral monuments will acquaint you of diverse personages of note and
quality buried here.
At this place the Parish Clarks of the City once had and Fraternities of
Parish Clarks.
held a gild or fraternity, commonly called the Fraternity of St Nicholas. I
have my direction for this, from the following legacy of one Richard Cram
sometime of this City, who by his will In Registro Consist. Cant.
, dated 1490. gave to the Fraternity of St Nicholas kept by the Parish Clerks
of Canterbury, in the house of the Friars Preachers of Cant. vjs. viijd. as his
very words are. Of these Fraternities, our City has had diverse; amongst which
that of the Smiths newly revived, is the most ancient. The elder rentalls of
Christ-Church bounding out some Land of theirs lying without Newingate, make
mention both of it and of certain ground belonging to it, in these words.
Terra quae pertinet ad gildam fabrorum. This and all other like Fraternities
(if the Dissolution of the Monasteries spared them, yet) the Stat. of 1o. Ed.
6. cap. 14. took hold of, and dissipating the societies, seized on all their
goods and endowment. If any desire further information touching them and their
antiquity, I refer them to St Henry Spelmans Glossary, in Verb. Gilda.

This Monastery had a treble passage to it, namely by three Gates, one, and
that the most private, that opening before the Street by Saint Alphege Church,
a second by the Waterlocke, the third in Saint Peter's street (as we call it)
built (it seems) not long before the 30. of Ed. 3. for then these Friars, by
their Charter or deed pass over to the Hospital of Estbridge a place, shops
and garden lying toward the West and North, (inter novam portam nostram, say
they, and introitum ad ecclesiam nostram in parochia sancti Petri, etc.) as in
Estbridge Book; in another part of the Book thus described and bounded. In
parochia sancti Petri Civitatis Cant. inter gardinum and mansionem fratrum
praedicatorum Cant. versus North and West, and quandam venellam vocat'
Brekyepottislane versus East.

Approaching to an end of my discourse touching these Friars, I cannot (me
thinks) close better then with Matthew Paris his relation of the controversy,
in or about the year 1243. happening between them and the Franciscans, which
together with his gloss (which he adds) upon it, and them, verbatim follows,

ET ne mundus (says he having made mention of other discords) turbinibus
undique multiplicatis vacare videretur, Controversy between the Franciscans
and Dominicans.
inter fratres Minores and Praedicatores controversia eisdem temporibus
ventilata, multos, eo quod viam perfectionis, videlicet paupertatis and
patientiae, videbantur elegisse, movit in admirationem. Asserentibus enim
Praedicatoribus se fuisse priores, and in hoc ipso digniores, habitu quoque
honestiores, a praedicatione merito nomen and officium se sortiri, and
Apostolica dignitate verius insigniri, respondent Minores: se arctiorem vitam
and humiliorem pro Deo elegisse, and idcirco digniorem, quia sanctiorem, and ab
ordine Praedicatorum ad ordinem eorum fratres posse and licenter debere, quasi
ab inferiori ad ordinem arctiorem and superiorem, transmigrare. Contradicunt
eis in faciem. Praedicatores, asserentes, quod licet ipsi Minores, nudi pede,
and viliter tunicati, cinctique funiculis incedant, non tamen eis esus carnium,
etiam in publico, vel dieta propensior, denegatur, quod fratribus est
Praedicatoribus interdictum: quapropter non licet ipsis Praedicatoribus ad
Minorum ordinem, quasi arctiorem and digniorem avolare, sed potius e converso.
Sic sic igitur, sicut inter Templarios and Hospitalarios in sancta terra, sic
and inter illos, humani generis inimico zizania seminante, ortum est discordiae
enorme scandalum, and quia viri literati sunt and scholares, universali
ecclesiae nimis periculosum, in indicium magni Iudicij prae foribus imminentis.
Et quod terribile est, and in triste praesagium, per trecentos annos, vel
quadringentos, vel amplius, ordo Monasticus tam festinanter non caepit
praecipitium, sicut eorum ordo, quorum fratres jam vix transactis viginti
quatuor annis, primus in Anglia construxere mansiones, quarum adificia jam in
Regales consurgunt altitudines. Hijam sunt, qui in sumptuosis and diatim
ampliatis adificiis, and celsis muralibus, the sauros exponunt impreciabiles,
paupertatis limits, and basim suae professionis, juxta Prophetiam Hyldegardis
Alemanniae, impudenter transgredientes. Morituris magnatibus, and divitibus,
quos norunt pecuniis abundare, diligenter insistunt, non sine ordinariorum
injuriis and jacturis, ut emolumentis inhient, confessiones extorquent, and
occulta Testamenta, se suumque ordinem solum commendantes, and omnibus aliis
praeponentes. Vnde nullus fidelis, nisi Praedicatorum and Minorum regatur
consiliis jam credit salvari. In acquirendis privilegiis solliciti, in curiis
Regum and potentum consiliarii, and cubicularii and the saurarii, paranimphi
and nuptiarum praeloquutores, Papalium extortionum executores, in
praedicationibus suis, vel adulatores, vel mordacissimi reprehensores, vel
confessionum detectores, velincauti redargutores. Ordines quoque auctenticos,
and a sanctis patribus constitutos, videlicet a sanctis Bendicto and Augustino,
and eorum professores, contemnentes, prout in causa ecclesiae de scardeburc, in
qua Minores turpiter ceciderunt, patuit, suum ordinem aliis praeponunt. Rudes
reputant, simplices, and semilaicos, vel potius rusticos, Cistercienses
Monachos: Nigros vero, superbos, and epicuros. Thus he.

I have but only to tell you that Robert Kilwardy, afterward, first
Archbishop of Canterbury, and then advanced to a Cardinall-ship, was first a
Friar of this Sect of the Dominicans, and I leave them.

My progress in this Ward, brings me next to Estbridge or Estbridge Hospital.
Kingsbridge Hospital. An ancient Spittle, and as now known (Christened, as
it were) by the name, so first erected and endowed by the Charity and Piety of
St Thomas Becket in Hen. 2. time; and thence to this day called the Hospital
of St Thomas the Martyr of Estbridge. For this we have the testimony of
Archbishop Stratford, a successor of his: who upon his novell ordination of the
Hospitali, and in the Charter thereof, (as shall be seen anon) acknowledges
him the first founder and indower of it. For other Record either of the
foundation of the Hospital it self; or of the intent wherefore it was
erected, besides that Charter of Stratford, is not, nay in his time (as it
seems by him) was not extant, or to be found. The reason probably why the
Record of the state of it taken by the Commissioners upon the stat. of 37. Hen.
8. cap. 4. ascribes the foundation unto Stratford; whereas he (as his Charter
will declare) did but restore the foundation, and give laws and a form of
government to it, to supply the former which were lost, and so the Hospital in
hazard of confusion for want of them: as you shall easily perceive by this
transcript or copy of it, if you peruse it.

Johannes permissione divina Cantuar. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas and
Apostolicae sedis Legatus. Dilecto in Christo filio Domino Rogero de Rondes
presbytero magistro Hospitalis pauperum de Estbreg in Civitate Cantuar.
patronatus nostri Salutem, gratiam and benedictionem. Et si votivus noster
invalescat affectus, decus and commoda locorum ad miserabilium personarum and
pauperum receptionem and sustentationem divinique cultus augmentum provide
deputatorum nobis potissime subditorum, quatenus possumus procurare: tamen
conservatio and relevamen necessarium Hospitalis de Estbregpraedict' per beatum
and gloriosummartyrem Thomam olim Cant. Archiepisc. praedecessorem nostrum
fundati antiquitus and dotati, ob ipsius martyris Fundator quis.
qui suis veneratoribus opem porrigit, honorem praecipuum prae caeteris locis
hujusmodi insident nobis cordi. Sane tua petitio nuper nobis exhibita
continebat, quod idem Hospitale per beatum martyrem antedictum, pro pauperum
peregrinorum Cantuar. confluentium receptione nocturna, and sustentatione
aliquali ab olim, and pro jam incumbentibus eidem oneribus dotatum exiliter per
ipsius Hospitalis incuriam magistrorum, qui ejus prostrarunt nemora, eaque and
alia jura possessiones and bona ipsius tam mobilia quam immobilia modis
alienare variis temere praesumpserunt, ad supremam egestatis inopiam est
deductum ac aeris alieni immoderate per ipsos fatueque contracti plurimis
oneribus, ad quorum solutionem bona dicti Hospitalis absque remedio and auxilio
extrinseco his diebus non sufficient, primitus manifest in suis etiam domibus
olim sufficienter constructis deformitates evidentes in tantum patitur et
rutnam, quod nisi ejusdem Hospitalis provideatur indigentiae aliunde, illud
nedum peregrinos hujusmodi ad ipsum post gloriosum triumphum et canonizationem
dicti sancti plus solito consluentium, admittere non valebit, set desolationis
tantis subiciet obprobriis quod vix aliquis aut nullus idoneus invenietur, qui
recipere velit hujusmodi regimen Hospitalis. Quapropter nobis humiliter
supplicasti, ut ad relevamen omnium praemissorum, and pro sustentatione
pauperum peregrinorum illuc copiose indies confluentium pleniori, ecclesiam
parochialem beati Nicholai Ecclesia parochialis. Sancti Nicholai de Herbaldowne.
de Herbaldowne nostrae Dioc. cujus ad dictum Hospitale jus spectare dinoscitur
patronatus eidem tibi successoribusque tuis ipsius Hosp. magistris ex causis
praemissis in proprios usus in perpetuum concedere, annectere, and unire
vellemus. Nos siquidem Hosp. praedict' quod nuper visitavimus defectum notorium
quem patitur intuentes tam circa divina obsequia quam alia caritatis opera
inibi exercenda sub forma competenti and indubia sicut convenit minime
ordinati, ipsiusque indigentiis evidentibus paterno compatientes affectu, tuis
etiam justis in ea part supplicationibus inclinati, super causis superius
expressatis, ac veritate ipsarum, vocatis ad hoc omnibus evocandis de Iure, per
viros fide dignos in forma juris juratos, and singillatim examinat.
sufficientem praemissorum noticiam optinentes, authoritate nostra, inquisitione
juxta exigentiam juris facta, demum super his cum religiosis viris filiis
nostris Priore and Capitulo nostrae Cantuar. ecclesiae in ipsius capitulo
tractatum diligentem habuimus and solempnem prout requiritur in concessionibus
hujusmodi perpetuis and alienationibus ecclesiarum de Iure. Et quia dictas
causas and per te nobis in hac part suggestaomnia and singula invenimus esse
vera legitimeque probata, necnon justa and sufsicientia fore ad appropriationem
dictae ecclesiae faciend. cum urgens necessitas ac evidens notorie subsit
utilitas in hac part, praefatam ecclesiam beati Nicholai de Herbaldowne,
interveniente in ea part quorum interest consensu, cum Priore and Capitulo
nostris praedictis, tractatu ut est dictum super his solempni and diligenti
praehabito, ac de ipsorum consensu, concurrentibusque omnibus and singulis quae
in praemissis and ea tangen. requirebantur de Iure, praedictisque ex causis,
authoritate nostra ordinaria, Hospitali praedicto tibique and tuis
successoribus magistris ejusdem ministraturis in eo, appropriamus, annectimus
and unimus, ipsiusque ecclesiae fructus, redditusque and proventus in dicti
Hospitalis usus proprios and tuos ac Successorum tuorum magistrorum ejusdem and
peregrinorum pauperum ad illud confluentium, juxta modum inferius annotatum
concedimus in perpetuum convertendos, salvo idoneo sacerdoti dictae servituro
ecclesiae in divinis qui and animarum curam exercebit in ea, tuo successorumque
tuorum magistrorum ibidem arbitrio deputando and amovendo, propter exilitatem
ecclesiae antedictae ad perpetui vicarii sustentationem and onerum relevamen
hujusm' minime suffic^ntis, pro suis victualibus and sustentatione de ipsius
ecclesiae fructibus, redditibus, and proventibus congrua portione; alia
siquidem onera eidem ecclesiae incumbentia per magistrum Hospitalis praedicti
volumus supportari. Ceterum quia super modum divina celebrandi officia in Hosp.
praedicto, and caritatis opera caeteraque peragenda inibi exercendi clara,
sufficiens and indubia ordinatio minime reperitur, licet quaedam observantiae
in his and praecipue in provisione pauperum usitatae in eo nobis fuerunt
intimatae. Nos ad perpetuam rei memoriam super his certos modum and formam in
Hosp. praedict' in perpetuum observandos cdere seu constituere duximus, and
taliter ordinamus, viz. quod in ipso Hosp. Statuta sive Regulae Hospitalis.
per nos and successores nostros Archiepisc. Cant. ponatur seu praeficiatur
Magister, qui tempore quo ponetur seu praeficietur eidem, sit in sacerdotali
ordine constitutus, cui per Nos and successores nostros hujusmodi dicti Hosp.
regimen committatur, prout canonicis eonvenit institutis. Magistrum etiam
quemlib' hujus modi cum ipsum hosp. primo adeptus fuerit infra mensem sequentem
prox. de ipsius hosp. bonis singulis singillatim and specifice Inventarium
plenum conficere, ipsiusque copiam infra mensem eundem Priori nostrae Cant
eccl' qui erit pro tempore tradere, ac eidem vel Suppriori ejusd' dicto
prioratu vacant, seu alteri ad hoc deputando per ipsorum arbitrium, suo casu,
in ipso Prioratu, vice Cant. Archiep. and authoritate praesentium annis
singulis inter sancti Michaelis and omnium Sanctorum festa de administratione
sua reddere plenam and distinctam volumus rationem. Ordinamus insuper qd'
magister ipse qui erit pro tempore unum alium ad se habeat continue secum in
hosp. praed' idoneum Capellanum secularem ponend' and amovend' prout eidem
magistro videbitur expedire. Quodque magister and Capellanus hujusm' in Hosp.
praed' matutinas and ceteras horas canonicas ad invicem, legitimo impedimento
cessante, secundum usum Sar. eccl' psallere vel convenienter dicere and devote
ac divina, viz. unus eorum missam de die, alius vero diebus dominicis, de
sancto Nicholao, diebus Martis de beato Thoma Martyr antedicto, diebus Iovis
de beata Virgin Catherina, caeteris vero diebus ebdomadatim missam pro
defunctis and pro benefactoribus hospitalis praedicti teneantur diebus singulis
celebrare, ac orum quilibet orationem, Rege quesum' Domine famulum tuum
Pontificem nostrum, and caetera pro nobis quam diu agimus in hac vita, and post
solutum nostrae carnis debitum, orationem. Deus qui inter Apostolicos
sacerdotes, diebus ad hoc aptis competen'dieere, necnon in Canone missae pro
nobis specialiter orare, nostrique habere memoriam specificam in celebrandis
suis missis singulis in perpetuum sit astrictus. Ordinam' preterea quod ad
dicti magistri dispositionem and curam solicitam, fructus, redditus and
proventus dictique totius hosp. regimen, quamdiu magister ibidem fuerit cum
moderamine pertineant infrascripto. viz. quod magistro and Capellano hujusm'
celebraturis and ministraturis pro tempore in hospitali praedicto singlis
communibus diebus de uno ferculo duplicato, in dominicis vero diebus and festis
duplicibus ac solempnibus cum hujusmodi ferculo de una pitantia non mimus
sumptuosa deserviatur in mensa. Inhibemus insuper and interdicimus ne commune
sigillum in hosp. praedicto habeatur a modo vel existat. Peregrini siquidem
valetud^arit pauperes quos arripit infirmitas in suae peregrinationis itinere
non leprosi in hosp. suscipiantur eodem, and in fata decidentes ibidem, in
Cimiterio nostrae Cantuar. ecclesiae sepeliantur in loco ad hoc antiquitus
assignato. Sani autem Sepulturae locus ubi.
peregrini pauperes accedentes ibidem per noctem unam recipiantur duntaxat: in
quorum tam valetudinarior. quam sanor. peregrinor. hujusmodi usus ad ipsorum
vitae subsidium diebus singulis ad quatuor denarior. estimationem de bonis
hosp. praedict. volumus and ordinamus expendi. Peregrinos valetudinarios
pauperes illuc confluentes cum sanis tam ad moram quam ad vitae subsidia in
estimatione praedicta percipienda sanis volumus anteferri. Quod si dierum
aliquo in usus praedict. peregrinorum hujusmodi de bonis hosp. ipsius propterea
quia nullos vel paucos peregrinantes hujusmodi contigerit declinare ad
estimationem non expendat. eandem; ordinamus and volumus quod diebus aliis seu
temporibus copiosoris adventus peregrinorum praed' ibidem, quod minus dtebus
praeced' est expensum, in ampliori receptione subsidiorumque vitae necessorior
and ministratione pauperum peregrinorum hujusmodi juxta modum superius
annotatum suppleatur tali cum affectu quod in usu tam pio and laudabili de
bonis hosp praed' ad summam iiijd. pro numero singulor' dier' in anno
discretione pr^via integraliter and fideliter erogetur. In hosp. etiam praed'
12. lectos competentes ordinamus debere inperpetuum consistere ad usum
confluentium pauperum peregrinorum ibidem, ac mulierem aliquam honest vitae,
quae quadraginta annorum etatem excesserit ministerio peregrinorum hujusmodi
tam in lectis quam vitae necessariis ut praemittitur ministrandis esse volumus
intendentem, cui mulieri de bonis Hospitalis praedicti ministretur in singulis
vitae suae necessariis competenter. Et ad ordinationem praesentem in singulis
suis articulis prout est possibile fideliter observand. and quatenus in eo est
facere fieri observari, necnon de corrodiis, pensionibus, possessionibus,
nemoribus aut bonis immobilibus seu juribus ipsius Hospitalis non vendendis,
concedendis in perpetuum, vel ad tempus donandis, vel alio quovis alienationis
titulo non alienand. nobis aut successoribus nostris Archiepiscopis Cantuar.
inconsultis, et non consentientibus ad hoc express, per quoscunque magistros
Hosp. praedict. quibus ejus regimen committetur imposterum praestari volumus et
ordinamus in commissionibus singulis de ipso faciendis eisdem corporale ad
sancta Dei Evangelia Iuramentum. Commissionem autem Hosp. praedicti si facta
fuerit alteri quam in sacerdotio constituto, vel praedicto non exacto vel
praestito Iuramento fore volumus ipso facto irritam et inanem. Reservata nobis
et successoribus nostris Archiepisc. Cantuar. hujusmodi ordinationi nostrae
addendi, detrahendi, eamq^e mutandi et corrigendi prout expedire videbitur
plenaria potestate. Acta et dat' in Capitulo dictae nostrae Cantuar. Ecclesiae
xxiij o. die mensis September. Anno Domini MCCCXLIJ. et nostrae translationis
nono.

By this time you see who was both the first and second founder of Eastbridge
Hospital. The ancient rules and ordinances prescribed to it, the union and
annexation made of St Nicholas of Herbaldowne Church to it, into which the
Leiger shows the Masters induction and investiture by the Commissary of Cant.
by mandat from (the appropriator) Archbishop Stratford.

I must now look back to the times intervening these two founders. In which I
find In lib. private hujus Hospitalis.
Hubert the Archbishop in King John's time, an especial benefactor to this
Spittle: giving to it the tithes of Westgate-Mill, of a Mill and two
Salt-pitsat Herewic (in or near Whitstable, I take it) of a Windmill in
Raculfre, and of another Windmill in Westhalimot in Thanet. This, with the
confirmation of the then Prior and Charter of Christ-Church.

In this Archbishops time, there was another Hospital neighboring unto this
of Estbridge called Cokyns Hospital, Cokyns Haspitall.
built and founded by one William Cokyn a Citizen of Canterb. and of a worthy
family, whose name in his posterity (...) Ibidem.
did long survive him in this City: some of whom were Bailiffes of the City in
their time. The Hospital was dedicate to Saint Nicholas, and (the Virgin and
Martyr) Saint Catherine, and stood sometime in the Parish of Saint Peter in
Cant. almost directly opposite to the now Blacke-Fryers Gate: having had a Lane
by it aforetime called Cokyns-Lane, now shut up and built upon, often mentioned
in Cokyns Lane.
Eastbridge Book, and not forgotten of some yet living. I collect by Charters
which I have seen, that the Founder lived by that Lane. And find that for 18.
marks de gersuma, or for the consideration of 18. marks, purchased of Stephen
the Priest, and Godesman, the sons of Richard Mercer of Canterb. with the
consent of their Widow-mother Cicely, a message next adjacent to his own,
thus in the deed or charter described. Totum illud messuagium cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis, quod habet in latitudine versus cheminium in Domini Regis
42. pedes, and in longitudine quantum extendit a cheminio Domini Regis, usque
ad aquam quae dicitur Sture. Quod vero messuagium adjacet proximo messuagio
lapideo praedicti Willielmi, and messuag. Walteri mercatoris in parochia sancti
Petri. Having purchased this message he either builds there a new Hospital
or else converts his purchase into one. Afterward, by his Charter (wherein he
says the Hospitals of Saint Nicholas, Saint Katherine, and Saint Thomas of
Eastbridge in Cant. were united, happily and probably by Archbishop Hubert, and
that union by Pope Innocent confirmed) intitles these Hospitals to all his
Lands, possessions and Chattels, and makes them his heirs. This done, and one
Godelman son of Richard the Merchant, challenging an interest in the soil
where the Hospital stood; for 7s. consideration he is bought out, and makes a
Charter to Archbishop Hubert, acknowledged in a full Burgmote of the City, of
release of all his right thereunto. i. De terra (as his words are) in qua
Hospitale fundatum est quod Willielmus Cokyn fecit, quae jacet inter terram
quae fuit W. Cokyn, and terram Thomae mercatoris, scil. a magna via regali
usque ad Sturam. The Priory of Saint Gregory (it seems) had some interest here
also. For Robert the Prior and his Covent of the place, did by their Charter
made to the Hospital confirm, Donationem quam Willielmus Cokyn fecit
fratribus Hosp. Sancti Nicholai, and Sancti Catherinae, and Sancti Thomae
martyris de Eastbridge, de illo messuagio quod est in parochia Sancti Petri
proximo adjacen' Hosp. Sancti Nicholai et Sanctae Katherinae versus West, quod
est in tenura nostra, as the Charter runs. Eastbridge Hospital being thus
(i. by union or consolidation) possessed, and become owners of Cokyns
Hospital: it ceased soon after (I take it) to be used as an Hospital, or in
the way of an Hospital, and was hired and rented out. In the year 1238. Peter
the then Rector or Keeper of Estbridge Hosp. and the brothers of the same,
grant and demise to one William Samuel a parcel thereof, to wit, Totum
tenementum cum aedificiis supra positis tam ligneis quam lapideis et omnibus
pertinentiis suis quod jacet in parochia Sancti Petri Cant. inter domum Osmundi
Polre quae est ex part orientali, et venellam quae appellatur Cokyneslane,
quae est ex prrte occidentali, et Regiam stratam quae est ex part Aquilonari,
et Sturam quae est ex part Australi. The lane there (by the way) was asyet
open, as you may see; and that it might continue so, hearken to what follows
in the Deed. Preterea ita convenit inter parts praedict' quod nec praedict'
Petrus, nec fratres nec successores little, nec praedict' Willielmus, nec
heredes sui nec sui assignati poterint praed^ct' venellam obstruere, quin
utraque pars possit uti commode via praedictae venellae eundo and redeundo. So
much for Cokyns Hospital: and now I return to Estbridge.

Stephen Langton the next Archbishop after Hubert, by his and his Covents
Charter Liber. memorat.
, confirms unto this Hospital, the gift of Blean Church or parsonage, made
unto it by the Patron, Hamon Crevequer, after the resignation of it by the
Blean parsonage.
till then incumbent Parson, William Crevequer. Whereupon the Master or Keeper
of the Hosp. became afterward Parson there, to whom and to the Brothers of the
Hosp. the And parsonage house.
same Hamon, by another Charter, grants totum messuagium cum pertinentiis quod
fuit Lefwini sacerdotis personae ejusd' ecclesiae, and quod postea fuit
Archidiaconi de Petters personae ejusdo ecclesiae, and quod postea fuit
Willielmi de Crevequer personae ejusdem ecclesiae: that is, the Parsonage
house. The Parsonage thus to the Hosp. assigned and confirmed in proprios usus,
Archbishop Islep afterward, induced by many reasons, founds a perpetual
Vicarage there, indowing it in such wise Blean Vicarage
as the Charter or Instrument thereof in my Appendix, will demonstrate, page
247.

At this place (the Bleane) lay the most of this Hospitals demeanes and
revenewes. Amongst which the principal (I take it) is the Manor of Bleane
given Liber memoratus.
to the Hosp. by Thomas de Roos de Hamlak, Anno 33. Ed. 3. the same man (I take
it) whose death Walsingham thus mentions in the year 1399. Eodem Anno (says
he) Dominus Thomas de Roos dum reverteretur a terra sancta in Insula de Cypro
civitate Papho, tactus aeris regionis incommodo, diem clausit extremum. By
Cambden in Kent. English Edition. page 334.
probable conjecture, he dwelt at Chilham Castle, from whence the year before,
his mother Margery Lady Roos daughter of Bartholomew Lord Badlesmere, and Widow
of William de Roos de Hamlak, who as a benefactor to the work, has his name
and effigies set up and pourtrayed in a Window of the Chapter House at
Christ-Church, dates a Charter of hers to the Master of this Hosp. and at her
presentation, as patroness in the year 1349. the Sea of Canterbury being then
void, one Osbertus is admitted by the Prior and Chap. ad liberam capellam
beatae Mariae in Castro de Chilham, there personally to serve and officiate as
a perpetual Chaplain Liber Eccles. Cant.
. This by the by.

The very next year after this gift of the Manor of Bleane, by Thomas de
Roos, viz. anno 34. Ed. 3. one Sr John Lee Knight by his deed or charter (as I
find by a copy of it in the Lieger of the house) gave to this Hospital one
message 180 acres of land, 27s rent of assise, 9 cocks and 21 hens in villa de
Blean. in augmentum operum pietatis in eodem Hospitali etc.

With leave and liking of Archbishop Langham a certain chantery in the Church
of Livingsborne, that is Beaksborne founded in the year 1314. by one James of
Bourne, with the revenues of the same was translated to this Hospital by one
Bartholomew of Bourne Vide copiam fundationis Cantariae de Eastbridge in
Appendict, page
.

There was sometime a windmill standing near the Nonnery without Ridingate,
which this Hospital held by the grant of the Nonnes there Lib. bujus
Hospitalis.
. The very place of situation whereof was in quarta part unius acrae in parva
Foxmold versus Occidentem, in hundredo de Ridingate. So go the words of the
deed. The conditions mutually agreed upon at the time of the grant were, that
the Nonnes bearing the fourth part of the charge of the mill, should reap the
fourth part of the profit of it, and have their own corn ground there for them
when they would gratis, or of free cost. And the Hospital to find a way to it
a Cheminio magno Regali..i. from the rode or highway by it. And this about
King John's time.

By the Bull of Pope Honorius (I take it) the third, this Hospital was
privileged of and from paying tithe, de hortis,.i. of their gardens Ibid.
.

The City Chamber has a record dated the 7. Rich. 2. anno Domini 1391. whereby
it appears that the Master of this Hospital ought to repair, erect and
sustain the neighbour-bridge,.i. Kingsbridge. The account of the Hospitalls
estate given up to the Commissioners upon the stat. 37. H. 8. c. 4. charge
the Master with the paving also of the street there.

The Hospital has a neat handsome Chapel, to which have belonged two bells to
ring to service. So it is reported Chapel at Eastbridge.
to those Commissioners, by the Parson and Churchwardens of All Saints: who say
withal, that the said Hospital (as their own words are) is a Parish Church,
wherein there is continually ministered all Sacraments and Sacramentalls to the
poor people thither resorting, and to the keeper of the said Hospital and his
household, and all other remaining within the precinct of the same by the
Chantere Priest etc. Truth is, this Chapel was served heretofore by a Chantery
Priest which had x. lib. vjs viijd. yearly wages, Chantery there.
besides his Mansion or dwelling, which was that at the West end of the
Hospital, whereof the Stat. 1. Ed. 6. cap. 14. for the superstitious quality
of it, has long since deprived it. However, to satisfy the inquisitive, I
have given the foundation a place in my Appendix. I have nothing further Vide
pro S^iptura sexta in Appendice.
to say of the Chapel, but that one Cressy a Jew building against the head of
it, that house which yet stands there, and now belongs to Christ-Church (to
which upon the expulsion of the Jews it was, with other, given by the King:)
he was feign afterward to agree with the Hospital, that he might have their
sufferance for the standing of it, and had it in writing, the Charter whereof
dated 1236. I have seen in a Lieger of Christ-Church entitled Carta
Remissionis, made by Peter the then Rector, and the brethren of the Hospital
of St Thomas of Eastbridge Cant. to Cressie the Jew, de omnibus querelis
occasion domus vel fundamenti vel muri quam in part orientali in capite
capellae nostrae aedifieavit, ut nunquam question movebitur in Curia
Christianitatis vel seculari etc. as the deed runs.

For brevity and dispatch sake, I balk and spare the mention of much of this
Hospitalls indowment. But there is yet a parcel more, which I may not so pass
over; and that is of certain tenements in All Saints Parish, situate between
the sign of the George West, and the Queens head East, in the high street.
Thither then I will make next: But first, for some satisfaction to them that
cannot understand the foundation of the house formerly laid down in Latin, I
desire first to set down the state of it in which it stood at Cardinal Pooles
visitation of the place, anno 1557. taken in English. viz.

Memorandum they are bound to receive wayfaring and hurt men, and to have 8
beds for men, and 4 for women, to remain for a night and more if they be not
able to depart, and the Master of the Hospital is charged with the burial,
and they have 20 loads of wood yearly allowed, and 26s. a year for drink.

Now to the tenements which happily seem to be so mean as scarce worthy of any
notice. True. But for what has sometime stood here, and into the place whereof
they have succeeded, I think scarce a place in the City more remarkable, if at
all so memorable: which was an Exchange, a royal Exchange. Cambium Regis:
mention whereof often Exchange.
occurres in the old rentals and other records of Christ-Church, whose tenement
(now the George) is anciently bounded Eastward to this Exchange. It was
standing it seems until Ed. 3. days, and in likelihood received its fatal
period from him. For he in augmentation of the Hospitalls indowment gave it
Lib. de Eastbridge.
to the then Master of Eastbridge, by name, Thomas New of Wolton, for life, and
afterward to his Successors for ever. Which Thomas shortly after, dividing it
(it seems) into tenements, hires them out in fee-ferme to several Tenants,
viz. one part thereof to the then Commissary of Cant. Thomas Mason by name,
viz. quandam placeam terrae cum domibus superedificatis muris and aliis
pertinentiis suis quae pars fuit tenementi vocat' la Change jacen' in Civitate
Cant. in parochia omnium Sanctorum, simul cum quodam introitu ducente ab alto
vico ex part South per magnum hostium dictae placeae usque ad eandem placeam,
inter tenementum heredum Willielmi Child versus East, and tenem' Prioris and
Conventus ecclesiae Christi Cant. versus West, and tenem' Edmundi Horn versus
North, and tenementum praedicti Thomae de Wolton quod pars est tenementi vocat'
la Change versus South. This anno 43. Ed. 3.

The other part or residue thereof, unto one William Silkenden and Ioane his
wife, in these words, viz. quandam placeam quae pars est tenementi quod la
Change vocabatur, and quod Dominus noster Rex qui nunc est mihi dedit ad
terminum vitae meae and meis successoribus in perpetuum ad augmentum dotis
Hospitalis memorati, in qua quidem placeae unum cellarium, duo solaria and una
domus intermedia ad instar aulae cum quadam pecia gardini jacen' ad finem dicti
cellarii, quae omnia conjunctim jacent and situantur in dicta Civitate in
parochia omnium Sanctorum inter unam partem dicti tenementi vocat' la Change
quam modo tenet Magister Thomas Mason ex dimissione mea versus North, and aliam
partem ejusdem teneme^ti de la Change quam etiam idem Mr Thomas tenet ex
traditione mea, and quasdam choppas dicti Hospitalis versus West, and
tenementum heredum Willielmi Child versus East, and Regiam stratam versus
South. Tres etiam choppas praefati Hosp. cum una parva placea jucen' per longum
inter ipsas choppas, and ten' dicti Magistri Thomae quod etiam habet ex
dimissione mea ex part North, and introitum quendam antiquum in ipsum
tenementu^ de la Change ex part East, and Regiam stratam versus South, cum
uno muro lapideo qui est ad finem ipsarum placeae and schopparum, a tenemento
dicti Magistri Thomae linealiter extenso usque ad hostium dicti introitus ex
part sinistra ingredientium per illud. This anno 47. Ed. 3. Both which demises
I was desirous to express at large, because I have not seen any other record
that sets forth at all what kind of building this Exchange was.

For the antiquity of its continuance here before the suppression; Antiquity of
^ts standing here.
I cannot say much. In the sixth year of H. 3. anno Domini 1222. I meet with
the Kings Exchange at Canterb. For Henry the third (Stow n is my author) in the
sixth year of his reign, wrote to the Scabines and men of Ipre, that he
Survey. page ^51. ult. edit.
and his counsel had given prohibition, that none Englishmen, or other, should
make change of plate, or other mass of silver, but only at his Exchange at
London, or at Canterbury.

Shortly, there was sometime a family in our City, which from their
neighborhood or other relation to this place, took name from it, and were
surnamed De Cambio.

An exchange relates to a Mint, or place of mintage and Mint.
coynage of money; but of old, as will appear by the Stat. anno primo H. 6.
cap. 4. they might not be together, but were kept apart, and a place there was
sometime neighboring to the Exchange, on the other side of the same street,
even there where now the Inn called the Crown or some part of it stands where
our Mint was kept. In angulo monetariae versus East, is part of the boundary to
that which is now the dwelling house of Isaac Clerk. The Officers and Ministers
retaining to this Mint had their housing hard by it in some tenements of
Christ-Church. Whence in their old rentalls is frequent mention De monetariis
in parochia Sanctae Mariae Bredman. This Mint (I take it) was silenced about
the same time with the Exchange, for of latter years I find no mention of it.

From what antiquity it had stood and been kept at this Antiquity of it
place I know not. But amongst the places where King John in his letters makes
mention of Mints kept in England, this City is one Stow. Survey. page 46.
, and had been so (I suppose) for many ages. King Aethelstane appointing out
the places for Mints, and the number of minters throughout the Kingdom
Limbert. Archoeonom.
, begins with Canterbury, to which he allowed seven minters: a greater number
then to any other place in the Kingdom, except London, which was allowed to
have eight. Of these 7, four were for the King, two for the Archbishop, and
the seventh for the Abbat of S. Augustines. The Archbishops mint (it seems) is
yet elder. For Mr Seldom in his notes upon Edmerus, and Speed in his History
make mention of two several coins, one of Archbishop Plegmund under Alfred,
the other of Celnoth under Ethelwolf extant, and presented in figure, by Speed
the latter, by Seldom the former. When or how the Arohbishop lost or left off
his mintage here, I do no where find. Of the time when the Abbats ceased I
have showed before out of Thorn, in my Survey of S. Aug.

Amongst other pieces of antique (Roman, Britain, Saxon, Danish and Norman)
coin which I have met with and reserve, some were stamped in this Mint, I take
it; in this City, of certain, the reverse of the coin says so; I have withal
a piece or two of H. 8. coined at Canterbury, not here, but as I conceive at
the place now called the Mint by the Court-gate of Christ-Church; where after
the dissolution he coined money for the service (they say) of his French
wars. Ever since which time, the place therefore retains the name of the
Mint, and the court or yard which it incloseth is called the Mint-yard. So much
for the Mint.

Retreating a little from this place, on the same side of the street there is a
place where sometime the Jews, that, of old, Jews in Cant.
for a long time together, were suffered to dwell amongst us in most of our
chief Cities, kept their residence; being housed in this street and in the lane
by it, from thence to this day called Jury-lane, the same. (I take it) which of
old I find called Little-pet-lane Rental, vel. eccles. Cant.
. There was of their houses hereaway to the number of almost 20. All which,
together with their Synagogue, or (as more frequently called) Schola Iudaeorum,
their School, upon their general banishment out of this and all other parts of
the kingdom in Ed. 2. days (at what time their number amounted unto 16511
Matt. weslm. de anno 1290.
.) as confiscate, escheated to the King: and by him were eftsoons, some of
gift, some otherwise alienated, some to one, some to another, but the most (to
the number viz. of at least 12. and a void piece of ground which was
Communitatis Iudaeorum Civitatis,.i. the Jews in common) to the Monks of
Christ-Church Lib. eccles. Christi Can^.
. Their Synagogue or School stood about where now some part of the Saracens
head Tavern does, as appears by the Records of Christ-Church. Which have this
bound to certain fee of the late Monks hard by it, viz. Terrae in parochia
omnium Sanctorum inter magnum vicum qui est versus Aquilonem, and Scholam
Iudaeorum quae est versus Austrum, juxta venellam qua itur a praedicto magno
vico versus sanctam Mildritham: being that ground (I take it) whereon the
forepart (to the street-ward) of that which is now the Saracens head Tavern,
being in show newer then the back-part, was afterward built. To which ground
the very next house above (the Mitre) is bounded Westward, and called domus
juxt a scolam Iudeorum, thus explained in the Rentall, viz. Domus lapidea quae
est contra terram ubi scola Iudaeorum sita est versus Occidentem. By all which
I collect and verily conceive, that the now Stone-Parlour of the Saracens head,
mounted upon a Vault and ascended by many Stone-steps (as the Jewish Synagogues
and Schools were always built aloft Moses and Aaron. lib. 2. cap. 2. page 80.
) is the Remains of a good part of that which was our Canterbury Jews School
or Synagogue.

I could here very much enlarge my self in giving you the Story of the Jews
first advent or entrance into this Land, their time of continuance here, with
their behavior and dealings during that time, and the causes, reasons and
motives for their expulsion at last: which were chiefly two; their immoderate
usury; and their barbarous practice of crucifying, at places where they abode,
any Christians child they could get about Easter time. But I am prevented here
in by many others that have severally divulged these things already to the
full; as Harpsfield, and Stow, but more exactly and most elaborately and like
himself, our learned Seldom, Purcases guide and Author for a purposed
discourse of this kind; wherefore I forbear, ne actum agerem: only adding
what I have seen noted, (but how truly I know not) that the Jews, when
living here, were such notorious Usurers, that Usury, among the Christians,
Usury called Iudeisme.
became called Iudaisme. Pro praemiss is Abbas donatorem acquietavit de 28^. in
Iudeismo, loco gersumiae: as it is in an old deed. And they still continue this
trade wheresoever they become, whereby they grow rich even to envy every where,
yet (as one says Sandys Relation of Religion, etc.
) many of the Christians do use them under hand in improving their unlawful
rents to their utmost proportion.

Now a word or two of the Gild-hall (or Court-hall, as Gildhall.
we call it) and my survey of this Ward is at an end. Here then, as in the
fittest, and most convenient place, being the principal street of the City, is
the Court, Tribunal, or place of Judicature of the City seated and kept: where
distributive Justice in both, civil and criminal causes, of secular nature,
sorting to the cognizance of that Court, is administered. Vulgarly we call the
place the Gildhall. The etymology and derivation whereof is from the Saxon (or
old English) word, Gild, signifying a society or corporation. Here is a Court
kept every Monday throughout the year, for Law-matters, and for the deciding
of differences and righting of grievances between party and party; and on
every other Twesday a Court of Burgmote holden beside, for meeting and treaty
about the affairs and good government of the City. It had not the name of the
Gildhall until (as it were) of late years. That name of it occurres not in
any record that I could yet meet with, until the 26. of Hen. 6. who then in
his Charter of the change of the Bailiffes into a Mayor, makes mention of this
Tribunal by that name, granting (inter alia) that the Mayor shall hold pleas
in le Guildhall Civitatis praedict. as his words are. Aforetime Spech-house.
it was commonly called and known by the name of the Spech-house; and the
common goal or prison of the City, since removed to Westgate, being then kept
by it, that is in that part of it which is to the street-ward, was from it
adjacency to it, so called also. For proof both of one and the other read the
following notes extracted from certain witnesses examinations, Anno 1414.
taken in a cause of defamation, between a couple of the City (for calling one
the other Thief, a crime and calumny wherein the defamed of those days did
usually after purgation, right himself in Court Christian) and recorded in a
Book of Depositions remaining in the Office Regist. Consist. Cant.
. Whereof one is this: Dicit (says the witness) quod Iohannem Copherst semel
vidit in quadam domo vocat' Spech-house scituat' juxta Hospitium Leonis in alto
vico Cant. in parochia sanctae Mariae Bredman. Another this. Occasion
hujusmodi verborum dictus Thomas fuer at arrestatus ad prisonam vocat'
Spech-house in alto vico Cant. scituat' and ibidem dictus T. B. movebat
querelam contra eum ad summam december marcarum, coram Ballivo and juratis dictae
villae. A third, and the last, this. Interrogatus penes quos opinio dicti Tho.
sit denigrat' dicit apud Ballivos Cant. Io. Brown and Will. Bennet, and apud
omnes Burgenses pro tunc existentes in domo vocat' Spech-house Cant.

The Towne-Court has not always been kept at this place: but, as now it is
and of long time has been here, so both it and the prison were formerly kept
together elsewhere, and that (I take it) at the place of the now Corne-Market,
and were then also called the Spech-house (of which before at large:) Very
properly did they stand contiguously together, if Tholosanus De Republica. lib.
2. cap. 7.
judgment in this point be to be followed who says. Iuxta tribunalia and
continentes sint carceres qui ad custodiam judicandorum aedificari debent, tuti
and contra vim omnem muniti ut inde facilius and cum minori periculo ad
judicium duci and reduci possint. Thus he. But why the place of Judicature
called the Spech-house? Properly, Whence called the Spech-house.
some think, from the arguing and debating of matters there, not without much
vociferation. And not unlikely. With as much congruity (I dare say) as For us
is of Isodore derived a fando, from speaking. But I leave it, and this Ward,
and proceed (up the street) to Newingate-Ward.

Newingate Ward.
IN which what is most remarkable of us, are the Remains of the Augustines
Friars, whereunto a reasonable Augustine Friars.
fair Stone-Gate in Saint Georges street leads; the now Mansion or
habitation of Captain Berries Heirs, after many other mesne owners, since the
suppression: before which time it was the seat of the Augustine (as I said)
Eremite, mendicant Friars. Mendicant because it was one and the first of the
four orders of begging Friars: Eremite and Augustine, because Saint Augustine,
that famous African Father (they say) was their founder, who being and living
in Eremo or in the Wilderness, erected and instituted their order, and
prescribed them a rule of living; About which they and the Regular Canons are
at contestation as you may read elsewhere. They were otherwhile and of some
called also the White FF. (though properly and strictly the Carmelites are
understood by that Epithete) because that they do wear Owen Genealogy of
Monks, etc.
a long white wate of cloth down to their heels all loose, with a cowle or
hood of the same, when they are in their Cloisters; however when they go
abroad, they wear a black coat over the other, with another cowle, having
both their coats then bound close to their bodies, with a-broad leather girdle
or belt, says O^wen.

The generality of these FF. came first into England, from Italy, about the
year 1252. says Bale. These in particular came hither, and settled themselves
here, about the year 1325. For that very year the then Archbishop of
Canterbury sends and directs these his mandatory letters Liber Eccles. Cant.
concerning them to his then Commissary, viz.

Walterus permissione divina etc. Dilecto filio Commissario nostro Cant.
salutem, gratiam and benedictionem. Licet universaliter tamjura civilia quam
canonica prohibeant ne quis absque pontificali authoritate Oratorii domum de
novo construere praesumat, ac seeds Apostolica per multa privilegia specialiter
indul^erit and express, ne quis in fundo ecclesiae Cant. praeter authori^atem
Cantuar. Archiepiscopi and capituli, ecclesiam, capellam vel oratorium de novo
edificare moliatur. Fratres tamen heremitarum sancti Augustini hac die dominica
in festo Natalis beatae Mariae Virginis in quadam domo Civitatis Cant. in fundo
ecclesiae Cant. absque licentia and assensu nostro and Capituli nostri,
oratorium seu ecclesiam de novo erexerunt, and pulsata campanae missarum
solempnia public celebrare and oblationes, ecclesiae parochiali debitas temere
recipere ut asseritur praesumpser'. Quocirca vo^is firmiter injungendo mandamus
quatenus per viros fide dignos ^jus rei plenam noticiam habentes diligentem
faciatis inquisi^ionem. Et si per inquisitionem praedict' suggestae inveneritis
^eritate fulciri, tunc ipsum locum in quo praedicti fratres sic ut praemittitur
temere celebrarunt, and adhuc ut dicitur celebrant, vice and authoritate nostra
ecclesiastico supponatis interdicto. Citantes nichilominus nominatim illos
fratres quos in praedicto loco per dictam inquisitionem convinceritis
celebrasse, ac ipsos fratres ibidem commorantes, si qui sint, quod compareant
coram nobis die legitimo per vos statuendo ubicunque in Civitate Dioc. seu
Provinc. nostrae Cant. tunc fuerimus de hujusmodi injuria and contemptis nobis
and ecclesiae nostrae Cant. per eosdem illatis responsuri, ulteriusque facturi
and recepturi quod canonicis convenitinstitutis. De die vero receptionis
praesentium, and quid feceritis in praemissis nos dictis die and loco
certificetis per literas vestras patentes harum seriem continentes. Dat' apud
Tenham 18. Kal. October. Anno Domini Mcccxxvo.


For the Friars Lib. eccles. Christ's Cant.
having purchased and gotten possession of a house or tenement and
appertenances, in the Parish of Saint George in Canterbury of one Thomas of
Bonynton, bounded out as follows, viz. by a certain lane, sometime called
Lambertslane, afterward Brewerslane, that is, between the same lane, and
another tenement of the said Thomas toward the North, and a certain place
called Eald-gaole and the tenement of Cicely at Gayole toward the West, and the
tenement of. Thomas Chich toward the East, and the tenement of Thomas Clement,
and of the Hospital of Priests toward the South: the Friars (I say) having
purchased and gotten possession of this tenement; forthwith build them a
Church, and therein erect Altars, and all of their own authority: So busily
bestirring themselves, that both the Monks and the Parson of Saint George were
in danger to be prejudiced in their several interests, the one (the Monks) to
an annuity of 20d. per annum, payable to them (that is the Prior and Covent of
Christ-Church;) the other (the Parson) to the tithes and other rights
ecclesiastical payable to him, out of the said Tenement. At length within a
year after or such a matter, the Monks and they came to composition for their
annuity, of whom they obtained a remission and release of all arrerages thereof
past, so as the Friars see to the due payment of it for time to come. The
Parson also, John of Natyndon by name, after he had (for the timely prevention
of his own and his Churches prejudice, by the Friars alteration of the state
and property of that late house, which beside primitias decimas and oblationes,
yielded him and it other commodities before the Friars time) brought his action
against them before John Badesley the Chancellor, and Robert de Weston,
Auditors of causes under the then Archbishop (Walter Reinolds) to the end to
compel them by course of law (as but right and reason required) to secure him
and his Church against detriment and deterioration in this behalf; came also
to composition with them: in and by the which the house is quietly yielded and
confirmed to the FF. with liberty to make their abode therein, and to get their
Chapel, oratory or Church and Altars already erected upon the place, and also
a certain plot of ground laid out for a Churchyard, to be dedicated: and IXs
to be yearly paid by them, for and in lieu of all dues, to the Parson of Saint
George for the time being for ever; whereof the one moiety at Midsummer, and
the other at Michaelmas; subjecting themselves to the Archbishop, or any other
Judge ordinary, or delegate, for compulsion, in default of payment. The Parson
being tied to obey sub poena excommunicationis, and the Friars, sub poena
interdicti.

The Friars afterward Lib. Eccles. memora^ae.
enlarging their seat by purchasing of John Cherh of Canterbury, quandam
placeam seu aream in fra prochiam sancti Georgii Cant. existen' super stratam
Regiam apud Clothmarket, upon part of which they built their outward Gate: in
the year 1356. they enter into obgation, and do bind themselves and their
house to the Prior and Covent of Christ-Church (of whose Fee it seems it was a
part) to pay them 2s 4d. per annum for it. And thus have I showed you when and
in what manner these Friars came to house first, and afterward compleately
seat themselves here.

A great ornament afterward to this place, and to the John Capgrave.
whole order was John Capgrave, in his time, that is, Anno 1484. or
thereabouts, a famous Friar of this house, and a great Writer, the Catalogue of
whose works may be seen in Pitseus, who is very large, if not lavish in his
commendation for a man of most excellent parts.

For benefactors to this Monastery of note, I read of but two: the one a Widow
woman, one Amabilia Gobyon; who made choice of these Austin-Fryers-Church for
her place of Sepulture, and gave by her will Penes registrum Consist. Cant.
ten marks to the repair thereof. This in the year 1405. The other one Sir
John Fineur Knight, who in Hen. 7. time became a most liberal benefactor to
the place, as, if you peruse the following Instrument Ms. penes meipsum.
, will appear unto you.

Vniversis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis praesentes literas visuris seu
audituris Willielmus Mallaham Prior Conventus domus fratrum heremitarum divi
Augustini ordinis in Civitate Cantuar. sit' and fundat' ac ejusdem loci
fratres, salutem and sinceram in Domino caritatem. Cum in officiis caritatis
illis primo loco teneamur obnoxii ex quibus nos beneficia recepisse
cognoscimus, nec magnum immo dignissimum fore arbitremur ut illos spiritualibus
reficiamus epulis qui nos temporalibus dotaverunt: and Dominus Johannes Fyneux
miles Dominique Henrici Regis septimi Dominus Johannes Fyneux.
necnon and octavi capitalis Iusticiarius ad placita coram eisdem Regibus
tenend' vir utique prudentissimus, genere nisignis, Iustitia praeclarus,
pietate refertus, humanitate splendidus and caritate fecundus, ex ejus
munificentia and bonitate circa ecclesiae nostrae, refectorii, dormitorii
nostri, murorum nostrorum reparationem and refectionem quadraginta librarum
summam ampliusque largissime exposuerit. Hinc est quod Nos Willielmus Prior
antedictus and ejusd' domus fratres hujus dignissimi viri caritatem fecundam
advertentes pro hujusm' ejus largitione suapiissima unanimi consensu and
assensu, concessimus, donavimus ac praesentis donationis nostrae scripto
roboravimus and pro perpetuo confirmavimus prout per praesentes confirmamus
eidem Iohanni Fyneux heredibus and successoribus suis unum Capellanum ex
fratribus nostris quotidie and imperpetuum apud altar in honor beatae Mariae
Virginis vocat' in Capella beatae Mariae edificatade visitatione ejus, missam
quae vocabitur missabeatae Mariae inter horam septimam and octavam
celebraturum. Et quod idem Capellanus pro tempore celebraturus quotidie post
offeratori^m, and ante manuum lotionem ad cornu Altaris conversus alta voce
recitabit in quadam tabula nomina infra scripta ut sequitur. Oretur divina
clementia pro animabus Domini Iohannis Fyneux militis and Elisabeth consortis
suae, Henrici Regis ejus nomine septimi, Iohannis Morton Cardinalis quondam
Archiepiscopi Cantuar. Willielmi Apuldorfeld and Mildredae consortis suae, ac
pro animabus omnium fidelium defunctorum. Et ut haec donatio and concessio
nostra firmiter and perpetuo observetur: Nos Willielmus Prior praefatus and
hujus ejusdem loci Conventus hanc do^ationem and concessionem nostram non solum
sigilli nostri communis and Capitularis appositione sed and manuum nostrarum
subscriptione confirmavimus, and per praesentes confirmamus. Dat' in domo
nostra Capitulari praedictae domus nostrae apud Cantuar. vicesimo octavo die
mensis Novembris Anno Domini Millesimo quingentesimo vicesimo secundo.

Et ego frater Willielmus Wederhall Doctor in theologia and Provincialis
ejusdem ordinis fratrum heremitarum omnia and singula praedicta condigno and
salubriter percontentus fuisse concessa and condonata, pro confirmatione omnium
and singulorum, sic ut praefertur per Priorem and confratres praedictos
concessorum and condonatorum ad specialem rogatum and requisitionem praefatorum
Prioris and Conventus, praescriptis concessioni and condonationi sigillum meum
quo ad talia negotia utor apposui. Dat' quoad sigillationem hujus
confirmationis nostrae vicesimo die Decembris Anno Dom. supra dicto.

Hitherto and enough of the Aug. Friars. Having formerly discoursed at large of
the old Gaol or Prison sometime standing about this place; for avoiding of
repetitions, I forbear all further discourse ofit here. And so finish with this
Ward: finding nothing more observable in it, except the goodly conduit there,
which, because of a future occasion which I shall have to make mention of it, I
shall defer to speak of here.

Northgate Ward.
THis Ward offers and affords three remarkable places, to our Survey, and they
are, 1. The place called Stablegate. 2. the quondam house of the Templars. 3.
The late house of the black Princes chantery Priests.

I will begin with Stablegate. A borough or hamlet by the Stablegate.
Charter of Hen. 6. made to the City excepted from the Franchise of the same,
as being a parcel of the vill of Westgate, and of the sea and liberty of the
Archbishop, to whom of old it has belonged: it being taken for the very place
where Augustine the first Archbishop of Canterbury, and his company were
entertained and seated by King Ethelbert, before he resigned to him his royal
Palace. Concessit cis (Thorns words) locum habitationis in civitate
Doroberniae scituatum, viz. infra parochiam Sancti Aclphegi, ex opposito regiae
stratae versus Aquilonem; per murum Palatii Archiepiscopalis in longitudine se
extendit, in quo Augustinus cum suis domesticis usque ad conversionem Regis
hospitatus est. Fuerat tunc temporis quasi oratorium pro familia Regis ut ibi
^dorarent and Diis suis liberos immolarent. Sanctus vero ille hospes tanta
hospitium suum voluit liberate promovere, and ab exactionibus quorumcunque
perpetualiter acquietare, quod neque Civibus in tallagiis and assessionibus
quoquo modo debeant respondere, vel eis subsidium aliquod praestare: sed
Archiepiscopo in omnibus subjacere, and ut suum Palatium firma liberate
gaudere. Ita ut si fures vel homicidae vel alii quan^is indictati situm de
Stablegate valiant introire; ut in ecclesia, liberate gaudebunt. Thus he.

Whence it took the name of Stablegate, I am as yet ignorant. Some surmise from
the staple of wool which anciently was kept in the City. Canterbury being one
of the places where by the stat. 27. Ed. 3. it was ordained to be kept, and the
only place that two years before (25. Ed. 3.) the same King appointed for the
keeping of it at, for the honor of St Thomas Stow. Survey. page 496. ult.
^ditionis.
. If so, then is there a mistake in the writing of it Stablegate, for
Staplegate.

There was sometime a family in our City, who from their habitation either at
or near this place, were surnamed De Stablegate, and of Stab. whereof one
Edmund Stablegate Edmund Stablegate.
(the same man I take it that Lambert speaks of. Peramb. of Kent, in
Bilsington) in the 42. Ed. 3. was a Bailiff of the City. For to a deed or
Charter of Nicholas at Crouch, made to the Hospital of Eastbridge (de quieta
clamatione juris sui in quodam tenemento cum gardino and pertinen' scituat' in
parochia sancti Petri Cant. inter curtilagium de Estbridge versus East, and
murum lapideum fratrum minorum Cant. versus West, continen' in longitudine a
regia strata versus North usque ad aquam del Stour verse. South 136 pedes, and
in latitud. 46 pedes) this Edmund, by the title of one of the Bailiffs of the
City is, with others, a witness. He had also a seat or habitation in the
Suburbs by Natindon, limitaneous to the Cities Franchise thereaway, as the
perambulation thereof will show.

I leave Stablegate, and pass to the house of the Templars. House of Templars.
An order of Knights that began in the year 1118. These Knights Templars
(says Stow Survey page 438. and 439.
, speaking out of Matthew Paris, of the Temple in London) took their beginning
about the year 1118. in manner following. Certain noble Knights bound
themselves by vow in the hands of the Patriarch of Jerusalem, to serve Christ
after the manner of Regular Canons, in chastity and obedience, and to renounce
their own proper wills for ever: the first of which order were Hugh Pagan and
Geffrey of S. Audomar.

And whereas at the first they had no certain habitation, Baldwin, King of
Jerusalem, granted unto them a dwelling place in his Palace by the Temple, and
the Canons of the same Temple gave them the street, thereby to build therein
their houses of Office; and the Patriarch, the King, the Nobles, and the
Prelates, gave unto them certain revenues out of their Lordships.

Their first profession was for safeguard of the Pilgrims, coming to visit the
Sepulcher, and to keep the highways against the lying in wait of thieves etc.
About ten years after, they had a rule appointed unto them, and a white habit
by Honorius the second; then Pope; and whereas they had but nine in number,
they began to increase greatly. Afterward in Pope Eugenius time, they bare
crosses of red cloth, on their uppermost garments, to be known from others, and
in short time because they had their first Mansion hard by the temple of our
Lord in Jerusalem, they were called Knights of the Temple.

Many Noblemen in all parts of Christendom, became brethren of this order, and
builded for themselves Temples in every City or great Town in England, but this
(says my Author) at London was their chief house, which they builded after the
form of the Temple near to the Sepulcher of our Lord at Jerusalem. They had
also (says he) other Temples in Cambridge, Bristow, Canterbury, Dover, Warwick
etc.

That in Canterbury Stow speaks of, was situate in Northgate Parish, in or
near Waterlock-lane (the lane, I conceive, under the Town-wall, and leading by
Northgate Church within, down to the river running from Abbotsmill.) For I
read Thorn in vitis Abbat. Sancti Augustini.
of a message, which in the year 1271 was given to St Austines Abbey by one
Edmunde de Cambio scituat' in venella de Weterloke in parochia de Northgate,
prope domos Templariorum etc. When this sect of the Templars was abolished, and
why, as also what became of their possessions, you may find elsewhere.

Leaving them then, I shall show you next where the black Princes Priests.
Princes Chantery Priests were once housed, and so I shall have done with this
Ward. Their house stood, I may say it yet stands (for so I take it, in part it
does) very near, if not in the place where some part of the Templars
habitation was situate. But let me first show you that such a house there once
was, and that I shall do from the charter or deed of this Princes Chanteries
foundation, in which are these words. Promora siquidem dictorum sacerdotum
assignavimus quendam habitationis locum juxta elemosinariam dicti monasterii
(meaning Christ-Church) in quo construetur etc. wherewith concurreth the
relation of the Priests themselves (one of them at least) to Hen. 8.
Commissioners, which has these words ofit. Also the said Prince Edward gave to
the s^id. Chaplains and to their Successors for ever a house in S. Alphies
Parish, the yearly value of it is XXs. etc.

Next let me observe unto you that over an ancient stone-porch opening to the
lane leading you from Stablegate, Westward, toward the lane turning to
Abbats-mill, there are yet undefaced the Black-Princes arms obvious to the eye
of any observing passenger. And so by this time (I hope) the place is
sufficiently discovered, and my task for this Ward absolved.

Worthgate Ward.
COming now to Worthgate ward. The first thing I shall survey there is the
quondam Hospital of poor Priests. Hospital of Poor Priests.
A Spittle first built and founded by Simon Langton Archdeacon (and brother of
Stephen Langton Archbishop) of Canterbury about the year 1240. Not (it seems)
altogether of his own purse, but chiefly by and with the alms and charity of
pious and devout benefactors. Quod Hospitale idem Archidiaconus diversorum
elemosinis dicitur fundasse, says Thorn relating the foundation of this
Spittle. It was (I conceive) intended for a place of succor and relief to
poor Priests. i. Chaplains, Curates, and other like unbeneficed Clerks,
chiefly those (I suppose) that either by age or other infirmity, were disabled
for the performance any longer of their holy function abroad in the world, and
therefore were here accommodated with a Chapel (wherein to pray, sing and
celebrate for their benefactors, and to perform Chapel.
other divine duties) contiguous to this their habitation, dedicate, as their
Hospital, to the blessed Virgin; whose first fabric was not, as now, of
stone. One Thomas Wyke (Master, I take it of the Hospital) anno 1373. new
built it of stone, but it is now made and parcelled out into dwellings and
workhouses.

Shortly after the Hospitalls foundation perfected, at Langton the founder his
instance, the then Abbat and Covent of S. Augustines granted to it the
Parsonage of Stodmersh, of their Patronage. Of which grant my Author (Thorn)
gives this Copy.

OMnibus Sanctae matris etc. R. Dei gratia etc. Ad universitatis Grant of
Stodmersh Church.
vestrae noticiam volumus pervenire, nos, divinae pietatis intuitu ad
instantiam viri venerabilis and amici nostri karissimi Magistri Simonis de L.
Archidiac. Cant. Ecclesiam Sanctae Mariae de Stodin. quae ad nostram pertinuit
donationem perpetue concessisse and dedisse Hospitali pauperum Sacerdotum quod
situm est in parochia de Sancta Margareta in Cant. ad sustentationem eorundem
cum proventibus quatuor acrarum singulis annis de Dominio nostro de Stodmarsh
antiquo more de gratia nostra speciali percipiendum: hoc adjecto, quod in dicta
parochia nullas terras vel redditus de nostris tenentibus, dicti Sacerdotes vel
eorum procuratores ement vel aliquo titulo sibi appropriabunt nisi de nostro
vel Successorum nostrorum licentia speciali, nec decimas aliquas de Dom^nio
nostro de Stodm. requirent in futuro. Quando autem dictam eis fecimus
donationem Synd^cus dicti Hospitalis de voluntate Archidiaconi memorati, nomine
dictorum Sacerdotum and Hospitalis supradicti nobis and ecclesiae nostrae
Sacramentum praestitit fidelitatis, and hoc idem facient omnes Successores sui.
Dictus autem Procurator vel aliquis Sacerdos Hospitalis supradicti omni anno
super majus altar in ecclesia nostra in die S. Augustin' unum cereum unius
librae in signum recognitionis praemissorum etc.

To this Parsonage, not long after, to wit anno 1271. another was added, that I
mean of S. Margaret in Cant. given to this Hospital by the same donors that
the former, or if you will (as the private Lieger of the house has it) by Hugh
Mortimer then Archdeacon, authoritate ordinaria, the Sea being void, with
consent of the Patrons, the Abbat and Covent aforesaid. Anno Domini Millesimo
Cclxxjo (says Thorn Grant of S. Margarets Church.
of it) data fuit ecclesia Sanctae Margaretae Cant. Hospitali pauperum
Sacerdotum ibidem in liberam and perpetuam elem' ab abbate R. quae fuit ante
nostri patronatus. Et non licebit Syndico vel Sacerdoti Hosp. praed' aliquas
terras redditus vel tenementa in dicta parochia sanctae Margaretae de
tenentibus nostris emere, vel aliquo titulo sibi appropriare sine licentia Abb.
and Con. speciali. Syndicus autem praed' Hosp. qui pro tempore fuerit in
recognitionem Iuris nostri praed' sacramentum nobis praestabit fidelitatis in
Capitulo eum ad hoc fuerit requisitus. Pulsatio vero in eadem ecclesia siet
contra Dominum Abbatem quotiens eum per illam ecclesiam transire contigerit.

I shall not further insist on the particulars of this Hospitals demaines and
revenewes, saving the Island behind it, and a forgotten milne sometime both
neighboring and belonging to it, called Medmilne, either I take it, because
Medmilne.
situate by the Meadows, quasi Meadmilne, or else because standing about
midway between Saint Mildreds Mill on the one, and Eastbridge on the other
side, quasi Middlemilne. Before the Hospitals erection it was the proper Mill
of one Lambinus or Lambin, from either his birthplace or parentage, surnamed
Flandrensis or Fleming, who dwelt where since and now the Hospital is seated;
and living there, gave to Eastbridge Hospital, beside 14. perches of his land
lying in With, an annuity of one quarter of wheat out of the said Mill, of
which gift I once took this note from Eastbridge Book. Carta Lambini
Flandrensis filii Adae de Berghes, Hospitali de una summa frumenti de molendino
meo quod vocatur Medmilne, and 14. perticatis terrae meae quae jacet Binnewytt
inter ter. [ten.] Samuelis tinctoris versus North, and terram Godardi
molendinarii verse. South, super Sturam Cant.

The Poor Priests afterward succeeding Lambine in his seat, succeeded him
(it seems) in this Mill also. For in the year 1325. a controversy arising
between the two Hospitals about this Mill Liber sancti Lawrentii.
, and that brought before Robert de Malling then Commissary of Canterbury, He,
causa prius cognita, adjudged the Mill to the Hospital, of Poor Priests. It
stood charged nevertheless with a Resolute of certain bushels of wheat to
Eastbridge Hospital which it seems by my Inventory of the present Hospital
taken in Hen. 8. time was four bushels. For in the recital there of the rents
Resolute yearly going out of the same Hospital, this is one. Item, to the
Hospital of Eastbridge in Canterbury in wheat four bushels.

Now as for the Island behind this Hospital, and lying Island.
between it and the Friars, called by a Saxon word With, it was sometime
belonging to this Hospital serving the poor Priests for a garden, but
aforetime appertained partly to Christ-Church, and partly to several private
men: whereof one family long ago, took their surname, and from this their
habitation were called the Withs or Binnewiths, as some of those were (as you
have seen before) which inhabited the neighbor With or Island, the late Gray
Friars seat. Part if not all the Island anciently lay in the Parish of Saint
Margaret. For the elder Rentals of Christ-Church who had rents here, make
mention of several tenants and parcels of ground here, as of and within that
Parish. And the private Leiger of this Hospital so mentions the house of one
Solomon of Binnewith, Anno 1239. At Way to the Island.
or about which time the common and ordinary way or passage to this Island was
by the now little and straightened lane leading from the street before the
Hospital (called Stour-street) to the common washing place on the North-side
of the Hospital, and from thence over the Stour by a Bridge crossing the
stream. For the situation of that which is now the dwelling house of Peter
Noble (then one Robert de Hotwells) on the North-side of the Chapel is in an
ancient rentall of Christ-Church described thus. Inter domum quae fuit Lambini
Flandrensis and vicum sicut itur ad With. i. between the house sometime of L.
F. (which I told you is now the Hospital) on the one side, and the lane as you
go to With or at the Island on the other. In another Rentall thus described.
Tenementum quod est inter capellam Hospitalis sacerdotum versus South, and
quandam venellam quae ducit ad Insulam praed' Hosp verse. North, and regiam
stratam verse. East. And that on the lanes other side thus. In parochia sanctae
Mariae de Bredman inter domum lapideam Samuelis tinctoris verse. Aquil. and
domum Roberti de Hotwell verse. Austrum, interjacente quadam venella qua itur
versus Stur, and regiam stratam verse. Orien. and Stur versus occiden. Which
first described house was sometime belonging to Christ-Church: of all right and
title to which house (or challenge thereof) the poor Priests Anno 1242. coming
to be neighbors to it (and their neighborhood, it seems, of the jealous
Monks suspected) make a Charter Liber eccles. Cant.
of release to them, namely (as the words of it are) de Iure suo in quadam
terra and domo apud Hottewell (for so it seems, the place was Hottewell.
called) quae est juxta pontem ex part aquilonari; to which they put Simon
Langton the Archdeacons Seal, because they had then (as they say in their
Charter, by reason, I take it, their Hospital was but newly founded) no seal
as yet of their own.

The late owners of the Gray-Fryers have exchanged this house (which was
theirs) with the City, for that Island, which now goes with the Friars, and is
parcel of the same.

But now to our Hospital again, which I find clearly to The Hospital
spared by the Dissolution.
have stood out and escaped the general dissolution, unsuppressed. In Queen
Mary's days, Anno 1554. the Mastership thereof with the Rectory of Saint
Margaret, which went still with it, was conferred upon one Hugh Barret,
presented thereto by the Patron Nicholas Harpesfield the Archdeacon, to the
Deane and Chapter of Christ-Church, Ordinaries, or Keepers of the spiritualties
in the Sees then vacancy, who gave the presented Institution with letters
mandatory to the Archdeacon or his Official for his Induction: whereof a Book
of that Church keeps this Record.

VIcesimo septimo Iulii 1554. D'nus admisit Hugonem Barret presbiterum ad
Hospitale pauperum sacerdotum Civitatis Cant. necnon and Rectoriam sive
ecclesiam parochialem divae Margaretae ejusdem Civitatis dicto Hospitali
appropriat. per mortem naturalem Nicolai Langdon ultimi Incumbentis ejusdem
vacan'. Ad quam sive quod per venerabilem virum magistrum Nicolaum Harpesfield
legum dectorem Archidiaconum Cant. dict. hospit. and ecclesiae verum and
indubitatum ut dicitur patronum D'no praesentatus extitit. Ipsumque Praepositum
Magistrum sive Rectorem instituit and investivit canonice in and de eisdem eum
suis juribus and pertinentiis universis, Curamque and regimen animarum etc.
sibi in Domino commisit, Iuribus capitularibus, etc. and ecclesiae Metropol'
Christi Cantuar. dignitate et honor in omnibus semper salvis, ac praestito
Iuramento per Iacobum Canceler procuratorem supradicti Hugonis Barret in hac
part legitime constitutum, de observand' statutis et ordinationibus dicti
Hospitalis juxta fundationem ejusdem, ac etiam de canonica obedientia, etc.
Scriptum fuit Archidiacono Cant. sen ejus Officiali pro ipsius inductione, etc.

But afterward, to wit Anno 17. Eliz. (and not before) When surrendered.
this Hospital was dissolved, being then surrendered to her Majesty, by Blase
Winter the Master, Edmund Freake the Patron, and Matthew Parker the Ordinary,
and eftsoons granted by the Queen to the City, whereunto ever since it has
belonged, and is called Bridewell Hospital: Bride-well, Bride-well.
because of the house of correction there kept; and Hospital, both for the old
names sake, and because of a certain number of Boys (poor Townesmens
Children) kept there in an Hospital way. Of the foresaid Royal grant my
Appendix shall give you a Copy, if you desire Vide pro Scriptura 7ma in
^ppendice.
the sight of it: So much of this Hospital. Of the state whereof in 37. Hen.
8. whilst it yet was in Esse, if any desire satisfaction, I shall be willing
to give them a more exact account, from good record thereof, which I can
produce.

One thing being very pertinent to our discourse of this Spittle, since I wrote
the premises come to my knowledge, and therefore hitherto omitted; I desire
leave to mention here, though the place in some respect be indeed improper; and
that is, that in the interim of this Hospitals foundation, and the
appropriation of St Margarets Church unto it, the Parson and the Hospital with
consent and confirmation of the Abbat and Archdeacon, did come to composition
about the tithes and other ecclesiastical rights and duties of this Hospital:
a Copy whereof taken from a Lieger Book of Saint Austins, you shall find in
my Appendix, Scriptura ixa.

I come next to Maynards, or more rightly Mayners Spittle, Mayners Spittle.
so called from the founder, one Mayner, sometime a Citizen of Canterbury
dwelling in St Mildreds Parish Rentale vetus eccl^siae Christi Cant.
: and that (as I have good inducement to avouch) in H. 2. days. A man in his
time (it seems) of noted wealth, and (I suppose) therefore, and to distinguish
him and his family from another family of Mayners which were Dyers about the
same time, surnamed Dives, and so styled and called in ancient writings that
make mention of him, viz. Maynerus Dives, or Mayner le Rich, an addition
whereby his succession or posterity were known and called after him, by name
Ethelstane and Wiulphus, Wilulphus or Winulphus (for so variously is he
written) his sons, and afterward, Maynerus, his Grandchild (I take it.) Of
which the two former lived in Rich. 1. and King John's days (and in the first
of King John, Winulphus, who lived where Alderman Sabin now dwells R^ale
eccles. prad.
, was one of the Praepositi of the City) and the latter in Henry the thirds; in
the thirteenth year of whose reign he was a like Governor of the City.

I find n the Hospital called both Hospitale Mayneri and Hosp. Winulphi
[Wiulphi]. For this cause (I conceive) that Sic in Archivis ecclesie prad.
the Patronage of the Hospital though the first founder were dead, yet
continued to the son. And so Maynerus the father dying, the Hospital took
name afterward from W. the son, the succeeding Patron, whilst as yet the
City had not the patronage, power or government of it. Or else thus. The
foundation was imperfect in the Fathers days, and became afterward either
perfected or bettered by the son, and so it gained the name of Winulphs or
Wiulphs Hospital, which latter name it has now clean lost, and is known
only by the former.

The Hospital has a neat little Chapel to it (of late encumbered and
endangered too, by part of a house and a chimney put up against it) which
together with the Hospital was dedicate to the blessed Virgin o. Ex Archivis
the moral.


As for the endowment, possessions and goods of this Hospital and Chapel,
what they are now, or at first were, I know not; but what they were in Hen. 8.
days, you may learn from this following Inventory taken of them and delivered
up to the Commissioners upon the Stat. 37. Hen. 8. cap. 4.

Maynards Hospital.
The house and the Garden is by estimation one half acre and the rod.

Item, in the Spittle lane they have three tenements, the rent of them all is
yearly xiijs Item, in Castle-street be two tenements, the rent is yearly of
both vjs Item, in the same Castle-street, in the Parish of St Margarets they
have one tenement by the year vjs viijd Item, in the same street other three
tenements all by the year at xvs Item, in the same street other three
tenements, by the year all ixs Item, in Wincheape one tenement, by year iiijs
Item, in Waterlocke lane in the Parish of St Margaret, there they have two
tenements by the year x^ Item, they have three little pieces of Garden rooms,
every of them goes for 12d by the year iijs Item, they have a little stripe
of ground leading them from their Wood unto the Kings highway iis iiijd Item,
they have a Wood called the Brotherhedds Wood in the Parish of Fordwich
containing by estimation six Acres.
In the Chapel.
Item, one Chalice. Item, two Masers bound with silver. Item, two Candlestickes
for two Tapers of Catten. Item, one Corporas and the Case. Item, two vestements
and two Albs. Item, one painted cloth for the forefront of an Altar. Item, one
Bell. Item, one great chest in the Chapel.
Adjoining to this Hospital, or rather within it is another Cottons Hospital.
like Hospital, erected of late by one Leonard Cotton Gentleman, sometimes an
Alderman and Mayor of this City: whose commendable piety is as yet so fresh in
memory, and his Will so obvious to any that will search the Office for it, and
therein the nature and condition of the foundation so largely set forth, that
it shall not need my further mention.

Ridingate Ward.
Wherein the Dungeon, a Manor lying in this Ward, The Dungeon.
so called, challenges the next place in our Survey: whose name time (I
perceive) has sported with, calling it sometime Danzon and Dangon (totam
terram nostram quam habuimus ad Dangonem [Danzonem] as in an old deed of St
Lawrence:) as also Dangun (in campio qui vocatur Dangun, as in a deed of 47.
Hen. 3. And, particula terrae meae cum pertinen' jacent' apud Dangun, as in a
deed of 14. Ed. 1.) Likewise Daungeon (juxta le Daungeon, as in old Rentals of
Christ-Church:) and Dungeon so Roger Brent of Canterbury in his Will In
Registro Co^ Cantuarien.
dated Anno 2486. mentioning his Manor there, calls it, and so do we at
this day, and the Hill hard by Dungeon-Hill:) Names much alike all. And as the
Manor (I take it) derived it name from that of the neighboring Hill; so the
radix and original of that, I conceive to signify the Danes work: and
therefore corruptly called Dungeon-Hill for Danian Hill, or Danes-Hill: and
that because it was either theirs against the City, or contrariwise the Cities
against them. For my part, I conceive first that it was the proper work of the
Danes, (the great and frequent molesters, invaders and wasters of our City:)
and that probably at such time as they beleaguered the City in King Etheldreds
days, which stood out against them and their siege twenty days, and then was
not mastered aperto Mart, by open force, but by base treachery surprised: if
we may follow Henry of Huntington; Osborne Vide pro Scrip^ra xxxj. in Appendice.
that was (and writ the story) many years before him, making no mention of any
treason that the other says was plotted or practiced in the winning of the
City.

Next I am persuaded (and so may easily, I think, any one be that well
observes the place) that the works both within and without the present Wall of
the City, were not counter-workes one against the other, as the vulgar opinion
goes; but were sometimes all one entire plot containing about three Acres of
ground; of a triangular form (the out-worke) with a mount or hill entrenched
round within it. And that, when first made and cast up, it lay wholly without
the City-wall: and has been (the hill or mount, and most part also of the
out-worke) for the Cities more security, taken and walled in since: that side
of the trench encompassing the mount now lying without, and under the wall,
fitly meeting with the rest of the City-ditch, after either side of the
out-worke was cut thorough to make way for it, at the time of the Cities
inditching, as I suppose it cannot seem unlikely to have been, to any that
shall considerately mark and examine the place.

But leaving that, a word or two more of the Manor of Dungeon, which was
sometime the Chiches, a family of Chiches a family.
Gentlemen, for many generations known in our City, though now extinct to one
poor Spark, to whom the Aldermanry of Burgate apperteined. Of which Thomas
Chich (whose name in an old Character, together with his effigies are set up in
the West Window, as his coat is in the Chancell, in stone-worke, of St Mary
Bredins Church) was Anno 1259 Recorda ^cles. Cant.
, and again Anno 1271 Recorda ^cles. Cant.
, one of the Bailiffes of the City, as was also John Chich Recorda ^cles. Cant.
in the 23th, and again in the 26th year of Ed. 3. After the Chiches, it was
the Brents, then the Butlers, and shortly after (as now) the Hales.

This Ward affoords me nothing else observable, wherefore I leave it, and
betake me to the next.

Burgate Ward.
Wherein I shall observe first the Market-crosse at the Bull-stake: and
thereof let me give you the Bull-stake:
true antiquity from a rythmicall brazen memorial fastened to one of the
columns, which is this. John Coppyn of Whitstabell in great devotion,
And William Bigg of Canterbury in Christ's Passion
Did do make this Cross, in Heaven God them solace,
Mcccc and xlvj. in the year of Grace.


This Cross (it seems) was built to supply the decay of a former standing
here. For in the story of Archbishop Stra^fords troubles recorded in the
Antiquit. Brit. my Author maks mention of a writ of summons against the
Archbishop set up at noone day, ad crucem excelsam extra portam Prioratus
Cantuariensis Antiq. Brit. in ^la Stratford. page 2^4.
.

Now for the name of the place, the Bull-stake: which it took from the baiting
and chasing of Bulls there, by an ancient order and custom of the City, used by
the City Butchers, before their killing, not so much (if at all) for pleasure,
as to make them man's meat, and fit to be eaten; which Bulls flesh, without such
baiting and chasing, is not held to be.

At this place (the Bullstake) is a mercate holden twice a week, viz. every
Wednesday and Saturday throughout the year, plentifully serving the City and
neighboring parts with household provision of victual of diverse kinds,
especially of poultry, and that ab antiquo: whence in a composition Lib.
eccles. Cant.
between Christ-Church and Saint Augustines Monks, made Anno 41. Ed. 3. that
part of the street by it, i. between it and the now Lane called Angell-lane,
is termed le Po^lettria, the Poultry (in quodam Messuagio cum cellar' and shop,
ad idem pertinen. dictorum Prioris and Conventus The Poultry.
in parochia sancti Andreae Cant. in le Polettria scituat' inter Regalem
stratam verse. North and alia tenementa ipsorum P. and C. verse. South, and
quandam venellam vocat' Clementeslane verse. East, and quandam placeam communem
vocat' le Bolstake versus West, as it is in the Composition).

Offa King of Mercia in the year 785. gave unto Ealdberht his Minister, and
his Sister Seledrith the Abbess, vicum qui dicitur Curringtun in urbe quae
dicitur Dorovernensi, in aquilonali part venalis loci. Where to find this
Market place I Mereats in the City and Sub^bs.
know not. But here (as in a place which I have purposely reserved, as most
proper for it) let me show unto you what several Markets and Marketplaces our
City had of old. For, as we now see they are, and like as the Philosopher in
his Politics Aristot. 7. Politicor. cap. 12.
in like case requires (where he says, Fora haec separanda sunt pro faciliori
commercio, ut alibi oves, alibi alia animalia, alibi carnes, alibi pa^is
veneant, si modo civitas aut oppidum locorum commoditatem admit^at; aliter una
and eadem platea forum admittere poterit, etc.) So have our mercates been of
old, kept apart, each commodity almost Wheat market.
having a distinct place to be vented in. As (for example) first Poultry and
other like privision here at the Bull-stake. Upwards, i. without Burgate in
Saint Paul's Parish, was of ancient time a Wheat-market (De quodam tenemento
apud Wheat-market, and De novis shoppis quae sunt apud Wheat-market in parochia
sancti Pauli, as in old Rentals of Christ-Church, mentioning their now houses,
at and about the corner on your left hand without Burgate. A deed or Charter of
Lands given to Saint Austins, by one Dum^voldus, in the year 760. makes
mention of a Marketplace by Quenegate, in these words. Villam (...) quae jam
ad quenega^ ^bis Dorov^ in so^o pos^. Rush-market. Cloth-market.
) Come we back again, and at the Red-well, by the Palace backegate, there was
another market, commonly called and to this day remembered by the name of the
Rush-market. In Saint Georges street, about the Augustine Friars Gate, there
was a Cloth-market kept (a touch where of I have given before in speaking of
those Friars) whence the Lane now called Iron-barre lane, was then called and
described, venella quae ducit a Cloth-markes versus Burgate R^le v^s eccles
Christi Cant. Thoroughhall lane.
. The same Lane (by the way) was sometime called Thorough-hall lane, whether or
no from a house in or by it of Christ-Church, called in their old Rentals, Aula
Sancti Dunstani; I leave to conjecture. Below this Cloth-market, was, as it is
still, the Flesh-market, or Flesh-shambles for Butchery ware. To the repair
whereof, and for paving the street thereaway, Alderman Bennet by his Will In
Registro Domins Archid. Cant.
Anno 1462. gave xl. Thus occasionally induced, let me observe that the City in
those days lay generally unpaved, and so continued a good space of time
afterward. But in the 17. year of Ed. 4. by a particular act of Parliament
made for that purpose, order Act of Parliament for paving the streets.
was taken for the paving of the principal streets, as by a copy of the same
act, which you may find in my Appendix Striptura 8v^ will more fully appear.

Yet lower down (to return to our mercate-places) to wit in the High Street,
besides St Mary Bredmans. Church, was wont in time past to be kept a
Fish-market. In medio Fish-market.
mercati ubi venduntur pisces Cant. juxta ecclesiam beatae Mariae Bredman, as I
find in the examination of a witness mentioning where certain words of
defamation were uttered by one that was sued for them, in Anno 1414z. This
Fish-market (it seems) was of long continuance kept here. (...) Ex R^gistro
Consistor. Cant.
For in a deed of Christ-Church dated 1187. mention is made of a house,
scituat' in parochia sanctae Mariae, quae vocatur ecclesia Piscariorum in Cant.
passed over to the Church (in exchange for another) by the Nonnes of Saint
Sexburgh in the I Will of Shepey. And before that, Odo the Prior of Christ-Church
leased out Managium Lamberti Gargate juxta Fismannecherich, ubi ipse Lambertus
manner solebat, scilicet partem illam quae est proxima ecclesiae, etc. as the
demise runs. Now I conceive this to be the Church intended by those deeds. And
so, as it is now, from the Bred-market by it, called Saint Mary Bredmans
Church, it was more anciently called Saint Mary Fishmans Church. I proceed.

Upwards, a little without Newingate, at Oaten-hill, Oaten-hill.
now the Cities place of execution, was that commodity of oats, sometime
vented; as at the same place before, salt Rentale vet. ^cles. Christi (...)
was sold; whence it was called Salt-hill. It had a market-crosse to it: for I
read of Crucem de Oat-hill. The place has a cross still, but it is ill
marketting at it.

Not far hence, to wit, by the Nunnery, at the meeting of the four weuts or
ways there, another market was kept, or the former continued thither, whence
the field over against the Nunnery, Southward, now almost all over dug for
chalk, is anciently called Market-field Lib. S. Lawrentii. and Rentale Eccles.
Ca^.
. Here were, as not far hence yet are, cattle bought and sold, especially
(at this day) bullocks, oxen, and the like: whence (as I conceive) the market
took it name at first of Rethercheape, Rethercheape.
which being a compound of two Saxon words Hrythera and Ceape, may be rendered
in Latin, Forum armentorum, and in English, the Drove-market, (...) in the
Saxon signifying a drove of oxen, or such like big cattle. Whence in a Latin
Charter of Cuthred King of Kent, made to Archbishop Wlfred, which I have seen
in Christ-Church, Campus armentorum, is englished, (...). For the antiquity
sake of this market, I cannot but take notice of the mention made of it in the
second of King Ethelberts charters to S. Augustines Abbey.

There was yet another market, and that of old was kept Wincheape.
in Wincheape. A mercate happily for wines. For so the name imports. Cheap
signifying a market: whence the name of Cheapside in London, Chepstow in
Monmouthshire, and other like Market places: as Chapman, for a trader there.
Our words also of Cheapening, Chopping (as chopping and changing) and of Shop,
anciently written usually (in Lawyers Latin) Choppa, as also of Lieu-cope
(signifying a sale or bargain made upon the place) have thence all their
derivation: springing from the Saxon Radix, which is Ceap, signifying wares, or
merchandise, and Cyppan, to buy. Cambden. Spelman.
This market had it cross too, and that standing within man's memory, upon the
Green before the street built of stone, with a crosse-house about it, and was
called Barnacle-Crosse. Barnacle-Crosse.
But there is neither market, nor market-crosse there now. It Is true there is
hard by, a cross; but (as that other at Oaten-hill) it spoils their marketting
ever after that once market thereat. And therefore let us hasten from it.

Cathedral, and Parish Churches.
HAving briefly surveyed our Cities Wards, the order of my proposed method
requires, in the next place, my survey of the Cathedral, and Parish Churches
of and about the City. First then of the Mother Church (the Cathedral) and
then of the Daughters. The former indeed the thing which I account the chiefest
glory both of the City, and my present survey thereof. Which Malmesbury In
prolog. lib. 1. de gestis Pontif.
happily not knowing how to commend enough; amongst the many commendations which
he gives our City (as, for the situation and exceeding fertility of the soil
adjoining, for the soundness of the enclosing walls, for the rivers watering
Malmesb. commendation of Canterbury.
it, for the commodiousnes of the neighboring woods, for the vicinitie also of
the sea yielding store of fish to serve it, for the noble and generous
disposition of the people, as well of it as of the country, prone and propense
to offer courtesy to others, and impatient of any injury offered to
themselves, and the like) says no more of the Church, but this. After the
conversion of the English to Christianity, the prime Episcopal See was fixed
at Canterbury, and there continues: Saving that anon after he adds. There is
the Archbishops chief Seat, who is the Primate and Patriarch of all England.
But I cannot so contain my self; yet for my more methodicall proceeding, much
being to be said of this Metropolitan Church, my whole discourse thereof shall
be referred to these heads.

1. The antiquity of the foundation, and the nature thereof. 2. The history of
the Churches Fabric. 3. A survey of the present Church, with the monuments
therein, as also of the more ancient buildings throughout the Praecinct both of
it and the Palace, with the Ambitus, or Praecinct it self. 4. A Catalogue of
the principal Benefactors to the Church. 5 A Catalogue of the 1. Archbishps.
of the Church. 2. Priors. 3. Archdeacons.
TO begin with the first. The Antiquity and nature of 1. Particular.
the foundation. In the former of which I shall be brief, that so I may not
dictum dicere, and make no needless repetitions of what others, many others,
for even vulgar satisfaction, have already said upon the point, as Bede,
Parker, Cambden, Lambert; a few of the many that have largely and worthily
written hereof. It may not be expected, nor will it (I conceive) become me,
post tot Homeros scribere Iliada. Neither can I in this matter say what is not
vulgarly known already. And Crambe bis cocta, will not please I know in such
dainty times as these. Yet, not altogether to put you over to other men's
instructions, and to let you see that the ancient Liegers of the Church, in
thankfulness to the Founder, keep him and the foundation in memory; I shall
here by way of Corollarie, or (to speak in the language of mine own profession)
ex superabundanti, produce and present unto you a double note faithfully taken
from the Liegers, which does memorize both one and the other. The one thus penned.

Sanctus Ethelbertus Rex Anglorum qui suscepit Christianitatem a beato
Augustino misso a beato Gregorio Papa Anno Domini Dxcvito. in ecclesia Christi
Cant. dedit eidem Augustino and Successoribus suis Palatium Regium and sedem
perpetuam in Civitate Doroberniae quae nunc dicitur Cantuar. cum ecclesia
veteri quae ab antiquo tempore Romanorum ibidem fuerat fabricata, quam ipsemet
Augustinus S. Salvatoris nomine dedicavit post consecrationem suam Arelatenis
factam. Statuit etiam idem Rex authoritate S. R. E. ut in Ecclesia Cantuar.
ordinem Monasticum Monachi in perpetuum observarint, ne primorum viz.
praedicatio Monachoram a memoria deleretur, sed semper recens in mentibus
succedentium perseveraret etc. The other thus. Aethelbertus Rex, anno Regni sui
XXXV. ad fidem Christi per sanctum Augustinum conversus statim palatium suum
eidem Augustino and Successoribus suis infra Civitatem Doroberniam perpetue
dedit, ut ibi sedem Metropolitanam in ev^m haberent: Quam beatus Gregorius
primam totius Regni esse decrevit and confirmavit, ut sicut prima fuit fidem
suscipiendo, prima esset in dignitate. Hoc donum fecit Rex Anno Domini Dxcvij.



Thus the Liegers; testes indeed domestici, but in regard of the many
consentient testimonies (if not of themselves) of indubious credit. So much for
the Antiquity.

Now the nature of the foundation appears from these Extracts, plainly showing
the intention both of Augustine, Ethelbert, and Greg. to be to make it (as it
afterward became) both a Monastery and a Cathedral, or rather a Cathedral
Monastery. The better to understand me, you must know that (as Reyner
Apostolat. Benedictin. tract. 1. Sectio 1.. 17. page 77.
has it) since and from the time that Christianity was first embraced by the
Saxons inhabiting this Island, there have been in England two sorts of
Monasteries, the one Claustrall, the other Cathedral. Etenim duo genera
coenobiorum (says my author) habuit Anglia, a prima fidei Christianae
receptione: unum claustralium duntaxat, aliud vero Cathedralium; vocabantur
claustralia, in quibus sub Ahbate aut Priore, Abbatem proprium non hahente,
occupabatur conventus in divinis officiis, actibusque regularibus ad
perfectionem singulorum Monachorum acquirendam ordinatis, sine onere and cura
regiminis dioecesani. Cathedralia vero, quorum Abbas erat Episcopus, and
conventus erat capitulum cathedralis ecclesiae, atque adeo Monachi erant
canonici cathedrales, ad quos omnia munia pertinebant, quae in ecclesiis
cathedralibus saecularibus, ad saeculares canonicos spectare dignoscuntur etc.
Of Christ-Church* a Cathedral Monastery.
the which latter sort was this our Monastery, a Cathedral Monastery.

Now of what order this Augustine and his Monks were, and consequently this
foundation originally was, is of some made disputable in these days; the
received opinion until now of late without question affirming them Benectines,
or followers of the order of the black Monks of St Benet. The adversaries of
which opinion happily are sufficiently answered in Reyner's Apostolatus
Benedictinorum etc. to which I refer the unsatisfied. Now what kind of order
this of St Benet was, will best be learned from the story of it Author, St
Benet himself. Take here therefore a relation De Invent. Rerum. l. 7. c. (...).
thereof borrowed for the more part of Polydore Virgil

Authors vary in the year, but agree that in the fifth Century Story of S.
Benet.
or age of the Church, one Benedictus Nursinus, a man born in Umbria, a Region
in Italy, having lead some certain years a solitary life in those desert
places, at length retired to Sublacum, a town distant 40 miles from Rome,
whither many people (by reason of his great fame and integrity and holiness of
life) resorted unto him: but within a while he departed thence, and repaired to
Cassinum an ancient City in that region, where he built a Monastery and in a
very short time gathered together all such Monks as then wandered here and there
in the woods and deserts of Italy, and gave them certain rules and statutes to
observe and keep, and withal bound them to three several vows (by the example
of St Basil, who had prescribed them in the East-Countrey to certain Monks of
his, about the year 383. which Basil was the first that gave rules or orders
unto Monks:) The one of Chastity: the second of Poverty: the last of obedience.
To live chastely, to possess nothing, and to obey their Superiors commands.
Again Benet gave unto his Monks a new kind of habit, he appointed them also a
certain form of praying, and intending to allow them but mean commons,
prescribed them a new rule of abstinence. You have the story.

By the way, this congregation of St Benet grew by little and little to be so
great, that it is almost incredible. There were no Monasteries (says Reyner
Apostolat. Benedict. tract. 1.. 1 sect. 1 page 11.
) amongst the English from the time of King Edgar, till the time of William the
Conqueror, but Benedictines. Yet in the end there happened such a schism
among them, that it was and still is divided into many families, as the
Cluniacenses, Camalduenses, Vallisumbrenses, Montolivitenses, Grandimontenses,
Cistercienses, Sylvestrenses, Coelestini, and diverse others, who are now
adays either united with other Orders, or else quite extirpated and abolished.
Those that were first instituted by this Saint (as they themselves confess,
says Polydor) are Vbi supra. Benedictines their habit.
those that now adays wear a black loose coat of stuff reaching down to their
heels, with a cowl or hood of the same which hangs down to their shoulders, and
their Scapular shorter then any other of those Monks: and under that coat
another white habit as large as the former, made of stuff or white flannen,
and boots on their legs. They shave their heads, except one little round circle
which they call their crown, and perpetually abstain from flesh, unless when
they are sick etc. This Order (says Reyner) came first into England with
Augustine the Monk, Archbishop of Canterbury. So you have in brief both the
story of St Benet, and the condition of his order: wherewith if you would be
further acquainted, I refer you to the Decrees or Constitutions of it,
recommended by Archbishop Lanfranc to the observation of his Monks of this
Church, (whereof Reyner's forecited book affoords a copy;) and to the
Ceremoniale Benedictinum. And so have I done with the first Head or Particular,
and proceed to the next.

The History of the Churches Fabric.
THe records of the Church, concurring with the common opinion of our
Historians, tell us of a Church in Canterbury, which Augustine at his first
arrival here found standing in the East part of the City. A work (says Bid)
Ecclesiast. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 33.
of the ancient faithful or believing Romans. This Church Aug. had of gift
from King Ethelbert, which, after his consecration at Arles in France, he
commended by special dedication to the patronage of our blessed Savior.
Whence it afterward became called Ecclesia S. Salvatoris. All extant Stories,
Coucher-books or Liegers and Records that ever I could yet see, afford no
remarkable matter concerning this fabric (the miraculous preservation of it
from the injury of all weathers then very tempestuous in neighboring parts,
whilst it was in roofing, at the prayer of Archbishop Odo, only excepted)
from the time of this her infancy until Malmesb. de Gest. Pontif. lib. 1 page
201. (...)* (...) Franco^rt. The Cathedral burned.
that lamentable Danish demolition of it in the days of King Etheldred. When a
common fire kindled by that implacable insatiable rout of Danish-Divelish
furies, malicing not the persons only, but for their sakes, the place too,
consumed both it and the City: whereof see a full relation (if you please) in
my Appendix taken from Osborne the Monk of Canterb. and never before printed.
viz. Scriptura 31.

Shortly after which vastation, it arose again, and was (I Reedified.
read) by Agelnoth the Archbishop (at whose coming to the Sea it was begun to
be repaired after that Danish spoil) brought to perfection Antiq. Brit. i^ ^jus
vita page 94.
. About which time, to wit in the year 1023. happily by the same Archbishops
procurement, (for being well beloved of the King, he persuaded him to many
worthy acts) and not unlikely for recompense and expiation of the late spoil of
the Church, made by the Kings Countrymen the Danes (Anglos quoque omnes,
hortatu Emmae Reginae, sibi reconciliare studens, multa eis donaria contulit;
they are the words of Matt. of Westminster of King Knute in that very year
1023.) Knute gave the port of Sandwich (or Sandwich.
rather restored it, for King Egel^ed had given it 44 years before) to this
Church. A thing thus recorded in one of the Liegers of the place. 1023. Kanutus
Rex dedit ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia portum de Sandwico cum corona sua
aurea quae adhuc servatur in capite crucis majoris in navi ejusdem ecclesiae.
Portum illum dedit Monachis cum thelonio ejusdem villae, wrecco ma^is and
omnibus aliis consuetudinibus ad portum illum pertinentibus. Which gift Hen. 2.
afterward renewed and enlarged, granting to the Monks by his charter
consuetudines portus Sandwici ex utraque part aquae, viz. ab Eadburgate usque
ad M^rkes fleet, and naviculam ad transfretandum etc. as I have it in the
Church Records: all which exceptis domibus Lib. Eccles. Christi Cant.
eorum and Kaiis, ac libero passagio in portu praedicto in batello qui dicitur
verebote, and free liberty for themselves and their men to buy and sell
toll-free, were of the Monks in exchange, pro lx. libratis terrae in alio loco
competenti, in Com' Kan' resigned to the King, not Ed. 3. as Mr Cambden
delivers, but Ed. 1. and that Anno 18. Regni sui, to wit Anno Domini 1290. But
let us to our Church fabric again.

Which it seems by fire or otherwise fell shortly to decay The Cathedral
fired a second time.
a second time. For of certain it was greatly ruinated, when Lanfranc came to
the Chair. Hic ergo Lanfrancus (says Edmerus Hist. Novor. lib. 1. page 7.
) cum Cantuariam primo venisset, and ecclesiam Salvatoris, quam regere
susceperat, incendio atque ruinis pene nihili factam invenisset etc. Indeed
Edmerus elsewhere says expressly that the Church was burnt the third year
Ead Hist. cod. lib. 1. page 9.
before Lanfrancs coming to the Sea; an accident enough in it self, but for
the loss of those ancient privileges (certain Charters or Muniments) of the
Church, which (as the same Author also there witnesses) perished in that
flame, much more deplorable. Of certain then, fire brought this fabric to a
second desolation before Lanfrancs time. And as certain it is, that his care,
piety and pity raised both the Monastery and it in all parts of new, Reedified
by Lanfranc.
and that in a novell and more magnificent kind and form of structure then
was formerly here used, which made it a precedent and pattern, to succeeding
structures of this kind in the Kingdom. Per totam terram illam (Edmerus words
again) religio aucta est, and ubique nova Monasteriorum Page 7.
aedificia, sicut hodie apparet, constructa; quorum aedificiorum
constructoribus ipse primus exemplum praebens, ecclesiam Christi Cantuariensem,
cum omnibus officinis quae infra murum ipsius Curiae sunt cum ipso muro
aedificavit. Indeed it is observed Stow. Survey of London. page 352. ^lt. Edit.
Daniel. Hist. in vita Conquestoris.
, that, before the Normans advent, most of our Monasteries and Church-buildings
were of Wood (all the Monasteries in my Realm, says King Edgar, in his
Charter to the Abbey of Malmesbury, dated the year of Christ 974 D. H.
Spelman. Council. page 488.
. to the outward sight are nothing but worme-eaten and rotten Timber and
Boords:) and that upon the Norman Conquest such Timber-fabrickes grew out of
use and gave place to stone buildings raised upon Arches: a form of structure
introduced by that Nation furnished with stone from Cane in Normandy. In the
year 1087. (Stows words of the Cathedral at London) this Church of Saint Paul
was burnt with fire, and therewith the most part of the City. Mauricius then
Bishop began therefore the foundation of a new Church of Saint Paul, a work
that men (of that time) judged would never have been finished it was to them
so wonderful for length and breadth, as also the same was builded upon Arches
(or Vaults) of stone, for defense of fire; which was a manner of work before
that time unknown to the people of this Nation, and then brought in by the
French, and the stone was fetched from Cane in Normandy. Saint Mary Bow-Church
in London being built much about the same time and manner, that is, on Arches
of stone, was therefore called (says the same Author) New Mary Church, or
Saint Mary le Bow* as Stratford Bridge, being the first builded with Arches of
stone, was called therefore Stratford le Bow. This doubtless is that new kind
of Architecture, the Continuer of Bid (whose words Malmesbury has taken up)
intends, where speaking of De gest. Reg. Ang. lib. 3. page 102. edit. Francof.
the Normans In-come, he says Videas ubique in villis ecclesias, in vicis and
urbibus Monasteria novo aedificandi genere consurgere. I have digressed, but
return and proceed.

Lanfranc you see new built the Church, and that probably (as I conceive) after
this new French form, and within the space of seven years (says Edmerus
Hist. (...). page 8.
) a fundamentis ferme totam perfectam reddidit. Which so by him perfected,
probably, he innovated the name and title of it, dedicating the same to the
Holy-Trinity. For as until then it Name of the Cathedral altered.
had been called (as you see before) Ecclesia S. Salvatoris: So in his time
and from thence forth it became called (as by Doomsday Book appears) Ecclesia
sanctae Trinitatis. The inscription on the Churches first seal (made no doubt
since the conquest, they not being in use in this Kingdom before*) shows as
much, which in allusion (it seems) and (...) Cambd. Erit. In Essex page 444.
Engl. Ed.
reference to the Churches dedication was this. Deus pater, Deus silius, Deus
spiritus sanctus.

Thus I am told; how truly, I make some doubt, both because, though conversant
in the Church Records, I never as yet met with any such seal, and for that the
seal which was in use not long after the Conquest, namely both in the time of
Anselme the Archbishop (Lanfrancs immediate successor) and Arnulfe the Prior.
1. about the beginning of the eleventh century, which I have often seen, has
no other inscription at all on it, but this (nor would the proportion of the
seal admit of a larger) Sigillum ecclesiae Christi. But to go on.

Next after Lanfranc succeeded Anselme, as in his See, so in his piety. For in
his time, and chiefly by his care, Cathedral enlarged.
cost and providence, that fabric begun and perfected by his predecessor,
became much enlarged; whereof Edmerus makes a double mention, to wit first,
page 35. and again page 108. Super hoc (says he) ipsum Oratorium, quantum a
majore turri in orientem porrectum est, ipso patre Anselmo providente,
disponente auctum est. The Monks (it seems by Edmerus) magnificently finished
this work which Anselme piously began, the King (Hen. 1.) affoording it and
them his countenance and encouragement. For when some evillminded persons,
maligning the work, suggested to the King that the Monks were mad, and
prodigally wasted to superfluous uses what might stand him much in stead in his
Regal expenses; he answers them thus. Quid (says Edmer. Hist. Novor. lib. 5.
page 109.
he) in externas expensas, in saecularia aliqua, in vana and ordini suo
contraria opera, res suas Monachi ponunt? At, si in augmentum and gloriam Domus
Dei, eas expendant, benedicatur Deus, qui and illis hujusmodi animum
inspiravit, and hanc mihi suo munere gratiam tribuit, ut meis diebus, meamater
ecclesia crementum potius capiat, quam detrimentum. Matthew Paris Records a
dedication of the Church of Canterbury in the year of Christ 1114. being the
year of Anselmes death. Happily it was of that new piece or new work, as
Edmerus calls it. This doubtless is the part meant by Malmes bury De Gest.
Pontific. lib. 1. page 23^. Editio. Francosurt.
, ascribed to Ernulfus the then Prior of the Church, and of him (erroniously it
seems) said to have been built in the place of a like part then demolished,
whereof he has these words. Cantiae (says he) dejectam priorem partem
ecclesiae quam Lanfrancus aedificaverat, adeo splendide erexit, ut nihil tale
possit in Anglia videri, in vitrearum fenestrarum luce, in marmorei pavimenti
nitore, in diversi coloribus picturis, quae mirantes oculos trahunt ad fastigia
lacunaris. Thus he.

This Church thus new built, and thus also enlarged fell Cathedral sired a
third time.
again by fire about the year 1130. She happily found such as pitied her
misfortune, and took commiseration of her ruins: whereof Archbishop Corboyt
is said Antiq. Brit. Harpsfield. Godwin. in ejus vita.
to be the chief, who of his own purse set it up again, and then after a
most solemn manner did dedicate the same, in the presence of the King, the
Queen, David King of Scots, most of the Bishops, and a great number of the
Nobility of both Realms. Whereunto the King of England presently became a
Benefactor, giving and granting, besides an annuity of ten ponnds in money, the
Church (or Priory) of Saint Martin in or near Dover, to this Church for ever
Harpsfield ubi supra. Cathedral again named.
. In and at which Dedication, the Churches name was again changed, from
Ecclesia sanctae Trinitatis, to Ecclesia Christi Cant. Thorn (St Austins
Chronicler) records the thing, but under the year 1128. Anno Domini 1128
(says he) quarto nonas Martii, fuit ecclesia sanctae Trinitatis Cant.
dedicata, a praefato Willielmo Archiepiscopo, quae postmodum ecclesia Christi
Cantuariae est vulgariter vocitata. And then also was the Churches Common Seal
renewed, which in the forepart had this inscription about it. Sigillum
ecclesiae Christi Cantuariae primae sedis Britanniae; and in the reverse, this
about our Saviors Picture. Ego suam via, veritas and vita. This Seal
continued till Beckets Martyrdom, and then was a third time changed, as you
shall find hereafter.

About forty years after that, viz. in the year 1174 Liber Ecclesiae Cant.
and Ansiy. Britan. page 291.
. I read of yet another combustion of this sacred edifice. At whose cost it
recovered it self then, I find not; saving that the Popes Bulls shortly after
provide that the offerings In Archivis Ecclesiae.
to the then newly murdered and canonized Archbishop, Thomas Becket, should go
and be converted in restaurationem ecclesiae (one cause happily why it was called
Saint Thomas Church:) And that way (I believe) such store of Coin might come
in, (the devotion of that age to Saint Thomas inclining many to be forward and
liberal benefactors) that it cannot seem a thing improbable for the Church to
have recovered by that means.

The Monks now at length more nearly affected with the woeful havocke which
these frequent fires had made of their Church-fabricke, either occasioned or
furthered by some neighboring edifices, carefully provide to remove that
cause, and for that end, diverse houses belonging to St Austins, being built and
situate near unto their Campanile or Steeple standing on the Southside of
their Campanile of Christ-Church
Churchyard; after much suite, they prevailed at length with those their
neighbors the Monks of Saint Aust. to exchange the houses with their ground
about them for the like elsewhere. Let me enlarge this matter to you out of
Thorn who records and reports it as follows. Anno Domini 1177. (says he)
facta fuit quaedam commutatio terrarum censualium inter Monasterium istud and
Monasterium sanctae Trinitatis. Habebat enimistud Monasterium quasdam terras ex
part meridiana cimiterii sanctae Trinitatis juxta Campanile little, quae terrae
reddebant huic Monasterio singulis annis xxs and xjd: and quia istae terrae
erant ipsi ecclesiae de sancta Trinitate it a propinquae and in casu ignis
multum periculosae. Ideo praedictus electus and conventus sancti August' licet
invite, precibus tamen Regis Henrici Forte potius, coacti.
coactus mutaverunt praedictas terras cum quibusdam terris quae fuerunt de
Dominio sanctae Trinitatis diversis locis in Civitate jacentibus, quaeterrae
reddebant singularis annis xxijs. ijd. Haec commutatio est confirmata sigillo
Regis Henrici, and sigillis utrius que Monasterii, etc. Thus he, recording Vide
pro Scriptura x^. in Appendice.
also the Composition it self, whereof my Appendix shall give you a Copy. This
exchange (it seems) was made to good purpose: for afterward I find the
Church free of all fires. Once indeed since, and that shortly after this
exchange, it was in danger to be fired, but was preserved miraculously, if you
will believe my Author (Gervase, a Monk of the place about that time:) whose
words (if Harpesfield report them aright) are these. Quo Cantuariae sedente
(says he, speaking of Archbishop Richard, Beckets immediate successor)
constagravit Civitas Cantuariae, cumque jam pluribus aedibus consumptis,
incendium ad Christi ecclesiam serperet; consternati monachi, cum res humanam
opem superare videretur, ad divinum and divi Audoeni patrocinium se
contulerunt. Sanctas it aque ejus reliquias igni, magnaopis fiducia opponunt;
quae nec fuit inanis. Flamma enim divina quadam virtute repulsa, se reflexit ac
resiliit, nec ultra progressa est. Thus he. And so far Historically of the
general fabric of the Church. Now I shall descend to particulars, and show
how several parts of it were some built, some repaired at several times, and
by whom.

For new buildings in the first place. I read that Archbishop Body of
Christ-Church new built.
Sudbury, by whose time the Nave (or body) of the Church (the Aula ecclesia, so
Edmerus calls it) the Auditorium, as with the ancients I may style it, was so
decayed with age that it could not, and so far behind the upper part in
Majesty of building, as with his good liking it might not stand any longer,
took it down, with a purpose of his own purse to have built it of new after
a more magnificent manner; but being cut off by the fury of those Rebels (Wat
Tiler and his accomplices) in Rich. 2. time, was prevented. He dying, the burden
of that great work lay upon the Monks, or rather they consenting (as it
seems) in a common forwardness, willingly undertook it, and with the help
of Sudburies two next Successors (Courtney and Arundell) at length, brought the
body, together with the Chapter House and Cloister to full perfection.
Inferiorem autem ecclesiae suae partem (Harpesfields words of this matter Hist.
Eccles. Angl. saecul. 15. cap. 14. page 634.
) quam demolitus erat Simon Sudburiensis Archiepiscopus, magnificentius eam
extruendi animo, quod and perfecisset, nisi indignaillum caedes repent e medio
sustulisset, maximis monachi impensis nobili structura exaedisicarunt. For
their both encouragement and inablement to finish which work begun, too
chargeable for them to perfect without some addition to their present
revenewes; after they had that way expended above 5000 marks; the parsonages of
Godmersham Godmersham. westwell
and Westwell in Kent, at their petition, were by Archbishop Arundell, with
both King and Popes license, appropriated to them, as I have it from the
Instrument of that appropriation recorded in a Leiger of the Church, dated in
the year 1397. Which has these words of preface.

COnsiderantes (says the Archbishop to his Monks) expensas graves and
sumptuosas quas circa constructionem and reparationem ejusdem ecclesiae urgente
necessitate fudistis and inevitabiliter successivis temporibus, prout futura
per praeterita praecaventes animi compassione sentimus, vos refundere
oportebit, praesidium vobis and ecclesiae vestrae quod cum Deo possumus
procuremus, ne forte tam laudabile and necessarium opus inceptum, moderni (quod
absit) subtractione Prioris, vel alias ex adversae fortunae insultu perfectum
diutine non consequatur effectum, aut alicujus temeritatis incursus sanctorum
diminuat numerum monachorum, aut robur vestrae sacrae religionis infringat;
hinc est quod exhibita nobis pro part vestra petitio continebat, quod cum
bonae memoriae Dominus Simon de Sudburia quondam Archiepiscopus Cant.
praedecessor noster navem praefatae nostrae ecclesiae prosterni fecerat
funditus, and suis sumptibus demoliri, causa ipsam erigendi de nevo prout
proposuit and ferventer optavit, si non per Dei emulos fuisset inaudita per
prius populi furoris audacia decollatus. Vosque Prior and Capitulum circa
constructionem navis praedictae, and alia necessaria opera ejusdem ecclesiae
nostrae de communibus bonis vestris ultra quinque millia marcarum laudabiliter
expenderitis, ut gaudium operum exempla cunctorum oculis manifestant, quodque
incepta opera and alia inibi de necessitate fienda prostrati claustri vestri
and capitularis Domus vestrae pensata imminente ruina, cum sex millibus
marcarum perficinequeant, and reparari decenter, attenta Hospitalitate
Dominorum and aliorum diversorum Regnorum apud vos indies confluentium, quam
declinare non poteritis cum honor, etc.

Thomas Chillenden was Prior of the Church at this time. He it seems (as best
able) of the Monks was most beneficial to these works. The quoted Instrument
so insinuates and intimates, and the Epitaph on his Tomb (whereof hereafter)
verifies as much. Archbishop Courtney (as I told you) was another benefactor. I
have it from his Will In Archivis eccles. Cant.
, wherein he makes it his petition to the King (Rich. 2.) Ne successor meus (as
his own words are) pro reparationibus quicquam plus debito petat pie and just
habendo respectum in quo statu eccl' and maneria mea una cum Castro meo
Saltwood inveni, and qualiter subsequenter, non obstante terraemotu, non sine
gravibus and sumptuosis expensis, sicut novit Prior meus and seniores and
saniores Capituli, atque valentiores totius Diocesis, ipsa pro meo posse and
tempore reparavi. And also gives (says his Table following the Author of the
Antiquit' Britannicae, both, I take it, misinformed, 1000l.) 200l. and plus
juxta dispositionem Executorum meorum, and secundum informationem ministrand'
per eos pro nova factura sive constructione unius panae claustri ab hostio
Palatii usque in ecclesiam se erecto tramite extendentis. So his Will.
Archbishop Arundell may not be forgotten, who questionless was not only an
encourager, but a benefactor also in his own particular to the works I treat
of, though I doubt of his building that Steeple, which Archbishop Parker
followed by Bishop Godwin and some others, ascribe unto him, for some reasons
which when I come to survey it, I shall propound.

Hitherto of parts new built. Now shortly of parts repaired and beautified. I
read Liber eccles. Cant. Quire repaired.
that in Hen. the Priors time, viz. in the years 1304. and 1305. the whole
Quire was repaired, with three new doors, and a new Pulpit or ascent unto it,
as was likewise the Chapter House with two new Gables; all which cost 839l. 7s.
8d. I find also Vbi supra. And Beckets Crown.
that upon the beautifying of Saint Thomas Crown, that is Beckets Crown, was
expended in the same Priors time, to wit in the year 1314. in gold and silver
and precious stones 115l. 12s. So much for reparations. And now have I done
with the Story of the Fabric. Only I may not omit what had almost slipped my
memory, that Archbishop Chicheley, Arundell, immediate Successor built the
Steeple called of Bishop Godwin Oxford-tower, but vulgarly Dunstan-steeple, or
the most part of it, and also the Library Author Antiq. Brit. and Godwin in
ejus vitae
.

A Survey of the present Church, with the monuments therein, as also of the
more ancient buildings within the precinct both of it, and the Palace, with the
ambitus or precinct it self.
COming (in the next place) to the survey whereof; I (...) Particular.
will begin (a digniori) with the Church it self, that which (as Erasmus
Peregrinatio Religionis ergo.
has it) tanta majestate sese erigit in coelum, ut procul etiam intuentibus
religionem incutiat. That is, raises it self aloft with so great a majesty and
stateliness, that it strikes a sensible impression of religion in their
minds that behold it afar off. Before our entrance whereinto let me acquaint
you with what I have from the same Erasmus Vbi supra Porch.
who observed it, that over head at the entrance of the South Porch of the
Church, sometimes stood the statues cut in stone of certain armed men, those
namely which murdered Archbishop Becket, not in approbation of their fact, nor
for any honor intended them thereby more then is given to Judas, Pilate,
Caiaphas, or the band of Soldiers, whom (says Erasmus) you shall see
elaborately engraven in gilded altars. They are (says he) set out to sight
for premonition, that no Courtier afterward should lay violent hands either
upon the persons of Bishops, or their possessions.

Now enter we the body of the Church, a right noble Body.
structure. Ingressis aperit sese spatiosa quaedam aedificii majestas, says
the same Erasmus Vbi supra.
. This questionless is the identicall nave or body, of whose age and authors
you so lately heard. Turres sunt ingentes duae procul veluti salutantes
advenas, miroque nolarum aenearum boatu long lateque regionem vicinam
personantes, says Erasmus Vbi supra.
. Now that Steeple which you see at the West End and South Side of the Church,
is the Oxford-tower, or Dunstan-steeple I so lately Dunstan-steeple.
spoke of, and one of them. And the opposite one with the lofty spire or shaft
covered with lead is the other, and the same that is said to be of Archbishop
Arundells building, Arundell-steeple.
and at this day called by his name. But under correction, without warrant of
truth, as I conceive, induced thereunto partly from the work of the Steeple
which I hold elder then Arundells time, by comparing it with other pieces of
that age, and partly by this note in the records of the Church, seeming to me
by the Character almost as ancient as the time of Arundell. Pondus quinque
campanarum in campanili Angeli de novo donatarum per Reverend. in Christo
patrem and D. D. Tho. Arundell Cantuar' Archiepiscopum Anno Dom. 1408. etc.



This note you see calls it Angel, not Arundel-steeple, as I suppose it would
have done; or at the lest have mentioned him the founder, had he indeed erected
it. Besides I meet with the Angel-steeple in the Church-records long before
Arundells time,.i. in the days of Henry of Eastry the Prior, 1317.
and by the same name this very Steeple I find to be called in diverse dead
men's wills In Registris Consistorii and Offi. (...) Cant.
since Arundells time. Let me but add that Harpsfield in the life of
Archbishop Arundel mentions not this Steeple amongst the rest of his acts of
note, and I proceed.

This nave or body of the Church omnes recepit (says Erasmus) admits of all
comers, but at the upper end for the better security of the upper part of the
Church, where the shrine was and other treasure, was of old parted off from the
Quire by certain iron grates or bars; the doors whereof for the same reason
doubtless, Archbishop Winchelsey, by his Statutes Liber ms. Eccles. Christi
Cant.
, commanded to be kept always close shut, unless in time of Divine Service,
or at other times of necessary ingresse and egresse. Without offense to which
injunction let us enter. At or near which place of entrance sometime stood a
great cross, in the head whereof was kept and enclosed that golden crown which
(as is showed before) King Knute gave to the Church, and under it an altar:
which was known by the name of Altar sanctae crucis inter chorum and navem,
and Altar sub magnacruce ecclesiae (...) archivis Ec^es. praed.
.

Next observe we the first crosse-iles (wings some call them) of the Church,
those (I mean) between the nave and the quire, which by the work, seem of like
age with the body, saving that the North-Ile (the goodly and glorious window at
the head whereof, a piece in it kind beyond compare, was the gift of Ed. 4. as
may be seen upon it) with the lofty Tower or Steeple in the midst or meeting
of the Crosier by these capital letters T. G. P. with the three gold stones;
the mitre also and pastoral staff in them both and Archbishop Warham's coat
of arms beside in the roof of the latter (the Steeple;) I conceive of somewhat
a later building, and perfected, as in the time, so chiefly at the cost of
Prior Goldstone in Hen. 8. days.

In this North-Ile, between the cloyster-doore and the Lady-chapell is a place
enclosed and set apart, called to this day the Martyrdom. Archbishop Becket
(as tradition has Martyrdom.
it) being here or hard by (at or upon the third or fourth griece or step of
the Pulpitum or ascent to the Presbytery or quire, as some will) murdered,
martyred they call it, whence these verses, on each leaf of the door one, yet
legible in part. Est sacer intralocus, venerabilis, atque beatus
Praesul ubi sanctus Thomas est Martyrizatus.


Here sometime stood an Altar, by the wall, where now Dr Chapman's monument is
set up, commonly called Altar Martyrii Sancti Thomae. Which together with the
place Erasmus saw, and has left it thus described Peregrinatio religionis ergo.
. Illis (says he) ostenditur altar ligneum Divae Virgini sacrum, pusillum,
nec ulla re visendum, nisi monumento vetustatis luxum hisce temporibus
exprobrante. Illie vir pius (meaning Becket) dicitur extremum vale dixisse
virgini, cum mors immineret. In ara est cuspis gladii, quo praesectus est
vertex optimi praesulis, ac cerebrum confusum, videlicet quo mors esset
praesentior. Hujus ferri sacram rubiginem amore martyris religiose sumus
exosculati. From being the keeper of this Altar, Roger the Abbat of St
Augustines was chosen to that Abbacy by the Monks there, in hope that he would
bring with him some special relics (says my Author Thorn in vitis Abbat
Sancti Augustini.
) of the blessed Martyr; herein not deceived, for (says he) he conveied to
them a great part of Thomas his blood that was shed, and a piece of his crown
that was pared off. A thing which they of Christ-Church could not of a long
time digest, nor would they suffer the other in quiet with the purloyned
relics until at length some amends was made them by that composition made
between the two houses, passing over unto Christ-Church (in exchange for other
elsewhere) those houses and ground beside their Campanile, whereof you may
read before: as Thorn comments on it, nobis (that is to S^ Austins) multum
inutilis and incommoda. But in callem regredior. This place (no doubt) was of
high esteem with our Ancestors, the walls whereof seem to have been hanged, and
was a place picked out for the solemnity of Ed. 1. espousalls with his Queen
Margaret, whereof I read thus in the records of the Church Anno Dom. 1299.
Quinto idus Septembris, Dominus Robertus Cant. Archiepiscopus celebravit
sponsalia inter Dom. Edwardum Regem Angliae and Margaretam sororem Regis
Franciae in ostio ecclesiae versus claustrum juxta hostium Martyrii Sancti
Thomae. Lady-chapell.


I pass hence to the Chapel contiguous, commonly called the Lady-Chapell, a
piece not old; by the work, it should be much what about the age of
Dunstan-steeple. In Anno Dom. 1452. I find Antiq. Brit. in vita Stafford. page
289.
it called Nova Capella beatae Mariae.

I confess I read of the Lady-chapell long before. Archbishop Richard,
Beckets immediate Successor, was buried in it. But that Chapel stood within
the old body of the Church, and was parcel of it. I have it from the Church
records verified by the leaden Inscription and Pontifical relics, to wit,
his Cope, Crosier and Chalice lately found in digging Dr Anian's grave by St
John Boys his monument on the North side of the body, toward the upper end.
That old Chapel was not heard of since the present body of the Church was
built.

By the entry or testudo, under the greeces or steps (the pulpitum as wont to
be called) leading up to the Quire, from the body, I proceed and come to S.
Michaels Chapel, S. Michaels Chapel.
standing on the other (the South) side of the Quire. A Chapel indeed in name
old. For Archbishop Langton in Hen. 3 days is storied Antiq. Prit. in ejus
vita page 149.
to have been there intombed. But the work of the building of the modern
Chapel will not bear that age. I am therefore persuaded that the old one was
fain to be taken down, whilst the body and cross Isles of the Church were in
building, to give better way to that work, and that that being finished, this
was new built as now it is.

Ascend we now by the steps or Pulpitum to the Quire Quire.
(Chancell or Presbytery.) Ad hunc conscenditur multis gradibus, says Erasmus:
which whole work of the Quire, from end to end, I mean, from the Western door
thereof unto the Archiepiscopall throne or marble Chair behind the high Altar,
with the side-iles, crosse-iles and other buildings on both sides the Quire
(the Quires curious Western doore-case only excepted, built, I take it, about
the time that the body was) together with the under-croft (or vaults) to them
(except the Princes Chapel there) are much of an age; there is that harmonious
symmetry and agreement between the parts. But certainly of what age I cannot
define; only confessing it far elder then the Nave; I dare constantly and
confidently deny it to be elder then the Norman conquest: because of the
building of it upon Arches, a form of Architecture though in use with and
among the Romans long before, yet after their departure not used here in
England till the Normans brought it over with them (as I told you) from France.
So that (I say) elder then the conquest this piece Vide page 113.
cannot be, and I dare not pronounce it, the roof of it at lestwise to be so
old, because of the many combustions, betiding the fabric since the Conquest.
But by many inducements I am thoroughly persuaded that it is (for the main) the
upper part of that new Church which Lanfranc first built, whereof I have
treated sufficiently before. And so I have shortly done with the antiquity of
this fabric, the Quire.

Now a word or two of the Ornaments, and what else in it may worthily call for
our speculation. To begin with the Hangings.
Hangings setting forth the whole story both of our Saviors life and death.
They were given, one part of them by Prior Goldstone, and the other by Richard
Dering the Church-Cellerar, in H. 8. days. Witness these several memorialls
legible in the bordure of the hangings.

On the South Side.
Thomas Goldstone hujus ecclesiae Prior sacraeque Theologiae Professor me fieri
fecit. Anno Dom. Millesimo quingenmo. undecimo.

On the North side.
Richardus Dering hujus ecclesiae Commonachus and Celerarius me fieri fecit
Anno Dom. Millesimo quingenmo undecimo.

In the Church records I meet with Inferior and Superior chorus; and one Thomas
Ingram of Canterbury, by his will 1486.
in the office gives cuilibet Monacho de Superiori choro ecclesiae Christi
Cant. xijd. and cuilibet Monacho de inferiori choro ejusdem ecclesiae viijd.
Now as we see there are two rows of stalls (an upper and a lower) on either
side the Quire: so I conceive the seniors and superiors of the Monks used to
sit in the upper, as the juniors or inferiors in the lower row; and that thence
sprang the name of the superior and inferior chorus.

Above these stalls on the South side of the Quire stands the Archbishops
wooden seat or chair, sometime richly guilt and otherwise well set forth, but
now nothing specious through age and late neglect. It is a close seat made
after the old fashion of such stalls, called thence Faldistoria Glossar. D. H.
Spelman. in hac voce.
.

A little higher up, on the other side of the Quire, between Chichlies, and
Bourgchiers tombs was provision made heretofore for the storing and treasuring
up of Saints relics. This Repository was showed to Erasmus, who spends these
words upon it. Ad latus Septentrionale (says he) referuntur arcana, dictu
mirum, quantum ossium illine prolatum est, calvaria, menta, dentes, manus,
digiti, integra brachia, quibus omnibus adoratis fiximus oscula: nec erat
futurus finis, nisi qui mihi tum comes erat ejus peregrinationis parum
commodus, inter pellasset ostentandi sludium etc Peregrin. Relig. ergo.
. Hence Erasmus then beheld, as we may now, the Altars table and ornaments;
indeed (thanks to the piety of the times) very rich and becoming such days of
blessed peace as our Church (by Gods mercy) now enjoyes, but not comparable
surely to those that Erasmus saw, or else he much hyperboliseth, where he
says: Diceres Midam and Croesum fuisse mendicos, si spectares vim auri atque
argenti Erasm. ubi supra.
. This Altar was and still is called the high Altar, more properly so,
heretofore, then now, because it was the chief one in the whole Church, Christ's
Altar, and to distinguish it from the Saints Altars, whereof the Church had
many, 25. in number, one in the midst of the crosier between the nave and the
Quire, a second in the Altars.
Martyrdom, a third in the Lady-chapell, a fourth in St Michaels chapel, two
in either wing of the Quire viz. in each semicircle there one, one in the
Vestry, one in St Anselmes Chapel on the other side of the Quire, three near
unto the high Altar it self, whereof one was St Dunstans, a second St Elpheges,
a third (and that standing behind the high Altar) St Blases, two at least in
Beckets Chapel, whereof one in the little side Chapel against Hen. 4.
monument, and the other beyond the shrine, in the place called Beckets-crown,
besides seven other in the undercroft, and two in the body of the Church which
I had almost forgotten, whereof one was belonging to Arundels, and the other to
Brenchlyes chantery there. One more there was, and that in the now
Deanes-chapell.

But leaving these things and the Quire too, let us now Beckets-chapell
ascend. Post Altar summum rursus velut in novum templum ascenditur, says
Erasmus. To this I proceed, the upper part of the Church (I mean) from the
grate between the Archiepiscopall throne or marble chair, by the Mosaic or
Musaick-work Vide sit dict. vide Pancirol. par. prior tit. 23. and Martin.
Lexic. Philologic. verb. Musivus.
, upwards, called (from the standing of his Shrine there) Beckets Chapel:
which, with the vertex of the work, called Beckets crown (intended by Erasmus,
where he says Peregrin. Relig. ergo.
, Illic in sacello quodam ostenditur tota facies optimi viri inaurata multisque
gemmis insignita etc.) the either side-Iles, (except the Chapel on the
North-side, and the undercroft of it) I hold to be somewhat less ancient then
the Quire and it undercroft: The ocular and peeked or pointed form of the arch,
the round marble pillars or columns both above and below (to pass by other
disagreements easily observable) showing a manifest discrepancy and difference
of one from the other. For truth is, about the place where the Quire ends and
that Chapel begins (observe but the works above and underneath, and you will
easily perceive it) the Church once ended, and extended no further, the pillars
and work coming on and closing there.

The certain age of this part neither can I find, but from great probability
do conceive it to be that new work (whereof Edmerus speaks) begun and furthered
by this Patron) Archbishop Anselme, but continued and consummated by Enulph the
Prior with the help of his Monks in Hen. 1. time. A work that (as I told you
erewhile) was so envied of some about the King, and on the other side so much
applauded and extolled by William the Monk of Malmesbury, who for the windows,
pavement, and other ornaments of it preferres it to any other in the whole
kingdom. Nihil tale (says he) possit in Anglia videri etc. as before.
Properties wherein it yet justly deserves the comparison.

Some happily may here ask me why Beckets crown, if it be Beckets-crown.
a piece so ancient, is so imperfect on the top? For answer unto them, I say,
that time was when that piece was to the mind of the first founders complete,
being built not altogether so high at first as now it is. The Monks (says
tradition) at the the time of the Dissolution were in hand (in honor of
Becket) to have advanced the building to a higher pitch, but their fall
prevented that is rise. So that whereas before it had a handsome complete
battlement, it is now a great blemish to the Church, and an eyesore to
spectators, by the ragged and imperfect ruins of it. This is that Corona
Sancti Thomae, in beautifying whereof the Church Records tell me and I have
before told you 115 lib. 12s. was expended in Hen. the Priors time.

Now retreating let us take a view of the Vestry. A place Vestry.
of the Greeks called Diaconion and Diaconicon; but of the Latins Sacrarium,
Secretarium, and Vestiarium. This Vestry stands (like as Vestries generally do)
on the Northside of the Quire. Post haec ducimur in Sacrarium (the words which
Erasmus Peregrin. Relig. ergo.
spends upon it:) Deus bone, quae illic pompa vestium holosericarum, quae vis
candelabrorum aureorum! Ibidem vidimus pedum Divi Thomae. Videbatur arundo
lamina argentea obvestita, minimum erat ponderis, nihil operis, nec altius quam
us que ad cingulum etc.

The keeper or curator of this place was usually called Sacrista: Sacrist.
we English it the Sacristein or Sexten, and was one of the but three at first,
afterward four Obedientiarii or officers (for so the word signifies, as
Obedientia Cowell. Interpreter in hac voce.
does an office) of the Church; to one or other of which all the under Officers
and Ministers within the precinct, some few of the Priors retinue excepted, did
relate and appertain, viz. the Cellerar, the Sacrist, the Chamberlain and the
Treasurer. Within and under the Sextens office were these Liber Eccles. Cant.
.

1 Custos de Wexhouse (being, I take it, the small dark vault or grot under the
steps leading up to Beckets Chapel.) 2. Primus serviens ecclesiae ad
pulsandum. 3. Vigil ecclesiae. 4. Plumbarius Sacristae. 5. Duo clerici Altaris
beatae Mariae. 6. Duo clerici tumbae and Martyrii. 7. Quatuor servientes
ecclesiae ad pulsandum. 8. Vitriarius and garcio ejus. 9. Ostiarius Chori. 10.
Serviens feretri. 11. Aurifrig. and lotrix ecclesiae.
For which last (the rest being of easy understanding) I conceive it was one
that wrought the Church Vestments or hangings and the like in gold: but refer
you to Sir H. Spelmans Glossary, and Martinius Lexicon upon the word
Aurifrigium, for fuller satisfaction. Here, as seasonable, let me remember unto
you, that Gervasius Dorobernensis, the Monk of this place, for his good
authority, so often cited of our late Historians, was in his time, dignified
with this Office, of the Sacrist here, a part whereof it was to deliver the
Crosier to the new made Archbishop, which Ceremony this man very solemnly
performed to Archbishop Hubert Harpsfield. Eccles. Hist. saecul. 12. page 342.
Threasury.
.

There is a Room next wall to this, having had a door leading into it from
hence, wherein partly, and partly in the lost over this Vestry, the Church
Records are kept. The Threasury we call it, but it was known to former times
by the name either of Armarium or Armariolum Repertorium Munimentor. ecclesiae
Cant.
: and properly, since it was the Church Arcenall, yielding them weapons or
muniments wherewith to secure unto the Monks their possessions and
privileges, whence also the Curator thereof was called Armarius.

Now a word or two of the Deanes-Chapell, and my survey Deanes-Chapell.
of the Fabrics upper part is at an end. This Chapel, with the closet to it
newer then the Chapel, fell to the then Deanes share upon the division of
houses and buildings made anon after the change of the foundation by Hen. 8.
By what name it was formerly called, is a thing uncertain, or wherefore built.
That Division calls it only the Chapel next the Dorter. But observing the
pictures of Pope Alex. 3. and Lewis 7. of France drawn on the Chapell-walls,
the one opposite to the other, toward the East End: observing also Beckets
picture (as I take it, conjecturing by the new white glass put in place of his
coat of arms in the upper South-window, as the like was done generally
throughout the Church where either this or his name was found:) and then
considering what a Patron, Pope Alex. 3. was to Becket, what a friend K. Lewis
7. was to him in his exile, and lastly what a benefactor, for his sake to the
Monks after his death, and that the Records of the Church have a Charter of
Ed. 2. of xxl. worth of land to be purchased for the sustentation of seven
Chaplains that should daily celebrate in the Chapel of S^ Thomas the martyr
near the Priorygate for the souls of himself, his Ancestors etc. Considering
lastly, that the Priors ancient Gate, or the Gate of the Priory was and is,
near this Chapel, being the same which leads from the Green-Court into that
which we now call the dark Entry, and so to the door there now stopped up,
the Timber-frame whereof is yet hanging on the things, and anciently lead into
the Priors Cellar, as that other hard by it into his Chamber. All these things
(I say) observed and considered, I am assured that this was St Thomas Chapel,
otherwise Anno 16. Ed. 2. called Capella beatae Mariae and beati Thomae
martyris juxta portam Prioratus; our Lady pictured in many of the Windows
sharing (it seems) with him in the dedication.

Over this Chapel is the Church-library, not the same to the repair whereof
Archbishop Hubert gave the Church of Library.
Halstow, this being built (as erewhile I told you) by Archbishop Chichley, and
borrowed from the Chapel, or superadded to it; the juniority of the work, and
the passage to it plainly intimate so much. It was by the founder and others
once well stored with Books, but in man's memory shamefully robbed and spoiled
of them all, an act much prejudicial and very injurious both to posterity, and
the Commonwealth of letters. The piety of the present Churchmen has begun to
replenish it, and may it have (what it well deserves) many benefactors, to the
perfecting of the fair beginning; with which wish I leave both it and the
Chapel.

And now I shall desire you would take notice of the Windows, especially in
the Churches upper part, which Windows.
both for the glass and Iron-worke thereof are well worthy your observation.
This part of the Church was highly commended of Malmesbury De gest. Pontifi.
lib. 1. page 234. Edit. Francofurt.
in his time, amongst other things, for this ornament. Nihil tale possit in
Anglia videri, etc. says he. And, I think his words hold true still. And I
believe as much may be said of the Iron-worke about them, apparently various in
every Window. Besides, these Windows afford and offer to our view certain
verses containing a parallel of the old and new Testament. They are many and
therefore to avoyde too great an interruption here, you may find them in my
Appendix Scriptura 3.

Let me now lead you to the Undercroft. A place fit, Vndercroft.
and happily (as one cause) fitted to keep in memory the subterraneous Temples
of the Primitives, in the times of persecution. The West part, whereof being
spacious and lightsome, for many years has been the Strangers-Church. A
congregation for the most part of distressed French-Church.
exiles, grown so great and yet daily multiplying, that the place in short
time is likly to prove a hive too little to contain such a swarm. So great an
alteration is there since the time the first of the tribe came hither, the
number of them then consisting of but eighteen families or thereabouts, which
with the terms or Articles granted them at their humble suite by the then
Mayor and Communalty of the City, upon their first admittance, will appear
unto you, if you peruse what here follows Lib. camerae Civilatis Cant.
.

Dignissimis Dominis Domino Maiori and fratribus Consiliariis urbis
Cantuariensis Salutem.
Supplicant humilime extranei vestra liberate admissi in ista urbe
Cantuariensi quat' velitis sequentes articulos illis concedere.

Prior articulus.
1. Quia religionis amore (quam libera conscientia tenere percupiunt) patriam
and propria bona reliquerunt, orant sibi liberum exercitium suae religionis
permitti in hac urbe, quod in fiat commodius sibi assignari templum and locum
in quo poterint sepelire mortuos suos.

Secundus articulus.
2. Et ne sub eorum umbra and titulo religionis profani and male morati homines
sese in hanc urbem intromittant per quos tota societas male audiret apud cives
vestros; supplicant nemini liberam mansionem in hac urbe permitti, nisi prius
suae probitatis sufficiens testimonium vobis dederit.

Tertius Articulus.
3. Et ne Iuventus inculta maneat, requirunt permissionem dari praeceptori quem
secum adduxerunt instruendi Iuvenes, tum eos quos secum adduxerunt, tum eos qui
volunt linguam Gallicam discere.

Quartus Articulus.
4. Arts ad quas exercendas sunt vocati, and in quibus laborare cupit tota
societas sub vestro favore and protectione sunt Florence, Serges, Bombasin, D.
of Ascot Serges, etc. of Orleleance, Frotz, Silkwever, Mouquade, Mauntes,
Bages, etc. Stofe Mouquades.

Nomina supplicantium sunt.
Hector Hamon Minister verbi Dei.

Vincentius Primont Institutor Inventutis.

Egidius Cousin Magister operum, and conductor totius congregationis in opere.

Michael Cousin. Iacobus Querin. Petrus du Bose. Johannes de la Forterye. Noel
Lestene. Nicolaus Dubuisson. Antonius du verdier. Philippus de Neuz. Robertus
Iovelin. Johannes le Pelu. Petrus de spoptes. Iacobus Bouclet. Tres viduae.
But enough of this. Return we to our Undercroft. Where, under the
South-crosse I Will or wing of the Quire, was and still is (though not so used
now) Prince Edw. Chapel. The story whereof take here from the relation of its
Black Princes Chapel.
estate given up to the Commissioners; these Emissaries sent to inquire and
examine the state of all Chanteries, etc. upon and according to the Stat. 37.
Hen. 8. cap. 4. which tells that the said Chantery was founded in Christ-Church,
in a place called the Undercroft in the year of our Lord God 1363. by the
aforenamed Prince Edw. who with license of his Father, King Ed. 3. purchased
lands Fawkshall Manor by London. Lib. eccles. Cane.
, and made agreement with the Prior and Convent of Christ-Church for the
contentation and stipend of two Chaplains: Ordeining Sr John Steward, and Sr
Nicholas de Lodington and their Successors for ever to receive yearly of the
said Prior and Convent, forty marks above all charges of reparations or
otherwise. Also the said Prince Ed. gave to the said Chaplains and to their
Successors for ever, a house being in Saint Alphage Parish of the yearly value
of xxs. whereof 4d. is yearly resolute to St Austins: the reparation whereof
to be kept always at the proper cost of the said P. and Co. of Christ-Church.
Hence you may perceive the Founder and time of foundation of this Chapel. At
or shortly after this relation given up, the Chap. formerly with grates and
bars parted off from the rest of the Undercroft growing out of use and
deserted, was laid open to it, and sithence (I take it) the double way beaten
and made through the wall, for a passage, by that Chapel, to the French-Church
there. I may not leave this Chapel before I have observed the roof of it, a
piece of newer and more curious work then the rest of the Vaults about it, and
yet the over built Structure as old as any that stands within the neighbor
Vaults of elder-fashioned-worke. How this might be thus made, happily some will
wonder. But their satisfaction is easy. For the elder Roof of the Chapel (as
it might well be without indangering the Church) was undoubtedly taken down,
and that the Chapel might in all parts the better correspond and suite with
the dignity and degree of the Founder, was rebuilt in that neat quaint manner
that now it is.

Leaving now this Chapel, come we to the next, commonly Lady-Chapell.
called the Lady Vndercroft, an edifice, since the Dissolution and Reformation
quite deserted also and despicable, but formerly so much celebrated, of such
high esteem, and so very rich, that the sight of it debarred to the vulgar,
was reserved for persons only of great quality. Erasmus, who by especial
favor (Archbishop Warham recommending him) was brought to the sight of it,
describes it thus Pereg^n. Relig. ergo.
. There (says he) the Virgin Mother has an habitation, but somewhat dark,
enclosed with a double Sept or Rail of Iron, for fear of thieves. For indeed
I never saw a thing more laden with riches. Lights being brought, we saw a more
then Royal spectacle. In beauty it far surpasses that of Walsingham. This
Chapel (as he adds) is not showed but to Noble men, and especial friends,
etc. The Chapel doubtless is ancient. For in the Church-Records I read of
Altar beatae Mariae in Cryptis almost 400 years ago, to wit in the year
1242, and again in the year 1322. At what time the Altars in the Undercroft
are recorded to be these: St John the Baptist, St Thomas the Apostle, St
Clement the Pope, St Katherine the Virgin, St Nicholas the Bishop, St Mary
Magdalen, and St Mary the Virgin. If this word Altar amount not to prove it a
Chapel: Capella (I am sure) it is called in the foundation of the Lady Mohunes
Chantery, in the year 1397. long before Archbishop Mortons days, who some say
was the founder of it. Which mistake in Print of the Chapells Antiquity, thus
corrected, let us proceed.

A few steps forward brings us to Beckets Tomb, the Beckets Tomb
place (I mean) above the Lady-Chapell, so called, and that from Archbishop
Beckets first interment there; whose dead body the Assassinats giving out they
would take and cast it forth into the open fields to be a prey for beasts and
birds, or otherwise abuse the Carcass Antiq. B^it in ijus vita. page 137
Matthew. Paris. ^st. Angl page 167. Editio London.
, the then Monks forthwith buried here, where afterward it rested until such
time as Stephen Langton his Successor translated it in such solemn manner as
you shall hear hereafter. In the mean time comes Hen. 2. with bloody feet to
visit this place, and pray at his Tomb, in part of his penance Roger Hoveden.
An^al. par. post^r. page ^39. Editio. Francosurt.
. Hither also came Lewis the seventh of France, and here offered his Centum
modios vini, per quandam cuppam auream in perpetuam eleemosynam annuatim in
Castellaria Pistiaci recipiendos ad opus Conventus Cantuariae Lib. eccles.
Cant. Anno 1179.
. This parcel of the Undercroft (a most godly Vault and rarely paraleld, and a
place, heretofore until Beckets shrine and Saint-ships utter downfall and
casheering, no doubt much set by, and celebrated) fell to the share of D^ Bray
his predecessors upon the division of houses and places of accommodation for
the Deane and Prebendaries, whereof I have often told you. Which is all I have
to say of it (unless I should remember the Altar once standing there, called
Altar Tumbae beati Thomae martyris:) and periods my Survey of the Churches
Fabric, both Crypticall and other, saving that in a word or two I must
remember the Cloister and Chapter House.

For the latter of which, questionless it is the same, Chapter House
which in Prior Chillendens time (as whilome was said) was new-builded; you may
find his name (as a benefactor) over the entrance, in the foot of the
West-Window. This was not only the place for Capitular meetings and treaties
about Church-affaires, but also for the exercise and execution of regular
Discipline. Hence the discipline here said to be inflicted on Hen. 2. for
Archbishop Beckets murder, whereof our Stories tell Antiq. Brit. in ejus vita.
page 138. Cloister.
.

As for the former (the Cloister, the keeping whereof, and so of the Refectory,
the Dormitory and the Infirmary, very private, was cautiously provided for of
Archbishop Winchelsey by his Statutes Liber ^ecee. Cant.
, especially excluding women thence) it likewise seems to be the same which
was then new set up. The South-pane or Quarter whereof, somewhat more
beautified then the other three, I take to be that which Archbishop Courtney
(as was showed before) took order by his Will to be made, and has his Arms
set up about the entrance to it at the West End. As for the many other Arms
thick set about the Cloister, by the way, I suppose them to be theirs that
were benefactors in their time, either to the Church or Monastery, or both:
whereof I persuade my self the number was not small, as may probably be argued
from that one instance which Master Cambden gives of the new building of
Crowland Abbey in Lincolnshire; whither I refer such as desire to know and
learn, by what means such mighty huge and fair Religious houses and
buildings as these were raised in former times. And this shall suffice to have
spoken of the Church.

Now to make my Survey complete, I must another while play the Mystagogus, and
show you the Monuments, Monuments.
purposely reserving them till now, because being many, and some of them
yielding length of discourse, they would have too much interrupted my Survey of
the Fabric, if I should have intermixed them with it. Here I intend not a
recital of every Monument I meet with, but chiefly of the more ancient ones;
those of latter times, being either fresh in memory, or more easily known by
the Inscriptions and Epitaphs cut in the grave-stones, then those of elder
times, either wanting Inscriptions ab initio, or else done in Brass, which for
the most part is either with age defaced, or the Brass it self by wicked
hands purloined. And not all of them neither will I set down in this place,
purposing to mention the Archbishops and Priors Monuments in their several
Catalogues.

And so I begin with the first (I mean, the lowermost) Monument in the body of
the Church. Where is a very Bishop Bokinghams Monument.
fair gravestone with much of the Brass yet remaining, and having almost all
the Inscription or Epitaph still entire, saving (the principal) the interred
parties name upon it. It begins thus. Hic jacet in requie -- and there (the
brass being worn or rather torn away) breaks off. My diligence to inquire
of the ancient retainers of the Church, whose Monument it was, could have no
satisfaction. Yet at length one of them told me that the name was extant since
his memory, which he said (as his memory served him) was either Bobingham or
Robingham, or the like. This brought into my mind the name of Bokingham, which
This Font was given / consecrated by the right reverend father in God, John L.
Bishop of Rochester / Oxford this present year, 1630
Pay 181.
with Bokingham Chantery I had often read of in Records both of the Church and
Consistory. From this hint therefore given, I proceeded in my search, and at
length found God^. Catal. of B B in Lincoln. and Harpsf. saecul. 14. cap. 27.
this story of one John Bokyngham or Buckingham, viz. That in Rich. 2. days he
was keeper of the privy Seal; afterward Lord Bishop of Lincoln. From whence
in the year of our redemption 1397. Pope Boniface the 9th, bearing him some
grudge, translated him perforce unto Lichfield, a Bishopric not half so good,
which he refused to accept, and choosing rather a retired Monastic course of
life, became a Monk of this Church, where he spent the rest of his days.
Afterward amongst the Church Records I met with the foundation of his Chantery
(the Instrument or Charter thereof I mean) his Will likewise, in which he
appoints to be buried In Navi ecclesiae deorsum etc. By this time (I suppose)
you are satisfied with me whose monument this is. In the Covenants between him
and the then Prior and Cov. for his Chantery, one article required them with
all convenient speed, to build him a Chantery Chapel near unto his sepulcher:
but I find none he had. By his will (inter alia) he gave to the fabric of the
high Altar (made it seems, about that time) xx lib. His monument thus restored
I proceed.

Observing by the way, and that in the next place, one Font.
rare piece of novelty, which, because it has been hitherto omitted, and is so
worthy as I may not altogether balk or utterly pass it over in silence, I must
afford a place here, and that not altogether improperly, since it is a
monument; not of the dead, I confess, but (which is much better) of the
operative and exemplary piety of the living Donor. Whosoever knows not my
meaning may know, that by the munificence of a late worthy member of this
Church, Dr Warner, the now right reverend Lord Bishop of Rochester, the Church,
this part of it at least, is newly much graced with (what before it never had,
though much wanted) a fixed Font, and that such a one, as whether it be more
curious or more costly, I am not able, if worthy to judge; but both ways (I am
sure) so excellent and exquisite, that the Author cannot but be famous for it,
whilst the Church continues graced by it: and the rather, because it is (I
take it) the first thing of worth, that by any private hand has been offered
to this Church of latter times. Leaving this let us on.

In the same body, somewhat higher up, upon the gravestone of one Sr William
Septvans, I read as follows. Icy gist Gulian Septvans chevalier qui morust
le dernier iour Sr Wm Septvans Knight.
D'aust, Can de Grace. M. cccc. vij. de quele alme Deux eit pite and mercy Amen.



This Sr Wm. (says Wever) served in the wars of France, under Ed. 3. Milton by
Canterb. (I take it, and as I gather by his Willr) was his seat. In and by
which his Will, it is remarkable In Regist. Consistor. Cant. Manumission.
that he gave Manumission to diverse of his slaves and Natives.

Hard by the former.
Sub hoc marmore jacent corpora Willielmi Septvans militis, Sir Wm. Septvans
Knight and Elisabeth his wife.
qui obiit quarto die mensis Martii Anno Dom. 1448. and Elisabethae uxoris ejus
filiae Iohannis Peche militis, quae obiit 28. Martii. sequen' quorum animabus
propitietur Deus. Sum quod eris, volui quod vis, credens quasi credis
Vivere forte diu, mox ruo morte specu.
Cessi quo nescis, nec quomodo, quando sequeris,
Hinc simul in coelis ut simus quoque preceris.


This family of the Septvans, or de septem vannis, a long time together
flourished in these parts. Molond in Ash was a seat of theirs, where in one of
the windows, this motto or impresse, properly, pertinently and most
significantly alluding to their coat, is found. Diss^pabo inimicos Regis mei ut
paleam. Many of the family lie interred in Ash-church. And of the name one, a
Knight Templar he was as it seems by the crosse-legged posture of his effigies
on the gravestone, has a monument in the Chancell of Chartham Church. He was
one I suppose of the Septvans of Milton, anciently a Chapel to Chartham. In
callem regredior.

Not far hence.
Hic jacet Odomarus Hengham armiger qui obiit 4. April. Odmar Hengham.
Anno Dom. 1411.

On the South Side of the Body.
Hic jacet expectans misericordiam Dei, pernobilis vir Johannes Sir John
Guilford.
Guilford miles, unus Consiliarior. illustrissimi Regis Hen. 7. qui quidem
Johannes obiit 19 die Mensis Iul. 8. Hen. 7. Anno 1493. Cujus animae
propitietur altissimus. Jesus Filius Dei miserere mei.

Of him and his family Wever has many things.

On the same side.
Hic jacent Willielmus Bruchelle (sive Brenchley) miles, Sir Wm. Brenchley
Knight and Ioane his wife.
quondam Iustitiarius Domini Regis de communi banco, qui obiit in Holborne in
Suburb. London XXo Maii 1446. and Ioanna uxor ejus quae obiit 1453. Aug. 8. He
had a Chantery and Chantery-chapell, the revenues whereof the Dissolution
seized on and swept away. The Chapel is that (I take it) hard by his monument,
which is now called Deane Nevells Chapel, from his burial there, and his cost
in repairing it, whilst he lived for that purpose, after it had lien long
desolate.

There also.
Here lies Edmund Haute Esquire -- 1408. By his Will In Reg. Consist. Cant.
Sir Thomas Fogge Knight and Ioane his wife.
, Sir Edmund Haute.
he gave ten pounds operi ecclesiae Christi Cant.

On the North-side of the Body.
Thomas Fogge jacet hic, jacet hic sua sponsa Iohanna,
Sint celo cives per te Deus hos and Osanna;
Regni protector Francos Britones superavit
Nobilis Rector sicuti Leo Castra predavit
Et quoque militiam sic pro patria peramavit
Ad summam patriam Deus hic ab agone vocavit.
Read more of him, and others of his name and family, if you please you may in
Wever. I find ten marks given by him in his Will In Registro praedict.
, ad opus ecclesiae Christi Cant. Anno 1407.

There.
Sub isto marmore requiescit corpus magistri Ricardi Willeford, Richard
Willeford.
quondam Capellani Cantariae de Arundell, cujus animae etc. obiit 1520.

There also.
Hic jacet Robertus Clifford armiger, frater recolendae memoriae Robert
Clifford.
Domini Richardi Clifford Episcopi Londoniarum, qui obiit ixo die mensis
Martii, Anno Dom. 1422. Cujus etc.

There also.
Hic jacet Dominus Willielmus Arundell miles Iusticiarius S^ Wm. Arundell
Knight.
Domini Regis.

In the same body are also the monuments of Prebendary Milles, of one Thomas
H^o the younger of Cant. 1407. of William Lovelace Sergeant at Law, and high
Steward of the liberties of Christ-Church, and of Anne his first wife 1576. of
Dobs an Alderman of Cant. 1580. of the Lady Crook wife of S^ Gerard Crook
Knight 1579. as also of diverse other, but mostly obscure and mean personages,
which I think not mention-worthy. Wherefore I leave the Nave, and step to the
Martyrdom. Where I read upon one of the grave-stones.

Hic jacet Johannes Fyneux miles, and Elizabetha uxor ejus S^ John Hyneux
Knight and Elizabeth his wife.
filia -- Paston -- the rest gone. To supply which defect, I desire you to look
back to the Augustine-Friers, where you shall find that he was Lord chief
Justice of the Common pleas, both under Hen. 7. and Hen. 8. and an especial
benefactor to that Covent.

In the Lady-Chapell.
Hic jacet sub hoc marmore expectans misericordiam Dei, venerabilis Archd.
Bourgchier.
vir Magister Johannes Bourchier Archidiaconus Cantuariensis, qui quidem
Johannes migravit ad Dominum sexto die mensis November. 1495. Cujus etc.

In S. Michaels Chapel.
Where (as Wever has it) between her two husbands Margaret Duchess of
Clarence and her two husbands.
(John Beaufort, Marquess Dorset, lying on her left side, and Thomas
Plantagenet Duke of Clarence, on her right) Margaret, daughter of Thomas, and
sister, and one of the heirs to Edmund Holland, Earls of Kent, lies
gloriously intombed. Of her and them you may be further informed, if you please
to consult Wevers monuments. For I hasten.

And am now come to Beckets Chapel, where is offered Black Prince.
to our view the sumptuous monument of Edward surnamed the Black Prince, (so by
named, not of his color, but of his dreaded acts in battle) with his Epitaph,
both in prose and verse, in the French tongue. It is large, and Wever has
taken it out already and englished it, wherefore that labor is saved. This was
that Prince Edward, for whom, and by whom, in my survey of the Church, I told
you, the Chapel and Chantery was founded in the Undercroft.

Here also is the tomb of Hen. 4. King of England, (gracious Henry 4. and his
two wives.
in his time to the Monks of this Church by his confirming to them the ancient
privileges and prerogatives of the same Harpsfield Saecul. 15. cap. 14. page
634.
) and of Ioane his second wife, daughter of Charles the fifth, King of Navarre.
Of them both, as also of Mary, the same Henrie's first wife, Wever has many
things, of him especially, both in verse and prose: amongst the rest his Will.
In which (inter alia) I note that he willed to have a Chantery to consist of 2
Priests to sing and pray for his soul in this Church, and in such place thereof
and manner as should seem good to his Cousin the Archbishop of Canterbury (Tho.
Arundell.) In all probability the little Chapel on the North-side of his
monument is the very Chapel which was built for that purpose: the window-work
whereof, by Prior Goldstones name in the foot of it, seems to be of his
repairing.

I leave this Chapel and descend to the Undercroft. Isabel Countess of Atholl.
Where are two Lady-monuments, the one of Isabel Countess of Athol, whereof
let Wever further inform you.

The other of the Lady Mohun, wherewith I will better Joan Lady Mohun.
acquaint you from the Charter or Instrument of her Chantery, recorded in a
Lieger of the Church. She lived in the days of Rich. 2. and writes herself
Domina de Donesterr, springing (it seems) from that noble and mighty house or
family of the Mohuns of Dunster-castle in Sommersetshire, which (as my Author
Cambd. Britannia in Summersetshire.
adds) flourished from the Conquerours until Richard the 2. days. In the
Indenture between her and the then Prior and Covent, for the sum of 350 marks
sterling (and certain utensils, and accoutrements convenient for her Chantery)
with which money the Manor of Selgrave was purchased and amortized to them
(the P. and C.) with license of the King in that behalf, a perpetual Chantery
is granted unto her, by them, who covenant with her beside, that when she died
her corpse should be laid in the tomb which she of her own cost had prepared and
caused to be set up near the Altar of our Lady in the Undercroft: And being
there so entombed should never be removed, nor the name of the tomb ever
altered, but be honorably kept, and 5s per annum given to the Clerk that kept
the Lady-chapell, for the keeping clean of her tomb, with many other clauses
inserted in the same Indenture, which to the end the Chantery might not vanish
out of memory with their Successors the Monks caused to be enrolled and
recorded in their Martyrologe, that upon her obit-day it might be annually
recited. The indenture is dated in the year 1395. 19. Ric. 2. I will give you
the very words of her Epitaph, because Wever has set it down imperfectly. Pour
Dieu priez por l'ame Iohane Burwaschs, que fut Dame de Mohan.



And so I have done, as with hers, so with the rest also of the monuments
mentionable in this place.

The Church it self, with her appendent, annexed and connexed buildings thus
thoroughly surveyed, my proposed method sends me to survey next the other
ancient buildings within the precinct of it and the Palace etc. I begin with
the Palace.

Augustine the Monk, and the first Archbishop of this See Archbishops Palace.
and his associats, being kindly received of King Ethelbert, and admitted into
the City; for their present accommodation were seated (as whilome was told you)
first at Stablegate, near unto this Palace, where presently they began
(says venerable Bede Hist. eccles. lib. 1. c. 26.
) vitam imitari Apostolicam. By which and other means at length converting the
King to Christianity, and daily winning upon his favor; the King shortly
after removing and withdrawing himself and his Court to Reculver, and there
settling, as his Successors in the Kentish Kingdom whilst it lasted ever after
did, (as some report Antiq. Brit. in vita Augustini.
) bestows upon his beloved Augustine (for a perpetual seat for him and his
Successors) his own Royal Palace in the City, conceived to have stood much
hereabout. This Palace with the neighboring Church, Augustine afterward
converted both into a Cathedral and a Monastery, yet (as I take it) not
dividing his dwelling or setting out his habitation apart from the Monks; but,
as he was to them considered as Cathedral Canons, Bishop, and considered as
Claustrall Monks, Abbat, or in place of Abbat; and e converso, they to him
considered as Bishop, Cathedral Canons and Chapter, and considered as Abbat, a
Convent of Claustrall Monks: So he and they and both their Successors
intercommuning, as in goods and possessions, so in one and the same habitation,
of one entire precinct ever after until (I take it) Lanfrancs days. Who
innovating and altering the most of our fashions, and former usages in
Church-affaires, and happily not digesting this amongst the rest, thought good
(its like) to change it. For no mention of any such Palace or like several
habitation for the Archbishop, is to be found before his time. He indeed,
amongst his other structures built him a Court or Palace distinct from the
Monks. Edificavit and curiam sibi, etc. says Edmerus, speaking of the same
Archbishop Hist. Novor. lib. 1. page 8.
. He it was that first shifted and settled (in that manner that Doomsdayes
Survey found them) the Manors and Possessions between himself and the
Monks; setting out to each of them and the Successors of them both their
distinct and proper parts Lib. ecclesie Cant.
: and so no marvel if he discommoned himself and his Successors by a Palace,
per se, from the Monks ever after. Lanfranc then (I am persuaded) first
furnished the Sea with a Palace here. Whereof I think little or no part is
left to be now surveyed: Neither Hall, Chapel, or other whole piece about it
(I exclude the Hall where the Archbishops civill-Court is holden, which I shall
show was but of late laid to the Palace) being to my seeming of that Antiquity.

And no marvel: for this house (says Lambert') by that Peramb. of Kent in
Cant.
time Hubert the Archbishop had aspired to the Sea, was decayed, either with
age, or flame, or both. Who therefore (says he) pulled down the most part of
it, and in place thereof laid the foundation of that great Hall and other the
Offices that are now to be seen. But by reason that himself wanted time
(prevented by death) and some of his followers lacked money to perform the
work, it rested unperfect till the days of Boniface, who both substantially
and beautifully finished the whole; and yet (as some think) Stephen Langton
had accomplished the great Hall thereof before him. Thus Lambert. Harpesfield
is express for Langions building of the Hall. Egregiam illam (says he
Ecclesiastic. Hist. Saecul 13. Cap. 5 page 434.
) Palatii Cantuariensis ille aulam aedificavit. For the rest, all or most of it
is certainly much newer, as the work plainly discovers: whereof the present
Gate House (Iam told) was sometime used for the Lollards-Tower or Prison, and
so called.

Thus my Survey of the Palace would shortly end, but Great-Hall.
that I may not let the Great Hall (a piece of goodly struture) pass without
some little digression and enlargement of my discourse touching the same, it
being famous for many solemnities and celebrious assemblies there. Amongst the
rest, for that of King Ed. 1. his Wedding feast kept there Stow. Annals in Ed.
1.
. As also for that great state and solemnity of Archbishop Warhams
intertainment both of the Emperor with his Mother, and the King and Queen of
England, at a supper in the same Hall, and also of his own entertainment there
at his first coming and inthronization into the Sea; whereof his Successor
(Archbishop Parker) and others make mention. And lastly for the intertainment
there which the same Archbishop Parker gave the late Queen Elizabeth, and the
French Monsieur, the Duke of Rhetz, and many of the English Nobility. So much
for the Palace.

I come now to the Church-precinct: which how it lies Church-precinct.
and where it goes at this day, is a thing easily traced and found out, as
thus. From the partition Wall between the Palace and it, near the Rush-market
to the Church-gate, and so directly upwards almost to Burgate, from thence by
the Towne-Wall included to the Chancell-head of Northgate-Church, and from
thence by the Almnary (or Mint-yard) Wall (crossing and taking in the way
between the South-West corner of that Wall, and the opposite Palace Wall) to
the Court-Gate, commonly called the Porters-Gate. Thus lies the modern
precinct of the Church.

But time was when it lay otherwise, Lanfranc coming to the Sea; Omnes
Officinas quae infra murum Curiae sunt, cum ipso muro aedificavit (says
Edmerus Hist. Novor. lib. 1. page 7.
.) Si quis in praedicta ecclesia (says Theobald the Archbishop in a Charter of
his) vel infra ambitum murorum ecclesiam and curiam nostram and monachorum
cingentium, etc Liber ecclesiae. Cant.
. The Court and Church you see was sometimes walled in; the Churchyard was the
like. For by a Charter of Hen. 2. the Monks of the place had a way granted
them, or rather restored, circa murum Cimiterii sui tempore guerrae nuper
sublat. (meaning, I take it, that which happened at the end of King Stephens
reign:) which the King charge John and Hamon the then Praepositi of the City
to deliver them Liber ecclesie praedict.
. Some remains of this old Wall yet appear, as at D^ Causaubons a little
remanent of it, and a larger parcel and of good height by the Covent or
Common-garden: whereby it appears that this Wall stood some pretty distance
from the Wall of the City. The interposed ground between which double Wall,
not being then any parcel either of the Church demesnesse or liberty, lay
partly in Northgate, partly in Burgate-Ward. That (I am sure) between
Queningate and Burgate, called Queningate Lane, being in the Church-Records,
before it came to the Monks said to lie in Berthade Burgate, as I conceive it
thence probable, the rest to have lain in Northgate-Ward. Besides, within the
modern precinct, and that about the now Co. Garden, lay the best part of Saint
Michaels Parish, and Queningate Parish between that and Queningate, within
which Saint Austins Abbey, and diverse private men beside sometimes had houses,
land and other interest, as they had also lower down on the South Side of the
now Churchyard. I will therefore (as pertinent) show how in time the Church
became possessed of the whole precinct as now it is.

And first for the South Side of the Churchyard, I read thus Liber ecclesi^
memoratae.
. Anno Domini Miijo. Ethelredus Dux dedit ecclesia Christi particulam terrae in
Dorobernia quam sibi rex Ethelredus dedit XV virgarum in longitudine, and viij
virgarum in latitudine. Termini terrae sunt hii. In orientali part terra
Regis. In part australi placea civitatis. In occidente terra ecclesiae
Christi. In Aquilone cimiterium Christi. This parcel of land must needs lie on
the South Side of the Churchyard, the North and South bounds argue it so
plainly. Hen. 1. by his Charter confirms to Hugh, Abbat of Saint Austins, and
to the Monks there, Omnes illas terras quas Monachi S. Trinitatis eis dederunt
pro excambio terrae quam ab eis receperunt ad amplificandum cimiterium suum,
etc.

Saint Augustines Abbey (as you may remember I told you) had sometimes also
diverse tenants, tenements and ground on the same quarter of the Churchyard,
near and behind the Campanile or Clocarium of the Church, the ruined
foundation whereof appearing now in the form of a little Mount lies enclosed
in M^ Archdeacons Garden. These houses and lands in Hen. 2. time, and by his
help, were obtained (upon exchange) of that neighbor Monastery, by the Monks
of this Church, as by what I have said hereof before, and by the composition
made touching the same, copied in my Appendix, may further appear.

One Gervasius de Cornhill, whom that Composition (as you shall see) makes
mention of, had diverse tenements of his own near this Campanile, which the
Church also about the same time, and for the same reasons purchased of him, his
son Reignald and Maud his Wife, exchanging for them certain ground in
Friday-street London, which together with the former exchange were confirmed by
several Charters of Hen. 2. to be seen in the Liegers of the Church. It
seems by the premises that this Campanile did terminate both the
Church-ground and liberty at this time. But after this double exchange I
suppose those houses taken down, and the ground there laid open unto the
backside of the row of shops along Burgate-street (Shops I call them, for such
they were built for, and not for dwellinghouses, because, I take it, of fires,
which the neighborhood of dwelling-houses might occasion to the Church;
witness those by the Steeple, which we see were therefore purposely gotten in
and had away:) And the same ground being so dishoused and laid open, was made
cimitery ground, and became part and parcel of the Churchyard, and so
accounted. For the reason which the Prior and Covent render and show to
Archbishop Winchelsey in Ed. 1. time, why they ought not to contribute to the
reparation of Saint Mary Magdalens Church in Canterbury, in respect of their
rents of those shops, was, that the same were infra limits Cimiterii ecclesiae
Christi Cant. and de manso Ecclesiae Liber ecclesiae memoratae.
etc. Hitherto of the Church-ground there.

Now for the ground between Northgate and Queningate. This parcel came first
to the Church in Hen. 2. time, and of his gift. For by his Charter extant in
the Leigers of the Church, he gives to the Church, in augmentum elemosinariae
suae (as the words of it are) placeam illam inter murum Civitatis and murum qui
claudit curiam Prioris and monachorum, quae jacet inter Norgate and Queningate.
Quae quidem placea continet in five suo versus Or. xlj pedes in latitudine, and
versus Occiden. xxiiij pedes similiter in latitud. In medio sui xvij pedes, and
in longitudine lxxj perticas. In the year 1305. the Monks are presented and
charged by the Citizens to have stopped or made up the way between Queningate
and Norgate: a thing confessed on the Monks part, but defending themselves by
this Charter, they are acquitted Liber ecclesi^ Cant.
. However for more surety (as I guess) Hen. 4. afterward by his Charter,
grants them viam infra murum Civitatis Cantuar. quae ducere solebat de
Northgate usque Queningate: as the Church-Records inform me. And so much also
for that parcel of the now precinct.

For the rest of it thereabout, namely at and near Queningate, and between it
and Burgate, that is the ground known of late days by the name of the Co.
Garden. I have seen In Archivis ejusd. eccles.
several deeds, that show how, by parcells, it became added to and enclosed
within the Church-precinct. As first, the Church has a Composition made by the
Monks of the place with their neighbors of Saint Austins, and dated in the
year 1287. wherein many houses etc. within Queningate, are (in exchange for
other) passed over to the Church. De terris and tenementis (so runs the Deed)
quae dicti Abbas and Conventus habuerunt infra Queningate, viz. iijs. viijd. de
duabus domibus Sacristiae suae, and viijd. de una vacua placeajacente a vico
ibidem usque ad murum ecclesiae Christi praed'. Item iiijs. viijd. redditus de
quadam domo elemosinariae suae quam ibidem Aldhelmus tenuit simul cum una pecia
terrae quam similiter ille Aldhelmus tenuit ibidem. Item xjs. de tribus domibus
Thesaurariae suae ibidem. Quae tenementa (mark this) and redditus cum
pertinentiis remaneant dictis Priori and Capitulo and eorum successor. libera
and quieta ab omni redditu and servitio in feodum and dominium and tus
ecclesiae suae in perpetuum. Afterterwards. i. in the 41. Ed. 3. I find the
two Monasteries come to Composition about certain other houses and land
situate and lying about this place. The preamble of the Indenture thus states
the matter. Quod cum iidem Prior and Conventus certa messuagia and tofta de
quibus iidem Abbas and Conventus redditum xvs. particulariter percipere
consueverunt continentia in longitudine and latitudine dimidiam acram, dimid.
rod. and quartam partem unius rod. terrae, and quae de Nicolao Horn, Iohanne
Calward, Henrico ate Forstall and aliis in Queningate-lane separatim
acquisiverunt, and partem inde calumpniarunt, and residuum eorund. Messuag. and
Toftor. in augmentationem gardini ipsorum Prio. and Conv. ibidem includere
praetendunt, etc. Thus you may perceive the Church-precinct extending and
spreading further and further. And this composition gave scope for it. For
after that preamble it is yielded by the Abbat and Covent of Saint Austins,
what lay in them, that the Prior and Covent of Christ-Church, might at their
pleasure enclose those messuages and ground.

After this came yet another parcel of the ground thereabouts to the Church.
For I meet with a Deed or Charter of Ralph Broughton and John Tent Chaplains,
made to the Church 16. Rich. 2. (amongst other things) of one Message in the
Parish of Saint Michael in Canterbury near Quenegate, and of one Acre of Land
in the same Parish near Quenegate-lane: The house holding of the King. in
Burgage, and the Land of Saint Austins for xs. rent per annum.

By this time (I take it) the Church had gotten in all the ground hereabouts,
saving what lay between Queningate and Burgate, a slip called Queningate-lane.
Now for that, Queningate-lane.
I find that by an Act of Parliament. 1. Rich. 3. (by which the Aldermanry of
Westgate was granted to the City) the same parcel of ground, together with the
Posterne and Bridge, was granted to the Church. But in case of eviction of the
Aldermanry from the City, the slip of Aldermanry of Westgate.
ground and premises was to return to the City, a part of whose demesnesse it
was in Fee-ferme. And surely so it did; for in the 1. Hen. 7. the same
Aldermanry, by a like Act of Parliament was restored to S^ George Brownes
heirs, who by the former Act were made incapable of it, for their Father
taking part with Hen. 7. against Rich. 3. But yet at length, after all this, by
a composition between the Church and the City, made Anno 7. Hen. 7. the Church
becomes ever after quietly seized both of the same ground and Wall, with the
Towers, Posterne, and Bridge.

Thus have I showed you (as near as I think it may be found) the extent of
the ancient precinct, and how and when it became enlarged to that bigness that
now it bears. And so much of the precinct in general.

I come now to the survey of the particular ancient buildings Church-Gate.
in and about the same, beginning with the Church-gate. A very goodly, strong
and beautiful structure, and of excellent artifice, built in the year 1507.
as appears by this now scarcely legible inscription on the Gates-Front. Hoc
opus constructum est Anno Domini Millesimo, Quingentesimo septimo. Thomas
Goldstone the Junior, as I may call him, there being two (and he the latter) of
that name, being then Prior, and (as he was famous for his piety that way) this
works great benefactor. A new Gate it is, and not the first (I take it) was
builded there, but succeeding a former standing where this does. For that which
is now Alderman Nicholsons dwelling house, is anciently. i. 41. Hen. 3.
described Charta in lib. Hosp de Estbridge.
to stand ante portam ecclesiae sanctae Trinitatis: the most ancient Gate
standing higher up, somewhat nearer Burgate, a good part whereof is yet
remaining, but built up, and converted to private use. This (I suppose) is that
vetus portacimiterii the old Records of Christ-Church so often mention, the
opposition of it to that which is now Master Fidges, and the other contiguous
houses to his being Church-houses, serving to bound out and describe their
situation in the ancient Rentalls, calling them Magna domus contra veterem
portaem cimiterii. I have done with this Gate.

By which entering the Churchyard, and walking up toward Cimitery-Gate.
the Covent Garden, on the right hand, within the Cimitery-Gate there (so
called, I take it, because it had Cimitery ground lying on either side of it,
that within it being called Interius cimiterium) I find yet standing the old
Schoole-house, now put to other use, but (I am assured) that which was the
Schoole-house, before the present Schoole-house.
Shoole-house in the Mint-yard. The often-cited Division of houses between the
Deane and Preb. appointing out Master Archdeacons now Prebends-house, and
ground, bounds it out one way to the Schoole-Garden. There are that remember
the Free-Schoole kept there, and that by one Master Twyne (sometime a
Magistrate of the City) as they tell me. For it was a Free-Schoole for the City
chiefly, and so called, and sometime was of the liberty thereof, anciently
wayed unto, and having a passage to it from some part of Burgate-street (I take
it) leading you to the old door of entrance which it had now made up at the
Southend and West Side thereof, happily that which Anno 32. Hen. 3. is called
venella quae tendit de Burgate-street versus portam domus Sacristae Lib. Hosp.
Pauperum Sacerdot. Cantuar.
. It was a place of situation, for privacy and retiredness, well chosen. In
deligendo loco certo auditorii civitatis electae, adhuc danda opera, ut is
quantum incommoditas civitatis patietur, sit salubris and separatus a tumultu
transeuntium, maxim curruum seu planstrorum, ne interpellentur docentes aut
discentes, etc. So Tholosanus Repub. lib. 18. cap. 6. ^um. 1.
. What Antiquity the Free-Schoole in this place carries with it, I am
uncertain. Arch. Theodore, the seventh after Augustine, we read erected at
Canterbury by license of Vitalianus the Pope, a School or College (a kind of
Academicall foundation it was) wherein he placed professors of all the liberal
sciences, which (says my Authorq) was the very ^ Lamberts Perambulation of
Kent in Canterbury.
pattern to that School which Sigebert the King of East-Angle afterward
builded, etc. But this School long since vanished. The Danes have so often
wasted, and other accidents and casualties have so altered the face of the
City, that it were much folly now to seek with hope to find but the place.
Ipsae periere ruinae. Therefore no more of that School.

This we have in hand occurres to me Ms. in Archivis eccles. Cant.
first in the year 1259. when as Robertus Rector ecclesiae Scholarium
Civitatis Cantuar. his presence is taken to witness an appeal of the Prior
and Covent in a cause of theirs then depending before the Official of
Canterbury. A while after this I read that Robert Winchelsey, that in time came
to be Archbishop of Canterbury in Ed. 1. time, was a Scholar here: at
Canterbury they say Harpsfield eccles. Hist. in ejus vita.
; and therefore I suppose here. In whose immediate Successors time, there arose
a great controversy between the Rector of this School, and the Parson of
Saint Martin (who it seems by the right and custom of his Church held and
kept a kind of pettite Free-Schoole there) about the rights and liberties of
either School. The Records of the difference registered in Christ-Church, and
faithfully extracted thence will best report the matter with the circumstance,
which therefore my Appendix shall make public, Scriptura xj^.

Of this School the Archbishop sede plena; and the Church, sede vacant, were
patrons. The Archbishops right will appear unto you from those Records. The
Churches I gather from this note taken from other like Records. Collatio
magisterii Scholarium grammaticalium Civitatis Cant. per Ricardum Priorem
magistro Iohanni Bocton quem investivit per ferulae and virgae traditionem,
praestito per eum Iuramento de fideliter and diligenter regendo. This was in
the year 1374. at what time the Sea was void by Archbishop Wittlesey's death.
So much for the School.

The next thing falling under my Survey are certain old Honors.
buildings called Honors or the Honors; in the apportionment of dwellings
amongst the first Deane and Preb. by that name divided and shared between the
predecessors of Doctor Ieffery, and Doctor Vossius now Prebends. With Sir Henry
Spelman, and Doctor Cowells help, I understand the term; but how to apply it,
or how it may suite with the present buildings I know not: Unless in that the
late Priory of Christ-church being a Barony, and the Prior there, in right of
his dignity, one of the spiritual Barons of the Parliament, those buildings
(sometime the prime part of his seat) might specially appertain unto him in
right of the Barony, or be annexed to the Honor of the Barony, and thence take
the name of Honors. Their name occurres not to me in any Record of the Church
before this Division, else happily I could have said more of it, and with more
certainty.

A step or two further brings me to the ruins of that building which in the
Division is called the Fermary-Chapell. Fermary-Chapell.


Capgrave Quem refert Author Antiq. (...) vita Cutberti.
tells of a Chapel which he calls St John's standing almost contiguous to
Christ-Church, built by Cuthbert the Archbishop, amongst other intents, for a
place of burial for him and his Successors, and that he was therein interred.
Hence, and because of the Statue or effigies of St John (as they suppose it to
be; though St John, I take it, is no where pictured with a long beard and like
an old man, but there) with St John's, Ecce major me etc. in part yet legible
upon an open scrowl in his hand (though in a charactter I dare say less
ancient then the Conquest:) and from the near site of it to the great Church,
some are of opinion that this was that St John's Chapel Capgrave speaks of. By
their favor I think not. For first, granting for truth, that there sometimes
was such a Chapel, and we have barely Capgraves testimony for it (somewhat a
weak ground to build upon;) yet I cannot imagine that so much as is yet
standing of this Chapel could survive and stand out so many Danish inrodes,
devastations and other combustions as have betided this place since Cuthberts
days. Besides, Capgrave that tells of the beginning and foundation, withal
straightway shows the end and overthrow of that Chapel where he says. But
this Church of St John many ages since, together with Christ-Church, and the
offices thereof exchanged her substance with fire. Of the repair or reedifying
whereof I never read. Some supposing this and that other part of ancient
building that is below it Westward, to have been one entire structure, and to
have had dependence one upon the other, do conceive it to have been the Church
of S. Trinity which Archbishop Lanfranc built. Indeed the arched or embowed
work of it inclines my belief that it was a building erected since the
Conquest. But others will have it to be the remains of the old Church of St
Savior, that was built and standing before the Conquest, that happily which
Agelnoth the Archbishop in King Knutes time, after the former was destroyed and
burnt by the Danes, reedified. But by their favor, it was neither this, that,
nor the other. Truth is, as there is an upper and a lower part of this building,
so was each part a distinct structure by it self, and not one entire piece, the
lower^ Western part whereof was sometime a Hall, for the pulling down whereof
there passed a decree in Chapter anno 1545. whence in the Division the very
next year following it is called the late long Hall. And the upper or Eastern
part of the building was this very Fermary or Infirmary-Chapell. The same
Division calls it so, and that in regard-it did sometime appertain and was
appropriate to those of the Infirmary or Infirmitory (the Nosocomium I may call
it) of the Minster situate by it, consisting chiefly of an Hall or Refectory,
for their common board or table (if able and fit to come to it, otherwise
feeding in their chambers) a kitchen to dress their necessary provision in, a
Dormitory or Dortor for their place of sleep and repose, distributed into
certain distinct and several chambers; of which, that one might not disturb
another, every of the infirm folk had one proper to himself. And a private
Chapel for their devotions, who either were sick and could not, or diseased
and might not accompany their brethren in their more public and common
devotions in the Temple. Dr Langworth a late Predecessor of D^ Blechynden (as
it is noted down in a Chapter book) anno 1579. took down a cross wall between
his house and D^ Lawses (a Predecessor of D^ Brayes) at the Churches charge,
and paved the way between them with the stone. In all likelihood it was the
Western wall of this Chapel, or the wall which terminated the Chapel
Westward, a clear argument of the disjunction and separation thereof from that
other lower part of building. The Infirmary hall or Refectory, which the
Division calls the Table-hall, Infirmary.
yet stands perfect and entire, being the same which is now D^ Blechyndens hall
to his prebendall house, built with other rooms (as I find) about the year
1342. For out of Threasurers Accounts of the Church, in that and the next year
following, I have these notes. viz.

Pro nova aula and una Camera de novo factis infirmar. 96 lib. 8s. 2d. praeter
20 marcas receptas a Feretrario pro nova camera faciend. Item pro novis cameris
in firmar' and pentistis circa aulam ibid. 61 lib. 1s. 6d. Item pro novo
pentisio juxta novas cameras infirmar. 6 lib. 15s. 4d. ob.
This Infirmary or domus Infirmorum I read of in our Chronicles in King John's
time. For the Monks of this Church quitting the Monastery by command of the
King sorely offended at them, for their choice of Stephen Langton for their
Archbishop; 13 sick Monks which could not remove, were left behind (says my
Author Matt. Paris. page 299.
) in domo Infirmorum. The same had a bath at or near the entrance of it, happily
the leaden cistern yet remaining, of what use you may gather from the Decrees
of Lanfranc in Reyners book. Archbishops Winchelsey's Statutes Liber ms.
Eccles. Cant.
also mention it, which have provided many things touching the place. Amongst
the rest, that as a place of great secrecy, no secular should be admitted into
it to view or see it. And that the Prior of the Church should, if not twice,
yet at least once a week personally visit and view the place, to see that there
be nothing wanting to the sick there, nor ought else amiss, or if so, to see
it reformed. It had a special Curator beside, who was called Infirmarius. But
let us hence.

Of ancient buildings the next unto this is the Dortor, Dortor.
the common Dormitory for the Monks, a very old piece, as any now stands (I
believe) within the precinct. Here the Monks (according to S. Benets rule)
slept vestiti. i. in their clothes, their regular habit, lying in the woollen,
and without either sheet or shirt. Would you know why? Partly (I take it) to
further them in the way of Mortification of their bodies, and partly for their
more readiness to attend their Nocturnes, that is, their night Devotions,
which in imitation of the Primitives, they observed at certain of their
Canonical hours. To prevent disturbance this place Ms. memorat.
had two Vigils or Watchmen that guarded it every night; the one till midnight,
the other till break of day. By Archbishop Winchelsey's Statutes, no woman or
stranger might by any means have access thither.

Near unto this Dortor, are the ruins of the Kitchen, Pantry, Larder, and
other like rooms or offices built for the common use and service of the Covent
in point of food and repast, which was served in to them in their Common Hall
or Refectory built contiguous to the Kitchen (the Refectory.
Remains whereof show it to have been a very goodly, large and curious piece
of structure) opening on the Southside with a fair door into the Cloister,
before which door sometimes stood a double cistern, partly (I take it) for the
service of the Hall, and partly as a layer used at that Ceremony of washing the
hands and feet of the Monks by the chief Prelate or Superintendent by our
Saviors example toward his Disciples, commanded by St Benets rule at certain
times, especially at their Mandy, to be observed Decreta Lanfranci and
caerimoniale Benedictin.
This Hall they called the Fratria, in old English the Frater (so the Division
calls it) because it was the common place of resort and meeting for the
Fraternity to their repast served into them from the contiguous Kitchen. Their
ordinary fare and food here was fish and fruits, where they were not more
commonly and constantly served in, then flesh was rarely or never. Abstinence
from which being, as to all sorts of Monks in general, so to these in
particular expressly enjoined, and strictly imposed, the common Refectory
might upon no terms admit of or afford any. But were any of the family sick,
it was to be had for him in the Infirmary. The guests likewise in the Cella
Hospitum (the guessing chamber I may call it) were not denied it: and besides,
the Prior (to whose conscience and discretion in this behalf much was left) if
he saw cause to refresh any one or more with the flesh at his own table in his
private chamber, he might call unto him thither now and then such as he thought
fit. Thus and in these cases and places flesh might be at any time, and was
many times eaten. But within the public Refectory never, and that (as I
conceive) because of the rules violation in that behalf, which these
specialties were so far from infringing, that like as exceptions do a
general rule, they rather confirmed the same in the generality of it. For as
in point either of the office or other like agends in the Church, or of rest
and repose in the Dortor, by observing the rules (that is, the rites and
customs) of the Monastery in those cases in the places proper thereunto, the
Church and Dortor; by the generality of the Monks, the rule in those cases was
conceived and construed to be kept and fulfilled: So likewise by observing the
Monastic rules and customs for food and repast (and particularly this of
abstinence from flesh) in the Refectory, the proper place of common refection
to the whole Convent in general, the rule in that case was by common
intendment kept unviolated. And that it might be so, it was (no doubt) one main
end of devising and erecting these common Refectories. For might the Monks have
been allowed their particular Cells, and a Praebenda, or portion set them out
wherewith to find themselves, and provide them of their own commons, as our
Prebendaries now have, it might justly be feared that the rule in this point of
abstinence from flesh, would be either not at all, or nothing so well observed,
as in the common and public Refectory, where each one saw what his fellow ate.
The consideration whereof probably moved Wlfred the Archbishop of this Church
800 years ago and upwards (when by his Codicill he allowed the then Monks of
this place their proper Cells, or houses) to provide that the having of them
should not excuse nor hinder their resort to the Church, for prayers and other
like agends there, at their canonical hours, from the common Refectory for
their board, nor from the common Dormitory for their bed. As you shall find by
the Charter it self (if you peruse it) in my Appendix Scriptura 36. The Latin
is much to blame, and the sense somewhat imperfect and incoherent, but I
thought it not fit, nor my part to vary from it in the least syllable.

Of this Hall and the provision for the same and the ordering thereof, the
chief care and oversight was entrusted to the Cellerar one of the four great
Obedientiarii (or Cellerar. Sacrst. Cha^berlain. Threasur^r.
Officers) of the Monastery, as I told you: The Sacrista, Camerarius and
Thesaurarius being the other three. The Threasurers office was to collect and
gather in the rents and revenues of the Monastery. The Chamberlains chiefly
consisted in the care of vestitus or clothing for the Monks, and therefore he
had the charge of the Sartrinum and Sutrinum, the storehouses of that sort of
provision, as I guess by officers and retainers to them, such as these Lib.
Ecclesiae Cantuar.
Magister Cissor. Secundus Cissor. Pelli parius. Magister suitor and garcio
ejus. Tres servientes in Lavendria etc. whence he was also called Vestiarius.
It was the Sacrists or Sextens office and business to see the Church, the
Temple, kept sartum tectum, and to have care of the sacred vessels, the
vestments, ornaments, books and utensils of the Church, and to dispose of and
order both the place and manner of interring the dead, both Monks and others.
And our Cellerars office regarded the Or victum.
Cibum Monachorum, the provision of food for the Monks and the ordering
thereof, to which end he had the Pistrinum and the Bracinum (the Bakehouse and
the Brewhouse or Maulthouse) under his charge. Accordingly, at the settling of
the Churches Manors by Archbishop Lanfranc some were assigned and allotted to
the feeding, other to the clothing of the Monks: as you shall find by the
distinction which is observed in the recital of those Manors in Doomsday
book, where some are said and set down to appertain to the Monks ad cibum,
other ad vestitum.

By the way will you hear a learned man's opinion of this distinction of
Monastic Offi^es, and assigning out unto them their peculiar ferms and
revenues? Non est dubium (says Roverius in his Illustrations of the History of
S. John's Monastery at Rheimes page 649.) Quin inde maxima fuerit and
disciplinae and rei familiaris in Monasteriis labes, quod domesticis inprimis
administris, ac subinde etiam Monachis singulis suae attributae fuerint
sigillatim praediorum aut proventuum Monasterii parts. Nam lapsum inde est
paupertatis studium, jacta avaritlae semina, charitas public imminuta,
traductae in affines Monasteriorum facultates, licentiae, ac vitiis suppeditata
alimenta. Irrepsit vero haec lues in Monasteria vulgo post annum millesimum. Ac
licet eatenus administrationes ejuscemodi obedientiae dicerentur, quod solo
Abbatis and Capituli imperio, atque arbitrio quamdiu libitum esset gererentur;
tamen band multo postea Beneficiorum nomen, ac jus obtinuerunt, magnamque
monastic is statutis, vitaeque religiosae puritati, ac perfectioni
perturbationem attulere. Thus he. And now I proceed.

The Cellerar no doubt was a great man in the College. Archbishop Winchelseys
statutes Lib. eccles. Cant.
agreeably to Lanfranc's decrees, which say he ought to be Pater Monasterii,
expressly call him so. Item omnes Custodes Maneriorum, necnon omnes
Obedientiarii excepto duntaxat Maiore Celerario, qui pater dicitur Monasterii,
etc. and that he was a great man in his place may appear by the large extent
of his charge. In the list of the Churches family taken in the year 1322. I
find all these persons sorting to his Office.

Senescallus Libertatum. Clericus sen' Libertatum. Senescallus aulae hospitum.
Ianitor portae exterior. Curiae. Ianitor portae cimiterii. Panetar. in Celar.
Garcio ejus. Hostiarius Claustri. Garcio ejus. Panetarius aulae. Vigil Curiae.
Scutellarius aulae. Potagiarius. Scutellarius refectorii. Garcio ejus.
Lardarius qui est jus coquus. Conventus and garcio ejus. Secundus cocus
conventus. Cocus aulae and garcio ejus. Salsarius qui est Ostiarius Coquinae,
and garcio ejus. Focarius coquinae. Portarius. Partitor coquinae. Tractor vini
and cervisiae Qui est Cupparius. Garcio ejus. Armiger Celerarii. Stabularius
Celerarii. Carectarius Celerarii Et duo garciones ejus. Coltonarius interior.
Coltonarius exterior. Venator, and garcio ejus. Ianitor portae aulae. Garcio
ejus. Custos prati Celerarii. Gayolarius.
These (I take it) with those of the Bakehouse and Brewhouse Cellerars-Halimot.
or Malt-house, were the officers and retainers, whereof the Cellerars Halimot
occurring to me in a very ancient Deed of this Church did consist, which I
suppose was holden of him in his proper Hall, and thence took it name of
Halimot, to say, Conventus aulae. The office was indeed so exceeding great and
troublesome, that like as the Prior, for the same reason had his Sub-Prior, or
Prior claustri; the Sacrist or Sexten, for the like cause his Sub-sacrista: so
had this our Cellerar his Sub-Cellerarius to assist him and bear a share with
him (and surely need enough) in the managing of this burdensome office, and
weighty province.

I read Spelman. Glossar. in Verb. Cellerarius.
that in the Abbey of St Edmunds-bury, illustris aedium pars cum latifundiis
ejus muneri designata fuit, as my Authors own words are. So had our Cellerar
here. For he had a large part of principal housing allotted him, all contiguous
to the Covent-Hall and Kitchen (the Sphere wherein he chiefly moved) namely
his Hall and his Lodgings, as they were called. His Hall that which is now the
Archbishops Cellerars-Hall
for the keeping of his temporal Courts. An ancient piece, and (I take it) a
parcel of that housing Edmerus Hist. Novor. lib. 1. page 7. and 8.
speaks of, which he says Archbishop Lanfranc upon the increase of the number
of his Monks pulling down the former too little for their use, secondly built
better and larger then the former: the Dortor and North-Hall, being other part
of it, as I conceive, all built upon brave arched vaults of stone. Into this
(the Cellerars) Hall, the present passage lies by the Palace Green or Court;
whereas the ancient ordinary way to it was on the other side the Hall, in at a
fair door, over which is cut in the stone-worke the resemblance of the Holy
Ghost in the Doves form descending on our Savior, and under his feet the
statue of an Archbishop (happily the Founder) in his Pontificalls. Between this
Hall and the Court-gate sometimes lay a passage by and through the long low
Entry, in the Division called the Pantise, whereby ingresse and regresse,
carriage and recarriage might be made to and from the Hall.

His Lodgings lay on the West Side or Quarter of the Celler^. Lodgings.
Cloister, into which it had a double door, having in the Windows, the name,
coat of arms and Rebus or namedevice of Richard Dering the Monk, one of them
Vidc Stat. 25. ^en. 8.
that conspired with the Holy Maid of Kent in Hen. 8. days, and saluted
Tiburne for his pains, who in his time was Cellerar to the Church. The same
Hen. 8. afterward in his new erection and dotation of the Church, expressly
reserves to him and his Successors both Hall, and Lodgings, by the names of the
Cellerars Hall, and the Cellerars Lodgings. But they are since come to the Sea,
and laid to the Palace, and passages made to them from the same.

I have done with them, and pass from thence to the Court-Ga^.
Court-Gate, commonly called the Porters-Gate, built (as I take it) by the old
general founder Archbishop Lanfranc. On the North-side whereof stands an
ancient stone-worke-pile, the North part whereof. i. from the stairs or ascent
Northward, is now Dr Casaubons Prebends house. The name of which building is
now quite lost, saving that some call it Hog-Hall: happily rather (as Hogia,
Hoga, Hogium Hog-Hall.
and Hogum is by St Henry Spelman Glossar.
derived from the German Hog, signifying high, or mounted) because of the high
and lofty site and posture of it, then, as some dream, from the dressing of
Hogs sometime in the Undercroft of it, a use for which it were absurd to think
it built. Others from the site of it call it, and so do some of the
Church-Records, North-Hall, and magna aula juxta portam curiae versus
Aquilonem. I find it also in some of the Church Records called Oriall; but
whether from the same original with Oriall College in Oxford, which name some
conceive to be a corruption of Aul-royall, I leave to other men's judgments.
But all this while we are without satisfaction for what use so strong and
goodly a foundation as this is standing upon Vaults, and having to it a very
graceful ascent by stone-steps, be set on either side with small Marble
Columns and other (arched) stone-worke was intended or how used in former
time. If I may speak my opinion, I shall tell you (and I think rightly) what
it was.

There was (you must know then) before the Dissolution (as by Saint Benets Rule
there ought to be) Hospitality kept and intertainment affoorded and allowed
both at Bed and Board unto such strangers (Travelers and Pilgrims especially)
as resorting to the Monastery should crave it of the Monks: and consequently
there was a place in the Monastery set apart for that purpose. This place of
receipt they called Aula and Camera Hospitum. Now I am persuaded the Aula
Hospitum.
present building was that Aula and Camera Hospitum. I will give you my reasons.

First it stood and stands most conveniently for the purpose, 1.
being by the Court-Gate, remote from the Monastery which strangers were not to
pry into. And Archbishop Winchelsey his Statutes Lib. Ms. eccles. Cant.
making mention of the place, seem to intimate the standing of it within the
Court. Item aula Hospitum and paralitorium and quaecunque officia ac domus
exterioris curiae, etc. Say the same Stat.

Secondly the Cellerar had charge of it. Now the Pentice or Entry between the
Court-Gate and his Hall did (as 2.
it were) make them meet.

Thirdly the present building was not only a Hall, but 3.
divided (as appears by it) into an Hall and a Chamber (or Parlor) so to
accommodate the entertained guest with both Bed and Board, and what do the
same Winch. Statutes call it but Aula Hospitum and Paralitorium? as you see
before.

I must acknowledge to have received some light also in this matter from the
following story. A Keeper of Prince Edwards Wardrobe (say the Records of the
Church) in the great North-Hall of the Court, in the year 1304. kills another
man within the precinct, and flies straight way to the Chamber of the Hall, and
though he were required by the Steward of the Church, refuses to come forth,
or to suffer any to enter. Whereupon the Prince being consulted, another Keeper
is sent down, and order given to have the malefactor brought to his trial by
a prefixed time. In the interim the Justices in a Sessions holden ante portam
castri Cant. inquire of the murder and find it. Shortly after the malefactor
is brought before some Judges regia placita tenentibus in the Archbishops
Palace, where it being demanded of him how he would or could acquit himself, he
answers that being a Clerk, he cannot sine Ordinario suorespondere: whereupon,
being first found guilty of the fact by the Jury, he is, as convicted,
delivered over to the Ordinary, and sent to the Archbishops Jail at Maidstone.
Thus goes the Story. Now I collect from hence that the Prince himself had been
received here, and intertainment affoorded to his wardrobe after his departure;
a use suitable to the condition of the place in hand. By this time (I trow) you
see enough to persuade your belief of this building to have been the Aula and
Camera Hospitum. And now knowing what it was I shall next acquaint you with
what I further read concerning it in the Church-records.

The Hall had her p^oper and peculiar Steward; who, under the Cellerar, was to
see to the accommodation of the guests with all necessaries according to the
Statutes and Customs of the Monastery. He was called Senescallus aulae
Hospitum. Here was intertainment to be had of charity, for religious and
secular guests, and that (by the Statutes of Archbishop Winchelsey) for the
space of at least a day and a night: horse and man. On the top or by the foot
of the Staire-case of stone vaulted underneath, anciently hung a gate, whereof
(it seems) there was a constant keeper, who had his chamber hard at hand. For
in the year 1382. I find the Prior and Covent make a donation Custodiae
portae interioris juxta aulam Hospitii servienti and armigero suo, cum camera
dicti Custodis etc. So much of this pile.

But by the way we must allow the Steward of the Liberties Stewards court.
a part of this building for the keeping of his Courts, which have been holden
here from good antiquity: witness these words extracted from a Charter In
Archivis Eccles. Cant.
of H. 6. de Curia tenenda etc. Sciatis (says he) quod nos considerantes quod
Prior eccl. and ejusd. loci conven us and praedecessores sui usi sunt and
cosueverunt a tempore quo hominum memoria non existat habere tenere apud
North-hall, inframetas and septa eccles. sive Prioratus praedicti coram Ballivo
suo pro tempore existente do tribus septimanis, in tres septimanas quandam
curiam vocatam High Court, and in eadem Curiatenere, audire et terminare
placitae etc. This Court (it seems) was first set up with the Archbishops
li^ence many ages since. Concessit autem eis Archiepiscopus gratis habere
curiam suam de propriis hominibus eorum, as Roger Hoveden has it speaking of
Archbishop Hubert, sub anno 1200, and recording there the agreement made
between him and the Monks, first falling out about the Chapel at Lambeth. I
have nothing more to observe of this Court, except the smallness of the room
that it is kept in. The reason whereof may be this. The Dissolution diminishing
the revenues of the Church made the Churchmen (I suppose) to lessen their Court.

Hard by this place, in times past and until the Dissolution stood the Almnery
or Elemosinary of the Church, being Almnery.
the place where the poor were daily fed with the remains of such fare as
came from the Refectory and other tables kept within the Monastery. Omnes etiam
reliquiae and fragmenta tam ciborum quam potuum Refectorii, camerae Prioris,
mensae Magistri, Infirmitorii and etiam Aulae hospitum in vasis ad id congruis
colligantur, and ad elemosinam plene and integre reserventur, in usus alios
quam puram elemosinam nullatenus convertenda: say the private Stat. of this
Church made by Archbishop Winchelsey. Agreeable to that ordinance in the
Provincial Constitutions Cap. omn^m. de sta^ regular.
Omnia autem victualia religiosis apponenda sine subtractione aliqua eis
apponantur tam in conventu quam alibi ubi reficiuntur. Et de omnibus appositis
totum residuum sine diminutione aliqua cedat in elemosinam per Elemosinarium
egentibus simul erogandum. It a quod nec Abbas nec Prior nec Elemosinarius
possit contra hoc dispensare. The Monk that was entrusted with the care of this
place was called Decanus Elemosinariae and Elemosinarius Ecclesiae, the
Church-Almoner. King Hen. 2. by his Charter, gave unto the Monks, for and in
augmentation of this their Almnery, the ground between Northgate and Queningate
as is before showed. And Archbishop Richard (Beckets immediate Suecessor)
appropriated to this Almnery (or, if you will, to the Monks ad usum
Elemosinariae) the Churches of Monkton, Eastry, Mepham, and Eynesford. Whereof
Harpesfield thus. Hist. eccles. Secul. 12.
Magnum tamen sui (says he speaking of that Archbishop) pauperibus quibus
liberaliter perpetuae elecmosina prospexit, ad quem usum appropriavit ecclesias
Monakensem, Estriensem, Mephamensem and Eynesfordensem, desiderium reliquit.
Afterward Lib. eccles. Cant.
in the year 1319. 11. Ed. 2. Henricus de Estria the then Prior of the Church,
within the precinct of the same Almnery, erected a Chapel and founded a
Chantery of six Priests to pray, sing and celebrate for the souls of King Ed.
1. Ed. 2. Archbishop Lanfranc and Winchelsey, with the Founder himself and
someothers, confirmed by the Kings Charter. Contiguous whereunto he built a
Chamber for the Priests, and afterward. i. in the year 1327. his Successor,
with consent of the Covent assigned and appropriated the Parsonage of
Westcliffe by Dover to the Almnery for ever, for the sustentation of the
Priests, and the maintenance of the Chapel, and Chamber, etc. Which both are
as yet standing, but converted to the Free-Schoole and housing for the
Schoolmasters. This Almnery was taken and pared from the Church at the
Dissolution, but restored by Queen Mary, through her Cousin Cardinal Pooles
means. In the Charter of which restitution (...) mention is made of a Mint
there, sometimes kept by her Father (Hen. 8.) from whence it took (as I told
you An Archivis ^esue pr^d.
formerly) and to this day retains the name of the Mint or Mint-yard. And thus
I have done with the third particular head of my discourse concerning the
Church: and come in the next place to (my third particular) the Catalogue of
benefactors.

A Catalogue of the principal benefactors to the Church.
SOme, it is well known, have written whole Books of 4. Particular.
the foundations, gifts, donations, and endowments of Churches, Colleges, and
the like. Witness (amongst the rest) for the parts of Germany chiefly, the
Codex donationum written by Miraeus. And all this to very good ends, namely to
preserve the honor and memory of such pious and devout benefactors, and to
commend the worthy example of their zeal and piety to the imitation both of
the present and future ages, at home and abroad. And for the very same purpose
have I pitched upon the ensuing Catalogue, containing the goodly company of
pious benefactors to the Church of Canterbury, with a brief memorial of their
several gifts, as I find them there upon Record.

Donationes Maneriorum and Ecclesiarum ecclesiae Christi Cantuarie^. and nomina
donantium, una cum privilegiis and libertat' eid. eccles. concessis.
EThelbertus Rex, Anno regni sui xxxv. ad fidem Christi per Palatium regium in
Cantuar.
sanct. Augustinum conversus, statim Palatium suum eidem Augustino and
successoribus suis infra Civitatem Doroberniam perpetue dedit, ut ibi sedem
Metropolitanam in evum haberent In quofundata est ecclesia Cantuarien. and in
nomine sancti salvatoris dedicata. As in another Ms. of the Church. Adesham.
, quam beatus Gregorius primam totius regni esse decrevit and confirmavit, ut
sicut prima fuit fidem suscipiendo, prima ess^t in dignitate. Hoc donum fecit
rex Anno Domini. Dxcvii.

Ethelbaldus filius Ethelberti dedit monachis ejusdem ecclesiae manerium de
Adesham ad cibum, Anno Domini Dcxvi. cum campis, siluis, pascuis and omnibus
aliis ad villam illam rite pertinentibus, liber ab omnibus secularibus
servitiis, and fiscali tributo, exceptis istis tribus consuetudinibus,
expeditione, Pontis Arcisve constructione. i. communi labor de quo nullus
excipiebatur.

Anno Domini Dclxxx. Cedwalla Rex dedit Wilfrico Archiepiscopo Pageham.
Pageham, cum appendiciis ejus. scil. Slindon, Scrippaneg, Ceretun, Bucgrenora,
Beorgamstede, Chrismehamme, Mundanham aquilonare and aliud Mundanham.

Anno Domini Dclxxxvij. Cedwalla Rex cum conjuge sua Geddinge. Wodetone.
Keneldritha dedit Theodoro Archiepiscopo and familiae ecclesiae Christi in
Dor^bernia, Geddinge and Wodetone, labere sicut Adesham.

Anno Domini Dclxxxxiij. Withredus Rex Cantiae dedit terram Nunhelmestun.
quatuo^r aratrorum pro amore Dei and Brithwaldi Archiepiscopi, ecclesiae
beatae Mariae quae sita est apud Liminge, quae terra vocatur Nunhelmestun, L.
S. A. i Libere sicut Adesham. Piscaria de Lamhethe.


Anno Domini Dccxlj. Eadbriht Rex dedit ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia
capturam piscium in Lamhethe, and alia quaedam ecclesiae de Liminge, tempore
Cuthberti Archiepiscopi, L. S. A.

Anno Domini Dccxlvij. Eadbertus Rex Kanciae dedit ecclesiae de Reculure,
tempore Bregwini Archiepiscopi tributum unius navis in villa de Fordwic.

Anno Domini Dcclxxiiij. Off a Rex, Ianiberto Archiepiscopo Hlyden.
rogante, dedit monachis ecclesiae Christi Doroberniae Hlyden juxta Sandwicum,
L. S. A.

Eodem Anno Off a Rex totius Angliae dedit Ianiberto Archiepiscopo Hlyden.
ad ecclesiam Christi Dorober. terram trium aratrorum, quam Cantiam Anglice
dicunt three swolinges in occidentali paerteregionis quae dicitur Mersware, ubi
nominatur illa terra data Hlyden. Et signatum est hoc scriptum signis praedict.
Regis and Arch. episcopo, and similiter Kinedrithae reginae, trium Episcoporum,
quinque Abbatum, Edbald; Ducis and xi. Principum.

Wullafus dedit Bramling Monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Bramling.
qui illud habuit ex dono Edwlfi Regis idem donum confirmantis, ut scriptum
suum inde testatur.

Anno Domini Dcclxxxiiij. Eadmundus Rex Kanciae dedit Sheldwich.
Hwatrede Abbati de Reculure, and ejus familae ibidem degenti Scheldwihc, scil.
terram xij aratrorum. L. S. A.

Anno Domini Dccxc. Off a Rex Anglorum Anno regni sui xxxviij. ad instigationem
Athelardi Archiepiscopi, dedit ecclesiae sancti Salvatoris in Dorobernia xc.
tributaria terrae bipartita in duobus locis, lx in loco qui dicitur Lingahaese
and Gedding as, Lingahaese. Geddinges. Twicanham.
circa rivulum qui dicitur Fisces burna, and xxx in aquilonali ripa fluminis
Tamis, ubi appellat^r Twicanham: lx ad emendationem ecclesiae Salvatoris, and
xxx ad indumentum fratrum qui Deo serviunt in illa sancta ecclesia.

Anno Domini Dccxcj. Off a Rex dedit ecclesiae Christi Doroberniae, Otteford.
Yecham. Rokinge. Sandherst. Bocholt. Blean and al.
Otteford, and terram quindecim aratrorum in provincia Canciae nomine Yecham,
ad cibum monachorum. Perhamstede, Rokinge and Andred ad pascua porcorum.
Dunmalingdene, Sandherst, Smnthelmmgdene. Et in silvis qui dicuntur Bocholte
and Blean Heaubric. Et aliud inter torrentem nomine Eortburna^ and Aghne,
Orgariswike, treon, and pastum unius gregis juxta Theningden, and quinquaginta
porcorum b^nnan Smed^. Tenham.


Eodem anno. Cenulfus Rex, rogatu Athelardi Archiepiscopi Doroberniae dedit
vicario munere terram duodecim ara^rorum ^bi dicitur Tenham, ad Metropolem
Salvatoris ecclesiam in Dorobernia. Hanc munificentiam maxim fecit Rex quia
idem Archiepiscopus gratia recompensationis terram xij aratrorum dedit in loco
ubi dicitur Creges emilina.

Anno Domini Dccxcix. Cenewlfus Rex, Archiepiscopo Athelardo Cherring. Chert.
Burn and al.
rogante, ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia reddidit terras quas Off a Rex
abstulerat laniberto Archiepiscopo. scil. Cherring. Selebertes Chert ad
vestimentum monachorum. Brumgland and Burn. Terra in Cant.


Anno Domini Dccciiij. Cenulfus Rex and Rex Cuthredus dederunt ecclesiae de
Liminge, ubi jacet corpus beatae Eadburgae sex mansuras in civitate
Doroberniae, rogatu Athelardi Archiep.

Anno Domini Dcccv. Athel^rdus Archiep. dedit vel potius Burn.
restituit monachis ecclesiae Dorobern. villam dictam Burn, ad victum
monachorum, scil. terram quatuor aratrorum, quam terram prius homo bonus,
nomine Aldhun, qui in hac regali villae hujus civitatis Praefectus fuit,
praedictis monachis contulit ad vict^m, sed rapacitate Off ae Regis de eadem
terra privata est eadem ecclesia. L. S. A. i. Lihere sicut Adesham. Bocholt.


Eod. Anno Cuthredus Rex Canciae, cum licentia Cenulsi Regis Merciae, tempore
Wlfredi Archiep. dedit ecclesiae Christi Cant. terram duorum aratrorum, quae
dicitur Bocholte and Kingescualond. L. S. A.

Eod. Anno Cenulfus Rex dedit Wlfredo Archiepiscopo, ad epus Bixle.
ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia terram x aratrorum scil. Bixle. L. S. A.

Anno Domini Dcccix. Cenuifus Rex Canciae dedit Wlfredo Archiepisc.
Doroberniae, and monachis ecclesiae Christi, terram Bercham.
septem aratrorum, quae dicitur Bereham. L. S. A.

Anno Domini Dcccxj. Wifredus Archiepisc. emit a Cenulfo Gravene. Elmested. and
al.
Rege has terras, ad opus ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia, scil. Gravenea.
Cassingburnan. Ealmestede. Suuithunigland juxta Graven^, and Appingland. L. S.
A.

Anno Domini eod. Wlfredus Archiepisc. Doroberniae concambium Eastria pro Burn^.
fecit cum conventu suo de villa de Eastria pro Burn.

Anno Domini Dcccxiiij. Cenulfus Rex dedit Wlfredo Archiepiscopo, Binne.
and monachis in ecclesia Christi Doroberniae circiter xxx jugera inter duos
gremiales rivos fluminis quod dicitur Stour, and vocatur terra illa Binne. L.
S. A.

Lyfchild dedit M^ddeltone Wlfredo Archiepiscopo, and monachis Meltone.
ecclesiae Christi Cant. and postea scil. Anno Dom. Dcccxxij. Cenulfus Rex
Merciorum idem donum confirmavit, ab omni seculari gravitate liberum, and
fiscali tributo.

Anno Domini Dcccxxij. Cenulfus Rex dedit Wlfredo Archiepisc. Shaldeford.
Coppanstan. Gretamarsc. and Shaldeford. L. S. M. i. Libere sicut Meltone.
Godm^rsham.
.

Eod. Anno Beornulfus Rex Merciorum dedit ecclesiae Christi Godmersham, ad
victum and vestitum monachorum, rogante Wlfredo Archiep. L. S. A.

Eod. Anno Wlfredus Archiep. Doroberniae concilium celebravit Harghes. Gedding.
Cu^be, and al.
in loco praeclaro qui dicitur Clovesho, present Beornulpho Rege Merciorum;
super liberate ecclesiae, ubi idem Archiepiscopus recuteravit quasdam terras
ecclesiae Christi Dorobe^ ablatis, scil. Harghes, Herefordingland, Wambelean,
Gedding and Cumbe.

Anno Domini Dcccxxiij. Cenulfus Rex dedit Wlfredo Archiep. (...) in Cant. and
^a.
quandam terram infra moenia urbis Doroberniae, s^l. lx pedum in longitud. and
xxx pedum in latitud. partem etiam extra civitatem ab aquilone Civitatis xxx
jugera, xxv in arido campo and v agros prati.

Lifstanus dedit Southcherch monachis ecclesiae Christi Cant. Southcherch.
Et postea Celulfus Rex Merciorum dedit eisdem, et idem donum confirmavit.

Anno Dom. Dcccxxiiij. Wlfredus Archiepiscopus dedit Monachis Eghethorne and
Langdone pro (...)
ecclesiae Christi Dorobern. Eghethorne et Langedone pro commutatione de
Bereham.

Item idem dedit eisdem villam quae dicitur Eastur-Waldington Terra in Cant.
in occidentali plaga ecclesiae Christi, infra moenia urbis Doroberniae, intra
ripam fluminis Stoure.

Item idem dedit eisdem terram quae vocatur Folquingland in Byri.
regione Estriae. Ruriculum quoque unius aratri in loco qui vocatur Byri.

Anno Domini Dcccxxviij. Wiglaf Rex Merciorum dedit ecclesiae Brotewelle.
Christi Dorobern. et Wlfredo Archiep. ejusd. ecclesiae Brotewelle in Midd^. L.
S. A.

Anno Domini Dcccxxx. Werhardus Presbyter praepotens in Anglia, de praecepto
Archiepiscopi dedit Monachis ecclesiae Christi Harghes. Otteford. and alia.
Dorobern. terras prius ablatas, scil. Harghes Ciiij. hydas. Otteford C. hydas.
Graveneyam xxxij. hydas. Burnan xliiij. hydas. Seswalun x. hydas. Bereham xxxvj
hydas etc.

Anno Domini Dcccxxxij. Rex Athulfus instinctu Ceolnothi Ebbeney and alia.
Archiepisc. dedit Ebbeneyam, Deferthesia, Mistanham, Langebornam,
Blakebornhamme, Plegimunhamme, Ofnehamme, and silvam quae vocatur Ostrynden,
and villam juxta civitatem Doroberniae quae vocatur Bertun, ad quam pertinent
quinque jugera and duo prata apud Scertingan, and aliud apud Tanintun. omnia L.
S. A..i. Libere sicut Adesh^m. Lose.


Ethelwlfus Rex dedit Lose Suete viduae and filiae ejus, and illae dederunt
Monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. and est de vestitu eorum.

Anno Domini Dcccxxxv. Cinnewarra Abbatissa dedit Humberto Duci terram juris
sui, nomine Wircesmuth, ea condition ut omni anno det ecclesiae Christi in
Dorobernia pro gablo, plumbum trecentorum solidorum ad opus ejusdem ecclesiae
Archiepiscopo Ceolnotho, and successoribus suis in perpetuum.

Eod' anno Hadleghe in Suthfolca data fuit per Elsledam sciente and
consentiente Ethelredo Rege. Hadleghe.


Anno Domini Dcccxxxviij. Ecgbertus and Athelwlfus Rex Mallings.
filius ejus dederunt ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia Mallings in Suthsexan,
quod viz. manerium prius eidem ecclesiae dedit Baldredus Rex, sed quia non fuit
de consensu magnatum regni, donum id non potuit valere. Et ideo isto anno in
concilio apud Kingstone celebrato ab Archiepisc. Doroberniae Ceolnotho
restauratum est ecclesiae antedictae. L. S. A.

Anno Domini Dcccxxxix. Ceolnothus Archiepiscopus propria pecunia sua emit
Chert a quodam principe vocato Halethe Chert.
concedente Rege Athelwlfo, and eandem villam eccles. Christi Monachis dedit.
L. S. A.

Anno Domini Dcccxxxix. Athulfus Rex dedit Ceolnotho Archiepiscopo Eastreasta
Delham, scil. vij jugera, quae viz. terra adjacet ecclesiae S. Mariae de
Liming. L. S. A.

Anno Domini Dccclxxj. Elfredus Dux dedit Ethelredo Archiepiscopo Chertham.
Doroberniae, and Monachis ejusdem ecclesiae villam de Chertham, ad vestitum
Monachor. ut patet per chartam suam inde confectam, quam potius Codicellum
dicimus.

Anno Domini Dcccxcv. Wefingwerhs juxta flumen quod dicitur Rome^eya datum fuit
per Plegmundum Archiepiscopum ecclesiae Christi.

Anno Domini Dcccxlix. Another Ms. calls it Etheredsh^. [He^h.
Heth dat' fuit per Elfredum Regem Plegmundo Archiepiscopo, and successoribus
suis ad opus ecclesiae et Monachorum.

Anno Domini Dccccxxiij. Wlfelmus Archiepiscopus agros comparavit ab incolis
qui nominantur Waldland and Wlfre^ingland, juxta locum qui dicitur Rethercheap,
extra portas Doroberniae.

Anno Domini Dccccxxvij. Athelstanus Rex, pro anima patris Folks^ane.
sui Edwardi and honor Wlfelmi Archisacerdocis Doroberniae, dedit Folkstane
sitam super mare, ubi quondam fuit Monasterium and Abbatia sanctarum virginum,
ubi etiam sepulta est S. Eanswitha, qui locus a Paganis destructus fuit. L. S.
A i. Libere sicut Adesham.
.

Anno Dom. Dccccxxxiiij. Eylfleda dedit Hamme Ecclesiae Hamme.
Christi Cant.

Anno Domini Dccccxxxix. Winhelmus dedit Wlfelmo Archiep. Terra a meridi^
Doroberniae.
Dorober. xj. agros Iugera, as in another Ms.
a meridie Doroberniae. Et est terra illa circumdata his terminis. Ab orient
Adredsland, ab aquilone Kingsland, a meridie publica strata, and ab occidente
Brihtelmesland. Factum fuit donum istud in praesentia Athelstani Regis.

Anno Domini Dccccxl. Eadulfus Dux per concessionem Regis Mepeham.
Athelstani, praesente Wlfelmo Archiep. dedit Mepeham. L. S. M.

Anno Domini Dccccxlj. Prestantun. Wingham. Wolecumbe, Prestantun Wingham and
al.
Swerdlingan, Bosington and Graveney restitut. ecclesiae per Eadmundum Regem,
and Eadredum fratrem ejus, and Edwinum filium ejusdem Edmundi.

Athelstan Rex dedit villam de Terrings sitam super mare in Terrings.
Suthsexan, ecclesiae Christi in Dorob. L. S. A.

Anno Domini Dccccxliij. Eardulfus Rex Cantiae dedit Heahberthae Abbati de
Racul and ejus familiae, scil. Monachis consistentibus in illo loco vocato
Raculfre, et etiam unius aratri in loco qui nominatur Perhamstede.

Anno Domini Dccccxlvij. Pecchings dat' ecclesiae per Pecchinges.
Wlfricum, present et consentiente Rege Edredo, matreque ejus Regina Eadgiva,
Odoneque Archiepiscopo Doroberniae, Wlstano Archiepiscopo Eborac. et aliis
multis nobilibus. L. S. A.

Anno Domini Dccccxlix. Edredus Rex present Odone Archiepiscopo Monasterium
Raculfense.
Eadgiva regina matre ipsius Edredi dedit ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia
Monasterium Raculfense bis denis semisque estimatum cassatis cum omnibus
pertinen' sive litorum sive camporum, agrorum, saltunmve. L. S. A.

Anno Dom. Dcccclviij. Villa de Iccham data fuit per Athelwardum, Iccham.
praesente Odone Archiepiscopo.

Anno Domini Dcccclxj. Ediva regina, alio nomine dicta Meapham and alia.
Edgiva, scil. matter Eadmundi et Eadredi Regum dedit Mepeham, Coulings,
Osterland, Leanham, Pecham, Farnleghe Monketone, et Aldintone, huic ecclesiae.

Anno Domini Dcccclxiij. Dunstanus, de consensu regis Edgari dedit huic eccles.
Fengg' vij. aratrorum, quod Anglice dicitur vij hides emptorum de Ingelram
Optimato ejusdem regis.

Anno Domini Dcccclxiiij. Ethelstanus, consentiente et concedente Archiepise.
Dunstano dedit ecclesiae Sanctae Mariae de Liminges, ubi sepulta est sancta
Eadburga terram unius jugeri quae Vleham nominatur.

Anno Domini Dcccclxxix. Egelredus Rex dedit ecclesiae in Sandwich. Estrey.
Dorobernia Sandwich, ad vestitum Monachorum, et Estreyam ad cibum Monachor. L.
S. A.

Anno Domini Dccccxcj. Aschwinus Dorsetensis Episcopus Risbergh.
reddidit ecclesiae Christi Alfrico Archiepiscopo Risbergh.

Anno Domini Dccccxcvij. Elfgiva regina dedit huic ecclesiae Newinton et
Brotewelle in regione de Oxinaford, et calicem Newinton and Brotewell. and al.
aureum cum patena aurea, in quo sunt xiij. marcae de puro auro, et duo
dorsalia de pallio, et duas capas de pallio cum tassellis auro paratis. L. S.
A.i. Libere sicut Adesham.
.

AoD. Dcccclxxx Mxv. as in another Ms. Holingburne.
. Athelstanus filius Aelthredi, de consensu et licentia ejus dedit ecclesiae
Doroberniae Holingburnan, ad cibum Monachorum, quam villam emit a patre suo. L.
S. A.

Edmundus Rex filius Edivae Reginae dedit Preston.i. Copton. Preston and
Eylwarton. Laling. Illegh. Hadlegh.
, et Eylwartone Monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. et est de victu little.

AoD. Dccccxlj. Dux Brithnotus iturus ad bellum contra paganos, dedit Laling,
Illegh, Hadlegh, consentiente Rege Ethelredo, present Sirico Archiep. Dorober.

AoD. Miijo Ethelredus Dux dedit ecclesiae Christi particulam Terra in Cant.
and extra.
terrae in Dorobernia, quam sibi Rex Ethelredus dedit, xv. virgarum in
longitud. et viij. virgarum in latitud. et vj. agros extra murum. Termini
terrae infra murum sunt hii. In orientali part terra Regis, in part australi
placea civitatis. In occidente terra ecclesiae Christi. In aquilone coemiterium
Christi.

AoD. Mvj. Ethelredus Rex confirmavit omnes donationes Cons^matio Donationum
and Libertatum.
terrarum quae datae sunt ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia, et super hoc
scriptum suum dedit Elfrico Archiep. cumpiscationibus, venationibus,
aucupationibus, et aliis omnibus libertatibus, exceptis illis tribus in
Adesham, signo ipsius confirmatum, una cum xxxj. signis optimatum suorum.

Eod' anno Ethelric and Leofwina, annuente rege Ethelredo, Bocking and Mersey.
dederunt Bocking et Me^sey ad victum Monachorum.

Anno Domini Mx. Elfegus Archiepiscopus adauxit ecclesiae Werehorne and alia.
Christi Cantuar. quandam terram, nomine Werehorne, Fremingham et Wodetone, et
est de vestitu Monachorum. L. S. M..i. Libero sicut Milton. Me^steham. and
Cheyham.
.

Anno Dom. Mxviij. Mesteham et Cheyham, duae villae in regione Surreyae dat.
per Ethelstanum, qui et Livingus.

Eod. anno Knuht Rex^ dedit Livingo Archiepiscopo, ad opu^ ecclesiae, silvam
Heseleherst. L. S. A.

AoD. Mxxiij. Kanutus Rex dedit ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia Portus Sandwici.
portum de Sandwico cum corona sua aurea, quae adhuc servatur in capite crucis
majoris in navi ejusdem ecclesia. Portum illum dedit Monachis cum thelonio
ejusdem villae, wrecco maris and omnibus aliis consuetudinibus ad portum illum
pertinentibus.

AoD. Mxxxij. Apuldre, Orpintone, Palstre, and Wihttrischeham dat' ecclesiae
per Edsinum presbiterum Episcopum S. Martini, quae ecclesia sita est extra
Civitatem Doroberniae in Orient. as another Ms. has it. Apuldre and alia.
Horsleghe. Heth and Saltwode. Godmersham.
, consentientibus Canuto Rege, and Elfgiva, Regina sua.

AoD. Mxxxvj. Theored. consentiente and concedente Knuto, dedit Horsleghe, ad
opus and victum Monachorum. L. S. A.

Memorandum quod idem Rex Kanute, confirmavit privilegia praedecessorum suorum
legalia in libertatem Monasteriorum infra Kanciam positorum.

Eod. anno. Hethe and Saltwode data ecclesiae per unum de principibus Angliae,
nomine Haldene.

Eod' anno. Godmersham data fuit ecclesiae per Egelnothum Archiepiscopum.

AoD. Mxxxviij. Knuthus Rex reddidit ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia Folkstane.
villam de Folkstane, quam olim Rex Atbelstanus filius regis Edwardi eidem
ecclesiae dedit, ea condition hanc donationem fecit Knutus, ut nunquam
alienaretur eadem villa per Archiepiscopum sine licentia Regis and Monachorum.

Wlstanus, cognomento Wildepreost, annuente Domino suo Hardeknuto, Thurrock.
dedit huic ecclesiae Thurrock.

AoD. Mxliiij. Egelricus Big dedit huic eccles. Chert, Stouting and Meletune.
Chert. Stouting. Meletune


A. D. Mxlvj. Wlfgith relicta Elfwine, and Godwinus, consentiente sancto
Edwardo Rege dederunt ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia, Stistede. Goggeshale.
Stistede and Goggeshale in Essex, ad victum Monachorum. L. S. A.

A. D. Mlj. Villae de Chertham and Waleworth concessae and confirmatae Chertham
and Waleworth.
fueru^ per sanctum Edwardum, cum maneriis jam habitis, and multis libertatibus
concessis. Praedictam villam Walworth Edmundus Rex dedit cuidam joculatori suo
nomine Hitardo. Tempore tandem Regis Edwardi idem Hitardus volens limina
Apostolorum Romae venit ad ecclesiam Christi in Dorobernia, and per consensum
and concessionem Regis Edwardi dedit candem villam eidem ecclesiae Christi,
chartam quoque ejusdem terrae posuit super altar Christi etc.

Siwardus and Matildis uxor ejus dederunt Mersham Monachis Mersham.
ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Sancto Edwardo Rege anno Domini Mlj. per scriptum
suum idem donum confirmante, and est de cibo little.

Eod' anno. Sake. Sokne and alia libertates concessae and confirmatae
Libertates.
per S. Edwardum.

Carta ejusdem de libera Warenna.

A. D. Mliij. Brihtmerus civis London dedit ecclesiae Cantuar. Messuagium and
Ecclesia in Civitate London.
messuagium suum apud Gerscherche, and de licentia and consensu Stigandi
Archiepiscopi and Godrici Decani dedit eidem ecclesiam omnium Sanctorum,
testimonio Liefstani Portreve and aliorum.

Willielmus Rex conquestor reddidit manerium de Haltone in Haltone.
comitatu Bock. Monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. antiquis and modernis
temporibus a jure ipsius ecclesiae ablatum, and multa alia ut in martilagio Ita
Ms.
continetur. Et before scriptum suuminde confectum testatur. Pro Deo and
salute animae suae gratis hoc fecit, and sine ullo pretio.

A. D. Mlxxv. Conquestor confirmavit donum fratris sui Odonis Episcopi
Baiocensis, and Comitis Canciae de domibus in Sandwico Domus in Sandwico.
datis ecclesiae etc.

Carta Regis Wmi Conquestoris ut Monachi Cantuar. omnes terras suas libere
teneant.

Similis Carta Regis Hen. 1. and 2.

AoD. Mlxxiij. Conquestor confirmavit Lanfranco Archiepisc. omnes consuetudines
in ecclesia de Newenton antecessorum ejus, and in ecclesia sancti Martini de
Doffris, and in Scapeia.

Charta ejusdem de eadem in omnibus Dominicis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar.

Charta ejusdem Anglice and Latin de libertatibus ecclesiae

Charta ejusd' de libertatibus quas S. Edw. concessit eid' ecclesiae. Christi
Cant. concessis.

Charta Regis Regis Henrici primi de eisdem.

Charta Regis Richardi de eisdem.

Karlemannus levita dedit Broke ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. and Broke.
postea Hen. Rex 1mus idem manerium per chartam suam eidem ecclesiae contulit,
and Hen. Rex 2dus per chartam suam idem manerium confirmavit.

AoD. Mevj. Rex Hen. 1. rogatus ab Anselmo Archiep. reddidit Slindone.
ecclesiae Christi Cant. villam quae vocatur Slindone in Suthsex.

Carta Regis Hen. 1. Hen. 3. and Richardi de Geld and Danegeld.

Anselmus Archiepiscopus Cantuar. reddidit monachis ecclesiae suae medietatem
altaris Christi, quam in manu sua habebat post Medietas Altaris.
mortem praedecessoris sui Lanfranci Archiepiscopi, qui eis aliam medietatem,
cognita veritate quod ad illos pertineret, in vita sua reddiderat. Similiter
and manerium de Stistede eis reddidit idem Anselmus, eo quod ad eos pertinere
scitur. ^ede.


AoD. Mcxxx. Henricus Rex primus dedit ecclesiam sancti ecclesia Sancti Martini
Dovor
Martini Dover monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. in dedicatione ejusdem
ecclesiae Cant. cum omnibus pertinen. and provenien. tam in terra quam in
imari, ut inde chartatestatur.

Ao Eodem Wmus Archiep. dedit octo libras annui redditus de manerio suo de
Reculvere, monachis ecclesiae Christi Cant. in dotem Reculver octo libr.
ipsius ecclesiae Cant.in perpetuum and hoc tempore Regis Hen. 1. quod donum S.
Edmundus Archiepisc. postea confirmavit.

AoD. Mcxlvj. Henricus de Rya seisivit ecclesiam Christi Cant. de manerio de
Diepham per quendam cultellum super altari Diepham.
Christi, presentibus Teobaldo Archiepiscopo, Waltero Priore aliisque multis,
and acceptus fuit in fraternitatem a praedictis Archiepisc. and Prio. Anno
supradicto. Quam donationem. Hen. Rex. 2. confirmavit.

Manerium de Berkesore datum per Stephanum Regem, ad inveniendum lumen ante
capsam beati Anselm^ Archiepiscopi. Berkesore.


Henricus Rex 2dus dedit and confirmavit Deo, beato Thomae, and ecclesiae S.
Trinitatis Cantuar. xv libratas redditus in Berkesor, and in Hokis aisse, and
Rissendona, and xxv libratas redditus in Leisdona, Berkesore. Leisdone etc.
and ita libere etc. sicut ego etc.

Wmus Tracy dedit Doccombe tempore Regis Hen. 2di. idem donum comfirmantis.
Doccomb.


Carta Regis Hen. 2di. de. via circa murum Cemiterii nostri.

Carta ejusdem de terra nostra super montes de Hollingborne. Hollingbourne.


Carta ejusdem de libertatibus nostris libere tenendis.

Carta Regis Stephani de eisdem.

AoD. Mcxcix. Richardus Rex primus, anno regni sui primo, dedit Boscum de
Blean, monachis eccleslae Christi Cant. per unum Boscus de Blean.
par cirotecarum, salvo tamen uno summario quem pater ejusdem regis concessit
ecclesiae and canonicis S. Gregorii in eod. bosco.

Duae cartae Alienorae reginae de xiij tenementis in Iudaismo Tenamenta in Cant.
Cantuar.

Carta ejusdem de maneriis de Terstane and Westfarlegh, cum advocationibus
Terstane and alia pro Sandwico.
ecclesiarum de Westclive and Westerham pro portu de Sandwice, quam donationem.
Edwardus Rex primus per cartam suam confirmavit.

AoD. Mcccxxvj. Dominus Walterus Raynold Archiepisc. de Caldecote. Torholte.
licentia speciali Ed. Regis 3. dedit monachis ecclesiae Christi Cant. manerium
de Caldecote juxta Cantuar. cum bosco de Torholte, and cum omnibus and singulis
libertatibus, etc.

Ao R. R. Ed. 3. xxvijo. Richardus Bovyton, de licentia speciali Bovyton.
ejusdem regis dedit manerium suum de Bovyton, cum omnibus pertinen. in villa
de Bocking in Com. Essex, Priori and Conventui ecclesiae Christi Cant.

Dominus Edus Princeps filius Regis Ed. 3. dedit monachis ecclesiae Cant.
manerium de Fawkeshall, codem rege Edwardo idem Fawkshall.
donum confirmante, ad sustentationem duorum Capellanorum in eadem ecclesia
celebratur.

Edwardus 3. Anno Regni sui xxxviij. dedit in escambium Borle pro Sandwico.
Prio. and Conventui ecclesiae Christi Cant. manerium de Borle in Comitatu
Essex, pro consuetudinibus and redditibus una cum omnibus juribus etc. quae
iidem P. and C. habuer' vel habere aliquo modo potuerunt in villa and portu de
Sandwico, cum aliis redditibus in insula de scapeia, ut in carta, etc.

Carta Regis Hen. 4. ne furagium capiatur ubicunque in Comitatu Canciae ad
equos sustentandos in castello Dovor.

Item carta ejusdem regis, de via infra murum Civitatis Cant. quae ducere
solebat de Northgate usque Queningate.

Ecclesiae appropriatae ecclesiae Christi Cantuar.
Hubertus Archiepiscopus dedit ecclesiam de Halstow, ad officium Praecentoris,
pro reparatione librorum ecclesiae Christi Halstowe.
Cantuar. and postea Bonifacius Archiepiscopus eandem ecclesiam per sigillum
suum confirmavit.

Stephanus Archiepiscopus dedit ecclesiam de Freningham, and per sigillum suum
confirmavit, ad opus Elemosinariae ecclesiae Christi Freningham.
Cantuar. Anno Domini Mccxxv.

Sanctus Edmundus Archiepisc. dedit ecclesiam de Fairfield Fairfield.
ecclesiae Christi Cant. and per sigillum suum confirmavit Anno Pontificat. sui
quarto.

Gregorius Papa ix. de assensu Episcopi Norwicen. and Capituli ejusdem
ecclesiae, confirmavit ecclesiam de Deipham ad opus ecclesiae Deipham.
Christi Cantuar. ut patet per bullam suam inde confectam. Anno Pontificat.
suiprimo.

Idem Papa appropriavit ecclesiam de Sesaltre monachis ecclesiae Christi
Cantuar. in sustentationem eorum, ut patet per bullam etc. Sesaltre.
Anno Pontificatus sui xmo.

Edwardus Rex 2dus Anno Regni sui xixno appropriavit ecclesiam de Esshe in
Comitatu Suffolc. ad novam capellam Elemosinariae Esshe.
ecclesiae Christi Cantuar.

Simon Islep Archiepiscopus, de speciali confirmatione Regis Edwardi 3tii. Anno
ejusdem regis xxxixno. fecit appropriari ecclesias Monketon. Eastry.
de Monketon and Eastry monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar.

Idem Archiep. de speciali confirmatione and licentia ejusdem Regis, Anno Regni
sui xlvjo. fecit appropriari ecclesiam de Pageham Pageham.
in augmentationem scolarium studentium Oxoniae in Collegio ecclesiae Christi
Cantuar.

Willielmus Courtney Archiepis. de speciali licentia Regis Ricardi secundi,
Anno regni sui nono, fecit appropriari ecclesiam de Mepeham Mepeham.
monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar.

Ao D. Mcccxcvij. Dom. Thomas Arundell Cantuar. Archiepisc. de licentia
speciali Regis Ricardi 2di. fecit appropriari Godmersham.
ecclesiam de Godmersham monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. ad fabricam
ecclesiae Christi praedictae.

Ao D. Mcccco. Idem Archiepiscopus, de licentia speciali regis Westwell.
Hen. 4ti. regni vero sui Anno 2do. fecit appropriari ecclesiam de Westwell
monachis ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. ad habendum vacationem ecclesiae de
Aldermancherche London, ad opus ecclesiae Christi praedictae.

De ecclesiis de Westerham and Westclyve vide cum maneriis de Westfarlegh and
Terstane, ut supra patet. Westerham Westelyve.


Here the Record ends: much sooner (I confess) then it should. For a multitude
of benefactors there were, both before and after this time that are here
omitted. But (I take it) these were all or the most of the chief, and it would
have been an endless work to have mentioned all. In which regard, I hope, it
will not be expected that I should perfect the Catalogue. I pass therefore
from it.

And now am come to my Catalogue of the 1 Archbishops of the Church. 5.
Particular.
2 Priors 3 Archdeacons

Beginning with the Archbishops, let me set before you in the first place, a
few things very fit to be premised. viz.

1. The Antiquity of Archbishops in general, and the cause of their first
Institution. 2. The Antiquity of our Archbishops in particular, with the number
of Archbishops in England, in former time, and at this day.
FOr the first (the Antiquity of Archbishops, etc.) I shall not need take much
pains to search it out. For truth is, the Antiquity both of the name and
office of an Archbishop is already so fully laid down and proved to my hand by
the worthily admired Author of the Defense of the answer to the Admonition, and
so vindicated and cleared from the aspersion of Antichristianisme (wherewith
some late turbulent Innovators have been pleased falsely to stigmatize them)
and by his learned pen, who fetches and deriveth them (so venerable is their
Antiquity) from before the time of the Gospel public embracing by any Prince,
or in any Kingdom, and (if I mistake him not) the Office, though not the Name,
from the Apostolic times; and Bishop Bilson also, Bishop Downham, and many
others, as the learned well know, have so labored in this argument, that if I
shall further proceed in the observing of the Antiquity of Archbishops, I shall
but, as it were, actum agere. And therefore will it suffice that remissive, I
refer the reader to these men's Learned Labors, whom I have chosen to cite,
because the vulgar, whose only information I here intend, can more easily both
purchase and peruse them, their works like themselves speaking English. The
learned, I know, can further satisfy themselves in the point from Bertherius
in his Pithano^, and Morinus of late, in Ecclesiasticae Exercitationes, not to
mention diverse others. Of the former also, he may see those men answered, who
(relishing nothing but a Presbyterian-Vtopian parity in the Ministry) under
the pretense of zeal for the Reformation (as they term it) of disorders in
the Church Government by Archbishops etc. kick and carpe at the same, and upon
occasion which un-offered they take of the report of those, who to show the
original of Archbishops in the Church, say that they succeeded in the places
of the Archi-flamines (certain heathen Highpriests, or Arch-Priests, which
had the oversight of the manners of the Flamins, heathen Priests likewise, as
Judges over them: of whom Duarenus Tract. de Beneficiis.
, Alexander ab Alexandro Genial. Di^.
, and our Countryman Acts etc. Monum.
Fox with others make mention) collect and conclude thus. That the ministry of
the Gospel was framed by example of idolatrous and heathenish functions. Of my
forecited Authors the Defender of the Answer to the Admonition chiefly takes
these men to task. After what manner he encountreth their arguments would be
too prolix here to relate, and because his larger discourse is, in my opinion
well abridged and epitonized by Mr Mason: I have chosen rather to present you
with these words of his. Sed id demum (says he De Ministerio Anglican. lib. 2.
cap. 3. page 79.
) illos pessime habet quod Episcopi nostri atque Archiepiscopi seeds suas ad
Flaminum atque Archiflaminum Ethnicorum numerum aptatas habuisse dicuntur.
verum quid obsecro inde nascetur incommodi, si pulsis Idolorum cultoribus, very
Dei adoratores succedunt? Neque enim ulli loci Episcopatibus erigendis aptiores
quam maxima and frequentissimae Givitates. Ipsi Apostoli in nobilissimis
urbibus in quibus fuerant, aliquando Flamines and Archiflamines aut sacrorum
Praesides little non dissimiles Episcopos constituerunt, etc. Thus far Mr
Mason.

Some learned men (I am not ignorant) there have been and are, which will by
no means yield, that the Sees of our Bishops and Archbishops were adapted to
the number and places of the Flamins and Arch-flamins, arguing very stiffly
against it, by name Bishop Godwin in his Treatise of the Conversion of
Britannie, preceding his Catalogue of Bishops, Fol. 26. and some others. But
put case it be granted that they were so, and let these Cavillers (which
distasting our Aristrocracy (for such is our Church government Downings
Discourse Conclus. 1.. 6.
) and desirous, as it seems, of an Anarchy, a Church like to Plinies
Acephali, all body and no head) be allowed their so much desired premises; yet
still a non sequitur will attend on their conclusion. For were it (think they)
a good collection to say that because there is now a Minister of the Gospel
placed, where in the Popes time there was a massing Priest: Ergo the Ministry
of the Gospel is framed by the example of massing Priests? If they cannot
justly say so of Ministers, neither can they of Bishops and Archbishops. For
the reason is the same in both. As much to this purpose the said Author of the
Defense etc. has it Fol. 321. Agreeable whereunto is that of Bishop Hall
Apology against Brownists. Sect. 46.
. Christianity (says he) came in the room of Iudaisme, was it therefore
derived from it? I leave the judicious reader to give the answer.

And so enough of this, only pray we that Anarchy never get possession of our
Stage, lest Confusion shut up the Scene. And that maugre the malice of all
turbulent Innovators, our Church may still glory in this (the commendation
given her by the late learned Isaac Casaubon) that she, Exercitationes.
Inter vel excessu vel defectu peccantes mediam viam sequitur. And may continue
to deserve that Encomium given her of divine Herbertu. The Temple.


I joy dear Mother, when I view
Thy perfect lineaments and hiew,
Both sweet and bright.
Beauty in thee takes up her place,
And dates her letters from thy face,
When she does write.
A fine aspect in fit array,
Neither too mean, nor yet too gay,
Shows who is best.
Outlandish looks may not compare;
For all they either painted are,
Or else undrest.
She on the Hills, which wantonly
Allureth all in hope to be
By her preferred,
Has kissed so long her painted Shrines,
That even her face by kissing shines,
For her reward.
She in the Valley is so shye
Of dressing, that her hair does lie
About her ears.
While she avoides her neighbors pride,
She wholly goes on the other side,
And nothing wears.
But, dearest mother (what those miss)
The mean thy praise and glory is,
And long may be.
Blessed be God, whose love it was,
To double moate thee with his Grace,
And none but thee.
So much of the Antiquity of Archbishops.
The cause of their first Institution follows. And it was briefly this. As
the whole Hierarchy was first invented and instituted, ut Augustae illius ac
divinae Civitatis, quam ecclesiam vocamus, unitas ac tranquillitas melius
conservetur. So Duarenus Desacr. eccles. M^nister. and Ec^ficiis. lib. 1. cap 9.
, who there proceeds to show the further utility of the Hierarchicall order: so
consequently the final cause of ordaining an Archbishop (a principal member
of that Hierarchicall body) was to promote and advance the Churches peace. This
the often alleged Author of the Defense, etc. well knowing, says, that it is
the chief and principal office of an Archbishop, To keep Unity in the
Church, to compound contentions, to redress heresies, schisms, factions, etc.
as he gathers out of Saint Cyprian, as you may read Fol. 355. And so I have
done with my first Particular.

ANd come now to the other (The Antiquity of our Archbishops (...).
in particular, etc.) In the world (as I read in a French Author Gualterus.
, a Civilian, who has noted it out of the Provinciale omnium universi orbis
Ecclesiarum, a book so called, in which as he relates all the
Archbishoprickes in the whole world with their Suffraganes are particularly
reckoned up) there are to the number of an hundred and thirty Archbishoprickes.
For the truth of this relation (because it is a thing not so easily proved as
published) sit fides penes autorem. But sure I am that We in this Kingdom
acknowledge only two Archbishops to be in this our English-Orb at this day;
albeit in time past, namely from the conversion of King Lucius unto
Christianity foureteen hundred years ago and upwards, unto the coming of
Augustine (the Monk sent from Rome) into England, happening above one thousand
years since, that is, for the space of about 400. years together, there were
in this our Island, three Archbishops, Antiq. Brit. page 6. Acts etc. Mon. tom.
1. page 96. Lamb. Perambul. page 62. Catal of BB. page 181*
to wit of London, York and Caerleon. To Caerleon the Churches of Wales were
subject; Yorkes province was Scotland and the North of England; and lastly,
London had Jurisdiction over the rest of the Kingdom. In which three
principal Cities of the Realm (as Fox and Lambert affirm) were before Lucius
time, and in his reign also until his conversion, three Arch-flamins, who
were by Fugatius or Faganus, and Damianus or Dimianus (teachers or Preachers
sent by Eleutherius then Bishop of Rome into this Island for the conversion of
the King and people thereof) turned into Archbishops, about the year of our
redemption 180. Who, from and after that their plantation continued their
Archiepiscopall seats there, until such time as Augustine came over and was
entertained of Ethelbert the Kentish King, in the time of the Saxon Heptarchy.
For at that time (according to that prediction of Merlin. Dignitas Lovedoniae
adornabit Doroberniam) at the prayer of the Citizens of Dorobernia (as Mr Fox
has it) the Archbishopric Tom. 1. page 108.
of London (whose chair stood at Saint Peter's in Cornhill) was by Augustine
and Ethelbert translated from thence to Canterbury. Other reasons for the
translation of it are given by the Author of the Antiquitat. Brit Vbi supra.
. You shall have his words. Sed Augustinus etc. But Augustine (says he)
whether for Ethelbert the Kentish King, and his kind Hosts sake, whether
because London was not Ethelberts, but Seberts his Nephew, whether in charity
or good will to the Kentish-men for their kind intertainment of him, or
whether in regard that Kent was the prime and chief province of Britanny, to
the Dominion and Empire of whose King, the rest of the Kings were subject etc.
But Master Lambert Vbi supra.
says flatly (if we may believe him) that Augustine by great injury spoiled
London of this dignity of the Archbishops chair, bestowing the same upon
Canterbury. Indeed it appears, that Pope Gregory intending London for the
Metropolitan Seat of Augustines Archbishopricke, sent him his Pall thither.
But August. for many reasons (wherein you see Authors are divided) placed the
same at Canterb. Whereof afterward the Popes, Boniface, and Honorius, in their
several letters, the one to Iustus, the other to Honorius successors of Aug.
gave their express approbations. The first thus Malmesb. de gestis Pontificum
lib. 1. page 208.
. Id ipsum praecipientes firmamus, ut in Dorobernia civitate semper in posterum
Metropolitanus totius Britanniae locus habeatur; omnesque provinciae regni
Anglorum praefati loci Metropolitanae ecclesiae subjiciantur, immutilata and
perpetua stabilitate decrevimus. The latter in these words Ibidem. Page 209.
. Tuae ergo jurisdictioni subjici praecipimus omnes Angliae ecclesias and
regiones: and in civitate Dorobernia Metropolitanus locus and honor
Archiepisoopatus and caput omnium eccclesiarum Angliae semper in posterum
servetur; and a nulla persona per aliquam malam suasionem in alium locum
mutetur. Which thing, for the honor of Austin it pleased the wisdom of this
Nation afterward to establish and confirm; witness this passage in certain
letters of Kenulfus King of Mercia to Pope Leo Idem. De Gestis Regum Anglor. l.
1. page 31.
. Nam quia beatae recordationis Augustinus, qui verbum Dei (imperante beato
Gregorio) Anglorum genti ministrabat, and gloriosissime ecclesiis praefuit
Saxoniae, in eadem civitate diem obiit, and corpus illius in ecclesia beati
Petri Apostolorum principis (quam successor ejus Lawrentius sacravit) conditum
fuisset; visum est cunctis gentis nostrae sapientibus, quatenus in illa
civitate Metropolitanus honor haberetur, ubi corpus ejus pausat, qui his
partibus fidei veritatem inseruit. But enough of this matter; It is now time
that I come to my Catalogue. Wherein I purpose, beside their names, to repeat
little of what others have written of the Archbishops, unless in a brief
collection of their more memorable acts and places of burial, adding what
things of note I find omitted of others, with some pertinent observations.

Augustine. 1. Anno Dom. 596

Augustine (you see) was the first Archbishop of Canterbury. Whose whole story
is become so trite and vulgar that it needs no repetition. Wherefore let other
men's copious discourse of him and his acts excuse my silence of either.

Lawrence. 2.
Lawrence succeeded Austin, as it was appointed by Austin 611.
before his death, and sat till 616. and then died.

Mellitus. 3.
Mellitus succeeded him, and died in the year 624. Of the miraculous
preservation of our city from the fury of 619.
the flame, by whose prayers and presence, you may read Anno Dom.
in Bede's eccles. Hist. lib. 2. c. 7.

Iustus. 4.
Whom Iustus succeeded, governed the Sea 10 years, and then died. 624.


Honorius succeeded Iustus. This Archbishop is famous for his division of the
Kingdom into Parishes. For I read, 634. Division of Parishes.
that about the year of our redemption 636. this man first began to divide
England into Parishes: that so (says my Author Antiq. Britan in ejus vita.
) he might appoint particular Ministers to particular congregations. I read,
that Euaristus the first Bishop of Rome, who suffered martyrdom under Trajan
the Emperor, about the year 110. did the like in Rome. And Pet. Greg. Tholos.
de Benefic. cap. 4. number. 5.
that Dionysius, that blessed Martyr, Bishop of Rome circa annum 266. did
attempt to do the like throughout the whole Christian world Id. Tholos. ubi
supra.
. I find no question made of any of these three divisions of Parishes save
only of that of our Honorius; which Mr Seldom in his History of Tithes flatly
denies. His arguments you may find examined and answered by his
Animadversioner, to whom for brevity-sake I refer you, and come to the
History of the Council of Trent, the Author whereof delivers his opinion in
the generality of the point in hand thus. The division of Parishes (says he
Lib. 6. page 498.
) was first made by the people, when a certain number of inhabitants, having
received the true faith, built a temple for exercise of their Religion, hired a
Priest and did constitute a Church, which by the neighbors was called a
Parish; and when the number was increased, if one Church and Priest were not
sufficient, those who were most remote did build another. In progress of time,
for good order and concord a custom began to have the Bishops consent also.
Thus he. And so I return to our Archbishop who sat almost 20 years, and died
in the year 653.

Deus-dedit, or Adeodatus. 6.
Him next succeeded Deus-dedit or Adeodatus. He continued Archbishop about six
years, and dying was buried (as 655.
all his predecessors were) in the Church Porch of S. Augustines.

Theodorus. 7. Anno Dom. 668.

Theodorus succeeded him. Amongst his other designs for the advancement of
learning, he founded the school at Canterbury; which I have on a former occasion
mentioned: In his time and chiefly by his endeavors learning so flourished in
this Island, that from a Nursery of Tyrones it became a peculiar seminary of
Philosophy Malmesb. De Gestis Reg lib. 1. page 11.
. He continued Archbishop two and twenty years, and dying anno Dom. 690. was
buried within the Church of S. Austins Abbey, because the porch was full
before, all his predecessors (six in number) being (as I told you) buried
there. In memory of them all were composed and engraven in marble certain
verses, which Wever has already published both in Latin and English Ancient
funeral Monum. page 248.
.

Brithwald. 8.
Theodores next successor was Brithwald, sometime Abbat 692.
of Reculver. No Archbishop continued so long in this See as he, either before
or since his time. He sat 38 years and a half. Dying then, in the year 731.
he was buried at S. Austins with his predecessors. He held a Synod at Clift and
another at a place then called Bacanceld, since Backchild and now Bapchild, an
obscure village upon the rode near Sitting bourne in Kent.

Tatwyn. 9.
Tatwyn succeeded him, and sat 3 years. died in the 732.
year 734. and was buried at Canterbury.

Nothelmus. 10.
Nothelmus succeeded Tatwyn. He was one of venerable 736.
Bedes Intelligencers for his Ecclesiastical story, and dying Vide Praefat*
Bedae.
in the year 741. was buried also at Canterbury.

Cuthbert. 11.
Cuthbert was his Successor. This man was the first that obtained Churchyards
for this Kingdom. For you must 742. Churchyards.
know there was a law amongst the Romans, borrowed of the Grecians, and
inserted into their Twelve Tables, that none should be buried or burned within
any town. Hominem mortuum in urbe ne sepelito neve urito. So that all were
buried either in the fields, along the high way-side (to put passengers in
mind of their mortality) upon the top or at the feet of mountains. And this
kind of interrement by general custom was used both of Jews and Gentiles,
as you may find at large illustrated by Wever in his Monuments. Hence was it
that Augustine the first of our Archbishops procured the ground, on part
whereof he afterward erected his Abbey, lying without the City, for a place of
sepulture for the Kings of Kent, himself and all succeeding Archbishops of that
See.

Cicero making mention of this law, gives this reason for it. Credo (says he)
vel propter ignem, vel periculum. But Wever. Of ancient funer-Monuments page 7.
Hospinian out of Durand, Vlpian and others, shows the reason of it more at
large. It was a custom (says he) in times of old that men and women were
buried in their own private houses or gardens; but afterward for the noisome
savor and contagious stink of the dead carcasses so interred, it was inacted
that all burialls should be without Towns and Cities, in some convenient place
appointed for that purpose. And however that this order was observed by the
Gentiles upon this reason only, scilicet ut in urbibus mundicies servaretur,
et aer minus inficeretur, ex cadaverum putrescentium foetore; yet the true
Christians, and such as by their lively faith were adopted the children of God,
had a further mystery in this their manner of interrments: for by the carriage
and burial of the dead corpse without their City-walls, they did publicly
confirm and witness, that the parties deceased were gone out of this world to
be made free denizens of another City, namely Heaven, there to remain with the
blessed Saints in eternal happiness.

This order or custom of burial without cities continued amongst the
Christians until the time of Gregory the Great, for as then the Monks, Friars
and Priests (says my foresaid Author) began to offer sacrifice for the souls
departed. So that for their more ease and greater profit, they procured first
that the places of sepulture should be adjoining unto their Churches. Upon this
reason out of the said Gregory 13. quaest. 2^ c. xvij.
. Cum gravia peccata non deprimunt (says he) tunc prodest mortuis si in
ecclesiis sepeliantur: quia eorum proximi quoties ad cadem sacra loca veniunt
suorumque sepulturam aspiciunt, recordantur and pro eis Domino pr^ces fundunt.
Anciently (says Onuphrius Panvinius) the bodies of the dead In lib. de Rit^
sepeliendi mortuos.
were buried only without Cities in coemiteries or sleeping places (as the
word signifies) until the resurrection. But persecution being ended, and peace
given to the Christian Church, the manner grew in use to bury within Cities, at
the entrance into their sacred Temples, yea and afterward in the very Churches
themselves. Now our Archbishop Cuthbert happening to be at Rome, and seeing of
these burialls, obtained from the Pope a dispensation for the making of
Coemiteries or Churchyards within Towns or Cities throughout England.

By this time you may see when the old custom of burying without City-walls
ceased, and buryingin Churches and Churchyards both here and elsewhere began,
and may guess at the cause of the frequency of burialls in Churches in former
times. A thing thus tartly reproved of Baldvinus the Civilian. Posteatamen
(says he Ad LL. 12. Tabularum.
, having spoken before of the prohibition of such burialls) Christianorum
Principum indulgentia res eo evasit ut multi in ipsis etiam divorum templis
atque sacellis loculisque ambitiose sepeliri vellent, quam superstitionem dicam
an impudentem ambitionem Gratianus, Valentinianus and Theodosius reprimere
conati sunt, edito hoc rescripto. Nemo Apostolorum vel Martyrum sedem humanis
corporibus existimet esse concessam etc. So he. But enough of this.

Now return we to our Archbishop, Cuthbert. Who five years after his
translation to this See, to wit anno 747. by the counsel of Boniface Bishop of
Mentz, called a Convocation at Clift beside Rochester, to reform the manifold
enormities wherewith the Church of England at that time was over grown. The
constitutions whereof you may read of elsewhere. He procured of Eadbert King
of Kent, that the bodies of all the Archbishops deceased, from thenceforth
should not be buried at S. Augustines (as heretofore) Anno Dom.
but at Christ-Church. And dying, his funerals were there solemnized
accordingly.

Bregwyn. 12.
As also were the funerals of his next successor Bregwyn, who sat only 3
years and died Anno 762. 759.


Lambert. 13.
Lambert succeeded Bregwyn. From Abbat of S. Austins, he was by the Monks of
Christ-Church chosen for their 764.
Archbishop, assuring themselves he would now be as earnest a defender of their
liberties, as he had been heretofore an oppugner in behalf of S. Austins about
the burial of the Archbishops, for which being Abbat he had contended with
Bregwyn his predecessor: but their hopes failed them; for perceiving his end to
approach, he took order to be buried in S. Austins, and was (says my Author)
very honorably interred in the Chapter house there. In his time Offa King of
Mercia erected a new Archbishopric at Litchfield, and obtained of the Pope
authority for Eadulfus Archbishopric at Litchfield.
Bishop there to govern the Diocesses of Worcester, Leicester, Sidnacester,
Hereford, Helmham and Dunwich. So that Canterbury had left unto him for his
Province only these, London, Winchester, Rochester, and Sherborne. But

Athelard. 14.
Athelard, his Successor, prevailed with (Offa's successor) Kenulph, and Leo
the third then Pope, to quash this new 793.
Archbishopric, and to ^educe all in statu quo prius. He sat 13 years, and
then dying was buried in Christ-Church:

(By his means King Offa became an especial benefactor to this Church, as by
his charter there appears; which, if it be authentic, and may be credited (as
I see not why to question it) discovers an error in the computation and
account which the current of our Histories and Chronologies do make of the
beginning both of Offa's reign and this Archbishops government: wherefo^e, and
because it is otherwise remarkable, I have thought fit wholly to transcribe it,
as you may find in my Appendix Scriptura 1a.) Anno Dom. 807.


Wlfred. 15.
As his successor Wlfred likewise was, who died in the year 830. In his time
the Monks of his Church died all to ^ Liber eccles^ Cantuar.
five^.

Theologild or Fleologild. 16.
After Wlfred, Theologild or Fleologild, sometimes Abbat of Canterb. was
Arcbishop for the space of 3 months, and 83^.
dying was buried also in Christ-Church. One named Syred succeeded him, but
being taken away before he had full possession, is not reckoned amongst the
Archbishops.

Celnoth. 17.
Celnoth succeeded and continued Archbishop 38 years, died anno 870. and was
buried in Christ-Church. He 832.
brought Clerks into his Church in aid of those 5 monks that survived the
mortality before spoken of in Wlfred Lib. supradi^.
.

Athelred. 18.
Athelred was Archbishop after Celnoth 18 years, and died anno 889. and was
buried in the same Church. He expelled 871.
those Clerks out of his Church which his predecessor brought thither, and made
up the number of his Monks ^ Lib. (...).
again.

Plegmund. 19.
Plegmund succeeded him, and sat Archbishop 26 years, 889.
and dying anno 915. was buried also in his own Church.

Athelm. 20.
Athelm succeeded, and sat nine years, died anno 924. and was buried with his
predecessors. 915.


Wlfhelm. 21.
Wlfhelm succeeded Athelm. He continued 10 years, 924.
and died anno 934.

Odo. 22.
Odo surnamed Severus succeeded him and sat 24 years. Dying then he was
buried on the South Side of the high 934.
Altar, in a tomb built after the form of a Pyramid. Bishop Godwyn in his
catalogue conceives it to be the tomb of ^ouchstone (such are his words)
standing in the grate near the steps that lead up to S. Thomas Chapel. And
there indeed accordingly, shall you find a table hanging, epitomizing the
story of his life and acts. Not without a great mistake doubtless. For first
the modern Church is not Odo's tomb mistaken.
the same that stood in Odo's days, or when he died: that (I think) is made
plain enough before. Secondly this tomb is not built Pyramis-wise, or after
the form of a Pyramid. Thirdly it is clear by Archbishop Parkers report, and
by the words also of the same Bishop Godwin in his foresaid Catalogue, that
this was and is the tomb of Archbishop Sudbury, who was slain by the Rebels
in Ric. 2. time, whose body (they say) was intombed on the South Side of S.
Dunstan's altar (Godwin adds) a little above the tomb of Bishop Stratford.
Now this is the next and only tomb above Stratfords, and S. Dunstan's altar
(as shall appear unto you) stood hard by. But hereof no more, till I come to
speak of Archbishop Sudbury.

Dunstan. 23.
Dunstan succeeded Odo, sat 27 years, and then dying Anno* Dom. 961.
was buried in Christ-Church, that is (and so it must be understood of all his
predecessors said to be there buried) in the old Church, not in the modern. For
his piety and miracles in his life time (so they say of him) he was (like his
predecessor Odo) canonized a Saint after his death; and his relics of such
high account, even in those times, that Harpsfield. Hi^. eccles. Angl. in ejus
vita.
Archbishop Lanfranc, when he built the Church of new in the Conquerours days,
very solemnly translated his corpse from its first sepulcher into his new
Church, and there of new intombed it (with the Pontificalls, wherewith,
according to the times, it was apparelled, and a plate of lead bearing an
inscription to show upon inquiry whose body it was) near unto the high Altar
on the South Side. And from thenceforth the tomb became called the altar of S.
Dunstan, and the steps leading to it the steps of S. Dunstans altar. Whosoever
observes the pavement on the Southside of the steps between Stratford and
Sudburyes monuments with the gilded work on the wall and pillar there, shall
easily discern some such thing had thence, as questionless this Altar was at
the purging of the Church of such things at or shortly after the Reformation.

Whilst it was standing there, such high estimation was had of this Saint and
his relics, and so beneficial they became to the place that enjoyed them, by
the offerings to his altar, that the Monks of Glastonbury (amongst whom he was
brought up) in Hen. 7. time, began to boast and give out that they had them in
possession, being translated thither from Canterb. (as Capgrave in the life of
Dunstan affirms) in the year 1012. Hereupon these Monks built him a Shrine
Harpsfield. ubi supra.
. and by that and other means the stream of benefit formerly running to
Christ-Church became turned to Glastonb. This at length so troubled the
Archbishop of Canterb. and his Monks, that bethinking themselves of a speedy
remedy, they resolve on a scrutinie to be made in Scrutiny in S. Dunstans
tomb.
his Tomb or Altar; by opening thereof to see whether really his corpse, his
relics, were there enclosed or not. The scrutiny is made, and the searchers
find for the Christ-Church Monks. Whereupon Warham the then Archbishop
forthwith directs and sends his letters to the Abbat and Monks of Glastonb.
straightly charging them to desist from all other jactitation of their
possession of S. Dunstan's relics, which letters he was fain to iterate,
before they would obey; so loath they were to forgo their Diana. A Record of the
scrutiny is kept in in Archivis ecclesiae, a true copy whereof you shall find
in my Appendix Scriptura duodecima. It is a pretty ^elation, and worth your
reading.

Aethelgar. 24. Anno Dom. 988.

After Dunstan succeeded Aethelgar, who continued in the Sea only one year
and three months. Dying then he was buried in his own Church.

Siricius. 25.
Him Siricius succeeded, sat four years, died anno 993. 989.
and was buried at Canterbury.

Aluricius alias Alfricus. 26.
Aluricius or Alfricus succeeded next, died 1006. and 993.
was buried first at Abingdon, but was afterward removed to Canterb. Anno Dom.


Elphege. 27.
Elphege succeeded him, and sat six years. He was most barbarously murdered
by the Danes in the year 1011. at 1006.
what time they both spoiled the Church and City, and tithed the Monks and
other people therein, whereof our Chronicles are so very full, that I forbear
it further relation, only crave favor to give you the description of it out
of Henry of Huntington^. Who thus sadly tells. Anno undecimo (...) (...). lib.
6.
etc. In the eleventh year (says he) when the Danes had done preying on the
North-side of Thames, they besieged Canterbury the Metropolis of England, and
by treachery took it. For Almar whom before Archbishop Alfege had rescued from
death, betrayed the same. Entering therefore they took Alfege the Archbishop,
Godwyn the Bishop, Lefwyn the Abbat, and Alfword the Kings Provost, the Clerks
also with the Monks, the men with the women, and so returned conquerors to
their ships. But you might have seen an horrid spectacle, the face of an
ancient and most beautiful City all brought to ashes, the carcasses of the
citizens thick strawed in the streets, dying both soil and River black with
blood, the weeping and howling of women and children which were to be led away
captive, the chieftaine of faith, and fountain of doctrine of the English
hurried about in fetters A fuller relation of this out of Osborne the Monk of
Cant. is to be seen in my Appendix. Scriptura xxxj.
. Thus he. Our Archbish. Elphege being by those bloody miscreants thus basely
butchered, was buried first in S. Paul's Church in London, afterward conveyed to
Canterb. by the command of King Knute, and interred in his own Church. He was
afterward made a Saint, and had an Altar proper to him standing by that of his
predecessor Dunstan, both near unto the high altar that now is, as is clear
by these words in Archbishop Winchelseys Statutes. De redditibus vero (say the
same) magno altari and duobus altaribus vicinioribus, viz. sanctorum Dunstani
and Elphege etc.

Living. 28.
Living succeeded Alphege, and having been Archbishop Anno Dom. 1013.
about 7 years died in the year 1020.

Agelnoth. 29.
Agelnoth was his Successor. Who when he had sat Archbishop 17 years and
upwards, in which interim of time he 1020.
perfected the work of his Churches repair that had been destroyed and burnt by
the Danes, as formerly I have said, died anno 1038. I read that the Monastery
of Reculver, Reculver.
built by one Bassa, in the time of Egbright (the 7th King of Kent in
succession after Hengist) whereof Brithwald that was afterward Archbishop was
(as we read) sometimes Abbat, was in the year 949. given to Christ-Church by
King Edred Lib. eccles. Cantuar.
. Notwithstanding which donation I find it still continued a Monastery
undissolved unto this Archbishops time, but the governor of it turned from an
Abbat to a Deane, as, with some further discovery of that Monasteries then
estate and condition, and somewhat else also of Antiquaries observable, by a
certain Charter of this our Archbishop concerning that Monastery, to be found
in my Appendix, will appear, page 261.

Eadsin. 30.
Eadsin succeeded Agelnoth. He continued Archbishop almost 11 years, and died
in the year 1050. was buried 1038.
in his own Church, and after his death made a Saint.

Robert. 31.
Robert surnamed Gemeticensis succeed Eadsin. He died and 1050.
was buried in the Abbey of Gemetica where he was brought up, having been
Archbishop about the space of 2 years or scarcely so much.

Stigand. 32.
Stigand was his Successor. He was deposed by the Conqueror, whom (if Spot, S.
Austins Chronicler, say true) 105^.
with Egelsine, the then Abbat there, he incountred as a stout champion for the
Kentish liberties, whereof you may read your fill elsewhere. He lies buried at
Winchester, dying 1069.

Lanfranke. 33.
Stigand being thus deprived, Lanfranke was consecrate Anno Dom. 1070.
Archbishop. He caused the Sees of many Bishops, that were before and until
then in countrey-villages to be removed from thence into Cities, according to
the Canon. Distinct. lxxx. per totum. So that a City with us (Westminster
Bishops See the note of a City.
excepted) has ever since been and yet is known, by having in it a Bishop, and
a Cathedral Church. Plures igitur Civitates haud numerarunt nostri Majores,
quam Episcopatus, says Sr H. Spelman Glossar. in verb. Burgus.
. And not only here, but elsewhere also is this a note whereby to distinguish
and discern a City from a Town or Village, as you may learn from the
Interpreter, who for instance in this point, alleges that Cowell.
of Cassaneus in Consuetud. Burgund. c. 15. where he averreth that within the
territories of France are 104 Cities, and gives this (says he) for his
reason, because there are within the same so many Bishoprics. But return we to
our Archbishop.

Besides his new building of the Cathedral with the Monastery, and a Palace
for himself and his Successors (whereof before) he built also the Priory of S.
Gregory's without the Northgate of the City of Canterb. and by it the Hosp.
called S. John's, as also that other of S. Nicholas at Herbaldowne: all which he
endowed with competent revenues, as has been fully showed already. And did
many other good and pious acts, whereof (as also of the former) you may find
mention in the Antiquit. Brit. and the Catal. of Bishops, in his life and
elsewhere. He contended at Windsor with Thomas Norman Archbishop of York for
the primacy, and there, by Judgment before Hugo the Popes Legate, recovered it
from him. So that ever since the one (that is, he of Cant.) is called Totius
Angliae Primas; and the other Title of totius Anglie Primas.
Angliae Primas, without any further addition. There happened afterward
frequent controversies between the succeeding Archbishops of both Provinces
about the Primacy, and for the ones bearing up the cross in the others
Province: all which differences Wever Of ancient funeral Monum. page 305*
has concatenated in a continued discourse, whither I refer you. This
Lanfranc was the man that settled the Manors both of the Sea and the Priory..i.
both of the Archbishop and the Monks in that manner as they are recorded in
Doomsday-book Archbishop and Monks Manors. Vide pro scriptu. 14* in Appendice.
, which for Antiquity-sake, and as a monument which the curious that way happily
may desire to see, my Appendix shall make public. To the Prior and Monks of
his Church, for their better future observance of S. Benets rule and order,
from which by the remissness and neglect of former times, he found in them a
deviation, he prescribed in writing certain ordinances, which entitled Decret'
Lanfranci pro ordine sancti Benedicti, you may find published in the latter
end of Reyners Apostolatus Benedictionorum. This Archbishop having fate 19
years, and then dying was buried at Cant. in his own Church. But his monument
not now extant; however Wever tells he found his body to be interred there by a
Table inscribed which hangs upon his Tomb. Erroniously. For there is neither
Tomb nor Table of his there.

Anselme. 34. Anno Dom. 1093.

Anselme succeeded Lanfrank, who died in the 16 year of his government, and
was buried first at the head of his predecessor Lanfrank, but afterward (says
Malmesbury) De (...). Pontific. lib. 1.
Dignius ma^soleum in Orientali porticu accepit; he was removed to the East end
of his Church. That (I take it) is his monument on the South Side of Beckets
Chapel, and Anselmes Monument.
on the same side of the Black Prince his Tomb, whereon Teobald's table hangs.
But of this see more in Theobald. Almost 400 years after his death, by the
procurement of John Morton one of his Successors he was canonized a Saint. For
the finding of a light before whose Tomb, King Stephen Lib. Eccles. Cant.
gave unto the Monks the Manor of Berkesore near Shepey in Kent. He built (as
I have already told you from Thorns report) the Nonnery of S. Sepulchers by
Canterb. The preceding story of the Churches Fabric will further inform you
of his piety. Other things I pass over as obvious enough elsewhere.

Ralfe or Rodulph. 35.
Ralph or Rodulph succeeded Anselme, sat eight years, Anno Dom. 1114.
and then died, to wit anno 1122. and was buried in the middle of the body of
Christ-Church in Canterb. in medio aeulae majoris ecclesiae decenter sepultus,
says Edmerus. Howbeit (says Bishop Godwyn) I see not any monument or other
sign of his sepulture there at all. But no marvel, because the modern nave or
body of the Church was built long since this Archbishops time. His burial
place was in the elder, the former body of the Church which Archbishop Sudbury
(as I told you) took down, and was sithence rebuilt. Besides it is hard to
find a monument, much less an Epitaph Old Epitaphs rare in England.
so ancient any where in England. That age (it seems) was not very ambitious of
either. The ancient custom was to put laminam plumbeam a plate of lead with
the interred parties name inscribed on it, into the sepulcher with the corpse
Vide Mat. Paris. ad Ann. Dom. 1257. page 1258. Land. Ed.
. So had Archbishop Dunstan. So also Richard, Beckets immediate Successor. But
Simon Islip (of the Archbishops) is the first that has an Epitaph upon his
tomb in the whole Church. About his time (I take it) they first became common
and frequent. Haec obiter. This our Archbishop gave a penny a day out of his
Manor of Liminge in Kent to Herbaldowne Hospital for ever, which gift his
Successor Theobald renewed and confirmed Ro^. Hosp. de Herbald.
.

William Corboyl. 36.
W^ Corboyl succeeded Ralfe, and died in the year 1136. having sat almost 14
years, and lies buried in his own 1122.
Church: the particular place I find not; happily it was in the old body. He is
famous for the new building of this Church (whereof before) as also of S.
Martins by Dover. Of which please you to hear Archdeacon Harpsfield speak.
Erant in eo sacello (says he speaking of S. Martins) antiquitus St Martins by
Dover.
Canonici quos seclares appellant. Quorum ecclesia cum in medio oppidi, parvi
illius quidem sed populosi consisteret, canonicique ecclesiae sacra pensa
perfunctorie obirent, illiusque bona per lustra, libidines and luxuriam
profunderent and consumerent: Guiliel. diligenter meditatus secum est, qua
potissimum ratione huic malo occurreret. Aedificat itaque novam extra muros
oppidi Anno Dom.
ecclesiam, cum caeteris domibus ad habitationem monastic is viris accommodis
etc. Out of this Monastery, Richard, a successor of this Archbish. was taken
and chosen to the Sea.

Theobald. 37.
Theobald succeeded William. He departed this life in the year 1160. when he
had sat Archbishop 22 years. He 1138.
was the first of the Catalogue that had the title of Apostolicae Sedis Legatus
conferred upon him, to wit in the year 1138. Title of Apostolice Sedi^ Legatus.
Which title was retained until Archbishop Cranmers time. But then the Popes
authority finding its deserved ruin in our clearer and better understanding, a
decree passed in the Synod (Anno 1534) that laying aside that title, they
should be styled, I use now my Authors own words) Primats and Metropolitans of
all England Parker. in vita Cranmer.
. This our Archbishop perceiving his end to approach made his Will, and gave
all his goods unto the poor: and dying was buried in his own Church, in the
South-part of S. Thomas Chapel, in a marble Tomb joining to the wall (says
Bishop Godwyn) and accordingly there hangs a table lately made, of him and his
acts. But with what warrant give me leave A mistake about Theobalds tomb.
to make question. The table I know follows Bishop Godwyn. And sure I am that
none that have written his life beside Godw. (before him I mean) have
authorized this report of his. The particular place of his burial has no
mention amongst them, nor yet in his Will, which I have seen too. Besides this,
and the probability that it is Archbishop Anselmes tomb (as you may see
before) another unlikelihood there is it should be Theobalds, and that is this.
It has no Inscription or Epitaph upon or about it, whereas his had, and it was
this (as Wever says) Hic jacet Theobaldus Cantuar. Archiepiscopas, ob morum
placabilitatem atque constantiam, Hen. 2. valde gratiosus, affabibilis,
veridicus, prudens and amicus firmus, in omnes liberalis, and in pauperes
munificus, qui suae tandem senectut is and languidae vitae pertaesus anteactam
vita^ morti persolvit. Anno Dom. 1160. cum 22. annis sedisset. Anima ejus
requiescat in pace. Amen.



Now if you will have my opinion where this Archbishop was buried: I shall tell
you that I think it was in the old body of the Church, whose demolition and new
erection is the very cause (as I conceive) we now miss so many of those elder
monuments.

Clarenbald the first Abbat of Feversham (in the year Lib. Eccles. Christi
^ant.
812. called the Kings little town of Fefresham. In partibus suburbanis Regi^
oppidulo Fefresham dicto, as it is in a Charter Feversham.
of Kenulph King of Mercia, made to Wulfred the then Archbishop received
benediction of this Theobald in praesentia Reginae Matildis quae praedictum
monasterium de Feversham incepit and terris aliisque donis ditavit: Clarenbald
first having obtained his and his fellows release from the Clunia^s, to be
clearly absolved from subjection to that order, being now to live under the
rule of S. Benet in Feversham Abbey: whereof in Christ-Church a record is kept
to this effect, viz. that at Clarenbalds benediction by Archbishop Theobald,
were first read publicly literae absolutoriae Petri Abbatis Cluniacensis, and
B. Prioris S. Mariae de Caritate, quae praedictos Clarenbaldum and Monachos qui
secum venerant de Bermondeseia ab omni subjectione and obedientia ecclesiae
Cluniacensis absolvebant, ne viz. ecclesia Cluniacensis aliqd' subjectionis in
eundem Clarenbald. sive in successores ejus vel aliqd' juris in Monasterio* de
Fever. calumpniare posset in posterum. Thus the Record. Mr Cambden then (salva
ejus Reverentia) is mistaken in saying that King Stephen founded this Abbey for
the Monks of Clugny.

The same Records (being thus fairly occasioned, let me note it by the way)
furnish me with a Catalogue of the names of diverse Abbats as well of that
place, as of several other Abbeys in the Diocese that receiving benediction
from the Archbishop made profession of obedience to him and his Church, which I
have thought not impertinent here to insert.

Professiones.
Feversham. Baxley. Clarenbald^ primi Abbats, Theobaldo. Lamberti. Guerrici.
Richardo. Thomae. Theobaldo. Algari. Iohannis. Petri. Willielmi. Petri.
Bonifacio. Dionisii. Iohannis. Walteri. Petri de Herdes^o. Simonis. Oswardi.
Roberti. Bonifacio. Clementis. Gilberti.

St Radegund. Langdun. Combwell. Hugonis. Huberto. Richardi. Huberto. Iohannis.
Henrici. Iohannis. Richardi. Roberti. Iohannis. Willielm. Huberto. Henrici.
Willielm. Bonifacio. Willielmi. Rogeri. Roberti. Waltero.

I pass from Theobald and come to his successor.

Thomas Becket. 38. Anno Dom. 1161.

Whose whole story our Chronicles and tradition withal have made so trite and
vulgar, that lest I be checked with a Nil dictum quod etc. I forbear to relate
it, only I shall desire to say somewhat of his burial, translation and
shrine, and to show what the quarrel was he so stoutly (stubbornly I should
say) defended.

Being most barbarously murdered, upon Tuesday the 28 of December 1170. his
body was buried first in the Undercroft. But the revolution of 50 years,
having brought about his Jubilee (to wit in the year 1220:) and being first
matriculated by the Pope a glorious Saint and Martyr; his Beckets Translation.
body with great solemnity, was taken up and laid in a most sumptuous shrine at
the East end of the Church, at the charge of Stephen Langton his Successor,
whereof I read as follows. Adveniente igitur translationis die, praesente
maxima multitudine tam divitum quam pauperum; Pandulphus Apostolicae sedis
Legatus, Cantuariensis and Remensis Archiepiscopi, Episcopique atque Abbates
quamplurimi, cum Comitibus and Baronibus praedictam ^apsam, praesente Rege
Henrico tertio, super humeros suos susceperunt, and in loco quo nunc honoratur
cum omni gaudio collocaverunt.

The solemnity of this Translation happened upon or about the 7th of July.
Hence (I take it) the occasion and original of our (as we call it) Beckets
Fair at Cant. beginning to be holden annually on the 7th of that month. His
Fair.


For, as Sr Hen. Spelman Glossar. in verb. Feri^.
is of opinion, that Fairs began and came up by the flocking of Christians to
the place for the solemnizing of some festival, such either as the feast of
the Churches dedication or other the like; and says it is easy to conjecture
to what Saint the place has been commended, by the Fair-day: So I am persuaded
that this Fair which we hold at Canterb. annually on the 7th of July (as that
other on the 29th of December) first came up as a means to gather the greater
multitude thither for the celebration of the Anniversary solemnities of Beckets
translation, on the one, and his passion (as they used to term it) on the
other of those days. And (for so my author adds) as Fairs were greater, as
the Church and town were of more estimation: Faires.
So however these our Fairs at Canterb. are now so small as not at all
considerable, yet assuredly time was when they were of greater request, and
might justly boast of great resort as any elsewhere: the decay of them and of
the trading of our city participating of both one cause, namely the defacing of
the shrine we now treat of, and the demolishing Whence the decay of Canterbury.
of such religious houses as were sometime standing in and about the City, the
magazins of reputed holy relics, the incentives unto all sorts of people in
those times for their frequent visitation of them. Whence that of Mr Lambert
Perambulation of Kent in Caterburie.
. To tell the truth (says he) little had all these casualties of fire and
flame been to the decay of this Town (speaking before of the often firing of
Canterb.) had not the dissolution and final overthrow of the religious houses
also come upon it. For where wealth is at command, how easily are buildings
repaired? and where opinion of great holiness is, how soon are cities and
towns advanced to great estimation and riches? And therefore no marvel if
after wealth withdrawn, and opinion of holiness removed, the places tumbled
headlong to ruin and decay. Thus he.

The so seasonable application of these observations will (...) shrine.
beplea good enough (I trust) for this digression. And in that hope I return
to our Archbishop, or rather to his Shrine. Whereof let me first give you
Erasmus, then Stowe's description. Auream thecam (says the former Peregrinatio
^lig. (...).
) theca contegit lignea, ea funibus sublata opes nudat inaestimabiles,
vilissima pars erat aurum, gemmis raris ac praegrandibus collucebant, nitebant
ac fulgurabant omnia, quaedam superabant ovi anserini magnitudinem. Prior
candida virga demonstrabat contact^ singulas gemmas, addens nomen Gallicum,
pretium and authorem doni. Nam praecipui Monarchae done miserant. Thus he. It
was built (says Stow Annals ^n H^n. 8.
) about a man's height all of stone, then upward oftimber plain, within the
which was a chest of iron, containing the bones of Thomas Becket, skull and
all, with the wound of his death, and the piece cut out of his skull laid in
the same wound. The timber work of this shrine on the outside was covered with
plates of gold, damasked and embossed with wires of gold, garnished with
broches, images, Angels, chains, precious stones, and great orient pearls, the
spoil of which shrine (in gold and jewels of an inestimable value) filled two
great chests, one of which six or eight strong men could do no more then convey
out of the Church: all which was taken to the Kings use, and the bones of St
Thomas (by commandment of the Lord Cromwell) were then and there burned to
ashes, which was in September, the year 1538. Hen. 8. 30. Liber comp^ Eccles.
Christ^ Cant.


This Shrine had a Clerk and other retainers that constantly gave their
attendance upon it; and need enough in regard both of the treasure that was
about it and also of the continual offerings thereunto by such as either of
visitation or in pilgrimage made their approaches to it: Which offerings
amounted to a great value by the year, as I guess by the accounts thereof for
certain years which I have seen, showing that from about 200 lib. per annu^m
which they arose unto about 300 years since; within a six or eight years
following they were grown to be more then trebled. But (by the way) when the
Accomptant comes to Christ's altar (the high altar) that is dispatched with a
blank or a Nil: summo altari Nil. So much had that Shrine obscured this altar.
The less marvel that the Church dedicated to Christ, gave place (as it did)
to the name of St Thomas, and that the prints of their devotion in the marble
stones who crept and kneeled to his Shrine remain to this day; therein but
royallists (as I may call them) or imitators of sovereigne example, if we but
consider with what reverence some of our Kings mention both him and his shrine.
Cujus pretiosum corpus (Hen. 6. words of him to the Monks of the place) in
ecclesia vestra praedicta gloriose tumulatum extitit. In cujus ecclesia Metrop.
corpus beati Thomae martyris ad quem devotionem gerimus specialem, honorifice
feretratur, says Ed. 4. in his Charter to our City.

It may not be omitted that this Saints Jubilee was kept Beckets Jubilee
every fifty years from and after his death: because such multitudes flocked
to the City to solemnize the same as is scarce credible; witness this record
kept of one happening in the year 1420. which I here commend to your perusal,
transcribed from a book of the City chamber.

De anno Iubileo apud Cant.
MEmorand' quod anno ab incarnatione Domini 1420. and anno Regni illustrissimi
Regis and principis Hen. 5. a conquestu Angliae octavo, tempore Willielmi
Bennet and Wmi Ickham tunc Balivor^m Cant. Henrici Chichele tunc Archiepiscopi
Sedis Cant. and Iohannis Woodnesberwe ad tunc Prioris ecclesiae Christi Cant.
die dominica in festo translationis sancti Thomae Martyris extitit apud Cant.
annus Iubileus in ecclesia Christi Cant. qui tunc extiterat sextus annus
Iubileus a translatione praedicti Thomae Martyris gloriosi. Cujus quidem
jubilei solemnizatio incepit ad horam duodecimam in vigilia dicti festi, and
continuavit per 15 dies continuos proximo and immediate sequentes; quo tempore
idem Rex and princeps illustrissimus fuit in Francia cum suo honorabili
exercitu ad obsedio^* villae Millon' quae distat a Civitate Parisiensi triginta
milliaria. Qui quidem vero Ballivi praelibati universaliter praeceperunt
civibus Civitatis illius sufficientiam domorum ad herbigandum and ad
hospitandum populum ad tunc pro salute animarum suarum adipisc^nda venturum,
divina gratia suffragante, tam infra Civitatem praedictam, quam infra suburbia
Civitatis ejusdem habentibus, quod essent parati in lectis and aliis populo
praedicto necessariis: Ac etiam praeceperunt universis vitellariis dictae
Civitatis, viz. Tabernariis, Pandoxatoribus, Pistoribus, Carnificibus,
Piscinariis, Cocis and hospitatoribus quod ordinarent contra tempus praedictum
victualia populo praedicto tunc suffectura, qui quidem populus ut aestimabatur
ad tunc atting^bant ad numerum Centum millia hominum and mulierum tam
Angliginentium qu^m alieniginentium exterorum viz. Hibernicorum, Wallicorum,
Scotticorum, Francorum, Normannorum, Garnisientium and Gernisientium, ad eandem
Civitatem, pro gratia praedicta habenda ad tunc affluentium, pace vero and
tranquillitate inter populum praedict' opitulatione Dei omnipotentis suaeque
gloriosissimae genetricis Dei Mariae, precibus quoque gloriosi Martyris Thomae
sociorumque ejus sanctorum Curiae celestis, veniendo, morando and redeundo,
toto tempore Iubilei illius habitis and optentis. Qui quidem vitellarii
ordin^runt victualia pro populo praedicto copiosa, it a quod lagena vini rubii
de Vasconia tunc vendebatur ad octo denarios, and lagena vini albi ad sex
denarios, and duo panes levati vendebantur ad unum denarium, and omnia alia
victualia, Domino disponente, de bono foro extiterunt; per quae Civitas
praedicta and totus Comitatus Kanciae exinde per totam Angliam favente altissm^
magnum and diutinum revera optinuerunt honorem. Thomas Chirch fecit and
scripsit, and ad hoc per plenam Curiam de Burgemoto, tam per Ballivos,
Aldermannos, xij Iuratos, cum xxxvj hominibus in numero consueto, specialiter
requisitus fuerat, and in forma praedicta redegit in scriptis.



Our City of Canterb. (it seems) of old pitched upon Becket our Cities Patron.
this S. Thomas, for it Patron and tutelar Saint: and therefore caused these
verses to be cut about the ring of her old common seal. Ictibus immensis
Thomas qui corruit ensis,
Tutor ab offensis urbis sit Canturie^sis.


And, which is more, borrowed a part of the City arms retained to this day (if
I mistake not) from his coat, which is three Cornish choughs proper. It is
observable beside, that as by means of his fame and the great account of his
martyrdom and miracles the name of Christ* Church became changed to S. Thomas
Church; so the common seal of the Church, from the new dedication thereof by
Archbishop Corboyl until then used, upon his martyrdom was changed, and on
the one side of it that represented with these verses circumscribed. Est huic
vita mori pro qu^ dum vixit amori
Mors erat and memori per mortem vivit honori.


This was the Churches third common seal, and was not altered afterward until
the new foundation by H. 8.

So much for this Archbishop; the legend of whose miracles, were it utterly
lost, might easily (I think) be repaired from the windows on each side of the
place where his shrine sometime stood abounding altogether with the story
thereof.

I come now to his quarrel, which was the defense of the Clergy, and their
liberties, their exemption especially from secular judgment or trial. The
shadow of which privilege we still retain; and call it Clergy. For your
Clergy^.
better understanding whereof, and consequently of the quarrel Becket died in,
my Appendix shall treat unto you of Vide in fi^ ^i.
these 5 particulars.

The nature and quality of the privilege, what it is, and whence it came.
(...).


The form and manner how it is put in practice. 2. 3. 4. 5.


The antiquity thereof in this land.

The extent of it.

The declining of it by degrees and restrained condition thereof, with us, at
this day.

I may not here forget our Archbishops foundation and erection of an ancient
Spittle which we have at this day in our City, and is called Eastbridge or
Kingsbridg-hospitall, whereof enough before in proper place.

To conclude, the Monks (it seems) glorying and priding themselves in nothing
more then this of Beckets Martyrdom (for so they calld'd his murder) or at
leastwise conceiving their Church in no one respect so famous and renowned as
in that, and not satisfied with the resemblance or representation of it in that
their forenamed common seal; nor knowing better how, either to perpetuate the
memory of it, or to make it more generally known abroad then thus: at or about
what time that their common seal was renewed, contriving another special seal,
ad causas, (that is, as I conceive, chiefly for matters concerning
Jurisdiction, which, sede vacant, devolved into their hands) A Seal ad causas.
did insculp it also in the same. And now to distinguish this from that their
more usual and common seal, they vary the inscription on both sides of it;
that on the forepart, about the ring (containing within it the figure of the
Church and Beckets Martyrdom) being this Sigillum ecclesiae Christi Cantuarie
ad causas: whilst that on the reverse, about the ring (within which are three
smaller rings or circles having in each of them ^n head or face like to the
picture of our Saviors) was this. Deus pater. Deus filius. Deus spiritus
sanctus. An inscription probably intended to help preserve the then decaying
memory of the Churches ancient name and dedication to the Trinity. This
undoubtedly is that seal, which some, from ('it is like) the triple visage, and
that Trinitarian ins^ription in the reverse, have ^istaken for our Cathedralls
first se^le, whereof before in my 1. Particular of the Church-Survey.

Richard. 39.
Richard first a Monk of this Church, afterward Prior Anno Dom. 1171.
of Dover, succeeded Becket, and dying anno 1183. his body was honorably
interred in Christ-Church, in the then Lady-chapell: not in that which now
stands, but in a more ancient one included within the old body of the Church,
as is before showed more at large.

Baldewin. 40.
After Richard succeeded Baldewin. He died in the holy land, whither he would
needs attend the King (Ric. 1.) 1184.
when he had been Archbishop even almost 7 years, and was buried there.
Between the Monks of Cant. and him there was great debate and strife about the
College which he first intended and attempted to erect at Hackington by
Canterb. and afterward at Lambhith: but was crossed in both, as you may find
at large elsewhere. He first laid Wales to the Province of Cant.

Reginald. 41.
Reginald Fitz-joceline succeeded Baldwin, but died within fifteen days after
his confirmation, and after his election. 1191.
49.

Hubert Walter. 42.
Then succeeded Hubert Walter. He it was that first devised our assize of bread,
our weights and measures of wine, oil, 119^.
corn etc. He compassed the Tower of London with a strong wall and deep mote,
so as the water enclosed the same quite round, which before that time could
never be brought to pass, and performed many other great works of inestimable
charge: such as his ecclesiastical revenues alone could never have enabled him
to do, had not other helps from his secular offices been adjoined. For at one
time, besides that he was Archbishop, and the Popes Legate a latere, he was
Lord Chancellor, Lord chief Justice, and High immediate governor under King
Ric. 1. of all his dominions born in Wales and England. And having been
Archbishop almost 12 years, died at his Manor of Tenham. And was buried July
13. 1205, in the South-wall of Christ-church, beside the Quire. His tomb is
there extant at this day, and is (I take it) the most ancient one (except
Anselmes) that the Church visibly affoords. From the situation whereof, let me
give you this note, that the ancientest tombs in Ancient tombs.
Churches are so or alike situate, namely in or along by the Church-walls. For
the honor of his Church, I may not omit his crowning there of King John and
Queen Isabel his last wife, anno 1201.

Stephen Langton. 43 Anno Dom. 1206.

Stephen Langton succeeded Hubert. He was made a Cardinal, and sat Archbishop
22 years, and dying July 9. 1228. was buried in his own Church, in the Chapel
of S. Michael; where you may find his monument. The first dividing of the
Bible into Chapters, in such sort as we now account them, is ascribed to him,
of some Parker and Godwin. i^ ejus vita.
, but denied of other Spelman. Gloss. verb. Heptatic^. Vlcombe.
. This man changed the Parish Church of Olecombe, now called Vlcombe, into a
collegiate Church. The Ordination whereof is extant in the Records of
Christ-Church, where I have seen it. The head of which Church or College was
styled Archipresbyter, by which name one S^ Benjamin, in the vacancy of the Sea
by Archbishop Peckham's death, in the year 1293. presents to the then Prior of
Christ-Church one S^ John Elmestone a Priest, with desire of his admission in
minorem Canonicum ecclesiae praedictae, juxta ordinationem bonae memoriae
Domini Stephani quondam Cantuar' Archiepiscopi etc. as I have it from the same
Records.

In this Archbishops time five marks per annum was holden a competency for a
Vicars stipend (at Halstow, anciently called Halegestow signifying the Holy
place, a Vicarage Vicars stipend
being erected and endowed by Archbishop Hubert, the Vicars stipend there was
rated accordingly;) and thereupon that constitution, Quoniam autem de officio
Vicarii, in Provinciali, was agreed upon and made, for the establishing of that
rate as sufficient. Indeed five marks in those days was as much as ten pound
in these. However, it seems it was a great deal cheaper world in those days,
and all saleable things were then of far less price then now, when four
Anno Dom.
times five marks of ours, nay four times five pounds of ours is now the
ordinary, and yet (in respect to the chargeable state of these days) but
reasonable and moderate stipend for a Curate. Would you know the reason? It is
then shortly this; the greater abundance of money now then heretofore. For (as
Sr Henry Savill notes upon Tacitus) the excessive abundance of things which
consist merely on the constitution of men; draws necessarily those things
which nature requires, to an higher rate in the market. Capta ab Augusto
Alexandria (says Orosius) Roma in tantum opibus ejus crevit, ut duplo majora
quam antehac rerum venalium pretia statuerentur. Thus he. And so I leave this
Archbishop.

Richard Wethershed. 44.
Richard Wethershed succeeded Stephen Langton: who enjoyed the honor but a
little while to wit, two years or 1229.
thereabouts, and died at S. Gemma in his return from Rome, where he was buried.

S. Edmund. 45.
S. Edmund succeeded him, who died anno 1242. eight years after his
consecration, and was buried also in foreign 1234.
parts. He married King Hen. 3. to Queen Eleanor at Canterbury in the year
1236.

Boniface. 46.
Boniface succeeded S. Edmund. He died in Savoy (his 1244.
own Country) in the year 1270. somewhat more then 26 years after his
consecration. He performed two things not unworthy of memory, he paid the debt
of 22 thousand marks that he found his See indebted in. And built a
good-Hospitall at Maidstone, called the new works, and endued Maidstone Hosp.
with revenues valued at the suppression at 159 lib. 7s 10d. (William Courtnay
his successor long after translated the same in a College of secular Priests.
Bishop Godwin adds a third thing, at the belief whereof I somewhat stick; and
that is his perfecting and finishing that most stately Hall of the Lord
Archbishops palace at Cant. with the buildings adjoining: unless it may be
thus made good, to wit, by his paying the debt which his predecessors by
building the same had run themselves into. And indeed in that sense he was wont
to vaunt himself the builder of it. Praedecessores mei (says he) istam aulam
cum magnis expensis fecerunt, been quidem fecerunt, sed expensas ad illam
construendam nisi de pecunia mutua non invenerunt, videtur quidem mihi, quod
ego illam feci, quia illorum debita persolvi Antiq. Brit. in ejus vita.
.

Robert Kilwardby. 47. Anno Dom. 1272. Black Friars London.

Robert Kilwardby succeeded Boniface. He built the Black Friars in London,
being himself of that order. Having been Archbishop about the space of six
years he was made a Cardinal, and then resigning his Archbishopric gat him
into Italy, and died and was buried at Viterbium. Being yet Archbishop in the
year 1277. by his kind and gentle persuasion he appeased the Citizens of
Canterb. eagerly bent upon revenge in a very strange way to be taken of the
Monks of Christ-Church, for refusing them their aid in that imposition of
finding and setting forth twelve horsemen to serve in the Kings intended war
against Lewelyn Prince of Wales, laid upon the City, whereof before in the
Black Friars I have spoken.

John Peckham. 48.
John Peckham succeeding Kilwardby: and continued in the Chair 13 years, and
almost an half. In which time he 1278. Wingham.
founded the collegiate Churchat Wingham in Kent, or rather changed the
Parish Church there into a Collegiate. The head of which College was called
Praepositus, a Provost. The ordination of which Praepositure, together with
this our Archbishops letters for the dividing of Wingham Church into four
Parishes, dated anno 1282. are extant in the Records of Christ-Church, where I
have seen them. Now Wingham it self (the mother Cuurch) Ash, Goodnestone, and
Nonington (Chapells to it) were the 4 Parishes. Overland and Richborough were
Chapells to Ash, and Wimingswold a Chapel to Nonington. This College of
secular Canons (for such the founder placed in it) was valued at the time of
the suppression at 84 lib. of yearly revenues. Collegium in Cantia Wengamense
(Harpsfields words of this foundation) ejus potissimum opera constitutum est,
sed seminarium ejus beneficii a Roberto decessore ejus profectum est: Qui a
Gregorio Pontifice impetrabat, ut liceret ecclesiam parochialem Wengamensem in
eum usum convertere. The City of Canterb. went to suit with this Archbishop
about limits and liberties, of which heretofore in my survey of Westgate
street. Amongst other of his labors (as I have it from Gavantus his Thesaurus
sacrorum rituum) he composed an office for Trinity-Sunday, called Officium
Sanctae Trinitatis. It was received by the Church of Rome, and in use about the
year 1290. but for the difficulty and obscurity of the style was sithence
abrogated.

Leaving these things I come now to the place of this Peckhams tomb.
Archbishops burial. He was buried (says Bishop Godwin) in his own Church,
but in what particular place I find not. Archbishop Parker (it seems) found it
not neither, for he mentions it not. By a Record in the Church of the time of
the death and place of the burial of this Archbishop which I have seen, it
appears he was laid in part Aquilonari, juxta locum Martyrii beati Thomae
Martyris. I fear the Author of the Tables has done him some wrong in hanging
Archbishop Vfford's Table upon that which (I take it) is rather Peckhams tomb
then his, that namely in the corner of the Martyrdom next unto Warham, which
the Table-writer upon (it seems) Bishop Godwin's conjecture, takes for granted
to be Vffords tomb. But (as I conceive) the cost bestowed on that monument
(however the Archiepiscopall effigies which it has is framed of wood) being
built somewhat Pyramis-like, and richly overlaid with gold, which is not yet
worn off, gainsayes it to be Vffords. For I read Antiq. Brit. in vita Vfford.
, that dying before he was fully Archbishop, having never received either his
pall or consecration, and that in the time of that great plague which (as
Walsingham reports) consumed nine parts of the men through England; his body
without any pomp or wonted solemnity was carried to Canterb. and there secretly
buried by the North-wall, beside the wall of Thomas Becket. But I pass to his
Successor. Anno Dom. 1294. Sub-Deacon-Cardinals at Christ-Church.


Robert Winchelsey. 49.
Robert Winchelsey succeeded Peckham. In the Record of whose inthronization, I
find mention of three Sub-Deacon-Cardinalls of the Church which did assist the
then Prior in that action. Such (it seems) the Church had at that time. Of the
like sometimes in S. Paul's Church London, S. Hen. Spelman's Glossary will
inform you in verbo Cardinalis. But I come to the Archbishop, who kept
possession of the Chair about the space of 19 years, and died in the year
1313. Much might be said of his admirable liberality and charity to the
poor, but here of Archbishop Parker, and from him, Bishop Godwin and others
have said enough already. And I pass over his whole life, and come to his
burial place, which is not now extant by any monument of Winchelseyes tomb.
him in the Church. But certain it is he once had one there, and it stood (say
those Authors) beside the Altar of S. Gregory by the South-wall. This obscure
description of the situation at length I came to understand thus. First I read
in some Records of the Church a gift ad luminare troni qui est contra imaginem
Salvatoris contra altaria Sanctorum Iohannis Evangelistae and Gregorii Papae.
To show me where these altars stood, comes after to my sight the mention of
Altar Sancti Iohannis Evangelistae in Australi cruce. Which laid to the former
I perceive these altars stood in the South crosse-Ile of the Quire, the one
under the one, the other under the other East-window thereof, more assured of
it by viewing the opposite wall, where are tokens of something (most likely
that throne) once affixed to it, but now had away. By the South-wall then of
this Crosse-Ile sometime stood this Archbishops tomb.

About 13 years after his death, Thomas then Earl of Endeavors for his
Canonization.
Lancaster, implored his Canonization at the Popes hands, but without success
for these reasons. Scire te volumus (says the Pope to him Liber Ecc^s. Cant.
) quod Romana matter ecclesia non cons^vit super tanta causa praesertim
praecipitanter aliquid agere, quin potius tale negotium solempnis examinationis
indagine ponderare, propter quod si negotium ipsum credideris promovendum,
oportet quod illud coram fratribus nostris in Consistorio per solempnes
personas ex part Praelatorum Cleri and populi Anglicani vitam, merita, atque
miracula ipsius Archiepiscopi attestantium specialiter destinatas solempniter
proponatur, supplicatione subjuncta, ut inquisitio hujusmodi de vita mirabili,
miraculis etiam and meritis gloriosis person^ idoneis committatur, ut juxta
exitum inquisitionis ipsius canonizatio fieri debeat vel omitti etc. Hereupon
his immediate Successor (Walter Reynolds) and his Suffragans, anno 1326., all
joined in petition to the Pope for his Canonization, directing their letters to
him for that purpose under their several hands and seals: which it seems were
never sent, for the original is yet remaining in the Cathedral. Vidi,
inspexi. And I do not read that he was ever canonized. Yet for his virtues,
the common people would needs esteem him a Saint. And I find treasurers of the
Church account diverse years for offerings to or at his tomb. Therefore it was
afterward pulled down. In the Records both of the Cathedral, and of the
Hospital of Herbaldowne I have seen new Statutes of his making, His Statutes.
namely such as he made and gave to either, upon and after his Visitation of
each place. It was he that first erected perpetual Vicarages in the mother
Church of Reculver, and the Chapells to it (Hearne and St Nicholas) and endowed
them, as I find by an authentical copy of the ordination of those Vicarages
which has come unto my hands.

For the maintenance of the Churches liberties, and ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, he mainly opposed prohibitions Prohibitions.
grown frequent in his days, and caused the Clergies grievances to be drawn
into Articles: whereof see the Antiquitates Britannicae in his life. page 211.
See also page 215. in the life of his Successor Reynolds; and if you would know
what good courses have from time to time sithence been taken to restrain
Prohibitions, see the same Author page 216. in the life of the same Reynolds.
page 286. in the life of Stafford. page 294 in the life of Bourgchier, in which
last place you may find this worthy question properly, by my rendered Author,
subjoyned. Cum itaque (says he) omnis Laicorum Iudicum in Praelatos
quaerimonia, tum cum Romanae Curiae potestas etiam Regibus ipsis terrorem
incussit; sola haec fuit, qd' nisi pleraeque causae ab ecclesiastico foro
ampu^entur, appellationibus a regia cognitione ad populum perferantur: quid
nunc dicere possunt cum pralati Regiam authoritatem and divino verbo sanctius,
and sua jurisdictione multo peritius tueantur quam Causidici? etc.

To return to our Archbishop. He married King Ed. 1. to his second wife
Margaret in his Church at Cant. whose nuptial feast (says Stow) was kept in
the great Hall of his Palace.

Walter Reynolds. 50.
Walter Reynolds succeeded Rob. Winchelsey, who when he had sat Archbishop 13
years and somewhat more, died and was buried in the South-wall of
Christ-Church near the Quire, where his tomb is as yet extant. At his
inthronization (see the state of it in those days) Bartholomew Lord Badlesmere
tendered himself to the Earl of Gloucester chief Steward, to serve in the
office of Chamberlain to the Archbishop, for (or in respect of) his Manor of
Hatfield by Charing Lib. eccles. Cant.
. This occasionally induced, let me set before you in this place the fees which
by ancient Record in the Cathedral appear to have belonged to the Earl of
Gloucester in respect of his office of Steward and Butler to Earl of Gloucester.
the Archbishop of Canterbury on the day of his inthronization: and they were
these.

Ista pertinent ad fe^d. Comitis Gloverniae pro officio senescalli, die
intronizationis cujuslibet Archiepiscopi Cantuar. si tamen summonitus fuerit,
and venerit ad faciendum servitium suum and non aliter.

Idem Comes habebit de Archiepiscopo vij robas de scarleto.

Item xxx sextarios vini.

Item l. libras cer^ ad luminare suum proprium pro toto festo.

Item liberationem feni and avenae ad lxxx equos per 2. noctes tantum.

Item discos and salsaria quae assid^bit coram Archiepiscopo ad primum
ferculum.

Item post festum pcrendinationem trium dierum cum l. equis tantum, sumptibus
Archiepiscopi, ubi idem Comes eligere voluerit de proximis maneriis dicti
Archiepiscopi ad sanguinem min uendum.

Ista pertinent ad feod. ejusdem Comitis, pro Officio Pincernar. die
supradicto, si tamen, etc.

Idem Comes habebit vij robas de scarleto.

Item xx sextarios vini.

Item l. libras cerae.

Item liberationem feni and avenae ad lx equos per 2 noctes tantum.

Item cuppam qua serviet coram Archiep. die festi.

Item omnia dolia evacuata.

Item habebit sex dolia si tot potata fuerint viz. subtus barram, in crastino
festi computo recepto, and licet plura dolia si^ potat^ fuerint, sex tantum
inde habebit, and residuum Archiepiscopo remanebit.

Et nota quod in intronizatione Roberti de Kilewardby Archiepiscopi, praedict'
Comes habuit primo praedicta feoda: and tunc habuit unum mantellum cum penula.
Et postea in intronizatione I. de Peckam Archiepiscopi habuit duos mantellos.

Ista maneria tenet praedict. comes pro dicto officio senescalli faciend. viz.
Tonebregg, cum castro and handlo cum pertinen. and totam leucatam.

Ista maneria tenet praedict. comes pro officio Pincernar. viz. Bradestede.
Vieleston. Horsmandenne. Melton and Pectes.

See more of this (if you please) in Mr Lamberts Perambulation of Kent in
Tunbridge.

To return to our Archbishop. He gave unto his Covent (says Bishop Godwin)
the Manor of Caldcote, and the Caldecote. Thoreholt.
Wood of Thorlehot. Now the Charters of this gift I have seen in the Church
Records, dated Anno 1326. In which the Archbishop gives to the Prior and Covent
manerium nostrum (as his words are) de Caldecotes juxta Cant. cum bosco nostro
de Toreholt: and that by consent of the King and Pope. In the Popes license the
situation and value of the thing, together with the use which the Covent meant
to make of it, and for which they begged it of the Archbishop, is thus
expressed. Cum tu (the Pope so writes to the Archbishop) inter alia mensae tuae
Archiepiscopalis Cant. bona, unum modicum receptaculum vocat' Caldecote juxta
Civitatem Cant. scituat', cum quadam terra eidem adjacen' valoris december
librarum vel circiter ad mensam eandem spectan' obtinere noscaris, quod u^que
receptaculum cum terra praedicta, iidem Prior and Capitulum ac dilecti filii
monachi ecclesia tuae Cantuarien. sanguine minuti, and ceteris laboribus
futigati ibidem interdum propter loci vicinitatem recreari valiant, multum
affectant per te sibi concedi, and in usus eorum perpetuos assignari, etc. In
this passage give me leave to take notice of two things, to show what they
mean and were. The first is that of Sanguinis Sanguinis mi^tio.
minutio, the other is the work or labor what it was that the Monks employed
themselves about. For the former (sanguinis minutio) it was apertio venae ad
minuendum sanguinem. So Reyner in his Onom^sticum. And was used of the Monks
partly (I suppose) to keep their bodies under, and partly physically and for
their health-sake, to evacuate corrupt and bad humors contracted, some may
think, by their unwholesome diet, feeding most what upon fish, and course
fare; and true it is, by their order they were to abstain from eating flesh;
yet hear what Polydor Virgil says (...) (...). (...). Rer. lib. 7. cap. 2.
of that matter. Item a carnibus (says he) perpetuo se abstinent, nisi cum
aegrotare caeperint. Vnde monachi (mark now) qui hodie continenter carnibus
vescuntur, quorum numerus ubique gen^ium extra Italiam ingentissimus est,
perpetuo aegrotent necesse est, nisi velint impudenter fateri se contra suas
leges facere (...). Fras. Co^. In I^opbagia. Fa^r, and defen^ (...) Haius i^
Astro inex^o. q^io. (...) page 130. etc.
. So that I conceive they did thus evacuate not so much for unwholesome as for
full and high feeding, and much ease withal, a course of life contrary to that
of the Primitive Monks, who fared hardly, and not only lived by their labor,
but used it as a principal means of their Mortification Creccelius de Orig.
and fund. Monastic. or^. cap. 1.
.

As for the other point, their work or labor wherein Monks employment.
they employed themselves, and were occupied, it was of diverse kinds. The
Ceremoniale Benedictinum thus sets them forth. Opera autem quibus se occupare
debent, sunt haec: videlicet scribere libros, aut rubricare, velligare,
pergamenum and alia necessaria praeparare, and his similia etc. No longer to
digress this Caldecote Manor sometime lay partly in the old Park and
there-away, about Cockar-barne, as they now call it for Caldcote-barne.

And now return we to our Archbishop. To the Nonnes of Davington by Feversham
which my Author thinks were Ha p^field.
French-women, he gave and prescribed rules or ordinances in the French Tongue,
for their more easy intellect. He amerced the President of S. Bertins, for
leasing out, without his privity, the fruits of Chilham Parsonage which
belonged to the Priory of Throuleigh, a Cell to S. Bertins, and one of those
that in the general suppression of Priors aliens by Hen. 5. was dissolved. And
so much for this Archbishop, Priors aliens.
except I shall remember his appropriation of the Parsonages of Farley and
Sutton to the Hospital at Maidstone of his Predecessor Boniface foundation,
and his like appropriation of the Parsonage of Waldershire to Langdon Abbey,
unto which about the same time King Ed. 1. gave the Parsonage of Tongue.

Simon Mepham. 51. Anno Dom. 1327.

Simon Mepham succeeded Walter Reynolds; and continued Archbishop five years
and somewhat more, and dyed Anno 1333. at Mayfield in Sussex. His body was
conveyed to Canterb. and laid in a Tomb of Black-Marble upon the North-side
of St Anselmes Chapel: that so called at this day, for when he was buried
there, it had another Sai^ Peter's Chapel.
name. The Record of the place and manner with the time of his burial kept in
the Church says he was laid in Quadam capella sancti Petri nuncupata ex part
australi summi altaris. His Tomb is that whereon by error Archbishop Mephams
Tomb mistaken.
Sudburies Table now hangs.

John Stratford. 52.
His Successor was John Stratford who having sat Archbishop about 15. years,
dyed and was buried in a Tomb 1333.
of Alabaster on the South Side of the high Altar, besides the steps of St
Dunstans Altar. By the Table hanging whereon you may easily find it.

John Vfford, or Offord. 53.
Him succeeded John Vfford or Offord. But he never received either his Pall or
Consecration. Of his burial I have 1348.
spoken before in Peckham.

Thomas Bradwardin. 54.
Thomas Bradwardin succeeded, but within five weeks 1348.
and four days after his consecration he dyed, so that he was never
inthronized at all. He was buried in St Anselmes foresaid Chapel, by the
South-wall.

Simon Islip. 55.
Simon Islip was his next Successor. Amongst many other acts of his piety, he
gave unto his Covent to the use of their 1349.
Elemosinary, the Churches or Parsonages of Monkton and Monkton. Eastry.
Eastry; say the Writers of his life. Yet I find these very Churches with
others formerly appropriated to them for that use, to wit by Archbishop
Richard, Beckets immediate Successor, as you may find before in my Survey of
the Almnery. Both relations true. For the Church Muniments inform me that
these Parsonages were taken from the Church by Archbishop Baldwin; that
Richards immediate Successor in and upon the quarrel that was between him and
his Monks (whereof before) and so they continued, at least at the Archbishops
dispose, until this Simon Islip, with the Kings license, did restore, reunite
and annexe them again unto the Church: shortly after which gift of his Vicars
perpetual were ordained and endowed to each Church; Copies of the ordination
and dotation of which Vicarages I have seen in the Liegers of the Church,
where they are fairly registered. But to our Archbishop again. With his
consent Buckland Parsonage was appropriated to H^.
the Priory of Dover, as was the Parsonage there to Bilsington Priory. He dyed
Anno 1366. after he had been Archbishop 16. years and upwards: and was
sometime buried under a fair Tomb of Marble inlaid with Brass in the middle,
and near the upper end of the Body of his Church, sithence removed and set
between the two next Pillars on the North-side thereof. The times were very
mortal, by the raging of the plague, when he came first to the Sea, as Great
mo^aility. Note.
from Walsingham, is noted by Harpesfield, with this note of his upon it. Cum
vero (says he) propter hanc hominum animaliumque ceterorum pestilenti^m, agri
passim inculti, vasti, and deserti jacerent, and possessores solitis redditibus
destituerentur; coacti sunt non modo de solita pensione remittere, sed etiam
agros omni rustica facultate instructos colonis locare. Quod and si a laicis
possessoribus, ad rem attentioribus observari fere desitum est, in praediis
tamen coenobiorum, Episcoporum and collegiorum mos ille frequens, ad
nostrausque tempora, maximo colonorum emolumento perduravit.

Simon Langham. 56. Anno Dom. 1366.

Simon Langham succeeded Islip. Who sat only two years, dyed Anno 1376. was
first buried at Avinion (where he dyed) in the Church of the Carth^sians (whose
house he had founded,) but afterward at Westminster (where he had been first a
Monk, afterward Prior, and lastly Abbat) in a goodly Tomb of Alabaster.

William Wittlesey. 57.
William Wittlesey succeeded Langham, who having continued in the Sea, almost
seven years, dyed in the year 1368.
1374. and was buried almost over against (his Uncle) Simon Islip, between two
Pillars on the South side of the body of the Church, under a fair Marble Tomb
inlaid with Brass, as his Table will direct.

Simon Sudbury. 58.
Him next succeeded Simon Sudbury: who being barbarously murdered by the
Rebels in Rich. 2. days, Anno 1375.
Domini 1381. his body after all stirs ended was carried to Canterbury, and
there honorably interred upon the South Side of the Altar of St Dunstan, the
next above the Tomb Sudbury his Tomb mistaken.
of Archbishop Stratford, and is that (as in Odo I told you) whereon Odo's
Table hangs. The place (I take it) or near it where his predecessor St
Elpheges Altar-Tombe sometimes stood. That as there was but little or no
difference between them, in the condition either of their lives or deaths,
they being both Archbishops of the place and both unworthily murdered (I might
say martyred) by the outrage of the people, a rabble of cruel assassinats, of
Danes the one, ofDomestickes the other, little better then devils incarnate
both, so there might also be little or no distance in their sepulchers or
resting places after death. He built the West-gate of our City together with
the greatest part of the Wall between it and the Northgate, commonly called by
the name of the Long-Wall. A great work (says my Author) no less necessary
and profitable unto the City then costly and chargeable unto the builder.
Leland.
The Mayor and Aldermen once a year, used to come solemnly to his Tomb to
pray for his soul in memory of this his good deed to their City. To remedy and
remove which piece of superstition (I take it) his Epitaph (some tokens whereof
are yet discernable) was torn and taken from his Tomb at or since the
Reformation. Wevers Monuments has this fragment of it.

Sudburiae natus Simon jacet hic tumulatus
Martyrizatus nece pro republica stratus.
Heu scelus infernum, crux, exitiale, nefandum
Praesulis eximii corpus venerabile dandum
In rabiem vulgi --
William Courtney. 59.
William Courtney succeeded Simon Sudbury, and having sat twelve years
lacking one month, dyed Anno 1396. at 1381.
Maidstone. Where he pulled down the old work first built by Boniface his
predecessor for an Hospital, and building it after a more stately manner
translated it into a College of secular Priests, which at the time of the
suppression was Maidstone College.
valued at 139l. 7s. 6d. by the year. This Archbishop lies buried (says
Bishop Godwyn) upon the South Side of Thomas Beckets shrine, at the feet of the
black Prince in a goodly Tomb of Alabaster. But what says Wever? It was the
custom of old (says he) and so it is in these days for men of eminent rank
and quality, to have Tombs erected in more places then one; for example and
proof of my speech, I find here in this Church a Monument of Alabaster at the
feet of the black Prince, wherein both by tradition and writing, it is
affirmed that the bones of William Courtney (the son of Hugh Courtney, the
third of that Christian name, Earl of Devonshire) Archbishop of this See lies
intombed. And I find another to the memory of the same man at Maidstone here
in Kent, wherein (because of the Epitaph) I rather believe that his body lies
buried. Thus he. His place of burial appointed of him in his Will extant
Contradiction about the place of Courtneys burial.
in Christ-Church was the Cathedral at Exceter, where he had sometime been a
Prebendary, and where he requested the Bishop of the place to bury him.
Afterward lying on his death bed and having changed his mind in this point;
and holding his body (as he then declared) unworthy of burial in his
Metropolicall or any other Cathedral or Collegiate Church, he wills it to be
buried in the Churchyard of his Collegiate-Church at Maidstone, in loco
designato Iohanni Boteler armigero suo (as his own words are.) Thus you see
his Will sends us to seek his burial place at Exceter. His after declaration
on his death bed, to the Cimitery of his Collegiate Church at Maidstone. His
Monument in that Church says he lies there, and this in Christ-Church, that he
is in none of the three but here. And that I take to be the truest. For I find
in a Lieger Book of Christ-Church, that the King (Rich. 2.) happening to be at
Canterb. when he was to be buried (upon the Monks suite, it is like) overruled
the matter, and commanded his body to be there interred.

This Archbishop upon the overture of an intended invasion Clergy armed and
rated.
by the French, directs his letters to the then Commissary of Cant. to arm the
Clergy of the City and Diocese after these rates and proportions Ex Registro
Courtney.
. A benefice exceeding 100 marks to find a man and two Archers, a benefice
exceeding xll. to find two Archers, a benefice of xxl. one Archer, and for
those under xxl. to find Loricas, coats of male and other smaller a^mes.
Here, as from a fit occasion, Archery.
let us observe by the way the alteration of the times in point of martial and
military weapons. The Bow, (the long Bow) and the Bow-man, we all know, were
those which did the deed, and bare away the Bell in martial brunts in former
times, the Bow then the prime weapon for offensive service, and the chiefest
instrument war knew wherewith to try the mastery; the Gun, and Gunshot being
but of late (though too soon heaven knows whilst earth rues) invented: and
yet so cried up and magnified, by Martiallists especially, that the Bow the
whilst is quite rejected with contempt as useless, and doomd and deemd at
best as only fit for men of peace in way of recreation to sport withal. Now
being grounded in a good opinion of Archery my self, and not unwilling to
vindicate the under valuation A worthy commendati* of it.
of it with other men, I desire here to recommend unto my reader a worthy and
judicious Elogie one commendation of (Englands ancient glory.) Archery; not my
own, nor yet any mere Mercurians, one able to judge only by theoreticall
speculation, but a learned disciples both of Mars and Mercury, one equally
experienced in both warfares, the armed and gowned; Master John Bingham I
mean, in his Notes upon Aelians Tactiks, where he plays the part of a most
excellent advocate for discarded Archery. The Book is now somewhat dear and
scarce, and therefore to save their labor and cost (of searching the
original) who can endure to see despised Archery commended according to it
worth, I shall present them with a true Copy of that whole passage verbatim, as
there it lies, page 24. and so forward. It is somewhat long; for avoiding
therefore of too great an interruption and digression here, I have given it a
place in my Appendix, where you may find it, Scriptura 15a. Craving pardon for
this digression, I return to our Archbishop.

He had the Bailiffes of Canterbury in question for meddling in and with
ecclesiastical matters, as the punishment of Adultery Meddling in Church
matters by Laics punished.
and the like, and made them to submit sub poena interdicti Civitatis. He had
the Sergeants of the City also in coram, for bearing their Maces and using
their authority within the precinct of his Church. But at the petition of the
City they were dismissed, provided that for time to come they leave their Maces
without the utter-gate when they come to the Church, or within the precinct. He
had the Bailiffes of Romney also in coram, for meddling in Churchbusinesse, who
obstinately rebelled and sought and thought to secure themselves by a
prohibition, but were deceived, for the Archbishop gat it reversed, and (says
the Record) made that unadvised Town submit. He obtained Liber Eccles. Cant.
of Ric. 2. four Faires for the Church at the four principal feasts of
peregrination in the year, viz. one on the Innocents-day, on Witson-Eve
another, on the Eve of Beckets translation a third, and the fourth and last on
Michaelmas-Eve, to hold for nine days next following every of them, and be
kept within the site of the Priory.

Thomas Arundell. 60.
Thomas Arundell next succeeded after Courtney. Who sat one month above 17
years, and dyed Anno 1413. He 1396.
lies buried (as his Table will show) on the North-side of the body of
Christ-Church, where doubtless he sometime had a far better Monument then
now remains of him. For his Will appoints out his burial thus. In Monumento
meo novo quod ad hoc lices indignissime construi and fieri feci in oratorio
Arundels Monument.
meo in navi sanctae Cant. ecclesiae, infra Cantariam meam perpetuam duorum
Capellanorum ibidem ordinatam, etc. But Chantery and Monument are both gone, a
bare gravestone His Chantery.
levelled with the floor, with the brass all shamefully torn away being
only left; whereas you may know there sometimes stood a Chapel (like to that
I suppose of Bishop Kemp on the North-side of the Body of Paul's) wherein both
the Archbishop lay fairly intombed, and his two Chanterists did daily
celebrate, which had for their stipend xl. a piece yearly out of Northfleet
Parsonage: and their dwelling or Mansion which was built for them by himself ex
australi part ecclesiae, and contained in length 80. and in breadth 60 foot
measured. I suppose it yet standing, and to be one of those present buildings
on the South Side of the Churchyard. The Chapel (as I learn from the report
of the Chantery Priest thereof) was taken down and sold away by H. 8. his
Commissioners. This Archbishop Harpsfield. Bredgare.
confirmed the foundation of the College of Bredgare, to which the Parish
Church there was in his time converted by Robert then Parson thereof. In the
year 1413. what year this Archbishop died I find Walsingham.
him an Inhabitant in the Castle of Leeds in Kent, which in a decree or
sentence which he gave between his Monks and the Covent of S. Gregory's by
Cant. dated at that place, the same year, he calls his own Castle. (...).
Dat' (says he) in Castello meo de Ledes.

Henry Chicheley. 61. Anno Dom. 1414.

Henry Chicheley succeeded next after Thomas Arundell. He sat 29 years, and
dying anno 1443. was laid in a very fair tomb built by himself in his life
time, standing on the North-side of the Presbytery. It is the tomb which was
lately repaired and beautified by the All-souls-colledge men, whose founder he
was. His table will direct you to it. Lindewood dedicating his Provincial to
this Archbishop styles him Dei gratia, Cantuarien' Archiep. And no marvel Dei
gratia.
for 600 year before, his predecessor Archbishop Athelard uses the style,
writing himself thus. Ego Aethilheardus, gratia Dei humilis sanctae
Dorobernensis ecclesiae Archiepiscopus etc. The like D. H. Spelman. Glessar. in
verb. Dei gratia.
was usual in the styles of other Archbishops. And not only Archbishops,
Bishops, and Dukes, in times past used the same in their titles, but also
Abbats, Priors, Earls, yea the meanest Magistrates and Legates sometimes, Earls
especially which had Iura Regalia, and mitred Abbats. But Kings in the mean
season disdaining and displeased at it, and challenging it as the symboll and
proof of their (save under God) independent Majesty, by little and little it
became either wholly omitted or else altered, as our Archbishops into
providentia divina, or permissione divina. Mr Seldom will instruct you more at
large in this matter, if you peruse the 1. part of his titles of Honor cap. 7.
2. Unto whom let me add a pertinent discourse hereof. The author of it,
Roverius, in his Illustrations upon the History of S. John's Monastery at Rheims
page 618. Fecerant (says he) liberae electiones, and Pontificiae exemptiones,
ut horum temporum Abbates (speaking of the year 1192.) se Dei solius gratia
constitutos censerent, atque inter dignitatis titulos hunc etiam annumerarent.
Neque vero hoc primum saeculo natus est hic sensus, cum anno jam Mxxx.
Gandensis Abbas S. Bavonis sic scriberet. Otginae Comitissae Othelboldus gratia
Dei Abbas, and annis plusquam centenis ante Abbas S. Galli; Christi favente
gratia Harm^tus Abbas, and Christi disponente providentia, aut largiente
clementia, Crimaldus Abba. Verum ii, qui amantiores erant humilitatis
religiosae, non facile comperiuntur hoc usi sermon. Neque ehim vel
Cluniacensis ullus, vel Bernardus Claraevallensis, vel Gofridus Vindocinensis,
vel Lupus Ferrariensis id sibi usquam tituli arrogarunt. Nam sive ea voce
significetur Praefecturam Deo soli debitam, subditamve esse, sive Monasterio
beneficium a Deo impertitum, quod vir talis fuerit Praefectus, sive Abbati
gratiam a Deo factam, quod sit Praefectus, non potest non aliquid continere
sensus, quam humilitatem religiosam deceat, sublimioris, cum id de seipso Abbas
profitetur, qui nec satis vere potest affirmare supremum sibi jus esse, vel
sacrarum, vel temporalium rerum sui Monasterii, nec satis dimisse sua in
Monasterium merita jactare, nec satis tuto Praefecturam, quae gravissimum onus
est pro divino favore habere. Itaque sapientissimi quique, and si aliis hunc
titulum tribuunt, nunquam tamen sibi, dignum videlicet rati, ut de aliis
sentiant, quod de se non ausint. Quamobrem suspicari licet has voces pluribus
Abbatum chartis, actisque publicis non tam illorum quam pragmaticorum usu, ac
instituto invectas, dum Abbates inducunt de seipsis eo loquentes modo, quo ipsi
pragmatici sibi de illis sentiebant loquendum. Quanquam videri etiam possit has
voces a Librariis in antiqua interdum scripta ex sui saeculi moribus intrusas.
Vix enim ante secundam Regum Franciae stirpem, aut Reges supremam pet^statem
rerum civilium, aut Episcopi rerum sacrarum his verbis expresserunt. Sane and
Episcopi, and Abbates aliqui invidiam titulo praeclare aliquando emollierunt,
aut potius sunt interpretati, dum se permissione, aut concessione Dei
Episcopos, vel Abbates dixere etc.

John Stafford. 62. Anno Dom. 1443.

John Stafford succeeded. Sat almost nine years, and dying anno 1452. was
buried in the Martyrdom, under a flat marble stone inlaid with brass.

John Kemp. 63.
John Kemp succeeded next. He continued not in the Sea 1452. (...) College.
above a year and an half. The Parish Church of Wy in Kent where he was born,
he converted into a College, in which he placed secular Priests to attend
divine service, and to teach the youth of their Parish. Their Governor was
called a Prebendary. This College at the suppression was valued at 93 lib. 2s
by the year. It was surrendered anno 36. Hen. 8. This Archbishop, with his two
next Successors were Cardinals.

Thomas Bourgchier. 64.
Thomas Bourgchier succeeded Cardinal Kemp, continued Archbishop 32 years,
and dying anno 1486. was buried 1454.
upon the North-side of the high Altar in a marble tomb. He gave to his
Successor by his Will 200 lib. in recompense of dilapidations. He had a
Chantery. The revenues whereof were surrendered with the Priory to the King (H.
8.)

John Morton. 65.
John Morton succeeded. Thirteen years he enjoyed 1487.
the Archbishopric, died the year 1500. He lies buried in the Lady-chapell
of the Vndercroft under a marble stone. Howbeit a goodly tomb is erected in
memory of him upon the South Side of the Chapel.

Henry Deane 66.
Henry Deane succeeded, who died anno 1502. the second 1501.
year after his translation, and was buried in the Martyrdom.

William Warham. 67. Anno Dom. 1504.

William Warham succeeded Henry Deane. The pomp and state of whose
entertainment and inthronization you may read of at large elsewhere. He
continued Archbishop 28 years, and died at S. Stephens near Canterb. in the
house of William Warham his kinsman, Archdeacon of Cant. and was laid in a
little Chapel built by himself for the place of his burial upon the
North-side of the Martyrdom, and has there a reasonable fair tomb, where he
founded a perpetual Chantery of one Priest daily to say mass for his soul,
but the dissolution of the Priory suppressed it, and seized the revenues
thereof to the Kings use. Erasmus Pereg^natio Relig. ergo.
(upon whom this Archbishop bestowed the Parsonage of Aldington in Kent) so
commends him for his humanity, learning, integrity and piety, that (as he
concludes) nullam absoluti praesulis dotem in eo desideres.

Thomas Cranmer. 68.
Thomas Cranmer succeeded, being consecrated Archbishop anno 1533. and suffered
most unworthy death at Oxford 1533.
anno 1556. He was the man designed to succeed in the Chair by his predecessor,
who though he foresaw and foretold too, that a Thomas should succeed him, who
(as my Author says, slandereth I should say) per laxam and remissam vitae
Harpsfield.! Warhams evil prseage of a Thomas.
licentioris indulgentiam populo concessam, perque prava dogmata, magis
Cantuariensem, omnemque reliquam Angliae ecclesiam deformaret, quam eam olim
Thomas Martyr suo martyrio amplificasset; admonuitque nepotem, ut si quis forte
Thomas, eo vivo ea sede potiretur, ne ulla ratione in illius famulitium se
ascribi pateretur etc. Yet to see, he pitches upon this man (a Thomas) in his
choice of a successor. Waramus aute^ (says the same Author) eum ipsum Thomam,
de quo tam male ominabatur, quique primus ex omnibus Cantuariae Episcopis
haeresim (so he slanders our religion) in eam sedem invexit, successorem sibi
sortitus est.

Reginald Poole 69.
Reginald Poole otherwise and more vulgarly called Cardinal Pooole succeeded.
Two years and almost eight 1555.
months he continued Archbishop, and died even the same day that Queen Mary
did. His body was (and lies) intombed on the North-side of Beckets crown, where
his monument is extant. He was the last Archbishop that was buried in
Christ-church. Their burialls there have been ever since Burial of the
Archbishops in Christ-Church discontinued.
discontinued; a thing the whilst to some seeming very strange, that of all
the Archbishops since the Reformation, not one has liked to be buried there,
but all, as it were with one consent, declined their own Cathedral (the
ancient and accustomed place of Archiepiscopall sepulture) and choosing rather
an obscure burial in some one private Parish Church or other.

Matthew Parker. 70. Anno Dom. 1559.

Matthew Parker succeeded Cardinal Poole in the Archbishopric, held the same
15 years and 5 months and deceased anno 1575. Besides a multitude of pious
acts, he bestowed upon the reparation of his Palace at Canterb. one thousand
four hundred pounds. He lies buried in the Chapel of Lambeth house. Amongst
other his works, with the help no doubt of other able Antiquaries, he wrote the
lives of his predecessors, the Archbishops of Canterb. intituling his book. De
Antiquitate Britannicae Ecclesiae etc. Whereof Cuiacius (having occasion to
make mention of it Ad cap. qu^ s^te. de Appellationib.
) gives this commendation. Sunt multa (says he) in eo auctore praeclara, nomen
ejus ignoratur, and liber tantum exstat in Anglia, unde accersitur, and
accersitus est magno pretio.

Edmund Grindall. 71.
Edmund Grindall succeeded, and sat seven years and 1575.
almost an half, and died and was buried at Croydon. He was a very grave man,
and gave to our City C. lib. to be employed upon a stock to set the poor on
work.

John Whitgift. 72. 1583. Hosp. and School at Croydon.

John Whitgift succeeded and continued Archbishop somewhat above 20 years. In
which mean space he built the Hospital and School at Croydon. After the
finishing whereof S^ George Paul, in his ^fe.
, the French Lieger Ambassador, Boys Sisi, inquiring what works the Archbishop
had published, and receiving answer that he had written only in defense of
Church government, but it being incidently told him that he had founded an
Hospital and a School: Profecto (says he presently) Hospitale ad sublevandum
paupertatem, and Schola ad instruendum juventutem sunt optimi libri quos
Archiepiscopus conscribere potuit. He lies buried at Croydon.

Richard Bancroft. 73. Anno Dom. 1604.

Richard Bancroft succeeded and sat 6 years or thereabouts, died anno 1610. A
man of singular wisdom, and very zealous in defense both of Church-liberties
and discipline.

George Abbot. 74.
George Abbot succeeded, he sat Archbishop 22 years. In which space of time
he bestowed great sums of money in 1611
building and indowing of an Hospital at Guilford in Surrey, the Town wherein
he was born, and afterward buried. He ^uilord Hosp.
began also to show himself a special benefactor to our City: witness the
goodly conduit which he built for the common Conduit at Canterbury.
good and service of the same. A work as of great charge to the Author, so of
no less benefit to the City. He died in July Anno Domini 1633.

William Laud. 75.
After whom succeeded the present Lord Archbishop his Grace, by name William
Laud, by title Primate of all England, and Metropolitan, one of the LL. of his
Majesty's most honorable privy Council, and Chancellor of the University of
Oxford. Of whom to speak, is not a task for my pen. I leave it to posterity
hereafter, and to better abilities to set forth his constant piety, great
wisdom and spotless justice. Howbeit, what all men take unto themselves a
liberty to speak of him, I shall be bold to commemorate, namely those famous
works of his that so much praise him in the gate: As his care, his cost, his
encouragement to the repair of what all men despaired as much to see repaired
until he undertook it, as ever they did to see it finished, Stow. Godwyn.
when Mauritius first began to build it, S. Paul's Church in London. Another,
that never to be forgotten gift of his to the Vniversity-library of Oxford, of
an innumerable multitude of choice and rare Manuscripts, with his great care
and cost, gathered from all parts not only of this Kingdom, but also of the
whole world. A third, the flourishing of the same University by his means in
a twofold way; one, in the government of it, by his late new Statutes; the
other, in buildings, at S. John's first, at his own proper cost and charges;
and by his example and furtherance, in other Colleges, such buildings all and
so goodly, as none did ever expect, and all do now admire to see raised.

Now that Providence, which by the means of a most pious and prudent King sent
him unto us, grant we may long enjoy him, and afterward translate him from the
cares of the Church militant here, to the joys of that triumphant one above.

If any shall desire to see the ancient form of our Archbishops Inthronization
of the Archbishop of Cant. the form of it. Vide pro Scriptura 16. in Append.
inthronization, he may find it in my Appendix, transcribed from a Record of
that of Archbishop Winchelseys, kept in the Church, and (as it may be supposed
by the general title of it) intended for a precedent in this kind. And so
having done with the first part of my intended Catalogue, to wit concerning the
Archbishops of Canterb. I proceed to the second. viz.

A Catalogue of the Priors of Christ-Church, with a brief touch of the
contemporary Monks of note.
Until the Conquerours time, I find no mention of any Prior of Christ-Church.
Henry brought hither by Archbishop Lanfrank, being the first I meet with.
Aforetime (it seems) he that held the place was called Decanus ecclesiae. So it
is intimated by Archbishop Parker in the life of Agelnoth, who tells also that
Celnoth the Archbishop, almost 200 years before, was first Deane of the
Church. A Saxon Record of this Church makes mention of one Aethelwine a Deane
also in the same Archbishops time, and another Record tells of another, one
Godric in Archbishops Stigands days, whom the book of Doomsday makes mention
of. Further then thus I am not instructed in the names of those Deanes:
wherefore I must pass them over and come to the Priors.

Henry. 1. Anno Dom. 1080.

Whereof (as I said) Henry was the first: Sometime Abbat of Cane in Normandy:
from thence brought hither by Lanfrank, and made Prior of this Church.
Afterward he became Abbat of Battle in Sussex Reyner. Apost. Benedictin.
, and so died.

Ernulphus, or Arnulphus. 2.
Ernulphus or Arnulphus, first a Monk of the Church, afterward 1104.
became Prior, succeeding Henry: then was preferred to the Abbatship of
Peterborough, and lastly had the Bishopric of Rochester given him by his
Predecessor in that See, Ralfe, the Archbishop of Canterb. you may read more
of him in the Catalogue of BB. in Rochester, and in Fox his Acts and Monuments
you shall find a letter directed to him and others about Priests marriages.

Conradus. 3.
Conradus a Monk also of the place succeeded Ernulphus, made Prior as his
Predecessor by Archbishop Anselme. Of 1108.
whom, and of Henry Predecessor to them both, Edmerus makes this mention. Res
Monachorum (says he, speaking of Anselme) posuit in dispositione suorum,
constituens eis in Priorem, post Henricum, Ernulphum, post Ernulphum, Conradum
(ipsius loci Monachos) ad quorum nutum negotia ecclesiae cuncta referrentur.
Which is all I read of him.

Elmerus or Ailmerus. 4.
Elmerus or Ailmerus succeeded Conradus. He was first 1112.
also a Monk, afterward Prior of Christ-church, and continued Prior eighteen
years, dying in the year 1130. He was contemporary with Edmerus and
Alexander, both famous Monks of the place, great ornaments to the Church, and
very dear both of them unto Archbishop Anselme. This Prior wrote diverse
Treatises mentioned of Pitseus, who will further inform you both of him, and
those his Coaetaneans. Here by the way to do Balaeus right, let me note it once
for all, that Pitseus for these and many other like things which Pitseus Bal^us
his Plagiary.
I shall have occasion to cite him for, is but Balaeus his Plagiary; yet I
rather quote him then Balaeus, because his Book is more common and easy to
get.

Gosfridus. 5.
The next Prior after Elmerus, was Gosfridus, who (as I 1128.
have it from the Continuer of Florence of Worceter) in the year 1128. was at
the suite of David of Scots, by the consent of the Archbishop (William Corboyl)
chosen Abbat of the Monastery of Dunfermelin in Scotland. Vir religionis
eximiae (my Authors own words) Cantuariae Prior Gosfridus nomine, Rege
Scotorum David petente, and Archiepiscopo Gulielmo annuente, Abbas eligitur ad
locum in Scotia qui Dunfermelin dicitur. Ordinatus est autem ab Episcopo
ecclesiae sancti Andreae. A petition to this purpose of the same Scottish King
is extant to this day amongst the Records of the Cathedral, where I have seen
and read it.

Ieremias. 6.
Ieremias (a Monk also of the place) succeeded Elmerus. 1130.
Of whom I read in the Acts and Monuments, that Archbishop Theobald falling
out with him for certain causes between them, for which the Archbishop taking
stomach against him would lay the sentence of Interdiction against him: The
Prior, to save himself, made his appeal to Pope Innocent. The Archbishop
provoked the more by that, deposed him from the Priorship, and placed one
Walter in his room. Ieremias notwithstanding making his complaint and appeal
to Rome, obtained letters from the Pope to Henry Bishop of Winchester, being
the Popes Legate; by the virtue whereof he against the heart of the Archbishop
was restored, and Walter displaced. Nevertheless, the said Jeremy, not willing
there to continue with displeasure of the Archbishop, shortly after of his own
accord renounced his Priory, and Walter again was received in his stead. Thus
Master Fox. Bishop Godwyn in his Catalogue, in the life of Archbishop Theobald,
writing of this matter, by mistake affirms him to have been Prior of Saint
Austins. That he is herein mistaken you shall plainly perceive both by Matthew
Paris. page 103. London edition. and by Archbishop Parker in the life of
Theobald, if you please to consult them; of whom the latter tells, that this
Jeremy had given him in consideration of his surrender of the Priory 100
marks. These things happened (you see) in the time of Pope Innocent the
second, who dyed Anno 1143. This Prior is mentioned by Harpesfield in the story
of the new work of Dover by Corboyl.

Walterus. 7.
Walterus (as you see) was made his Successor. I find him surnamed Durusdens,
in English Durdent, or Hard-tooth. 1143.
Pitseus in his Appendix to his Catalogue of English-Writers, mentions one of
the name, this very Prior in all probability; and gives him a large Enconium,
for his great learning, especially in divinity, and mentions some of his works
you may read more of him in the story of the strife between Archbishop
Theobald and Sylvester the 45. Abbat of Saint Austins, about his consecration,
opposed of this Prior in the year 1151. recorded in the Acts and Monuments,
part. 1a. page 307.

Walterus parvus. 8.
Walterus (to distinguish him from his predecessor) surnamed Parvus succeeded,
whom I know only by his name, 1151.
and the time in which he lived.

Wibertus. 9.
And so must I say of his next successor Wibert, saving that his burial place
is lately come to my knowledge by this inscription 1160.
in Brass on a gravestone in the Chapter House. Hic jacet Wibertus quondam
Prior hujus ecclesiae.

Odo. 10.
Odo succeeded Wibert, and was Prior in Archbishop Beckets days. After whose
death (says Master Fox) there 1170. Acts and Monum. vol. 1. page 307.
was a great stir between the King (Hen. 2.) and this Prior about the choice
of a new Archbishop. For the King (says my Author) seeing the Realm so
oftentimes encumbered by those Popish Archbishops, and fearing least the Monks
of Canterbury should elect such another as would follow the steps of Thomas
Becket, most humbly with cap in hand, and courtesy of knee, desired Odo the
Prior, that at his request, and for contentation of his mind, such a one might
be elected whom he would appoint (appointing and naming a certain Bishop,
which was a good simple man after the Kings liking;) but the Prior
dissemblingly answering the King again that he neither could nor would without
the consent of the Covent give promise to any man: in fine, contrary to the
Kings so humble request, agreed to the election of another, which was the Prior
of Dover called Richard Anno 1173. who continued in that sea eleven years.
Thus Fox. His Covent and he (as the same Author reports) fell out about his
translating the relics of Saint Dunstan. This doubtless is the man whom
Pitseus mentions, and calls St Odo. A man (says he) of approved virtue, and
eminent learning. From Prior of this Church he was translated and preferred to
be Abbat of Battle, says the same Pitseus. One Sampson Dorobernensis, a man
famous also for his piety and learning, was his equal in time, and companion
in place, being a Monk of this Church about the year 1170.

Benedictus. 11.
Benedictus succeeded Odo. And in the year 1177. was a 1177.
party to the composition made between him and his Covent on the one side and
the Abbat and Covent of St Austins on the other, touching the houses and ground
on the Southside of the Churchyard of Christ-Church, by the Campanile sometime
standing there, exchanged by St Austins with Christ-Church for other like
elsewhere, whereof before in my Survey of the precinct. See more of him you may
in Pitseus, who says that from this Priory he was translated to the Abbey of
Peterborough, and therefore is known by the surname of Petriburgensis, and
dyed about the year 1200.

Herlewinus. 12.
Herlewinus succeeded Benedictus, and was Prior in the days of Pope Alex. 3.
(who dyed 1181.) for I find him direct 118^.
his Bulls to this Prior by name, commanding that the Offerings of the Church
should be disposed of in resta^rationem ecclesiae, etc. Extreme Age having
indisposed him for government he gave over his place, and had to his Successor

Alanus. 13.
This Alanus (Harpesfield says) was first a Canon of Beneventum, but
English-borne, afterward Sacrist or Sexton of 1181.
this Church, then Prior, and lastly made Abbat of Teuxbury. He wrote much; the
particulars of whose labors you may find in Pitseus. Being Sexton he was very
intimate with Archbishop Becket. But afterward when he was Prior he opposed
himself against Baldwin, both in his election, and in his proceedings
afterward: by whose policy, because he could not win him to his side, under
the pretense of his preferment he at length procured his removal from this
Priory to the Abbatship of Tewksbury: where he lived till the year 1201. and
then dyed. He was doubtless a strict and stout prelate. For I read (...).
eccles. (...) Cant.
that in the year 1181. when, in a Procession at Christ-Church, one St Robert
Mortimer an excommunicate person for his contumacy, quia noluit juri parere,
super injuria quam fecerat Cantuar. ecclesiae de quadam pastura, quam abstulit
manerio eorum quod dicitur Depeham: intruded himself into the company: this
Prior, Alan, espying of him there, informs the Archbishop, who was then
present, of it, and that a second time because the Archbishop would have
connived at it; the Archbishops servants dissuading the Prior because of the
Kings displeasure. At length because the Prior saw the Archbishop would take no
notice of it, he tells him that since he will not use his authority without, he
will use his own within the Church. And accordingly being entered the Church
and at mass, the Prior requires the Covent to surcease, who obeyed, and so the
excommunicate to his shame was by strong hand cast out of the Church, and then
they proceeded in their devotions. You may see more of this Prior in the story
of the troubles happening between Archbishop Baldwyn and the Monks of his
Church recorded in the Acts and Monuments. vol. 1. page 308.

Honorius. 14. Roger Norris. 15. Osbertus. 16. Anno Dom. 1185.

Honorius succeeded Alanus: of whom and of his next Successor Roger Norris, as
also of Osbertus, or Osbernus his next Successor, you may read in that story I
last mentioned: where it is said that Honorius died at Rome, whither he was
sent to oppose Baldwyn in his project for the College at Hackington: And that
Roger was made Prior in his stead: 1189.
by Baldwyn who obtruded him upon the Monks, whereupon in their treaty for
conditions of peace and composition, one article was, that this Prior should be
deposed; And accordingly he was so, and at the request of the Archbishop
promoted to be Abbat of Eusham, and with consent of the King and Covent
Osbernus designed and made Prior, who 1190.
had before taken part with the Archbishop,: but continued not long in the
place; for the Monks not pleased with him, after Baldwins death, removed him
again. About this time one William Stephens (or Gulielmus Stephanides) a famous
Monk, lead his life in this Monastery, of whom you may read a large Encomium
in Pitseus.

Gaufridus or Galfridus. 17.
Gaufridus or Galfridus succeeded Osber. Letters or Bulls 1192.
like to those above mentioned sent by Pope Alex. to Herlewin his predecessor,
and as were also directed by Pope Urban 3. to Honorius the Prior, I find
inscribed to this Prior by Pope Innocent 3. I meet also with certain letters of
his and the Covent, whereby, with cons^nt of Hubert the Archbishop, and at the
petition of M (...) then Custos or keeper of that house, they take the leprous
Hospital of S. Jacobs near Cant. into their custody and protection, S. I^bs.
Reyner. (...) (...). page (...). and 107.
as I have more at large made appear unto you in my survey of that quondam
Hospital. In this man's time the controversy between the Monks and the
Suffragans of the Province, about the choice of the Archbishop was decided by
the decree of Pope Innocent 3. and the same Pope by another decree and letters
to the Archbishop discarded secular Clerks out of the Church and Monastery.
Contemporary with this Prior was the famous Gervasius Dorobernensis a Monk of
this Church a great Historian and Antiquary, as Pitseus will inform you: as
also of Nigellus Wireker another like Monk: and chantor of the Church, on whom
my Author, from Leland bestows a most ample commendation for his piety and
excellent indowments.

Iobn Sittingbourne. 18. Anno Dom. 1206.

John (from I suppose the place of his birth) surnamed Sittingbourne succeeded,
and was Prior in the time of the Churches troubles about the election of a new
Archbishop to succeed Hubert, the Story whereof is obvious, and was with his
Monks, 64 in number, by King John on that occasion sent into banishment. Whose
places he caused to be filled Monks banished.
with certain Monks out of S. Anstin's Abbey: But the storm at length being
after 7 years banishment, blown over, they were called home, full restitution
was made both to him and them every way, and 1000 lib. given them for
recompense of all detriments as our Stories witness, together Matt. Paris page
315. Land. Editio.
with a Charter of Restitution, which because our stories have it not, I have
thought good to annex and add as a Corollary to the story, and I find it to
be of this tenor, in a Lieger of the Church. Johannes Dei gratia Rex Angliae,
Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Normanniae and Aquitanniae and Comes Andeg. Omnibus
Vicecomitibus, and Forrestariis, and Ballivis suis salutem. Praecipimus
volentes quod Priorem and Monachos Cant. pacifice habere permittatis omnes
libertates and liberas consuetudines suas in Ballivis vestris sicut habuerunt
tempore inchoatae discordiae inter nos and ipsos. Test meipso apud Winton xx^
die Iulii.



This Prior afterward, to wit in the Vacancy by the death of Richard the
great, was designed to the Archbishopric 1234.
by the free election of the Chapter, but going to Rome for Fox Acts and-Mon.
vol. 1. page 356.
confirmation, though the Cardinals designed for his examination gave
testimony to the Pope of his fitness and sufficiency: yet the Pope persuading
him it was a Province (or office) of too great care and difficulty for him to
manage being an aged plain man, he humbly renounced the election, and craved
license to return home, and S. Edmund afterward filled the Chair by the Popes
provision.

Rogerus de la Lee. 19. Anno Dom. 1234.

Rogerus de la Lee succeeded John Sittingbourne. I find him and his Covent in
the year 1242. enter into composition with the Abbat and Covent of S. Austins
touching diverse matters then in difference between them, especially maritime
rights and customs at Ministre and Sandwich, a copy whereof you may find in
my Appendix Scriptura 17.

Nicholaus de Sandwico. 20.
Nicholas of Sandwich succeeded: but I find nothing 1244.
of him more; Unless that be (as its like enough to be) his Epitaph or
Inscription, which I lately holp to discover, being in somewhat a strange and
unwonted character, after the old fashion, cut into the stone at the foot of a
buttresse, on the South Side of Beckets-chapell, a little within the Coemitery
Gate, and, if read, runs thus.

Respice: care: mere: rogo: defuncti: miserere:
Sandwicensis: vivens: frater: memor: en: sis:
Qui: nunc: in Limo::e: stricte: jacet: ymo:
Dic: Pater: hinc: and: Ave: Deus: hunc: and:protegat: a: ve:
Omni: ne: baratri: penas: sibi: sentiat: atri:
Set: celi: solio: requiescat: in: agm^ne: pio:
Omnis: orans: ita: letetur: perpete: vita; Amen.
That is as like to be either his predecessors or successors Epitaph, which on
the contrary side of the Chapel is in the like character and manner cut into
the wall, the briefest one shall see, being no more but

Hic requiescit Rogerus.
Hard by which; on a Buttresse is a Sub-Priors Epitaph, sometime legible, but
now obscured for the most part by the foundation of the little Chapel put up
between that and the next buttresse to it.

Rogerus de Sancto Elphego. 21.
Roger. de S. Elpheg. was the next Prior. I find him a 1258.
benefactor to the Chapel now the Deanes; for in several windows of it, you
may read Rogerus de Sancto Elphego, dedit hanc fenestram.

Adam Chillenden. 22.
Adam Chillenden is said to be the next Successor in the Priory. With the Abbat
of S. Austins, the Prior of S. Gregory's 1263.
and others, he was by the Kings writ anno 1269. 53. Hen. 3. declared quit and
free from tallage with the City, under this form, as I find in Thorn. Tallage.
Anno Domini Mcclxixo. fuit declaratum quod Abbas non debet talliari in
Civitate sub tali forma. Rogerus Abbas sancti Aug. Cant. Prior ecclesiae
Christi Cant. and Prior sancti Gregorii, and magister Hamo Doge perquisiverunt
breve Domini Regis direct' Baronibus de scaccario quod Vicecomes Kanc' venire
faceret 6. de discretioribus hominibus villae Cant. and 6. tam milites quam
alios liberos and legales homines de vicineto ejusdem villae per quos rei
veritas melius sciri poterit ad certificandum eosdem Barons si praedicti Abbas
etc. and eorum predecessores unquam talliari consueverunt ratione tenementorum
quae habent in Cant. vel non. Et postea venit inquisitio per Rogerum de
Northwood, Ricardum de Pontefracto milites and alios qui dixerunt super
sacramentum suum quod praedicti Abbas and Priores nunquam talliari consueverunt
cum Burgensibus ejusdem villae ratione tenementorum suorum praedictorum.
Dixerunt etiam quod antecessores praedicti Hamonis Doge ratione mercandisarum
suarum quas fecerunt in eadem Civitate talliari consueverunt, sed ipse non
quianullas exercuit mercandisas and ideo concessum est quod praedicti Abbas et
Priores ab hujusm' tallag' sint quieti. Vnde H. Rex Vicec. Cantii sic. Constat
nobis per inquisitionem quam nuper fieri fecimus quod Abbas and alii superius
nominati nunquam consueverunt talliari ratione tenementorum suorum quae habent
in eadem villa, quando cives ejusdem Civitatis talliati fuerunt. Ideo tibi
praecipimus quod de demanda quam facis per summonitionem scaccarii nostri
praedictis Abbati et Prioribus de tall' ratione tenementorum suorum quae habent
ibidem pacem habere permittas: Et averia sua seu catalla si quae capta fuerint
occasion praedicta eis deliberari facia^ etc. I have no more to say of this
Prior, except I should mention his election to the Archbishopric, the passages
and effect whereof I had rather you should acquaint your self withal (gentle
Reader) from the Acts and Monum. vol. 1. page 439.



Thomas Ringemer. 23.
Thomas Ringemer succeeded. In his time certain of the 1270.
Monks of his Covent, leaving the Monastery, dispersed and seated themselves
abroad in the rural and country possessions of their house, and appropriating
to themselves, and converting to their private use the fruits of the same,
spent their days in worldly pleasures and delights, contrary to the canons and
rules of monastic discipline. Whom this Prior, an honest and pious man, called
home, and provided that for time to come, the possessions of the Monastery
should be commended to the care and managing of trusty laics, and not of the
Monks. Herein he had to friend the then Archbishop John Peckham, who took his
part, and affoorded him his help and furtherance in the business.
Notwithstanding, he found the Monks very reluctant and averse to reformation,
who being impatient of an unwonted restraint, complotted to displace the one
(the Prior) and with their calumnious aspersions sought the others infamy. Of
certain (says my Author) this Archbishop and Robert Harpsfield.
his next Successor, inacted many decrees very useful and conducing to the
regulating of the Monks and keeping them within the compass of monastic
discipline. And whereas (says he) 30 of the due and ancient number of the
Monks was decreased and wanting, the same Robert reduced them to their full
number. But this Thomas, our Prior, betook himself to the Cistertian disciple
at Beaulieu, and afterward becoming more rigid to himself turned Anchoret.
Peter Ikham a Kentishman, and (as my author thinks) a Canterb. man born, a
famous Historian and Antiquary, was contemporary with this Prior, of whom see
more (if you please) in Pits.

Henricus de Eastry. 24.
Hen. de Eastry succeeded Tho. Ringemer, and continued Anno Dom. 1285.
Prior 37 years. A fair time, in which I find Record of many worthy acts done
both in and about the Church and Monastery, and also in their Demesnes abroad,
which therefore I may justly entitle to this Prior: whereof I may not forget
the repair of the Quire and Chapter House which cost 839 lib. 7s8d. and the
Novum clocarium longum versus North in the year 1317. a Steeple sometime
standing on the Northside of the Church sithence either with age decayed, or by
some alterations or new buildings defaced. He built also a new Grange at
Berton, where in his time to wit anno 1302. Berton.
I find the Church had a Goal or Prison. For (as the Story Liber eccles. Cant.
goes) one of Christ-Church Berton that year killing another there, and being
by the Churches Officers imprisoned in the Gaol there: the Bailiffs of the City
go to Berton, and by strong hand take the prisoner thence, and commit him to
the Town Gaol: but after treaty and sight of the Church Charters of Infangthes
etc. they restore him; who at the next assizes at Maidstone was tried,
convicted, condemned, and hanged at the Church-gallowes at Hollingborne.

To return to our Prior. I find ^b. eccles. Cantuar.
that in his time the Church was plentifully furnished with Vines, as at
Colton, Berton, S. Martins, Chertham, Brook and Hollingbourne, all Manors of
the same. They had to all or most of their Manors a domestic Chapel, to each
of them almost, a Vines.
new one of his making, and a Bertary. The total of the charge of his 37
years works is recorded to be 2184 lib. 18s. 8d. In his time a suit or at
least a complaint or presentment was brought by the City against him and the
Chapter, for building fourscore shops toward Burgate, and for stopping up the
way between Queningate, and Northgate. But in the one, the latter, they
defended themselves by the Charter of Hen. (whereof before:) And for the other,
by the Jury it was found that although they had made shops opening to Burgate,
yet upon their own soil, and without prejudice to the City, because the Church
did not demand nor had any stallage for them. In the list of the Churches
family in this Priors time, a Notary makes one of the company. The Prior
Notarie.
(I take it) for the time being always had one, and used him (among other
employments) chiefly as his Amanuensis or Scribe for the dispatch of such
business as was brought before him by delegation from the Sea of Rome. For thus
I find him petitioning the Pope for his authority to create Notaries, as it
is in a Lieger of the Church. Significat sanctitati vestrae Prior ecclesiae
Christi Cant. quod per sedem Apostolicam frequenter committuntur eidem Priori
Causae and negotia audienda and discutienda, ac etiam Delegatorum sententiae
exequendae: propter quae necessarium est sibi usus and officium Tabellion' and
quia in Civitate and Dioc. Cant. rarissime haberi potest copia tabellionum:
supplicat sanctitati vestrae Prior praedictus quod placeat vobis gratiose
concedere sibi potestatem faciendi duos Tabelliones.



But the present Prior Henry, in the year 1306. makes it his suit to an
Imperial Count Palatine, who by a privilege annexed to his dignity, has
power to make notaries, to authorize him by letters of deputation to create
three. Whereunto he condiscended: whose letters or license together with the
Instrument or faculty of a Notariship by virtue thereof granted I purpose in my
Appendix to tender Vide pro Scriptura 16. in Appendice.
to their perusal who would know the course of that age in this point of
creating Notaries. They even as little differ in tenor as in time, with those
of Mr. Seldens setting out in his Titles of Honor. par. 2. c. 1.. 44. But (by
the way) this way of creating Notaries is so long since disused and left, and
that originally for this reason viz. Eo quod Regnum Angliae ab omni subjectione
imperiali sit liberrimum, as it is in Ed. 2. constitution or writ made for the
future discarding that course of creating Notaries, and directed and sent to
the Archbishop of Cant. and the Mayor of London, whereof you may read more at
large in the same Author, both in the quoted place, and also Part. 1. c. 2.. 5.
And indeed Notaries were scarce and rare in this Kingdom long before Ed. 2.
time, as you may find by those 2 Legatine Constitutions of Otho: Cap. Quanto.
and Cap. Quoniam tabellionum. in the preface to each. And for that cause, and
for supply of that defect, it was thought requisite, for the credit of public
Instruments to invent and have recourse to authentic seals. Whence those two
Legatine Constitutions; Authentic Seals.
the one commanding them to be frequently used, the other forbidding them to be
at all misused. Ever since which time the public instruments of Bishops and
other Ordinaries have been justified, by such authentic seals: and such of
them as going out under the Bishops seal (for, as one says the certificate of
any Ordinary under a Bishop Finch. Of law lib. 4 page 138.
is of no credit nor will be received in the Kings Courts) use has bin made of
at the common law; for their seals sake, have been of faith and reputed
authentic. How true then their affirmation is which say that Ecclesiastical
Courts are no Courts of Record comes fitly Co^s of Record.
here in place to be inquired. Bishops I know for certain (says one)
certifying Bastardy, Bigamy, Excommunication, the Vacancy or Plenarty of a
Church, a marriage, a Divorce, a spiritual intrusion, or whether a man be
professed in any religion, with other such like are credited without further
inquiry or controlment. Besides a Testament showed under the seal of the
Ordinary is not traversable. Thus Dr Cowell in his Interpreter, in verb.
Record. Where he cites many authorities for proof hereof out of common law and
lawyers books: whither I refer you, and return to our Prior. Who in the year
1285. entered into composition with the then Abbat of S. Austins touching a
certain kay (...) Kay at ^dwich.
and house built by him or the preceding Prior at Fordwich, to the great
distaste of the Abbat, whereof more hereafter in my Appendix, where I will give
you the full relation of it from Thorn. viz. page 275.

In his time, namely anno 1296. the Priory was a while in great distress and
worthily, for denying the King a subsidy, by example of the Archbishop (Robert
Winchelsey) who made like denial of payment thereof: Vnde (says my Author
Reyner, in Append. ad Apostolat. Be^edict. page 62.
) omnia temporalia ejus confiscata sunt, and quod horrendum est quicquid
habebant Monachi ibidem infra portas suae ecclesiae, seisita sunt, ita quod non
haberent ad quod manus apponerent, pro vitae necessariis nisi quod vicini eorum
Religiosi, and alii mittebant eis intuitu charitatis, and hoc tam diu duravit,
donec Prior and Capitulum necessitate compulsi redemptionem fecerunt etc.

I will conclude my discourse of this Prior with what I find written by
Archbishop Parker of him and his stout and faithful discharge of his duty in
maintenance of such rights, and putting into practice such power of
Jurisdiction as in the vacancy of the Sea (by Walter Reynods death) devolved
and appertained unto him and the Chapter. Erat eo tempore (says he Antiq.
Britan. page 217.
). Prior Cantuariensis quidam Henricus, vir ut existimari convenit, minus rerum
usu, quam jure ipso prudens, juriumque Cantuarien. Ecclesiae vacant sede quod
ab antecessoribus suis neglecta videbantur, explorator sedulus atque sagax, tum
in gerendis ecclesiae rebus assiduus atque solers. Hic paucis mensibus omnem
illam intermediam Iurisdictionem ante intermissam plene exercuit atque
renovavit. De Clericis ad ecclesiastica benesicia praesentatis and patronorum
Iure diligenter inquisivit, electiones confirmavit, intestatorum bona
administranda commisit, provocantium appellationes recepit, testamenta actis
insinuavit, ab executoribus and administratoribus rations exegit, inter quos
maxim Episcoporum defunctorum testamentorum executores, aut bonorum
administratores interpellavit. Ita ut Iohannis Peckam (ut in ejus vita diximus)
testamentum exequentes ad rations reddendas coegit. Ad haec visitavit,
procurationes percepit, Synodum celebravit, Clerum ex mandato Regio ad
Parliamentum citavit, contumaces and in suam jurisdictionem committentes poenis
coercuit, beneficia vacantium sedium contulit, ad haec capas choreales, annulos
and sigilla a singulis Cant. provinciae Suffraganeis Cant. eccl. vendicavit,
omniaque ad Archiepiscopalem Iurisdictionem per singulas species tam exquisite
exercuit, ut nihil fuerit praetermissum praeter Episcoporum consecrationem,
quam cum sua authoritate per agere non poterat, Episcopo Londinensi mandavit
and injunxit, ut is suffraganeis Cantuariae in Christi ecclesia die quodam
statuto congregatis Meneuensem and Bangorens' Episcopos tunc electos and sua
authoritate confirmatos consecraret. Quibus sic consecratis in testimonium and
fidem consecrationis literas conventus sigillo sigillatus dedit etc.

Richard Oxinden. 25.
Richard Oxinden succeeded Hen. Who is the first of all Anno Dom. 1322.
the Priors (except Wibert) that has any memorial of his burial in the
Church: and that you shall find to be in S. Michaels Chapel upon a plate of
brass fastened to and upon East-wall, bearing this inscription Hic requiescit
in gratia and Misericordia Dei Richardus Oxinden, quondam Prior hujus
Ecclesiae, qui ob. Aug. 4. 1338.



Johannes de Teneth (Thanetensis Pits. calls him) a man famous for his piety
and learning, was a Monk of this place contemporary with this our Prior, and
Chantor of the Chantor.
Church (an office of great account in those days:) you may find him a
witness to Henry the preceding Priors Letters or faculty of Notariship before
mentioned.

Robert Hathbrand. 26.
Robert Hathbrand succeeded R. Oxinden, and having been Prior 32. years died,
and was buried in the same Chapel 1338.
with his predecessor, where he has the like memorial thus inscribed. Hic
requiescit in gratia and misericordia Dei Dominus Robertus Hathbrand quondam
Prior hujus Ecclesiae, qui obiit xvij. die Aug. Anno Domini Mccclxx. Cujus
animae propitietur Deus, Amen.



In his time the Monastery being visited with the Pestilence then raging
generally throughout the Kingdom, Appledoor mershes inned.
the whole Covent almost died of it. Appledore mershes were inned in his time,
to wit anno 1349. which cost the Church 350. lib Lib. Eccles. Cantuar.
. 1370. Richard Gillingham. 27.
1376. Stephen Mongeham. 28.


Of these two, besides their names and times in which they lived, as yet I
find not what to say.

John Finch. 29. Anno Dom. 1377.

Of this Priors acts, or what he did living, I have seen no Monument but that
of him dead you may find in the Martyrdom, where he lies interred under this
broken Epitaph. Hic jacet Johannes Fynch de Winchelsey quondam Prior hujus
ecclesiae qui obiit 9. die Ianuarii -- edificia constructa and plura alia
collata bona -- cujus animae --



I have seen a Bull of Pope Urban 6. to this Prior de mitra, 1378.
tunica, Dalmatica, cirothecis, cum annulo. To these the Pastoral staff and
Sandalls were added and granted to his Successor, and the succeeding Priors for
ever, to be used by them in the absence only of the Archbishop. From this time
(I take it) and because these were badges of Episcopal power and state, they
and their Successors were (and were called) Lord-Priors. Stephen Birchynton was
a Monk of Lord Prior.
this Church in those days. Pits. calls him Steph. Brickington, and says he
wrote the lives of the Archbishops of Cant. all until Courtney, and a Catal.
of the Bishops of Ely.

Thomas Chillenden. 30. 1390.

Thomas Chillenden (whom Archbishop Parker by mistake calls Henry Ch^llenden,
and so does Bishop Godwyn from him) succeeded John Fynch. Concerning this
worthy Prelate I have (as occasion was offered) spoken much already in my
Survey of the Church, unto which he was a matchless benefactor, and deserves
eternal memory for it: wherefore I will be sparing of much further discourse
of him or his acts. He was a man well beloved of Archbishop Courtney, but more
dear unto his Successor Arundell (who made him his Commissary of Canterb.) and
lies hard beside him in the Nave or body of the Church, a stately pile and Body
of Christ-Church ne^ built,
chiefly of his raising, as I have at large showed you before: and what says
his Epitaph? Hic jacet Dominus Thomas Chyllindenne quondam Prior hujus
ecclesiae, Decretorum Doctor egregius, qui navem istius ecclesiae caeteraque
diversaaedificia, quamplurima quoque opera laudabilia de novo fieri fecit.
Pretiosa in super -- ecclesiastica, multaque privilegia insignia huic ecclesiae
acquisivit, qui postquam Prioratum hujus ecclesiae Annis viginti. 25.
septimanis; and quinque diebus nobiliter rexisset, tandem in die assumptionis
beatae Mariae Virginis diem suum clausit extremum. Anno Domini 1411. Cujus
animae propitietur Deus. Amen.



William Gillingham, a Monk of this Church was Coaetaneous with this Prior: of
whom you shall find great commendation given by Pits.

John Woodnesborough. 31
John Woodnesborough succeeded Tho. Chillenden. See this Anno Dom. 1411.
man's courtesy to the City by what here follows, taken from the Records of the
Church. Memorandum quod xijo die Iulii Anno R. R. Hen 5. Angl, Aid lent to the
City by the Prior.
tertio, Dominus Johannes Prior ecclesiae Christi Cant. ad instantiam and
specialem rogatum Wmi Lane and Wmi Mason Ballivorum Civitatis Cant. fact. per
Ioannem Brown Plomer dictae Civitatis Civem and armigerum ac plumbarium
praefatae ecclesiae permisit servientes suos cum villanis egredi cum armis and
aliis instrumentis defensivis ad augendum numerum and populum Civitatis.
Quandam vigiliam in Civitate observatam progente Francorum qui revertebantur a
Domino Rege de Suthampton versus parts proprias postquam acceperant a Domino
Rege quod ad parts hujusmodi disponeret transmeare. Et pro part dictorum
Ballivorum and civium Civitatis per oraculum viv^ vocis dicti Iohannis Brown
nuncii sive procuratoris eorundem, Dompno Stephano de Sancto Laurentio
Cellerario, ac Willielmo Molush tunc Custodi ac capellano praefati Domini
Prioris, sub fidelitate eorum est infallibiliter repromissum, Quod nusquam pro
isto facto in hominibus nostris aliquid juris vel clamei pro consimilibus
negotiis aliquid in posterum super nos aut homines nostros futuris temporibus
vendicabunt, and sub hac condition Dominus Prior supra dictus de familiaribus
suis ipsis accommodavit xvj. (...) cum omni apparatu honesto ac xxiiij.
architenentes ad decorem and laudem civium praedictorum. Hoc idem fecerunt
penes Abbatem S. Augustini die and anno supradictis a quo ix. lanc' and xxiiij.
architenen' ex praescripto habuerunt.



This man continued Prior about 17 years, and then dying was laid next above
his predecessor Chillenden, in the body of the Church, with this Epitaph.

Est nece substratus Ion Woodnesbergh tumulatus,
Hujus erat gratus Prior ecclesiae numeratus;
Quem colie ornatus hic tantus ubique novatus,
Per loca plura datus sit sumptus testificatus:
Auctor erat morum, probitatis, laudis honorum,
Largus cunctorum, cunctis dator ille laborum,
Quique Prioratum rexit sub schemate gratum.
Annos hunc plenos per septenos quoque denos:
Quadrigentenis Mil. ejus bis quoque denis
Annis septenis Domini nondum sibi plenis.
-- cum tibi Chiste -- agone
Quem precibus pone radiantis forte corone.
John Langdon a famous Monk of the place was contemporary with this Prior, of
whom see further in Pits.

William Molush. 32.
William Molush succeeded Woodnesb: The tower now called Dunstan steeple, built
for the most part by Archbishop 1427.
Chichely being finished, this Prior in the year 1430. Godwin.
furnished it with a goodly bell remaining there till this day, and known by
the name of bell Dunstan, as the steeple also is from thence. The Diameter of
that bell at the lowest brim (says my Author) is two yards and somewhat more.
He also the year following bestowed on the Church-Brewhouse a great cauldron of
the weight of vm^l. iiiic. iii. quart', as I find noted in a book of the
Church.

John Salesbury. 33.
This Prior lies buried at the upper end of the body of the Church with this
Epitaph 1437.


Preteriens flere discas, and dic miserere,
Et ne subsannes, quia victus morte Johannes,
Membris extensis jacet hic Sarisburiensis:
Sic non evades, vindice morte cades.
Hic prior ecclesiae Doctorque fuit Theoriae:
Wulstani festo feria quarta memor esto
Mill quater centum x. v. dant documentum
Sint animae merces, lux, decor and requies.
Amen.
John Elham. 34.
He lies next above his predecessor Woodnesborough, under a fair stone with
this Epitaph. 1440.
Hic requiescit Dominus Thomas Elham quondam Prior hujus ecclesiae, Qui cum
Ann. 2. men's. 11. and 4. dieb. honorifice vixisset, 20, Febru. 1440. obdormivit
in Domino.



Thomas Goldstone. 35.
This man in behalf of himself and his Covent appealed 1448.
to the then Comissary of Cant. for Justice against a certain foul mouthed
abusive fellow, who (as he stands charged upon record) anno 1452. had called
them Whoresons and farting Monks. He lies buried in the Lady-Chapell, but the
brass is almost all torn from his monument. John Stone a most pious Monk of
the place was contemporary with this Prior, of whom see Pits. 1468. John Oxney.
36.
1471. William Petham 37.


William Selling. 38.
Being a Monk of this Church, with leave of the Chapter he gat him over into
Italy, studied at Bononie, and became a 1472.
great Scholar. But of his affection to antiquities he gathered together where
ever he came in Italy all the ancient Authors, both Greek and Latin, he could
get, and brought them over into England and to Cant. Not long after his
return, Harpsfield.
by the common vote and suffrage of the Monks, he was chosen for their Prior.
Shortly after his death by a fire which happened in the Monastery in the night
time by the carelessness of some drunken servants, those brave Books Priorie
fired.
(which Lambert by error says were brought over by a Monk of Saint Austins)
amongst which were Tullies books de Republica so much desired, and many other
of great price, were brought to ashes. Hen. 7. taking notice of his worth, sent
him Embass^dour to the Pope. He died anno 1494. and lies buried in the
Martyrdom with this Epitaph, which Wever has curtaild. Hic jacet reverendus
pater Wilhelmus Selling hujus sacrosanctae ecclesiae Prior, ac sacrae Paginae.
professor, qui postquam hanc ecclesiam per ann. 22. men's. 5. and 24. d. optime
gubernasset migravit ad Dominum, die viz. passionis sancti Thom^ Martyris, Anno
1494.



Doctor Theologus Selling Greca etque Latina
Lingua predoctus hic Prior almus obit
Omnis virtutis speculum, exemplar Monachorum,
Religionis honor, mitis imago Dei.
Add quod ingenii rivorum tanta cucurrit
Copia cunctorum quantula rara virum.
Regius orator cujus facundia mulsit
Romanos Gallos Orbis and ampla loca.
Hujus presidio res ista domestica rata est,
Et redimita annis plurimis egregie.
Pervigil hic Pastor damna atque incommoda cuncta
A grege commisso fortiter expulerat.
Dum brevi tumulo latet hoc, tota Anglia famam
Predicat, and tanto lugeat orba patre.
Huc iter omnis habens, stet, perlegat and memor ejus
Oret ut ascendat spiritus alta poli.
Thomas Goldstone. 39.
Thomas Goldstone succeeded Selling. He was a man also 1495. Harpsfield.
which had his Princes favor. For Hen. 7. sent him Ambassador to Charles the
French King. He is in nothing more famous then for his much building, and
repairing of and about the Church, as (for instance) the new building of the
Tower or Lantorne of the steeple now commonly called Bell-Harry-steeple, as
also of the Church-gate (stately piles both) and many other like pious works,
which are easy of discovery by the three gold stones, the two first letters of
his name and surname, the Miter and Pastorall-staffe set up in many places
about the Church and Monastery. He continued his government almost 25. years,
and dying anno 1517. was laid by his immediate predecessor in the Martyrdom,
with this Epitaph, which Wever also has curtaild. Hic jacet reverendus pater
Thomas Goldstone hujus sacrosanctae ecclesiae Prior, ac sacraepaginae
professor, qui postquam hanc ecclesiam per annos 24. 8. men's. and dies 16.
optime gubernasset, migravit ad Dominum, 16. September. Anno Dom. 1517. Cujus
animae, etc.



Tangite vos Citharam plangentes carmine, mole
Hic jacet occulta Religionis honos.
Occubuit Doctor Thomas Goldston vocitatus
Moles quem presens saxea magna tenet.
Arripit hunc patrem mors pervigilemque Priorem
Sic rapitur quoque lux istius ecclesiae.
Grex sibi commissus monachorum plangat eundem
Omissum Patrem, qui sibi fautor erat.
Largus in expensis fieri dat plura novata
Istius ecclesiam vestibus ornat idem.
Sic fuit ad Regni laudem canit Anglia largus
Totus and is mitis pauperibus fuerat
O vos spectantes hujus jam funera patris,
Nunc estis memores fundite quaeso preces.
Requiescat in sancta Pace.
Amen.
Thomas Goldwell. 40.
Thomas Goldwell succeeded Tho: Goldstone, and was the last Prior of the Church
of Cant. governing the same until 1517.
the year 1540. at what time this Priory was dissolved, and the Prior and
Monks ejected and displaced by Hen. 8. who, in lieu of them, placed a Deane and
twelve Prebendaries. The names of the Deanes it shall not be amiss here to set
down.

1. Nicholas Wotton, Dr. of Law. 2. Thomas Godwyn, Dr. of Divinity. 3. Richard
Rogers, Suffragan of Dover. 4. Thomas Nevill, Dr. of Divinity. 5. Charles
Fotherby, Bachelor of Divinity. 6. John Boys, Dr. of Divinity. 7. Isaac
Bargrave, Dr. of Divinity.
At the time of which new foundation of the Church by The Cathedralls fourth
and last seal.
Hen. 8. the common seal thereof was again changed and new made. The
inscription in the circumference whereof was this, on the one side. Sigill.
ecclesie Cathed. et Metrop'x. Cant. noviter erecte per regem Hen. 8. On the
other side: Ego sum via. veritas. et vita. anno incarnati. Christi. 1540. Which
was the Churches fourth and last common seal, and continues still in use,
being not so large as the former, which former was much larger then the next
precedent, which was also far greater then the first, which first was much
both of the same size and character with that leaden seal to St. Augustines
bull or charter lately set out St. A^stins common ^eales.
by St. Hen. Spelman in his Counsels page 122. And now having so sit an
occasion, it will not be thought impertinent, I hope, if I present you with the
inscriptions on the common seals of that Abbey. Whereof I find only two. The
one, the smaller of the two, a very old one, representing on the one side both
the names and pourtraicts of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, with this
inscription in the circumference. Hoc sigillum factum est anno primo Henrici
Regis Anglorum. And on the other side, the effigies of an Archbishop in his
pontifical habit (St. Augustine probably meant by it) with this inscription in
the circumference Sigill. ecclesie sancti Augustini Cantuarie Anglorum
Apostoli. The other common seal, the larger of the two, and of more curious
work then the former, represents on the one side a Church, and in the
midddest of it, both the name and effigies of St. Austin. together with the
Abbeys arms Being a Cross argent in a field sable.
and some other embellishments, with this inscription in the circumference.
Anglia quae domino fidet sociatur amore
Hoc Augustino debetur patris honor.


On the other side, a Church also with the figures of both those Apostles Peter
and Paul, this with a sword, the other with a key in his hand, and underneath,
(if I mistake not) the Christening or baptizing of King Ethelbert, by Austin,
with this circumscription in the ^ing. Sigillum monasterii beatorum Apostolorum
Petri et Pauli sociorum Augustini Anglorum Apostoli Cantuar. But I will no
longer digress.

For a Corollary to this Catalogue, I pray my Reader to take notice that this
Prior, was a Lord-Prior, a spiritual Baron of the Parliament, and the Priory
whilst it had existence, possessed of great revenewes, being valued at the
suppression (but not to the worth) at 2489l. 4s. 9d. The form of electing and
installing this Prior, transcribed from the Church-records, he may find in
mine Appendix. Vide p. (...) Scriptura 19. in Appendice.
And so this Catal. also being ended, I proceed to the third.

A Catalogue of the Archdeacons of Canterbury.
FOr your better understanding the original of this Original of the
Archdeaconry.
Archdeaconry, take here, by way of preface or introduction to the ensuing
catalogue, the words of Archbishop Parker Antiq. Britan, in vita Lanfranci.
touching the same. Extra Civitatem Cantuariae (says he) in part orientali
erat ecclesia sancti Martini, ubi seeds Episcopi erat, qui domi, vel in
Comitatu semper manebat, and vices Archiepisc. (qui Regis curiam frequentabat)
per omnia gerebat. Monachos ecclesiae Christi (ac ipse Monachus) in obsequium
accipiebat: solennitates in ecclesia Metropoli celebrabat, quibus peractis ad
suaredieba^. Hic and Prior ecclesiae Christi (quem Decanum vocabant) in Synodis
pari ornatu considebant. Atque hic mos usque ad tempora Normannorum perduravit,
ejusque Episcopii praesul extremus fuit Godwinus. Quo mortuo anno scilicet
1065. Lanfrancus Episcopum Ecclesiae beati Martini substituere renuit, dicens
quod in una Civitate duo Episcopi esse non deberent, cum revera in Civitate
Episc. non fuit, sed extra civitatem. Is igitur loco Episcopi quendam Clericum
suum Archidiaconum ordinavit, cujus rei ante mortem eum poenituit. Thus he.

Let me further enlarge this matter unto you out of a Record of Christ-Church,
which is somewhat more copious in the relation of it then the former, and is
thus entitled. Nota a quo tempore incepit primo ecclesiae Cantuariensis esse
Archidiaconus. And then follows. Memorandum qd' a tempore beati Augustini primi
Archiepisc. Cant. usque ad tempus bonae memoriae Lanfranci Archiepiscopi, per
Ccclxij annos nullus fuit Archidiaconus in Civitate vel Dioc. Cant. Sed a
tempore beati Theodori Archiepisc. qui sextus erat a beato Augustino usque ad
tempus praed' Lanfranci fuit in ecclesia Sancti Martini in Suburbio Cant.
quidam Episcopus authoritate Vitaliani Bishop of S. Martin.
Papae a Sancto Theodoro ordinatus, qui in tota Civitate and Dicc. Cant. vices
Episcopi gerebat, in ordinibus celebrandis, ecclesiis consecrandis and puris
confirmandis, and aliis officiis pontificalibus exequendis ipso absente. Idem
etiam Episcopus omnimodam jurisdictionem in Civitate and Dioc. Cant. sede
plena, authoritate Archiepisc. ipso absente and sede vacant in tota Provincia
authoritate Capi^uli exercebat per Cccxlix. annos usque ad tempus Lanfranci
praedict. Postmodum tempore Lanfranci Archiepiscopi praefatus Episcopus in fata
decessit. Sed idem Archiepisc. alium substituere non decrevit, sed postmodum
concessit cuidam clerico suo, nomine Valerio, totam Iurisdictionem in Civitate
Cant. tantum, exceptis and ecclesiis de patronatu Archiepisc. and causis
matrimonial. de quibus se nihil intromittet. Et incepit idem Clericus tunc
primo vocari Archidiaconus Cant. Contulit etiam eidem clerico domicilium extra
Northgate juxta Monasterium Sancti Gregorii in quo continuo residebat usque ad
tempus bonae memoriae Stephani Archiepiscopi per Clix. annos.

By the premises it seems clear that Lanfranc erected the Archdeaconry (and
instituted the first Archdeacon) of Canterb. yet I read that Almar (or Almarus)
the man so much (and if guilty, worthily) condemned in our Stories for
betraying the City of Canterb. (besieged by the Danes) into their hands, in the
reign of King Ethelred, anno 1011. was Archdeacon of the Church of Canterb. so
was likewise afterward one Haimo, who, because of the troubled state of his
country infested by the Danes, for a time, forsook his country, and gat him
over into France, where he kept until the times were more quiet and tolerable
here at home, and then returning, was welcomed with this dignity. Harpsfield
mentions both. But beside, long before either of these, I find in two Saxon
manuscripts in Christ-Church, the one a Codicill, or Libell dated anno 805. the
other, the Record or memorial of a Synod two years before, holden at
Clofeshoaf (Cliff beside Rochester) one Wlfraed to subscribe with the
Archbishop of Canterb. and others of his Church, thus. Wlfraed Archidiaconus.
The same Records make mention of the names of other Archdeacons afterward, as

Anno Dom. 844. Beornoth. 853. Aethelweald. 864. Ealstan. 866. Sigefreth. Eod.
Liaving. 890. Werbeald.

Let me add that in the year 1075. (if we follow Harpsfields account, which
questionless is the truer, for Lanfranc was not yet Archbishop, when Parker
says Godwyn died) eleven years before Godwyn's time, to the Instrument or
Record of the Council holden at London De primatu ecclesiae Cantuar. and
regulis ecclesiarum, next unto the Archbishops and BB. is this inscription. Ego
Anschitillus sanctae Dorobernensis ecclesiae Archidiaconus subscripsi. How is
it true then, that Lanfrank founded the Archdeaconry, and made the first
Archdeacon of Canterb.? I answer and conceive for truth that there was a settled
Archdeaconry before Lanfranks days: but he that was Archdeacon of the Church,
was withal Bishop of S. Martin: that is, beside that of an Archdeacon, was
endued with the title, power and office of a Bishop, or (as I take it rather)
of a Chorepisc. whereby the might and did vices gerere Archiepisc. and supply
his absence in many things, wherein a bare Archdeacon, by his office, by law,
cannot meddle. Now Lanfrank finding the case thus to stand, and well knowing
that Chorepiscopi (both in name and office) were abolished abroad, because of
their pride, usurpation, and no very good ground of institution at first, and
(as his own reason is) not liking to have two Bishops to one City; Godwyn the
Incumbent of that dignity dying in his time, (as he was a man that much changed
the face ofthings in our Church affairs) he changed the Chorepiscopall
Archdeacon into a simple Archd. that is stripped him of his Chorepiscopall title
and power, restraining the succeeding Archdeacons power within the limits only
of an Archdeacons office. Et ita mihi videtur, pace alterius melius me
sentientis semper salva. Now to my Catalogue.

Before Lanfranks erection or change rather of the Archdeaconry, twelve are all
the Bishops or Archdeacons, whose names I meet with. viz.

1. Wlfred. 2. Beornoth. 3. Aethelweald. 4. Ealstan. 5. Sigefreth. 6. Liaving.
7. Werbeald. 8. Almar. 9. Haimo. 10. Edsin. 11. A^schitillus. 12. Godwyn.
Whereof the first (Wlfred) I take it within few years after that his
subscription before remembered, became Archbishop of Cant. In the year 807.
Wlfred being a Monk of Christ-church in Cant. was made Archbishop of Cant.
says Godwyn. Likely to be this Wlfred. For he was always a Monk of
Christ-Church that was Bishop of S. Martin. So Parker ubi supra.

Of the 6 next, I have nothing to say, unless I should note that in
subscribing to a Charter of King Etheldreds, Beornoths name is set before
diverse Dukes.

Of Almar, if you would know more, consult the Story of the Danish siege and
surprisall of our City anno 1011. related by Roger Hoveden and others.

Eor Haimo, let Balaeus and Pits. be your further informers.

As for Edsin, I read in the Records of Christ-Church that anno 1035. Kanutus
Rex dedit Eadsino Episcopo Sancti Martini, quae ecclesia sita est extra
Doroberniam in Orient, Apuldre, Palstre and Witricham ad opus ecclesiae
Christi Doroberniae, libere sicut Adesham. Whether this were the man that in
the year 1038. was made Archbishop of Cant. I am uncertain. Happily it was. If
so, the Catalogue of B B. will further inform you of him.

Of the other two Anschitillus and Godwyn, I have said what I know. Wherefore I
pass now to Lanfranks first Archdeacon. Archbishop Parker names him not, nor
yet Archd. Harpsfield: but the Church Record (as you may see before) does; and
calls him Valerius, adding that he was Lanfranks Clerk. How long this man held
the place I find not, but he was the last of that (the eleventh) Century.
Those of the next were the 9 next following.

1. William. 2. Ichn. 3. Ascelinus. 4. Helewisus. 5. Walter. 6. Roger. 7.
Thomas Becket. 8. Geffrey Ridell. 9. Herbert.
Whereof William was the first. For in the year 1101. in the Enquiry whether
Maud, daughter of Malcolme King of Scots and Margaret his Queen, being to be
married to Henry 1. were a Nonne, or had taken on her the veil and vow of a
Nonne, or not, related by Edmerus, mention is made of Hist. Novorum lib 3. page
57.
one William Archdeacon of Cant. who together with Humbald the Archdeacon of
Sar. was sent by Archbishop Anselme to Wilton to inquire out the truth of the
matter there, it being the place of her education. He is again afterward, to
wit anno 1108. mentioned by the same Author page 96. as used and sent by
Anselme, on his behalf, to invest and put into possession of the Bishopric of
Rochester, Ralfe Gundulph's next successor upon whom Anselme had bestowed the
same. And that is all I read of him, saving a letter of the same Anselme
directed to him and others about Priests marriages, mentioned in the Acts and
Monuments.

His next Successor (and he with whom Harpsfield begins his Catalogue) was one
John nephew unto Ralfe the Archbishop, who gave him this Archdeaconry with
great and unwonted solemnity, as Edmerus relates it Hist. memorat. li. 5. page
114.
, who says that Radulphus Archiepisc. consilio and petitione Episcoporum,
proxime supra nominatorum (to wit Richard of London, Roger of Salisbury,
Herbert of Norwich, Ralph of Chichester, John of Bath, and Hervey of Ely) dedit
(concedentibus and approbantibus Monachis Cantuariensibus) Archidiaconatum
ipsius ecclesiae Iohanni nepoti suo. Quae donatio facta est in Capitulo,
praesente fratrum conventu, copiosa Clericorum ac Laicorum multitudine, pro hoc
ipso in medium adducta, facta prius, coram omnibus, ab eodem Iohanne, tactis
Evangeliis, sacramento, quo se fidelitatem ecclesiae ipsi, per omnia and in
omnibus exhibiturum, dum viveret, repromisit. In the year 1119. this man was
sent by the Archbishop to the Council then holden at Remes, there to withstand
the consecration of Thurstan the elect of York at the hands of the Pope, who
had been rejected of Ralph the Archbishop of Cant. for refusing to make
profession of subjection to his See. How he behaved himself in that Province,
and what was the issue thereof, I leave it to Edmerus page 125.
, and the Catal. of B B. to inform you. The same man afterward, to wit in the
year 1125. succeeded Ernulph in the Bishopric of Rochester, which he enjoyed
till his death which happened anno 1137.

Ascelinus or Asketinus succeeded John, both first in the Archdeaconry of
Canterb: and afterward (as I take it) in the Bishopric of Rochester. For upon
the death of John, Ascelinus (says the Catal. of B B.) succeeded, and died
anno 1147. Likely to be this Archdeacon.

Helewisus or Helvinus succeeded. He was sent by Archbishop Corboyl together
with the B B. of St. David's and Rochester, ^.
to put the Monks of Dover in possession of their new Monastery built for them
by that Archbishop, in the year 1134. which is all I read of him.

Walter succeeded him. He was afterward, to wit in the year 1147. elected
Bishop of Rochester, and was the first that ^ ^ (...).
ever was made Bishop there by the Monks election. The Archbishop of Cant. was
wont aforetime to nominate to this Bishopric whom pleased him. Theobald the
Archbishop bestowed this privilege upon them, by whose command they chose this
Walter, who was the Archbishops brother for their Bishop. Which Bishopric he
held 35. years, and dyed in the year 1182.

He was succeeded in the Archdeaconry by Roger, preferred thereunto by Theobald
the Archbishop (as were his immediate Predecessor and Successors:) By whose
means he became afterward Archbishop of York. Read more of him (if you
please) in the Catal. of BB. in York: where one thing is chiefly remarkable,
viz. that whereas in his life Lex (...)
time he had procured of Pope Alex. this privilege, that if any Clergy man
died in his Province, and delivered not his goods away by hand before his
death, the Archbish. should have the disposition of them; it pleased God that
the same measure he met unto other, he should be served withal himself. He
left behind him (or had at least wise what time he sickned) 11000 lib. in
silver, and 300 lib. of gold, beside an infinite deal of plate, and sumptuous
housholdstuffe. All this (though he had bestowed it to the use of the poor and
other good purposes) the King notwithstanding seized upon, and converted it to
his own use, saying it was no reason that his Will should stand for good, that
had disannulled the testaments of so many other.

Being Archdeacon (as he was one that savoured not the Monks of his time Godwin.
) he proved very troublesome and offensive to them of Christ-Church, by
intruding himself amongst them, and into their Chapters and assemblies, as one
of the society. Being no Monk, but a secular, the Monks could not brook his
doings: but addressing themselves to the Archbishop for remedy, they procured
of him the following letters. Theobaldus Dei gratia Cant. Archiepisc. Angliae
Primas. W. Priori and Conventui ejusdem ecclesiae, Salutem. Cum grande
conversationis monasticae detrimentum esse dinoscitur, contra usum ecclesiarum,
and contra statuta regulae Monachorum capitulo clericos quasi de Iure
admisceri: iccirco ne quis clericorum sive Cant. Archidiaconus sive alius
vestrrum quoquo modo habeat capitulum prohibemus. Si vero vobis Archidiaconus
vester necessarius fuerit, and eum vocaveritis, tunc demum non differat, and ad
vos venire, and vobis, si opus est, pro viribus auxiliari. Quotiens autem ipse
a vobis accersitus vel Archiepiscopum comitatus sive in coena Domini, sive
aliis opportunis temporibus in vestrum venerit Capitulum, more praedecessorum
suorum Archidiaconorum, Asketini scilicet, Willielmi, and Helewisi qui nos
praecesserunt semper in suppeditaneo sedis Archiepiscopi sedeat, nec occasion
hac vel alia in Capitulo vestro juris quippiam se habere arbitretur etc.



Of this Archdeacon you may see more in Richard Archbishop of Canterb. in the
Catalogue before cited.

Thomas Becket succeeded Roger. But he that so favored him as to bring him to
this dignity, Archbishop Theobald, prevailed so far with the King for his
further advancement, as that, after the accession of other preferments, at
length Theobald dying, this man was selected by the King for his Successor. His
story is obvious, wherefore I will not repeat it, and the rather because I have
my self delivered many things of him before in proper place.

Geffrey Ridell succeeded Becket: and was as the 3 former, of Theobalds
preferring and putting in. He continued Archdeacon until Archbishop Beckets
time, whose story mentions him as an enemy to him and his proceedings, as
taking part with the King in his quarrel with Becket, who therefore
excommunicated him as you may read in Rog. Hoveden, who will tell you more of
this matter. This Archd. afterward was consecrate Bishop of Ely, to wit. anno
1174. The often-cited Catal. in Ely will let you know more of him.

Herbert succeeded him, in the time of Richard the Archbishop, Beckets
immediate Successor. Who ('it is said) made Man. Paris.
three Archdeacons to his Diocese, which usually had but one before. Their
names were Savaricus, Nicolaus and Herebertus. But this held not long, the 3
being in the same Archbishops time reduced to one again, namely this Herbert.
To whom the Archbishop made a personal Grant of Jurisdiction much like that
whereabout the Archbishop of York and the Archdeacon of Richemond differed
about the same time; for appeasing of which difference issued out that
Decretall Epistle of Innocent. 3. Cap. Cum venissent. de Institutionibus. Our
present Archdeacons Grant, which for Antiquity-sake I insert, was this here
following. Richardus Dei gratia Cant. Archiepisc. totius Angliae Primas and
Apostolicae sedis Legatus. Vniversis Christi fidelibus Personal Grant of
Jurisdiction.
ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, salutem. Cum dilectus filius Herbertus
Archidiaconus noster plura ad Archidiaconatum suum de Iure debere pertinere
vendicaret, de quibus nobis non constabat, Intuitu probitatis suae and sincera
affectione quam circa personam ipsius gerimus, haec el personaliter
concessimus, sine omni praejudicio Cant. ecclesiae and Successorum nostrorum.
Institutiones viz. and Destitutiones Decanorum, praehabito consilio nostro.
Custodiam vacantium ecclesiarum ad nostram donationem non pertinentium, and
omnes fructus dum vacaverint inde provenientes libere and absolute. Placita
etiam ecclesiastica and omnia emolumenta inde provenientia tam de Dominiis
nostris quam Monachorum ecclesiae Cant. in Archidiaconatu Cant. constitutis.
Omnia etiam emolumenta de placitis Archidiaconatus sui ubicunque agitentur. Ita
tamen quod si modum circa homines Episcopor. vel Monachorum excesserit, nobis
excessus correctionem reservavimus. Cognitionem etiam de causis matrimonior.
cum accusantur usque ad desinitivum calculum, and si dirimendum fuerit
matrimonium, id nobis reservavimus. Institutiones etiam personarum in ecclesiis
vacan' quae ad nostram specialiter non pertineant donationem: cum extra
provinciam fuerimus: cum autem praesentes fuerimus and persona aliqua
instituenda prius oblata fuerit Archidiacono, dummodo hoc non fuerit
procuratum, cum eam ad nos introduxerit, honorem ei in facto suo conservabimus.
Omnes autem per nos instituti tam in ecclesiis de dominio nostro and
Monachorum, quam in aliis, per Archidiaconum vel ejus Officialem introducentur
in corporalem possessionem ecclesiarum in quibus fuerint instituti. Haec autem
omnia praescripta sub praesentis scripti and sigilli nostri testimonio duximus
redigenda, ut sicut ea praefato Archidiacono nostro sunt a nobis personaliter
concessa, ita ejus personae illibata conserventur. His testibus M10 Gerardo
Walerano Archid. Baiocen. M10 Petro Blesen etc.



Thus much of the Archdeacons of the 12t. I come now to them of the next
Century, whose names and order were as follows.

1. Robert. 2. Hen. de Castil. 3. Hen. de Stanford. 4. Simon Langton. 5.
Stephan. de Vicenna. 6. Stephan. de monte Luelli. 7. Hugo de mortuo mari. 8.
Willielmus Middleton. 9. Robertus de Gernemutha. 10. Richardus de Ferrings. 11.
Johannes de Longtona.
For the first, Robert: I read that of Archdeacon of Canterb. he was made
Bishop of Salisbury, succeeding Hubert that was translated thence to Canterb:
in the year 1193.

The second Hen. de Castilion succeeded Robert, and was Archdeacon in Hubert
the Archbishops time: as I find by diverse of his subscriptions to charters and
other evidences of St. Radigund's Abbey by Dover, made by Hubert and others. In
the year of our Lord 1202. this man being Archdeacon, there happened a great
controversy between King John and the Monks of St. Augustines touching the
right of the patronage of the Church of Feversham. They were so Feversham.
stiff and stout on both sides in the carriage of the business, that through
the violence that was used by the one to out the other of possession, the
Churches profanation ensued, whereupon this our Archdeacon challenging right
to the custody of the Church during the vacancy thereof, interposeth himself,
excommunicates the Monks for holding the Church by force, overthrows the altars
as thereby profaned, and then interdicts the Church. The Monks streightway
appeal to the Pope. He sends out his commission for the full understanding of
the matter: But (says Lambert Perambul. of Kent, in Feversham.
) the Monks (being now better advised) took a shorter way, and sending presents
to the King, they both obtained at his hands restitution of their right, and
also wan him to become their good Lord and Patron. Notwithstanding, the
Archdeacon and they proceeded on in suite at Rome, about the custody and
fruitss of their vacant Churches: this and Milton especially. In which suite
issued out that Decretal Epistle of Innocent 3. Bonae memoriae. de Appellatio.
directed to the B B. of Rochester and London. I find also amongst the records
of Christ-church a long scrowle of witnesses depositions taken as well on the
one part as the other, but what was the issue or final end of the controversy
I know not, but do guess (by a like course afterward taken with a succeeding
Archdeacon upon this quarrel renewed) he had composition given him by the
Monks, and thereby some share and part with them of the profits of their vacant
Churches yielded to him for a peace. The matter which they strove for, was in
those days of moment and very considerable, but the case is now altered by
Stat. which gives the Successor ^8. (...). 8. 11.
the fruits in the vacancie, and so has cut off such brabbles. I have nothing
more to say of this Archdeacon, but that you may find him a witness to Queen
Alianor's Charter made to the Monks of Christ-Church, acquitting them of the
Cities walling and inditching in Ric. 1. time.

I come now to the third Archdeacon of this Century, which was Hen. de Stanford
or Sandford (for I find him written either way, and Harpsfield writes him
Stafford) elected afterward to the Bishopric of Rochester, and consecrate
anno 1227. Being Archdeacon, he took a resignation of Blean Church, by the
title of vices gerens Domini Stephani Cantuariensis, which was Archbishop
Langton. He was coexecutor with the Prior of Christ-Church, of the Lady Agnes
Lib. Hosp. d: Estbridg.
Cliffords Will: See more of him in the Catalogue of B B. in Rochester. Ibidem.


This Archdeacon being so preferred: Stephen Langton who was then Archbishop,
having to his brother one Simon Langton (one that was not only out of means,
but also out of favor both with the King and Pope, the latter, by means of the
former giving him the repulse for the Archbishopric Matt. Paris.
of York, to which he was elected by the Chapter there) conferred the
Archdeaconry upon him, the year before he died. In favor of whom (carne and
sanguine revelante, says a Record in Christ-Church) he much amended the
Archdeaconry. For with the consent and confirmation of the Chapter, he annexed
and united to it, not only the Churches (or Personages) of Tenham and
Hackington, but also the Tenham. (...).
whole Jurisdiction over the Diocese, with an exception only and reservation
of some causes and Churches. Et quia (says the Record in Christ-Church) dictus
Archidiaconatus exilis erat in possess, concessit eidem Simoni totam
Iurisdictionem Diocesanam in Decanatibus ruralibus, exceptis causis
matrimonialibus and ecclesiis quae sunt in maneriis Archiepiscopatus and
Monachorum, de quibus se nihil intromittebat. But you may see (if you please)
in my Appendix, the double Instrument of the conveyance of both one and the
other Vide pro Scriptur. 20. and 2^. in Appendice.
.

To complete and make this grant absolute: whereas Baldwyn and Hubert his
predecessors, upon the controversy between them and the Monks about the
Chapels of Hakington and Lambhith, upon displeasure taken against the
Archdeacon (it is like) for opposing them and their project in behalf of the
Monks, had exempted certain Churches: this Stephen, with the Monks consent,
by a special Charter, reverseth and revokes that exemption, and subjects
again the Churches to the Archdeacons Jurisdiction in such manner as by the
tenor of the Charter copied in my Appendix Scriptura 22. may and will appear.
And then began A^chidiaconal Jurisdiction enlarged.
the Archdeaconry to be enlarged, this Archdeacon being the first that ever had
a real or perpetual grant made to him and his Successors of the Archidiaconal
Jurisdiction, whose predecessors never had other then a personal, such as was
that (before set forth) made to Herbert, or the like.

These things happening in December Anno Domini 1227. In the month of February
next following, the same Archdeacon makes a double Charter to the Monks,
whether in consideration of their passing their consent to the uniting the two
foresaid Churches of Hakynton and Tenham to the Archdeaconry, or wherefore else
to me appears not; by the one, conveying to them, with consent of his brother
the Archbishop, omnes decimas de Eylwarton majores and minores Tit^ery of
Yelverton.
sitas infra limits parochiae de stanes Capella de Tenham: which at this day
pass by and under the name of dominicall or demeasne-tithes. i. Tithes of the
demeasnesse of that Manor, which is now called Yelverton. By the other,
becoming engaged for himself and his Successors that nothing should be done in
the Church or Chapel of Hakynton, then there built or to be built, to the
prejudice of the Church of Canterbury, a thing which the late stir between
Archbishop Baldwyn and the Monks made them fearful of, and therefore
cautions, wary and careful to prevent: and Archdeacons House.
the rather because the Archdeacon had now seated himself there. For whereas
from Lanfrancs until his time the Archdeacons dwelling was near Saint
Gregory's Record. eccles. Cant.
hard by the Court there; it was in this Simons time removed, and the place
given to the Monks of Christ-Church, (happily in consideration of their consent
to the Archbishops fore-noted indultums or grants made to this Archdeacon) who
kept it, as to the propriety of it at least wise, until the 25. Ed. 3. and was
the same (I take it) which they then exchanged with the Canons of the place for
other the like of theirs: in the deed whereof I find it thus described, viz.
Placiam suam cum pertinen. jacen. inter Curiam. S. Gregorii versus South,
venellam de Baggeb' verse. North, ortum de Forgehagh verse. East, and ortum
quondam Iohannis le Gerdeler versus West. The Archdeacon then removing thence,
he settled and seated himself (as I said) at Hakynton, where his usual
residence continued until that of late days the mansion house was alienated.
Of late days, I say, for I read that not only Archbishop Arundell in Hen. 5.
time dyed at the Archdeacon of Canterbury his mansion house at Hakynton, but
that of late in Hen. 8. days Archbishop Warham did likewise. But now it is
gone, and the Archdeacon, quatenus Archdeacon, left houselesse.

I return to our present Archdeacon Simon, who in the vacancy of the Sea by
Archbishop Edmunds death which stood Peter Lambard the Monks Official, for
that time of the vacancy, challenging to himself in right of his Archdeaconry
all the Jurisdiction both Provincial and Diocesan. But at length after some
alterations hinc inde, all contentions between the Chapter and him in that
behalf were friendly ended by a personal composition, a Copy whereof (that
you may see the then state of this Archdeaconry) I suppose in my Appendix to
set forth. This man, before he was Archdeacon took part (against King John)
with Lewis Vale pro Scriptura 23. in Append^ce. Matthew. Paris.
the French Dolphin, who made him his Chancellor, for whose establishment here
he was very active, as you may find more at large in Matthew Paris and others.
The Pope, by his letters consulted with this Simon about Ralfe Nevill the
Bishop of Chichester and Chancellor of England, whom the Monks of
Christ-Church, to gratify the King who much respected him, had (as the
Canonists phrase it) postulated for their Archbishop in the vacancy by the
death of Richard the great, whose relation of the man so wrought the Pope
against him, that he was put by it and Edmund promoted to the place. Shortly
this Archdeacon founded the Hospital of Poor Priests in Canterb. whereof
enough already in proper place, and died about the year 1248. having been
Archdeacon 21 years, upon whom Matthew Paris bestows this Epitaph. Sub eodem
quoque annali curriculo, obiit Magister Simon de Langetuna, frater praeclarae
memoriae Stephani Cantuariensis 1248.
Archiepiscopi, ecclesiae Cantuariensis Archidiaconus. Qui si ecclesiae suae,
videlicet Cantuariensis, persecutor and perturbator fuisset, non est mirandum,
quin imo Regnum Francorum, Regnum and Anglorum, quandoque cum ex multiplici
bello vexaretur, sicut sufficienter in loco suo praedictum est, movit, commovit
and perturbavit etc.



See more (if you please) of this man in Pitseus.

Stephanus de Vicenna succeeded Simon Langton. So the process of the suit
between his Successor Richard de Ferrings and the Chapter about title of
Jurisdiction in the vacancy of the Sea informs me, which gives a Catalogue of
the Archdeacons, and the order of their succession from Simon Langton down to
that Richard. He held the place till his death, which by the computation of
that process was about x. years.

But I am persuaded that one Stephanus de monte Luelli ought to have a share
with him of that time allotted to him for his incumbency in that dignity, which
that process omitting this Stephen reckons between the former Stephen and Hugh
Mortimer. For in the year 1257. in the time of Archbishop Boniface, I find in
a Lieger of S. Radigund's Abbey by Dover the subscription of this Stephanus de
monte Luelli, by the express title of Archdeacon of Canterb. as (with others)
a witness to some Instruments or Charters made to that Abbey by the
Archbishop. At what time I find that Hugh Mortimer was the Archbishops
Official. To whom I pass.

This Hugh Mortimer was first (as I said Official of Cant. Electus Cantuar.
(says Florilegus) naves ascensurus jussit nemora 1245.
Archiepiscopatus abscidi and vendi, and quasdam tallias and collectas in
terris suis fieri, and constituit quendam suum Officialem natione Pictaviensem,
Magistrum Hugonem de Mortimer, qui diligenter mandata sua exequebatur. He
continued Official very long, it seems. For in the year 1270. I find a
decision of his (as Official) of a controversy, wherein the Monks of Horton
Priory in Kent were interessed, recorded in the Lieger of that house. It seems
he was also Chancellor or Vicar general to the Archbishop. For in the year
1258. he sends his Mandatum ad inducendum to the Archdeacons Official, for the
inducting of the Abbat of S. Radegund into the Parsonage of Alcham, in this
form. Magister Hugo de Mortuo mari Dilecto sibi officiali Archidiacon' Cant.
salutem in Domino. De mandato Domini mei Archiepiscopi Cant. vobis mando
specialiter, Quatenus Abbatem sanctae Radigundis nomine suo and conventus sui
in possessionem ecclesiae de Alcham mittatis corporalem, and tueamini inductum
contradictores and rebels per censuram ecclesiasticam compescendo. Dat' die
Martis prox. ante festum. S Nicolai Anno Domini 1258.



Afterward to wit about the year 1271. he became Archdeacon, which place he
held about 14 years. In which time, to wit in the vacancy of the
Archbishopric by the death of Boniface, I find him Liber Hosp. Pauper. (...).
Cantuar.
play the Diocesan, in appropriating (authoritate ordinaria, as his words are)
to the Hospital of Poor Priests in Cant. the Parish Church of S. Margaret in
Cant. with consent of the Patr. the Abbat of S. Austins. His challenging of
this and the like power in the time of the vacancy, begat a quarrel between him
and the Monks of Christ-Church, the like to that between his predecessor Simon
Langton and them, both in the nature and end of it. Postmodum vero (says the
often cited Record of Christ-Church) vacant sede per mortem bonae memoriae
Bonifacii Capitulum Cant. (...) Iurisdictionem Provincialem and (...) supra
exercebat per fratrem Galfridum de Romenal^ officialem suum. Postea vero Mr
Hugo de Mortuo mari tunc Archidiaconus Cant. ratione talis qualis possessionis
Simonis praedecess^ris sui vendicabat hujusmodi jurisdictionem ad ipsum and
Archidiaconatum pertinere. Tandem inter Capitulum and praedictum Hugonem
personalis compositio intervenit, and ad vitam ipsius Hugonis tantummodo
duratura, prout patet per tenorem ejusdem. This composition is much like that
which you shall find copied in my Appendix, made to Simon Langton.

William Middleton succeeded Hugh Mortimer, and held the place 2 years and
upwards. And in the year 1278. was removed thence to the Bishopric of
Norwich. Where, in the Catal. of BB. you may read somewhat more of him.

Robertus de Gernemutha (or of Yarmouth whom Fox calls Gernemine, succeeded
William Middleton, and like his predecessor continued Archdeacon upward of two
years. This man renewed the old quarrel for Jurisdiction in the vacancy twice
set on foot before, as you may see in Simon and Hugo: appealing the Monks to
the Pope about it. During the dependence of which appeal in the Court of Rome,
this Archdeacon died. This suit happened in the vacancy by Robert Kilwardbyes
remove or translation Postmodum (says the old Record again) vacant sede Cant.
per translationem Domini Roberti de Kylewardby Archiepiscopi in Episcopum
Portuensem Capitulum Cantuar. omnimodam hujusmodi Iurisdictionem ut supra
exercuit per Magistrum Ricardum de Stradford Officialem suum. Sed postea
Magister Robertus Gernemuta Archidiaconus Cant. occasion talis qualis
possessionis praedictorum Simonis and Hugonis praedecessorum suorum vendicabat
omnimodam hujusmodi Iurisdictionem ad ipsum and Archidiaconatum suum pertinere,
and super hoc ad sedem Apostolicam (at dicitur) appellavit, and praedictum
Capitulum in Curia Romana traxit in causam, ut patet per processum inde
habitum, inter Capitulum and dictum Robertum. Sed pendente causa in Curia
praedicta Robertus ibi diem suum clausit extremum.

Ricardus de Ferrings succeeded in the Archdeaconry and held it fifteen years
until he was removed thence to the Archbishopric of Dublin in Ireland vacant
by the death of one Ottoninus (so Parker from Matt. of Westminster) and
conferred on him by the Provision of Pope Boniface 8. but he died by the way in
his return from Rome; where, being Archdeacon, he revived the suit then dormant
by the death of his predecessor, which suit was hotly prosecuted for a while,
but to little purpose. Postmodum vero (the Cathedral Record again) vacant
sede Cant. per mortem bonae memoriae Iohannis Archiepisc. Capitulum Cant.
omnimod. hujusmodi Iurisdictio. ut supra exercuit per Magistrum Iohannem de
Selveston officialem suum. Sed Magister Richardus de Ferrings tunc
Archidiaconus Cant. litem sopitam per mortem dicti Roberti praedecessoris sui
in Curia Romana resuscitavit, and usque ad examinationem testium est
prosecutum, and dati sunt Iudices de consensu partium ad examinandum testes,
viz. Mt Rogerus de Roll Archidiacon^s Bedforden. M^ Philippus de Barton, and
Mt Johannes de Excestre qui bullam remissionis ut dicitur receperunt, sed nihil
ad rem inde factum est, nec etiam terminatum.

John Langton (or Johannes De Langtona) succeeded Richard in the year 1299.
which thing came thus to pass Godwin. Catal. of BB. in Ely.
. This John, being Chancellor of England, first constituted anno 1293. and a
second time anno 1307. was by a part of the Covent of Ely, chosen for their
Bishop and he endeavored mainly to have his election confirmed: but being
disappointed of that Bishopric, the Pope, Boniface 8. (to whom from the
Archbishop who had disannulled his election he appealed, but in vain)
preferring another to that Bishopric, in way of recompense of his labor and
cost, made him Archdeacon of Canterb. in the place of his predecessor Ferrings.
This John afterward, to wit in the year 1305. was made Bishop of Chichester,
being consecrated by Archbishop Winchelsey on the 10th of the Kal. of October.
anno praed' Anno 1305. (says a book of Christ-Church) 10. Kal. October. Robertus
Winchelsey Archiep. consecravit in ecclesia Cant. Dominum Iohannem de Langtone
Archidiaconum Cant. in Episcopum Cicestrensem. Harpsfield reports, that between
him and both the Archbishop and Monks arose certain controversies about (the
old quarrel) Jurisdiction in the Sees vacancy. But I suppose he mistakes him in
this for his predecessor Ferrings. See more of him in the C^tel. of BB. in Ely
and Chichester, as also in Harpsfield, Cent. 13.

Thus have I briefly run over the 11 Archdeacons of this 13th Century. A
greater number (if you mark) then Harpsfield reckons upon: who of these names
only Simon, Henry, William, Richard and John. He adds Robert Winchelsey, but
erroniously. Indeed he was Archdeacon of Essex, but of Cant. never that I can
find. Now let us on to those of the next Century. viz.

1. Simon de Fever sham. 2. Bernardus de Eyci. 3. Gutterdus Labredus. 4. Simon
Convenius. 5. Johannes Brutonius. 6. Raymundus. 7. Hugo de Engolisma. 8. Robert
Stratford. 9. Petrus Rogerius. 10. Henricus Wakefield. 11. Willielmus. 12.
Audomarus de Rupy. 13. Willielmus Packington. 14. Adam de Mottrum. 15. Ricardus
Clifford.
Harpsfield begins this Century with Bernardus, ranking him next Successor to
John Langton. But I find one between them, namely Simon de Feversham: to whom
Archbishop Winchelsey gave the Archdeaconry vacant by Langton's remove to the
Bishopric of Chichester. For the last cited Record goes on thus. Et eodem die
dedit Magistro Simoni de Feversham Archidiaconatum Cantuar. Which is all I
read of him, saving the testimony given him by Pitseus De illust. Angl.
Scriptor. ^ate 14. page 505.
.

Of Bernard, I read that in the year 1313. when the Sea of Cant. was void by
Archbishop Winchelseyes death, this man was Archdeacon, and that he suffered
the Chapters then Official quietly to hold and exercise all manner of
Jurisdiction belonging to the Sea. Postmodum vero (says that old Record of
Christ-Church) vacant sede Cant. per mortem bonae memoriae Roberti de
Winchelsey Archiepiscopi, Capitulum Cant. omnimodam hujusmodi jurisdictionem ut
supra excrcuit per Magistrum Rogerum de Rowell Officialem suum, sine aliqua
appellatione vel contradictione. Erat tunc temporis Archidiaconus Cant. M^
Bernardus Eyci filius Dom. Aimeney de la Berto.

For the next three. I find they did successively hold the Archdeaconry in the
time of Walter Reynolds the Archbishop, and that is all: saving that the
Records of the Cathedral have a Bull of Pope John xxij. thus entitled Bulla
revocationis collationis Archidiaconatus Cant. fact' magistro Iohanni de
Bruiton per Archiepisc. ut conferatur Raymundo sanctae Mariae in Cosmedin Diac.
Card. per Iohannem Papam: From which Raymund I pass unto (I take it) his next
Successor,

Hugo de Engolisma. Both in the year 1327. and 1330. I have seen Records that
style him Archdeacon of Canterbury Lib. Hosp. Pauper. sacerd.
adding that one Petrus de Matre was his Proctor and Vicar general. To him
Nicholas Trivet dedicated his History.

Robert Stratford (I take it) succeeded next. For I find him Archdeacon in his
brother John Stratford the Archbishops time. He was Chancellor of England first
constituted 11. Ed. 3. and again afterward 14. ejusd. How this came to pass
you may learn in the Catalogue of BB. in Chichester, to the which Bishopric
he was preferred, succeeding therein his predecessor in the Archdeaconry, John
Langton. I have seen In Archivis Consistorii Cant.
a plea of his consisting of many articles, and containing in the first place
an enumeration or particular of all the rights and privileges of his
Archdeaconry; after which follows a suggestion of certain grievances offered
to him and it by the then Commissary of Canterbury put up against him to his
brother the Archbishop, with what success I know not, for I cannot find the
issue.

Petrus Rogerius sanctae Mariae novae Diaconus Cardinalis, in the year 1356.
was Archdeacon of Canterbury, and Stratfords ^Lib. Hosp. Pauper. sa^d.
next Successor (I take it:) whose absence was supplied by one Hugo Pelegrinus,
who thus writes himself. Hugo Pelogrinus Thesaurarius Lichfield Apostolicae
sedis in Anglia Nuntius, Reverendi patris in Christo Domini Petri Rogerii
sanctae Mariae novae Diaconi Cardinalis Archidiaconi Cantuar. Vicarius in
spiritualibus generalis.

In the Vacancy of the Sea by the death of William Wittlesey, Anno 1374. one
Henry of Wakefield was made Archdeacon by the then Prior and Covent of
Christ-Church Lib. eccl^e Cantuar.
, who swear them Canonical obedience vacatione durante.

In the year 1379. 2. Rich. 2. Fox Acts and Monum. Par. 1. page 562.
ex bundello brevium Regis de Anno 2. Rich. 2. par. 1. mentions two
Archdeacons of Canterbury. Thus the one. Lord William of the holy Church of
Rome Cardinal, a stranger does hold the Archdeaconry of Canterbury, and is not
resident, the true value of all the yearly fruits, rents and profits, is worth
seven hundred florens.



Thus the other.
Lord Andomar de Rupy is Archdeacon of Canterbury, to the which Archdeacon
belong the Church of Lymin within the same Dioces, worth by year after
taxation of the tenth xxl. The Church of Tenham worth by year after the said
taxation, Cxxxl. vj^. viijd. The Church of Hakington near Canterbury, worth by
year twenty marks. The Church of Saint Clement in Sandwich, worth by year
after the taxation aforesaid, eight marks. The Church of Saint Mary in
Sandwich, worth by year eight pounds, of the which the said Archdeacon
receives only six marks. The profits of all which premises S. William
Latimer Knight has received, together with the profits arising out of the
Jurisdiction of the Archdeaconry, worth by year xxl.
Afterward, to wit, in the year 1381. one William of Packington, or (as
Pitseus writes him) Pachenton, had the Archdeaconry conferred upon him by the
then Prior and Covent Lib. eccles. Cant.
in the vacancy by Sudburies death: his Proctor making and taking the
accustomed oath of obedience to the Prior and Covent; and that he will not
attempt any thing to the prejudice of the Church of Canterbury, and will
faithfully execute such mandates as he should receive from the Prior and
Chapter. Pitseus will further acquaint you with this man, and his great worth,
and good parts, if you consult him.

In Archbishop Courtneys time (Sudburies next Successor) one Adam de Mottrum
was Archdeacon, and withal the Archbishops Chancellor, as I find by Courtneys
Will extant in Christ-Church, wherein he is a legatary.

He was succeeded by Richard Clifford, who was Archdeacon in Archbishop
Arundels days. Harpesfield tells of Hist. ecs. Angl. Saecul. 15. cap. 14. page
634.
a controversy that happened to arise between the Archbishop and him about
matter of Jurisdiction. Ricardo (says he) controversia quaedam, de exercenda
Jurisdiction, cum Arundellio intercessit, quae certa transactione, mutuo
ipsorum consensu composita est. The composition here spoken of is extant (for I
have seen both prototype and copy) in the Church Records. The Lieger of the
Consistory has also a transcript of it. He was afterward consecrate Bishop of
Worcester, to wit Anno 1401. and translated thence to London Anno 1407. See
more of him there in Bishop Godwins Catalogue who speaks very honorably of
him. I find his name and picture drawn and set up in the West-Window of the
Chapterhouse of Christ-Church, as in likelihood, a benefactor to the work, it
being new built in his time, as you may find elsewhere.

For that was the way by which the religious men used to express their
thankfulness to their benefactors, namely, by representing their effigies, and
setting up their names, their coats also that had any, in some part of that
building, which by their bounty they had help to advance; sometimes adding
withal their gift and largess, what and how much it was: as for instance in
that particular, in the Cloister, hard by the door of the Chapter House, about
the shield of a coat representing the effigies of a Monk in his habit, one
that about the same time with this Archdeacon, was a benefactor to that work,
I read as followeth*^ Frater Johannes Schepene, cum adjutorio amicorum suorum,
contribuit ad fabricam claustri C. lib. cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen.

I have done with the Archdeacons of this (14th) Century, and come now to them
of the next, by name.

1. Robertus Hall. 2. Johannes Wakering. 3. Thomas Rumnoth. 4. Willielmus
Chichley. 5. Prosper de Columna. 6. Thomas Chichley. 7. Thomas Wittembourne. 8.
Johannes Bourgchier. 9. Hugo Pentwin.
The first of these (Hall) was (as Harpesfield says) Archbishop Arundells
Vicar general.

The second Wakering, was keeper of the Privy Seal (says Sir Henry Spelman)
to Hen. 4. Regi ab archivis sive scriniis, says Harpsfield, and in the year
1416. he was elected and consecrate Bishop of Norwich. Godwyn writes very
honorably of him, as you may see in his Catalogue in Norwich.

The third Rumnoth Harpsfield ubi supra.
, questioned and called before him John Bishop of Saint Assaph, as not legally
holding his Bishopric, being never inducted or put into possession by his
predecessor Robert, as the manner was, and of right he should have been, it
being one of the rights of the Archdeacon to induct all B B. of the Province
into the possession of their Sees.

The fourth, William Chicheley Idem Harpsf. ubi supra.
, being Archbishop Chicheleys near Kinsman, was by him made Archdeacon, what
time he was with the King in the French expedition. This William being a Notary
of the Apostolic See, and dying in the Court of Rome: Pope Martin 5. bestowed
the Archdeaconry upon his nephew Prosper de Columna, a Boy under fourteen
years of age, and richly provided for before by the Pope his Uncle, but not to
the content of the Popes avaritions mind; who so prevailed with the King, that
his nephew being an alien, and so incapable of the dignity by the laws of the
Realm, he was by Royal indulgence indenized and made capable of the same, but
so as the Pope should by his Bull, conceptis verbis, give way to the Patron
freely to confer it afterward, as it should fall void, and that this
indulgence should not be drawn into example. This Archdeacon after a few
years was made a Cardinal.

The sixth, Thomas Chicheley, had the Archdeaconry afterward conferred upon him
by the same Archbishop Hen. Chicheley, his near Kinsman also. In an
examplification of his (which I have seen) belonging to S. John's Hospital
without Northgate, I find him style himself thus. Thomas Chicheley,
decretorum Doctor, Archidiaconus Cant. and Domini Papae Prothonotarius. In the
year 1463. he was Provost of Wingham College in Kent Liber testam. pen^,
registr. Domin^ (...). Cant.


The seventh and ninth I know only by their names. For as yet I find nothing
at all written of them.

The eight, John Bourgchier, was (I take it) brother or near Kinsman to the
Archbishop Thomas Bourgchier. He dyed in the year 1495. and was buried in the
Lady Chapel of Christ-Church, where you may find his Monument. I have
transcribed the Inscription or Epitaph upon it before in the Survey of the
Church Monuments. The Windows of this Chapel where he lies are very full of
the Bourgchiers arms.

Thus much very briefly of the Archdeacons of the 15th Cent. I come now to
those of the next, by name.

1. William Warham. 2. Edmund Cranmer. 3. Nicholas Harpsfield. 4. Edmund Guest.
5. Edmund Freake. 6. William Redman. 7. Charles Fotherby.
The first, William Warham, was Archbishop Warhams Kinsman, in whose house
Antiq. Brit in ejus vita.
then situate at Hakington, the Archbishop dyed. He was withal Provost of
Wingham. For the cause (its like) of his conscience, by Cession, as the
Canonists phrase it, he left both it, and the Archdeaconry, and by the privity
and consent of the then Archbishop (Thomas Cranmer) had a stipend or pension of
60l. per annum, allowed him during his life, out of the Archdeaconry, and 20l.
per annum out of his Prepositure of Wingham Ex R^ Cranm^.
,

By his Successor in both, Edmund Cranmer, Archbishop Cranmers brother, who
continued Archdeacon afterward until Queen Mary's days, and was then
deprived of it, his Prebend also, and Parsonage of Ickham, which were all taken
from him in the year 1554. for being a married Clerk, and the first given to
Nicholas Harpsfield Doctor of Law, the second to Robert Collens Bachelor of
Law and Commissary of Canterbury, and the third to one Robert Marsh. (...) Lib.
eccl^s. Cant.


Concerning Harpsfield, Fox, a Protestant, and Pitseus, a Papist, give their
several censures: but clearly ex diametro contrary, and so full (I fear) of
partiality, and by their reflection upon the cause of religion, so prejudicate,
that I leave it to the moderate to give a temper to them both, not desirous to
interpose my judgment, but wishing only he may be censured with truth and
indifferency. He was withal a Prebendary of Canterbury whom Doctor Moulin,
after many other, does succeed. Being a prisoner, he wrote the Ecclesiastical
story of England, and other Books whereof see a Catalogue in Pitseus.

Harpsfield in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, being deprived,
Edmund Guest succeeded in the Archdeaconry, and shortly after, to wit Anno
1559. was consecrate Bishop of Rochester, and translated thence to Salisbury
Anno 1571. Where you may see more of him in the Catalogue of B B.

His next Successor was Edmund Freake, both in the Archdeaconry, and also in
the Bishopric of Rochester, with which latter he held the Archdeaconry in
Commendam, until he was afterward removed to Norwich, and from thence to
Worceter. The forecited Catalogue will tell you more of him.

William Redman succeeded in the Archdeaconry, but in the year 1594. was
removed to the Bishopric of Norwich. Consult the often cited Catalogue in
Norwich, if you would know more of him.

Charles Fotherby upon Redmans remove to Norwich was made Archdeacon, and
afterward Deane of Canterbury: both which with other spiritual livings
besides, he held till his death, which happened Anno Domini 1616. He lies
buried in the Lady Chapel in Christ-Church; and, Bourgchier excepted, who lies
buried in the same Chapel, is the only Archdeacon of Canterbury, that by any
Monument or Record appears to have been buried in Christ-Church. He was (you
see) the last of that Century; as the modern Archdeacon, the reverend Dr
Kingsley, is the first of the next, and makes the 59th Archdeacon. But manum de
tabella. And here let me close this discourse of the Archdeacons with a touch
of that Praerogative anciently belonging to them, of putting the
Suffragan-Bishops after their consecration or translation to a Bishopric, in
possession of the same, (which we vulgarly call induction or installation)
together with such rights and fees as were usually paid unto the Archdeacon in
respect thereof. Their private Leiger called (from the sable cover) the black
book sets forth the matter at large, but affecting brevity, I have chosen
rather to represent it in Archdeacon Harpsfields more compendious way. Est
quidem (says he Histor. eccles. Saecul. 13. page 450.
) Cantuariensis ceterorum in Anglia Archidiaconorum antesignanus, habetque and
hoc etiam saeculo habuit id praerogativae, ut designatos and initiatos
Episcopos, quasi in praesenti rerum omnium possessione constituat. Ad quam
possessionem tradendam, solebat ipse proficisci ad Episcopum in possessione
locandum. Quibus temporibus equum Episcopi, and penulum ad suos usus, and
viginti praeterea aureos 10 marcas, says Parker. Antiq. Britan. page 28.
ad sumptus accipiebat. Moris praeterea erat, ut ex argenteo aut de aurato
quodam poculo Episcopus ei in mensa praebiberet, acceptumque poculum ad
Archidiaconi commodum cederet. Posterioribus, and nostris praesertim
temporibus, Archidiaconi possessionem hanc tradendi provinciam, aliis per
literas mandantes, ipsi non proficiscebantur, viginti illos aureos solummodo
sibi decerpentes. Thus he. And so both this Catalogue, and my whole task for
the Cathedral is absolved.

Parochial Churches.
I Come in the next place, according to my method, to speak of the parochial
Churches in and about the City. Give me leave, before I treat of them in
several (as I mean to do) to premise a few things touching them in general.
It is but of a very few of them, that I know or have found the certain either
time or Author of their foundation. But as I shall show you that some of them
have been erected since the Conquest: so I conceive (and am verily persuaded)
none of them (except Saint Martins) do much, if at all, exceed the same in
age, and that for many inducements. One that before it our Churches were
generally built and made of Wood, and it is a thing noted of the Normans, that
upon their Income they builded their Churches of stone Stow. Daniell.
. Another is that the Saints whose names some of our Churches do carry will
not bear any much greater age, as Saint Alphege, St Dunstan, St Edmund the
King and Martyr. A third reason I have, and I take it from a Deed or Charter of
Coenulf King of Mercia, and Cuthred his brother, King of Kent, made to the
Abbess and her Nonnes of Liminge, In Archivis (...). Cant.
and dated Anno Domini 804. granting them a certain parcel of Land in our
City, appertaining (says the Charter or Land-boc) to a Church situate in the
West part of the same, built in honor of Saint Mary. Now no such Church is, or
since the Conquest (that I ever found) was standing in that part of our City.
Whence I infer, that the face and condition of our City has suffered an
utter change since those days; and because we read that the Danes made havocke
both of people and place in King Etheldreds days, slaying the most part of the
one, and burning and spoiling all the other (not sparing the Cathedral it
self) I think we may justly charge upon that all-wasting deluge the utter
subversion of such Churches as then were in our City, and consequently may not
imagine any of our modern Churches (except as is before excepted) so ancient as
to preced, but contrariwise to succeed and follow the same. The Deed or
Charter, because it may give content to some sort of Readers, and indeed
historically glanceth at the misery that our Country suffered by the frequent
invasion of the Danes, as I conceive of it from the end for which this land was
given by it to the Nonnes, being (Ad necessitatis refugium) I here subjoyne.
Dispensante ac gubernante Domino Deo omnipotente, Ego Coenulph Rex Maerciorum,
and Cuthred frater meus Rex Cantuariorum Anno Dominicae incarnationis Dccciiij.
concessimus venerabili Abbatissae Selethrythae and suae familiae ad ecclesiam
sanctae Mariae semper virginis quae sita est in loco qui dicitur Limming, ubi
pausat corpus beatae Eadburgae, aliquantulum terrae partem in Civitate
Dorobernia ad necessitatis refugium: hoc est, vj. jugera pertinentia ad
ecclesiam quae sita est in honor beatae Mariae in Occidentali part civitatis,
and quorum Forte terminos.
termini sic cingere videntur. Ab orient fluvius Stur. Ab occidente and ab
austromurus Civitatis. A statu ecclesiae protenditur in Aquilonem emissione
virgarum circiter ut fertur quindecim. Si quis autem hanc nostram donationem
infringere vel minuere temptaverit sciat se rationem redditurum in die
Iudidicii, nisi ante digna satisfactione Deo and hominibus emendare voluerit.
Et haec testium nomina quae inferius scripta sunt.

Ego Coenulfus Rex Merciorum hanc donationem meam cum signo crucis Christi
confirmo.

Ego Cuthredus Rex Cant. sig. crucis confirmo.

Ego Aethelheardus gratia Dei archiep' consensi and sub.

Ego Aldulf Episc' consensi and subscripsi.

Ego Daeneberht Episc' con. and sub.



Now of all the present Churches in and about our City, I find only two that
were not of the patronage of some Abbey or other religious house, in or near
neighboring to the City; and they were S. Martin without, and S. Alphege
within the walls of the City, both appertaining to the Sea of Canterb. Of S.
Martin I have spoken enough already, on a former occasion. Leaving that then I
will make to (the other) S. Aelphege, where I meet with the following S.
Aelphege.
monuments.

In the Chancell.
In Maidstone natus jacet hic Ion Piers vocitatus John Piers.

Ecclesiae Rector Alphegi martyris almi.
Cujus protector sit Deus omnipotens.
Qui legis haec omnia prome pro seque labora,
Sic tibi prosicies and amicus tu mihi fies.
Cum ser is a tergo sator es impavidus ergo.
Hic jacet Magister Johannes Parmenter quondam Rector istius John Parmenter.
ecclesiae qui obiit XXo die mensis October. Anno Domini M. D. j. cujus etc. This
John was Commissary of Canterbury, in his time, and Parson of Adisham in Kent.

Here lies Sr Robert Provest Parson of S. Alpheys, which died Robert Provest.
the 22th day of January, Anno Dom. 1487. Mercy Ihu'. Es testis Christ quod
non jacet hic lapis iste John Lovelych.

Corpus ut ornetur set spiritus ut memoretur.


Hic jacet Mr Johannes Lovelych bacallarius in Legibus quondam rector istius
ecclesiae, qui obiit 6 die Sept. Anno Dom. 1438. Cujus etc. This man was in his
time Register of the Archbishops Consistory at Cant.

Here lies Richard Stuppeny bachelor of both laws, who had by his wife
Catherine 2 sons and 4 daughters, and departed this Richard Stuppeny.
life the sixteenth day of November. 1596.

Lo here a view of thine estate is set before thine eye:
For as thou art even such was he who here in grave does lie.
If virtuous life or faithful friend could ought prevailed have,
Then should not he who here lies dead have laid here in grave.
But death will not entreated be, it takes hold on all:
So that as all men come from earth, so to the earth they shall.
Yet this the comfort is of them which now to Christ pertain,
That dying they do die to live with Christ for ay to reign.
This Richard Stuppeny was in his time a Proctor of Canterbury.

In the South-Chancell.
Here lies Henry Gosborne cetezen and Alderman of the town Henry Gosborne.
of Canturbury, and four years at sundry times Mayre of the same Cety the
which deceased the 22th day of April, the year of our Lord 1522. on whose
soul etc.

This worthy Patriot by his will gave twenty marks (a In Regist. Consistor.
Cant.
large legacy in those days) toward the repairing of the City-walls, at such
places as the Abbat of S. Augustine, and the Mayor of the City should assign.
It appears by and upon his monument that he had 2. wives, and by them 25.
children, whereof ten were sons. Robert Gosborne his brother Robert Gosborne
lies hard beside him.

In the same Chancell.
Richardus Engeham de magna Cherte reliquit hanc lucem 7. die Feb. Anno Dom.
1568. cujus animae etc. Richard Exg^ham.
Qui tumulos cernis cur non mortalia spernis?
Tali namque domo clauditur omnis homo.


In the body.
Pray for the sawlys of John Caxton and of Ione
And Isabel that to this Church great good has done John Caxto^ and Ioane h^
wife.

In making new in the Chancell
Of Dexkys and Setys as well
An Antiphon the which did bye
With a table of the Martyrdom of St Alphye
For thing much which did pay
And departed out of this life of October the 12. day.
And Isbel his second wiff
Passed to bliss where is no strife
The xijt day to tell the trowth
Of the same month as our Lord knows
In the year of our Lord God a thousand four hundred fowerscore and five.
Hic jacet Johannes Colfol quondam clericus parochialis istius John Colsell.
ecclesiae qui obiit 28. die men's. Maii A. D. 1500. and anno gratiae, cujus
animae etc.

Hic jacet Nicolaus Reve quondam Civis and Wexchandler Nicholas Reve.
Cantuar. qui obiit 28. die men's. December. 1431. cujus etc.

On the second Pillar from the West end
Gaude Prude Thoma
Per quem sit is it a columpna. Thomas Prude.

With his coat of arms engraven (as the rest) in brass. He lived in Ed. 4.
days, and by his Will In Registro m^morato.
appoints to be buried by Christ-church porch, and therein gives as much as
will build a pillar in this Church, and 5 marks to Christ-Church works anno
1468.

In the West-window.
Orate pro animabus Edmundi Staplegate and Ellenorae at Pytte Edmund Staplegate
and Ellenor his wife.
uxoris ejus. This man who took his name from his place of habitation which was
Staplegate in this Parish, was in his time namely in Ed. 3. days diverstimes
one of the Bailiffs of our City: of whom see more in Stablegate.

In the West-wall, without.
O ye good people that here go this way: Agnes Halke.

Of your charity to have in remembrance:
For the soul of Agnes Halke to pray
Sometime here of acquaintance.
In this Churchyard so was her chance
First after the hallowing of the same.
Before all other here to begin the dance
Which to all creatures is the loath game.
The Tuisday next before Pentecost
The year of our Lord M. Dc. and two
Whose soul Ihu' pardon that of might is most.
Having now done with S. Aelphege, let us on and survey the rest. Whereof
three, to wit, S. George, S. Mary Bredman, and S. Peter anciently were as they
still are of the patronage of Christ-church, as were likewise whilst they
stood, two other, viz. S. Michael of Burgate, and S. Mary of Queningate: all
which 5, together with S. Sepulchers, were confirmed to it by Bulls of Pope
Alex. 3. and diverse succeeding Popes, and every one of them anciently paid in
to it Liber eccles. Cant.
a several annual pension, as S. George, 5s. S. Mary Bredman, 6d. S. Peter.
6s. 8d. S. Michael, 2s. and S. Sepulchers, 12d. But let us on to the rest:
whereof six, viz. S. Mary Magdalen, S. Andrew, S. Mary Castle, S. Mildred, All
Saints and S. Paul belonged to S. Austins, and whilst it stood, also S. John's,
and sometime S. Margaret. Three viz. S. Dunstan, Holy Cross of Westgate, and
S. Mary of Northgate, to S. Gregory's. One viz. S. Mary Bredin, and whilst it
stood St Edmund of Ridingate to the Nonnes of S. Sepulchers: and one also, to
wit S. Margaret to the Hospital of Poor Priests of later time, as formerly to
S. Austins. I will begin with those belonging to the Cathedral. And of them
first with S. Georges: in the Chancell whereof you may read upon a gravestone
the following Epitaph

St George.
Hic requiescit Dominus Johannes Lovell quondam Rector John Lovell.
Istius ecclesiae, qui obiit 24. die mensis Aprilis Anno Domini 1438. Cujus
etc.

Which one is the only monument of any antiquity that I find there. I pass
therefore hence to S. Mary Bredman. St Mary Bredman.
Surnamed (I take it) to distinguish it from other Mary's in and about the
City; and so surnamed, I conceive, and so have said before, because of the
Bread-market kept beside it, as it is (we see) to this day. It was (as I have
elsewhere also noted) anciently in Latin called Ecclesia S. Mariae
Piscariorum, and in English, S. Mary Fishmanschurch, from a fish market
thereby. B^t yet more anciently and before all this Ecclesia S. Mariae de
Andresgate l^b. (...). Can^.
, from that place hard by it where the 4 ways meet at S. Andrews-Church, of
old called Andresgate, to say, Andrews-gate. Whence the Inn, now the Checquer,
an house from great antiquity belonging to Christ-Church, in the elder Rentalls
thereof stands described to be situate by Andresgate. But enter we the Church,
and we shall there find some ancient monuments, as

In the Chancell.
Orate pro Thoma Alcock quondam Rectore istius ecclesiae qui Thomas Alcock.
obiit in die sanctae Crucis Anno Domini 1500. Cujus animam salvet passio
Christi.

Orate pro anima Domini Roberti Richmond olim hujus ecclesia Rectoris, qui
obiit anno Domini 1524. decimo octavo die lulii. Robert Richmond.


In the Body.
Here lies William Megg sometime Alderman of this city which deceased the
first day of January Anno Domini 1519. On William Megg.
whose soul etc.

St Peter.
Whence Wever has taken these monuments. Thomas Ikham and Ione sa femme
gisoint icy Thomas Ikham and Joan his wife. William Ikham.

Dieu de salmes eit mercy. -- 1400.


Hic jacet Willielmus Ikham quondam civis and Balivus Civitat. Cantuar. qui
obiit -- Iulii -- 1424.

Orate pro anima Wilhelmi Septvans militis and Elisabethe ux. ejus. William
Septvans.


He mentions another; of one John Biggs but imperfectly. John Bigg and
Constance his wife.
I balk his, and set it out of new: from the Windows

Orate pro bono statu Iohannis Bigg armigeri ac Aldermanni Civitatis Cant. and
Constantiae consortis suae, qui me vitrari fecerunt, Anno Domini 1473.

In the next window.
Et specialiter pro bono stat^ Willielmi Bygg -- Civitatis Cant. and Iohannae
consortis suae, and pro animabus parentum ac William Bygg and Ioane his wife.
benefactorum eorum qui hoc lumen -- Anno Dom. 1468. This William Bigg was he
(I take it) that with John Coppyn of Whitstable, built our Market Cross at the
Bulstake: and gave x lib. toward the new building of St Georges-gate, whereof
before.

In the Chancell.
Hic jacet Dominus Johannes Colley quondam Rector istius ecclesiae, John Colley.
qui obiit 22. die mensis Feb. Anno Domini 14 8. Cujus etc. This man (it seems)
built the Chancell-window, for in the foot thereof is or lately was legible.
Per Iehan Collay qui estoit Person icy.

In the body.
Hic jacet Magister Johannes Sire quondam Rector ecclesiae John Sire.
Sancti Petri Cant. qui obiit in festo Sancti Pauli ad vincula, Anno Dom. 1436.
cujus etc.

As a thing worthy a monument, a Memorandum at least, let me acquaint you that
anno 25. Ed. 3. the Parsonage house of this Church was given to Thomas the then
Rector, by one Richard Langdon of Canterbury, with license of the King Lib.
Eccles. Cant.
.

S^ Michael of Burgate and her Chapel S. Mary of Queningate are both down and
gone: and so far from yielding any monument of others, that they rather stand
in need of one for themselves, least they be quite forgotten, both name and
place.

Having done with the Churches, by right of Patronage, belonging to
Christ-church, let us proceed to those of S. Austins. Out of all which the
Abbey anciently had and received certain annual pensions Thorn In vitis
Abbat. S. Augustini.
, to wit out of St Mildreds 10s. St Mary Castle 12d. St John 6d. St Margaret
3^. All Saints 12d. St Andrew 12d. St Mary Magdalen 12d. and S. Paul 3^. Which
together with the like in other Churches of their patronage in the Diocese,
Robert the Abbat and his Covent anno Domini 1242. in consideration of a
valuable recompense another way did release and relinquish.

St Mary Magdalen.
Hic jacet Iohanna filia Iohannis Hache quondam uxoris Henrici (...) Hach^.
Lynde de Cant. quae obiit 21. die November. Anno Domini 1417.

Hic jacet Christoferus Alcock Draper qui obiit 3. d e men's. Chris^er Alcock
September. Anno Domini 1492.

Here lies buried the body of Sybell Orchard Widow, late the Sybell Orchard.
wife of Mr. Libby Orchard late of Mounckton Court, in the Isle of Thanet
deceased, which Sybell dyed the 12. day of March, Anno Domini 1586.

One Richard Wekys of this Parish, a Butcher, in the year 1471. by his Will
was a great benefactor to this Church, as In Regist. Cons. Cant.
if you search the office you may find by his Will there. The Steeple of this
Church was new built in the year 1503. toward which at that time (as I find
by his Will) one Sir In R^gist Dom. Archid. Cant
Harry Ramsey of S^ George gave six seames of lime. Concerning the stopping up
the Chancell-Window of this Church, I find that in the year 1511. a
presentment of the matter was made to Archbishop Warham in a visitation of his
in these words: viz. That John Fish has joined his house to the Church by a
dormant to the hurt of the Church, and the light of the Church is stopped by
it. Fish being called into question for it, compounds with the Church Wardens,
who the year following judicially appear and acknowledge it. Ex Registro
Warham.


At a visitation holden Anno 1560. it was by the sworn Officers of this Church
presented as follows, viz. That there does belong to the Parsonage house a
piece of ground called Maudelen crossed, which is and has been wrongfully
detained by Mr Hyde Auditor of Christ-Church, to the great impoverishing of the
said Parsonage In Archvis C^s Cant.
. By other Records Lib. Came^ Civi^s.
I find this ground to lie in the Parish of St Martin, that it was Northward
bounded with the street, and Southward with certain Lands of St Austins, and
that the Parson of this Church paid for it 4s per annum to the Hosp. of St
Jacob, as I find in a Chantery-Booke.

St Andrew.
Of your charity pray for the soul of Edward Bolney Esquire Edward Bolney.
which deceased the second day of January in the year of our Lord God 1517.
whose soul, etc. you shall find him in the Catalogue of our Majors.

Here lies buried the body of Stephen White Citizen of this City and the first
Ironmonger that ever was dwelling in the City Stephen White.
of Canterbury who deceased the 28^h. of May Anno Domini 1592. etc.

In the Windows.
Orate pro anima Domini Willielmi Mellrose rectoris ecclesiae William Mellrose.
sanctae Mariae de Bredman. By it is his Device, being W. M. with a Rose over
head.

Orate pro anima fratris Iohannis Fanting Rectoris sanctae John Fanting.
Mariae de Bredyn. With his Picture, and Det matter Christi Fanting John gaudia
coeli.

These happily were benefactors to this Church about the same time that one
Thomas Petyt of this Parish was, who in year 1498. by his Will In Regist. Dom.
Archid. Cant.
, gave five marks to the making of a new Steeple, and a new Roof to this
Church, like as did one Io^n Swan In ^od. Regist.
another Parishioner there at the same time, and an Alderman sometime Mayor of
the City, viz. lxvjs. viijd. facturae novae testudinis and campanilis ibidem,
cum contigerit de novo fieri, as his Will expresses it. It was presented to
Archbishop Warham at his visitation holden Anno 1511. Quod Mayor and Communitas
Civitatis Cantuar subtrahunt decimas and oblationes ratione opellarum fori
piscari^ in dicta parochia scit. debitas ecclesiae supradicte. But the
Chamberlain of the City appearing and in the Towns behalf denying the
presentment to be true, it does not appear that the matter proceeded any
further Ex Registro Watham.
. Here was sometime a Chantery for William Butler.

St Mary Castle.
So surnamed for distinction sake, from the other Mary's of the City. This
Church has line long desolate: and the Chancellonely (to the repair whereof
one Roger Ridley An. 1470. by his Will gave 4l.) is left standing of it. Time
was it was as absolute a Parish Church as any about the City, and in time of
Popery, no doubt for it Tutelar Saints sake fared well and flourished, the
change of the times in that point being very probably a maine cause of the
Churches decay and desolation. For offerings, altarages and the like profits
whereof the living did mainely consist, and whereby the incumbent consequently
chiefly subsist, being (as the Reformation would) withdrawn, there was not
otherwise a competency for him to subsist by, which made it be deserted. St
Austins Abbey, before the dissolution, having the patronage, both of it and St
John's, another Parish Church not far distant from it now in a manner
forgotten, this latter, with the consent of the Patron, was by the Prior and
Covent of Christ-Church, in a vacancy, Anno 1349. united to the former Lib.
eccles. Cant.
. Both which united Churches and Parishes since their desolation tacitly
devolved to St Mildreds, and have been reckoned of that Parish, until now
very lately this of St Mary Castle is begun to be divorced again from it by
having a particular incumbent presented and inducted into it. A word or two
more of St John's and I leave them both. It seems the Parish was of small
extent, and so the living was according, poor and mean. For Records Li^er
(...).
do call it Eccles^ sancti Iohannis dicti pauperis. The Church stood much
about the upper end of that Lane leading from Castle-street, which at this day
we call, the back-lane, but was from thence anciently called St John's Lane
Renta v^l. eccles. Cant.
. It being come into private hands is (they say) and has been of a long time
profaned into a Maulthouse, or the like. Saint Lawrence book makes mention of
some portions of Tithes belonging to this Church: thus. Item praedict'
Hospitale percipit totam decimam de 4 acris terrae in Marketfield, and Rector
sancti Iohannis Cant^a. percipit de 2 acris, 8 garb. and de aliis 2 acris, 7
garb. in toto 1 copp. Item praeddict. Hosp. percipit duas parts decimae de 6
acris terrae capit. ad stonestreet verse. South and parvam semitam verse. North.
Et Rector sancti Iohannis Cant. percipit tertiam partim decimae. One Henry
Plaice was found dead in Cant. Anno 5. Ed. 3.
by a fall from a ladder as he was in tyling St John's Church in Cant. say the
Crown rolls.

The Parishes of St Andrew, St Mary Magdalen, and for a while S^ Paul which
before the Dissolution buried at St Augustines, since the Churchyard there was
withdrawn, in lieu thereof, I take it (this St Mary Castle Church being of
that Abbeys patronage) had this Churchyard assigned them for the burial of
their dead there; a privilege wherein St Mary Bredmans Parish did and does
(but by what right, that being of the patronage of Christ-Church, I know not)
communicate with the rest, but all or some part of the benefit arising by the
burialls there went and goes to the poor of Mayners Spitle, who in respect
thereof anciently kept it in repair, and for default thereof An. 1560. were
presented Ex Archivis Cons. Cant.
from St Andrews. Since which time the case is altered, each Parish keeping
their part of the enclosure.

St Mildred.
This Church, and a great part of the City (as Stow has it in his Summary) was
burnt in the year 1246.

In the Windows.
Orate pro anima Richardi Atwood. In a very ancient Character. Richard Atwood
A family of this name anciently dwelt in this Parish, being housed in
Stour-street, where one Thomas Atwood that lived in Hen. 8. days, dwelt and
(being four several times Mayor of the City) kept his Maioralty. The same man
here built the South Side Chancell or Chapel, for a peculiar place of
Sepulture for himself and his family, dive^s of whom lie there interred, under
fair grave-stones, sometimes inlaid with brass, all not worn but shamefully
torn away, even founders and all: who yet has a remembrance left of him in
the glass, viz. Orate pro animabus Thomae Wood armigeri custodis contra Thomos
Wood and Margaret his wife.
ro^ular. Hospitii reverendissimi pa^ris in Christo Domini -- Maioris hujus
Civitatis, qui in honor Jesus hanc capellam fieri fecit, and Margaretae uxoris
ejus filiae Iohannis Moyle armigeri. Orate pro eis.



In the Windows.
Magister Johannes Boold -- John Boold.


Dominus Johannes Mawny -- John Mawny.


Orate pro animabus Roberti Bennet and Crist -- Robert Bennet.


Orate pro animabus Iohannis Boys: -- John Boys.
Orate pro animabus Iohannis Pocat, and Iohannis Pocot silii ej usdem. John
Pocat.




One John Stulp (it seems) as a benefactor, had a great John Stulp.
hand in making diverse new pewes in this Church, as appears by his name upon
them.

At this place Lambert Perambul. of Kent. in Cant.
says, there was long since an Abbey. (S^ Mildreds, says he, in the
South-siae of the City long since (but not lately) an Abbay.) But surely he is
mistaken, and that hence, as I conceive. In the siege, surprisall and sacking
of our City by the Danes in the days of King Etheldred, amongst other
personages of note that are storied to have been lead captive by them, one
Lefwine (whom some call L^frune) the Abbess of St Mildred, is named for one.
Now this happening to be done at Canterbury, and she styled an Abbess, and
that of St Mildred Canterbury, as in Harpsfield, Mr Lambert, it seems, finding
in Canterbury a Parish Church of that name, supposed it had sometimes been that
Abbey whereof Lefwine or Leofrune in the Deanes time was Abbess, whereas
indeed she was Abbess of S^ Mildreds minster in the I Will of Thanet, and the
last Abbess of the same. So Thorn and from him Reyner in his Apostolatus
Benedictiorum e will both tell you. Tract. 1. Sect. 1. page 62.


All Saints.
This Church affoords no ancient Monument with an Inscription or Epitaph. Yet I
find some men of good note buried there. Amongst the rest one Roger Brent
sometimes ^oger Brent.
an Alderman and thrice Mayor of Canterbury who by his Will In Regist. Co^s.
Cant.
dated Anno 1486. gave unto the City his Message called Stone-Hall in this
parish, the house (I take it) wherein Mr Delme lately dwelt.

This Churches Cimitery was acquired and laid to it but of late days as it
were. For in Hen. 3. days, and (long after that) in Ed. 3. days too, it was
in private hands, as I find by several Deeds of those times, and did
anciently belong to Estbridge Hospital, in part at least Lib. Ho^. de
Estbridge.
.

St Paul.
In the Chancell-Windowes-foote is this remembrance Hamon Doge.
of Mr Hamon Doge, in an ancient Character or letter. Magister Hamo Doge. He
was a man of note in his time, lived in Hen. 3. reign, was the Archdeacon of
Canterbury his Official and the last Parson of this Church. For which Thorn
Lib. S. Radegundis.
is my Author, who says, that Anno quo supra (which was 1268) ordinatio
vicariae sancti Pauli facta fuit per magistrum Hugonem de mortuo mari per
assensum Domini R. Abbatis, and magistri Hamonis Doge ultimi Rectoris ibidem.
Fifteen years he had and held the Aldermanry of Westgate, and then passed it
over to the Abbey of St Austins, who infeoffed one Nicholas Doge with it Ex
Arcbivis terris London. 4. and 9. Ed. 1.
. The same Hamon founded the Chartery in this parish, whereof I have formerly
informed you.

In other of the Windows.
Orate pro Ricardo Wavere. Richard wavere.


Orate pro anima Iohannis Stace, and Constanciae uxoris ejus. John Stace.


Orate pro animabus Iohannis Gale and Christine uxoris. John Gale.
Orate pro animabus Georgii Wyndbourne genero^ and Katherinae George Wyndbourne.
uxoris suae, qui quidem G. obiit. 5o. die Ap. Ao. Dom. 1531. quorum etc.



Orate pro animabus Richardi Berne and Iohanna uxoris ejus. Richard Be^e.


Orate pro animabus Thomae Pollard. and Io. -- Thomas Pollard.


Against a Pillar.
Sub isto marmore tumulatur corpus Magistri Edmundi Hovynden quondam vicarii
hujus ecclesiae, qui obiit 23. die Iulii Edmund Hovynden.
1497. Cujus etc.

By the South-wall.
Epitaphium Iohannis Twyne armigeri qui obiit 24. November. John Twyne.
1581.

Clauditur hoc tumulo Johannes ille Tuuynus,
Qui docu^ pu^ros verba latina loqui.
Quique urbem hanc rexit Praetor turbante Viato
Rem populi and Regni seditione vafra.
Huic Deus in Christi mundato sanguine donet
Leta resurgenti Lector idemque tibi.
Vivit Dominus.
Of these, Richard Berne, by his Will In Regist. D. Archid. Cant.
dated anno 1461. full of pious and charitable legacies, gave x lib. toward
the repair of this Church at that time in great want thereof. Item lego (says
he) ecclesiae Sancti Pauli pro reparatione operum ejusdem ecclesiae locis
maxim indigentibus x lib. deliberandas per executores meos septimatim sicut
denarii praedicti expendi possint in operibus praedictis.

Because of some ancient and late differences between the City and St Austins,
touching the extent of the Cities Franchise or liberty hereaway, to help
clear the doubt, my Appendix shall give you a copy of an ancient composition,
whereby this difference was in part composed between Vide pro Scriptura 24. in
Appendice.
them. And there also you may find a copy of the ordination of this Churches
Vicarage.

And now having done with the Churches in and about our City of St Austins
patronage, I come to those next belonging to St Gregory's. viz. Northgate,
Westgate and St Dunstans.

St Mary Northgate.
Hic jacet Galfridus Holman armiger qui obiit 24. die mensis Gefferey ^olman.
Ianuarii. Anno Dom. 1478. Cujus etc.

Hic jacet Walterus Garrade nuper Vicarius istius ecclesiae, qui Walter Garrade.
obiit 26. die mensis Augusti Anno Dom. 1498. cujus etc.

Upon a plate set in the North-wall.
All ye that stand upon my corse
Remember that late Ralf Brown I was. Ralfe Brown.

Alderman and Mayre of this Cite.
Jesus upon my soul have pite.
For the time that this man lived in, see my Catalogue of the Majors.

Archbishop Stratford in the year 1346. with consent of the Prior and Covent
of St Gregory's, Patrons of this Church, erecting a Vicarage here, endowed the
same in such manner, as by the ordination or composition thereof extant in my
Appendix shall be fully showed. Scriptura 26.

Holy cross of Westgate.
Hic jacet Stephanus Matthew quondam parmarius istius villae Stephen Matthew.
qui obiit 5. die Ianuar. Anno Dom. 1442. cujus animae etc.

Hic jacet Dominus Willielmus Hall Capellanus. cujus etc. William Hall.


Hic jacet Robertus Colt quondam pandoxator istius villae qui Robert Colt.
obiit 6. die December. Anno Dom. 1444. and Deonisia uxor ejus quae obiit --
quorum animabus etc.

Hic jacet Willielmus Colkyn qui obiit 3. die Aug. Anno Dom. William Colkyn.
1440. cujus etc.

Of your charity pray for the souls of John Nayler and Robert John Nayler.
Robert Nayler.
Nayler his son late Aldermen of the City of Cant. which Robert died the 25.
day of December. Anno Dom. 1545. On whose soul etc. you may find the father in
the Catalogue of Majors.

Orate pro animabus Thomae Ramsey and Margaretae uxoris ejus, qui obiit 3. die
mensis Maii Anno Dim. 1495. Thomas Ramsey


Hic jacet Johannes Cornwell dier and Iohanna ac Alicia uxores John Cornwell.
ejus, qui quidem Johannes obiit 30. die men's. December. Anno Dom. 1492. quorum
etc.

Of your charity pray for the soul of Margaret Colpholl the wife of Thomas
Colpholl, which Marg. died the first day of March Margaret Colpholl.
Anno Dom. 1533. on whose etc.

Hic jacet Iacobus Hope Gentleman qui obiit 12. die December. Anno Dom. 1458.
cujus etc. James Hope.


Hic jacet Christiana Crane quae obiit 22. die men's. Ianuar. Anno Dom. 1445.
cujus etc. Christian Crane.


Of your charity pray for the soul of John Barber and Ione his John Barber.
wife which John deceased the Xth day of April in the year of our Lord God.
1533.

Hic -- Thomas Lynd primus Mayor Cant. and Constantiauxor Thomas Lynd.
ejus -- Feb. 12. Anno Dom. --

Of your charity pray for the soul of William Charnell first Chantery Priest
of Ihesus. which deceased the 10th day of December. Anno Dom. 1516.

This monument reduces to my memory (what I have often met withal) the
Fraternity of Ihesus mass (as they called it) kept of old in this Church. For
your better understanding whereof, you may please to know that in our
Forefathers days there was a Priest named Jesus Mass Priest Chantery book.
maintained within the said Church by the brothers of the said brotherhood with
the help and devotion of the Parishioners there, which bought and purchased
diverse lands and tenements to maintain the same, that is to say, one message
and 66 acres of land and mershlying in Ash, 6 tenements in this Parish, 4
little tenements in S^ Dunstans, and (...) in Harbledowne, at the valuation of
them by H. 8. Commissioners for visiting of Chanteries and the like, found
worth together 11 lib. 7s. 8d. per annum. Out of this the Priest had for his
stipend or wages by the year with the charges of wax and wine 7 lib. And the
Parish Clerk for ringing to the said mass at 6. of the clock in the morning,
and for helping to sing the mass had yearly 6s. 8d. The names of such as were
admitted to be of the Fraterntie were entered in a bead-roll, and like as those
that of old had their names entered in the Diptycks, were specially and
particularly mentioned and recomended to our Saviors mercy by the Priest at
Mass. In Ed. 6. time, this and all such Fraternities were dissolved.

As a cause or token at least of this Churches name of Holy Cross, there was
sometime over the porch or entrance into the Church a Crucifix or
representation of our Saviors crucifixion. Richard Marley's Will In Regist.
Cons. C^t.
tells me so, who tells me so, who therein appoints to be buried in this
Churchyard before the Crucifix of our Lord, as nigh the coming in of the
North-dore there as conveniently can be. And wills his Executors to see gilt
well and workmanly the Crucifix of our Lord with the Mary and John standing
upon the porch of the said North-doore; as his Will has it, dated 1521. The
Crucifix is gone, and the Kings arms set up in place of it.

The Vicarage of this Church was erected and endowed by the same Archbishop
that Northgate-Vicarage was. If the ordination thereof come to my hands, I
shall impart it Vid^ pro Scriptura 27. in Appendice.
to you in my Appendix. Some of the Vicars of the place lie interred in the
Chancell: as Nicholas Chilton, who died anno 1400.
Robert Raynhull, who died anno 1416.
Patricius Gerard, who died anno 1458.


And hard by them one Clement Harding, bachelor of Clement Harding.
law, with these lines upon his monument. Multorum causas defendere quique
solebat
Hanc mortis causam evadere non potuit
Doctus and indoctus moritur, sic respice finem
Vt been discedas quisquis es ista legens.


St Dunstan.
In a side Chapel or Chancell here belonging to the Ropers - Chantery book.
(and n wherein anciently two chaplains were of that family maintained to sing
for the souls of such of the family as were dead and for the prosperity of
their heirs living, and had given and allowed to each of them 8 lib. per annum
for their salary or wages, beside a little tenement, next the mansion place of
the Ropers, for their habitation) you may find these monuments.

Hic jacet Edmundus Roper qui obiit 11. die December. Anno Dom. 1433. cujus etc.

Pray for the soul of John Roper Esquire, sometime general John Roper and
^ane his wife.
Attorney to our Sovereigne Lord King Hen. 8. and Prygnatory of the bench of
our said Sovereigne Lord, and for the soul of Jane his wife, daughter of St
John Hyneux Knight chief Judge of England, which John died the 7th day of
April in the year of the incarnation of Ihu' Christ 1524. on whose souls and
all his antecessors souls Ihu' have mercy, Amen.

Hic jacet venerabilis vir Gulielmus Roper armiger filius and here is quondam
Iohannis Roper armigeri and Margaretae uxor. William Roper and Margaret his
wife.
ejusdem Gul. filia quondam Thomae Mori militis summi olim Angliae Cancellarii
Graecis Latinisque literis doctissima, qui quidem Gul. patri suo in officio
prothonotariatus supremae curiae banci Regii successit, in quo cum annis 54.
fideliter ministrasset idem officium filio suo primogenito Thomae reliquit.
Fuit is Gul. domi forisque munificens, mitis, misericors, incarceratorum,
oppressorum and pauperum baculus. Genuit ex Margareta uxore (quam unicam
habuit) filios duos and filias tres, ex iis vidit in vita sua nepotes, et
pronepotes, uxorem in virili aetate amisit, viduatus uxore castissime vixit
annis 33. Tandem completis in pace diebus decessit in senectute bona ab omnibus
desideratus, die quarto mensis Ian. Anno Christi Salvatoris 1577. aetatis vero
suae 82.

There are other monuments of the Ropers, but out of my survey, being not of
any Antiquity.

On the North-side, and West End of this Church, is a little forlorn Chapel,
founded by one Henry (surnamed) Lib. Hosp. Pauperum Sacerdot. Cant.
of Canterbury, the Kings Chaplain (as he writes himself) in the year 1330.
and dedicated to the Holy-Trinity, together with a perpetual Chantery
committed to the care and oversight of the Hospital of Poore-Priests in Cant.
who being to reap the profit, were to find the Chaplain and undergo all
burdens.

Archbishop Reynolds, in the year 1322. erected and endowed the Vicarage here.
For the first ordination whereof and its augmentation afterward see my
Appendix Scriptur. 28. and 29. And now let us pass to the Churches sometime
appertaining to the Nonnery. viz. S. Mary Bredin, and (whilst it was in being)
S. Edmund of Ridingate.

St Mary Bredin.
Hic expectat resurrectionem mortuorum corpus Iohannis Hales John Hales.
filii Iohannis Hales secundarii Baronis de scaccario Domini Regis, qui
Johannes Hales filius obiit quarto die Maii Anno Domini 1532.

Humphrey Hales also and James Hales, others of the family, Humphry Hales.
James Hales.
lie beside him. Their seat was the Dungeon, a Manor continuing to the
succession to this day. More anciently it was the Chiches: of which family one
of the first, and most famous was Thomas Chich, that lived in Hen. 3. days:
whose name effigies and Coat, being argent, 3 Lions rampant, azure; you shall
find set up in the West-Window, as the Coat also is in stone in one Corner of
the Chancell of this Church.

William, the son of Hamon, the son of Vitalis one of them which came in
with the Conqueror, built this Church, as his father Hamon did that whither we
are going Lib. Hosp. S. Lawrentii.
,

St Edmund of Ridingate.
A Church so quite desolate, as the place is no where to be found. And
therefore, and because I have made it the subject of my Survey on a former
occasion, I will spare all further discourse of it in this place, and come to
St Margaret, a Church sometime, by right of patronage, belonging to St Austins,
but in the year 1271. given to the Hospital of Poor Priests, as I have at
large set forth in my Survey of that Spittle.

St Margaret. In the Chancell.
Hic jacet Johannes Winter bis Mayor Civitatis Cant. qui obiit decimo die
Novembris 1470. cujus animae propitietur Deus Amen, John Winter.
qui lampadem ante summum altar presentis. ecclesiae in perpetuam memoriam
sanctissimi corporis Domini nostri Jesus Christi illuminari constituit. About
which he takes order by his Will In Regist. Dom. Archid. Cant.
. Quod firma sive proficuum proveniens de duobus tenement' cum pertinen' apud
yrencrosse in dicta parochia annui valoris 16s solvantur custodibus bonorum
ejusdem ecclesiae annuatim in perpetuum ad sustentationem unius lampadis ardere
coram summo altar in summa cancella dictae ecclesiae, ac ad acquictandum
cimiterium ejusdem ecclesiae de 3s provenien' annuatim de eodem cimiterio
versus Prior. and Conventum ecclesiae Christi Cant. and residuum dict. 16s
fideliter expendatur circa reparationem dictorum 2 tenementorum, as his Will
runs: whose words I have proposed because they give occasion of some further
pertinent discourse: as first about our Churchyard which it seems was
anciently in whole or in part Christ-Church land, and indeed I have in the
Records there met with an ancient Deed, that bounding out an house out of which
was given to the Monks a rent, lays it Eastward to St Margarets Church:
Christ-Church afterward parting with her interest, was (it seems) considered
with 3s a year for it. Another thing is the Iron-crosse there spoken of. Some
that would speak or write it short called it Tierne-crouch, or Tierne-crosse.
Tierne-crosse.
It stood and that within memory of man, at the meeting of the foure-streets in
this parish, whereof one leads to the Castle, another to Bridewell Hosp. a
third to Ridingate, and the last up the City to the Cathedral. It gave name to
the whole quadrangle there, and the houses thereaway are in ancient Deeds Lib.
Hosp. Paup. Sacerd.
described to be situate apud Tierne, or apud Tierne-crouch. So is that corner
house there stone-built most: what, out of which issues a certain yearly
rent to Christ-Church Rental. eccles. Cant.
. So where you see the two houses of this John Winters gift, being those very
two which of late Alderman Watson (who purchased them from the Crown to which
they escheated of old because given to superstitious uses) by his Will freely
gave unto the City to the use of poor people; But let us on.

Here lies the body of Leonard Cotton Gent. who was Sheriff Leonard Cotton.
of the City of Cant. in the year of our Lord 1563. in the time of Thomas
Giles Mayor, and was afterward himself Mayor of the same City in the year of
our Lord 1579. and departed this life in the year of God the 24th of April
1605. being of the age of 80. years. I have remembered him before in
Maynards-Spittle.

Pray for the souls of Thomas Fort and Elizabeth his Wife. On Thomas Fort.
whose souls, etc.

Hic jacet Iohonnes Hosbrand and Iohanna ac Iohannauxores ejus, John Hosbrand.
qui quidem Johannes obiit 1o die October. Anno Domini 1452. quorum animabus etc.
Richard Prat lies buried here
Sometime of Cant. Citizen and Draper Richard Prat*

And Alice his wife, etc. you shall find him in the Catalogue of Majors.


Here are no other ancient Monuments now extant. Some John Broker.
more have been, but the brass is gone. Happily amongst those, one was for John
Broker of this Parish, in his time an Alderman, and twice Mayor of our City,
who by his Will In Regist. Cons. Cant.
dated Anno 1521. appoints to lie before St John's Altar. To understand him, I
must tell you that, as this Church has a double, or either-side I Will and
Chancell, so the one. i. the South Chancell or Chapel was dedicate to St John,
and the other to our Lady: each of which had it proper Altar now removed, the
Officialls Court taking up the place of our Ladies, a tribunall-seate first
erected and settled there in the year of our Lord 1560 Lib. act. pen^s Regist.
Domini Cant.
. I have the rather made mention of this John Broker because of his liberality
to the City, to the Mayor and Communalty whereof and their Successors for ever
he gave two houses, the one in Saint Mary Castle-Parish, the other at the
Waterlocke in this Parish. For which excuse me if I think him memorable.

On the North-side of this Church our City has her Fish-market, and long has
had of my knowledge from good record, about 100 years: but anciently all or
some part of the ground was the Parsons of this Church. Sciant etc. (says a
Deed in the Leiger of Poore-Priests Hosp. as ancient as about the first of Hen.
3. reign) quod ego Rogerus filius Henrici de Northamtona and Christiana silia
Andreae Flandrensis concessimus and confirmavimus illam donationem and
concessionem quam Alexander de Glovernia fecit Deo and ecclesiae beatae
Margaretae and Iohanni Rectori ejusdem ecclesiae ac successoribus suis de
quadam terra juxta praedictam ecclesiam ex part Boreali ante domum Iohannis
Turre inter regiam stratam and venellam ante domum quae fuit quondam Iohannis
Pikenot and extenditur versus pistrinum Durandi vinetarii, etc. I fall not upon
this, any way intending to disturb the quiet of our Cities Title to this piece
of ground, nor so much regarding the thing given, as it bounds, and of them
chiefly, what it calls venella ante domum quae fuit quondam Iohannis Pikenot.
Here then fixing a while, let me tell you first, that this venella was a Lane
which sometime lead by the backe-side of the now fish-market straight on till
you come into the High Street, opening into the same, much-what over against
the now Checquer-gate. And was then called Pikenot-alley, you may see from
whence, namely Pikenot-alley.
from one Pikenot in his time a man of note, living or dwelling by it: It being
a very common practice with our Ancestors to call their lanes by their names,
who were known, and eminent men, and either dwelt in them or at one end of
them. Hence (to begin with that) Canterbury-lane took Canterbury-lane.
name first from a family of Canterburies sometime dwelling in or near the same.
The name of a lane hard by it in that Parish which we call Shepeshunklane, but
should call Sepesonkelane, Sepesonklane.
had a like original, namely from one of that name an in habitant there. A
lane in St Peter's Parish over against the Church called of old Pocockslane
took name from the Pocockslane.
like occasion. So did also that lane in St Margarets which we at this day call
Hawkes-lane, but was anciently known by the name of Willardslane. As likewise
did a lane sometime in St Mildreds-Parish, now lost, opening at the one end
into Willardslane.
Stour-street, at the other against the Chapell-Church-yard, to this day
remembered by the name of Ballock-lane. For the Ballock-lane.
same cause was that lane in St Andrews Parish which we call Angell-lane,
anciently called Sunwineslane, afterward Sulcockslane, Sunwineslane.
Salcockslane. Clements-lane.
after that Clements-lane. Hence lastly, another lane sometime in St Peter's
Parish, now lost, opening against the blacke-Friers gate there, was called
Cokins-lane: and whether the lane late at the one end opening into the middle
Cokyns-lane.
of Castle-street, and into Stour-street at the other, in Saint Warelane.
Mildreds Parish, by name (as usually called) Ware-lane, which the late Mr
Thomas Cranmer bought of the City, did take it name from hence or not, from one
Ware, I mean, that had his habitation by it, though it be uncertain, yet is
not unlikely that it did. But enough of these things. One word more of the
Fish-market. Certain old verses made in commendation of some Cities of this
Kingdom singular in affording some one commodity or other, commend of
Canterbury for her Fish, wherewith indeed, by reason of the Seas vicinity, as
Malmesbury has long since observed, her market is so well supplied, as none
that know the place will think the Poet flattered her. The verses are these.
Testis est London ratibus, Wintonia Baccho.
Herefordeque grege. Worcestria fruge redundans.
Batha lacu. Sarumque feris. Cantuaria pisce, etc.


Having now done with the Churches, a word or two of Tithes how paid in
Canterbury.
their indowments in general, I mean in Tithes. The custom and manner of
payment whereof at this day, whether prediall or personal is not in kind, but
by and according to the rents of houses, viz. after the rate of xd. in the
noble, quarterly payable. This I say is the present general custom of tithing
throughout our City, one Parish (St Andrew) only excepted, where, but why I
know not, the custom is, to pay somewhat more, viz. xd. ob in the noble. How
long this custom has been in force with us I find not, but by Records in
the Archbishops Registry to be found Copied in mine Appendix, it will appear
that anciently our Clergy Vide pro Scriptur. 29. and 30. in Appendice.
of this City were at like pass for their Tithes and offerings with their
brethren the Clergy of London: and did partake with them of their custom,
which how long afterward it did continue, or when or wherefore it ceased and
was changed and abated into the present manner of Tithing; and whether or no,
parsonall Tithes were then paid beside (as Parsonall Tithes.
Linwoods opinion is they ought to be, this being, according to him, a prediall
Tith) I no where find. But I persuade my self that parsonall Tithes were
likewise paid, and that because that almost every testator as well of City or
Country gave satisfaction more or less by his Will to the Parish Priest, for
his Tithes forgotten or neligently paid; which I conceive could not easily happen
in this certain kind of payment. Yet I rather then otherwise suppose these
privy parsonall Tithes seldom or never drawn from the parishioner by any
legal compulsory way, or by any course taken for their recovery in foro
exteriori, but by other means in those times as prevalent; one, the calling
the parishioner to account for them in, foro conscientiae, at the time of
confession and shrift (one cause happily of their name of privy Tithes;) another,
the Privy Tithes.
much affrighting danger to incur the greater curse pronounced, and (which
confirms me much in my persuasion of the usual payment of them) in every
Parish Church in Town and Country until the Reformation four times in the
year declared against all with-holders of such Tithes, as elsewhere may be
found Relics of Rome. fol. 243.
: the cause happily that every man was so careful not to dye in the Priests debt
for them. Hitherto, and enough of the Churches, both Cathedral and Parochial
in and about our City.

Ecclesiastical government of the City.
HAving now run through the description of the whole City, with all parts,
and members of the same, let us in the next place take notice of the policy
whether spiritual or temporal, whereby the same is governed, beginning with
the spiritual, or ecclesiastical.

According to the Aristocraticall form of Church government used in this
Realm Dowings Discourse. Conclus. 1.. 6.
, our City in spiritualibus, is subject to the Ordinary of the place, which is
the Archbishop of Canterbury for the time being, immediately; but mediately,
and under him, in a subordinate way, partly to the Archdeacon, partly to the
Commissary; and, in quibusdam, to the Deane rural of the place. Of the
Archbishops and Archdeacons elsewhere enough: somewhat I have thought fit to
speak in this place of the remaining other two. And first of the Commissary, a
subordinate officer anciently relating and retaining to the Sea of Canterbury.
But before I fall upon his original, give me leave to premise a few things
touching our ecclesiastical Judges in genernall, and their Consistoriall form
of Judicature, which (by the consent of our learned Antiquaries) began under
the Norman-conquerour, it being of a different condition aforetime. For until
then Daniell Hist. in Will. 1.
the Bishop, and the Alderman were the absolute Judges to determine all
businesses in every Shire, and the Bishops in many cases shared in the benefit
of mulcts with the King. But the Conqueror confined the Clergy within the
province of their own ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to deal only in
business concerning rule of souls, according to the Canons and Laws
Episcopal. Further and better to illustrate this matter, well worthy your
knowledge (courteous Reader) I must let you know, that it was the Law Ian Angl.
(...). (...). page 130. Fox. Acts and Mou. vol. 1. page 1017
of King Edgar (a Saxon) Ex omni eomitatu bis quotannis Conventus agitor, cui
quidem illius Dioecesis Episcopus and Senator intersunto, quorum alter Iura
divina, humana alter populum edoceto. A Law by King Canutus the Dane,
reinforced thus Spelman. Glossar. in V^rbo Aldermannus. Fox ubisupra.
. Habeatur ter in Anno Burgesmotus (i. Civitatis Conventus) and Shiremotus (i.
pagi vel comitatus Conventus) bis, nisi saepius opus sit; and intersit
Episcopus and Aldermannus, and doceant ibi Dei r^ctum and saeculi, uterque
scilicet pro suo munere. Hence that of Mr Seldom, speaking of the Jurisdiction
that belonged to the Saxon. Ealdormen, or Earls. The scyregemot (says he
Titles of Honor. par. 2. cap. 5.. 5.
) which was a Court kept twice every year, as the Sheriffs turn is at this
day, was held by the Bishop of the Diocese and the Ealderman (in shires that
had Ealdormen) and by the Bishops and Sheriffs, in such as were committed to
the Sheriff that were immediate to the King. And so both the ecclesiastical
and temporal Laws were together given in charge to the Country. Thus he.
Hence also that of S. H. Spelman, speaking of the Saxon-Count or Earl.
Praesidebat autem (says he Gloss. in Verb. Comes.
) foro comitatus non solus, sed adjunctus Episcopo: hic ut jus divinum, ille ut
humanum diceret, alterque alteri auxilio esset and consilio: praesertim
Episcopus Comiti, nam in hunc illi animadvertere saepe licuit, and errantem
cohibere. Idem igitur utrique territorium, and jurisdictionis terminus. As also
hence that of him in another place: Aderant (says he Gloss. in Verbis Gemotum
and Hundred.
) scilicet Hundredo (which was kept and held once a month) Thani (the same
which sithence are called Barons) ipsique Iudices ecclesiastici, cum partis
illius Clero. In hundredo enim non minus quam in comitatu unatunc agebantur,
quae adforum pertinent ecclesiasticum, and quae ad seculare, donec Gulielmus
Conquestor divisis Iurisdictionibus, hanc ab illa separavit. In English even
the same with that of Mr Seldom in another place then any of those out of him
above cited. In the Saxon-times (says he Hist. of Titb^. cap. 14.. 1. vid.
Fox. Acts and Monum. vol. 1. page 193.
) all jurisdiction of ecclesiastical causes was exercised jointly by the
Bishop of the Diocese, and the Shrife or Alderman of the Shiregemot, or
Hundred or County Court, where they both sat; the one to give Gods right, the
other for pupulds right, that is the one to judge according to the Laws of the
Kingdom, the other to direct according to divinity. But at the Norman
conquest, this kind of holding ecclesiastical pleas in the Hundred or County
Court was taken away. Thus he. The Law or edict ordaining or commanding this
separation of the two Courts you may find elsewhere Ian. Angl. lib. 2. page
76. Hist. of Tithes. cap. 14.. 1.
: with the repetition whereof, because it has at several times been
published, and for brevity sake, I will not trouble you. In those days one way
and manner of trial and determination of causes was by a kind of decisory
oath of the party. A^ autem (as is observed by the forenamed learned Knight
Council. Tom. 1. page 336.
) idest, jusiurandum sive sacramentum, appellabant Saxones nostri, litium illud
dirimendi genus, quo ex consacramentalium (uti vocant.) assertione, de
litigatis cognoscebant and judicabant, etc. The same observation has Mr
Lambert in his Perambulation. In Eareth. An example whereof they severally set
forth. I my self have met with the like amongst the Records of our Cathcdrall,
of the year 844. containing in it (if you will pardon the barbarous false
latin, the fault of that ages ignorance) many observable passages, which you
shall find in my Appendix Scriptura 32. But let me go on where I left. Since
that edict of the Conqueror, as I find by searching and turning over ancient
moniments, Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was a while exercised chiefly and for
the most part, for Clergy-mens causes especially in Synods or Chapters, the
Bishop using in person to preside over the one, as the Archdeacon over the
other. Afterward upon the revivall of the civil, and promulgation of the
canon law, sufficiently repleate with light and directions for deciding of
doubts, and determination of causes without need either of Synods or Chapters,
they began by little and little to decline, or at least not to be of such
ordinary use for the hearing and ending of causes, such especially as were
ouely civil and not criminal, as before; and then as a more easy and speedy
way of dispatch the Consistoriall form of Judicature which we now retain,
exercised by Officialls, Chancellors, Commissaries and the like ecclesiastical
Judges, came into request, of whom, in this nation, until about Pope Alex. 3.
days, no mention at all, in any Record with us extant at this day is (I take
it) to be found. I deny not the antiquity of Ecclesiecdici, or Church-lawyers.
I Eccl^siecdici.
would not be so mistaken. For I grant (as behooves me) an existence of them
many hundreds of years before, whereof the late learned Sr Thomas Ridley in
his view of the Civil and ecclesiastical law Page 104.
, worthily vindicating their challenged antiquity, has made very satisfactory
proof. Whom in their Office I conceive not much unlike (if not the same that
were) the Periodeutai mentioned by Justinian in his Constitution Omnem. 42. de
Episc. and Cler. Of whom see Gothofreds notes there: as also Cujacius there,
and upon the Title of the Pandects, de excus. tutor. lib. 6.. 1. and Iustellus,
in his Notes upon the Codex canonum Ecclesiae universae. page 216. who all
agree that these Periodeutai were certain circuitores sive visitatores qui
veluti episcoporum vicarii Regiones Civitatibus subjectas visitant ac
circumeunt, nullamque propriam sedem habent. And I grant that such
Church-Lawyers were ever after of use, as Assistants (or Assessors) to Bishops,
for their help and direction in debating and deciding controversies according
to the forms and formalities of Law (hence our Archbishop had his Auditores
Causarum:) but came not, I conceive, to that perfection of authority, here in
England at least, until about the time I told you.

Synods then thus (as I said) declining, and their authority being transferred
upon Officialls and the like: our Commissariship of Canterb. did not presently
take beginning, but the Archbishops Official partly, and partly the Archdeacon
did for a time use and exercise the Jurisdiction throughout the City and
Diocese, whilst as yet there was no Commissary at Cant. Afterward the
increase of causes in the Arches Court at London requiring the Officialls
constant resisidence and attendance there, who before (like the Periodeutai)
was ambulatory, and followed the Archbishop, leaving the Deane of the Arches to
dispatch causes there as his deputy in his absence; and complaint being made Ex
Lib. eccles. Christi Cant.
(and it, as one amongst many other grievances by some propounded and put up)
to Archbishop Peckham, to wit the non-Residence of the Official, he was by a
Statute Ms. pe^ms.
of Archbishop Winchelsey, Peckhams next Successor, enjoined to residence; and
about the same time, and upon that occasion (as I conceive) and the Archbishops
more constant residence at Lambhith, a Commissariship was established in and
for the Commissary of Cant. his original.
City and Diocese of Cant. and a perpetual or settled Commissary appointed to
attend the same: the first (I take it) that by Patent or Commission held the
place, being one Mr Martin, in his time Parson of Ickam in Kent, and thus his
Patent or Commission runs.

Frater I. Archiepisc. etc. Magistro Martino etc. Salutem. Quia quocunque
auctoritas nostra se protendit ad incumbentia ncbis onera exequenda simul and
semel personaliter adesse nequivimus, illos nonnunquam in partem solicitudinis
accepimus de quorum fide and industria plenam in Domino fiduciam reportamus.
Hinc est quod de tuae circumspectionis and fidei plenitudine considentes,
officium Commissar. Cant. tibi cum omnibus Iuribus and Iurisdictionibus ad
ipsum officium qualitercunque spectan' committimus per praesentes, ut tam
prudenter quam fideliter in omnibus libere authoritate nostra exercere valeas
officium memoratum, and ad te tanquam nostrum in nostra Diocesi Commissarium
generalem in his quae ad ipsum pertinent officium recurratur. In cujus etc.
Dat' apud Mortlake, 3. Non. Maii Anno Dom. 1282. Consecrationis nostrae quarto.

I shall spare recital of the succeeding Commissaries names, and their Patents
or Commissions, not because I want instruction to do either, but for brevity
sake.

For which cause, though I might instance in many particular favors which
several Archbishops graciously inclined to the advancement of their Episcopal
Consistory, have been pleased to grant unto their Commissaries, rendering it a
Court of good credit, yet I forbear the mention of them all: and the rather
because being mostly upon Record in the Registry, they are already public, and
obvious to all men's scrutiny. But yet one thing which antedates those Records,
and concerns the Court, at least is not impertinent to our present discourse
of the original thereof, I crave leave to particularize, and it is this, viz.
A course taken upon and anon after the erection of the Commissariship, for the
enlargement and bettering of the same, by the Archbishops revoking and calling
the Jurisdiction, which diverse Rectors or Parsons of exempt Churches within the
Diocese exercised, from and out of their quasi possession (Iura etenim
incorporalia non possidentur, sed quasi possidentur Lih 3.. qui us^ ctus. F. de
vi and viar. and Inst. de Interdict, in princ.
) and conferring or transferring it upon the Commissary: whereof I find the
following Record in Christ-Church.

Revocatio Iurisdictionis ecclesiarum exemptarum.
Walter. permissione divina Cant. Archiep. totius Angliae Primas. Dilecto
filio Commiss. nostro Cant. salute^, gratia^ and benedictionem. Quia tam de
Iure communi quam de consuetudine in nostra Civitate and Diocesi omnis
Iurisdictio spiritualis ad nos authoritate Diocesana dinoscitur pertinere,
jurisdictionem omnimodam quam rectores ecclesiarum sanctorum Martini and
Elphegi Cant. and de Reculver, Monketon, Adesham, Ickham, Eastry, Dale,
Godmersham, Saltwood, Westwell, Charing, Woodchurch, Wittresham, Northfleet et
Pageham, necnon de Maidestan, and de Bocton subtus le Blen nostrae Dioecesis,
ex nostra conniventia in parochiis ecclesiarum suarum singulariter exercuerunt,
in derogationem Iuris nostri and ecclesiae nostrae, certis ex causis ad nos
jamdudum revocavimus, ipsam jurisdictionem per nostros officiales seu
Commissarios exercendam fore decernentes. Vobis committimus and mandamus
quatenus omnimoda jur is dictione in parochiis ecclesiarum praedict and earum
qualibet ac capellarum dependentium ab eisdem and subditis earundem, de cetero
utamini vice nostra prout Commissarii Cant. seu alii quicunque uti consueverunt
in eisdem temporibus. retroactis. Contradictores and rebels per censuras
ecclesiasticas compescendo. In cujus Rei testimonium Sigillum nostrum
praesentibus est appensum. Dat' apud Lambeth 15. Kal. April. Anno Dom. 1317.

Now only a word or two to show how it came to pass that the Records of the
Consistory fall so much short of the original of the Court, as indeed they do,
beginning not until about the year 1396. above 100 years after the erection
of the Commissariship, and then leaving the Commissary, I shall proceed to
speak somewhat of the Deane.

The cause I cannot impute to the injury of time consuming the Records,
because Records of greater antiquity are daily seen, and frequently and
generally extant. As I cannot impute it to that, so neither will I ascribe it
to the sloth or negligence of the Registers in times past, which I cannot, in
charity, presume upon no better warrant then conjecture; although the
meannesse of their places and the moveablenesse of the Court in those and
latter times would readily help to support that surmise. To these causes (I
say) I will not attribute the cause of our Courts disabilitie to produce the
Records of those elder times. Because (after a hint received from some well
versed in Antiquity) spending some time about perusing our Chronicles which
make mention of the rebellious insurrection made by Wat Tyler and Jack Straw,
happening in the reign of Ric. 2. and in the year of our Lord 1381. by and
upon this perusal of the story, I found that they and their accomplices bare an
especial hatred and spite to Lawyers, insomuch that not only they wasted and
consumed with fire the Lawyers houses then situate near Temple-barre London;
but also being at, Canterb. and having received kind welcome and intertainment
of the Townsmen there (all the people being (...).
of their assent) upon their departure, taking their way to Rochester, they
sent their people to the villages about, and in their going they beat down and
robbed the houses of Advocates and Procurers of the Kings Court and of the
Archbishop, bearing him much malice for imprisoning their Priest, John Ball, a
seditious malecontent and hypocritical Preacher. What should kindle in them
this fire of envy to Lawyers, is easily apprehended if the drift of this their
seditious rising be but considered. For like the Stoics of old, whose hearts
were set upon a community; whence that of Seneca. Homines quietissime viverent
si haec duo Pronomina de medio tollerentur, meum and tuum) a parity and
community was the thing projected, and the effecting of a plebetan liberty
their aim, whereunto they well knew (as who knows it not) that laws and
Lawyers were notorious enemies and obstacles: in as much as meum and tuum
cannot stand with community, for Si teneant omnes omnia, nemo suum.


Therefore says one, speaking of this Ball, he persuaded or counseled them to
kill and murder (amongst others) all Lawyers, Iusticers, and all manner Judges,
Magistrates and men in authority etc. Herewithall, what writings or Records
soever they could fasten on where they came (as another obstacle to their
projects thriving, which they were to remove) they concluded to set on fire.
Hence was it that at Cambridge, the rabble of them there, breaking up the
chests and forcing the places where the Records of the University were kept,
without regard had, or difference made of any writings, whether Charters,
Bulls, Letters patents, Statutes or other monuments whatsoever, in the Market
place, some, other elsewhere they committed to the flame. Now to bring this
home to my present purpose, which is to show what is become of our Records of
the Consistory of Canterb. before those now extant. Having by this Story found
how Lawyers and law-records were maliced by these all-wasting rebels, and
considering (by comparing of the times) that our Registry takes its beginning
not till awhile some few years after this rebellion, (it not being able
presently to gather breath again) and that it was and is the Archbishops
Registry whom they maliced even to the death: I cannot but persuade my self,
and in mine opinion more then conjecturall it is, that those elder Records and
their Registry bare a share with the rest of the Records and Lawyers houses which
suffered the violence of those Rebels.

I pass now from our Co^missary with an hearty wish that the following
Distichon (which George Sandys Relation. lib. 1. page 6.
tells me is set over the court of Justice at Zant may be ever verified of his
Consistory. Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat,
Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, jura, probos. Thus Englished.
This place does hate, love, punish, keep, requite,
Voluptuous riot, peace, crimes, laws, th'upright.




Having done with the Commissary, it remains that I speak Deane of Canter^ury.
somewhat of the Dean, an ecclesiastical officer set to oversee a certain
number of Parishes, amongst which are those of our City, and a necessary member
in the ecclesiastical or spiritual government of the same. We call him a
Rural Deane.

Now rural Deanes (to speak of them first in the general) are the same with
Archipresbyteri vicani or rurales, and their names are often confounded, but
more frequently occurreth the name of Archipresbyter, and is more used amongst
the Canonists, then that of Decanus. Wherefore I am minded to expound this of
Deane by that of Archpriest (an Ecclesiastical degree, by the order of the
Decretalls following next unto an Archdeacon, and following rather then
preceding, because that albeit the Archpriest be, then the Archdeacon (if he
be but a Deacon and not a Priest) major ordine, yet is the Archdeacon then the
Archpriest major dignitate Gl. in c. 1. de ^ic. Archipresb. verb. subesse.
.

Of Arch-priests there is a double kind. Duarenus shall bring you acquainted
with them. Sunt autem (says he De sacr. eccles. Minist. and Benefic. lib. 1.
c. 8
) Archipresbyterorum duo genera, quorum urbani quidam dicuntur, alii vicani.
Vrbani dicuntur qui in urbe and in majori ecclesia officio suo funguntur. Cum
enim Episcopus propter absentiam forte, vel occupationes suas non possit omnia
Episcopi munia, vel solus, vel una cum presbyteris obire, sed cur as suas cum
eis partiri necesse habeat: utilius visum est ex presbyteris unum caeteris
praeponere, qui ea quae ad presbyterorum officium pertinent, partim ipse
exequatur, partim aliis facienda praescribat, quam omnibus simul presbyteris id
committere, ne contentio aliqua inter ipsos ex communione administrationis
oriretur. Et Archipresbyteri vicani nullam in urbe potestatem, nullum
ministerium habent, sed in majoribus celebrioribusque pagis constituuntur. Ac
singulis, praeter ecclesiae propriae curationem, certarum ecclesiarum,
certorumque presbyterorum, qui videlicet per minores titulos habitant,
inspectio observatioque committitur etc. Thus he; who in the next Chapter to
that above cited proceeds to show and set forth the original of these
Arch-priests or Deanes rural, and how they first sprang up, and is persuaded
(as he tells us) that upon the abolishing and antiquating of the Chorepiscopi,
these Deanes or Arch-priests succeeded in their stead. Where in St Hen. Spelman
concurring with him in opinion, delivers the same very succinctly thus.
Chorepiscoporum munus (says her) cum nomine sensim antiquatum Glossar. in
verb. Chorepiscopus.
abolevit (nec pridem) ecclesia: subinductis vero in eorum vicem (qui Episcopis
liberius cedunt, and humiliori jure contenti sunt) Archipresbyteris, alias
Decanis ruralibus, and Plebanis. So have you both the definition and original
of Rural Deanes.

To speak now more purposedly of their use and office in this kingdom
especially. Decani rurales (says Lindwood) sunt Decani temporales ad aliquod
ministerium sub Episcopo vel (...) constituti etc. From this place in Lindwood,
De Constitut cap 1. verb. Decanos rurales.
Dr Cowell tells us that Deanes rural are certain persons that have certain
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical over other Ministers and Parishes near adjoining,
assigned unto them by the Bishop and Archdeacon being placed and displaced by
them Interpreter. in verb. De^ne.
. Would you know upon what ground, and for what intent first instituted?
briefly this, the assistance of the Bishop, or Archdeacon, or both. Cum enim
(says one Rover. Illust Histor. Mon^st. S. Joann R^maens page 629.
) ad presbyteros rure degentes extendere se continuo non posset Episcoporum,
aut Archidiaconorum vigilantia, collocati fuere per intervalla, in quibusdam
quasi excubiis Presbyterorum aliqui Decani, vel Archipresbyteri vocitati, ut
Caeterorum Presbyterorum, ac plebis moribus vice Episcopi aut Archidiaconi
invigilarent. Their Jurisdiction for ought that I can find is not so certain,
nor particularly laid down any where as it can be said to be of this or that
form, or to be thus or thus bounded out: and therefore, as they are generally a
motive and removeable ad nutum constituentis, so is it arbitrary to the
Superior that ordains them, I suppose, with decency and order, what charge or
business they shall undergo. Yet these particulars of their office I meet
with. First that by custom warranted by law Vide Sum. Sylvestr. in verb.
Archipresbyter.
, many of them have a kind of Jurisdiction to visit their Deanrie, and to
inquire of crimes and defamations happening in the same, especially by the
Clergy, and to take cognizance thereof, correcting, for the smaller offenses,
by themselves, and for the rest referring them to the Superior, the Bishop
namely or Archdeacon at the next Synod, Chapter, or visitation, reporting unto
them what they find, (like as did the Irenarchae and Apparitores of old, their
Notaria to the Magistrate;) whence they are termed testes Synodales Lindwood.
ubi supra.
. But are by law flatly forbidden not only to take to ferme Episcopal
Jurisdiction Cap. quoniam. Ne praelati vic^ suas etc.
, but also to meddle in arduous or weighty causes such as matrimony and the
like In Constable. Othon. c. cum non solum. de Indiciis.
, as being by common intendment not qualified with skill enough to handle them:
and those of Cant. Diocese by an ancient Injunction of the Archdeacon, were
forbidden Probat of Wills. Moreover I find that these Rural Deanes had each
of them their seal, and were appointed so to have by the Legatine constitution
of Otho. Quoniam tabellionum, which will have it authentical: and such seal
to have only cut and graved in it the name of Office, sine nomine proprio,
says the gloss, because upon the expiration of their office it was presently
to be resigned and surrendered up into the hands of him from whom they derived
their office (so runs the Constitution.) The use which they made of these
seals was this among other. Citations being often, atleast in causes of moment
and against the Clergy of their Deanery, directed, committed and entrusted to
their execution, they (as a part of their office) either executed the same
themselves, or else they caused them to be executed by their apparitors,
servants, beadles or messengers (for such they had as well as the Bishop himself
or other Ordinaries had theirs) and then returned the same citations, together
with a certificate of the manner and form of their execution thereof under
their seal. These things will appear to any that shall have recourse to the
places quoted Constable. Otho. Tanto calliditatis. c. excussis. etc. quidam
ruralium de ^udic. etc. Item contra. de censib. in Provinciali.
in the margent. Those particularly of Canterbury Diocese, were Receivers of
the Peter Pence or Romescot in their several Deanries, had many times
purgations committed by the Commissary to their dispatch, for the ease and
benefit of the subject, and their wisdom and fidelity was entrusted for the
taking of them: a thing warranted (if not required) by the Provincial
Constitution. Item licet. de purgatio. canon. Besides they were Poenitentiaries
and Confessors for the Clergy of their several Deanries. They convocated the
Clergy to visitations and to the choice of Clerks of the Convocation. Upon the
vacancy of any Church in their Deanery it was usual with them of old to have
the custody of it, that is to collect the fruits and get the cure supplied, in
the name and stead of the Archdeaconry during the Churches Widowhood or
vacancy; and to that end the one had the Churchdoore Key delivered him, which
upon his induction of the new Incumbent, to put him in possession of the
Church, he used to deliver him, according to the manner of giving corporal
possession in those elder times observed, springing happily from those laws in
the Digests. l. quaratione.. 9. Item si quis. D. de acquir. rer. dom. l.
clavibus. 74. de contra. empt.

These and many other things brought them in such profit as that some of them
were unwilling to depose their office and deliver up their seal Io. de Atho.
in Constable. quonian tabellionum. Verb. and sine molestia.
. The choice and ordination of them is not hitherto quite worn out of use
amongst us, but their office in any of the premises, is either quite obsolete,
or at least much diminished. Hence that of St H. Spelm. Ruralium Decanorum
genus (says he Gloss. in Verb. Decani.
) hinc ab Episcopo, illin^ ab Archid' vel exhaustum omnino est, vel pristino
spendore denudatum. The Authors and projecters of the intended Reformation of
the laws ecclesiastical of this Realm, meant to indue them with no mean
power, as is plainly seen by the fifth Chapter of the Title, De ecclesia and
ministris ejus, illorumque officiis, running thus.

De Archipresbiteris sive Decanis ruralibus. cap. 5.
DEcanatus quilibet Archipresbiterum rusticanum habeat, vel ab episcopo, vel
ecclesiae Ordinario praeficiendum. Munus autem ejus erit annuum. Hic tanquam in
specula presbiteris, diaconis, gardianis, and aedituis, ut singuli quae ad
eorum munus attinent praestent, perpetuo invigilabit. De Idololatris, and
haereticis, de Symoniacis, de lenonibus and meretricibus, de adulteris and
fornicatoribus, de his qui duas uxores simul habent atque maritos duos, de
magis and veneficis, de calumniatoribus and blasphemis, de Sodomiticis and
ebriosis, de ultimarum voluntatum corruptelis and perjuriis, de injunctionum
aut nostrarum aut Episcopi violatoribus, inquirat. Et vocandi ad se, examinandi
horum scelerum suspectos authoritatem habeat. Omnem accusationis ortum, sive
per famam publicam, sive deferentium testimonio probatum, vel suspectum,
Episcopo aut ejus loci ordinario infra december dies in scriptis prodet. Qui autem
venire ad eum recusaverit, per apparitorem vocatus tanquam contumax Episcopi
voluntatem omnibus ejus Decanatus ecclesiis, sibi per literas significatam,
quanta poterit celeritate subinde exponi curabit: alioqui subibit supplicium
contemptus. Officii sui sexto quolibet mense Episcopum aut loci ordinarium
certiorem faciet, quot infra ejus decanatum conciones co temporis spatio
fuerint habitae.

By this intended Constitution you see much of the pristine authority of Rural
Deanes, was meant to be annexed to them and their office. But this as the rest
of those laws never came in force. So that of the quality, use and office of
our Rural Deanes, all the face that surviveth, or can be gathered from any
express law or Constitution made touching them since the reformation, is
represented and exhibited unto us by part of an English Canon made and
published in Anno Dom. 1571. runs thus. When the visitation is finished, the
Archdeacon shall signify unto the Bishop, whom he has found in every Deanery
so furnished with learning and judgment, that they may be thought worthy to
instruct the people in Sermons, and to rule and govern others. Of these the
Bishop may choose some, whom he will have rural Deanes This under the title of
Archdeacons.
. Hitherto and enough of Rural Deanes in general: only let me tell you, that
I suppose they were more in request when Ecclesiastical Courts were moveable,
and kept from Deanery to Deanery (for which see the Constitution Excussis. De
judiciis in Provincial.) and when Rural Chapters, whereof there were four
more principal in the year, each quarter one, were in use (for which see the
Constitution Quia Incontinentiae. De Constitutio. in text. and glos. in verb.
capitulis ruralibus) which rural Chapters are not hitherto so exolete and
disused, but that our Archdeacon of Canterb. every year holds one, namely
about Michaelmas, annually, throughout the whole Archdeaconry, which he
therefore calls Generale; then which one, though now he do not, yet did he
formerly hold more, as is probable, because by the old Composition made between
the Archbishop and him, his Apparitors 1396.
are in express words assigned him, pro capitulis celebrandis, and for no
other purpose.

Now a word or two of our particular Deane, to whom I find that former times
have had recourse for his assistance in many things. The Threasurer of
Christ-Church Liber ejusd. ecc^e.
in the year 1257. being unpaid diverse rents due by the Church tenants in
Canterb. hires the Deanes crier for 12d. at four several times to denounce or
publish throughout the City all such retainers of rents excommunicated: and
makes it parcel of his demands in his Account for that year, viz. Preconi
Decani Cant. 12d. ut denuntiaret detentores reddituum excommunicatos per totam
Civitatem etc. His seal being authentical, he had a hand in many
Exemplifications, in some joining with other, in other, alone by himself. Of
which I have seen of each sort not a few. Wherein, especially in those of the
elder sort, he writes and styles himself Decanus Christi civitatis Cant. For
the same cause, I suppose, that our spiritual Courts were and are to this day
called Curiae Christianitatis (Courts Christian) originally so called (as Mr
Seldom In Notisad Eadmerum. page 208. and 209.
notes upon the term frequent with Eadmerus and other writers of that age using
it to denotate Episcopal authority and Jurisdiction) because in the primitive
age of the Church, and in the Edicts of ancient Emperors. Bishops were
specially and chiefly understood by the general name of Christians. Generali
Christianorum nomine (says he) in edictis Imperatorum veterum Episcopos
speciatim designart volunt Iuris consulti nonnulli, ad l. 11. Christianos. C.
de Episcopali audientia. Hinc apud nos Fora sacra quibus jure nempe communi
subnixis aut Episcopi praesunt, aut ii qui eo nomine Episcopos, utpote quos
provocare licet, suspiciunt, Curiae Curiae Chris^ianitatis.
Christianitatis etiamnum vocitantur. Primo Christianitatis vocabulum, legem
Christianam seu venerationem Christianam and Christianum cultum generatim
sonabat, uti videre est in C. tit. de Apostolatis. l. 4. and C. Theodos. tit.
de spectaculis l. 5. C. Eod. tit. de Decurtonibus. l. 112. C. Eod. tit. de
Iudaeis, Coelicolis l. 19. alibi item. Sed postea Functio atque Iurisdictio
illa quae in gerenda Christianae religionis seu Christianitatis aut politiae
Ecclesiasticae cura potissimum exercentur, Christianitas etiam signa^ter dicta
sunt; atque inde sacra Fora, Fora Christianitatis vocitata. Thus he. And
hitherto of the Ecclesiastical government of the City. I proceed to the
temporal. But by the way let me refer you for further understanding of that
style or title of Decanus Christianitatis, and of the quality, antiquity, and
use of Rural Deanes to Roverius his Illustrations upon the History of S. John's
Monastery at Rheimes. page 628. 629.

How our City was governed in temporalibus, before the time of the Bailiffes is
somewhat obscure. Yet questionless it always had a special and distinct
Magistrate to preside over it, whom I find styled, either the Prefect, the
Portreeve, (...). (...). (...).
or the Provost, names differing more in sound then in sense and signification.
For the first of which, in the year 780. in certain Charters of Christ-Church
bearing date at Canterbury, mention is made of one Al^e hujus Civitatis
Praefectus, as in one, Regis Praefectus in Do^nia, as in another of them, who
having purchased Burn^, consisting of four plough-lands, of his Master the
Kentish King Egbert, for two thousand shillings, gave it all to the Monks of
that Church, ad mensam, that is, for their maintenance in food diet. For the
second, Portreve or Portgreve, in the year 956. to a Deed of the sale of a
parcel of Land in Canterbury to one Ethelstane, by two Knights Ethelsi and
Wlfsi, is the subscription (amongst other witnesses) of one Hlothewig
Portgerefa, on this wise, viz. After King Edgar, Queen Eadgive (who writes
herself, in Cantia etiam Guberbnator) and some others, it follows. (...). By
the way these (...) here mentioned as witnesses in the last place, and which I
meet with in two other like Charters of Christ-Church about the same age were
(I take it) of the nature of those Fraternities, Gilds, or Gildscips which Mr
Lambert in his explication of Saxon words, in verb. Contubernalis, and more at
large St Hen. Spelman in his Glossary, in verb. Geldum, severally expound. I
proceed. In the Danish massacre here under King Etheldred, happening Anno 1011.
Alfword (as Huntington) Elfrig (as Hoveden) Alfred (as Thorn calls him)
Praepositus Regis (the City-Governor, I take it) was one of the personages of
quality then taken prisoners. Afterward Doomsday-booke records the name of
another like Praepositus, Brumannus by name, in these words. Quidam Praepositus
Brumannus nomine T. R. E. Id^ (...) R^ Edwardi i. (...) Regis Willielmi.
cepit consuetudines de extraneis mercatoribus in terra S. Trinitatis, and
sancti Augustini, qui postea T. R. W. ante Archiepiscopum Lanfrancum and
Episcopum Bajocen. recognovit se injuste accepisse etc. (as it is before p. 4.)
Thus before the Conquest.

In succeeding times it seems the City was the Archbishops, especially
Lanfranks, and his immediate successor Anselmes, the former holding it as it
were in see ferme, the latter, freely, ex solido, in the nature of what the
Lumbards call an Alodium. Hence that of Mr Lambert P^rambulation o^ Kent in
Canterbury.
. The Bishops (says he) were never absolute owners thereof till the time of
King William Rufus, who (as the Annals of S. Augustine say) dedit civitatem
Cantuariae Anselmo ex solido, quam Lanfrancus tenuerat ex beneficio. Hence also
that of Eadmerus Hist. Novor. lib. 1. page 18.
, who then lived. Praecepit itaque Rex, ut sine dilatione ac diminutione
investiretur de omnibus, ad Archiepiscopatum pertinentibus intus and extra,
atque ut civitas Cantuaria quam Lanfrancus suo tempore in beneficio a Rege
tenebat, and Abathia sancti Albani quam non solum Lanfrancus, sed and
antecesseres ejus habuisse noscuntur in alodium ecclesiae Christi
Cantuariensis, proredemptione animae suae, perpetuo jure, transirent.
Nevertheless the City still had a Portreve to superintend and rule over it.
For in the same Archbishop Anselmes time, one Calveal, by the name and title of
Portgreva, is mentioned as a witness to an exchange of houses between the
Church, and the City; the Deed whereof, for the old English-sake, and because
withal a good evidence of that ages plainness and simplicity, as much (it
seems) affecting the Imperatorian Brevity, as ours abhorres it (an age truly
then in which men were never more extraordinarily cautious, and yet never more
ordinarily cousened) it shall not be amiss here verbatim to insert.

(...). Which in our modern English may be thus rendered.

This is the Exchange between the Family. at Christ-Church, and the Knights at
Canterbury of the society of Merchants. The society of Merchants give up (or
put over) into the hands of the family eight houses within Burgate with (the
liberties of) sace and socne, as they themselves enjoy them. And the family
give up (or put over) into their hands on the other side nine houses, two
without Readingate. In one of them dwells Aelfric, and Bruman in the other.
The (other) seven within Newingate. In them dwell Siward Entfert, and Brihtric,
and Goldwine, and Hereword, and Willelm, and Wulfgeve, and Alfwine, with (the
liberties of) sace and socne as the family enjoyes them. Thereunto is witness
Anselme Archbishop, and the family at Christ-Church, and Calveal Portreve, and
the chiefest men of the society. To show (or manifest) this, the family has
one writing (or part) and the society another.

Not long after, the single was changed into a double Portreeve, Bailiffe, or
Provost; yet not elective by the vote and suffrage of the Citizens until Hen.
3. time, who in the eighteenth year of his reign, by his Charter granting the
Town to the Citizens in Fee-ferme, infranchised them with license and power
yearly to choose them Bailiffes of Bailisses of Canterbu^y.
their own. From and after which time, the City continued a Bailiffe-Towne,
that is, was governed by Bailiffes, until the change thereof into a Maioralty
by Hen. 6. in the 26th Majors.
year of his reign, in which estate it now stands. My past endeavors cannot
as yet furnish me with a complete nomenclature of all the Bailiffes: if my
future shall, I shall willingly impart them. But of the Majors this, so near
as I ca^ is a true list or Catalogue according to their several Successions.

Majors. How often. What year. 1 John Lynde. 1 1449 He lies buried in
Westgate-Church. If you look back, you may find his monument or epitaph there.
2 William Bennet. 1 1450 He was diverse times before, one of the Bailiffes of
the City, unto which at his death he became a benefactor. For by his Will In
Regi^t. Dom. Archid. Cant.
he gave unto the City his Tenements beside Iury-lane in Saint Mary Bredmans
Parish. Those two stonehouses (I take it) they are, the one the Tigre, the
other the White-horse standing by that Lane, very ancient both, and known to
belong unto the City at this day. He gave also to the Wardens of S Andrews
Church in Cant. where he was a Parishioner, 4s 4d. per annum, to keep and
maintain the clock there, for ever. His other good deeds have their deserved
mention elsewhere. 3. Gervase Clifton. 1. 1451. 4. Roger Ridley. 1. 1452. He
gave by his Will In Regist^ Dom. Archid. Cantuar.
five marks to the paving of the Bulstake, and as much to the new building of
S. Georges-gate, and 4 lib. also toward repairing of the Chancell of S. Mary
Castle Church in Canterbury. 5. John Mulling. 1. 1453. 6. John Mulling. 2.
1454. 7. John Winter. 1. 1455. He lies buried in S. Margarets Church, where if
you look you shall find by his Epitaph what were his works of piety. He was in
his former days one of the Bailiffs of the City, viz. anno 25. H. 6. the very
last year of the Bailiffs government thereof. 8. William Bennington. 1. 1456.
9. Richard Pratt. 1. 1457. What he was, may be further known by his Epitaph
formerly taken and set forth in S. Margarets Church, where he lies interred.
10. Philip Belknap. 1. 1458. He dwelt (they say) at the Mote, but died within
the year, and William Bold supplied the place. 11. Roger Ridley. 2. 1459. 12.
William Bigg. 1. 1460. He it was that with one John Coppyn of Whitstable built
our present Mercat-crosse at the Bulstake, as the Inscription upon it will show
you. By his will In ^ed. Regist.
he gave 10 lib. toward the work of S. Georges-gate. He was a benefactor also
to the window-work of S. Peter's Church, as is before remembered. 13. John
Freningham Esq^. 1. 1461. His Will In eod. Regist.
shows him to be a man of much piety. For thereby he gave twenty Nobles to S.
Mary Magdalens Church, 20 lib. to Christ-Church, 20 nobles to the Prior of
Christ-Church for overseeing his will, 20 lib. to the repairing of S. Michaels-
gate, or paving of the Bulstake, and 20 nobles to the amending of foul ways in
and near Canterbury. This year the City was made a County per se, and that
upon these (very valuable) considerations. Nos (says the King, Ed. 4.)
Civitatem nostram praedict. unam de antiquissimis Canterbury one of the
ancientest Cities of England.
Angliae Civitatibus existentem in loco ejusdem regni eminentiori in prospectu
omnium tam in idem regnum peregrinantium vel aliter a partibus ex^eris
venientium, quam per idem transeuntium sitam existere considerantes, sedemque
ejusdem Regni Metropolem in eadem existere, in cujus ecclesia Metropolitica
corpus beati Thomae Martyris ad quem devotionem gerimus specialem honor^ice
feretratur, necnon ossa carissimi consanguinei nostri ac praenobilis principis
Edwardi nuper principis Walliae requiescunt humata. In superque fidelitates and
obsequia laudabilia, Citizens commended.
ac probitatem, industriam and s^renuitatem Maiorum and civium Civitatis
nostrae praedict. quibus se nobis incli^que recordationis atque memoriae
progenitoribus nostris Regibus Angliae hucusque gratos in omnibus and paratos
exhibuerunt, and praecipue sidelitates and obsequia laudabilia ^obis jam nuper
per Cives Civitatis praedict' ad sumptus, custas, expensas, labores, pericula,
and gravamina Maiorum and Civium nostrorum praedict' plura and non modica
exhibita merito contemplantes etc. As it is in the Charter. The very same year
16 lib. 13s. 4d. part of the 60 lib. per annum, until then paid as fee-ferme
to the King by the City, was first abated, and by the Kings Charter for ever
after remitted to the City. The reasons and inducements were these. Quia Nos
(says the same Ed.) ex gravi and lamentabili querela eorundem nunc Maioris and
Civium nostrorum Civitatis praedictae accipientes quod eadem Civitas nostra ac
inhabitants eandem in tantam paupertatem tam ob grandem and onerosam
solutionem praedictae firmae sive feodi firmae ejusdem civitatis lx lib. nobis
and progenitoribus nostris solus', ac grandes and onerosas custas and expensas
suas in resistentia inimicorum nostrorum Regnum nostrum Angliae in partibus
ejusdem Regni eidem Civitati vicinis quampluries invadere nitentium quam ob
alia onera eidem Civitati necessario incumbentia ac paucitatem inhabitantium
ibidem in tantum depauperantur and vastantur, quod ipsos inhabitants Civitatem
illam necessario oportebit, quod absit, omnino relinquere desolatam, nisi eis
per nos in hac part gratiosius succurratur etc. as it is in the same Charter.
14. Thomas Foster. 1. 1462. 15. William Sellow. 1. 1463. 16. Hamon Beale. 1.
1464. He was a benefactor to S. Pancrace Chapel, as may be seen before, and
beside gave 40^. to the Friars Minors or Gray F F. in Cant. where by his Will
In Regi^ praedict.
he appoints to have his body interred (in medio navis ecclesiae fratrum
minorum, such are his own words) and to have a tomb of 3 foot high, at his
Executors charges, set over him and Isabell his wife, anno 1492. 17. John
Harndell alias Hearnhill. 1. 1465. 18. William Bigg. 2. 1466. 19. John
Freningham. Esquire. 2. 1467. 20. Roger Ridley. 3. 1468. 21. Nicholas Faunt. 1.
1469. He was hanged (as tradition gives) at the Bulstake in Cant. for aiding
Bastard Falconbridge; and the liberties of the City were seized into the Kings
hands, so that the City was without a Mayor for some good space. 22. Roger
Brent, Esquire. 1. 1470. 23. Foger Brent, Esquire. 2. 1471. See more of him in
All Saints Church. 24. John Bygg, Esquire. 1. 1372. 25. John Bygg, Esquire. 2. 1473.
26. John Bygg, Esquire. 3. 1474. See further of him in S. Peter's Church, to the
windowwork whereof he was a benefactor, as there is to be seen. 27. John
Whiteloke. 1. 1475. 28. Roger Brent. 3. 1476. 29. Thomas Atwood, Esquire. 1. 1477.
See more of him in S. Mildreds. 30. Hamon Beale. 2. 1478. 31. Thomas Atwood,
Esquire. 2. 1479. 32. Thomas Atwood, Esquire. 3. 1480. 33. Richard Carpinter. 1. 1481.
34. Nichol. Sheldwich, Esquire. 1. 1482. 35. Nichol. Sheldwich, Esquire. 2. 1483. 36.
William Sellow. 2. 1484. 37. John Whiteloke. 2. 1485. 38. Thomas Atwood, Esquire.
4. 1486. 39. Stephen Barret. 1. 1487. 40. John Ingram. 1. 1488. 41. John
Crispe. 1. 1489. 42. John Carlisle. 1. 1490. 43. John Swan. 1. 1491. See more of
him in S. Andrews. 44. Thomas Propchant. 1. 1492. 45. Edward Bolney. 1. 1493.
46. Edward Bolney. 2. 1494. See more of him in S. Andrews. 47. Thomas Atwood,
Esquire. 5. 1495. 48. Stephen Barret. 2. 1496. 49. Henry Gosborne. 1. 1497. See
concerning him in St Elpheges Church. 50. Thomas Sayer. 1. This year being 13.
H. 7. by his Charter called Nova ordinatio (inter alia) the number of Aldermen
till then but 6. was increased to 12. and the number of the common council
abated from 36. to 24. both which continue to this day. 1498. 51. John
Plumpton. 1. 1499. 52. Thomas Atwood son of Thomas Atwood. 1. 1500. 53. John
Huet. 1. 1501. 54. Henry Gosborne. 2. 1502. 55. Thomas Sayer. 2. 1503. 56.
Thomas Atwood. 2. 1504. 57. William Crampe. 1. 1505. 58. Henry Gosborne. 3.
1506. 59. Rafe Brown. 1. 1507. See concerning him in Northgate Church. 60.
John Nayler. 1. 1508. 61. William Crampe. 2. 1509. 62. John Huet. 2. 1510. He
dyed in the time of his Maioralty, and Ralph Brown supplied. 63. Roger Clarke.
1. 1511. By his Will In Registro praed.
he appoints to be buried between the Church-gate and the Church-doore of St
Peter in Canterbury Anno 1542. It seems then one of the Altar-tombes there at
this day was erected for him. 64. Thomas Atwood. 3. 1512. 65. John Broker. 1.
1513. See concerning him before in St Margarets- Church. 66. Thomas Wainflet.
1. 1514. He dyed and John Foukes served out the year. 67. John Nayler. 2.
1515. See concerning him before in Westgate- Church. 68. Henry Gosborne. 4.
1516. 69. Thomas Foukes. 2. 1517. 70. William Rutland. 1. 1518. 71. John
Broker. 2. 1519. 72. John Brigges. 1. 1520. One of the name, Anno 36. Ed. 3.
gave unto the City, a parcel of Land called le Gravelpet in Winchepefield in
parochia sanctae Mariae de Castro, inter quandam semitam ducentem de Wincheape
ad Dodindale versus South, etc. as the Deed or Charter expresses it Lib.
Testam. pertinen. ad cameram Civitatis.
. 73. Roger Clarke. 2. 1521. 74. William Note or Nutt. 1. 1522. 75. Thomas
Beale, son of Hamon, Beale. 1. 1523. 76. John Brigges. 2. 1524. 77. John
Alcocke. 1. 1525. 78. Roger Clarke. 3. 1526. 79. Jacob Whitlaffe. 1. 1527. 80.
William Rutland. 2. He willed his body to be buried by his Wife in St Pancraces
Chapel at St Augustines, and gave twenty nobles for the buying in of vijl. x^.
parcel of the Cities Fee-ferme, which was yearly paid (so runs his Will)
unto the heirs of Mr John Lucus. 1528. 81. Robert Jews. 1. 1529. 82. Thomas
Atwood. 4. 1530. 83. John Alcocke. 2. 1531. 84. Thomas Beale. 2. 1532. 85.
William Note or Nutt. 2. 1533. 86. John Brigges. 3. 1534. 87. John Alcocke. 3.
1535. 88. Robert Jews. 2. 1536. 89. Rogert Clarke. 4. 1537. 90. John Stark.
1. 1538. 91. Thomas Beale. 3. 1539. 92. Robert Jews. 3. 1540. 93. William
Coppin. 1. 1541. 94. Thomas Gower. 1. 1542. 95. John Freeman. 1. 1543. 96. John
Alcocke, son of John 1. 1544. 97. John French. 1. 1545. 98. Thomas Batherst. 1.
1546. 99. George Webb. 1. 1547. 100. George Rand. 1. 1548. 101. John Freeman.
2. 1549. 102. Robert Jews. 4. 1550. 103. William Coppin. 2. 1551. 104. George
Webb. 2. 1552. 105. John Twyne. 1. 1553. See concerning him before in St Paul's.
106. Thomas French. 2. 1554. 107. Edward Carpenter. 1. 1555. 108. John Fuller.
1. 1556. 109. George May. 1. 1557. 110. Stephen Sear. 1. 1558. 111. John
Fuller. 2. 1559. 112. Henry Alday. 1. 1560. 113. Richard Furner. 1. 1561. 114.
Richard Raiston. 1. 1562. 115. Thomas Percy. 1. 1563. 116. Thomas Giles. 1.
1564. 117. George May. 2. 1565. 118. William Fisher. 1. 1566. 119. James
Nethersole. 1. 1567. 120. Peter Kelsham. 1. 1568. 121. John Seamor. 1. 1569.
122. James Drayton. 1. 1570. 123. Anthony Webb, son of George Webb. 1. 1571.
124. James Nethersole. 2. 1572. He was, for forgery, displaced, and William
Fisher chosen in his room, who served out the year. 125. Simon Broom. 1.
1573. 126. John Rose. 1. 1574. See concerning him before where I have spoken of
our River. 127. Peter Kelsham. 2. 1575. 128. Simon Broom. 2. 1576. 129. Thomas
Limitary. 1. 1577. 130. Clement Bassocke. 1. 1578. 131. James Nethersole. 3.
1579. 132. Leonard Cotton. 1. 1580. See concerning him before both in the
Hospital called Maynards Spittle, and in St Margarets Church. 133. Richard
Gaunt. 1. 1581. 134. John Nutt. 1. 1582. 135. Iose Rose. 2. 1583. 136. Ralfe
Bawden. 1. 1584. 137. John Easday. 1. 1585. See concerning him before where I
treat of our City-Wall. 138. Gilbert Penny. 1. 1586. 139. Simon Broom. 3.
1587. 140. Adrian Nicholle. 1. 1588. A fatal year to the May Pole at
Dundgel-hill, as of us corruptly called. 141. Bartholmew Broom. 1. 1589. 142.
Edward Nether sole, son of James. 1. 1590. 143. Christopher Leeds. 1. 1591.
144. Mark Berry. 1. 1592. 145. Thomas Long. 1. 1593. A great plague this
year. 146. William Amy. 1. 1594. 147. Thomas Hovenden. 1. 1595. 148. James
Fringeham. 1. 1596. 149. William Clarke. 1. 1597. 150. Charles Whetenhall. 1.
1598. 151. Robert Win. 1. 1599. 152. Warham Iennet. 1. 1600. 153. Simon
Broom. 4. 1601. 154. Richard Gaunt. 2. 1602. 155. Ralfe Bawden. 2. 1603. 156.
Edward Nethersole. 2. 1604. 157. Mark Berry. 2. 1605. 158. Thomas Hovenden. 2.
1606. 159. Thomas Paramor. 1. 1607. He obtained the Sword for the City, not
without great expense to the same. 160. William Watmer. 1. 1608. 161. George
Clagget. 1. 1609. 162. Thomas Hawks. 1. 1610. 163. Joseph Calfe. 1. 1611. 164.
Thomas Fetherstone. 1. 1612. 165. George Elven. 1. 1613. 166. John Pierce. 1.
1614. 167. John Watson. 1. 1615. 168. Mark Berry. 3. 1616. 169. Thomas
Hovenden. 3. 1617. 170. Avery Sabin. 1. 1618. 171. Henry Vanver. 1. 1619. 172.
Ralfe Hawkins. 1. 1620. 173. John Hunt. 1. 1621. 174. George Clagget. 2. 1622.
175. Richard Lockley. 1. 1623. 176. James Maste. 1. 1624. 177. William Whiting.
1. 1625. 178. John Stanley. 1. 1626. 179. John Fusser. 1. 1627. 180. John
Roberts. 1. 1628. 181. William Watmer. 2. 1629. 182. Avery Sabin. 2. 1630. 183.
John Meryam. 1. 1631. 184. George Clagget. 3. 1632. 185. John Leed. 1. 1633.
186. Walter Southwell. 1. 1634. 187. James Nicholson. 1. 1635. 188. William
Bridge. 1. 1636. 189. John Terry. 1. 1637. 190. James Master. 2. 1638. 191.
John Stanley. 2. 1639. Hitherto of the Temporal Government of our City, the
concluding Chapter of the present discourse or Survey thereof.

AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING SVCH Authentical Instruments, escripts and writings
as are quoted and cited in the precedent work.
King Offa's Charter of the donation of certain Scriptura 1.
Lands to Christ-Church.
EGo Off a Rex Anglorum Dccxc. Anno dominicae incarnationis,
nostri autem regni Dei gratia concessi xxxviij. cogitans de salute animae
meae, and de statu regionis Merciorum perveni ad Lundoniam Civitatem Tempus.
Donor.
ad conloquium venerabilis viri Aethelheardi Archiepiscopi, and locutus sum cum
eo quid pro salute animae meae, and totius gentis Mercior. deo omnipotenti
darem. Inter haec postulavit a me venerabilis Archiepiscopus Aethelheard ut
darem sibi aliquod supplementum ad ecclesiam sancti Salvatoris in urbe
Doroberniae; dicens cum omnibus Episcopis nostrae regionis esse inonestum non
ditari matrem ecclesiarum a siliabus and filiis suis regibus quos font
baptismatis regeneravit. Ego vero concessi petit^i illius and omnium
episcoporum nostrorum, and dedi illi xC. Do^m.
tributaria terrae bipertita in duobus locis. lx. in loco qui dicitur o^ Linga
hoese and Geddingas circa rivulum qui dicitur Fisces burna, and xxx. in
aquilonali ripa fluminis Tamis, ubi appellatur Twicanham, ut habeat lx. ad
emendationem ecclesiae sancti Salvatoris. xxx vero in Twicanhamme ad indumentum
fratrum qui serviunt Deo in illa sancta ecclesia. Hanc elemosinam humilis and
devotus ego Off a Rex Anglorum pro pignore Christianae fidei totius gentis
nostrae offero Deo omnipotenti, ad suam sanctam ecclesiam, ut mei memoria and
meae carissimae gentis ibi celebretur and Deo commendetur. Erat autem in
conventu nostro celeberrimus dies Pentecostes, and conventus famulorum Dei
quorum nomina scripta sunt hic. Aethelheard Archiep. Ceolwulf Episc. Vnwona
Episc. Hathored Episc. Ceolmund Episc. Ealhheard Episc. Elfhum Episc. Cyneberht
Episc. Dunferth Episc. Wermund Episc. Weohthun Episc. Omnes isti una mecum
clamaverunt ad Dominum in die sancto in ecclesia sancti Pauli. Spiritus Domini
qui hodie replevit orbem terrarum, and omnia continet, and scientiam Solemnis
Ap (...). Im
habet vocis all' and omnes sancti Dei Apostoli qui ab illo spiritu repleti
sunt, tribuat Ita Ms.
benedictionem sempiternaem consentientibus and def^ntibus hanc largitatem, and
condemnet and excommunicet and in hoc saeculo and in futuro eum qui auferat vel
minimam partem hujus doni ab ecclesia sancti Salvatoris quae sita est in urbe
Cantewariorum. Et respondit omnis chorus, Testes.
Amen. Ad confirmandum vero hoc largitatis donum in testes aderant and
subscripserunt and confirmaverunt donum Salvatori nostre.

Ego Off a Rex Merciorum cum benedictione omnium Episcoporum inpono signum
sanctae ad confirmationem hujus doni, mihi donanti ad redemptionem. Et minuenti
ad aeternam condempnationem, and sine ullo remedio in inferno ad aeternae
poenae cruciatum.

Ego Eogferth Rex consensi and subscripsi, and promisi hoc donum semper firmare
and angere. Ego Aethelheard Archiepiscopus signum sanctae crucis inpono. Et in
nomine sanct. Salvatoris conscribo. Ego Colwulf Epis. Cons. Ego Vnwona Epis.
Cons. Ego Hathored Episc. Ego Ceolmund Epis. Ego Ealheard Epis. Ego Elfhun
Epis. Ego Cyneberht Epis. Ego Deneferth Epis. Ego Wermund Epis. Ego Ealhmund
Abb. Ego Vtel Abb. Ego Fothred Abb. Bronda Princ. Bynna Princ. Esne Princ.
Heurdbriht Princ. Ethelmund Princ. Eadgar Princ. Wigga Princ. Cydda Princ.
Cudberht Princ. Ceolmund Princ. Vbba Princ. Eobing Princ.
The Foundation of Herbaldowne-Chantery. Scriptura 2^.

THomas permissione divina Cant. Archiepisc. totius Angliae Primas and
Apostolicae sedis Legatus. Dilectis in Christo filiis Priori and Priorissae ac
fratribus and sororibus Hospitalis nostri de Herbaldowne. Salutem, gratiam and
benedictionem. Scrutato registro bonae memoriae Domini Willielmi Wittlesey
praedecessoris nostri dotationem sive ordinationem perpetuae cantariae in
Hospitali nostro praedicto, reperimus in eodem, tenorem qui sequitur
continentem. Vniversis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis presents literas
inspecturis. Willielmus permissione divina Cant. Archiepisc. totius Angliae
Primas and Apostolicae sedis legatus. Salutem in Domino sempiternam. Cum Custos
quilibet hospitalis nostri de Estbrigge in Cantuaria qui pro tempore fuerit
suis sumptibus and expensis invenire teneatur sacerdotem idoneum qui jugiter
divina celebret coram pauperibus alterius hospitalis nostri de Herbaldowne in
ecclesia sancti Nicholai ibidem, and eorum confessiones audiat, e^sque diebus
and noctibus prout oportebit ecclesiastica ministret sacramenta. Sitque in
praesenti and erit verisimiliter in futurum plurimum difficile stipendiarios
reperire idoneos sacerdotes, qui inter dictos pauperes taliter conversari
voluerint, praesertim cum ipsorum pauperum nonnulli lepra sint infecti, ac pro
infectis hujusmodi ipsum hospitale principaliter Hospitale pro Leprosis
principaliter fundatum.
sit fundatum, nisi for san mansionem ab eis separatam habuerint and vicinam,
cantariamque non mobilem sed perpetuam obtineant ac ad victum eorundem
Capellanorum dotatam competenter. Nos praemissa debito considerationis intuitu
pensantes, curaeque animarum dictorum pauperam and hosp. praedict. utilitati
providere volentes, quandam perpetuam Cantariam unius Capellani ut praemittitur
divina apud Herbaldowne celebraturi fundamus, dotamus, and ut subscribitur
ordinamus. Habebit siquidem sacerdos hujusmodi ipsius cantariae perpetuus in
partem dotis ejusdem unam mansionem sufficientem and honestam aedificatam ex
opposito portae dicti Hospitalis de Herbaldowne cum praediis and gardinis
adjacentibus, and quodam columbari ibidem jam conferend. dicto Hosp. de
Estbrigge per Dominum Willielmum Attewelle Capellanum de Regis licentia jam
obtenta ut inter benefactores habeatur utriusque hospitalis supradicti, necnon
quandam aream praefato hospitali nostro de Herbaldowne contiguam vocat'
Claveringe where, before, page 86 speaking of the Hosp. I s^id the ^ry Priest
(...) (...) against the Hosp I fi^de I w^ m^staken. (...) the Account of the
(...) indowment, gi ven to the Commissioners abo^ the times of the suppression,
(...) (...) had his dwelling (...), ^t Clavering.
: Claveringe
habebit etiam sacerdos istius Cantariae de fratribus and sororibus hosp. de
Herbaldowne duas marcas de claro per equales portiones annuatim in perpetuum.
Reputabitur insuper and erit sacerdos ipse absque nostro aut successorum
nostrorum novo onere unus de numero pauperum in eodem hosp. nostro de
Herbaldowne requisito propter ipsius conversationem, celebrationes and
orationes quas quasi continue faciet coram eis and inter eos, tantum percipiens
and taliter sicut eorum unus incedens si voluerit vestitus pro reverentia sui
ordinis ut sacerdos secularis. Habebit in super quinque marcas liberi and
securi redditus in denariis tempore Domini Thomae Eltone jam custodis dicti
nostri hosp. de Eastbrigge eid' hosp. adquisitas apud Herne quas solvent quidam
Thomas de Co^t heredes and assignati ejus pro terris and tenementis (...) per
factum in hac part sufficiens de solvendo, ac etiam duas marcas cum dimid.
annuatim de custode quocunque ipsius hosp. nostri de Eastbrigge pro tempore
eidem Capellano persolvend. ad quatuor anni terminos usualiter principales quas
custos ipse cum ^lteriori summa annis singulis de certis terris redditibus and
pasturis libere habere poterit quas dictus Dominus Thomas custos etiam suae
custodiae tempore adquisivit de Domino Thoma de Ros milite apud Dominus Thomas
de Ros.
Hothe. Super quibus terris and pasturis, libere distringere sacerdos ipse
valeat pro omni tempore ipsarum duarum marcarum and dimidiae post unumquemque
terminum supradictum per mensem, si postea in solutione ejusdem sit cessatum.
Et sic dos ipsius Cantaria undecim marcas cum dimidia vel circiter
verisimiliter inposterum valebit annuatim. Ad ipsam autem Cantariam quotiens
eam vacare contigerit, Custos dicti Hosp. de Eastbridge qui pro tempore fuerit
sacerdotes idoneos qui in ea residere voluerint, and quotidie coram ipsis
pauperibus, cessante impedimento legitimo juxta Canonum exigentiam celebrare
divina, aut per alium facere celebrari and animarum curam gerere corundem ut
est dictum, ad quae omnia and singula sacerdotes hujusmodi teneri volumus and
arctari nobis and successoribus nostris praesentabit. Ad sumptus autem
reparationis domorum praefatae mansionis and columbaris ac exhibitionem panis,
vini and luminariorum honestorum pro celebrationibus missarum praedictarum
necessariorum tenebitur sacerdos ipse ratione praedictae dotis suae. Si autem
sacerdos idoneus haberi non poterit qui ipsam cantariam habere velit, and ad
celebrationes and curam praedict. ac alia praedicta oner a arctari noluerit ut
est dictum, extunc Custos memorati Hosp. de Estbrigge qui pro tempore fuerit
possessiones dictae dotis superius descriptas ingrediatur and teneat, ac de
dictis celebrationibus and cur a disponat sicuti prius tenebatur and prout
melius videbitur sibi expedire. In quorum omnium testimonium has literas
nostras fieri fecimus pa^entes sigillo nostro consignatas. Dat' apud Croydone
iiij10. Non. Feb. Anno Domini Mccclxxj^. and nostrae translationis quarto. Nos
igitur Thomas permissione divina Cant. Archiepiscopus, totius Angliae Primas
and Apostolicae sedis Legatus praedictus, praedictam dotationem sive
ordinationem ratam habentes pariter and acceptam similiter approbando and
quantum in nobis est confirmantes: Vobis Con' and divi' firmiter injungendo
mandamus quatenus Dominum Iohannem Bray Capellanum praedictae Cantariae
modernum tantum unum de numero pauperum in hospitali praedicto admittatis
tantum and taliter sicut alicui alteri pauperi ejusdem in quibuscunque
pecuniarum summis seu aliis vitae necessariis effectualiter ministrantes. Dat.
in Palatio nostro Cantuar. xviij0. die mensis Maii. Anno Dom. Mccccij0. and
nostrae translationis Anno sexto.

Rather then my Reader should swallow an error in the Herbaldowne.
Etymology of this name (of Look for a discourse of the original of this
name at the end of this Instrument. The names original examined.
Herbaldowne) I have thought fit here (though out of proper place) to recommend
unto him some notions concerning the same (which very lately came into my
thoughts) to supply their omission in my discourse of the place. So it is then,
that Mr Lambard in his Perambulation of Kent, writing of this place, intitles
his discourse thereof thus. Herbaldowne by Canterbury, in Saxon (...), that is,
the Hill where the Army was betrayed. Hence a man would think, (as no question
but the inference is made by some) that Mr Lambard met with that Saxon name of
the place in some ancient Record or Monument of the Saxons times. And indeed if
he did not, he was to blame thus in a manner, to affirm as much. Peremptorily
to deny that he did, I will not presume; but shall here propose to the
consideration of my Reader such probable presumptions to the contrary; and that
the place took and gained the present name of Herbaldowne, from other grounds
long since the Saxons times, as, I think, may give just cause of suspicion
that Mr Lambard never had warrant for that name from any kind of Saxon
antiquity whatsoever. I have collected them chiefly from the ancient Records
and Evidences of the Hospital there, whereof Archbishop Lanfranc, in the
Conquerors time, was the undoubted Founder, which I think the best and fittest
Judges to try and determine this matter.

But for entry into this discourse, let me entreat you in the first place, to
observe with me, that as this name of (...) has no ground in Story (no
Chronicle of ours that ever I saw recording any such occurrence as the
betraying of an Army, either there, or any where else thereabouts:) so Mr
Lambard is silent in the instancing or specifying of any such matter for the
illustration of the name. Next if we consult Edmerus, who lived a Monk of
Canterbury in Hen. 1. time, and Records the erection of the Hospital there by
Lanfranc, and the situation of it Vide page 82.
, we shall find him make no mention of the name of Herbaldowne, or of any other
proper name it then had; not likely to have escaped his pen, but that also it
escaped his knowledge. Now examine we the Hospital Records. The eldest whereof
that I have seen (and I think I have not left any unsearched) have no mention
at all neither, of that name, until Hen. 2. time. A Charter there of H. 1.
concerning Assarts For Assarts, what they signify, see Sr Hen. Spelmans
Glossary in Verb. Assa^tum.
(grubbing up of wood, I take it) which you shall have anon, calls it
Hospitale de bosco de Blen. Another Charter there of a six penny quit-rent out
of a house in Canterbury, seeming, both by the style and Charter to be made not
long after the former, gives it no other denomination then of, Hospitale de
Sancto Nicolao A name which neither Edmerus nor the former Charter mentions:
and therefore I question whether the Church so called were then in being or not.
. True it is that a following Charterthere, viz. of xx marks per annum, given
to the Hospital (not by Hen. 3. as before it is mistaken Page 84.
, but) by Hen. 2. payable out of the Fee-ferme of Canterbury and continued to
this day, makes express mention of the name of Herbaldowne, in these words:
Leprosis de Herbaldona xx marcatas redditus singulis annis habendas de redditu
meo Cantuaria, donec eas assignem alibi suscipiendas vel in ecclesiis vel in
aliis redditibus etc. And another Charter In lib. Hosp. de Esthridge, Cantuar.
much of that age, made by Archbishop Theobald, granting to the Church of St
Nicholas there, and to the Priest officiating in the same, the Tithes of
Westgate-Court (or Manor) makes like mention of the name. Clearly then so old
it is: and that it should be much elder, I would be glad that any could show me
as satisfactory reasons, as, I think I can them, that it is not. Not to
repeat these already premised; I must acquaint you that the quondam extent and
continent of Blen-wood (or of the Forest of Blen, as I have seen it called in
some old Deeds) cujus (...) pars been magna in agros ac pascua complanatur, as
Twine Derebus Alb^onic. lib. (...). page 101.
has it: was much larger then of late and at this day. By that Charter of Hen.
1. concerning Assarts, it may plainly, and without any straining or
inferrement, be inferred that it then extended to the place of the Hospitalls
situation: and therefore does the Deed call it (as the best description, and
most intelligible and proper for it at that time) Hospitale de bosco de Blen,
(that is, the Hospital of (or within) Blen-wood) without any other proper
name. But (to come now to the original and ground of the name of Harbaldowne)
not long afterward, to wit, in the interim of time between this Charter, and
those aforementioned of Hen. 2. time, I conceive the place, by grubbing or
rooting up the wood there, was disforested, manured; and from Wood-land
converted to herbage, or tillage. As Well the Hospitals denomination in that
Charter of Hen. 1. calling it (as I said) Hospitale de bosco de Blen; as the
Grant it self, being to give the Hospitallers liberty to ridd away 8. perches
of wood, on all sides (or round about) the Hospital, plainly inferres that the
place was woody then. For you better satisfaction, see here the Charter it
self recited verbatim. H. Rex Angl. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. and Vicecomiti and
omnibus Baronibus and Ministris and fidelibus suis de Chent, Francis and
Anglis, Sal. Sciatis me dedisse and concessisse, pro Dei amore, and anima
patris and matris meae and Matildis regine and Willielmi filii mei, and pro
redemptione peccatorum meorum, in acremento Hospitalis de bosco de Blen. x
perticatas terre de bosco ad exsartandum and excolendum undique circa
hospitale. Et volo and firmiter praecipio ut habitantes in loco illo habeant
meam firmam pacem, ne aliquis eis injuriam vel contumeliam faciat. T. Wmo.
Elemosinario Capellano meo, and Pagano filio Iohannis, and Gauf^ido filio
Pagani, and Pagano Pe^r. apud Odestoc.



Which Charter having taken effect: and, as the Hospital, so also the Hill (or
Down) thereaway, it seems, then or soon after cleared of the wood upon it,
and manured, it then first in all probability, to distinguish it from the
neighboring Hills and Downs as yet wild and woddy, took the name (or began
to be called by the name) of Herbaldowne, that is, either the Pasture-downe or
the down of herbage (or tillage) like as Wirtsberge, a City in Germany, so
called (says Verstegan Restitution of decayed intelligence. page 238.
) from the abundance of warts or herbs which grew about the hill-sides by that
town, is in Latin called Herbipolis: or (to instance in an example nearer
home) as that Bocton near Lenham in Kent, for distinction sake from the other
three Boctons in that County, has this addition, of Malherb, from a kind of
bad herbage proper to the place, as I am told. And now the place thus beginning
to be so called; to the Hospitals name, of Saint Nicholas this, of Herbaldowne,
was added, as in the stead, and for the supply of that former addition, and
cognizance of Blen-wood, so likewise as a fuller description to the Hospitals
place of situation. Ita mihi videtur etc. or to say with learned, but modest
Covaruvias Pa^. 1. Relect. in Cap. Alma Matter etc. Tom. 1. page 411.. 11.
in a like doubtful case. His rationibus animum induxi meum, ut hanc opinionem
in hac quaestione probarem, facillime admissurus cujuslibet saniorem
sententiam, and quae his probationibus exclusis, fortioribus and melioribus
constet. Etenim in re dubia nequaquam decet semel conceptis opinionibus ita
contumaci animo adhaerere, ut doctissimorum virorum judicia recusare nitamur.
This (I say) is mine opinion in this matter, but with submission to better
judgments, being very willing that other men should take or leave it as they
please, and shall see cause. Assuring them by the way, that I have not taken
this pains, so much to discover M Lambards error, as to certify my Reader of
what a large and vast extent and continent Blen-wood. (or the Forest of Blen)
has sometime been, and how near it has come unto our City. Give me leave to
conclude this discourse with the words of the aforenamed Mr Twine In libro, and
loco superi^s citato.
(sometime an Alderman and Mayor of our City) concerning this Blen-Wood. Quid
referam (says he) sylvam Blenam Cantuariae vicinam, magnitudinis non
contemnendae, si quae alia senta atque frondosa, cujus hodie pars been magna in
agros ac pascua complanatur, in qua patrum nostrorum memoria apri venatione
(...), ut non ineptam sane ad ursos quoqu^g g^endos, quae modo vulpium ac
taxonum lustra opacat, arbitre^ etc.

Fenestrae in superiori part ecclesiae Christi Cant. incipientes a part
septentrionali.
Fenestra prima. Scriptura 3^.

1 MOses cum Rubo. In Medio. Angelus cum Maria. Rubus non consumitur, tua nec
comburitur in carne virginitas. 2 Gedeon cum vellere and conca. Vellus
coelestirore maduit, dum puellae venture intumuit. 3 Misericordia and veritas.
In medio Maria and Elizabeth. Plaude puer puero, virgo vetulae, quia vero
Obviat hic pietas: veteri dat lex nova metas.
4 Iustitia and Pax. Applaudit Regi previsor gratia legi.
Oscula Iustitiae dat pax; cognata Mariae.
5 Nabugodonosor and lapis cum statua. Puer in praesepio. Vt Regi visus lapis
est de monte recisus
Sic gravis absque viro virgo parit ordine miro.
6 In medio Maria. 7 Moses cum virga. In medio. Angelus and Pastores. Vt contra
morem dedit arida virgula florem
Sic virgo puerum, verso parit ordine rerum.
8 David. Gaudebunt campi and omnia quae in eis sunt. 9 Abacuc. Operuit coelos
gloria ejus etc.
Fenestra secunda.
1 IN medio tres Reges equitantes. Balaam. Orietur stella ex Jacob, and exurget
homo de Israel. Isaia and Ieremia. Ambulabunt gentes in lumine tuo etc. 2 In
medio. Herodes and Magi. Christus and Gentes. Qui sequuntur me non ambulabunt
in tenebris. Stella Magos duxit, and eos ab Herod reduxit
Sic Sathanam gentes fugiunt, te Christ sequentes.
3 Pharaoh and Moses, cum populo exiens ab Egipto. Exit ab erumna populus
ducente columna
Stella Magos duxit. Lux Christus utrisque reluxit.
4 In medio. Maria cum puero. Magi and Pastores. Joseph and fratres sui cum
Egiptiis. Ad te longinquos Joseph trahis atque propinquos.
Sic Deus in cunis Iudaeos gentibus unis.
5 Rex Solomon, and Regina Saba. Hiis donis donat Regina domum Solomonis.
Sic Reges Domino dant munera tres, tria, trino.
6 Admoniti sunt Magi ne Herodem adeant: Propheta and Rex Jeroboam immolans. Vt
via mutetur redeundo Propheta monetur
Sic tres egerunt qui Christo dona tulerunt.
7 Subversio Sodomae and Loath fugiens. Vt Loath salvetur ne respiciat prohibetur.
Sic vitant revehi per Herodis regna Sabei.
8 Oblatio pueri in templo, and Simeon. Melchisedech offerens panem and vinum
pro Abraham. Sacrum quod cernis sacris fuit umbra modernis.
Vmbra fugit. Quare? quia Christus sistitur arae.
9 Oblatio Samuel. Natura geminum triplex oblatio trinum
Significat Dominum Samuel puer, amphora vinum.
10 Fuga Domini in Egiptum. Fuga David and Doeg. Hunc Saul infestat: Saul
Herodis typus extat.
Iste typus Christi, cujus fuga consonat isti.
11 Elias Iesabel and Achab. Vt trucis insidias Iesabel declinat Elias
Sic Deus Herodem, terrore remotus eodem.
12 Occisio Innocentum. Occisio sacerdotum Domini sub Saul. Non cecidit David,
pro quo Saul hos jugulavit
Sic non est caesus cum caesis transfuga Jesus.
13 Occisio Tribus Benjamin in Gabaon. Ecce Rachel nati fratrum gladiis jugulati
His sunt signati pueri sub Herod necati.

Fenestra tertia.
1 Jesus sedet in medio Doctorum. Moses and Iethro cum populo. Sic Moses audit
Iethro vir sanctus obaudit
Gentiles verbis humiles sunt forma superbis.
2 Daniel in medio seniorum. Mirantur pueri seniores voce doceri
Sic responsa Dei sensum stupent Pharisei.
3 Baptizatur Dominus. Noah in archa. Fluxu cuncta vago submergens prima vorag^
Omnia purgavit: Baptisma significavit.
4 Submersio Pharaonis and transitus populi. Vnda maris rubri spatio divisa
salubri
Quae mentem mundam facit a vitio notat undam.
5 Temptatio gulae and vanae gloriae. Eva capiens fructum. Qui temptat Iesum
movet Evam mortis ad esum
Eva gulae cedit, sed non ita Jesus obedit.
6 Eva comedit. Victor es hic Sathana: movet Evam gloria vana
Sed quo vicisti te vicit gratia Christi.
7 Tentatio cupiditatis. Adam and Eva comedunt. David and Goliath. Quo Satan
hos subicit Sathanam sapientia vicit
Vt Goliam David, Sathanam Christus superavit.

Fenestra quarta.
1 VOcatio Nathanael jacentis sub ficu. Adam and Eva cum foliis. Populus sub
lege. Vidit in hiis Christus sub ficu Nathanaelem. Lex tegit hanc plebem, quasi
ficus Nathanaelem.
2 Christus mutavit aquam in vinum. Sex hydriae. Sex aetates mundi. Sex aetates
hominum. Hydria metretas capiens est quaelibet aetas, Primum signorum Deus hic
prodendo suorum. Lympha dat historiam, vinum notat allegoriam In vinum morum
convertit aquam vitiorum.
3 Piscatore Apostolorum. S. Petrus cum eccles. de Iud. Palus cum ecclesia de
gentibus. Verbum rete ratis Petri domus haec pietatis Pisces Iudaei, qui rete
ferant Pharisei Illa secunda ratis, domus haec est plena beatis Retia
scismaticus, and quivis scindit iniquus.
4 In medio Jesus legit in Synagoga. Esdras legit legem populo. Stu^ Gregor.
ordinans lectores. Quod promulgavit Moses, legem reparavit Esdras amissam;
Christus renovavit omissam. Quod Christus legit, quasi pro lectoribus egit.
Exemplo cujus sacer est gradus ordinis hujus.
5 Sermo Domini in monte. Doctores Ecclesiae. Moses suscipit legem. Hii montem
scandunt Scripturae dum sacra pandunt. Christus sublimis docet hos sed vulgus
in imis Ex hinc inde datur in monte quod inde notatur Christum novisse debemus
utramque dedisse.
6 Christus descendens de monte mundat leprosum. Paulus baptizat populum.
Heliseus. Naaman and Iordanis. Carne Deus tectus quasi vallis ad ima provectus
Mundat leprosum genus humanum vitiosum: Que^ lavat ecce Deus que^ mundat and
hic Heliseus Est genus humanum Christi baptismate sanum.
Fenestra quinta.
1 Jesus ejicit Demonium. Angelus ligavit Demonium. Imperat immundis Deus hic
equis furibundis Hiis virtus Christi dominatur ut Angelus isti.
2 Maria unxit pedes Chr. Drusiana vestit and pascit egenos. Curam languenti,
victum qui praebet egenti Seque reum plangit, Christi vestigia tangit. Illa
quod ungendo facit haec sua distribuendo Dum quod de pleno superest largitur
egeno.
3 Marta and Maria cum Jesus. Petrus in navi. Johannes legit. Equoris unda ferit
hunc; ille silentia querit; Sic requies orat dum mundi cura laborat.
4 Leah and Rachel cum Jacob. Lyah gerit curam carnis; Rachelque figuram
Mentis, cura gravis est haec, est altera suavis.
5 Jesus and Apostoli colligunt spicas. Mola fumus and Apostoli facientes
panes. Quod terit alterna Mola lex vetus atque moderna Passio, crux Christi
fermentans cibus iste.
Petrus and Paulus cum populis. Arguit iste reos, humiles alit hic Phariseos*
Sic apice tritae panis sunt verbaque vitae.
6 Jesus cum Samaritana Synagoga and Moses cum quinque libris. Ecclesia de
gentibus ad Iohannem. Potum quesisti fidei cum Christ sitisti E qua viri cui
sex Synogoga librique sui sex. delicta notat hydria font relicta Ad te de
gente Deus ecclesia veniente.
7 Samaritana adduxit populum ad Iesum. Rebecca dat potum servo Abraham. Jacob
obviat Rachaeli. Fons servus minans pecus hydria virgo propinans Lex Christo
gentes mulierque fide redolentes. Jacob lassatus Rachel obvia grex adaquatus
Sunt Deus and turbae mulier quas duxit ab urbe.


Fenestra sexta.
1 Jesus loquens cum Apostolis. Gentes audiunt. Pharisei contemnunt. Sollicitae
gentes stant verba Dei sitientes Haec sunt verba Dei quae contemnant Pharisei.
2 Seminator and voluores. Pharisei recedentes a Jesus. Pharisei tentantes
Iesum. Semen rore carens expers rationis and arens Hii sunt qui credunt,
tentantes sicque recedunt. Semen sermo Dei, via lex secus hanc Pharisei Et tu
Christi sator insidiator.
3 Semen cecidit inter spinas. Divites hujus mundi cum pecunia. Isti spinosi
locupletes delioiosi Nil fructus referunt quoniam terrestria querunt.
4 Semen cecidit in terram bonam. Job. Daniel. Noah. Verba prius seruit Deus
his fructus sibi crevit In tellure bond, triplex sua cuique corona.
5 Jesus and mulier commiscens sata tria. Tres filii Noae cum Ecclesia.
Virgins Continentes. Conjugati. Part, Noae nati, mihi quisque sua dominati.
Vna sides natis ex his tribus est Deitatis. Personae trinae tria sunt sata
mista farinae Fermentata sata tria tres fructus operata.
6 Piscatores. Hinc Pisces boni, inde mali. Isti in vitam aeternam. Hii qui
jactantur in levam qui reprobantur Pars sunt a Domino maledicta cremanda camino
Vase reservantur pisces quibus assimulantur Hii quos addixit vitae Deus and
benedixit.
7 Messes. Seges reponitur in horreum. Zizania in ignem. Iusti in vitam
aeternam. Reprobi in ignem aeter. Cum sudore sata messoris in horrea lata Sunt
hic vexati sed Christo glorificati. Hic cremat ex mess quod inutile judicat
esse Sic pravos digne punit judex Deus igne.
8 De quinque panibus and duob. piscibus satiavit multa millia hominum. Dus
Sacerdos. Rex. Hii panes legem, pisces dantem sacra Regem Signant quassatos a
plebe nec adnihilatos.
Synagoga cum Mose and libris. Ecclesia cum Iohanne. Quae populos saturant
panes piscesque figurant Quod Testamenta duo nobis dant alimenta.
Fenestra septima.
1 CVravit Jesus filiam viduae. Ecclesia de gentibus cum Jesus. Petrus orat and
animalia dimittuntur in linthea. Natam cum curat matris prece; matre figurat
Christo credentes primos, nataque sequentes. Fide viventes signant animalia
gentes; Quos mundat sacri submersio trina lavacri.
2 Curavit Jesus hominem ad piscinam. Moses cum quinque libris. Baptizat
Dominus. Lex tibi piscina concordat sunt quia quina Ostia piscinae, seu parts
lex tibi quinae. Sanat ut aegrotum piscinae motio lotum Sic cruce signatos
mundat baptisma renatos.
3 Transfigurationem Domini. Angeli vestiunt mortuos resurgentes. Angeli
adducunt justos ad Deum. Spes transformati capitis, spes vivificati Clares in
indutis membris a morte solutis. Cum transformares te Christ, quid insinuares
Vest decorati declarant clarificati.
4 Petrus piscatur and invenit staterem. Dominus ascendit in Hier. Dominus
crucifigitur. Hunc ascendente^ mox mortis adesse vidente^ Tempora; te Christ
piscis praenunciat iste. Ludibrium turbae Deus est ejectus ab urbe.
5 Statuit Jesus parvulum in medio Discipulorum. Monachi lavant pedes pauperum.
Reges inclinant doctrinae Petri and Pauli. Hoc informantur exemplo qui
monachantur Ne dedignentur peregrinis si famulentur. Sic incurvati pueris sunt
assimulati Reges cum gente Paulo Petroque docente.
6 Pastor reportat ovem. Christus pendet in cruce. Christus spoliat infern u^

Fenestra octava.
1 DOminus remittit debita servo poscenti. Vt prece submissa sunt huic commissa
remissa Parcet poscenti seu parcit Deus egenti.
Petrus and Paulus absolvunt poenitentem, and Dominus sibi credentes. Servus
percutit conservum. Paulus lapidatur. Stephanus lapidatur. Cur plus ignoscit
Dominus minus ille poposcit Conservum servus populus te Paul protervus Regi
conservo repetenti debita servo Assimulare Deus Martyr nequam Pharisaeus
Tradidit eum tortoribus. Mittuntur impii in ignem. Iudaei perimuntur. Caeditur
affligens, captivatur crucifigens Hunc punit Dominus flagris, hos igne caminus.
Fenestra nona.
HOmo quidam descendebat de Hier. in Ierico and incidit in latrones. Perforat
hasta latus, occidit ad mala natus. Creatur Adam. Formatur Eva, comedunt
fructum, ejiciuntur de Paradiso. Ex Adae costa prodiit formata virago. Ex
Christi latere processit sancta propage. Fructum decerpens mulier suadens mala
serpens Immemor authoris vir perdit culmen honoris Virgultum. fructus. mulier.
vir. vipera. luctus Plantatur. rapitur. dat. gustat. fallit. initur. Poena reos
tangit, vir sudat, foemina plangit. Pectore portatur serpens, tellure ribatur.
Sacerdos and Levita vident vulneratum and pertranseunt. Vulneribus plenum
neuter miseratus egenum. Moses and Aaron cum Pharaone. Sribitur tau. Educitur
populus. Adorat vitulum. Datur lex. Elevatur Serpens. Pro populo Moses coram
Pharaone laborat. Exangetque preces, signorum luce coronat. Cui color est
rubeus siccum mare transit Hebraeus Angelico ductu patet in medio via fluctu.
In ligno serpens positum notat in cruce Christu^ Qui videt hunc vivit, vivet
qui credit in istu^. Cernens quod speciem Deitatis dum teret aurum Frangit
scripta tenens Moses in pulvere tauru^.
Samaritanus ducit vulneratum in stabulum cum jumento. Ancilla accusat Petrum.
Dominus crucifigitur. sepelitur. Resurgit. Loquitur Angelus ad Marias. Qui
caput est nostrum capitur: qui regibus ostrum Prebet, nudatur: qui solvit
vincla ligatur. In signo pendens. In ligno brachia tendens. In signo lignum
superasti Christ malignum Christum lege rei, livor condemnat Hebraei Carne
flagellatum, rapit, attrahit ante Pilatum Solemn justitiae tres, orto sole,
Maria Quaerunt lugentes, ex ejus morte trementes.
Fenestra decima.
Suscitat Jesus puellam in Domo. Abigael occurrit David and mutat propositum.
Constantinus jacens and matres cum pueris. Quae jacet in cella surgens de morte
puella Signat peccatum meditantis cord creatum Rex David arma gerit, dum Nabal
perdere quaerit Obviat Abigael mulier David, arma refrenat. Et nebulam vultus
hilari sermon serenat. Rex soboles Helenae, Romanae rector habenae Vult
mundare cutem quaerendo cruce salutem. Nec scelus exercet, slet, humet, dictata
coercet.
Dominus suscitat puerum extra portam. Rex Solomon adorat Idola and deflet
peccatum. Poenitentia Theophili. Qui jacet in morte puer extra limina portae De
foris abstractum peccati denotat actum. Errat foemineo Solomon deceptus amore:
Errorum redimit men's sancto tacta dolor. Dum lacrimando gemit Theophilus acta
redemit Invenies veniam dulcem rogando Mariam.
Dominus suscitat Lazarum. Angelus alloquitur Ionam sub hedera ante Ninevem.
Poenitentia Mariae Egipticae. Men's mala mors intus; malus actus mors foris:
usus Tumba, puella, puer, Lazarus ista notant. Pingitur hic Ninevejam pene
peracta perire Vest fidus Zosimas nudam tegit Mariam.
Mittit Dominus duos Discipul. propter asinam and Pullum. Sp. sanctus in specie
columbae inter Deum and homenum. Imperat adduci pullum cum matre Magister
Paruit huic operae succinctus uterque minister, Signacius simplex quod sit
dilectio duplex Ala Deum dextra fratrem docet ala sinistra,
Jesus stans inter Petrum and Paulum. Genti quae servit petris Petrum, petra
mittit. Escas divinas Iudeis Paul propinas.
Adducunt discipuli Asinum and Pullum. Petrus adducit ecclesiam de Iudeis.
Paulus adducit ecclesiam de gentib. Quae duo solvuntur duo sunt animalia bruta
Ducitur ad Christum pullus materque soluta. De populo fusco Petri sermon
corusco Extrahit ecclesiam veram reserando Sophiam Sic radio fidei caeci
radiantur Hebraei Per Pauli verba fructum sterilis dedit herba Dum plebs
gentilis per eum sit mente sidelis Gentilis populus venit ad Christum quasi
pullus.
Occurrunt pueri Domino sedenti super Asinam Vestibus ornari patitur Salvator
asellam Qui super astra sedet, nec habet frenum neque sellam,
Isaias dicit. Ecce Rex tuus sedens super asinam. Qui sedet in coelo ferri
dignatur asello. David ex ore infantum, etc. Sancti sanctorum laus ore sonat
puerorum. Fenestra undecima.
IN medio coena Domini David gestans se in manibus suis. Manna fluit populo de
coelo. Quid manibus David se gestans significavit Te manibus gestans das
Christ tuis manifestans Manna fluit saturans populum de plebe figurans De
mensa Jesus dare se coenantibus esum.
Lavat Jesus pedes Apostolorum. Abraham Angelorum Laban camelorum Obsequio
lavacri notaet hospes in hospite sacri Quos mundas sacro mundasti Christ
lavacro. Cum Laban hos curat, typice te Christ figurat Cura camelorum mandatum
Discipulorum.
Proditio Jesus. Venditio Joseph. Ioab osculatur Abner and occidit Fraus Iudae
Christum, fraus fratrum vendidit istum Hii Iudae, Christi Joseph tu forma
fuisti. Foedera dum fingit Ioab in funera stringit Ferrum, Iudaicum praesignans
foedus iniquum.
Vapulatio Jesus. Job percussus ulcere. Helizeus and pueri irridentes. Christi
testatur plagas Job dum cruciatur Vt sum Iudeae, iocus pueris Helisee.
Fenestra duodecima.
CHristus portat crucem. Isaac ligna. Mulier colligit duo ligna. Ligna puer
gestat, crucis typum manifestat. Fert crucis in signum duplex muliercula
lignum.
Christus suspenditur de ligno. Serpens aeneus elevatur in columna: Vacca
comburitur Mors est exanguis dum cernitur aereus anguis Sic Deus in ligno nos
salvat ab host maligno Vt Moses jussit vitulam rufam rogus ussit Sic tua
Christ caro crucis igne crematur amaro.
Dominus deponitur de ligno. Abel occiditur. Heliseus expandit se super puerum
Nos a morte Deus revocavit and hunc Heliseus. Signa Abel Christi pia funera
funere tristi.
Moses scribit Thau in frontibus in porta de sanguine agni. Dominus in
sepulcro. Samson dormit cum amica sua. Jonas in ventre ceti. Frontibus infixum
Thau praecinuit crucifixum Vt Samson typice causa dormivit amicae. Ecolesiae
causa Christi caro marmore clausa. Dum jacet absorptus Jonas Sol triplicat
ortus Sic Deus arctatur tumulo triduoque moratur.
Dominus ligans Diabolum. Spoliavit infernum. David eripuit Oves. and Samson
tulit portas. Salvat ovem David; sic Christum significavit. Est Samson fortis
qui rupit vincula mortis. Instar Samsonis, frangit Deus ossa Leonis. Dum
Sathana^ stravit, Chrtus Regulu^ jugulavit
Surgit Dominus de sepulcro. Jonas ejicitur de pisce. David emissus per
fenestram. Redditur ut salvus, quem ceti clauserat alvus: Sic redit illesus, a
mortis carcere Jesus. Hinc abit illesus David: sic invida Jesus Agmina
conturbat, ut victa morte resurgat.
Angelus alloquitur Mariam ad Sepulcrum. Joseph extrahitur e carcere. Et Leo
suscitat filium. Ad vitam Christum Deus ut leo suscitat istum. Te signat
Christ Joseph; te mors; locus iste.


To these verses in the Windows let me add four other legible of late on the
Wall in the North-Ile of the Quire, in the foot almost of the painted piece
there, and contain a brief dialogue between Saint Anselm sometime Archbishop
here, and an Heretic, about the Virgin* conception of our blessed Lady,
written (it there appears) Anno Domini 1477.

Haereticus.
Nunquam natura mutavit sic suajura,
Vt virgo pareret, in virginitate careret.
Anselmus.
Lumine solari nescit vitrum violari;
Nec vitrum sole, nec virgo puerpera prole,
The Articles between the Prior of S. Gregory's of Canterbury Scriptura 4ta.
and the Covent of the same Church on the one party, and the Mayor and
Communalty of the City of Cant. of the other party, by the mediation of Thomas,
Prior of Christ-Church of Cant. John Hales one of the Barons of the Exchequer
of our Saveraigne Lord the King, Christopher Hales general Attorney of our
said Sovereign Lord the King, and Thomas Wood Esquire, by the consent of the
most reverend Father in God William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

FIrst it is agreed and determined that the said Monastery 1.
as it is enclosed at this present date with the new houses and tenantries
which been built next adjoining unto the same Monastery, as well on and by the
South part of the said Church-gate, as on and by the North-part of the
Court-gate of the said Church, be fully and entirely to all intents of and
within the liberties and franchises of the said City of Cant. And that the
tenants inhabiting in the same tenements shall at all times do and owe their
obedience unto the Mayor of the said City, and to the Aldermen and other
Officers of the said City and of the Ward of Northgate for the time being and
shall be contributory to every charge within the same City in like wise as all
the other inhabitants of the same City and shall be. And that the said Mayor
and Aldermen of the said City and Ward and their Successors shall execute their
Office within the said Monastery as they should do in any other part of the
said City, except in the causes and articles following.

Item it is agreed for the quietness of the said Prior and 2.
Covent and their Successors that no person shall be arrested by his body
within the said monastery for any personal action to be attempted by way of
plaint before the Mayor of the said City, but in form following, that is to
say, if any plaint be entered and affirmed against the said Prior or his
successors or any person inhabiting or abiding within the said Monastery in
such manner that the process and execution according to the same plaint cannot
be had and done upon the said Prior, his successors, or any such foresaid
Person there inhabiting or abiding within the said Monastery, that then if the
said Prior, his successors or other person inhabiting or abiding within the
said Monastery, having knowledge by the said Mayor or by any of his Officers
thereof by monition to be given by the time of two days before the time
prefixed for the appearance, he at the time of that monition being within the
said Monastery or elsewhere within the liberties of the same City: If then the
said Prior, the next Court-day after the said summons or knowledge so given put
in pledges of right according to the custom of the said City to answer to the
said plaints so taken and affirmed, that then no manner of arrest nor
attachment of any of the said bodies shall not be put in execution within the
said Monastery against the said Prior his Successors or any such person
inhabiting or abiding within the same. And it is condiscended agreed and
determined by this composition that every such monition or warning hereafter to
be given against the Priors or any other person spiritual or temporal
inhabiting or resident within the same Monastery shall be good and effectual
to be given to the party to be sued or to any religious man of the same
Monastery then being a Priest.

Item it is agreed that all the manuell and necessary servants of the said
Prior and Covent that hereafter shall be 3.
inhabiting within any of the said tenantries shall not hereafter be
impanelled, summoned, amerced ne distreyned for any mercements for any manner
of Jury that shall be sued between party and party.

Foundation of the Vicarage of Cosmus-Bleane. Scriptura 5ta.

VNiversis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis praesentes literas inspecturis Simon
permissione divina Cant. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas and Apostolicae
sedis Legatus Salutem in Causae fundationis.
Domino. Quia tam ex fama publica quam ex inquisitione ex officio nostro in hac
part capta evidenter comperimus ecclesiam parochialem sanctorum Cosmae and
Damiani in la Bleen nostrae Dioc. Hospitali nostro sancti Thomae Martyris de
Estbrigge in Civitate Cantuar. ab abtiquo fuisse and esse appropriatam, unita^
pariter and annexam, per unum milliare and amplius ab ipsis Civitate and
Hospitali notorie distantem, sacerdotemque qui curae animarum parochianorum
ecclesiae praedictae hactenus intendebat seu intendere solebat in dicto Hosp.
per dies and noctes quasi continuo fuisse commorantem, cum alibi pro sacerdote
hujusmodi hospitium sive habitatio minime extiterat ordinat', quodque vix in
ecclesia praefata singulis ebdomadis sacerdos praedictus propter dictorum
locorum distantiam per dies duos missam celebravit, ac parochiani ecclesiae
praedictae nonnulli infirmati sacerdotem hujusmodi diebus and noctibus
inquirendo in loco ut praemittitur sic distanti quam plurimum fuerant fatigati,
and saepius in infirmitatibus subitis proper praefati sacerdotis absentiam
multiplicem neque confessi neque communicati lamentabiliter decesserunt, ac
alii in infirmitatibus hujusmodi remanserunt periculose and multipliciter
desolati. Nos itaque praemissa pericula mentis nostrae intuitu debite
ponderantes, eisque quantum cum Deo poterimus ex nostri officii debito mederi
cupientes, de voluntate and assensu Dilecti nobis in Christo Domini Thomae New
de Wolton custodis sive magistri Hosp. antedicti, intervenientibus etiam
authoritate and assensu dilectorum filiorum Prioris and Capituli ecclesiae
nostrae Christi Cant. de consilio Iurisperitorum nobis assistentium, volentes
dei cultum, animarumque profectum parochianorum ecclesiae praedictae, Domino
disponente, salubriter augmentare, statuimus, ordinamus and disponimus, ut de
cetero sit in dicta Dotatio Vica^iae.
ecclesia perpetuus Vicarius habens infra ejusdem paroch^ mansionem quom
praefatus Dominus Thomas New Custos erexit pro eodem. Habebit etiam idem
Vicarius decimas ac oblationes subscriptas ad valorem annuum december librarum and
ultra ut communiter creditur se extend^tes, pro victu suo and oneribus
infrascriptis supportandis, ejus quoque Vicarii praesentatio in vacationibus
ipsius Vicariae singulis ad Custodem ipsius Hosp. inperpetuum pertinebit.
Habebit etiam ipse Vicarius in partem summae praedictae pro dote sua omnes
decimas praediales apud Natyngdon D^cimae apud Natingdon.
dicto Hosp. debitas ab antiquo, quae quinque marcas aut circiter de claro
valebunt annuatim, nec non omnes decimas praediales per totam parochiam dictae
ecclesiae sanctor. Cosmae and Damiani praeterquam de terris and praediis
dominicalibus omnibus and singulis praedicti. Hosp. jam cultis and colendis
infra parochiam antedictam and preter omnimodas decimas praediales and alias
quascunque provenient' ex terris subscriptis and animalibus in eisdem
depascendis and eorum fetuum super terras hujusmodi emittend* quae terrae sic
exceptae sunt and jacent ex australi part cujusdam cursus aquae currentis in
ipsa parochia quae vocatur Vischmannysbourne in quadam valle infra dictam
parochiam inter ecclesiam Fishmannesbourne.
praedictam sanctor. Cosmae and Damiani in le Bleen and Curiam, dicti Hosp.
apud le Hothe dictae nostrae Dioc. scituat. Ita quod Vicarius ille de decimis
praedialibus nec aliis cujuscunque generis fuerint ex illa part australi dicti
cursus aquae infra parochiam praedict. qualitercunque provenien. nihil penitus
vendicare poterit vel debebit. Habebit insuper dictus Vicarius in complementum
summae december librarum praedictarum omnes decimas vitulorum, agnorum, aucarum,
lini, lanae, lactis, lacticinii, casei, foeni, herbagii, silvae ceduae,
aliarumque rerum omnium decimabilium infra dictam parochiam, decimis de terris
and praediis dominicalibus and possessionibus quibuscunque provenientibus ac de
animalibus dicti Hosp. and ipsorum foetibus in ipsa parochia ubicunque
depascendis and emittendis, cujuscunque generis fuerint, decimis quoque
animalium hominum aliorum quorumcunque super ipsas terras dominicales and super
terras aliorum ex part australi cursus aquae praedict' foetus emittentium, and
ex quibus ipse Vicarius nihil omnino percipiet duntaxat exceptis. Habebit
itaque omnes oblationes in dicta parochiali ecclesia sanctor. Cosmae and
Dam^ani and ejus parochia extra Curiam dicti Hosp. apud la Hoth ubicunque
faciendas and quia tanta commoda ipse Vicarius infra dictam parochiam quasi
Rector loci optinebit, subscripta onera de emolumentis and proficuis praedictis
dictus Vicarius qui fuerit pro tempore futuris temporibus supportabit, viz.
Cancellum On^ Vic^.
dictae ecclesiae sanctorum Cosmae and Damiani construet and reparabit suis
sumptibus and expensis quotiens and quando oportebit. Et volumus quod si in ea
part per Custodem praefati hosp. debite monitus infra tempus congruum per
ipsum Custodem limitandum reparationes and constructiones hujusmodi fieri non
fecerit competenter, licebit extunc eidem Custodi qui pro tempore fuerit de
dictis oblationibus and decimis partem rationabilem and non excessivam libere
capere and levare, cum qua reparationes aut constructiones ipsas poterit fieri
facere competenter, and si sic partem rationabilem ceperit and levaverit ipse
Custos, Vicarius ille pro reparationibus aut constructionibus tunc necessariis
excusatus habeatur penitus ne fraus aut malitia locum habeat in hac part.
Sustentabit etiam Vicarius hujusmodi qui ibidem pro tempore fuerit suis
sumptibus competentem mansionem pro ipso vicario in dicta parochia jam
constructam. Orabuntque singuli qui ibidem erunt Vicarii in singulis suis
missis pro nostra salute dum vixerimus, and pro anima nostra cum ab hac luce
migraverimus, ac pro salute Domini Thomae New dum vixerit, and pro ejus anima
cum ab hac luce migraverit, necnon pro anima bonae memoriae Domini Simonis de
Islep dudum Cant. Archiepisc. praedecessoris nostri, quia cum ejus bonis in
maiori part ipsa mansio ut accepimus erecta extitit and constructa, and pro
animabus Domini Thomae de Ros qui multas possessiones suae hereditatis dedit
Dominus Thomas de Ros. and Beatrix ejus uxor. Dominus Eustacius de Dapschecourt
and uxor.
dicto hospitali in partem dotis unius Cantariae perpetuae pro salute animae
suae and Beatricis consortis suae ac etiam Domini Eustacii de Dapschecourt and
consortis ejus, de quorum bonis multa pietatis opera facta sunt in dicto Hosp.
sancti Thomae martyris. Inveniet in super dictus Vicarius qui fuerit pro
tempore vinum and panem ac luminar' in praefata ecclesia pro celebrantibus
necessaria, and suis sumptibus ea exhiberi faciet competenter, and subibit
omnia alia onera praedictae ecclesiae imposterum imponenda quae ad decimas
solvendas taxata non existunt eaque agnoscat debite and persolvat. Artabitur
etiam ad residentiam continuam infra parochiam praefatae ecclesiae faciendam,
sicut ad residentiam continuam alii ecclesiarum Vicarii per constitutionem sunt
artati. Obedietque custodi praefati hosp. qui fuerit pro tempore in licitis and
honestis. Reservamus insuper nobis and Successoribus nostris Archiepisc. Cant.
potestatem corrigendi, augmentandi and diminuendi nostram ordinationem
praedictam quotiens nobis vel eis videbitur expediens and opportunum. In cujus
Rei testimonium sigillum nostrum fecimus hiis apponi. Dat' apud Otteforde
tertio Non. Augusti Anno Domini Millesimo CCCmo. septuagesimo quinto, and
nostrae translationis anno primo.

The Foundation of Eastbridge-Chantery. Scriptura 6^a.

SAnctae matris ecclesiae filiis universis ad quos praesentes literae
pervenerint Simon permissione divina Cantuar. Archiepiscopus etc. salutem in
Domino sempiternam. Quia per inspectionem cujusdam patentis literae bonae
memoriae Domini Simonis de Islep nuper Cant. Archiepisc. praedecessoris nostri
ejus sigillo Causae fundationis.
consignatae comperimus evidenter quod ipse ex certis causis una perpetuam
cantariam in hospitali nostro apud Estbrig' in Civitate Cant. ad honorem Dei
cultusque divini, and pro salute animarum quorundam benefactorum ipsius hosp.
and omnium fidelium defunctorum devote and legitime ordinavit, ejusque
Cantariae sacerdotem qui fuerit pro tempore annuatim percipere voluit ad certos
anni terminos in ordinatione eadem expressos de custode ejusdem hospitalis in
perpetuum december marcas ex valor antiquarum and novarum possessionum eidem
hospitali adquisitarum capiendas and etiam persolvendas, prout in dicta
ordinationis litera before expressatur. Sacerdotem quoque ipsius Cantariae per
literas ordinationis praedictas artavit ad residentiam continuam in dicta
Civitate aut eius suburbio faciendam, ita quod se ab ipsis Civitate aut
suburbio per spatium unius diei minime absentaret nisi de Custodis dicti Hosp.
aut tenentis ejus locum licentia speciali petita pariter and obtenta, quam ex
causis licitis necessariis and honestis dare poterit dictus Custos aut locum
ejus tenens quotiens ubi and quamdiu sibi videbitur expedire, dum tamen idem
capellanus in absentia sua hujusmodi per alium Capellanum idoneum faciat divina
celebrari, quodque pauperibus and peregrinis ad ipsum hosp. confluentibus and
in ipso infirmitatis sacramenta and sacramentalia quae si praesens fuerit per
se vel per alium ministrabit and debite faciat ministrari. Volumus itaque and
etiam ordinamus quod sacerdos ipsius Cantariae qui est and erit inposterum
mansionem habeat Mansio Cantaristae.
infra septa dicti hosp. inter Infirmariam and magnam portam ejusdem hosp. jam
ei assignatam, cum una camera supra ipsam portam aedificata, suis sumptibus
continue in statu debito conservandam. Verum post ipsam ordinationem Dominus
noster excellentissimus Dominus Edwardus Rex Angliae and Franciae illustris qui
nunc est quoddam messuagium suum in Civitate Cant. situm, la Change vulgariter
nuncupatum, in magna part tempore donationis ejusdem infrascript' collapsum ex
pia donatione sua Domino Thomae New de Wolton nunc magistro praedicti Hosp. ad
terminum vitae suae donavit, ita quod post mortem suam ipsum messuagium
Successoribus ipsius magistris, viz. Hosp. praedicti remaneret in perpetuum, in
auxilium sustentationis unius capellani perpetui divina celebranti in Hosp.
praedicto, pro salubri statu ipsius Domini Regis dum vixit, and anima
carissimae matris suae Isabellae defunctae, and anima ipsius Domini Regis cum
ab hac luce migraverit, anima etiam Domini Dominus Johannes at Lee.
Iohannis at Lee qui in part dotavit dictam Cantariam, ac animabus omnium
fidelium defunctorum, prout in carta dicti Domini nostri Regis plene vidimus
contineri, Ac per inquisitionem and informationem fidedignorum accepimus quod
dictum messuagium per praefatum Dominum nostrum Regem collatum ut praemittitur,
per executores dicti praedecessoris nostri and cum bonis ejus caritative est
taliter reparatum and constructum quod verus valor ejus in certo redditu ad
septem marcas ascendit, and in futurum ascendit annuatim ut speratur. Quodque
difficile sit in presenti honestum reperire sacerdotem, qui pro salario december
marcarum ad tam continuam residentiam and cotidianas celebrationes voluerit ut
praemittitur onerari. Devotionemque dicti Domini nostri Regis quoad augmentum
dictae dotis hactenus frustratum esse comperimus: Ordinamus Augmenta^ (...)
dotis.
and statuimus addendo ordinationi praedicti praedecessoris nostri, de consens^
dicti Domini Thomae Custodis praefati Hosp. and executoris praedecessoris
nostri praedicti quod dos dictae Cantariae december marcarum per quinque marcas
and dimidiam de septem marcis redditus messuagii sive tenementi praedicti per
Dominum Regem dati ut praemittitur percipiendas per sacerdotem praedictum qui
fuerit pro tempore equis portionibus, ad quatuor anni terminos, ad quos dictae
december marcae in ordinatione dicti praedecessoris nostri sunt sol vendae
augmentetur, and eandem Cantariam cum dictis quinque marcis and dimidia tenore
praesentium augmentamus, cum potestate per dictum Capellanum distringendi in
dicto messuagio seu tenemento vocat' la Change per Dominum nostrum Regem dato
ut praefertur, quotiens per aliquem terminorum praedict' in ordinatione
praedicta contentorum pars debita ipsius redditus quinque marcarum and dimidiae
in part vel in toto per dies quindecim eidem capellano non fuerit persoluta.
Et quia praesentatio Cantariae de Cantaria de Bourne.
Bourne hospitali praedicto unitae prout in ordinatione primae Cantariae
praedictae per praedecessorem nostrum facta before continetur, ad Bartholomeum
de Bourne seu ejus heredes a^t assignatos ante unionem praedictam pertinebat:
statuimus, ordinamus, and propterea declaramus quod praesentatio dictae
Cantariae cum vacaverit, nobis seu successoribus nostris, aut sede ecclesiae
Cant. vacant, Priori and Capitulo ejusdem ecclesiae facienda, ad praefatum
Bartholomaeum, heredes' ^ut assignatos suos, collatioque ejusdem ad nos and
Successores nostros cum eam vacare contigerit alternis vicibus pertinebunt, and
quod collatio dictae Cantariae in prima vacati' ejusdem ad nos vel Successores
nostros perti^eat, quia assignatus dicti Bartholomei ad ipsam Cantariam tunc
vacantem capallanum praesentavit eandem occupantem in praesenti. Iurabit
quilibet Capellanus ejusdem Cantariae in admissione sua seu collatione sibi
facienda, ordinationes dictae Cantariae and singula contenta in eisdem
fideliter observare, alioquin ejus admissio, collatio and institutio nullius
penitus sint momenti. In quorum omnium testimonium sigillum nostrum fecimus
hiis apponi. Dat' apud Wingham xv. Kalen. Novembris. Anno Domini Mccclxxvto.
and translationis nostrae anno primo.

The grant of Poor Priests Hospital with the Scriptura 7ma.
Lands and appertenances to it, by the late Queen, to the City.
ELizabetha Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regina fidei defensor
etc. Omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint Salutem. Cum Blasius Winter
clericus Magister hospitalis pauperum Sacerdotum in Comitatu Civitatis Cantuar.
necnon Ed. Freake Roffen' Episcopus Archidiaconus Cantuarien. verus and
indubitatus Patronus dicti Hospitalis in Iure Archidiaconatus praedicti and
Mattheus Cant. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas and Metropolitanus
Ordinarius ejusdem Hospitalis per scriptum suum gerens datum quarto decimo die
Maii anno Regni nostri decimo septimo ob diversas causas eosdem moventes in
praedicto scripto S^ sum redditio Hospit.
mentionat' and expressas, dederunt, concesserunt and confirmaverunt nobis
heredibus and successoribus nostris in perpetuum totum Hospitale pauperum
Sacerdotum infra Civitatem Cant. praedictum, and advocationem ejusdem Hosp.
necnon omnia and singula domos, aedificia, structuras, gardi^', pomar', terras
arabil', glebas, tenementa, prata, pasturas, mariscos, boscos, subboscos,
redditus, reversiones, servitia, portiones, pensiones, annuales redditus,
decimas bladorum, granorum and feni, advocationem and advocationes ecclesiae
and ecclesiarum, vicariae and vicariarum quarumcunque and reversionem and
reversiones omnium and singulorum praemissorum, ac omnia and singulaproficua,
franches', emolumenta and hereditamenta quaecunque dicto Hosp. spectantia and
pertinentia, vel ut pars, parcella vel m^mbrum ejusdem hosp. nunc vel antehac
accept', usitat', cogni^' seu reputat', tam infra Civitatem praedictam quam
infra Comitatum Kaenc. Habend' nobis, heredibus and Successoribus nostris ad
solum opus and usum nostrum heredum and Successorum nostrorum in perpetuum, ea
tamen intention and siducia q^d nos, heredes and Successores nostri ad humilem
supplicationem and petitionem Maioris and Communitatis dictae Civitatis nostrae
Cantuar^otum dictum Hosp. and omnia and singula alia praemiss^ cum su^
pertinen^is praefatis Maiori and Communitati and Successoribus suis per literas
nostras patentes sub magno sigillo nostro Angliae debito modo fiend' and
sigilland' dare and concedere dignaremur Tenend. praedictum Hosp. and omnia and
singula caetera praemissa cum pertinen' de nobis and Successoribus nostris ut
de manerio nostro de East-Greenwich in dicto comitatu nostro Kanc' in libero
socagio per fidelitatem tantum and non in capite, prout per praedictum scriptum
nobis heredibus and Successoribus nostris per praedictos Magistrum, Episcopum,
and Archiepiscopum inde confectum and sigillatum, quod quidem scriptum Decanus
and Capitulum ecclesiae Cathedralis and Metropoliticae Christi Cant. per eorum
scriptum sub eorum communi sigillo sigillatum gerens dat' decimo sexto die Maii
anno regni nostri supradicto consirmaverunt, and in omnibus ratisicaverunt and
aepprobaverunt, quod quidem scriptum -- -- and irrotulat' in Curia Cancellariae
nostrae prout per eadem manifest liquet and apparet. Ratione cujus nos modo
seisiti sumus de toto praedicto Hosp. ac de omnibus and singulis praemissis
supradictis cum suis pertinentiis in Dominico nostro ut de feodo ut in Iure
coron^ nostrae ad intentionem and fiduciam praedict' in nobis reposit. Sciatis
igitur quod nos tam ad humilem petitionem dictorum Maioris and Concessio ejusd.
Civitati.
Communitatis quam in performando and perimplendo intentionem and fiduciam
praedict' in nobis reposit' per praedict' Magistrum, Episcopum and Archiepisc.
confirmat' per praedict' Decanum and Capitulum in script' praedict' ut
praefertur express' and mentionat', de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa
scientia and mero motu nostris dedimus, concessimus and consirmavimus, ac per
presents, pro nobis, heredibus and Successoribus nostris damus, concedimus and
confirmamus praefatis Maiori and communitati and successoribus suis in
perpetuum totum praedictum hospitale pauperum Sacerdotum, and advocationem
ejusdem, necnon omnia and singula domos, edificia, structuras, gardina,
pomaria, terras arabiles and pasturas, terras glebales, tenementa, prata,
pascua, pasturas, mariscos, boscos, subboscos, ^edditus, servitia, portiones,
pensiones, annuales redditus, decimas bladorum, granorum and feni, advocationem
and advocationes ecclesiae and ecclesiarum, Vicariae and vicariarum
quarumcunque and reversionem and reversiones omnium and singulorum
praemissorum, ac omnia and singula proficua, libertates, franches', emolumenta
and hereditamentae quaecunque dicto Hosp. spectantia, pertinentia, vel ut pars,
parcella vel membrum ejusdem Hosp. nunc vel antehac accept', usitat', cognit'
seu reputat' -- -- nobis, heredibus and Successoribus nostris per praedictum
scriptum superius recitatum ut praefertur dat' and concess', tam infra
Civitatem praedictam quam infra Comitatum Kanc. Habend. tenend. and gaudend.
praedictum Hosp. necnon omnia and singula praemissa cum omnibus and singulis
suis pertinentiis pr^fatis Maiori and Communitati and Successoribus suis in
perpetuum. Tenend. de nobis heredibus and Successoribus nostris ut de manerio
nostro de East Greenwich in dicto Comitatu nostro Kanc' in libero and communi
socagio per fidelitatem tantum and non in Capite. Et ulterius de ampliori
gratia nostra dedimus and concessimus ac per praesentes damus and concedimus
praefatis Maiori and Communitati omnia exitus, redditus, reventiones and
proficua praedicti Hospitalis and ceterorum omnium and singulorum praemissorum
per praesentes concessorum cum pertinent' (...) dicto quartodecimo die Mati
ultimo praeteriti hucusque provenien' sive crescen' Habend. eisdem Maiori and
Communitati ex dono nostro absque computo s^u aliquo alio proinde nobis
heredibus vel successoribus nostris quoquo modo reddend' vel faciend. Et
ulterius volumus and per praesentes concedimus praefatis Maiori and Communitati
and successoribus suis quod nos heredes and Successores nostri in perpetuum
annuatim and de tempore in tempus exonerabimus, acquietabimus and indempnes
conservabimus tam eosdem Maiorem and Communitatem and successores suos quam
totum praedictum hospitale and caetera praemissa, cum omnibus and singulis suis
pertinen. superius per praesentes praeconcessa de omnibus and omnimodis
corrodiis, redditibus, feodis, annuitatibus and denariorum summis ac oneribus
quibuscunque per nos antehac quoquo modo factis seu concessis de praemissis
praeconcessis, seu de eisdem aliquo modo exeun' seu solvend. vel superinde
onerat' seu onerand. praeterqua^ de servitiis per praesentes nobis heredibus
and Successoribus nostris reservatis. Et ulterius volumus ac per praesentes pro
nobis, heredibus ac Successoribus nostris concedimus praefatis Maiori and
Communitati and Successoribus suis quod hae literae nostrae patentes and
irrotulament' earundem erunt firmae, validae, bonae, sufficientes and efficaces
in leges erga nos, heredes and successores nostros tam in omnibus curiis
nostris quam alibi infra regnum nostrum Angliae absque aliquibus
confirmationibus licentiis vel tolerationibus de nobis, heredibus vel
successoribus nostris inposterum per praedictos Maiorem and Communitatem vel
successores suos procurand. vel obtinen. non obstan' male nominand. vel male
recitand. vel non recitand. praedicta Hosp. domos, aedificia, structuras
gardina, pomaria, terras arabiles and pasturas, terras glebales, tenementa,
prata, pascua, pasturas, mariscos, boscos, subboscos, redditus, reversiones,
servitia, decimas bladorum, granorum and feni, advocationes, pensiones,
portiones, ac caetera omnia and singula praemissa vel alicujus inde parcellae,
aut non obstan' male recitan' vel non recitand. aliquarum dimiss' seu concess'
praemiss^rum seu alicujus inde parcellae de recordo sive non de recordo
existen', vel non obstan' aliquibus aliiis defectibus in non nominando alicujus
villae, hamletti, parochiae aut Com' in quibus praemissa vel aliqua inde
parcella jacent vel existunt, aut in non nominando vel male nominando
praemissorum five alicujus inde parcellae in natura, genere, specie, seu
qualitate sua. Volentes etiam and per praesentes firmiter injungendo
praecipientes tam Thesaurar. Camerar. Cancellar. and Baronibus curiae scaccarii
nostri praedicti quam omnibus receptoribus, auditoribus and aliis officiariis
and ministris nostris, heredum and successorum nostrorum quibuscunque pro
tempore existen' quod ipsi and eorum quilibet super solam demonstrationem harum
literarum nostrarum paten' vel irrotulament' earund' absque aliquo alio brevi
seu warranto a nobis heredibus vel successoribus nostris quoquo modo impetran'
seu prosequen' plenam, integram, debitamque allocationem and exoner ationem
manifestam de omnibus and omnimodis -- -- corrodiis, redditibus, feodis,
annuitatibus, denariorum summis and oneribus quibuscunque de praemissis exeun'
seu solvend. vel superinde onerat' seu oneran' praefatis Maiori and Communitati
and successoribus suis facient and de tempore in tempus fieri causabunt. Et hae
literae nostrae patentes and irrotulamet' earundem erunt annuatim and de
tempore in tempus tam dict' Thesaurar. Camerar. and Baronibus dictae Curiae
scaccarii nostri, quam omnibus, receptoribus, auditoribus, and aliis
officiariis and ministris nostris heredum and successorum nostrorum
quibuscunque pro tempore existentibus sufficiens warrantum and exoneratio in
hac part. Volumus and jam and per praesentes concedimus praefatis Maiori and
Communitati, quod ipsi habeant has literas nostras patentes sub magno sigillo
nostro Angliae debito modo fact' and sigillat' absque fine seu feodomagno vel
parvo nobis in hanaperio nostro seu alibi ad usum nostrum proinde quoquo modo
reddend. solvend. vel faciend. eo quod expressa mentio de vero valor an^uo aut
de aliquo alio valor vel certitudine praemissorum seu eorum alicujus, aut de
aliquibus aliis donis sive concessionibus per nos vel alios progenitores
nostros praefatis Maiori and Communitati antehac in praesentibus minime facta
existit aut aliquo actu, statuto, ordinatione, sive provisione, aut aliqua
aliare, causa, vel materia quacunque in aliquo non obstante. In cujus Rei
testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes. Test me^psa apud
Westm' quinto die Iulii, anno regni nostri decimo septimo.

Per breve de privato sigillo and de dat. praedict. Authoritate Parliamenti.
Lutley.

The indorsement.
IN the year of our Lord God 1575. and in the seventeenth year of Queen
Elizabeth within written, this bountiful and worthy gift by our said
Sovereign Lady Queen Eliz. to the Mayor and Communalty of the City of
Canterb. of the hosp. within mentioned, and the lands and tenements to the
same, to the use of the poor, was of the Charge of the Citizens by sesse to
fifty pound and more procured and obtained by John Rose then Mayor of the said
City and Richard Gaunt then Sheriff of the same suitors and soliciters in and
about he procuring thereof of the proper money and charge of the said John Rose
first disbursed till the full accomplishment and obteining the same, after he
again was paid the same as it was collected and gathered.

It is likewise indorsed upon these letters patents, that these lands and the
whole revenewes thereof were intended by her Matie to be to the use of the
poor of Canterb.

An act of Parliament for paving the streets. Scriptura viijua,

EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hibernia Omnibus ad
quos praesentes literae perverint salutem. Inspeximus quandam petitionem nobis
in Parliamento nostro apud Westm' sexto decimo die Ianuarii ultimo praeterito
summovit' and tento per Communitates Regni nostri Angliae in eodem Parliamento
existen', ex part Maioris and Communitatis Civitatis Cantuar. exhibitum in
haec verba. To the right wise and discreet Commons in this present Parliament
assembled. Shown unto your wisdoms the Mayor and communalty Canterbury one of
the eldest cities of England.
of the city of Canterbury, forasmuch as the same city is one of the eldest
Cities of this Realm, and therein is the principal See of the spiritual
estate of the same realm, and which city also is most in sight of all
strangers of the parts beyond the sea resorting into this said Realm and
departing out of the same, and because of the glorious Seints that there lie
shrined is greatly named throughout Christiandome unto which city also is
great repair of much of the people of this Realm as well of estates as other
in way of pilgrimage to visit the said Saints. And it is so that the same
City is oftentimes full foul, noyous, and uneasy to all the Inhabitants of
the same, as to all other persons resorting thereunto, whereof oftentimes is
spoken much disworship in diverse places as well beyond the Sea as on this side
the sea which cannot be remedied in any wise but if the said city might be
paved whereunto the more party of the Inhabitants of the same City having
Burgeses houses or tenements in the same be well willed and agreeable, so that
there might authority be had to compel other such persons as have burgeses
houses lands or tenements therein to be contributory to do the same. Please it
therefore your wisdoms the premises considered, and that the Mayor and
Communalty have no lands nor tenements nor other yearly revenewes in common
whereof they may make or sustain any such payment, to pray the King our
Sovereigne Lord that he by the advice and assent of the Lords spiritual and
temporal of this his Realm in this present Parliament assembled and by
authority of the same Parliament to ordain, establish and enact that all and
every person and persons being seized of meses or tenements within or adjoining
to the principal streat of the said City which begins at the gate called
Westgate set in the West part of the Westgate.
said City and extends from thence Eastward unto a gate called Newingate set
in the East part of the said City, and in or adjoining to another streat of
the said City which Newingate.
begins at a place called Burgate set in the East part of Burgate.
the same City, and extends from thence Westward unto a place of the same
city called the Bulstake where the Bullstake.
other market of the same City is usually kept, or in or adjoining to another
streat extending Westward from the same place called the Bulstake unto the
gate of the house of the Blackfriars of the same city, or in or adjoining to
another street of the same City extending from the same Black-Friersgate.
place called the Bulstake Southward unto the church of St Andrew in the same
city, and from the Church Southward unto another place of the same City being
in the parish of St Margrett in the said City called the Iron-Crosse into The
Iron-Crosse.
which streats and places commonly is more resort as well of strangers as of
other than to any other streat or place within the said City; by reasonable
premunition to the same person or persons, or to the inhabitants or occupiers
of the same Burgeses meses or tenements by the Mayor, Sheriff and Chamberlyns
of the same city for the time being or by two of them or by any of their
Ministers or servants to be made, as oftentimes as shall need or reasonably
require hereafter make or do to be made, repair or do to be repaired
sufficient and sufficiently pavement before all and every the said Burgeses
meses or tenements set lying or adjoining in or to any of the said streats or
places, immediately from the said Burgeses meses or tenements and every parcel
thereof unto the midst of the streat before them and every of them, and unto
such place or places of the streat before them and every of them as shall be
thought fit to the Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriff, Burgesses and Chamberlyns of the
same City for the time being or to the more part of them in number the canell
place before the said Burgeses meses or tenants or before any of them to be made.
And if any person or persons having any burgeses meses or tenements set lying
or adjoining in or to any of the said streats or places above rehearsed after
such premunition to them or to any of them made, make not or do to be made,
repair nor do to be repaired the said Canell or such pavements sufficiently
after the manner and form above rehearsed within six months nex after such
premunition to them or to any of them to be made: Then the Mayor, Sheriff and
the Chamberlyns of the said City for the time being, or two of them have full
power and authority to make or do to be made, repair or do to be repaired as
the cause and time of necessity shall require, the said pavement sufficiently
in form aforesaid before the said Burgeses meses and tenements and every of
them which shall happen not to be made or repaired sufficiently in the manner
aforerehersed within other six months the said first six months next ensuing.
And that it shall be lawful to the said Mayor, Sheriff and Chamberlyns of the
said City for the time being and to every of them to take sufficient distress
within every place of the said city of the goods and chattells of such person
or persons as shall happen hereafter to be found in default of making or
repairing of such pavement, or of the goods and chattells of the Iuhabitants or
occupiers of the same Burgeses meses or tenements before which such default
shall happen to be fo^nd, to the value of such reasonable costs and expenses as
shall happen to be due to the said Mayor, Sheriff or Chamberlyns of the said
city for the time being or any of them in making or repairing of the said
pavement, and the said distress to do praise by the oaths of four, three or
two honest persons of the same City, and it sell, and the money thereof coming
retain to him or them that shall happen to make or do to be made, or repair
or do to be repaired the said pavement for the costs or expenses by them or any
of them done in making or repairing of the same pavement. And the surplusage
of the money coming of the said goods or cattells so sold; if any be over the
said costs and expenses, be delivered to him or them that were owners of the
said goods and cattells so taken and praised before the time of the said taking.
And also that every person and persons having any rent in fee-simple,
fee-tayle, term of life or term of years, so the term exceed ten years
going out of any of the said Burgeses meses or tenements, set lying or
adjoining in or to the said streats or places or in or to any of them be
contributors and contributory, chargeable and charged by dew premunition to
them and every of them in manner and form before rehearsed. Caetera desunt.


Composition between the Parson of St Margaret Scriptura ixna.
and the Hospital of Poor Priests.
HEc est compositio facta inter Rectorem ecclesiae sanctae Margaretae Cantuar.
and hospitale pauperum sacerdotum, quod Capellanus qui in Capella pauperum
sacerdotum Cantuariae quae Iura Rectoris.
infra limits parochiae sanctae Margaretae est constituta pro tempore
ministrabit, inspectis sacrosanctis jurabit, quod nullas oblationes, nullas
decimas, nullas obventiones ad ecclesiam beatae Margaretae Iure parochiali
pertinentes, in praejudicium ipsius ecclesiae ex certa scientia recipiet, and
si forte receperit ignoran^er, eas cum omni integritate Rectori ^psius
ecclesiae restituet. Omnes vero servientes in dicto hospitale sive mares sive
feminae a Rectore dictae ecclesiae sanctae Margaretae sacramenta spiritualia
recipient sicut parochiani, and in festivitatibus in quibus oblatio debetur
ecclesiis, ad praedictam ecclesiam venient sicut alii parochiani facturi. Idem
etiam tam in laicis quam in clericis peregrinis si in dicto Hospitali moram
faciant undecunque sint observabitur: Ita quod si aliquem ex talibus personis
peregrinis in dicto Hospitali infirmari contigerit, spiritualia a praedicto
Rectore recipiet, and ecclesiam sanctae Margaretae si ipsum in dicto Hosp. mori
contigerit prosua respiciet facultate. Capellani vero and clerici degentes Iura
Capellanorum.
ibidem ab eo qui in spiritualibus a Rectore ecclesiae beatae Margaretae cum
sacramento ut dictum eis praeficitur praedicta recipiant sacramenta and liberam
habebunt potestatem ubi voluerint eligendi sepulturam. Habebunt etiam
potestatem sine calumpnia recipiendi annalia sive tricennialia ex devotione
fidelium qui non sunt parochiani ecclesiae sanctae Margaretae, vel etiamsi sint
parochiani, dum tamen non procurent hoc fieri in praejudicium matricis
ecclesiae; quod si fuerit ab eis procuratum, and super hoc convinci potuerint,
plena restituent quicquid taliter perceperunt. Insuper pro orto quem habent in
Binnewitht unam libram cymini solvent annuatim pro decimis praedicto Rectori,
and in festo sanctae Hortus in Binnewiht.
Margaretae, super altar ipsius ecclesiae matricis in signum Iuris parochialis
pro loco in quo habitant duos cereos trium librarum offerri faciant vel december
et octo denarios. Si vero contigerit quod aliquis separatim ab eis domum in
Binewith sitam inhabitaverit, erit parochianus sanctae Margaretae sicut antea
fuit. Item de tenemento Domini Abbatis and conventus sancti Augustini nullum
sibi tenementum perquirent nisi de eorum voluntate, and si aliqd' tenementum
alterius Domini in praedicta parochia quocunque titulo perquisierint, salvum
erit matrici ecclesiae jus quod in eo prius habuerat. Item si forte aliquo
tempore in praedicto Hosp. Capellanus non praefuerit, sed laicus procurator:
idem ad consimile sacramentum tactis sacrosanctis se astringet scilicet ad
observationem praemissorum. In diebus vero dominicis and aliis festivitatibus
in quibus ex consuetudine oblationes fiunt generales in ecclesiis, non
celebrabunt missam in dicto Hosp. donec Tempus missae celebrandae in Hospitali.
Evangelium in ecclesiabeatae Margaretae sit perlectum sive missa consummata,
nisi de licentia hoc fiat ecclesiae memoratae Rectoris, and his diebus
parochianos sanctae Margaretae non admittent nisi cum missa in ecclesia sanctae
Margaretae fuerit expleta. Campanas Campanae Hospitali prohibitae.
vero in praedicto loco non habebunt. Et si qua partium praedictarum contra
formam hic scriptam venire praesumpserit, unam marcam nomine poenae totiens
solvet Abbati sancti Augustini ^aena transgressoris.
and Archidiacono Cantuariae vel cui viderint secundum Dominum libere
conferendam, quotiens contravenerit, compositione nihilominus firmum robur
optinente. In cujus Rei testimonium tam Abbas sancti Augustini quam
Archidiaconus Cantuar. huic compositioni sigilla sua apponi fecerunt.

Composition between Christ-Church and St Augustines, Scriptura xma.
about lands lying by the Campanile of Christ-Church.
RIchardus Dei gratia Cantuar. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas and
Apostolicae sedis Legatus Vniversis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis ad quos
praesentes literae pervenerint eternam in Domino Salutem. Ad omnium volumus
noticiam pervenire qualiter dilecti filii nostri Benedictus Prior and Conventus
ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. cum Rogero electo monasterii sancti Augustini and
Conventus ejusdem loci quasdam terras suas pro quibusdam terris ad idem
monasterium pertinentibus commutaverunt. Praefatus siquidem Electus and
Conventus sancti Augustini quasdam terras habuerunt ex part meridiana
cimiterii nostri juxta Campanile nostrum in Cantuar. scilicet terras Gervasii
de Cornhelle unde solebant haber^ annuatim us and xd terram Willielmi
Furbatoris unde habebant ijs terram Willielmi filii Ricardi unde habebant viij
de quibus reddebant ad firmam Domini Regis annuatim xxd. unde monachi nostri
eos acquietabant erga Regem, terram etiam Baldwini presbiteri and Davidis de
Chert fratris ejus unde habebant ijs terram Philippi Parmentarii unde habebant
xxd terram quae fuit Everwaker unde habebant xvijd. Terram quae fuit Mudekyn
and Sedegos quae reddebat eis xxd. Summa quorum reddituum est xxs and xd. and
terram in qua quaedam Capella constructa Causa finalis hujus Compositionis.
fuerat. Quoniam vero hae praedictae terrae nobis and ecclesiae nostrae
periculosae fuerunt propter crebra incendia: Idcirco praedictus Rogerus Electus
and conventus praenominati Monasterii ad preces Domini nostri Henrici Regis
Angliae and nostras concesserunt and dederunt and assignaverunt in escambium
nobis and ecclesiae nostrae has terras liberas and quietas ab omni questione
and querela, salvo quidem jure illorum qui praenominatas terras de Monasterio
sancti Augustini tenebant. Nos autem pro jam dictis terris concessimus dedimus
and assignavimus in concambium eidem Electo and Conventui ad electionem ipsorum
quasdam de terris nostris liberas and quietas ab omni questione and querela,
salvo quidem jure illorum qui terras illas de nobis tenere solebant, scilicet
terram Roberti filii Richardi Flatbold, etc. ut in Compositione before poterit
apparere: as Thorn cuts it off, and that because (as he adds) Vbi situantur
non invenitur scriptum. Summa quorum reddituum est xxijs ijd. Cumque volumus
hanc commutationem and escambium hincinde sic de utriusque partis consensu
factum firmiter and inviolabiliter observari ipsam commutationem praesentis
scripti nostri patrocinio confirmamus and sigilli nostri munimine roboramus.
Facta est autem haec commutatio anno Incarnationis Dominicae Millesimo
Centesimo septuagesimo septimo, Regnante illustrissimo Anglorum Rege Henrico
secundo.

Concerning the School at Canterbury. Scriptura xja.

ACta and processus super statuscolar: ecclesiae sancti Martini juxta Cant.
coram m10 Roberto de Mallingg generali Commissario Cant. primo viva voce, and
post per specialem commissionem Domini W. Archiepiscopi Anno Domini 1321. inter
magistrum Radulphum de Waltham Rectorem scolarum Civitatis Cant. and m^um
Robertum de Henney Rectorem ecclesiae sancti Martini juxta Cant.

Commissio.
VVAlterus permissione divina Cantuar. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas
dilecto filio Commissario nostro Cantuar. Salutem, gratiam and benedictionem,
Cum nuper tibi praecepimus viva voce ut in negotio tangente m^m Radulfum
rectorem scolar' grammaticalium Civitatis nostrae Cantuar. and magistrum
Robertum, Rectorem ecclesiae sancti Martini juxta Cant. ac ejusdem loci
Rectorem scolarum, ex officio, authoritate nostra procederes, and inquisita
veritate idem negotium debito fine terminares, dictum negotium de quo miramur
adhuc coram te pendet indecisum. Quocirca tibi committimus and mandamus
quatenus ulterius in dicto negotio authoritate praedicta procedas, and finem
sententiando, previa ratione, celeritate qua poteris, imponere non omittas.
Dat' Cantuariae tertio Non. Ianuarii Anno Domini Millesimo trecentesimo
vicesimo primo.

Inquifitio.
DOminus Richardus rector ecclesiae de Monketon. Dominus Galfridus Vicar.
ecclesiae de Chyleha^. Dominus Stephanus de Wyks. Dominus Nich. capellanus
sancti Sepulchri. Dominus Theob. Vicar. ecclesiae S. Pauli. Dominus Simon
Rector eccles. S. Mariae de Castro. Dominus Thomas Rector eccles. S. Petri.
Dominus Johannes Rector eccles. omnium sanctor. Dominus Johannes Rector eccles.
S. Mich. Magister Robertus de Honynton. Alexander de Elemosinaria. Johannes le
Taillour. Simon at Fermerye. Johannes de Stablegate. Johannes de Strode.
Robertus de sancto Martino.
Iurati dicunt quod non debent esse plures gramatici in Schola sancti Martini
nisi xiij. and hoc se dicunt scire ex relatu bonorum and fide dignorum ab
antiquo and dicunt quod semper consuevit Rector Scholarum Cant. Scholas sancti
Martini per se vel suos propter numerum scolar. visitare. Dicunt etiam quod
quando hostiarius vel submonitor scolar. Cant. propter numerum scolarium scolas
sancti Martini visitavit, scholares sancti Martini absconderunt se usque ad
numerum xiij. and hoc se dicunt scire ex relatu fidedignorum ab antiquo. De
aliis scholaribus in scholis sancti Martini alphabetum, psalterium and cantum
addiscentibus non est certus numerus limitatus, ut dicunt.

Sententia diffinitiva.
IN Dei nomine Amen. Cum nuper inter mrum Radulphum, Rectorem scolarum
Civitatis Cant. ad collationem venerabilis patris Domini W. dei gratia Cant.
Archiepisc. totius Angliae Primatis spectantium, and mrum Robertum de Henny,
Rectorem ecclesiae sancti Martini juxta Cant. and ejusdem loci scolar. Rectorem
ad dictam ecclesiam sancti Martini de patronatu ejusdem existentem
pertinentium, super eo quod idem magister Radulphus praetendebat dictum mrum
scolarum S. Martini habere deberet in scolis suis xiij. scolares in gramatica
erudiendos duntaxat. Idemque magist' scolarum S. Martini omnes indistincte ad
scolas suas confluentes in praejudicium scolarum Civitatis praedictae and
contra consuetudinem admittere, and in suis scolis tenere and docere in
grammatica praesumpsit, orta fuisset materia questionis; tandem dictus
venerabilis pater utriusque loci Patronus and Diocesanus, nobis Commissario suo
Cant. generali tam vivae vocis oraculo, quam subsequenter literatorie hujusmodi
questionem seu negotium per viam inquisitionis ex officio commisit fine debito
terminandum. Nos igitur Commissarius praedictus magistros utriusque sc^larum
praedict. and Recto^em ecclesiae S. Martini praedict. coram nobis fecimus
evocari, and super dicto negotio viros fidedignos clericos specialiter juratos
inquiri fecimus diligenter. Qua inquisitione facta puplicata and dictis
magist^is and Rectori copia decreta, nihil dicto contra inquisitionem vel
probato, set ad audiendum pronuntiationem nostram die eisdem praefixo. Quia Nos
Comm^ssarius antedictus inve^ quod magister Scolarum S. Martini xiij. scolares
duntaxat in gramatica per ipsum scolarum magistrum quicunque fuerit docendos
habere and tenere ac docere debet ex consuetudine ab antiquo, illam
consuetudinem, authoritate, nobis in hac part commissa decerminus observandam.
Inhibentes magistro scolarum S. Martini ne plures scolares ultra numerum
praedict. in suis scolis in gramatica docendos admittat de cetero, nec
consuetudinem praedictam infringere praesumat quoquo modo.

Ab ista sententia praedictus magister Robertus appellavit ad sedem
Apostolicam, and pro tuitione Curiae Cant. Vnde Officialis Cur. Cant. inhibuit
Commissario, etc.
OFficialis Curiae Cantuar. discreto viro magistro Roberto de Mallingg
Commissario Cantuar. generali Salutem in autore salutis. Ex part m^i Roberti
de Henney Rectoris ecclesiae sancti Martini Cant. nobis extitit intimatum, quod
cum ipse ac praecessores seu praedecessores sui Rectores in ecclesia praedicta
omnes and singuli, temporibus suis, a tempore cujus contrarii memoria hominum
non existit fuerint, and adhuc sit idem magister Robertus de Henney nomine suo
and ecclesiae suae praed' in possessione ve^ quasi Iuris habendi scolas
grammaticales in dicta ecclesia S. Martini seu infra septa ejusdem,
magistrosque ad informandum and instruendum in art gramaticali quoscunque
illuc ea de causa accedentes ibi praeficiendi seu deputandi, and eos libere
admittendi, informandi and instruendi in art gram' praedicta. Ex part m^
Roberti de Henney in possessione vel quasi Iuris hujusmodi ut praemittitur
existentis, ac metuentis ex quibusdam causis probabilibus and veresimilibus
conjecturis grave sibi and ecclesiae suae praedictae circa praemissa
praejudicium posse generari in futurum, ne quis circa praemissa vel eorum
aliquid quicquam in ipsius vel ecclesiae suae praedictae praejudicium
attemptaret seu faceret aliqualiter adtemptari, ad sedem Apostolicam, and pro
tuitione Curiae Cant. extitit ut asseritur palam and public ac legitime
provocatum. Set vos ad instantiam seu procurationem cujusdam Radulfi magistrum
scolarum Cant. se praetendentis, provocatione praedicta quae vos veresimiliter
non latebat non obstante, post and contra eam, pradictum mrum Robertum de
Henney, q^uo minus possessione sua hujusmodi libere gaudere potuit, contra
justitiam m^lestastis, inquietastis ac multipliciter perturbastis, ac tresdecim
scolares duntaxat in dictis scolis ecclesiae sancti Martini and non plures
admitti debere minus veraciter pretendentes, cuidam magistro Iohanni le Bucwell
mro scolarum hujusmodi per dictum m^um Robertum de Henney praefecto seu
deputato, ne ultra 13. scolares hujusmodi inibi admitteret seu haberet
inhibuistis minus just in ipsius mri Roberti de Henney and ecclesiae suae
praedictae praejudicium, dampnum non modicum and gravamen. Vnde ex part
ejusdem mri Roberti sentientis se and ecclesiam suam praedictam ex hiis and
eorum quolibet per vos indebite praegravari, ad dictas sedem and Curiam extitit
ut asseritur legitime appellatum. Quare vobis inhibemus, and per vos omnibus
and singulis quibus jus exigit inhiberi volumus and mandamus ut pendente in
Curia Cant. hujusmodi tuitoriae appellationis negotio quicquam hac occasion in
dictae partis appellantis praejudicium attemptetis vel attemptent, faciatis aut
faciant aliqualiter attemptari, quo minus liberam habeat appellationis suae
prosecutionem prout justum fuerit. Citetis etiam seu citari faciatis
peremptory dictum Radulfum partem ut praemittitur appellatam quod compareat
coram nobis vel nostro Commissario in ecclesia beatae Maria de Aldermarichurche
London sexto die Iuridico post festum sancti Martini yemalis in dicto tuitoriae
appellationis negotio processurum, facturum and recepturum quod justitia
suadebit. De die vero receptionis praesentium, and quod in praemissis feceritis
nos vel nostrum Commissarium dictis die and loco certificetis per l^teras
vestras patentes harum seriem continentes. Dat. London' xij. Kalen. November.
Anno Domini 1323.

Sed quia pars appellans appellationem suam praefatae Curiae Cantuar.
suggestam, sufficienter prout debuit non probavit, pars appellata dimissa fuit
ab examine dictae Curiae Cant. per literam subscriptam.
THomas de Themnstr' Curiae Cantuar. examinator generalis Domini Officialis
ejusdem Curiae in ipsius and Domini Decani ecclesiae beatae Mariae de Arcubus
London Commissarii sui generalis absentia Commissarius, discreto viro magistro
Roberto de Mallingg Commissario Cant. generali Salutem in authore Salutis. Cum
nos in tuitoriae appellationis negotio quod in dicta Curia vertebatur, inter
mrum Robertum de Henney Rectorem ecclesiae S. Martini partem ut suggeritur
appellantem ex part una, and Mrum Radulfum mrum scolarum Cant. partem
appellatam ex altera legitime procedentes, dictam partem appellatam eo quod
pars appellans praedictam appellationem suam praefatae Curiae in hac part
suggestam, prout debuit, non probavit, ab examine dictae Curiae duxerimus
dimittendum. Tenore praesentium vobis intimamus quod inhibitione quacunque sub
dat' London' xii. Kalen. No. Anno Domini Millesimo trecentesimo vicesimo tertio
a Curia Cant. in hac part impetrata, and vobis directa non obstante, libere
poteritis exequi quod est vestrum. Dat' London. xiijtio. Kalen. Aprilis Anno
Domini supradicto. Scrutinie in Dunstans Tomb.


Scrutinium factum circa feretrum beatissimi patris Dunstani Scriptura xija.
Archiepiscopi, ex mandato Reverendissimi patris ac Dni Domini Willielmi Warham
Cantuar. Archiepisc. and Domini Thomae Goldston sacrae paginae professoris,
ejusdemque ecclesiae Prioris dignissimi Anno Domini 1508. die 22do Aprilis.
VIcesimo die Aprilis Anno Domini 1508. quo die tunc accidebat coena Domini* ex
mandato ipsius Domini Archiepisc. and Prioris, deputati sunt tres vel quatuor
de confratribus ad ejusmodi opus aptiores and ferventiores, ut in vespere, post
quam fores ecclesiae essent clausae, ne laici hujusmodi negotio adessent, ad
scrutinium faciendum circa feretrum sancti Dunstani, ut ipsi explorarent qua
via faciliori possent ejus sacrae reliquiae videri: ea ratione ut omni
ambiguitate and scrupulo semotis, oculata fide rei veritas probaretur. Hii
quidem fratres in ipsa noctis tempestate non tam diligenter quam prudenter ad
id quidem perduxerunt opus, ut anteluc^num oculis perspicere potuerunt arcam
quandam plumbeam ubi sacrae ejus reliquiae recondebantur. Quae quidem arca
deposita fuit and immersa Situs Feretri.
in opere lapideo feretri ex part australi summi altaris scituati. Ea siquidem
arca intus erat lignea exterius, interiusque plumbo undique cooperta and clavis
omni in loco affixa, adeo ut inter clavum and clavum non erat spatium relictum
latitudinis humanae palmae. Erat quoque haec arca longitudinis juxta
longitudinem operis lapidei ipsius feretri, viz septem pedum, latitudinis autem
circiter pedis cum dimidio. Era^que in omni sua part ferreis ligamentis
circumducta tutissimis adeo ut vix possit discerni via possibilis illam
aperiendi. Confisi tamen in divino auxilio and sancti Patroni suffragio,
instituit Dominus Archiepisc. cum Priore ut quidam confratres in sequenti
nocte, laicis semotis, iterum opus aggrederentur. Quod and factum est. Sex enim
de confratribus per Priorem ad hoc deputati una cum open aliorum quos
convocarunt ingenti sudore hanc arcam qu^ est maximi ponderis fecerunt supra
opus lapideum sublevari. Id cum fecissent, tandem cum magna difficultate
satagentes an^eriorem partem arcae aperierunt quod profecto facere nequivissent
nisi partem asseris quo in superiori part arca claudebatur effringerent. Eo
sane confracto licuit videre interius ab uno fine arcae usque in aelium finem.
Ibi vero patebat aspectui cista quaedam plumbea: quae quidem cista facta est
non ex plano plumbo, sed art quadam pulcherime fabricata and plicata. Ea vero
aperta, reperta est etiam and alia cista plumbea quasi tabefacta: quae putatur
esse illa in qua ossa sancti Dunstani cum primum sepeliebatur recondebantur.
Intra has duas cistas plumbeas cum aperirentur Quidrepertum
primo reperta est quaedam parva lamina plumbijacens supra pectus corporis. In
qua quidem lamina continebatur haec scriptura. Hic requiescit Sanctus Dunstanus
Archiepiscopus. Et scribitur hic titulus literis Romany. Deinde repertus est
pannus quidam lineus nitidus valde atque integer superpositus corpori sancti
Dunstani. Quo sublevato, apparuit illud sanctissimum organum spiritus sancti
indutum pontificalibus vetustate pro magna part consumptis. Porro apparuit
ibidem testa capitis quae and tangebatur and osculabatur tam a Domino
Archiepiscopo qui valde mane in crastino sequenti viz. in vigilia Paschae
aderat, quam a Priore ceterisque quamplurimis de conventu monachorum. Cujus
quidem testae partem a reliquo divisam Dominus Archiepiscopus tradidit Priori
ea ratione ut decenter adornaretur, ut inter reliquias ecclesiae venerandam
reponeretur. Denique videbantur and alia ossa diversa tam de brachiis quam de
costis, ac etiam nonnullae massae de carne ejusdem patroni nostri. Quae revera
omnia odore redolebant suavissimo. Ad istud non tam jocundum quam
desideratissimum spectaculum affuere prope omnes de conventu. Ad hoc etiam
invitati Testes.
sunt per Dominum Archiepiscopum hi capellani de familia sua, viz. Prior
Dovoriae Episcopus Suffraganeus ejus, nomine Johannes Thornton Doctor sacrae
theologiae. mr Cuthbertus Tunstall, Doctor legum, Cancellarius ejusdem Domini
Archiepiscopi. Mr Thomas Wellys, Doctor theologiae, Mr Robertus Wekys. M^
Andreas in artibus mag. Magr. Johannes Pers bacalarius in legibus. Hi vero
vocati sunt ad videndum and testimonium perbibendum e^rum quae superius scripta
sunt. Erant interea ad id ipsum advocati per Dominum Archiepiscopum tres
notarii publici, puta mr Johannes Baret scriba actorum praerogativae ecclesiae
Cant. Mr Johannes Colman scriba Consistorii Cant. and Mr Willielmus Potkyn
scriba Iurisdictionis immediatae. Eos notarios Dominus Archiepiscopus
requisivit ut singulis quae superius scripta sunt de scrutinio facto circa
reliquias sancti Dunstani diligenter per eos insp^is and consideratis,
instrumentam publicum de eisdem conficerent, idque complere super depositione
testium praedictorum polliciti sunt. Haec cum peracta fuissent, tunc ad
mandatum Domini Archiepiscopi arca superius dicta iterum clausa est firmissimis
tam opere ligneo quam plumbeo clavis quamplurimis affixa tu^issimis. Idque
factum est in praedicta vigilia Paschae. Nec fores ecclesiae antea
aperiebantur, quam confratres nostri id operis explevissent.

A Grant or Demise of part of the demeasnesse of Reculver Monastery made by
Archbishop Agelnoth Scriptura xiija.
to two of his Ministers.
IN nomine Domini nostri Ihu Christi. Ego Aegelnothus peccator, Servus servorum
Dei, and minister ecclesiae Christi, Anglorum quoque licet indignus
Archiepiscopus. Notum volo esse
omnibus nostrae mortalitatis Successoribus, quod quandam terram dominicam
sanctae Mariae Raculfensis Monasterii, L. scilicet agros in praestariam annuo
duobus ministris meis, Alfwoldo and Aedredo, ex consensu fratris nostri
Givehardi Decani ejusdem ecclesiae sanctae matris Dei, ut illam terram habeant
non longius quam ipsi placuerit Givehardus Dcanus.
Decano, vel ejus Successori. Quamdiu vero eam tenuerint, singulis annis dent
in ipso monasterio Deo famulantibus rectam decimam frugum and omnium pecorum
quae in ipsa terra nutriunt, and pro censu L. denarios, and de subjectis
pascuis j. pensam caseorum and si quid fracturae contigerit. Vbi vero eidem
fratri nostro Decano vel ejus successori visum fuerit ut illam terram possint
fructificare dominicatui suo, recedant ab ea, absque querela and
contradictione, quia Dominica est sanctae Mariae, nec eam sibi vel posteris
suis ullo modo possint defendere. Quod si praesumpserint, and ipsi and fautores
sui iram Dei and excommunicationem omnium Dei fidelium incurrant, and legem
patriae Domino suo solvant. Hujus praestariae traditionis testes sunt fratres
ejusdem Monasterii, and quidam milites mei qui subter sunt ordinate descripti.

Ego Givehardus subscripsi. Ego Fresnotus subannotavi. mon'
Ego Tancrad' recognovi. mon'
Ego Milo assignavi. mon'
Ego Siward contestificavi. miles
Ego Godri^ testis fui. miles
Ego Wlfi. miles
Ego Wlsige. miles
Ego Radwine. miles.
Ego Ordnoth. miles.
Ego Alfric. miles. hog.
Ego Osward. miles.
Ego Aelfhelm. miles.
Ego Lefsona. miles.
Ego Aelfric. miles. quatm'
Ego Sibriht. miles.
Ego Aelwine. miles.
Ego Haimericus presbiter jubente Domino Agelnotho Archiepiscopo hanc cartulam
conscripsi die Nativitatis sancti Iohannis Baptistae.



The Kentish manors, in the Conquerors time, belonging Scriptura xiiija.
both to the Archbishop and Monks of Canterbury, and recorded in the Book of
Doomsday.
De maneriis Archiepiscopatus. De Stursaete.
STursaete est manerium Archiepiscopi, and in Id est Tempore Ed. Regis.
T. E. R. se defendebat pro vii. sullinges, and nunc similiter, and est
appretiatum hoc quod est in dominio xl. lib. Et nunc habet Archiep. xx. and v.
burgenses, qui reddunt x. sol. de gablo, and ex his supradictis vij. sullin'
habet Godefridus dapifer unum sulline de Archiepiscopo Tenitune, and est
appretiatum C. sol.

Adhuc autem and Vitalis habet inde unum jugum terrae de Archiep. and est
appretiatum xxs. Hamo vero tenet inde similiter dimidium sulling' quod tenuit
Alric Big a 'pore Archiepiscopi in T. E. R. and est appretiatum C^.

Rodbertus de Hardes tenet inde unum jugum terrae ex isdem sull' and est
appretiatum xxxs. and ex his vij. sullin' habet Archiep. unum sull' apud
sanctum Martinum; and de eodem sullino habet Radulfus Camerarius in feodo
medietatem de Archiepiscopo and valet iiijl. and dominium valet vijl.

Et in Canterberi^ sunt vij. burgenses, qui reddunt huic manerio viijs. and
iiij. denarios de gablo.

Et inibi sunt iterum xxx. and ij. ma^surae and unum molendinum quae tenent
clerici sancti Gregorii ad eorum ecclesiam Ibique manent xij. burgenses qui
reddunt eis xxxv^. and molen linum reddit us.

Adhuc etiam tenet Aegelwardus iij. juga in (...) unde reddidit T. E. R. and
adhuc reddit altari sanctae Trinitatis xijs. and est appretiatum xls.

Albold vero tenet de supradictis sull' unum jugum Wic, and est de terra
monachorum sanctae Trinitatis, quod est appretiatum xxxs.

Hic finitur hundredus de Stursaete.

In Fordwic habet Archiepiscopus vij. mansuras terrae quae modo non faciunt
servitium ad mare ut in T. E. R.

De Wingeham.
Wingeham est proprium manerium Archiepiscopi and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro
xl. sull' and nunc pro xxx. and v. and valet Cl. hoc quod Archiepiscopus habet
inde.

Et ex isdem sull' habet Willielmus de Archis unum sull' Fleotes ab
Archiepiscopo in feodo and valet vjl.

Et Vitalis habet j. sull' and valet xlvs.

Wibertus and Arnoldus habent iij. sull' q' valent xijl.

Et Heringod habet inde j. sull' december agros minus and valet xls.

Et Godefridus Archibalistarius habet inde j. sull' and dimid' and valet Cs.

De Burn.
Burns est proprium manerium Archiep. and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro vj.
sull' and nunc similiter, and est appretiatum xxxl. and est in Handret de
Berham.

De Petham.
Peteham est proprium manerium Archiep, and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro vij.
sull', and nunc similiter, and est appretiatum xxl.

Et ex istis sull' habet Godefridus Dapifer dimid. sull' quod pertinet. ad
vestime^a monachorum, id est Suurtling.

Et Nigellus habet unum sull' and unum jugum terrae quae est appretiata xls.

Hoc est in hundredo de Peteham.

De Aldintune.
In hundredo de Bilicholt habet Archiepiscopus unum manerium, Aldintune, and in
T. E. R. se defendebat pro xxj. sull', and nunc pro xx. and valet Cl. and vij.

Et ex his habet Will' de Archis unum manerium stutinges quod Aelfere tenuit de
Archiep. and tunc defendebat se proj. sull' and dimid', and nunc pro uno, and
valet xl.

Item ex supradictis sull' de Aldintune habet Archiep. dimid. jugum and dimid.
virgam in Limines and valet xijl. and tam' qui tenet reddit xvl. de firma.

In Rumene sunt xxv. burgenses qui pertinent ad Aldintune.

De Limminge.
In Limwarlethe in hundret de Noniberge habet Archiepisc. in suo dominio unum
manerium Limminges quod T. E. R. se defendebat pro vij. sull' and nunc
similiter.

Rodbertus filius Watsonis habet ex his ij. sull' in feodo.

Et Rodbertus de Hardes dimid. sull'.

Et Osbertus Pasfora dimidium jugum.

Et in maresco de Rumene jacet unum sull' Aelmesland, de elemosina monachorum
sanctae Trinitatis, and non est de supradictis sull'.

Et de isto sull' habet Will' Folet unum jugum, id est, Sturtune.

Et de eodem sull' habet supradictus Rodbertus tria juga. i. Ordgareswice, and
Cassetvisle and Eadruneland.

De Raculf.
Raculf est manerium Archiepiscopi and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro viij.
sull' and est appretiatum xl. and ij. lib. and v. sol. tres minutes minus.

De Northewode.
Nordewode est manerum Archiepiscopi and in T. E. R. se d^fendebat pro xiij.
sull', and nunc similiter, and est appretiatum Ll. us.

Et ex iis sull' habet Vitalis de Canturberie unum sull' and unum jugum, and in
Tanet sull' and dimid. and etiam in Macebroc habet xij. agros and di' sull' ab
Archiepiscopo. Et Ezilamerth and tota haec terra est appretiata xiiijl. and us.
and vjd. Haec maneria habet Archiepisc. in hundret de ipso Raculf.

De Boctune,
Boctuna est manerium Archiepiscopi and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro v. sull'
and di' and nunc similiter, and fuit appretiatum in T. E. R. xl. Et
Archiepiscopus habet inde Cs. and xv. and iij. denarios de gablo. Nunc autem
valet xxl. Sed tamen reddit xx. and v. lib. de firma. and Archiepiscopus habet
suum gablum sicut prius.

Ricardus Constabularius habet inde unum manerium Gravenai in feodo ab
Archiepiscopo quod in T. E. R. se defendebat pro uno sull', and nunc similiter
and valet vjl. Hanc terram habet Archiepise. in Hundret de Boctune.

De Taeneham.
Teneham est manerium Archiepiscopi and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro v. sull'
and dimid. and nunc similiter, and est appretiatum Ll.

Dimidium sull' terra tenet Godefridus de Melling in scapai ab Archiepiscopo
quod valet iiijl. and tn' reddit Cs.

Oswardus vero tenuit hoc idem sull' ab Archiepiscopo Cantuarberiae in T. E. R.
Hanc praedictam terram habet Archiepiscopus in Hundret de Tenham.

De Cerringes.
Cerringis est proprium manerium Archiepiscopi and in T. E. R. se defendebat
pro viij. sull', and nunc pro vij. quia Archiepisc. habet aliud ad suam
propriam carrucam, and valebat in T. E. R. xxl. and habet inde Archiep. iiijl.
and vijs. de glabo. Nunc vero valet xxxl. sed tn' reddit xll. de firma. Et
Archiep. habet inde gablum sicut prius.

De Plukele.
In eodem Hundredo and in Lest de Wiwarleth habet Archiepiscopus unum manerium
Plukelai in dominio quod in T. E. R. se defendebat pro uno sull' and nunc
similiter and valet xvl. and tam' reddit xxl. de firma. Haec maneria habet
Archiepiscopus in Hundret de Calehela.

De Geldingeham.
Gelingham est proprium manerium Archiepiscopi, and in T. E. R. se defendebat
pro vj. sull' and est apretiatum hoc quod Archiepisc. habet inde in dominio x.
and viij. lib. and hoc quod Anscetillus de Ros and Rodbertus Brutinus habent
xl^. Et tamen reddit Archiepiscopo de firma xx. and v. lib. and xviijs. Hoc
manerium est in hundredo de Certaham.

De Meidestane.
Maeidestane est proprium maneriam Archiepiscopi and in T. E. R. se defendebat
pro x. sull'. Et ex iis tenet Radulfus unum sull' quod est apretiatum ls. Et
Willielmus frater Episcopi Gundulfi ij. sull', and sunt apretiat' xl. Et
Anscetillus de Ros unum sull' quod est apretiatum lxs. Et duo homines habent
inde j. sull', qui reddunt altari sanctae Trinitatis xvjs. and tam valet illud
sull' xxs. Hoc manerium habet hundret in seipso.

De Nordflita.
Nordflita est manerium Archiepiscopi, and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro vj.
sull' and nunc pro v. and est apretiatum xx. and vij. lib. Sed tamen ille qui
tenet reddit inde de firma xxx. and vijl. Et infra leugam de Tonebrig est inde
tantum quod est apretiatum xxxs. Hoc manerium and Meppaham jacent in hundredo
de Tollentr'.

De Bixle.
Bixle est manerium Archiepiscopi and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro iij. sull'
and nunc pro ij. and est apretiatum xxl. and reddit xxxl. and viij^. and est in
hundredo de Ealmestrou, and in dimidio Led de Sutune iiij. sull'.

De Earhede.
Earhede est manerium Archiepiscopi, and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro iiij.
sull' and nunc similiter. Et Osuvardus tenuit illud ab Archiep. in T. E. R. and
est apretiatum xvjl. and tam* reddit xxjl. Hoc manerium habet Archiep. in
hundredo de Litelet j. sull. and dimid.

De Bradestede.
Bradestede tenuit Wlnod cild ab Archiep. T. E. R. Et nunc tenet illud Haimo ab
isto Lanfranco Archiepisc. and tunc defendebat se pro uno sull' and dimid. and
nunc similiter, and est apretiatum xvijl. Istud manerium est in hundredo de
Hostreham.

De Otteford.
Otteford est manerium Archiep. and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro viij. sull'
and nunc pro totidem. Et est apretiatum lxl. Et hoc quod Haimo inde tenet est
apretiatum lxs and x. and hoc quod Rodbertus interpres, and Gosfridus de Ros
inde tenet viijl. and xs. Et hoc quod Ricardus de Tonebrig inde tenet xl. and
xxiij. porcos.

De Sunderhersce.
Sunderhersce est manerium Archiepisc. quod Godwinus tenuit T. E. R. injuste
and Archiepiscopus iste Lanfrancus explatitavit illud contra Episcopum
Bajocensem just per concessum Regis, and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro uno
sull' and dimid. and nunc similiter. Et est apretiatum xviijl. and tam' qui
tenet illud reddit inde xx. and iiij. lib. and unum equitem de firma
Archiepiscopo. Haec muneria sunt in hundredo de Codesede.

De Wroteham.
Wroteham est manerium Archiepiscopi and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro viij.
sull' and est apretiatum xx. and iiij. lib. and tam' ille qui tenet reddit inde
de firma xxx. and v. lib. Et de iis praedict. viij. sull' tenet Will'
Dispensator j. sull' quod est apretiatum iijl. Et Gosfridus de Ros aliud quod
est apretiatum iijl. Et Faremanus unum sull' and dimid. and est apretiat' Cs.
Et hoc quod Ricardus habet xvl. Hic finit hundredus de Wroteham.

De Mellingetes.
Mellingettes est manerium Archiep. and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro ij. sull'
and nunc similiter, and est apretiatum ixl. and tam' reddit de firma
Archiepiscopo xvl. Hoc manerium habet Archiepiscopus in hundredo de Lavercefeld.

De Derente.
Dairente est manerium Archiepiscopi, pro ij. sull' se defendebat in T. E. R.
and nunc similiter. Et est apretiatum xvl. Et xs. habet inde Ricardus infra
Castellum suum, and tam' Archiepiscopus habet in firma sua xviijl.

De Einesforde.
Einesford est manerium Archiepiscopi, and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro vj.
sull', and nunc similiter, and nunc tenet Radulfus filius Hospaci ab
Archiepiscopo, and est apretiatum xxl. Et ex eo habet Ricardus de Tonobrig
tantum quod est apretiatum iijl.

De Hulecumbe.
Hulecumbe tenuit Aelferus in T. E. R. de Archiepiscopo, and defendebat se pro
ij. sull' and dimid. and nunc tenet Comes de Os de Archiepiscopo, and defendit
se pro ij. sull', and est apretiatum xjl.

Archiepiscopus habet iiij. praebendas ad Nuventune, and sunt apretiatae vjl.

Tota summa Clxxx. and vij. sull' and dimid.
Incipiunt maneria Monachorum in Kent.
NOrdunda est manerium monachorum Sanctae Trinitatis, and est de cibo eorum,
and est de hundredo de Cantuarberia, and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro uno
sull'. and ei subjacent C. Burgenses iij. minus qui reddunt viijl. and vjd. de
gablo, and est apretiatum x. and vij. lib. H^c manerium est de Hundret de
Cantuar.

De Eastrege.
Eastrege est manerium monachorum, and de cibo eorum, and in T. E. R. se
defendebat pro vij. sull' and nunc similiter. Et in alia part est dimid. sull'
and unum ioc'. and v. aeceres. Gedinges, and valet xxx. and vij. lib. and x^.
and iijd. inter totum.

De Tilemannestune.
Willielmus Folet tenet j. manerium Tilesmannestune ab Archiepiscopo, and hoc
est de terra monachorum, and in T. E R. se defendebat pro j. sull', and nunc
facit similiter, and valet xxxs.

Iste idem Will' habet de praedicta terra dimid. sull' ab Archiepise. in
Fenglesham, quod tenuit Lenenot in T. E. R. ab Archiepisc. and valet xxs.

Iste idem Will' habet adhuc ab eod. Archiepisc. et de praedicta terra
monachorum Stepenberga quod se defendebat T. E. R. pro dimid' sull', and nunc
facit similiter. Et Godwinus tenuit illud in temp. E. R. ab Archiepisc. Aedzi
and valet xxxs.

Bocland se defendit pro j. jug^. Hic finit hundret de Estrege.


De Sandwic.
Sandwic est manerium sanctae Trinitatis, and de vestitu Monachorum, and est
Leth and Hundredus in seipso, and reddit Regi servitium in mare sicut Dovera,
and homines illius villae antequam Rex eis dedit suas consuetudines reddebant
xvl. quando Archiepiscopus recuperavit reddebat xll. and xl. milia de alecibus.
Et in praeterito anno reddidit Ll. and allecia sicut prius. Et in isto anno
debet reddere lx. and x. lib. and allecia sicut prius. In T. E. R. erant ibidem
Ccc. and vij. mansura. Nunc autem lx. and xvj. plus.

De Muneketune.
Munechetun est manerium monachorum and de cibo eorum, and in T. E. R. se
defendebat pro xx. sull', and nunc se defendit pro x. and viij. and est
apretiatum xll. Hoc praedictum manerium est in hundredo de Tenet.

De Eadesham.
Edesham est manerium monachorum sanctae Trinitatis and de cibo eorum and in T.
E. R. se defendebat pro xvij. sull' and nunc similiter, and de gablo reddit
xvjl. and xvjs. and iiijd. and valet xxxl. de firma and Cs. de gersuma.

Et ex iis sull' habet Rodbertus filius Watsonis ij. id est, Egedorn qui valent
vijl. and tamen qui tenet reddit inde viijl.

Et Rogerius tenet ex his j. sull' ad Beraham q' valet iiijl. Hoc manerium
habet hundret in seipso and in Laed est de aestraie.

De Iiecham.
Iecham est manerium monachorum and de cibo eorum, and in T. E. R. se
defendebat pro iiij. sull', and nunc similiter, and est apretiatum xxx. and ij.
lib. Et hoc quod Will' de Hedesham habet inde viz. j. sull' ad Rocinges valet
vijl. Hoc manerium est in hundret de Dunahamford.

De Saesaltre.
Saesealtre est Burgus monachorum and de cibo, and proprie de coquino eorum. Et
Blittaere tenet illud de monachis. Ibique est terraduarum carrucarum and est
apretiatum Cs. Hoc manerium in nullo hundret est.

De Certeham.
Certaham est manerium monachorum and de vestitu eorum and in T. E. R. se
defendebat pro iiij. sull', and nunc similiter, and est apretiatum xx. and v.
lib. and tamen reddit xxxl.

Godmeresham.
Godmaeresham est manerium monachorum and de vestitu eorum and in T. E. R. se
defendebat pro viij. sull' and est apretiatum xxl. sed tamen reddit xxx. Hic
sinitur hundretus de Feleberga.

De Cert.
Cert and manerium monachorum, and de vestitu little and in T. E. R. se
defendebat pro iij. sull' and nunc similiter and est apretiatum xxl. Istum Cert
est hundret.

De Litlecert.
Litelcert iterum est manerium monachorum and de cibo eorum quod in T. E. R. se
defendebat pro iij. sull', and nunc pro ij. and dimid. and valet viijl.

Et ex iis habet Will' fil' Hermenfridi dimid. sull', id est, Pette, ab
Archiepiscopo in feodo, and reddit inde altari sanctae Trinitatis xx^l. pro
omnibus consuetudinibus and valet xls.

De Apeldre.
In Letd de Limware jacet hundret de Blacctune, in quo Rodbertus de Rumene
tenet ad firman j. manerium Apeldre, and est de cibo monachorum S. Trinitatis
and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro ij. sull' and nunc pro j. and valet xijl. Sed
tamen reddit xvjl. xvjs. and vijd.

De Well.
Waell^ v'est manerium monachorum sanctae Trinitatis, and est de ^ibo eorum,
and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro vij. sull' and nunc pro v. and valet xxiiijl.
and iiijd. and tamen reddit xjl. de firma. Hoc manerium and Litlecert sunt in
hundret de Calehele.

Holingeburne.
Holingburne est manerium monachor. and de cibo eorum, and in T. E. R. se
defendebat pro vj. sull' and nunc similiter.

Et de isto manerio tenet Eps' Baiocensis dimid. sull' ab Archiepisc. per
gablum, and postquam Eps' habuit hoc dimid. sull' nunquam reddit inde scottum.
Et est appretiatum inter t^tum hoc manerium xxxl.

De Boctune.
Ratel tenuit Boctune de Archiepiscopo Cantuarberiae and defendebat sein T. E.
R. pro dimid. sull', and istud dimid. sull' est and fuit de vj. sull' de
Holingeburne. Nunc autem tenet illud Radulfus filius Toroldi ab Archiepisc. and
est apretiatum xl^. Haec maneria sunt in hundret de Haihorna.

De Merseham.
Merseham est manerium S. Trinitatis and de cibo eorum, quod T. E. R. se
defendebat pro vj. sull', and qua^do Archiep^us eum recepit pro v. and dimid.
and modo pro iij. and Hugo de Mundford habet ex iis unius medietatem and valet
xviijl. Hoc manerium jacet in Limwarled in hundret de Langebrige.

De Aelmesland.
Rodbertus filius Watsonis tenet de Priore Cantuarberiae Aelmesland ad firmam,
and praecepto ejusdem Prioris reddit firmam secrestano ejusdem ecclesiae.

De Werehorne.
In Limwarled and in hundret de Hamme habent monachi S. Trinitatis de vestitu
eorum j. manerium Werchorne j. sull', and est apretiatum lxs.

De Broke.
In Laed de Wiworlaed and est hundret in quo tenet Rodbertus de Rumene j.
manerium Broc ad firmam de cibo monachorum, and pro j. sull' defendebat se, and
nunc pro dimidio, and valet iiijl.

De Langeport.
Idem Rodbertus habet in Langport de terra monachorum j. sull' and dimid. de
Archiepisc. quod idem Archiepisc. diratiocinavit contra Epm' Baiocensem. Et
Godwinus Comes tenuit illud, ibique pertinebant and pertinent xx. and j.
burgenses, de quibus Rex in mare habet servitium, ideoque quieti sunt per totam
Angliam, exceptis tribus forisfacturis quae habet Rodbertus in Rumene. Adhuc
vero pertinet ibi j. jugum terrae, and haec omnia valent xvjl.

De Niwendenne.
In Limwarlaed and hundred de Selebrichtindaene habet Archiepiscopus de terra
monachorum j. manerium Niwendene in dominio quod in T. E. R. tenuit Leofric de
praeterito Archiepiscopo, and pro j. sull' se defendebat and subjacebat
Saltwade. Nunc est apretiatum viijl. and x^. garsumae.

De Berewicke.
In Limwarlaed in Hundred de Strate habet Will' de Edesham de terra monachorum
j. manerium de Archiepiscopo Berewic quod tenuit Godricus Decanus and pro
dimid' sull' se defendebat and nunc similiter, and est apretiatum xjl.

De Head and Saltwde.
In Limwarlaed in Hundred de Head habet Hugo de Munford de terra monachorum j.
manerium Saltwode de Archiepiscopo, and comes Godwinus tenuit illud and tunc se
defendebat pro vij. sull' and nunc sunt v. and tam' non scottent nisi pro iij.
and in Burgo de Head sunt cc. and xxv. burgenses qui pertinent huic manerio, de
quibus non habet Hugo nisi iij. forisfacta, and est apretiatum xxviijl. and
vjs. and iiijd.

De Prestetune.
Prestetune est manerium monachor. and est de victu eorum, and in T. E. R. se
defendebat pro j. sull' and nunc similiter, and est apretiatum xvl. Hoc
manerium est in hundred de Feversham.

De Liveland.
Liveland est terra monachorum, quam Ricardus Constabularius tenet in feodo ab
Archiepiscopo, and Decanus Cantuarberiae habuit and tenuit eandem terram and in
T. E. R. se defendebat pro j. sull' and nunc similiter, and valet xxs. Haec
maneria habent monachi in hundred de Feversham.

De Leanham.
Lenham est manerium monachor. quod Godefridus de Mellinges tenet ab
Archiepiscopo in feodo and in T. E. R. se defendebat pro ij. sull' and nunc
similiter, and valet viijl. and tam' reddit xijl. and xs. de firma.

De Fearnlege.
Fernlege est manerium monachorum, and est de cibo eorum, and in T. E. R. se
defendebat pro vj. sull' and est appretiatum xxijl. Et hoc quod Abel monachus
inde tenet per jussum Archiepiscopi and apretiatum vjl. Et hoc quod Ricardus
inde habet infra leugam suam iiijl. and de istis vj. sull' tenet Godefridus
dapifer dimid. sull' quod est apretiatum ixl. Hoc manerium habent monachi in
hundred de Maedestane.

De Pecham.
Pecham est manerium S. Trinitatis de cibo monachorum and in T. E. R. similiter
fuit, and se defendebat pro vj. sull' and ex istis habet nunc Ricardus de
Tunebrige ij. sull' and j. jugum. Et ex istis ij. sull' and joco isto nunquam
scottavit Ricardus postquam habuit ea. Et in T. E. R. fuit hoc manerium
apretiatum xijl. and ^nc viijl. Et praefatapars Ricardi valet iiijl.

Et in Stotingeberga quod tenuit Edricus de E. R. est dimid. sull' unde ipse
Edricus dabat Scottum ad Pecham spontanee, non quod pertineret ad sanctam
Trinitatem, nec ad monachos. Hoc manerium est de hundred de Litelfeld.

De Meapeham.
Mepaham est manerium monachorum, and de cibo eorum, and in T. E. R. se
defendebat pro x. sull' and est apretiatum xxvjl. and infra leugam Ricardi
habetur tantum quod est apretiatum xviijs. and viijd. Hoc manerium habent
monachi in hundred de Toltetem.

De Cliva.
Cliva est manerium monachorum and de vestitu eorum and in T. E. R. se
defendebat pro ij. sull' and dimid. and est apretiatum xvjl. Hoc manerium est
in hundred de Scamele.

De Orpintune.
Orpintuna est manerium monachor. and de vestitu eorum and in T. E. R. se
defendebat pro iij. sull' and nunc pro ij. sull' and dimid. and est apretiatum
xxvl. and tamen reddit de firma xx. and viij. lib.

Et in hoc eodem manerio tenet Malgerus ab Archiepiscopo iij. juga terrae quae
quidem liber homo tenuit in T. E. R. and haec tria juga non scottabant cum hoc
manerio and sunt de explacitatione quam fecit Archiepiscopus contra Epm'
Baiocensem per concessum Regis. Et illa iij. juga sunt appretiata Ls. and ex
iis eisdem sull' habet Dirmannus dimid. sull' ad Kestane.

De Saendlinge.
Elfgaet tenuit Saendlinge ab Archiepiscopo in T. E. R. and nunc tenet Hugo
nepos Herberti ab Episcopo Baiocen. and defendebat se in T. E. R. pro j. sull'
and dimid. and nunc similiter, and est appretiatum viijl. Haec maneria sunt de
hundred Aelmestrin and sunt in medio Led de Sudthune.

De Fremingeham.
Fremingeham est manerium monachor. and de vestitu little quod Ansgodus
Rubitoniensis tenet ab Archiepiscopo, and tn'reddit firmam monachis and in T.
E. R. se defendebat pro j. sull' and nunc similiter, and est appretiatum xjl.
Hoc manerium est in hundred de Clacstane.

De Gravenea.
Graven^ est manerium monachor. and de vestitu eorum quod Richardus
Constabularius tenet in feodo ab Archiepiscopo, and tamen reddit firmam
monachis, and pro j. sull' se defendit, and jacet in hundred de Boctune.

De Hlose.
Hlose est manerium monachorum and de vestitu eorum and pro j. sull' se
defendit quod Abel monachus tenet and firmam monac^is reddit. Hoc sull' jacet
in vj. sull' de Fernlege.

De Surlinge.
In Surlinge est dimid. sull' and pertinet ad vestitum monachor. quod
Godefridus Dapifer tenet and firmam reddit.

De Huntindune.
Huntindune est manerium monachorum and de vestitu eorum and defendit se pro
dimid. sull' quod Godefridus Dapifer tenet and and firmam reddit. Istud dimid.
sull' est de vj. sull' de Fernlege.

De Burricestune.
Burgericestune tenent Wlfricus and Cole and est ibi dimid. sull' and reddunt
inde Cs. altari S. Trinitatis. Hoc dimid. sull' est de x. sull' de Meidestane.

Tota summa Cxxx. and iij. sull' and dimid.
The Record of Archbishop Winchelsey his Inthronization, Scripturae xvj^.
showing in and after what form the Archbishops of Canterbury anciently were
inthronized: and thence entitled. Forma Inthronizationis Archiepiscopi.
Die dominico post festum sancti Michaelis, viz. vjto. No^. October. Anno Dom.
1294. Archiepiscopus Inthronizatus fuit ab Henrico tunc Priore ecclesiae
Christi Cantuar. forma sequenti.
EOdem die summo mane, conventus primam, and totum servitium usque ad magnam
missam celebrarunt, and postea, cappis induti, in choro Dominum Archiepiscopum
expectarunt qui in manerio conventus apud Chertham illa nocte and per quinque
dies praecedentes moram fecerat continuam. Cumque venisset Archiepiscopus ad
portam Cimiterii de equo descendit, and Prior sacris indutus pallium ipsius
Archiepiscopi de manu cujusda^ clerici ejusdem Archiepiscopi in panno mundo
plicatum recepit, and dictum pallium deplicavit and illud Capellano prius cum
Conventu revestito tradidit deferendum, qui in vase argenteo panno serico
candidissimo cooperto pallium deplicatum, manu erecta, conventu praecedente
coram Archiepiscopo and Priore ad magnum altar solempniter deportavit, and
super illud posuit. Conventu vero in Choro remanente Archiepiscipus ante magnum
altar se prostravit orando. Completa oratione and data populo benedictione,
Cantor T^ Deum incepit. Pallio vero super altar remanente, and Seeds lignea
Archiepiscopi.
conventu in choro Te Deum canente Archiepiscopus ad sedem suam ligneam ^n
choro interim declinavit. Quo cantato, Prior, deinde singuli per ordinem ad
altar accedentes pallium osculabantur deinde Archiepiscopum. Hiis peractis
pallium in Vestiarium delatum est: and Archiepiscopus ad cameram suam
declinavit. Cumque Dominus Rex de Sancto Augustino venisset, and ecclesiam
intrasset, Archiepiscopus solempnioribus pontificalibus in Vestiario indutus
and pallio redimitus, cum Priore, and tribus Diaconis, and tribus Sub. diaconis
Cardinalibus chorum intravit. Ad cujus introitum, Cantor Bs' Deum time incepit,
quod conventus Subdiaconi^ Cardinales.
solempniter decantavit. Iuterim vero Archiepisc. and Prior and praedicti
Ministri Altaris stationem fecerunt retro magnum ^eretrum beati Blasii. Seeds
marmorea.
altar sub feretro beati Blasii coram sede marmorea versi ad Orientem. Rex
vero juxta sedem praedictam stando cum multis nobilibus Regni Archiepiscopum
expectavit Rseio vero percantato, Prior subjunxit collectam. Dominus qui de
excelso coelorum. and dicta collecta, Prior Archiepiscopum usque ad praedictam
sedem marmoream perduxit. Et facta modica statione coram sede, Prior subjunxit
aliam collectam. Omnipotens sempiterne Deus. Dicta vero collecta, Prior dictum
Archiepiscopum inter brachia sua reverenter recepit, and ipsum in sede
praedicta intronizavit per verba subscripta quae legit in cedula quam manu
tenebat. In Dei nomine Amen. Authoritate ejusdem ego Henricus Prior istius
ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. intronizo te Dominum Robertum Archiepiscopum in hac
Cant. ecclesia, in qua idem Dominus noster Jesus Christus custodiat introitum
tuum ex hoc nunc and usque in seculum Amen. Lecta cedula vocatisque testibus,
Prior rogavit quendam notarium publicum quod praemissa omnia in publicam formam
redigeret, ad memoriam futurorum. Hiis peractis, octo monachi cantum Benedictus
coram Archiepiscopo in Cathedra sedente sub feretro sancti Blasii alternatim
decantaverunt. Quo cantato, Prior collectam subjunxit. Omnipotens sempiterne
Deus. Qua dicta, Cantor Of sicium missae de Trinitate solempniter incepit.
Archiepiscopus coram sede sua versus ad Orientem incepit Gloria in excelsis,
and postea ibidem collectam missae subjunxit, and lecto Evangelio, Credo ibidem
incepit, and postea Dominus vobiscum ibidem subjunxit. Cantato vero officio, de
sede sua descendit, and ante magnum Altar venit, and oblationem panis and vini
a Cantore prout moris est recepit, and extunc totam missam ibidem complevit,
nec postea illo die ad sedem suam est reversus. Missa celebrata indulgentias
populo concessit, and sacris vestibus in vestiario exutus, cameram suam
intravit, and vestibus festivalibus ad aulam magnam in palatio suo declinavit
pransurus. Rege vero autem ingresso discubuernt omnes and Aula magna Palatii.
spendide sunt refecti. Postmodum vero Rex and Archiepiscopus ac etiam omnes
Praelati and Proceres cameram Archiepiscopi in Palatio sunt ingressi, -- --
prout moris est post cibum sumpturi. Deinde Rex as S. Augustinum rediit, and
Archiepisc. in camera sua remansit. Caeteri vero omnes ad propria cum gaudio
sunt reversi. Praedictae vero intronizationi interfuerunt Dominus Edwardus Rex
Angliae, and E. filius suus, and E. frater ejusdem Regis, ac etiam London'.
Lincoln'. Hereford', Elyen', Norwicen', Roffen' and Dunelm' Episcopi. Et
Glovec', Lincoln', Penebr', Marescal', Hereford' and Warewik' Comites, ac etiam
innumerosa multitudo aliorum Praelatorum and Procerum Regni.

A Grant of power delegated to the Prior of Christ-Church Scriptura ^xvja.
by a Count Palatine, to create Notaries.
VEnerabili in Christo p^tri Priori ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Bassyanus de
Allyate de Mediolan' Dei gratia Comes Palatinus Salutem and debitam diligentiam
in commissis. Sagax humanae Causae concessionis.
naturae discretio, memorid hominum labitate pensata, ne diuturnitate temporum
quae inter contrahentes aguntur* oblivionis defectui subjacerent, tabellionatus
adinvenit officium, per quod contrahentium vota scribuntur and scripturae
ministerio postmodum longum servantur in aevum. Cum itaque ex part vestra
nobis extitit humiliter supplicatum, ut vobis potestatem creandi tres
tabelliones seu not arios publicos concedere dignaremur. Nos Concessio.
hujusmodi supplicationibus in hac part favorabiliter annuentes, praefatam
potestatem usque ad dictum numerum pa^ernitati vestrae authoritate nobis and
antecessoribus nostris a divis Imperatoribus super consiciendis tabellionibus
seu notari is publicis concessa plenarie duximus concedendam, vestram
paternitatem ad hujusmodi potestatem obtinendam approbantes. Verum quia volumus
quod forma solita in creatione not ariorum observetur, ne Formalia creationis
Notar.
minus idonei and insufficientes ad hujusmodi of sicium exercendum deputentur,
diligenti examinatione praemissa, eosdem quos creare volueritis per Pennam,
Calamartum atque Cartam quae tunc in manibus tenebitis praesentialiter
investiatis, recepto prius ab eisdem tribus sigillatim, sacri Imperii nomine,
fidelitatis solitae, necnon and de ipso tabellionatus officio fideliter and
legaliter exercendo, corporali Iuramento. Dantes and concedentes unicuique
illorum trium authoritate vobis, tenore praesentium, ut superius exprimitur,
concessa, plenam licentiam and liberam potestatem Instrumenta, acta,
prothocolla, and literas exemplandi, faciendi, copiandi and publicandi testes
recipiendi, and examinandi ac publicandi, testamenta conficiendi apperiendi and
approbandi, confessiones super quibuscunque contractibus audiendi and
recipiendi, and insinuandi and scribendi ultimas decedentium voluntates,
tutores and curatores dandi, alimenta decernendi, decretum interponendi and
faciendi ac scribendi quaelibet alia Instrumenta and scripturas sive contractus
tam ultimarum voluntatum, quam quorumcunque aliorum negotiorum, and
Tabellionatus officium libere, prudenter and fideliter ubilibet exercendi, and
omnia alia and singula scribendi and faciendi, quae ad saepedictum officium
spectare noscuntur vel etiam pertinere. Et ad unumquemque eorundem trium cum
necesse fuerit, in omnibus and singulis supradictis, and quae ad of ficium
pradictum pertinent libere recurratur. Forma autem Iuramenti per unumquemque
eorundem trium talis erit, dicatur etiam sic cuilibet sigillatim. Tu jurabis ad
Forma Iuramenti p^r notarium praestandi,
sancta Dei Evangelia quod nunquam er is contrarius Romanae ecclesiae, nec
imperio, nec nobis, nunquam falsam facies cartam. Testamentum autenticum and
omnia ea quae autenticari debent non autenticabis in cartis abrasis, bombacinis
vel papyris. Contratus vero, acta causarum, testamenta, donationes, and omnia
ea quae ad artem and officium notarii pertinent, prout audiveris and rogatus
fuer is, manu propria, cum tuo nomine and signo scribes and ^utenticabis. Dicta
quoque testium bona fide, sine fraud scribes and recipies, and generaliter
omnia alia and singula quae ad ipsam artem and officium not' spectant juxta
fidelitatem and officii consuetudinem fideliter ac integraliter observare
jurabis. In quorum omnium testimonium and certitudinem pleniorem presens
privilegium in forma publici Instrumenti fieri mandavimus per notarium
infrascriptum, and nostri sigilli fecimus appensione muniri. Dat' and act'
Lugd. in ecclesia maiori, sub anno Domini Millesimo trecentesimo sexto, die v.
mensis Martii, Indictione iv. tempore Domini Clemen. P P. quinti anno primo,
praesentibus discretis viris Albertino filio dicti Comitis laico and Vitale
Fagiani clerico Medioln' Dioc. testibus ad hoc specialiter vocatis and rogatis.
Et ego Willielmus Thomae dicti Coci de Ros clericus Hereford. Dioc. publicus
sacri Romani Imperii authoritate Notar' omnibus praedictis interfui, and de
dicti comitis mandato presens privilegium scripsi, and publicavi, meoque signo
consueto signavi rogatus.



A form or faculty of a Notaries creation by virtue of the precedent
delegation.
HEnricus permissione divina Prior ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Dilecto sibi in
Christo Iohanni de Watford clerico Lincoln' Dios. Salutem, and in agendis viam
veritatis. Hii sunt ad officia publica merito promovendi, quos morum honestas,
literarum peritia and factorum experientia sufficientes reddunt ad laborum
fastigia, and solicitudines publicas subeundas. Cum igitur Deminus Bassyanus de
Alliate de Mediolano Comes Palatinus nobis potestatem creandi tres tabelliones
seu notarios publicos authoritate eidem Domino Bassiano and antecessoribus suis
a divis Imperatoribus super conficiendis tabellionibus seu notariis publicis
concessa, plenarie duxerit concedendam, prout in literis suis patentibus inde
confectis quarum tenor inferius describitur before continetur. Nosque virtute
potestatis ejusdem, cum exacta diligentia, servata forma in eisdem literis
contenta, Ma' Richardum de Northon' Lincoln' Dioc', and Iohannem de Berham
Cantuarien. Dioc' Tabelliones seu Notarios publicos nuper creavimus, unumque
adhuc creare, virtute potestatis ejusdem, tabellionem seu notarium publicum
valeamus: probitatis merita, and sagacitatis industriam te idoneum redden' ad
tabellionatus officium exercendum, quae and quem, diligenti examinatione
praemissa in te invenimus, attendentes: recepto prius a te ad sancta Dei
Evangelia corporaliter juramento super omnibus and singulis articulis servandis
in praedictis patentibus literis contentis, and de tabellionatus officio
fideliter and legaliter exercendo, te creamus Tabellionem and N^' publicum, ac
de eodem officio per Pennam, Calamarium atque Cartam quae in manibus tenemus
praesentialite investimus authoritate qua fungimur memorata Dantes and
concedentes tibi plenam licentiam and liberam potestatem faciendi and exercendi
omnia and singula quae in eisdem patentibus literis continentur, and ad
Tabellionatus officium spectare noscuntur, vel etiam pertinere, and quod ad te,
si necesse fuerit, in omnibus and singulis supradictis and quae ad praedictum
officium pertinent libere recurratur. Tenor autem praedictarum literarum talis
est. Venerabili in Christo patri -- Priori ecclesiae Christi Cant. Bassianus de
Alliate de Mediolano Dei gratia Comes Palatinus Salutem, etc. ut supra. In
cujus Rei testimonium and certitudinem pleniorem praemissa per Hugonem de
Byford notarium publicum infrascriptum in hanc publicam formam redigi
mandavimus and sigilli nostri appensione muniri. Dat' and act' apud Waleworth
juxta Lamheth Anno Domini Millesimo trecentesimo nonc. Indictione octava,
vicesimo septimo die mensis Martii, Praesentibus discretis viris Iohanne de
Teneth, Hugone de sancta Margareta, Alexandro de Sandwico monachis ecclesiae
nostrae praedictae, Bertino de Twitham Ad. de Thrulegh armigeris nostris
literatis testibus ad haec vocatis specialiter and rogatis. Et ego Hugo de
Byford Clericus Hereford. Dioc. publicus authoritate Imperiali notarius,
praemissis Iuramenti praestationi, creationi and investiturae concessioni and
dationi una cum testibus praedictis, anno, indictione, die and loco praedictis
praesens interfui, and ea omnia prout supra scribuntur fieri vidi and audivi,
and ad mandatum dicti Domini Prioris in hanc publicam formam redegi, meoque
signo consueto signavirogatus.



The Kings writ forbidding such Notaries the exercise of their office, and
damning the credit of their Instruments, entitled
Breve de Officio Tabellionis authoritate Imperiali non exercendo.
REx Vi^. etc. Ex part Cleri and populi regni nostri gravis Immuni^s Angliae a
subjectione Imperiali.
relatio nostris auribus insonuit and tumultus, quod licet regnum nostrum
Angliae ab omni subjectione imperiali sit immune, and ab origin mundi
extiterit alienum, tanta tamen multitudo Notariorum authoritate imperiali
officium publicum in Regno nostro praedicto, tam de hiis quorum cognitio ad nos
and non ad alium pertinet, quam de aliis, exercentium crevit, quod nobis and
juri coronae nostrae grave exheredationis periculum and incolis and
habitatoribus dicti Regni nostri dampnum irrecuperabile praesumitur evenire,
nisi remedium apponetur in hac part. Nos igitur volentes hujusmodi dampnis and
periculis prout Iuramenti vinculo astringimur pro viribus obviare, and dictum
regnum nostrum inde exuere, prout decet, tibi praecipimus quod in singulis
locis infra Ballivam tuam ubi expedire videris public proclamari, and ex part
nostra firmiter inhiberi facias, ne quis hujusmodi Notarius, sub paena quae
incumbit in causis, contractibus, seu aliis negotiis officium notarii exerceat
quoquo modo. Facias a^te^ in dictis locis publicari and districtius inhiberi,
ne qui Archiepiscopi, Episcopi seu alii praelati vel eorum Ministri
instrumentis hujusmodi Notariorum ex nunc faciend. fidem aliquam praebeant ullo
modo. T. meipso apud Westm'. xxvj^. die April. Anno Regni nostri xiijtio.

A Composition made Anno 1242. between the Abbey Scriptura xvija.
of St Austins, and the Priory of Christ-Church, about diverse things,
especially maritime customs at and about Minster and Sandwich.
NOverint universi praesens scriptum inspectari quod cum inter viros religiosos
Dominum Robertum Abbatem and Conventum S. Augustini ex part una, and Dominum
Rogerum Priorem and Capitulum ecclesiae Christi Cant. ex altera super terris,
redditibus, consuetudinibus maritimis juribus variis and diversis agitata esset
diutius materia questionis, tandem de communi voluntate and assensu partium, de
consilio virorum prudentum amicabiliter in hunc modum conquievit, viz. quod
Abbas and Conventus praenominati pro bono perpetuae pacis concedunt quod Prior
and Capitulum memorati terras and redditus de feodo S. Augustini quas
dicebantur hactenus occupasse de cetero habeant tam in Cant. quam extra. Ita
tamen quod aequivalentes terras ac redditus permutationis nomine alibi
reeipiant ab eisdem. Simili modo concedunt Prior and Capitulum memorati Abbati
and Conventui praedictis in similibus similem permutationem. Ita tamen quod de
caetero neutra pars terras vel redditus alterius partis intrabit, vel sibi
appropriare praesumet, nisi licentia super hac petita prius and optenta. Item
pro bono pacis concessum est a Priore and Capitulo antedictis quod de cetero ad
Fletum de Menster per Fletum de Menster.
flumen de Sandwico sit accessus per navigium and recessus, hoc adjecto, quod
si in ipso flumine, ante dictum Fletum aliqua navis anchoram fixerit, vel
levandae navis, vel negotiandi, seu merces alias transferendi causa se ibidem
exoneravit, dicti Prior and Capitulam consuetudines maritimas habeant. In Fleto
autem antedicto nihil juris de caetero vendicabunt, sed omnes consuetudines and
emolumenta libere percipient Abbas and Conventus praedicti ratione fundi in
eodem. Ita tamen quod tenentes dictorum Prioris and Capituli liberi sint and
quieti ab omni consuetudine de qua hactenus liberi esse consueverunt, nec
dictum Fletum malitiose ampliabunt Abbas and Conventus praedicti in dictorum
Prioris and Capituli detrimentum. Simili modo provisum est quod Prior and
Capitulum memorati omnes consuetudines maritimas habeant in portu de Sandwico
ex utraque part Fluminis, secundum tenorem and usum cartarum suarum infra
terminos in ipsis cartis contentos, quia sic hactenus usi sunt. Ita tamen quod
dicti Abbas and Conventus Villa de Stanore.
in villa sua de Stanore and in terris suis dominium habeant and usum
consuetum: quod si in dicta villa de Stanor sive in terris dictorum Abbatis and
conventus sive in flumine infra dictos terminos inter qu^scunque personas
discordiae vel contentiones emerscrint, secundum qualitatem delicti justitia
super his siet sicut hactenus fieri consuevit. Vltra locum autem qui vocatur
Hennebrigge prope Stanor versus Clivesende, Ramesgate, Margate, Westgate,
Hennebrigge. Clivesende. Ramsgate. Margate. Westgate.
sive in aliis terris dictorum Abbatis and Conventus tam in Thaneto quam extra,
and ex alia part maris in tenemento ipsorum de Northborne Idem Abbas and
Conventus omnes consuetudines maritimas ratione applicationis and terrae suae
percipient preterquam ut distinctum est Ita quod in mari nil juris vel
consuetudinis maritimae percipient praeterquam ut distinctum est ratione
applicationis and terrae suae, nec impedient nec procurabunt quo minus dicti
Prior and Capitulum per suos Ministros in mari secundum tenorem cartarum suarum
and usum, jura and consuctudines maritimas recipere and capere possunt, nec
aliquam querent occasionem vel aliquid facient per quod dictorum Prioris and
Capituli jura and consuetudines maritimae infra suos terminos maris and terrae
in aliquo minuantur. Similiter dicti Prior and Capitulum ultra dictum locum qui
dicitur Hennebrigge nil juris aut maritimae consuetudinis quae dictis Abbati
and Conventui ratione applicationis and terrae suae provenire possunt
accipi^nt, vel impedient nec procurabunt quo minus naves quae applicare
voluerint ad terras dictorum Abbatis and Conventus applicent and consuetudines
maritimas reddant quae ipsis ratione applicationis and terrae suae debent, nec
aliquam quaerent occasionem vel facient aliquid per quod dictorum Abbatis and
Conventus jura and consuetudines in terris suis in aliquo minuantur sed locis
suis utrique libere utantur consuetis. Item concedunt liberaliter Prior and
Capitulum memorati quod in ^vicula ipsorum praedicti Abbas and Conventus and
eorum familia propria -- -- Item quoniam Navicula Prior. and Convent.
per clericos recusatos a Capitulo sancti Augustini and a Capitulo ecclesiae
Christi Cant. aliquando ad monachatum admissos, and e converso, sepius
consuevit discordiae fomes seminari, concessum est ab utrisque quod de caetero
ex causa culpae vel defectus recusatus ab alterutro capitulo a neutro
recipiatur.

A Composition between the same houses about a Scriptura xviij^.
Kay and house at Fordwich.
With such circumstances as are added by the Relator, Thorn, St Augustines
Chronicler. A lieger book of Christ-Church has a copy of it in French. Vidi.
ANno Domini Mcclxxxv^. die Lunae proximo post festum Translationis sancti
Thomae Martyris sedata est discordia quae Caya and domus apud Fordwich
mota fuerat inter Abbatem sancti Augustini and Priorem sanctae Trinitatis de
quadam caya and domo aedificata in quodam prato apud Forwicum per Priorem
sanctae Trinitatis, quae aedificia Abbas sancti Augustini destrui praecepit,
quibus iterum per Priorem ibidem aedificatis Abbas secundo funditus evertit
meremio and omnibus aliis ibidem inventis in Sturam. projectis. Vnde ad
praedictam litem pacificandam Dominis Henrico Episcopo de Verdun, Otes de
Episcopus de Verdun. Otes de Gransonne. Stephanu de Pencestre and (...) nobiles.
Gransonne, Stephano de Pencestr' and aliis nobilibus per Dominum Regem ad hoc
specialiter assignatis, sub hac forma conquievit, quod Prior pro se and suis
Successoribus: concessit quod in prato versus ecclesiam in Orient de cetero
aliquam domum alicujus aedificii sine gratia and licentia Abbatis nunquam
levabit. Et quia praedictus Prior non potest been esse sine domo super ripam de
Fordwico pro suis vinis and aliis suis victualibus recipiendis and servandis
Abbas praedictus concessit Priori and suis successoribus unam plateam in
Fordwico super ripam situatam quae tenet in longitudine ix. perticatas de xvj.
pedibus and dimid. in latitudine xxij. pedes, reddendo inde Abbati S. Augustini
unam Rosam in festo sancti Iohannis Baptistae pro omnibus servitiis, sectis
Curiarum, and omnibus aliis demandis; donis, Iudiciis, executionibus and
omnibus aliis delictis ibidem factis eidem Abbati semper salvis, sicut in aliis
locis ejusdem villae idem Abbas habet vel solet habere Ita quod in dicto manso
aliquas mercandizas, res vel victualia praeterquam propria bona ejusdem Prioris
non recipiet nec permittet quoquo modo fore recepta Pro hac autem concessione
Prior praedictus dedit Abbati and ecclesiae suae tres acras prati cum omnibus
suis pertinentiis in Fordwico unde una acra jacet ex latere prati elemosinar'
sancti Augustini, and aliae duae jacent partim in prato ubi domus prius sic
fuit levata, and partim in aliis locis prope pratum Abbatis, sicut bundae
monstrant and testantur, Reddendo inde Priori unam Rosam in festo S. Iohannis
Baptistae pro omnibus servitiis and demandis. Ordinatum Barrer. and Piles.
fuit etiam quod barrer' and piles per Abbatem in cursu aquae erectae super
calsetum ibidem per Custodem quinque portuum deponentur and illud calsetum per
Abbatem and homines suos de Fordwico reparatum fiat communis Abbati, Priori,
and Communitati villae praedictae, a quibus omnibus perpetuis futuris
temporibus ad fugandum and cariandum debet sustentari Nec licebit Priori and
successoribus suis in eadem villa de caetero aliquid perquirere de tenura
Abbatis sine ejus voluntate vel successorum suorum. Et quia per istam
compositionem seu ordinationem totum pratum in quo continetur quaedam walla
vocata walla seu casea Cellerarii ecclesiae Walla Cellerarii eccles. Christi
Cant.
Christi Cant. quae continet xxti perticatas in longitud. and viginti pedes in
latitudine data fuerat Abbati and Conventui sieve quacunque for prisa in
excambium pro platea apud Fordwicum ubi domus Prioris and Conventus sanctae
Trinitatis fuit aedisicata, nec poterant dicti Prior and Conventus extunc de
Iure habere usum dictae Wallae ut prius habuerunt, super quo postea inter
parts controversia orta per magnam compositionem sequentem provisum fuerat
quod walla seu casea praedicta dictis Abbati and Priori communis ad curiandum
and chaceandum quotiens necesse habuerint, and sibi viderint expedire.

The form of electing and installing the Prior of the Church of Canterbury.
Scriptura xixa.

STatuto die de Priore ^ligendo, congregatis omnibus fratribus in Capitulo, qui
ad Capitulum commod' poterint venire; Dominus Archiepiscopus Capitulum intrabit
cum solo Capellano suo, and proposito breviter verbo Dei, tanget de negotio
electionis Prioris. Deinde praecipiet in virtute obedientiae and sub poena
excommunicationis maioris ipso facto incurrendae, ne aliquis a more, favore vel
odio nominet aliquem in Priorem nisi illum quem magis idoneum and in
spiritualibus and temporalibus esse crediderit circumspectum. Subsequenter D.
Archiepiscopus examinabit personaliter totum conventum per singula capita. Et
Capellanus suus scribet in rotulo nomina nominantium and nominatorum. Postea D.
Archiepisc. deliberabit and conferet apud se illo die secundum Dominum and
sanam and sanctiam conscientiamsuam, and prout in extremo judicio reddere
voluerit rationem, de numero, zelo and merito nominantium, and idoneitate
nominatorum in Priorem. In craslino vero Dominus Archiepisc. in pleno Capitulo
illum quem mayor and sanior pars Capituli nominaverit, in Priorem nominabit
public ita dicens. Invocato nomine and auxilio sanctae Trinitatis and
gloriosae virginis matris Christi, and omnium Sanctorum hujus ecclesiae nostrae
Patronorum, ad laudem and honorem eorundum, fratrem N. de N. nominamus vobis
Priorem. Nominatus vero statim surget, and in medio Capituli insufficientiam
suam humiliter and instanter allegabit. Et statim praecentor incipiet. Te Deum
Laudamus. Quo incepto, omnes surgent, and conventu praecedente, and Domino
Archiepisc. and Priore sequentibus ibunt in ecclesiam solempniter cantantes Te
Deum. Et cum venerit in Chorum Dominus Archiepisc. S^llum Prio^is.
statim installabit Priorem in stallo suo ex part Boreali. Quo facto Prior
prosternat se super formam. Postea Dominus Archiepisc. in primo stallo chori ex
part australi expectabit quousque Te Deum percantetur. Quo finito, subjunget
Dominus Archiepisc. Kyriel. Christel. Kyriel. Pater noster. Et ne Nos. Salvum
fac servum tuum. Esto ei Domine turris fortitudinis. Nihil proficiat inimicus
in eo. Domine exaudi orationem meam. Domine vobiscum* Oremus. Omnipotens
sempiterne Deus miserere famulo tuo N. and dirige eum secundum tuam clementiam
in viam salutis eternae, ut te donante tibi placita capiat, and tota virtute
perficiat per Christum Dominum nostrum. Dicta itaque collecta omnes redibunt in
Capitulum, tam Dominus Archiepisc. quam Prior and conventus ordine quo supra.
Et cum venerint in Capitulum antequam Dominus Locus Prioris in Capitulo.
Archiepisc. sedeat, ponat Priorem in locum suum juxta sedem Archiepiscopi ex
part boreali. Et hiis expletis, Dominus Archiep. data benedictione conventui
and populo redeat ad cameram suam in Palatio, and Conventus ad servitium
divinum. Si vero Dominus Archiepisc. agens in remotis, non possit personaliter
interesse electioni Prioris, tunc committet vices suas duobus fratribus de
Capitulo Cant. ad audiendum and examinandum vota singulorum, sicut supra
continetur. Et ipsi duo fratres scribent nomina nominantium and nominatorum in
Priorem. Et hujusmodi nomina inscriptis mittent vel portabunt Domino
Archiepisc. sub sigillo communi Capituli ubicunque fuerit c^ra mare vel ultra.
Et Dominus Archiepiscopus habita deliberatione and facta collatione ut
praemittitur committet iterum vices suas alicui fratri de eodem Capitulo Cant.
ad nominandum in Capitulo Priorem, and ipsum installandum in choro et ponendum
in Capitulo in loco suo, juxta formam superius annotatam.

The Chapters Confirmation of the Parsonages of Hakinton Scriptura xxa.
and Tenham appropriated to the Archdeaconry of Canterbury by Stephen Langton
the Archbishop.
VNiversis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis praesentes literas inspecturis. I.
Prior and Conventus ecclesiae Christi Cant. Salutem in Domino. Ad universitatis
vestrae notitiam volumus pervenire nos cartam venerabilis patris nostri Domini
S. dei gratia Cant. Archiepiscopi totius Angliae Primatis and sanctae Romanae
ecclesiae Cardinalis inspexisse sub hac forma. Vniversis sanctae matris
ecclesiae filiis praesentes literas inspecturis. S. permissione divina Cant.
Archiepisc. totius Angliae Primas and sanctae Romanae ecclesiae Cardinalis
Salutem in Domino. Curae pastoralis officium commissum laudabiliter
prosequemur, si mentis acumen and manus exercitium ad ea quae honorem Dei and
ecclesiae profectum recipient solicitius convertamus. Ea propter Cantuariensis
ecclesiae quae Metropolis est, cui authore Domino deservimus, in omnibus quae
secundum Deum possumus augmentare volentes honorem, and supplere defectus,
advertimus diligenter quod ecclesia illa quae inter Dignitas ecclesiae Cantuar.
alias ecclesias Anglicanas obtinet principatum, utpote quae aliarum matter est
and magistra, non nisi unum habet Archidiaconum, cujus Archidiaconatus
proventus ita fuerunt hactenus tenues and exiles quod ipse, qui authoritate
tantae ecclesiae inter alias plus habere dinoscitur honoris, vix habere de suo
possit ad expensas and sumptus necessarios competentes. Volentes igitur
defectum hujusmodi qui Ecclesiae de Tenham and Hackington.
in scandalum ecclesiae nostrae redundat salubri provisione supplere ecclesias
de Tenham and Hackinton, quae ad patronatum nostrum spectare noscuntur, de
voluntate and assensu Capituli nostri, monachorum scilicet ecclesiae Christi
Cant. in Capitulo existentium Archidiaconatui ipsi duximus in perpetuum
uniendas, decernentes ut qui pro tempore Archidiaconatum illum obtinuerint
ecclesias praedictas, tanquam de corpore ipsius Archidiaconatus libere
possideat and quiet. Ad hoc cum actenus temporibus nostris de consuetudine sit
obtentum quod Officialis noster Decanos constituerit in Diocesi Cant. qui
constitutistatim tenebantur Cantuar. Archidiacono respondere, volumus and de
voluntate and assensu praedicti Capituli nostri statuimus ut de cetero
Archidiaconi Cant. qui pro tempore fuerint Decanos constituant, and amoveant
pro suae voluntatis arbitrio prout melius viderint expedire in Dioc. memorata,
and sibi respondeant sicut decet, cum absurdum sit ut alius eos constituat quam
is qui eis debeat praeesse, and cui respondere tenentur, praesertim cum ipsis
referentibus corrigere debent caeterorum errata. Vt igitur haec omnia perpetuis
temporibus stabilem obtineant firmitatem praesenti scripto sigillum nostrum
duximus apponendum. Actum Anno Domini Millesimo ducentesimo vicesimo septimo.
mense Decembris. Nos igitur haec omnia sicut a praememorato venerabili patre
nostro S. Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo pie and rationabiliter provisa sunt and
concessa, quantum in nobis est, rata habemus and accepta. In cujus rei
testimonium praesenti scripto sigillum nostrum apposuimus. Actum Anno Domini
Millesimo ducentesimo vicesimo septimo, mense December.

An enlargement of the same Archdeacons Jurisdiction by the same Archbishop.
Scriptura xxj^.

S. Dei gratia Cant. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas and sanctae Romanae
ecclesiae Cardinalis. Dilectis filiis universis ecclesiarum Rectoribus per
Cant. Dioc. constitutis Salutem, gratiam and benedictionem. Ad universitatis
vestrae notitiam volumus pervenire nos in Cantuariensi capitulo constitutos, de
assensu and voluntate ipsius Capituli, Prioris I. and Conventus ecclesiae
Christi Cant. concessisse dilecto filio, magistro S. de Langton Archid.
Cantuar. and successoribus suis, ut omnes ecclesiae parochiales Cant. Dioc. tam
ad nostram quam ad Capituli nostri donationem spectantes, and earum Rectores,
Capellani etiam tam perpetui quam annui, in morum correctione, and ecclesiarum
visitatione caeterisque omnibus ad Archidiaconi officium spectantibus, eisdem
in perpetuum sint subjecti. Vnde vobis mandamus quatenus praefato Archidiacono
and successoribus suis in praemissis de cetero intendatis. In cujus rei
testimonium has literas nostras patentes vobis duximus transmittendas. Dat'
Anno Domini Millesimo ducentesimo vicesimo septimo, mense Decembris.

The same Archbishops Charter of Revocation of certain Scriptura xxij^.
Churches in the times of Baldwin and Hubert his predecessors exempted from the
Archdeaconry, entitled
Carta S. Archiepiscopi de Revocatione ecclesiarum exemptarum tempore Baldwini
and Huberti, and de revocatione dignitatis Archidiaconatus.
VNiversis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis praesentes literas inspecturis S.
permissione divina Cant. Archiepisc. totius Anglia Primas, and sanctae Romanae
ecclesiae Cardinalis Salutem in Domino. Sicut ea quae rationabiliter provisa
fuerint and statuta robur optinere debent perpetuae firmitatis, sic si q' sint
contra rationis tramitem attemptata digna correctione convenit emendari. Cum
igitur nobis constet Archidiaconatum Cant. per abusum quorundam temporibus piae
recordationis Baldewini and Huberti praedecessorum nostrorum, necnon and
nostris temporibus in magna part fuisse minus rationabiliter diminutum,
quibusdam ecclesiis quae ad nostram seu capituli nostri donationem pertinent
Archidiaconi Cant. Iurisdictioni se subtrahentibus tam in morum correctione,
quam in ecclesiarum visitatione and ceteris pertinentibus ad officium
Archidiaconi memorati. Nos volentes praedictum Archidiaconatum in statum
meliorem and debitum reformare, de voluntate et assensu totius Capituli nostri,
in ipso capitulo existentes statuimus, quod etiam praesenti scripto duximus
confirmandum, ut de cetero omnes ecclesiae parochiales Cant. Diec. tam ad
nostram quam ad Capituli nostri donationem spectantes, et earum Rectores
Archidiacono Cantuar. quicunque pro tempore fuerit in perpetuum sint subjecti,
tam in morum correctione, quam in ecclesiarum visitatione et ceteris omnibus
quae ad Archidiaconi officium spectare noscuntur, non obstante exceptione quae
facta fuisse preponitur a memoratis antecesseribus Capellae de Hakinton and
Lamheth.
nostris Baldwino viz. Et Huberto occasion capellarum de Hakintun and Lamheth
quas ipsi in praejudicium Cant. ecclesiae construere nitebantur, praesertim cum
talis exemptio potius fuerit velamen malitiae quam libertas, and audaciam
frequentius praestitit delinquendi, cum etiam eaedem capellae per sententiam
Apostolicam fuerint demolitae, and sententiatum fuerit illa omnia irritanda
quae occasion ipsarum fuerant attemptata, sicut in rescripto Apostolico
contineri perspeximus evidenter. Vnde volumus and firmiter praecipimus omnibus
Rectoribus ecclesiarum praedictis, and Capellanis eorum tam annuis quam
perpetuis ut magistro Simoni Archidiacono Cant. and ejus successoribus Cant.
Archidiaconis, in hiis quae ad officium Archidiaconi pertinent decetero sint
subjecti, debitam eis in omnibus reverentiam and obedientiam, tanquam
Archidiaconis impendendo. In cujus Rei testimonium presens scriptum sigilli
nostri munimine duximus roborandum. Actum Anno Domini Mo. CCo. vicesimo
septimo, mense Decembris. Valt'.

A personal Composition between the Chapter Scriptura xxiija.
and the same Archdeacon touching Jurisdiction in the Vacancy.
VNiversis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis ad quos praesens scriptum pervenerit
Rogerus Prior and Capitulum ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Salutem in Domino.
Noverit universitas vestra quod cum contentio verteretur inter nos R. Priorem
and Capitulum ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. ex una part and magistrum Simonem de
Langeton Archidiaconum Cant. ex altera super quibusdam juribus ad
Archiepiscopum Cant. dum vivit sine contradictione and immediate spectantibus,
viz. super institutionibus faciendis ad vacantes ecclesias, and super
collationibus ecclesiarum vacantium Iura Archiepiscopalia.
authoritate concilii, ac etiam super cognitione causarum matrimonialium, quae
ipsius Archiepiscopi forum dum vivit immediate contingunt. Item super causis
omnibus quae moventur and moveri possunt inter Suffraganeos and Suffraganeorum
subjectos totius provinciae subjectae ecclesiae nostrae Christi Cant. tum per
simplicem querimoniam, tum per appellationem factam vel faciendam ad ipsum
Archiepiscopum dum vivit in omnibus casibus a Canone diffinitis, tum etiam in
causis tuitionum appellationum factarum ad sedem Apostolicam inter eosdem and
quoslibet totius provinciae supradictae, quatenus procedunt appellationes a
cognitione ordinaria vel extraordinaria delegatione. Item super instituendo
clerico seculari and poenitentiario in eadem ecclesia, sic conquievit. viz.
quod nos Prior and Capitulum concedimus pro bono pacis and intuitu personae
ipsius, praedicto mag. Simoni Archidiacono personaliter and ad vitam suam quod
authoritate ecclesiae Archidiacono quae concessa.
nostrae Cant. Metropolitanae, habeat, sede vacant, Institutiones infra
Dioces. and extra, collationes ecclesiarum vacantium authoritate concilii, and
cognitiones causarum matrimonialium. Ita tamen quod ex ista nostra concessione,
nec quoad titulum, nec quoad fidem bonam, nec quoad aliquam praescriptionem
inchoandam sive complendam in praedictis juribus post mortem ipsius
Archidiaconi vel cessionem nullum nobis possit praejudicium generari. De illis
vero quae sunt circa personas Episcoporum quoad querelas de eis deponendis vel
appellationes ab eis faciendas ad sedem Cant. and similiter de tuitionibus
appellationum ab eis ad Dominum Papam interpositarum, sic est actum inter
parts praedictas, quod dictus Archidiaconus (tenore praesentium) protestatur
and confitetur se nulla^ vendicare jurisdictionem nec cohertionem aliquam
faciendam in personis Episcoporu^ occasion alicujus querelae contra eos motae
vel movendae, vel ipsorum negligentiae; nec vendicat appellationes factas a
personis Episcoporum nec ab eorum Officialibus, ipsis Episcopis existentibus
extra regnum. Similiter Quae P. and Convent. reservata.
nec tuitiones appellationum ab eisdem ad Dominum Papam factarum cum sint de
sequela dictarum appellationum. Set ipsi Prior and Capitulum in praedictis quod
suum est exequantur. Ecclesias autem vacantes quae nostrae sunt donationis
dabimus personis quibus videbimus expedire, and collatione facta significabimus
Archidiacono instituendos eosdem, qui absque omni contradictione and
examinatione personae, and inquisitione de persona ac difficultate qualibet
instituet sine mora, nisi evidens and Poenitentiarius.
manifestum quid appareat propter quod hoc facere non possit, dummodo super
aliis articulis sicut moris est inquiratur. Magistro vero Willielmo
penitentiario mortuo vel amoto de alio substituendo clerico seculari in
Penitentiarium sic convenimus, quod de Prioris and Archidiaconi praeficiatur
assensu, qui tantum in ecclesia nostra and non alibi quotiens commode poterit
injunctum sibi officium prout Dominus dederit salubriter exequetur. Ille autem
Penitentiarius secularis providetur in supplementum fratrum nostrorum
penitentiariorum deputatorum vel deputandorum a Capitulo, ita quod tam salubre
negotium nullum defectum habeat vel neglectum. Invocationem vero brachii
secularis contra personas excommunicatorum tam a nobis authoritate privilegii
nostri quam ab aliis claves ecclesiae contemnentium habeat Archidiaconus, and
sic excommunicatos a nobis ad instantiam nostram faciat public denuntiari.
Ista autem sic procedit compositio quod Compositio temporalis.
tantummodo ad tempus Archidiaconi supradicti durabit, ita quod post obitum
ipsius vel cessionem nullum hincinde praejudicium in aliquogeneretur. Vtraque
vero pars haec omnia supradicta bona fide promisit fideliter observare. Et ut
haec compositio ut praedictum est robur optineat, duplicatum est hoc scriptum
in modum cyrographi, cujus una pars sigillo nostro signata penes dictum
Archidiaconum remanebit; altera vero pars sigillo dicti Archidiaconi signata
penes nos in testimonium residebit. Act apud Cant. Anno Domini Mo. CCo. xl.
primo xijo. Kalen. Septembr^s.

A Composition between Saint Augustines Abbey Scriptura xxiiija.
and the City of Canterbury about limits and liberties, entitled by Thorn
Compositio cum Civibus Cant.
ANno Domini Millesimo Cclxviijo. in crastino Purificationis beatae Mariae,
Anno Regni Regis Hen. filii Regis Iohannis xlijo. apud Westm' coram eodem
Domino Rege, convenit ex consensu ipsius Domini Regis inter Abbatem sancti
Augustini Cant. and Cives dictae Civitatis super quibusdam contentionibus motis
inter eos, viz. quod si aliquis latro captus fuerit cum manu opere, ita quod
possit vocari Infangthef, de porta Cimiterii (...). Porta cimiter^ Occidentalis.
Occidentalis sancti Augustini usque ad domum Henrici Fabri, and a domo H.
Fabri usque ad domum Nicholai de le Berton, and deinde per vicum qui vocatur
Loderslane usque ad novam Loderslane. Nova strata.
stratam, and sic a nova strata usque ad sanctum sepulchrum a dextris remanebit
de cetero civibus and libertati Civitatis Cant. sine contradictione praedicti
Abbatis vel successorum suorum vel ecclesiae Sti Aug' imperpetuum, sive ille
qui captus sit, de hominibus Abbatis vel de liberate sua interius vel exterius
fuerit. Et si qualiscunque captus fuerit, qui similiter vocari debeat
Infangthef in sinistra part praedictorum bundarum and metarum, vel a sancto
Sepulcro usque Chaldane, quantum fuerit de feodo ipsius Abbatis ex utraque
part, and similiter a domo praedicti Henrici Fabri per Chald^ne.
viam qua itur apud Fispole, ex utraque part usque ad Fispole, Fispole.
scilicet quicquid sit de feodo ipsius Abbatis, and similiter si talis latro
inventus fuerit in campis de Northome, and per vicum qui ducit ad portam S.
Augustini, de cetero remaneat praedicto Abbati (...).
and Successoribus suis and ecclesiae suae in perpetuum. Ita quod servientes
ipsius Abbatis illos licite capere poterint infra praedictas metas and bundas,
and justitiam facere de ipsis secundum cartam suam and legem and consuetudinem
Angliae, sine contradictione praedictorum civium vel heredum suorum
inperpetuum, sive ille qui captus fuerit sit de villa vel de liberate
praedictae civitatis vel aliunde. Ita tamen quod propter istam conventionem
nihil depereat praedictis civibus de juribus suis quae habuerint in tenentibus
praedicti Abbatis, qui manentes sunt infra metas and bundas praedictas, quae
remaneant tam praedicto Abbati quam praedictis civibus, quin illi qui
mercandisas fecerint sint in Lot and Scot and in Tallag' and in defensione
ipsorum contra omnes sicut Lot Scot. Tallag.
prius fuerunt sin^. aliqua contradictione ipsius Abbatis vel Successorum
suorum. Ita quod quando tallagium assessum est super eos, tallagium illud
colligetur per visum Ballivi Domini Abbatis si interesse voluerit, and si non
tunc licite per Ballivos praedictae Civitatis. Dicti etiam cives nihilominus
infra metas praedictas and bundas habebunt per Coronatorem suum visum hominum
mortuorum and vulneratorum, and praesentationem quae pertinet ad coronam Domini
Regis coram Iustic' in adventu suo sicut prius habuerunt attachiac' and
prisonam omnium eorum de quibus dictus Abbas non potest fa^ere Iustitiam in
Curia sua and si ille qui captus fuerit per praedictum Abbatem infra praedictas
metas and bundas evaserit de prisona dicti Abbatis dicti cives non debebunt
respondere Prisona Abbatis.
de ipso escapio coram Iustitiarii, sed dictus Abbas and successores sui ipsos
acquietabunt coram eisdem. Et concessum est hincinde quod si aliqua contentio
oriatur inter eos de aliquibus articulis quibus fortasse dictus Abbas dicit se
usum fuisse, vel dicti cives dicunt se habuisse in feodo ipsius Abbatis, and
non possunt inter eos inde convenire sine aliquo placito, querens veniet ad
curiam, and habebit breve Domini Regis ad vicecomitem quod per sacramentum xij.
tam militum quam aliorum liberorum and legalium hominum forinsecorum per quos
rei veritas melius sciri poterit, and qui nec praedictum Abbatem nec praedictos
cives aliqua affinitate contingant, inquirat rei veritatem de jure and usu per
illos xij. terminabitur contentio, quia utraque pars concessit quod sine aliqua
calumpnia tenebit se contentum de hoc quod praedicti Iurati utrique parti
dabunt per sacramentum suum.

The Ordination of the Vicarage of St Paul Cant. Scriptura xxva.

VNiversis Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens scriptum pervenerit, Magister
Hugo de Mortuo mari Officialis Curiae Cantuar. gerens vices venerabilis patris
Domini Bonifacii Dei gratia Cant. Archiepiscopi totius Angliae Primatis in
remotis agentis Salutem in domino sempiternam. Noveritis nos ad praesentationem
magistri Hamonis Doge Rectoris ecclesiae sancti Pauli Cantuar. Virgilium de
Alcham Capellanum ad Vicariam praedictae ecclesiae, de consensu and assensu
venerabilis patris R. dei gratia Abbatis S. Augustini Cant. and ejusdem loci
Conventus qui dictae ecclesiae very sunt patroni admisisse, ipsumque vicarium
charitatis intuitu instituisse cononice in eadem. Salvis tamen dicto magistro
Hamoni Rectori dictae ecclesiae and successoribus Reservata Rectori.
suis ejusdem ecclesiae Rectoribus octo marcis argenti annuis de fructibus
dictae Vicariae ad Natal' Domini, ad Pascham, ad festum Natalis beati Iohannis
Baptistae, and ad festum beati Michaelis equaliter percipiendis. Et dictus
Vicarius solvet procurationes Onera Vicarii.
Domini Archidiaconi, and alia omnia onera ordinaria sustinebit. Habebit autem
dictus Vicarius and percipiet nomine Vicariae Iura Vicarii.
suae omnes obventiones, oblationes, casus and alia. Iura omnia ad dictam
ecclesiam sancti Pauli aliquo modo spectantia and pertinentia (exceptis bladis
and fabis in campo) and sic est ad praesens taxata Vicaria supradicta. In cujus
Rei testimonium presents literas ei fieri fecimus sigillo Officialitatis
Curiae Cantuar. firmiter roborat'. Dat' Cantuar. 5. Id. December. Anno Domini
1268.

The Ordination of the Vicarage of St Mary Northgate Canterb. Scriptura xxvja.

Anno Domini 1346. Bonae memoriae Johannes Cant. Archiepiscopus Vicariam
parochialis ecclesiae beatae Mariae de Northgate Cant. religiosis viris Priori
and Conventui sancti Gregorii Cant. appropriatae, de expresso dictorum
Religiosorum and Domini Thomae Sheme Vicarii dictae ecclesiae consensu in
certis ordinavit portionibus, sub hac forma.
QVod viz. idem Vicarius and successores sui in dicta ecclesia Iura Vicariae.
Vicarii haberent and perciperent nomine Vicariae praedictae libere and absque
impedimento and contradictione dictorum religiosorum omnes oblationes in primis
missis parochianorum dictae ecclesiae de Northgate defunctorum ubicunque
sepeliendorum, in dicta ecclesia factas and faciendas, ac in secundis missis
hujusmodi defunctorum parochianorum ibidem haberent illi oblationes factas and
faciendas qui eas de Iure vel consuetudine habere deberent quodque dicti
Vicarii omnes and omnimodas alias oblationes in dicta ecclesia de Northgate,
and in quibuscunque locis infra fines, limits seu decimationes dictae
ecclesiae scituatis qualitercunque factas and faciendas, seu ad eam vel in ea
provenientes, seu inposterum provenire valentes, oblationibus and obventionibus
hospitalis Hospitale de Northgate exceptum.
de Northgate Cant. duntaxat exceptis. Dictique Vicarii omnes decimas lanae,
agnorum, porcellorum, aucarum, pomorum, pirorum, canap', lini, fabarum and
aliorum fructuum and herbarum in ortis sive gardinis crescentium, ac decimas
Warenciae sive mader vulgariter nuncupat', infra dictam parochiam provenientes,
nec non omnes alias minutas decimas ad dictam ecclesiam qualitercunque
spectantes, omnesque alios proventus, quos dictae ecclesiae Vicarii ab antiquo
percipere consueverunt, percipient and haberent, praeterquam omnes maiores
decimas (ad Raservata Religiosis.
quatuor marcas annis singulis aestimatas) ad dictam pertinentes ecclesiam,
quas Religiosi praefati sibiipsis perpetuum reservarunt. Quodque Vicarii
antedicti onus deserviendi praefatae ecclesiae in Onera Vicarii.
divinis, inventionisque librorum and ornamentorum dictae ecclesiae, cercorum
processionalium, and unius lampadis in Cancello dictae ecclesiae ardere
debentis, ministrationisque panis, vini, luminar and aliorum ad celebrationem
divinorum necessariorum ibidem, ac etiam solutionis decimarum ac aliarum
impositionum quarumcunque quae Anglicanae ecclesiae imponi contingent pro
medietate taxationis dictae ecclesiae, suis subirent sumptibus and expensis.
Praefati vero religiosi onus refectionis and reparationis Onera Religiosor.
Cancelli dictae ecclesiae intus and exterius, ac solutionis hujusmodi
decimarum and impositionum quarumcunque, pro alia medietate taxationis ipsius
ecclesiae, necnon caetera onera ordinaria and extraordinaria eidem ecclesiae
incumbentia seu incumbere debentia Vicariis dictae ecclesiae non ascripta
superius, agnoscerent perpetuum and subirent.

The Ordination of the Vicarage of Holy-Crosse Scriptura xxvija.
of Westgate, Cant.
Johannes permissione divina Cantuar. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas and
Apostolicae sedis Legatus cunctis Christi fidelibus Salutem consequi
sempiternam. Ex officii nostri debito Religiosos viros Priore^ and Conventum
Prioratus sancti Gregorii Cantuar. quibus ecclesia parochialis sanctae Crucis
de Westgate Cant. appropriata esse dicitur, and Dominum Iohannem dictum Sorges
vicarium ejusdem ecclesiae, ad exhibendum coram nobis ordinationem Vicariae
ejusdem ad judicium nuper fecimus evocari. Sed dictae parts in termino ad
praemissa eis dato nullam ordinationem hujusmodi exhibere se posse, quia eam
non habuerunt, allegarunt. Pars insuper dictorum Religiosorum asserunt quod
ipsi onera solutionis decimarum and aliarum impositionum quarumcunque pro
taxatione ipsius ecclesiae, necnon alia onera ordinariaeidem in cumbentia in
perpetuum agnoverunt, quodque ipsi nihil de fructibus, redditibus, proventibus
seu obventionibus ecclesiae praefatae pro tempore dicti Vicarii perceperunt,
quamvis aliorum vicariorum ejusdem ecclesiae temporibus certam pecuniae
pensionem habere consueverunt and percipere ab eisdem. Dictus etiam Vicarius
asseruit quod ecclesiae praefatae commoditates quaecunque sibi pro sua
sustentatione congrua and oneribus suae Vicariae incumbentibus vix sufficient
his diebus, unde nos super vero valor annuo, omnium and singulorum fructuum,
redituum, proventuum, and obventionum ejusdem ecclesiae in quibuscunque rebus
consistant, necnon de and super omnibus and singulis eidem ecclesiae
incumbentibus oneribus, quae viz. per dictos religiosos and quae per Vicarium
ipsius ecclesiae solebant agnosci, summarie and de plano, absque strepitu and
figura Iudicii praemissis finem volentes imponere; de consensu dictarum partium
inquisitionem in forma Iuris fieri fecimus diligentem, quam judicialiter
publicavimus and examinavimus in presentia partium earundem. Demumque de
consensu dictorum Religiosorum Vicariae praedictae Patronorum, Vicariam
ecclesiae memoratae, ejus consideratis facultatibus, and ponderatis in ea part
undique ponderandis, ordinandum duximus modo infrascripto, and taxandum and
limitandum quid and quantum praefati Religiosi in futurum perceperint ex
fructibus, reditibus and proventibus ecclesiae prelibatae. Ordinamus siquidem
and statuimus quod dicti Religiosi and Successores Reservata Religiosis.
eorum decimas omnium and singulorum hortorum inter sines and limits parochiae
praedictae constitutorum ecclesiae undecunque, necnon decimas cujusdam
molendini Sheffo^es-mill vulgariter nuncupati infra parochiam ejusdem ecclesiae
scituati percipiant and habeant post instans festum Nativitatis Sancti Iohannis
Baptistae temporibus sequuturis. Dictus autem Vicarius and Successores sui
Concessa Vicario.
ibidem Vicarii habeant and teneant duas mansiunculas subtus ecclesiam
praedictam ex utraque ipsius part scituatas ad Vicarium ejusdem ecclesiae
antiquitus pertinentes, ceteras etiam decimas tam majores quam minores, necnon
oblationes ac fructus, reditus, proventus and obventiones omnes and singulas ad
dictam pertinentes ecclesiam seu inposterum pertinere valentes causa seu
occasion quibuscunque dictis religiosis superius non ascripta percipiant,
teneant, habeant ipsius ecclesiae Vicarii in perpetuum suae nomine Vicariae.
Onus autem eidem deserviendi ecclesiae in divinis ac ministrationis, Onera
Vicarii.
and exhibitionis panis, vini, luminar', and aliorum quae ad celebrationem
divinorum ibidem necessaria fuerint per Rectores seu Vicarios locorum
inveniendorum seu ministrandorum de jure vel consuetudine in nostra Diocesi
usitata, ac etiam lotionis vestimentorum and ornamentorum dictae ecclesiae
inventionisque seu exhibitionis straminis quo dicta sternatur ecclesia prout
and quotiens opus fuerit, Vicarii ecclesiae praefatae suis agnoscant and sub^nt
sumptibus and expensis. Onera vero refectionis and reparationis Cancelli
ejusdem ecclesiae, inventionisque seu exhibitionis and reparationis Onera
Religiosor.
librorum, vestimentorum and ornamentorum ejusdem quae per ecclesiarum Rectores
inveniri seu exhiberi vel reparari de Iure vel consuetudine debent aut solent
Ac insuper onus solutionis decimarum and aliarum impositionum quarumcunque quae
dictam ecclesiam secundum ejus taxationem vel aliter concernere inposterum
poterint seu debebunt, necnon and caetera onera ordinaria and extraordinaria
ecclesiae praedictae qualitercunque incumbentia seu incumbere debentia Vicario
ejusdem ecclesiae qui erit pro tempore non ascripta superius, dicti Religiosi
subeant in perpetuum and agnoscant. Reservantes nobis and Successoribus nostris
Archiepiscopis Cantuariensibus dictam Vicariam augmentandi and diminuendi si
and quando nobis aut eis videbitur expedire, plenariam potestatem. In quorum
testimonium sigillum nostrum fecimus hiis apponi. Dat. Saltwood quinto Id.
Iunii Anno Domini Millesimo trecentesimo quadragesimo septimo, and nostrae
translationis quarto-decimo.

The Ordination of the Vicarage of St Dunstan, Cant. Scriptura xxviija.

VNiversis tenore praesentium innotescat, quod Nos Walterus permissione etc.
facta inquisitione super valor fructuum and obventionum omnium ecclesiae
sancti Dunstani juxta Cant. quae viris religiosis Priori and Conventui sancti
Gregorii Cantuar' appropriatam esse dinoscitur: Vicarium ecclesiae S. Dunstani
ordinamus in hunc modum, ut viz. ejusdem loci Vicarius qui pro tempore Iuta
Vicarii.
fuerit pro sua sustentatione and suorum omnes decimas minores, oblationes and
caeteros proventus omnimodos percipiat, decima garbarum cujuscunque bladi in
campis crescentis duntaxat excepta, Reservata Religiosis.
quam praefatis Religiosis nomine Rectoriae applicamus, ac ipsos hujusmodi
garbarum decimas perpetuis futuris temporibus percipere debere decernimus ac
etiam ordinamus. Onera vero tam ordinaria Onera eorum.
quam extraordinaria Cancelli, librorum and ornamentorum, quatenus ad Rectores
locorum pertinere consueverunt per hanc nostram ordinationem plene agnoscent.
Salvanobis potestate hanc nostram ordinationem interpretandi, declarandi,
corrigendi, addendi seu detrahendi quotiens and quando nobis expediri
videbitur. In cujus etc. Dat' apud Mortlake decimo sexto ^alen' Augusti 1322.

The tenor of the same Vicarages augmentation.
Johannes permissione divina Cant. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas and
Apostolicae sedis Legatus, cunctis Christi fidelibus Salutem perennem. Ne
perpetui ecclesiarum parochialium Vicarii, Causae augmentationis.
propter rerum inopiam, and suarum portionum tenuitatem egeant, nostro
pastorali officio convenit remedium adhibere. Eapropter religiosos viros
Priorem and Conventum sancti Gregorii Cant. ecclesiam sancti Dunstani Cant. in
proprios usus habentes, ut Domino Stephano Vicario ecclesiae antedictae cujus
Vicariae praesentatio ad ipsos dicitur pertinere, sufficientes de ipsius
ecclesiae fructibus, proventibus and obventionibus portiones, unde ipse possit
and Successores sui in dicta ecclesia Vicarii possint congruam sustentationem
habere, and sibi incumbentia onera supportare, infra certum a nobis eis
praesixum terminum assignarent, nostra authoritate legitima moneri fecimus and
induci. Qui quidem religiosi quandam exhibuerunt ordinationem dictae Vicariae
per bonae memoriae Walterum quondam Cant. Archiepiscopum praedecessorem nostrum
factam, in qua taliter continetur quod Vicarius dictae ecclesiae qui pro
tempore fuerit decimas minores, oblationes and caeteros proventus ad dictam
pertinentes ecclesiam, and provenientes undecunque ad eam debeat percipere and
habere, decimis garbarum cujuscunque generis bladi de terris infra parochiam
praedictae ecclesiae constitutis provenien ibus dictis religiosis retentis. Sed
idem Vicarius asserens dictas portiones in hujusmodi ordinatione Vicariae
contentas and assignatas eidem nullatenus sufficientes fore; judicialiter
demum, post altercationes diu^inas dictarum partium super sufficientia and
insufficientia portionum dictae Vicariae assignatarum in ordinatione praedicta
super valor eorum annuo de mandato nostro and consensu dictarum partium
legitime inquisito, compertum extitit portiones easdem per praedictum
praedecessorem nostrum, ut praemittitur assignatas Vicariae ipsius ecclesiae
quatuor marcis annis singulis duntaxat valere. Vnde Commissarius noster in
hujusmodi negotio rite proccdens, auditis propositis and allegationibus partium
earum, n^cnon depositionibus testium praedictorum hincinde rimatis plenarie and
discussis, nihil que per partem religiosorum quare potiones dictae Vic^riae
augmentarinon debeant and suppleri effectualiter proposito sive dicto, terminis
successivis and variis ad hoc datis, concurrentibusque omnibus and singulis
quae in ea part requirebantur de Iure, in praesentia dictarum partium coram eo
sufficienter comparentium, dictam Vicariam augmentari debere pronuntiavit
finaliter and decrevit Ipsisque Vicariis and Successoribus suis ibidem Vicariis
ultra Augmentatio ipsa.
ordinationem nostri praedecessoris praedicti, ea rata manente, mansum dictae
Vicariae quem Vicarii ejusdem inhabitare solent antiquitus, necnon and
pensionem duarum marcarum sterlingorum annuam per Religiosos praedictos
solvendarum sibi and successoribus suis ibidem Vicariis in festis Natalis
Domini and sancti Iohannis Baptistae equalibas portionibus annuatim in dictae
assignatae su^ portionis augmentum canonice assignavit. Ordinavit insuper and
decrevit Onera Vicarii.
quod idem Vicarius and sui successores in eadem ecclesia Vicarii futuris
temporibus eidem ecclesiae deserviant in divinis sustentationibusque cereorum,
luminarium, ac panis and vini, pro celebratione missarum in eadem. Necnon in
quibuscunque solutionibus decimarum and impositionibus aliis extraordinariis
dictae ecclesiae ad quatuor marcas estimata onera pro medietate supportabunt.
Praefatique religiosi refectiones and reparationes cancelli dictae ecclesiae,
Onera Religiosor.
inventionemque librorum, vestimentorum and ornamentorum ad Rectores locorum
pertinentes s^bibunt perpetim and agnoscent, reservata nobis and Successoribus
nostris etc. Vnde Nos idem Johannes Archiepiscopus praemissa omnia and singula
authoritate nostra ordinaris (ut praemittitur) rite facta approbamus and tenore
praesentium confirmamus. Dat' Cantuariae, iijo. Call. Augusti Anno Domini
Millesimo Cccmo. xlijo. and nostrae translationis nono.

A Record showing the ancient form and Custom of payment of Tithes in
Canterbury, taken out of the Archbishops principal Scriptura xxix.
Registry.
THomas permissione divina Cantuar. Archiepiscopus totius, etc. Dilectis in
Christo siliis Commissario nostro Cant. generali and Archidiaconi nostri
Officiali Salutem, gratiam and benedictonem. Clamosa insinuatione quorundam
Rectorum and Vicariorum ecclesiarum nostrae Civitatis ad aures nostras
pervenit, quod licet ex antiqua and rationabili consuetudine tam in nostra
Civitate quam alibi per totam Civitatem London' antiquitus observata and
legitime praescripta, etiam in contradictorio judicio aliquotiens obtenta, pro
quolibet hospitio seu domicilio dictae nostrae Civitatis pro december s^lidis
sterlingorum per unum annum conducto, quad^antem, and si pro viginti solidis
hujusm' hospitium seu domus per annumconducatur, obolum, and pro hospitio pro
quadraginta solidis per annum conducto denarium, and si hospitium hujusm' pro
majori summa per annum conductum fuerit, plus, juxta summam seu portionem
praedict', inhabitants and conducentes domos et hospitia hujusmodi qualibet
die dominica per annum, et singulis etiam festio solempnibus, and praecipue
Apostolorum quorum etiam vigiliae per annum jejunantur, Deo and ecclesiae in
cujus parochia domus seu aedificia hujusmodi situantur offerre debeant and
tenentur. Sunt tamen nonnulli dictae nostrae Civitatis qui tam oblationes suas
hujusmodi Oblationes.
ecclesiis eorum parochialibus ac Rectoribus and Vicariis earundem vigore
dictae consuetudinis debitas, quam decimas eorum Decimae personales.
personales de lucro negotiationum suarum provenientes and ecclesiis quarum
sunt parochiani debitas injuste subtrahunt and subtrahere moliuntur, ac decimas
hujusmodi solvere contradicunt, objicientes contra Rectores and Vicarios
hujusmodi decimas petentes consuetudinem non solvendi decimas supradictas, quam
Canones vocant corruptelam, and plerumque quod deterius est confederatis and
coadunatis pluribus conditionis similis, per illicitas conventiculas contra
decimas hujusmodi exigentes ex praecogitata malitia gratis insurgunt, and
quatenus in eis est Rectores and Vicarios sic petentes injuste opprimunt and
jurium ecclesiaslicorum subtractiones diversis modis adaugent contra canonicas
sanctiones, in animarum suarum grave periculum and libertatis ecclesiasticae
laesionem manifestam. Nos igitur animabus nostrorum subditorum prospicere and
morbo hujusmodi pestifero quantum a Canone est permissum mederi cupientes.
Vobis con' and utrique vestrum di' committimus and mandamus firmiter
injungendo, quatenus in singulis ecclesiis dictae nostrae Civitatis omnes and
singulos decimas and oblationes hujusmodi injuste subtrahentes, and eas debite
non solventes, diebus dominicis et festivis intramissarum solempnia, cum major
affuerit populi multitudo, authoritate nostra peremptory moneatis et
efficaciter inducatis, quod de eorum decimis seu oblationibus subtractis
ecclesiis quarum sunt parochiani, infra unius mensis spatium a tempore
monitionis vestrae continue numerandum satisfaciant competenter. Et quod de
caetero subtrahentes hujusmodi suas decimas et obl^tiones quatenus ad eos
attinet fideliter persolvant ut tenentur, sub poena excommunicationis majoris
quam in contravenientes et monitionibus vestris non parents in hac part, mora
et culpa eorum in ea part praecedentibus per vos volumus canonice fulminari,
et sic excommunicatos public nuntiari. De nominibus vero hujusmodi
subtrahentium cum omni diligentia et ca^teld before inquiratis seu inquiri
faciatis in singulis parochiis ecclesiarum dictae nostrae Civitatis, in quibus
per ipsarum ecclesiarum Rectores and Vicarios fueritis congrue requisiti. De
die vero receptionis presentium, monitionisque and executionis vestrarum in hac
part factarum modo and forma, ac de nominibus subtrahentium hujusmodi, necnon
de omni eo quod feceritis and inveneritis in hac part, nos cum per partem
dictorum Rectorum and Vicariorum fueritis congrue requisiti certificetis, per
vestras literas patentes, seu certificet alter vestrum qui praesens mandatum
fuerit executus per suas literas patentes harum seriem continentes. Dat' in
palatio nostro Cant. xiiij^o. die menfis Aprilis Anno Domini Millesimo Cccmo.
nonagesimo septimo, and nostraetranslationis anno primo.

Another Record to the same purpose, taken out of the Registry of the
Consistory at Cant. being a deposition Scriptura xxxa.
or witnesses examination taken in a suite, Anno 1457. there commenced, for
tithes, by the then Parson of St Elphege, Cant.
THomas Proud de parochia sancti Elphegi Civitatis Cantuar. aetatis L. annorum
and ultra, liberae conditionis ut dicit, interrogatus an sit consuetudo in
Civitate Cant. quod omnes and singuli parochiani cujuscunque parochiae tenentur
offerre diebus dominicis and aliis diebus solemnibus quorum vigiliae jejunantur
secundum valorem redditus domuum, hoc est, si domus solvat xxs. obolum, and si
xls denarium, and sic secundum ratam ascensive and descensive, dicit quod sic.
Interrogatus quomodo scit, dicit quod ita ipse observavit, and obtulit, and sic
vidit observari toto tempore suo, ac etiam sic audivit a tempore and per tempus
cujus contrarii memoria hominum non existit a praedecessoribus suis ita
observatum fuisse Interrogatus an novit aliquam constitutionem in hac part
latam dicit quod audivit quod sic, and quod virtute illius constitutionis ac
consuetudinis praedictae quidam magister Galfridus Langbrok nuper Vicarius
sancti Dunstani extra muros Civitatis Cantuar. contra Iohannem Belsyre
parochianum suum in casu consimili per sententiam diffinitivam victoriam
obtinuit. Interrogatus insuper an Curati dictae Civitatis praesentes and
praedecessores sui pro temporibus suis, and praesertim dictus Dominus Johannes
Permenter Rector sancti Elphegi fuerunt and sunt in possessione seu quasi juris
percipiendi and habendi hujusmodi oblationes ab inhabitantibus and occupantibus
domos and hospitia infra suam parochiam modo and forma praemissis, dicit quod
sic. Interrogatus per quantum tempus, dicit quod de notitia, and scientia suis
per x. xx. xxx. and xl. annos, and de auditu suo per lx. annos, and per tempus
cujus contrarii memoria hominum non existit, and nunquam audivit de contrario
usque ad litem hanc motam. These things are con-tested by William Sellow and
John Mersh both of that Parish.



An abstract out of the Life of St Elphege, written by Osborne Scriptura xxxja.
a Monk of Canterbury in the Conquerors time, of what concerns the siege and
spoil of Canterbury (both Cathedral and City) happening in the year 1011.
never before Printed.
SEd totius malignitatis magister simul ac minister Diabolus, Diabolus inquam
totius malignitatis magister simul ac minister, dum infideliu^ paucitatem ad
injustam justi hominis necem propter copiam fidelium impellere non potuisset,
aliam patrandi sceler^s arte^ aggreditur, per quam illi omni sociorum timore
sublato quod nequissime cogitaverant crudelissime exequerentur. Quendam namque
Edricum Rex totius Imperii sui Praefectum statuerat, hominem Edricus Regis and
Regni P^fectus.
humili quidem genere, sed qui lingu^ divitias ac nobilitatem comparaverat,
callentem ingenio, suave^ eloquio, and qui omnes ^d temporis mortales cum
invidia atque persidia tum superbia and crudelitate superaverat. Hujus igitur
fratrem primo nobilitati Cantuariorum in praesentia Regis gratuito
maledicentem, deinde ea quae unicuique ex paterna hereditate pervenissent
violenta dominatione invadentem, hujus inquam fratrem lubricum ac superbum
eadem nobilitas aggressum interfecerat, edes succenderat; justo Dei judicio
agente, ut qui in alios injuste exarsisset: ipse justae vindictae poenas
exolvisset. Cujus sanguinis frater superstes ultionem a Rege postulat. Denegat
Rex postulata, jure fratrem peremptum pronuntiat, qui tantam nobilitatem tanta
animi mobilitate regali palatio inpetere praesumpsisset. Praefectus colorem
mutatus palatium egreditur, junctisque secum december milibus viris quam optime
armatis occisum fratrem ulcisci conatur. Sed dum conatus suos parum processisse
conspiceret, resistentibus iis quos importunissmos adverfarios habebat, and
ingenti virtute contra certantibus, elatus in iram, Danorum conciliabula
expectat, auxiilia perquirit, non jam ad Cantuarienses solos debellandos, sed
ad totius Britanniae fines depopulandos. Quorum ignaviam maledictis increpitat,
quod tot annos laborando nihil offecerint; cum praesertim Rex senio and
languore, principes otio, omnesque divitiis ac voluptatibus contabescant. Opus
tantummodo esse incepto, cetera rem ipsam expedire. Regnum post victoriam aequa
sort dividendum, se Orientalibus Anglis, illos vero Aquilone potiri. Cujus
hominis pollicitationibus principes Danorum arrecti simul and memores sociorum
per doctrinam Pontificis sibi praereptorum socios se infatigables ad quodcunque
ducere vellet promittunt, dextrasque dant and accipiunt, sacramenta exigunt and
porrigunt. Itaque ma^urato consilio Dani and Angli: Dani relicta statione quam
hiemandi gratia prope Londoniam ceperant, cum innumera class and non segniter
armata Portum Sandvicum subeunt, ea viz. ratione, quod illam and ad receptionem
navium habilem and civitati ad quam Portus Sandwici.
tendebant acceperint primum. At Edricus cum innumera pedestri multitudine and
ipse pedes occurrens exercitum intolerabilem fac'. Hosts Pontifici Praefectis
nobilitati omnis Cantuariae necem intentant. Cujus Rei fama civitas
Cantuariorum vehementer permota, propterea quod neque alimentorum subsidia in
ea fuissent, nec illis comparandis tempus jam idoneum suppeteret totas spes
atque res suas in manus summi sacerdotis comendat, templumque Domini quod
excellentissima omnium populorum veneratione ibi quidem colitur assidua
supplicatione frequentat. Arbitrabantur etenim sese propter loci sanctitatem
ibi vitari posse, and omnia magis fieri, quam se violenta inimicorum manu inde
avelli. Sed verus ac sempiternus Deus, etc.

Mox universa nobilitas, quae olim in legis violatorem vindictam exercuerat:
universa inquam nobilitas lacrimabili quaest^ Pontificem circumdat, orat ut
urbem exeat, vitae consulat: in vulgi morte damnum quidem esse, sed quovis modo
tolerabile; illius vero vitam omnium in terravitas excellere. Sentiens autem
beatus ille suasionem tametsi piam sua tametsi existimatione indignam, long
inquit alia mihi via gradiundum puto, dum praeteritos mecum labores reputans,
aeternam Dei retributionem cogito, etc.

Postquam accepere ea homines quibus omnia quam mors and cruciatus corporis
cariora erant, citato mox consilio, diversi alius alio se transferunt: plures
vero placandi gratia Danos accedunt, ratos se apud hosts tutos fore qui infra
muros Civitatis tuti esse non possent. Sed e contra omnia venere. Sed me piget
ista narrare. At Aelphegus convocatis pauperibus populi sui, hortabatur
Aelph^gus.
eos bono animo esse, Deum prae oculis habere, praeter eum qui corpus and
animam in gehennam perdere potest nichil formidare, etc.

Deinde Episcopali super illos benedictione effusa, pacis communione in osculo
sancto libata, dum divini epuli omnes participes efficeret, se illis, illos
sibi, utrosque autem omnium protectori Deo commendavit. Iamque dies aderat
primos visura tumultus: Ecce tota Civitas hostili agmine circumvallata omnem
exeundi civibus libertatem negabat. At illi pro muris consistentes, resistendi
audaciam non tam ostendebant quam simulabant. Vigesimo autem obsidionis die
exhausto quicquid ad vitae usum paraverant, mittitur a Pontifice qui Dano
subgerat ut ab incepto desistat, populum innocenter obsidionem pati, cavere ne
divinae correptionis flagello pro filiorum castigatione ad tempus concesso
nimis ins^enter abutatur. Fieri plerumque ut quem pater heredem vult, bac^
percutiat, baculum post in ignem projiciat. Sed Angli (nam illi ad impietatem
procliviores extiterant) quo amplius cognatum populum afflictari cernebant, eo
sero^ores instare, vineas agere, turres extruere, arietibus murum ferire,
igneas faces jacere, prorsus nihil intactum habere. Inde feralis per contiguas
domos ignis conceptus, horrendos crines attollit, ac saeviente austro per omnia
loca se dilatando spargit. Cernere tibi videreris, aut Romanas flammas Neronem
mirari, aut Trojana incendia Aeneam deflere. Tum vero miseranda inter cives
cunctatio, utrumnam desertis murorum propugnaculis ad proprias domus
convolarent, an eis neglectis munitioni incumberent: vicit communem utilitatem
privata affectio, filiorum dulcis recordatio tuendae familiae innata compassio
Currunt itaque furore praecipites, animositate audaces, neque vitae memores
nequ^ mori potentes. Rapiunt e mediis ignibus conjuges and caros liberos,
hostili gladio statim feriendos. Sed illis ad cineres aedificiorum attentius
occupatis, ecce quod dictu quoque miserabile est, effracta urbe, exercitus
ingreditur, terribilis sonitus ex Vastatio Civitatis.
clamore vocum simul and ex clangore tubarum attollitur; adeo ut omnia
Civitatis fundamenta concuti viderentur. Quae tunc Danorum immanitas.
facies rerum, quam miserabilis confusio malorum, sub nullius scientiam cadere
potest qui non ejusdem calamitatis spectator affuerit. Alii namque ferro
jugulati, alii flammis consumpti, plures vero supra muros praecipites dati,
nonnulli quod dicere pudet per verenda suspensi deficiunt. Matronae quas
ceteris clariores nobilitas effecerat, dum thesauros quos non habebant coguntur
prodere capillis per omnis civitatis plateas distractae, ad ultimum flammis
injectae moriuntur. Super omnia in minorem aetatem crudelitas desevit, dum
parvul^ a matrum uberibus evulsi aut lanceis exciperentur aut superacto
plaustro minutatim conterentur. Iam vero ea quae sequuntur mala pro dolorum
magnitudine vix enarrare valeo. Ecce etenim venerandus Pontifex non ferens
tantam suorum depopulationem, dum forte plangentium Monachi in eccles.
Salvatoris circumsepti.
turba monachorum in ecclesia Salvatoris circumseptus fuisset: repent manibus
tenentium se lapsus de ecclesia evasit, currensque ad locum cadaveribus plenum
inter densissimos hostium cuneos se ingerit, talia geminando inclamitans.
Parcite ait parcite, etc.

Protinus ergo innumeris manibus fortissimis athleta carpitur, ac intercepto
g^jure vox loquentis praepeditur. Vinculis palmae A^egus capitur.
innectuntur, genae unguibus dissecantur, pugnis and calcibus latera tunduntur.
Inter haec servus Dei muto simillimus, ne uno quidem verbo dolorem prodere; sed
sancti spiritus consolatione roboratus, summa tantum labia quasi cum Deo
loquens movere. Sicque ad atrium Templi non tam deductus quam impiorum manibus
impulsus, jubetur novi flagitii spectator assistere, quatenus mortem ante
mortem videret, nullumque mortis genus existeret, quod illum sive patientem
sive suis condolentem praeteriret. Accedunt itaque filii Diaboli ad templum
filii omnipotentis Dei, cuppas super invicem positas inflammant, tectum exinde
molientes amburere. Iam plumbi materies a facie ignis resoluta Templum
spoliatum.
coepit introrsum defluere, cum bea^a monachorum plebs caput pallio cooperta,
amaris lachrymis faciem rigata in Deum per omnia confisa egrediebatur, datura
pro Salvatore quod pro omnibus ille dignatus est impendere. Ad quam ferro
excipiendam mox carnifex occurrens, mirabili atque miserabili eandem caede
devastat. Quid tum quaeso etc.

Igitur ex omni numero, qui ad octo millia hominum protendebatur, Decimatio
populi.
quatuor solummodo monasticae professionis, octingentos autem inferioris
ordinis viros remansisse accepimus, quos primum beneficii gratia pro decimis
computatos, deinde verberibus acriter -- aut pecuniaria redemptione dignos
judicaverint aut servilibus mancipandos operibus secum abduxerunt etc.

Iam populo caeso, jam urbe flammata, jam denique Christi templo violato,
perscrutato, spoliato, extrahitur sanctus toto corpore vinctus, furentis populi
manibus occidendus. Cumque Porta septentrionalis.
ad Portam Septemtrionis praecedentium raptu, and subsequentium impulsu
traheretur, ecce ii quos solos paulo ante ex omni Civitatis ruina superfuisse
commemoravi, pedes trabibus inserti sub militari custodia tenebantur. Qui viso
Pontisice etc.

Ducitur igitur ostia Christi de urbe ad classem, de class ad carcerem, de
carcere ad iniquitatis Iudicem. Carcerem pronuntio quem horror tenebrarum
foedavit, quem augustia parietum foedavit, quem ranarum importunitas foedavit.
Ibi virum menses septem duodeno milite septum servavere rati illum ecclesiae
patrimonia spoliaturum, ac pro sua liberatione eis daturum. Sed Elphegus etc.

Expectato autem sacrosancto Dominicae requici Sabatho, cum perfectae salutis
integritatem se recepisse, nec quemquam ex omni populo per totum triduum
obiisse conspicerent, legant principes legionum quatuor, qui pontifice adito,
primo quidem pro impenso beneficio gratias exhibeant, deinde hujus conditionis
alloquium proponant, ut si vita ac liberate velit potiri sexaginta argenti
talenta persolvat, singulis talentis quinquaginta librarum pondera appensis.
Praeter haec spondeat se suasurum Regi, ut cum impossible sit absque grandi
pecunia Anglos Danis conciliari ducenta superioris ponderis talenta solvantur,
sicque foedus inter utrosque populos firmum constituatur. Quo ille accepto
nuntio, etc.

Foundation of Lukedale Chantery.
SCiant praesentes and futuri ad quos praesens scriptum pervenerit Scriptura
xxxija.
quod ego Rogerus Dei gratia Abbas Sancti Augustini Cantuarien. and Conventus
ejusdem loci concessimus Reginaldo de Cornhelle and heredibus suis habere
cantariam suam in capella Reginaldas de Cornhelle.
sua quae constructa est intra septa Curiae suae de Lukedale faciendam Curia de
Lukedale.
per Capellanum suum commensalem in propriis expensis, salvo in omnibus Iure
matricis ecclesiae de Littlebourne, ita quod praefatus Reginaldus vel heredes
sui nullis futuris temporibus onerabunt personam vel sacerdotem praedictae
ecclesiae de Littlebourne occasion cantariae in jam dicta capella faciendae.
Reddet igitur tam praedictus Reginaldus quam heredes sui integre and plenarie
deciniationes omnium terrarum quas habent in eadem parochiatam magnas quam
minimas matrici ecclesiae de Littlebourne. Praeterea d^bunt decimas duarum
partium molendini de Bremlinge, and tertiae partis si eam recuperare potuerint,
and decimas Molendinum de Bremlinge.
feni tantilli prati quod ibi habent and duos solidos annuos super altar
matricis ecclesiae de Littlebourne, reddend, per manum Willielmi de S^octing
vel heredum suorum in duobus terminis, scilicet in media quadragesima 12^. and
in festo sancti Michaelis 12d. Visitabunt etiam matricem ecclesiam cum
oblationibus suis in quatuor annuis festivitatibus, Natalis scilicet Domini,
Purificationis, Paschae, and festivitate sancti Vincentii, cum in partibus
illis fuerint, ut parochiani saepedictae ecclesiae de Littlebourne. Sacerdos
etiam qui pro tempore in saepenominata capella ministrabit fidelitatem faciet
personae saepedictae matricis ecclesiae, quod in nullo defraudabit eam in
decimis magis sive minimis, nec in praedictis oblationibus confessionibus sive
testamentis, sponsalibus, sive purificationibus, vel tricennalibus, vel in
aliquibus ad Ius ecclesiae de Littlebourne pertinentibus. Veniens itaque
saepenominatus Reginaldus in Capitulum nostrum sacramentum prestitit pro se and
heredibus suis se and heredes suos in omnibus and per omnia haec supradicta
fideliter observaturos. Hiis testibus etc.

A Grant made by Archbishop Wlfred to the family at Scriptura xxxiija.
Christ-Church permitting them to enjoy certain houses which themselves had
built (it seems) upon the reedifying of the Monastery.
IN nomine sanctae Salvatoris Dei and Domini nostri Jesus Christi Anno ab
incarnatione ejusdem Dei and redemptoris mundi
D. CCC. xiij. Indict. iija. praesidente Christi gratia archipontifice Wlfredo
Metropolitano sedem ecclesiae Christi quae sita est in Dorovern^a civitate Anno
iiijo. Episcopatus ejusdem Archiepiscopi divina ac fraterna pietate ductus
amore Deo auxiliante renovando and restaurando pro honor and amore Dei sanctum
monasterium Dorovernensis ecclesiae reaedificando resici auxiliantibus ejusdem
ecclesiae presbiteris and Diaconibus cunctoque Clero Domino Deo servientium
simul. Ego Wlfredus misericordia Dei Archisacerdos pro intimo cordis affectu
dabo and concedo familia Christi habere and perfruere domos quas suu proprio
labor construxerunt jure perpetuo hereditatis munificentia illis viventibus
seu decedentibus cuicunque relinquere vel donare voluerint unusquisque liberam
habeant facultatem in eodem monasterio donandi sed nec alicui for as extra
congregationi. Ita etiam in Christi caritate obsecrans praecipio omnibus
successoribus meis hanc praedictam donationem inconcusse and inviolatam salva
ratione servandam sine fine semper in evum: hac tamen condition ut Deo
humiliores and gratiores omnium beneficiorum Dei semper existant, seduloque
frequentatione canonicis horis ecclesiam Christi visitent orantes ac
deprecantes pro seipsis propriis piaculis and pro aliorum remissione peccatorum
misericordiam Domini implorent. Necnon domum refectionis and dormitorium
communiter frequentent juxta regulam monasterialis disciplinae vitae observant.
Vt in omnibus honorificetur Deus and vita nostra and bona conversatio nobis
nostrisque proficiat in bonum. Si quis illorum per audaciam suae malae
voluntatis hanc praedictam constitutionem inritam habere and in oblivionem
deducere, and congregare convivias ad vescendum and bibendum seu etiam
dormiendum in propriis cellulis sciat se quisquis ille sit reatum se esse
propriae domi and in potestate Archiepiscopi ad habendum and cuicunque ei
placuerit donandum. l' manentem itaque hanc kartulam in sua nihilominus
firmitate. Ego Wlfred gratia Dei Arch' episc' signo sanctae crucis Christi
confirmans subscripsi.

Ego Wernoth pr' Ab' con' and subscripsi. Ego Wulfheard pr' con' and sub'. Ego
Heamund pr' con' and sub'. Ego Oswulf pr' con' and sub'. Ego Ceolstan pr' con'
and sub. Ego Tudda pr' con' and sub'. Ego Diornoth pr' con' and sub'. Ego
Guthmund pr' con' and sub'. Ego Cuthberht pr' con' and sub'. Ego Coenhere Dia.
con' and sub'. Ego Brunheard Dia. con' and sub'. Ego Haehferth praeposi' con'
and sub.
An Apology for Archery, by Mr John Bingham, in Scriptura xxxiiija.
his Notes upon Aelians Tactiks, page 24. etc.
ARrowes] Archers have always been of special esteem for the field, and
preferred before the other kinds of lightarmed. Many nations have been
commended for their skill in shooting. Amongst the Grecians the Cretans were
(of ancient time) sole Archers, Pausan. in Attecis 40.
as Pausanias witnesses. Yet was not their service equal with the service of
the Persians. For Xenophon confesses, that the Persian Bow overreached the
Cretan a great way: and that the Rhodians with their sling out-threw the Cretan
Bow. Of the Carduchans a people, through whose Country the Grecians passed at
their return out of Persia Xenoph. de exp^d Cyri. lib. 4. 322. C.
Xenophon writes thus: They carried no other arms, then Bows and Slings.
They were excellent Archers; and had Bows well nigh three Cubits long; Arrows
more, then two Cubits. When they shot, they drew the string, applying their
hand somewhat toward the neither end of the Bow, setting their left foot
forward. With their Arrows they pierced both Targets, and Curates. The
Grecians putting thongs to the midst of their Arrows sent them backat the
enemy in steed of Darts. The same in effect is reported by Diod. Sicul. lib.
14. 411.
Diodorus Siculus. Of the Parthian horsemen, Appian says: When Crassus
commanded the light-armed to disband, and go to the charge, they went not
far, but meeting with many Arrows, and being sore galled with them, they
retired straight, and hid themselves amongst the armed, and gave beginning of
disorder, and fear, representing to the sight of the rest, the force, and
violence of the shot, that rent all arms, they fell upon, and made way as well
thorough bodies, that had the best, as the worst furniture defensive: giving
mighty and violent strokes from stiff and great Bows, and forcing out the
Arrow boysterously with the compass, and bent of the Bow. Plutarch. in Crasso.
(...)
Plutatch has the very words, that are in Appian. The Indians also were good
Archers, albeit not much praised by Q. Curtius, Curtius lib. 8 353.
He says: their Arrows were two Cubits long, which they deliver out of their
Bows, with more labor, then effect: for as much as the Arrow whose whole
efficacy is in lightness, becomes altogether unwieldy by reason of the
weight. And yet he tells, that Alexander, at the assault of the principal
City of the Mallians, was stroke thorough his Curace into the side beneath the
Pappes with an Indian Arrow: with whom Plutarch in Alexan. Diod. Sicul. li^.
^7. 614.
Plutarch and Diod. Siculus accord. Arr lib. 6. 129. E.
Arrian adds the wound was so deep, that his breath was seen to issue out
together with his blood. The Goths and other people of the North, that invaded
the Roman Empire, had their chief victories against the Romans by the help
of Bows, and Arrows. Veget lib. 1. cap. 20.
Vegetius (before alleged) speaks it plainly: So our Soldiers, says he,
unarmed both bodies and heads, encountering with the Goths, were oftentimes
wholly defeated, and slain, with the multitude of their Arrows. I may not
pretermit the praise of our Nation in this skill. Our own stories testify,
that the great battles, we gained against the French, were gained by the
joynt-shooting of our Archers principally. And that the English have heretofore
excelled in Archery and shooting, is clear by the testimony even of Strangers.
Aurel. Cicuta de (...). mil. lib. 2. 206.
Cicuta (whom I named before) commending the use of Bows, as necessary for the
service of the field (and that long after Guns were invented) prefers the
English before all other, and sets him down, as a pattern for other to
follow. And Patrit. Parall. part secunda lib. 3. page 37.
Patritius, disputing of the violence of Arrows, doubts not to affirm, that
an English Arrow with a little wax put upon the point of the head, will pass
through any ordinary Co^slet or Curace. Howsoever the credit of Bows is lost,
at this present, with many great Soldiers, yet have they of ancient time been
highly prised. Veget. lib. 1. cap. 15.
Vegetius says; how great advantage good Archers bring in fight, both Cato in
his Books of military discipline does show evidently, and Claudius, by
augmenting the number of Archers, and teaching of them the use of their Bows,
overcame the enemy, whom before he was not able to match. Scipio Africanus (the
younger) being to give battle to the Numantines, that before had forced a
Roman army to pass under the yoke, thought he could not otherwise have the
better, unless he mingled chosen Archers in every Century. And Leo cap. 6.. 5.
Leo the Emperor in his Constitutions military has this Constitution amongst
other: You shall command all the Roman youth, till they come to forty years of
age, whether they have mean skill in shooting, or not, to carry Bows and
Quivers of Arrows. For since the Art of shooting has been neglected, many,
and great losses have befalne the Romans. And in another place: Leo cap. 11..
49.
you shall enjoyne the Commanders under you, in winter to take a view, and to
signify to the Turmarches (Coronells) how many horse, and what kind of arms
the Soldiers, under their Commands, stand in need of, that necessary provision
be made, and the Soldiers be furnished in time convenient. But specially you
are to have care of Archers; and that they, who remain at home, and have
vacation from war, hold Bows and Arrows in their houses. For carelessness
herein has brought great damage to the Roman State. So Leo. This of old time
was the opinion of the Romans concerning Archers. How we are fallen out with
them in our days (the skill of the Bow, being a quality so commendable, and so
proper to our Nation) I know not, unless fire-weapons perhaps have put them
out of countenance. And surely it may not be denied, that the force of
fire-weapons of our time does far exceed the height of all old inventions for
annoying the enemy. And, when I have given them the first place, I will not
doubt to give the second to Bows and Arrows: being so far from casting them
of, that I would rather follow the wisdom of the Grecians; who albeit they
esteemed Arrows the best flying weapons, yet thought it not amiss to hold in
use slinges, and darts. Every weapon has it property; and that which is fit
for one service, is not so fit for another. The fire-weapons have their
advantages; They have also their disadvantages. Their advantage is, they pierce
all defense of armor, and lighting upon a place of the body, the wound whereof
endangereth life, they bring with them certain death. Their disadvantages are,
they are not always certain, sometimes for want of charging, sometimes
through overcharging, sometimes the Bullet rolling out, sometimes for want of
good powder, or of dried powder, sometimes because of an ill dried match, not
fit to coal, or not well cocked. Besides they are somewhat long in charging,
while the Musketier takes down his Musket, uncockes the match, blows,
proynes, shuts, casts of the pan, castes about the musket, opens his charges,
charge, draws out his skouring stick, rams in the powder, draws out
again, and puts up his skouring stick, lays the musket on the rest, blows
of the match, cocks, and tryes it, gardes the pan, and so makes ready. All
which actions must necessarily be observed, if you will not fail of the true
use of a Musket. In rain, snow, fogs, or when the enemy has gained the wind,
they have small use. Add that but one rank (that is the first) can give fire
upon the enemy at once. For the rest behind, discharging, shall either wound
their own Companions before, or else shoot at randon, and so nothing endanger
the enemy, the force of a musket being only availeable at point blancke.
Contrariwise the disadvantage of Arrows is in the weakness of the stroke,
which is not able to enter a Curace, that the foot or horse now use. Yet can
no weather be found, wherein you may not have good use of Bows: rain, snow,
wind, hail, fogs, hinder little (especially the string of the Bow being not
to wet) nay rather profit. Because in them you can hardly discern, muchlesse
avoyde, the fall of the Arrow. As for quickness in delivery, the Bow far
excels the Musket. A good single Archer is able to give five shot in
exchange for one of the Musketier; and that with such certainty, that you shall
not hear of an Archer that misseth the delivery of his Arrow, where the
Musketier, often fails by reason of the accidents and impediments before by
me rehearsed. Join that a whole squadron of Archers, being embattailed, may
shoot at once together: which only the first rank of Musketeers may do. And
make the case there were a hundred Musketeers, and a hundred Bow-men each
digested into ten files, each file containing ten men, the Bow-men shall be
able to shoot at once a hundred Arrows (all their Arrows) for ten Bullets
given by the Musketeers, namely those ten of the first rank discharging alone.
It must not be pretermitted, that the Bow and Quiver both for marching, and all
service, are lighter and of less labor to use, then a Musket, which is no
small advantage in arms and fight. To conclude, the Bow-men may be placed
behind the armed foot, and yet in shooting over the Phalange annoy the enemy
before joining, and Plut. in Sylla.
all the time of fight, even whilst they are at pushe of Pike; where the
Musketier, there placed, must either idly look on, or else playing with his
Musket, most of all endanger his own friends. Neither is the force of Arrows
so weak, as is imagined, no not in the arming of our days. For the Pike
albeit he have his head and body covered, yet are his legs, and feet, his
arms, and hands open to wounds: any of which parts being wounded brings a
disability of service. To say nothing of his face, and eyes, before which the
showers of Arrows falling like a tempest without intermission, must needs
breed a remediless terror, and make him think rather of saving himself, then
offending his enemy. The Musketier being also unarmed is as subject to the shot
of Arrows, as the Archer is to the shot of the Musket; and the Arrow touching
any vital part, as much takes away life, as does the Musket. Lastly a
horseman for his own person (I must confess) is safe enough from the danger
of Arrows by reason of his armor; but his horse, being a fair and large
mark, and having neither barbe, nor pectorall, nor ought else to hide his head
or breast, how can he escape wounds? Witness our fields in France, where our
Archers always beat the French horse, being barbed, and better armed, then
our horse are, at this day. And for the bloody effect of Bows the story of
Plutarch is worth the rehearsing. He, in the life of Crassus has thus:
Plutarch in Crasso.
The Parthians opposing the Cataphracts against the Roman horse, the other
Persians galloping here and there dispersedly, and troubling the face of the
field, broke up from the bottom, Hills of Sand, that raised infinite dust,
whereby the Romans lost their sight and voice: and thronging together, and
thrusting one another were wounded, and dyed not a simple, of quick death, but
tormented with convulsions and pangs of grief, wallowing up, and down, in the
sand to break the Arrows in their wounds, or else endeavoring to pluck out
the hooked heads, which had pierced veins and sinews, renting a fresh
themselves, and adding torment to torment: so that many dyed in this manner,
and the rest became unprofitable. And when Publius Crassus desired them once
more to charge the Cataphracts, they showed their hands nailed to their
Targets, and their feet fastened to the ground, whereby they were unable
either to fly, or fight. These wonders did the Parthian Bows, which
notwithstanding were not to be compared to our ancient English Bows, either
for strength, or far shooting. And that we may not seem to rely upon
antiquity alone. Patric. paral. ^il. pa l. 2. 39.
The battle of Curzolare (commonly called the battle of Lepanto) fought in
our days betwixt the Turks, and Christians by Sea may serve for an experience
of the service of Bows and Arrows. In which there dyed of the Christians by
the Arrows of the Turks above five thousand, albeit they were in Galleyes and
Ships, and had their blinds pretended to save from sight, and mark of the
Turks, where as the Artillery of all sorts of the Christians consumed not so
many Turks: notwithstanding the Christians had the victory. Now then for us to
leave the Bow, being a weapon of so great efficacy, so ready, so familiar, and
as it were so domestical to our Nation, to which we were wont to be accustomed
from our Cradle, because other Nations take themselves to the Musket, has not
so much as any show of reason. Other Nations may well forbear that, they never
had. Neither Italian, nor Spaniard, nor French, nor Dutch, have these five
hundred years, been accounted Archers. It was a skill almost appropriated to
our Nation. By it, we gained the battles of Cressy, of Poitiers, of
Agincourt, in France: of Navarre, in Spain: By it, we made our selves famous
over Christendom. And to give it over upon a conceit only (for no experience
can say that our Bow was ever beaten out of the field by the Musket) will prove
an imitation of Aesops dog, who carrying a piece of flesh in his mouth over a
River, and seeing the shadow in the water, snatched at the shadow, and left
the flesh. I speak not this to abase the service of Muskets, which all men
must acknowledge to be great; I only show, there may be good use of Bows, if
our Archers were such, as they were wont: which is not to be despaired, and
will easily come with exercise.

A Discourse of the Privilege commonly called Vide pro Becket in Catalogo
Archiep.
Clergy, branched into the five following Particulars, viz.
1. The nature and qualities of the privilege, what it is, and whence it came.
2. The form and manner how it is put in practice. 3. The antiquity thereof in
the land. 4. The extent of it to lay men, and the cause thereof. 5. The
declining of it by degrees, and restrained condition thereof with us at this
day.
TO begin with the first. The better to know the nature and quality of this
privilege, liberty, immunity, exemption 1. Particular.
(callit which you please) I must let you know, that by the Canon Law (for I
will look no higher) every Clergy man has a certain Franchese granted him,
known by the term of Privilegium Clericale, the which as a chain, consists
and is made of many links. One, and that the chief, whereof is this. That he
may not be called to secular judgment c. Si diligenti. De foro comp. and
Lindw. in Provinciali. de off^. Ord c. 2. verb. ecclesiasticali privilegio.
. That is, that he may not be convented nor brought into question for any
matter by or before a temporal Judge. Within the compass and extent of the
which privilege, the Canons and Canonists bring as well civil as criminal
causes, so exempting Clerks from the secular power in the one as well as the
other. And by the way, if Dr Ridley, from whom I have it, be not deceived, this
I may safely say, that many titles of the Canon Law, such as those of buying
and selling, of leasing, letting and taking to ferme, of morgaging and
pledging, of giving by Deed of gift, of detecting of collusion, and cousenage,
of murder, of theft, and receiving of thieves, and such like, although they are
known notoriously to belong to the conusance of the Commonlaw at this day, yet
with the matters whereof they treat, were anciently in practice and allowed in
Bishops Courts, in this land, amongst Clerks. My Author, in my judgment,
speaks probably, but his reasons are many and large his discourse, and
therefore (for brevity sake) I refer you over to his Book View of the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Law. page 103.
. In case this once were so, yet time has worn it quite out of use, a thing
both at home and abroad notorious; for Conarruvias a late Civilian of Spain
can say, that, as in France, in real actions, so also in England, in real,
mixed and personal actions, by custom here used, Clerks are convented and
compelled to answer before the secular Judge Conarr. Pract. quaest. c. 3^. Tom.
2. page 497. number. 5.
. A course (as he notes) that much withdrawes them from their calling, and
such an one as is not known to take place in Spain. Ad rem redeo. The Clergy
of this Kingdom bearing themselves too much upon this privilege, heretofore
dared, and in other parts to this day are not afraid, to act and commit many
foul and heinous crimes: the truth of which assertion will easily appear by
the Story both of the Venetian Controversy, and of Archbishop Becket, who may
be rightly said, like a stout Champion, to have stood in defense and
maintenance of this ecclesiastical liberty (amongst the rest) usque ad aras:
This being one of the articles, (as himself in his Epistle to Pope Alex. 3.
reports) for which he and the King were at mutual defiance viz. That Clerks
and religious men might be taken from the Church to secular judgment Fox. Acts
and Monum. Tom. 1. page 282.
. The consequence of this privilege being so bad, and withal the
peremptorinesse of the men of the Church in claiming it as due and derived to
them Iure divino (for so they here sometimes did, and in other parts yet do
think of it) have provoked many to argue and debate the case pro and contra.
Amongst which (besides the controversy between Pope Paul. 5. and the
Venetians about it; and another like difference happening in France between the
Prelates and the Lord Peter's many years agone, reported in the Acts and
Monuments vol. 1. page 462. and so forward) Duarenus Com. in Digest. tit. de
Iudic. (...). ult. page 166. ^bisupra.
a famous Civilian of France, and Conarruvias f (whom I named before) an eminent
Lawyer of Spain, and a Bishop, both, as to the Papists, without exception,
being such themselves, have scanned and discussed the point, both of which
conclude, that this privilege descends not de Iure divino. Which being so,
inquire we next what positive law there is to uphold it; The Bases then and
props whereon it rests, have their chief foundation laid in many chapters of
that question 11. Q. 1. and in C. at si clerici. c. clerici. and c. qualiter.
de Iudic. c. Nullus. c. si diligenti and c. significasti de foro competenti,
and in many other places of the Canon Law mentioned of Conarruvias, ubi supra.
Through the countenance and warrant of which Canons, and in imitation of them
(as I suppose) the Constitutions extant in the Provincial. c. 1. de foro
competen. and c. 1. de Poenis. and other the like unto them were agreed upon
and made with us. Taking these and the like Canons for their warrant, the
Ordinaries heretofore with us in England were wont to address themselves to
the secular Magistrates, and of them to require and claim such Clerks (called
convict before, and attaint after judgment) as they detained, and went about
to bring or had brought to a trial, for any criminal matter, such as felony
and the like. And if denial or refusal were made of their delivery, then to
proceed to the coertion of the Judge by the censures of the Church, until he
should actually deliver up the Clerk Cap. 1. de foro competenti in Provinciali.
. But if they were delivered upon their demand, then they took them and the
matter to their hearing. Who, if Clerks in holy orders, and able canonically to
purge themselves of the objected crime (I say, canonically, because vulgar
purgation was and is forbidden by the Canon Law Tit. 15. de purgatione canonica
and vulgari.
) then were they acquitted. If they failed in such their purgation, then were
they degraded, or else sent to do perpetual penance in some Monastery. But if
no Clerks, but mere laymen, then were they dismissed in case of such
purgation, but if they were not able so to purge themselves, then were they
perpetually imprisoned (the punishment for an attainted Clerk, without any
allowance of purgation at all The aetiology of this see in the Reformati^.
legum ecclesiastic. de Purgation^. cap. 4.
.) Which things shall more largely be made appear unto you out of the Statutes
and Canons to be cited in the ensuing discourse. Of the further nature of
Clergy, see S. Hen. Finsh his Book Of Law. lib. 4. page 462. For I have
tarried long enough on that point. Yet before I pass to the next, be pleased
that I set before you the form of a Proclamation used to be sent out and
published before purgation, as I met with it in an old manuscript book in my
keeping, entitled

Litera proclamatoria seu citatoria quorum interest.
VV. Permissione divina Conventualis ecclesiae Westm' Abbas humilis discreto
viro Decano de B. salutem and mutuum in Domino charitatis affectum. Instat apud
nos W. de A. clericus super crimine homicidii per ipsum (ut imponitur) in villa
de B. perpetrati, in Curia laicali coram non suo judice, de facto dampnatus,
nobisque adjudicandus secundum libertates ecclesiasticas liberatus, and carceri
nostro, prout moris est, vinculis mancipatus, ut sibi ob ecclesiasticae
libertatis honorem, paternae solicitudinis officio assistentes, ipsius clerici
purgationem super imposito sibi crimine canonice recipere dignaremur. Volentes
igitur dicto clerico in sua justa petitione, quatenus cum justitia poterimus
nostri officii debitum impartiri, ceterisque quorum interest, plenam and
celerem exhibere justitiam in hac part: discretionem vestram sub mutuae
vicissitudinis obtentu requirimus and rogamus in juris subsidium, quatenus
tribus diebus dominicis proximis post receptionem praesentium, in ecclesiis de
B. and C. and aliis convicinis public and solempniter denuntietis seu
denuntiari faciatis, si qui dictum clericum super facinore memorato accusare,
seu aliter procedere voluerint, contra eundem, seu reclamare quominus ipsius
purgationem in forma juris admittere, and ad ejus liberationem procedere non
debeamus, coram nobis vel Commissario nostro compareant in ecclesiae nostra
Conventuali Westm' proximo die Iuridico post festum O. S. proposituri and
ostensuri in forma canonica, causas si quas habeant quare dictam purgationem
ejusdem W. super dicto crimine (ut praemittitur) diffamati in forma juris
admittere, and ad ejus liberationem procedere non debeamus, ac etiam audituri
and facturi in praemissis quod juris fuerit, and consonum rationi, alioquin in
dicto negotio procedetur quatenus de jure poterit and debebit, eorum absentia
non obstante qualiter autem, etc.

To this place belongs the writ called Terris, bonis and catallis 2. Particular.
rehabendis post purgationem. For which see the Interpreter, in Litera. T. I
leave it to the learned to inform and satisfy themselves in this first
Particular by many learned treatises written on this subject, especially of
late by occasion of the Venetian Controversy. And so I pass to the second
Particular, namely the form how this Privilege is put in practice, that is,
the Formalities used at and about the demanding and allowing of Clergy here in
England. But these are so common to be seen at every Assizes and Sessions, and
so obviovs in many men's writings, that I shall not need to make their recital
take up any part of my discourse. I leave them therefore, and invite you to my
next Particular.

The Antiquity of this Privilege here in England. As concerning 3. Particular.
which I find that Matthew Paris makes mention of it in the days of Hen. 2.
in these words. Quod de caetero clericus non trahatur ante Iudicem secularem
personaliter pro aliquo crimine vel trangressione, nisi pro foresta and laico
feodo, unde Regi vel alii Domino seculari laicum debetur servitium Matthew.
Paris. in Hen. 2.
. The Antiquity of this privilege also shows it self by many of the
provincial Constitutions, for example, by c. Item statuimus, and c. si aliqui.
de Poenis. as likewise by c. contingit de Iudiciis, all made by Boniface
Archbishop of Canterbury An. Dom. 1261. and other the like. And indeed the
Antiquity of it is plainly seen in Beckets days. For albeit the King and his
Ministers opposed and resisted it, yet then, if not sooner, it began to take
root here in England. And however by this Customs or Articles of Clarendon,
the Kings purpose was to put it down, and take it away, yet, in part of his
penance for the death of the Archbishop, these Articles that originally were
the occasion of the murder were by himself revoked Antiquitat. Britan. in vita
Thomae Becket.
. So as it may be said to have prevailed at that time, as it were, in
contradictorio judicio. And not only so but afterward, by degrees, through the
means of succeeding Archbishops (Stephen Langton especially, and Boniface,
stout Prelates both) backed by the Pope and his Canons, it did take place so
far, as that, not only after the publication of Magna Charta, it was ever
construed and conceived to be a Church-liberty Vide Stat. 4. H. 4. c. 3.
, but also sithence, beside the participation that it had with the rest of the
Church liberties in general in their allowance by the often iterated
confirmation of that Grand-Charter, it became at length established by many
particular Acts of Parliament, as first of all by that of the 3. Ed. 1. c. 2.
following within little more then twenty years after the making of the great
Charter. The next whereunto (from which we may argue the allowance of it) is
that of the 4. Ed. 1. c. 5. Thirdly it obtained express confirmation by the
Stat. of Articuli Cleri. 9. Ed. 2. c. 15. and 16. But my purpose being only in
this place to show the Antiquity of this privilege, and not to make any
larger Catalogue of the Acts of Parliament that have de tempore in tempus
confirmed it to the Church, then may serve to prove the same to have once, and
that how long since, been in it numbers absolute here in this land, therefore
enough of this.

Come we now to the extent of this Privilege. Touching which I must needs say
that the Canon Law (as all know) Particular 4.
affords it only to Clerks in orders. Secondly, that, for ought that I can
find, there is not any Statute of this land that ex professo has granted or
extended it to laymen, only the Stat. 4. Hen. 7. c. 13. and some other since
imply it. How is it then that heretofore and at this day laymen lay hold of,
and have the benefit of this privilege? Surely, by Custom, which as
Harpsfield Hist. eccles. Angl.
writing of Hen. 7. witnesses, first set footing here in those days. Quin and
hoc (says he) his temporibus in Anglia obtinuit, ut si quis legere potuisset,
and si nullo sacro ordini foret initiatus, pari potiretur privilegio. Now how
this Custom come up I freely confess I am to learn, and one would wonder how
laymen should come to share with Clerks in their so peculiar privilege.
Polydor Virgil making mention of it, says because Clericis affines Histor.
Angl. lib. 26.
. But in my poor opinion happily thus. Because an evident great favor and
benefit redounded to Clergymen in the enjoying of this privilege, in that
notwithstanding their conviction before the secular Magistrate, they might
escape without punishment (at least of death, and loss of member) in case they
were able canonically to purge themselves before their Ordinary. And because
also by the Canon Law, it belonged to the Church and ecclesiastical Judge to
handle the plea of Clergy, namely whether the offender be indeed (as in word
he affirms himself to be) a Clerk C. Si Iudex. de senten. excem. lib. 6.
. Therefore, in favor of laymen, who could not but take it much to heart to
see Clerks by this their immunity to escape, they themselves the whilst for
want of it, suffering; and no less in favor of life; the secular Magistrates
admitting and conniving at their plea, or their Ordinaries plea for them, of
Clergy, permitted them as Clerks to have the benefit of Clergy, in case (to
color over the matter) they could but read like a Clerk (the Book being made
as it were Vmpire between the two Judges:) the Ordinaries in the interim, for
the enlargement of their Jurisdiction readily condiscending, and after common
practice had in process of time given it the force of a Custom and so of a
law, being constrained to make no difference in this point of Clerks and Laics
that would pray their Clergy, but to challenge, claim and require them all
alike; so far forth (namely in such cases) as the Statutes of the land have
not disallowed nor restrained the same. Ita mihi videtur, correctione alterius
melius me sentientis semper salva. And so inclining toward an end of this
discourse, I desire you to hearken to the last of my five Particulars.

The declining and waning of this Privilege by degrees, and 5. Particular.
restrained condition thereof with us at this day. To demonstrate which I will
tie my self to speak even wholly out of the Statutes and Canons of this our
Realm: ordering them so, as that out of them you may see this point
historically lead along from beginning to end. Turning then with me the old
saying Religio peperit divitias, and filia devoravit matrem, into Immunitas
peperit impunitatem, and filia etc Vt partus ille viperinus, de quo Plinius.
lib. 10. c. 62.
. you shall see this plainly verified in the subsequent story. If you have
been versed in Beckets story, you cannot but know that this immunity stood
then generally accused of begetting impunity, and instances of it are there
given in some Clerks that escaped punishment altogether, or, if any, suffered
but slight pains nothing answerable to the quality of their faults by virtue
of this exemption, which thing caused the Kings so eager oppugning thereof. Now
no course or provision (that I can find) was taken for remedying this abuse
either by the Church or State afterward, until that Boniface aforesaid in the
year 1261. made and set out a provincial Constitution Cap. Item Statuimus de
poenis. in Provincial.
commanding and injoyning Bishops in their Diocesses to erect and have one or
more Prison or Prisous for the safe keeping of Clergy-malefactors. Providing
withal that if any Clerk be so incorrigible, and accustomed to commit
wickedness, such as for which, if he were a layman, he should by the laws of
the land suffer death, that he shall be adjudged to perpetual imprisonment,
etc. This Constitution, whether for want of execution, or because it was not
penal enough, did not afterward generally serve turn to keep Clerks within
compass, as may be gathered out of the very second Statute 3. Ed. 1. cap. 2.
that makes mention of this privilege. For there, to the end the King should
not need to provide any other remedy therein, he admonishes and enjoyneth the
Prelates, upon the faith which they owe to him, and for the common profit and
peace of the Realm, that Clerks convict of felony delivered over to the
Ordinary shall not be delivered without due purgation: which argues a
remissness this way in Ordinaries in former time. This Stat. being made in the
year 1275. within three years after, namely Ann. Dom. 1278. the Prelates
assembled in Convocation, consult, conclude upon and make a Constitution Cap.
Clerici de Purgatio. Canon. in Provincial.
providing against the too-easie enlargement of criminous Clerks, and the
admission of slight and slender purgations for them, and injoyning a solemnity
and wary exactness to be used therein, so that no occasion of offense be
offered to the King or his Ministers through the non observance of this
Constitution. Had not both these last mentioned Stat. and Constit. lain
neglected without execution, as it should seem (by the preamble of the Stat.
23. H. 8. c. 1.) they did, they might happily have been the last that needed to
have been made of this nature. But because they wrought not that good effect
which was hoped and expected, therefore in the 25. of Ed. 3. another Stat.
(viz. c. 4.) is inacted, and (as I gather by it) upon this occasion, viz.
Because that Clerks were suffered, by Ordinaries, upon slight purgations, to
be enlarged and dismissed to their encouragement to offend again, therefore
the secular Magistrates debarred them their Clergy, and sine delectu personarum,
punished them and lay men all alike. Now complaint being made here of in
Parliament by the Prelates, this Stat. was agreed upon and made, whereby for
redress of the injury offered to the Church and Churchmen, provision is first
made for the privilege of it and them, and then insueth a promise made in
their behalf by the then Archbishop of Cant. (Simon Islep) to the King, that
he will make a convenient Ordinance, whereby Clericall offenders delivered to
the Ordinaries shall be safely kept and duly punished, so that no Clerk shall
take courage to offend for default of correction. The performance of which his
promise you shall find recorded and testified by a Successor of his the Author
of the Antiquitates Britannicae, in the life of the same Simon page 244. under
the year of Grace 1351. As also by Harpsfield in his Eccles. Hist. p. 532.
whose severe Constitution made in that behalf; if you desire to see, although
you will not find it (I know not why) incorporated into Lindwoods Provincial,
yet is it extant amongst the Provincial Constitutions placed and annexed at
the latter end of the Legatine Constitutions, in some Books (in mine Fol.
150.) I must therefore why the Stat. 4. H. 4. c. 3. should about 50. years
after the date of it, call for such a Constitution, as if it had been yet
unmade, and the old promise of the Archbishop not hitherto performed. For so
the Stat. intimates, in so much as the then Archbishop Thomas Arundell was
feign to renew the promise in Parliament, which notwithstanding was neither by
himself nor by any other succeeding Archbishop performed, as is testified and
avouched by the forecited Stat. 23. H. 8. c. 1. And thus much of the first part
of the Apophthegme. Immunitas peperit impunitatem.

Great now had the patience of the King and State been in expecting the
reformation of such abuses as grew by reason of this ecclesiastical
privilege, and a long time had the secular arm forborne to apply a temporal,
but more terrible remedy and animadversion. So that now, since neither the
former Constitutions of the Church could keep the Clergy in awe (as indeed
how is it likely they should, the Authors of them not having gladii potestatem
Duaren. De sacr. eccles. minister. and benef. lib. 1. c. 4.
?) neither the ingeminated threats of applying a temporal remedy to curb
their extravagancies, would make them and others, partakers with them in their
privilege, to beware, it was now high time to clip the wings of this
masterlesse liberty by restraint. For until the fourth year of H. 7. we shall
find no Act of Parliament that has any whit derogated or taken away from this
privilege. But then (which brings on the latter part of the Apophthegme. Filia
devoravit matrem) because that in confidence and trust of the privilege of the
Church, diverse persons had been the more bold to commit murder, rape, robbery,
theft and all other mischeivous deeds, because they have been continually
admitted to the benefit of the Clergy, as often as they did offend in any of
the premises (as the preamble of the Stat. 4. H. 7, c. 13. ^unneth) therefore,
for avoiding of such boldness, it is enacted that the benefit of Clergy shall
be but once allowed to any person not being within orders, and that convicted
persons (to the end, as I suppose, it may be known whether they have had their
Clergy once before, or not) shall be marked with the letter M. for murder, or
F. for any other felony, and that to be done openly in the Court, before he be
delivered to the Ordinary. Thus for Lay-clerkes. Now for Clerks in orders, it
also provides, that if upon their second asking of their Clergy, they have not
their letters of orders, or a certificate from their Ordinary witnessing the
same, ready to show, or do produce the one or the other by a day given them by
the Justices to bring them in, then to loose the benefit of their Clergy as he
shall do that is without orders.

This Act (it should appear) was not strict enough to bridle the insolences
of some Clergymen and others that bare themselves upon the privilege of
Clergy. In the 23th year therefore of the next King (H. 8.) his reign, the
Parliament having in the preamble of the Stat. 23. ejusd. H. cap. 1. enumerated
many several promises iterated and made by the prelates to take course within
themselves, and by their own power and authority without any need of the
States, help to suppress the insolences of such malefactors, as upon
confidence of Clergy dared the committing of almost whatsoever foul enormities
and outrages, and declared how these promises were frustrate and came to none
effect, and withal complained of the many abuses of Ordinaries in and about
purgations. For remedy, they inact that Clergy shall be taken quite away from
all persons that are not within holy orders, which shall commit petit treason,
Wilful murder, and many the like fellonies. And as for persons in orders, none
(says the Statute) that shall be convict of any the fellonies therein
mentioned shall be suffered to make purgation before his Ordinary, but shall
remain and abide in perpetual prison under the keeping of the Ordinary,
unless he become bound with sureties (such as the Stat. there allows and
accepts of) for his good abearing, with certain other clauses and provisoes.
Amongst which one is for the degrading of Clerks convict, and sending them to
the Kings bench, there to suffer judgment to dye, as laymen. You see this
privilege now brought pretty low, yet it stoopes lower, and now comes to be
almost quite eclipsed. For besides many several Acts of Parliament 23. H. 8.
c. 11. and 25. H. 8. c. 3. and 5.
between the last spoken of, and the 28. H. 8. c. 1. taking it away from
diverse sorts of fellonies. By this Act of 28. H. 8. 1. Clerks in orders are
brought under the same pains and penalties that others be, which being but
temporal, and made to endure only unto the last day of the next Parliament,
when that time came about, was by the Stat. 32. H. 8. cap. 3. as good and
beneficial for the common wealth made perpetual. By which lact Act, over and
above, in express words, it is decreed that Clerks in orders, in such manner
as lay-clerkes are wont to be, shall be burnt in the hand for such fellonies as
they may or ought to have their Clergy for.

This privilege being brought thus low rose up no more. For after the last
mentioned Stat. came that of 1. Ed. 6. c. 12. whereas large an enumeration is
made what offenses shall exclude their Authors of their Clergy, as in the
former. It suffered yet daily further restraint. For afterward Statutes upon
Statutes, one at the heel, and in the neck of another take it from this and
the other offender, as Rastals Calendar, in verbo Clergy will fully direct, as
also will Lambards Eirenarcha. page 540. and so forward, to which I refer
you. For Convenient cymba vela minoramea.


And now, to set before you that which principally has divested and outed the
Church of her Jurisdiction over such as were and are to reap benefit by this
privilege, and to show unto you how the ancient course of the law in the point
of delivering Clerks to their Ordinaries to be purged, came to be altered. I
have to acquaint you that the Stat. of 18. Eliz. c. 6. (the causes and motives
for making whereof are in the preamble expressed, amongst the rest, to be
these, viz. the avoiding of sundry perjuries and other abuses in and about the
purgation of Clerks convict delivered to the Ordinaries) has quite taken away
purgation, until that time ever accustomed, ordaining withal that no man,
that shall be allowed his Clergy, shall be committed to the Ordinary, but
presently enlarged (after allowance of Clergy and burning in the hand:)
Providing nevertheless that the Justices, for the Offenders further
correction, may retain him in prison for a time. Thus have you seen how this
privilege has declined and been brought down to the present despicable
condition wherein it is with us at this day. Remains so mean, as by them the
once flourishing estate of it will hardly gain belief. Truly then Quod fuit
in pretio, sit nullo denique honor.


Suffer me to conclude this discourse with his sweet meditation, Quarles Hist.
of Jonah. Meditat. 10.
who making Gods mercy the subject of his contemplation, in allusion to this
practice and allowance of Clergy to convicted Prisoners, thus ejaculates.

Like pinioned prisoners at the dying tree,
Our lingering hopes attend and wait on thee;
(Arraigned at Justice bar) prevent our doom;
To thee with joyful hearts we cheerly come;
Thou art our Clergy; Thou that dearest book,
Wherein our fainting eyes desire to look.
In thee we trust to read (what will release us)
In bloody characters, that name of Jesus.
The Copy of an ancient Ms. showing and setting forth the form of some kind
of Law-trialls amongst Scriptura xxxva.
the English-Saxons.
IN nomine Dei summi regis aeterni. Plerumque etenim contingere (...)
solet ut res possessae hereditatis acquisitae in contentionem plerisque and
altercationis conflictum deveniunt nisi cum idoneis testibus and
subscriptionibus sapientum and fidelium personarum testimoniis tractata and
confirmata fuerint. Quapropter sapientes salubrem consilium prudentium
quaerunt, and cyrographorum cautionibus and heroicorum virorum testimoniis
confirmantur ne imposterum aliquibus altercationibus vel scrupulo falsi
suspitionis corrumpuntur, aut nebulo ignorantiae in aliquo fuscetur. Idcirco
etenim Oswlf Dei gratia Dux atque Princeps Provinciae Orientalis Oswlf Dux
atque Princeps Provinciae Orientalis Cantiae.
Cantiae circa suae propriae hereditatis jura tractare studuit. Et hoc coram
beatae memoriae Wlfredo Archiepisco, coramque Abbatis Wernotho atque Feologeldo
ceterisque fidelissimis and religiosissimis Ceolstano, viz. Aethelhuno atque
Heremodo presbyteris ecclesiae Christi, necnon saepe coram sociis suis and
amicis fidissimis, qualiter post discessionem suam circa hereditatem suam
imposterum agere voluisse, id est, ut post dies uxoris suae and filii ejus
Eardwl^i, filiae quoque suae Ealfthrythae ad ecclesiis Dei omnia dare Deo and
sanctis ejus sibi in sempiternam hereditatem sub eorum testimonia dare
praecepit sicut in altera kartula manifest and lucide comprobatur. Sed tamen
post obitum Oswlfi Ducis surrexit excitata a quibusdam quaestio and contentio
magno circa hereditatem Oswlfi contra uxorem ejus Beornthrythae cujus
altercationis conflictum neque a Domino Archiepiscopo nec ab aliquibus personis
inferioribus ullo modo sedare potuit, sed utrique parts ad synodale concilium
advocari and invitari jubebantur, and cum ad synodum devenissent and diligenti
investigatione veritatis sententia utrarumque partium a sancto synodo quae
facta est in loco praeclaro cet aeclea querendo examinaretur, inventum est
nihil justius nec rectius esse posse constare quam sic perseverare hereditatem
Oswlfi sicut ipse Oswlf prius proprio arbitrio per omnia donare coram
praedictis testibus decreverat, atque ita hoc etiam ab illo sancto synodo
perpetua^ perdurare dejudic atum est. Insuper etiam sancta illa synodus
decrevere statuit ut illa altercatio nunquam amplius per aliquam inquietudinis
discordiam post diem illum and deinceps excitando moveretur, and hoc cum signo
sanctae crucis Christi perenniter perdurare conscripserunt Et si quis posthaec
alicujus personis homo Diabolica instigatus temeritate insurrexerit qui hoc
Kanonica and synodalia decreta infringere temptaverit a societate sanctorum
omnium, and a coetu congregationis and communionis ipsorum sciret se esse
alienatum synodali judicio statuerunt. Sed heu pro dolor ille antiquus
venenatissimus serpens qui protuplaustu piacula indidit, and humanum genus sibi
per haec subdidit, ceu caelydra infesta and pestifera in quorundam pectore
adhuc turgescit, and ad excitandos seditiones discordiasque committendas post
curricula quantorum annorum id est xxxiiij iterum ecclesiam Christi and
hereditatem sanctorum ejus adgravare ac depravare impia nisu ac prava voluntate
conatus est, atque illam praedict' altercationis conslict^ renovare and
excitare post synodalia decreta, ac probabilium patrum sanctiones studuit.
Quamobrem congregata multitudine spiritalium Synodale concilium apud Cantuariam.
seculariuque personum in Dorovernia Civitate, anno dominicae incarnationis
Dcccxliiij. in dict. Aethelwlfo Regi praesente atque Aethelstano filio ejus
Ceolnotho quoque Archimetropolitano Archiepiscopo; necnon Tatnoth presbitero
electo ad Episcopalem sedem Dorobrevi, id est, civitatis Hro^i, cum
Principibus, Ducibus, Abbatibus and cunctis generalis dignitatis optimatibus
inter Dorobrevis.
quas etiam ille venenatissimus anguis cognomento Aethelwulf ad turbandum and
inquietandum ecclesiam Dei deveniens, sicut sepe progenies and parents ejus
fecerunt, prolatis falsis machinamentis e latebris cordis suae dicens
hereditatem Oswlfi Ducis cum auro and argento patris sui Aethelheah esse
comparatum, and per hoc spoliare ecclesiam Dei and sanctos coenubias ad quas
hereditas illa periinebat cum pravis sequacibus nisus est. Tunc ille
Archiepiscopus Ceolnoth and familia ejus id est ecclesiae Christi illa per
ordinem replicavit qualiter in illo sancto synodo de illo reconciliatum and
dejudicatum est. At ille nolens adquiescere, neque judicio synodis and
probabilium patrum sanctionibus neque adsertione and veredicavoce Episcopi vel
alicujus personis tunc etenim a sapientibus and prudentibus trutinatum ac
dijudicatum Iuridici examinisprisca formula.
est familiam ecclesiae Christi, and familiam aet Folcanstane, familiam quoque
at Dobrum, necnon and familiam aet Liminge ad quos hereditas illa pertinebat
justo juramenta hereditatem illam sibi ipsis contra hereditatem Aethelheahes
castigare, nam and ita fecerunt. Iuraverunt xxx homines de familiis praedictis,
xij presbeterli, ceterii communi gradus and sic etiam illa altercatio
utrarumque partium perenniter sedari decretu^ est, and illa altercatio nunquam
amplius per aliquam inquietudinis discordiam post diem illum excitando
moveatur, and firmiter decreverunt ut sub anathematis vinculo esset nodatus qui
hanc reconciliationem in aliquo Anathema in violatores.
irritum faceret, sicut and ille excommunicatus constat a consortio sanctorum
omnium and a communione synodalis concilii and familiis nostris ecclesiaeque
Dei alienus existat qui hoc Kanonica Statuta and synodalia praecepta infringere
studuit, nisi digne Deo and hominibus praesumptionis suae conamen emendare
voluerit, and hoc signo sanctae crucis Christi roborando omnes pariter
conscripserunt.

Ego Aethelwlf Deo dispensante Rex Occidentalium Anglorum hanc praedictam
reconciliationem familiae Christi and hereditatis Ethelheahes, and omnem
altercationis conflictum qui inter se concitatum habuerunt sedatum esse
demonstrans, and hoc cum sapientibus meis signo sanctae crucis Christi perenni
titulo roborabo and subscribo quorum subter in scedula liquescunt vocabula.

Ego Aethelwlf Dux con' and sub'. Ego Cynewlf con. and sub. Ego Lulling con.
and sub. Ego Aethelheah con. and sub. Ego Aethelheah con. and sub. Ego Gisshard
con. and sub.
Ego Ceolnoth gratia Dei Metropolitanus Archiepisc. cum presbyteris and familia
sua hoc id est signo sanctae crucis Christi roborando subscripsi.

Ego Alchhere Dux con. and sub. Ego Aethelwlf Dnx con. and sub. Ego Freothoric
Ab' con. and sub. Ego Aethelmod con. and sub. Ego Aethelred con. and sub. Ego
Freothoric con. and sub. Ego Denemod con. and sub. Ego Beornfreth con. and sub.
Ego Osfere con.
Haec sunt etiam nomina familiae Christi and illius familiae aet Folcanstane
necnon aet Dobrum, atque aet Liminge qui hanc jurationem juraverunt, quorum
nomina subter adnotantur.

Ego Abba pr' con. and sub. Ego Brunheard pr' con. and sub. Ego Hunred pr' con.
and sub. Ego Hysenod pr' con. and sub. Ego Wigmund pr' con. and sub. Ego Eof
pr' con. and sub. Ego Degmund pr' con. and sub. Ego Wealdhere pr' con. and sub.
Ego Aethelred pr' con. and sub. Ego Cichus con. and sub. Ego Sigemund con. and
sub. Ego Bornfred con. and sub. Ego Wynna con. and sub. Ego Sygeanod con. and
sub. Ego Wihtred con. and sub. Ego Willmund con. and sub. Ego Beornmod con. and
sub. Ego Cynwif. Ego Willhere. Ego Berhtnoth. Ego -- Ego Ceolbald con. Ego
Alchhere. Ego Duddel. Ego Ethelhere. Ego Nothhere.
Records extracted from the Tower of London, touching the liberties of
Canterbury. Scriptura xxxvj2.

Viz. Ex bundello recordorum and brevium Regis, de anno decimo nono regni Regis
Ricardi secundi.
RIcardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae Thes' and
Camerar' suis salutem. Volentes certis de causis certiorari quae and cujusmodi
libertates civibus Cantuar. apud Cantuar. coram Iohanne de Berewyk and sociis
suis Iusticiar' itinerantibus in comitatu Kanciae Anno Domini Edwardi filii
Regis Henrici quondam regis Angeliae vicesimo primo allocatae fuerunt, necnon
quae and cujusmodi libertates eisdem civibus allocatae fuerunt coram Henrico de
Stanton and sociis suis Iusticiar' Domini Regis Edwardi proavi nostri
itinerantibus apud Cant. Anno regni sui sexto in recordo and processu coram
eisdem Iusticiar' habitis de morte Alexandri Carectarii Prioris ecclesiae
Christi Cantuar. infra Prioratum ejusdem Prioris ut dicitur interfecti, vobis
mandamus quod scrutatis rotulis praedictorum Iusticiar. de annis praedictis in
Thesaur' nostra sub custodia vestra existentibus nos de eo quod inde
inveneritis in Cancell^r' nostra sub sigillo scaccarii nostri distinct and
aperte sine dilatione reddatis certiores, hoc breve nobis remittentes. Test
meipso apud Westm' qua^ decimo die Novembris, anno regni nostri decimo nono.
Scarle.

Placita coronae coram I. de Berewyk, Thoma de Normanville, Willielmo de
Bereford, Iohanne de Lythegreynes and Hugone de Kane Iusticiar' itinerantibus
apud Cantuar. in Comitatu Kanciae a die Paschae in quindecim dies anno regni
regis Edwardi filii Regis Henrici vicesimo primo.

De scriantiis dicunt quod Willielmus de Lynstede Rector ecclesiae de Stureye
tenet Alderman' de Westgate in capite de Domino Rege per seriantiam unius
esperuarii s^ri quae valet per annum Westgate.
december marcas, nesciunt quo waranto. Et similiter Johannes filius Iohannis de
Handlo tenet Aldr' de Redingate Cant. in Capite Redingate.
de Domino Rege quae valet per annum duos solid', nihil inde faciendo Domino
Regi per annum nesciunt quo waranto. Et similiter Edmundus de Tyerne tenet
Alder' de Worthgate quae valet Worthgate.
per annum duos solid' in capite de Domino Rege, nihil inde faciendo eidem
Domino Regi per annum, nesciunt quo waranto. Et similiter Thomas Chicch tenet
Aldr' de Burgate quae valet Burgate.
quadraginta denar' per annum. Et Stephanus Chicche tenet Alder' de Northgate
quae valet duos solidos per annum. Et Johannes Northgate.
de Holt tenet Aldermann' de Newingate quae valet per Newingate.
annum duos solidos nihil inde faciendo Domino Regi per annum, nesciunt quo
waranto. Ideo praeceptum vicecomiti quod venire faciat eos, etc. Postea
praedictus Stephanus Chicche and alii excepto magistro Willielmo de Lynstede
veniunt and dicunt quod praedictae Aldermanriae spectantes sunt and annexae ad
firmam Civitatis praedictae, viz. sexaginta libr'. quas solvunt Domino Regi pro
praedicta Civitate per annum. Et Iur' istius civitatis hoc idem testantur. Ideo
remaneant quousque and Postea venit praedictus mag' Willielmus de Lynstede and
dicit quod ipse tenet praedictam seriantiam de quodam Willielmo de Godstede,
reddendo eidem Willielmo inde per annum centum solid. sine quo ipse non potest
inde respondere etc. Ideo praeceptum est Vicecom' quod venire faciat eundem
Willielmum, etc. Et praedictus mag' Willielmus ponit loco suo Phm' de
Intebergh' clericum. Postea Willielmus de Godstede per attornatum suum venit
and dicit quod ipse tenet eandem seriantiam de communitate civitatis praedictae
reddendo inde per annum quadraginta denar' ad firmam civitatis and hoc a
tempore quo non extat memoria. Et Iur' hoc idem testantur. Ideo praedicti mag'
Willielmus de Lyndestede and Willielmus de God* ^ede inde sine dine, salvojure
Domini Regis etc. De libertatibus dicunt quod cives Cantuar' tenent eandem
civitatem de Domino Rege reddendo inde per annum ad scaccarium Domini Regis
sexaginta libras. In qua quidem civitate praedicti cives clamant habere return'
brevium, emendas assisae panis and cervisiae, Pillor', Tumbrell', and furcas
nesciunt quo waranto. Ideo praeceptum est vicecom' quod venire faciat
praedictos cives. Postea praedicti cives veniunt and dicunt quod Dominus
Henricus Rex pater Domini Regis nunc concessit eis and carta sua confirmavit
quod ipsi and heredes sui habeant and teneant de eodem Henrico Rege and
heredibus suis imperpetuum praedictam Civitatem Cantuar. ad firmam pro
sexaginta libris sterlingorum singulis annis solven' per manum suam viz. ad
Sccm' Pasche triginta libr', and ad Sccm' sancti Michaelis triginta libr' per
cartam suam quam proferunt and quae hoc idem testatur. Et quoad return' brevium
and alias praedictas libertates dicunt, quod idem Dominus Henricus Rex
concessit eis quod ipsi and eorum heredes imperpetuum habeant return' brevium
Regis praedictam civitatem and libertatem ejusdem civitatis tangen' tam infra
suburbium quam infra Civitatem praedictam. Et quoad praedictas libertates, viz.
tenere placita coronae habere mercatum, feriam, furcas and Weyf' in civitate
praedicta, dicunt quod Dominus Henricus Rex pater Domini Regis nunc concessit
eis omnes libertates and liberas consuetudines quas habuerunt tempore Henrici
Regis avi ipsius Henrici Regis patris D'omini Regis nunc, quando meliores and
liberiores eas habuerunt. Et dicunt quod cives praedicti and antecessores sui
praedictis libertatibus a tempore praedicti Henrici Regis proavi Domini Regis
nunc plene usi sunt. Et Johannes de Mulford qui sequitur pro Rege petit
judicium pro Domino Rege de sicut praedicti cives nullam speciale warantum
ostendunt a Domino Rege vel ab aliquo antecessore suo de libertatibus
praedictis nisi tantum quod Dominus Henricus Rex pater Domini Regis nunc
concessit eis omnes libertates and liberas consuetudines quas habuerunt tempore
Henrici Regis proavi Domini Regis nunc, quae quidem libertates non
specificantur in praedicta carta, si praedictas libertates, viz. emendas assise
panis and Servisie, pillor', tumbrell', furcas and Weyf' clamare possunt per
eandem cartam. Postea inquisitum est per Iur' istius civitatis si praedictae
libertates annexae fuerunt praedictae civitati tempore quo praedictus Dominus
Henricus Rex dimisit praedictis civibus praedictam civitatem ad feodi firmam
dicunt quod sic. Ideo remaneant salvo jure Domini Regis, etc.

Quaedam Avicia de Lymebernestere de London inventa fuit Borgha sancti Martini.
occisa in Borgha sancti Martini, nescitur quis eam occidit. Primus inventor
and quatuor vicini veniunt and non maletr'. Et praedicta Borgha sancti Martini
in qua ista felonia facta fuit ab ultimo itinere hic usque nunc subtraxit se a
civitate ista cum qua solebat esse respondens in itinere Justice. de omnibus ad
coronam Domini Regis pertinentibus. Et similiter compertum est per rotulos I.
de Reygate and sociorum suorum Iusticiar. ultimo itinerantium hic quod
praesentatum fuit coram eisdem Iusticiar' quod tenentes istius Borghae sancti
Martini and de la Fyspole solebant Fyshpole.
facere sectam ad hundredum Domini Regis de Burgate, de tribus septimanis in
tres septimanas, and ad Portmotum civitatis, and Portmotum.
quod subtraxerunt se ad dampnum Domini Regis duorum solidorum per annum per
quendam Iohannem de Tonford tunc ballivum Archiepiscopi Cantuar. Et idem
Johannes modo venit and dicit quod praedicta borgha nunquam subtracta fuit per
ipsum. Et praedicta Borgha sancti Martini venit and quoad hoc quod solebant
respondere and intendere cum hominibus istius civitatis ad praesentandum quae
ad coronam pertinent, been cogn. quod ipsi in aliis itineribus respondere
solebant cum hominibus istius Civitatis. Et qd' ipsi nunquam praemuniti fuerunt
nec sum. ad aliquid praesentandum cum eis. Et quod ipsi semper parati fuerunt
ad praesentandum cum eis si praemuniti fuissent. Et Iur. istius Civitatis
praesentes sunt and non possunt ostendere nec verificare quod unquam
praemuniverunt praedict. borgham ad aliquid praesentand. cum eis. Set omnino
praedictam feloniam infra praecinctum istius Civitatis factam concelaverunt.
Ideo ad judicium de eis them duodecim Iur. Et praedicta borgha de cetero sit
intendens and respondens cum praedictis civibus de hiis quae ad coronam
pertinent. Et quod Coron' Civitatis de cetero fac. officium coronatoris in
praedicta Borgha. Et eadem borgha sancti Martini quoad praedictam sectam dicit
quod nunquam consueverunt facere sectam ad hundredum praedictum de Burgate nec
ad Portmotum Civitatis praedictae nisi tantum bis in Anno ad arma monstranda.
Et de hoc ponit se super patriam. Et Iur. istius Civitatis simul cum militibus
ad hoc electis dicunt super sacramentum suum quod omnes residentes and
comorantes in eadem Borgha debent venire quater per annum ad hundredum de
Burgate ad summonitionem Ballivorum Civitatis ad praesentandum ea quae ad visum
franciplegii pertinent. Et similiter venire debent ad Portmotum istius
civitatis quociens cives praedicti corniare fecerint commune cornu Civitatis
praedictae, and dicunt quod praedicta secta subtracta est per octodecim annos
elapsos ad dampnum Domini Regis duodecim denar. per annum. Ideo consideratum
est quod praedicta Borgha de cetero faciet praedictas fectas, and quod distr.
decetero ad praedictam sectam fac. Et quod Dominus Rex recuperet arreragia sua
de eadem borgha viz. octodecim sold. Et praedicta borgha in misericordia. Et
quoad tenentes de Fyspole dicunt quod ipsi fac. sectam sicut facere consuerunt.
Et quod nichil est a retro domino Regi Ideo remaneant etc. Et quoad Iohannem de
Tomford dicunt quod ipse non fecit praedictam subtractionem, nec per ipsum
facta fuit.

Plita' coronae de Com. Kanciae coram Henrico de Stanton, Willielmo de Ormesby,
Henrico Spigurnel, Iohanne de Mutford and Willielmo de Goldington Iusticiar.
Domini Regis itiner antibus apud Cantuar. in octabis Nativitatis sancti
Iohannis Baptistae, anno Regniregis Edwardi filii regis Edwardi sexto.

Adam le Corour occidit Alex' Carectarium Prioris ecclesiae Christi Cantuar.
infra Prioratum ejusdem Prioris. Et statim post captus fuit and coram
Iusticiariis ad diversas transgressiones, etc. tanquam clericus convictus
liberatus fuit Archiepiscopo Cant. and adhuc est in prisona de Maydenstan,
nulla habuit catalla nec fuit in warda quia extraneus primus inventor and duo
vicini veniunt and non maletr. Et Alex. at Amerye and Thomas Biane duo vicini
non veniant and nec maletr. Et Alex. fuit attach' per Thomam Bean and Galf^m'
Coupere. Ideo in misericordia. Et praedictus Thomas fuit attach' per Williel'
Sellynghale and Richardum de Wykham. Ideo in misericordia. Postea compertum est
per rotulos Coron' Civitatis Cantuar. and testatum quod Johannes Andrew tunc
coronator etc. venit in crastino circa horam primam post feloniam praedictam
factam, and voluit vidisse corpus and fecisse officium Coronatoris, and
Willielmus de Derby tenens locum Richardi de Wylmynton tunc Senescalli
praedicti Prioratus, and Thomas Percy custos portae praedicti Prioris non
permiserunt ipsum Coronatorem intrare. Et postea praedictus Prior misit pro
coronatoribus forinsecis, viz. Henrico de Woghope, Willielmo Baroun qui
obierunt and Iohanne de Aldelose Coronatore superstite qui ceperunt
Inquisitionem de morte praedicta apud le Barbecan extra Castrum Cantuar. in
praesentiis Warrese' de Valoign' Barbecan.
and Iohannis de Bourne tunc Custodum pacis, etc. Et praeceptum est vicecom'
quod venire faciat praedictum Priorem, etc. Postea venit praedictus Prior and
dicit quod Prioratus ejus est locus exemptus a Civitate Cantuar. and ab ejus
liberate. Dicit etiam quod praedictus Coronator per ipsum impeditus non fuit,
nec praedicti Coronatores forinseci per ipsum fuerunt mandati. Et hoc petit
quod inquir. Et Iur. Civitatis simul cum militibus ad hoc electis dicunt super
sacramentum suum quod Richardus de Wylmynton qui obiit tunc Senescallus ejusdem
Prioris non permisit dictum Iohannem Andrew Coronatorum intrare dictum
Prioratum pro officio suo faciendo set claudere fecit portas ejusdem Prioratus
ita quod intrare non potuit, set dicunt quod hoc fecit nesciente Priore. Dicunt
etiam quod idem Richardus misit pro praedictis Coronatoribus forinsecis qui
ibidem venerunt, and praedictum mortuum viderunt. Et dicunt quod idem mortuus
postea sepultus fuit per quosdam garciones qui prius erant socii ipsius mortui
quorum nomina ignorant. Et quod praedicti Coronatores ceperunt inquisitionem
praedictam de praedicto mortuo apud le Barbecane, ut pradictum est. Et Iur.
quesiti qui Coronatores solebant facere officium coronatoris in praedicto
Prioratu temporibus retroactis, dicunt quod semper ante illud tempus
Coronatores Civitatis Cantuar. illud fecerunt. Quesiti etiam si praedicti
coronatores forinseci venissent ibidem per mandatum Prioris, dicunt quod non,
set per praedictum Richardum de Wylmynton ignorante praedicto Priore. Ideo idem
Prior inde quietus. Postea venit praedictus Willielmus de Derby and non potest
dedicere quin impedivit praedictum Coronatorem Cantuar. nec quin claudere fecit
portas praedicti Prioratus, per quod idem Coronator officium suum de praedicto
mortuo ibidem facere non potuit. Ideo ipse custoditur: Et praeceptum est
vicecom' quod capiat praedict' Thomam Percy, etc. Postea venit praedictus
Willielmus de Derby and fecit finem pro praedicta transgressione per quinque
marcas, per pl' Iohannis de Sfeld, and Thomae Dod de Faveresham. Postea venit
praedictus Thomas, and non potest dedicere quin fecit praedictam
transgressionem. Ideo ipse custoditur. Postea venit and finem fecit per
quadraginta denar. per plm' Richardi de Haddelegh.

Md. quod iste tenor exemplificatus est sub eo qui sequitur tenore. Richardus
dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae. Omnibus ad quos
praesentes literae pervenerint salutem. Inspeximus quandam certificationem
nobis in Cancellaria nostra per These. and Camerar. nostros de mandato nostro
missam in hec verba. Placita Coronae etc. de verbo in verbum usque in finem.
and tunc sic. Nos autem certificationem praedictam ad requisitionem dilectorum
nobis Ballivorum Civitatis nostrae Cant. tenore praesentium duximus
exemplificandam. In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Westm' quintodecimo die Anno

A Codicill (or Charter) of Kenulf King of Mercia, of the gift of certain Land
in Canterbury (at a place now called Binney) to Wlfred Scriptura xxxvija.
the Archbishop.
IN nomine sancti Salvatoris Dei and Domini nostri Jesus Christi Regnante ac
gubernante eodem Domino Jesus simulque spiritu
sancto gubernacula in imis and in arduis disponendo ubique regit. Licet sermo
sapientium consiliumque prudentium stabilis permaneat, tamen ob incertitudine
temporalium rerum divinis numinibus muniendo perscrutando pro ignotis and
incertis eventis stabilienda robor andaque in Deo vivo and vero sunt.
Quapropter ego Coenulfus gratia Dei Rex Merciorum viro venerando in Christi
charitate summo pontificalis apice decorato Wlfredo Archiep. dabo and concedo
aliquam partem terrae juris mei quae mihi largitor omnium bonorum Deus donare
dignatus est pro intimo caritatis affectu, ut Apost' ait, hilarem enim datorem
diligit Deus; Et hoc est in loco qui dicitur binnan ea circiter xxx. juger a
inter duos rivos gremiales Fluminis quod dicitur Stur. Et haec terra libera
Binnan ea.
permaneat in perpetuam possessionem ecclesiae Christi. Quod si quisque huic
largitioni contradixerit, contradicat ei Deus and deneget ingressum coelestis
vitae. Actum est hoc Ao. Dominicae incar. Dccc. xiiijo. Indict. vja. his
testibus consentientibus atque confirman. Quorum nomina nota sunt.

Ego Coenuulf gratia Dei Rex Merciorum hanc donationis confirmationem signo
crucis Christi rob. Ego Wlfred arc' aeps' cons. and sub. Ego Denebyrht aepsc'
cons. and sub. Ego Wlfhard aepsc' cons. and sub. Signum manus Eadberhti ducis.
Signum manus Ealhheardi Ducis. Signum manus Ceolwlfi Ducis.
The Epilogue to his Countrymen.
IF, by your good acceptance of these my Labors for the City, I may receive
encouragement to proceed in my endeavors, it is in my thoughts, by Gods
assistance, in convenient time, to do somewhat in like kind for you in the
Country. In the mean time, from that recourse which some of you have had unto
me for satisfaction and information to the memory of what Saints their Churches
were at first commended, conceiving that it may give content both to them and
others of you who (not out of any either superstitious or riotous instinct, I
hope, but for those good and pious ends which the first Institution of the
Encaenia Encaenia.
had regard unto, namely, not only the encouragement of others to the like
acts of piety and devotion, by a thankful commemoration of his or their bounty
and munisicence who had either founded or endowed the Church, as at the first;
but also the manifestation and maintenance of Christian Union, charity, and
good society, by a kind of Love-feast, as afterward the manner was) are
desirous to reduce that ancient laudable Custom, sometime consonant to Canon
Cap. Ex scr^pturis. de Feriis in Provincial.
, of observing those Feasts of Dedication, now, through ignorance most what, I
suppose, of their Saints names, generally in these parts laid aside; conceiving
it, I say, an acceptable thing to revive and restore to each Parochial Church
and Chapel the forgotten name and memory of such Saint or Saints, as at their
dedication (upon such or like grounds as are judiciously rendered and laid down
elsewhere Hooker. Ecclesiastic. polity. lib. 5. number. 13.
) were given (and are therefore proper) to them: having used my best diligence
for a full Collection of those of Canterbury-Diocesse from good Record, I shall
here leave it with you in pawn, and as a pledge unto you of those my future
endeavors for your further content hereafter, if God permit.

Canterbury-Deanrie.
St Alphege. Within the City. St Andrew. St Mary-Bredman. St Mary-Bredin. St
Mary-Castle. Holy Cross- of Westgate. St Edmu^- of Ridingate. St George- of
Newingate. St John. St Margaret. St Mary Magdalen. St Mary- of Northgate. St
Mary- of Queningate. St Michael- of Burgate. St Mildred. St Peter. All Saints.
St Dunstan. In the Suburbs. St Martin. St Paul. St Cosmas and Damian. Bleane.
St Mary. Fordwich. St Mary. Little Hardres. St Michael. Herbaldowne. St
Nicholas. Herbaldowne. St Stephen. Hackington. St Mary. Natyndon. St Nicholas.
Sturrey. St Nicholas. Thannington. Milton.
Sandwich-Deanrie.
St Clement. in Sandwich. St James. St Mary. St Peter. St Mary. Barfrestone.
Bettishanger. St Pancrace. Colred. St Leonard. Deal. St Mary. Eastry. St
Augustine. Eastlangdon. St Peter and Paul. Eithorne. St George. Ham. Knolton.
St Martin. Great Mongeham. St Augustine. Norborne. St Mary. Ripple. St
Nicholas. Ringwold. St Andrew. Sibertswold. Sutton. St Nicholas. Sholden. St
Andrew. Tilmanstone. St Mary. Westlangdon. All Saints. Waldershare. St Peter
and Paul. Worth. St Mary. Walmer. St Mary. Woodnesborough.
Westbere-Deanrie.
All Saints. Birchington. St Mary. Minster. St Mary Magdalen. Mounklon. St
Giles. Sarre. St John Baptist. in Thanet. St Lawrence. St Nicholas. St Peter.
St Mary. Chistlet. St Martin. Hearne. St Mary. Hoth. Holy Cross. St Mary.
Reculver. St Elphege. Seasalter. St John Baptist. Swalcliffe. All Saints.
Westbere. All Saints. Whitstable.
Bridge Deanrie.
St Innocents, Adisham. St Nicholas. Ash. St John Baptist. Barham. St Peter.
Beaksbourne. St John Evangelist. Ickham. St Giles. Kingstone. St Vincent.
Littlebourne. St Peter. Molash. St Mary. Bishopsbourne. St Peter. Bridge. St
Mary. Brook. All Saints. Boughton Alulph. St Mary. Chartam. St Cosmas and
Damian. Challocke. St Mary. Chilham. All Saints. Chillenden. St Mary. Crondall.
Elmestone. St Lawrence. Godmersham. Holy Cross- Goodnestone. St Peter and
Paul. Great Hardres. St Mary. Nonnington. All Saints. Petham. St Mary.
Patricksbourne. St Mildred. Preston. Stodmersh. St James. Staple. All Saints.
Stourmouth. St Mary. Stelling. St Andrew. Wickhambruex. St Mary. Wingham. St
Gregory and St Martin. Wy. St Bartholomew. Waltham. St Margaret. Wemingswold.
Dover-Deanry.
St Antonine. Alkham. St Peter. Bewsfield. St Andrew. Buckland. St Peter.
Charlton. St Martin. Cheriton. St Mary. Capleferne. St Peter and St Paul.
Ewell. St Mary and St Eanswith. Folkstone. St Margaret. at Cliffe. St Martin.
Guston. St Nicholas. Newington. St Laurence. Hougham. St Michael. Hawkinge. St
James. In Dover. St John. St Mary. St Nicholas. St Peter. St Mary. Liden. St
Peter and St Paul. River. St Peter. Swinkfield. St Peter. West-cliffe.
Ealham-Deanrie.
St Martin. Acris. St Mary. Braborne. St Margaret. Bircholt. St Mary Magdalen.
Denton. St Mary. Ealham. St James. Elmested. St Peter. Horton. St Mary.
Hastinglegh. St Mary and St Eadburgh. Liminge. St Leonard. Hith. St Mary.
Postling. St Oswald. Padlesworth. St Peter and St Paul. Saltwood. All Saints.
Stanford. St Mary. Stowting. St Martin. Woodton.
Charing-Deanrie.
St Mary. Ashford. St Nicholas. Boughton Malherb. St George. Bennenden. All
Saints. Biddenden. St Peter and Paul. Charing. St Mary. Great Chart. St Mary.
Little Chart. St Dunstan. Cranebrooke. St Mary. Eastwell. St Mary. Egerton. St
Mary. Frittenden. St Peter and Paul. Hedcorne. St Mary. Hothfield. St Mary.
Halden. St Lawrence. Hawkherst. St Mary. Kennington. St Peter. Newenden. St
Mary. Pevington. St Nicholas. Pluckley. St Mary. Rolvinden. St Michael.
Smarden. St Nicholas. Sandherst. St Mildred. Tenterden. St Mary. Westwell.
Lim-Deanrie.
S. Martin. Aldington. S. Peter and S. Paul. Appledoore. S. Romwald. Bonington.
S. Peter and S. Paul. Bilsington. All Saints. Burmesh. S. Eanswith. Brenset. S.
Augustine. Brookland. S. Peter and S. Paul. Dimchurch. S. Mary. Eboney. S.
Thomas Martyr. Fairfield. S. Mary. Hinxhill. All Saints. Hope. S. Leonard.
Herst. S. George. Ivechurch. S. Mary. Kenarton. S. Michael. Kingsnoth. S.
Stephen. Lim. S. Peter and Paul. Newchurch. S. Mary. Orlastone. S. Mary
Magdalen. Rokinge. S. Lawrence. in New Romney The present Church. S. Martin. S.
John Baptist. S. Nicholas. S. Clement. Old Romney. S. Mary. Sevington. S. Mary.
Sellinge. S. Peter and Paul. Shadoxherst. S. Mary. Smeth. S. Augustine. Snave.
S. Mary. Stone. S. Dunstan. Snargate. S. Mary. West-Hith. S. Mary.
Willesborough. All Saints. Lyd. S. Marych. In the Mersh. S. John Baptist.
Mersham. S. Matthew. Warhorne. All Saints. Wood-Church. S. John Baptist.
Wittresham.
Satton-Deanrie.
S. Margaret. Bromefield. S. Peter. Bredherst. Holy-Crosse. Barsted.
All Saints. Boxley. S. Peter. Boughton Monchensey. S. Michael. Chart. S.
Martin. Detling. S. Peter and Paul. East-Sutton. S. Dunstan. Frensted. S. Mary.
Goodherst. S. John Baptist. Harietsham. All Saints. Hollingbourne. S. Margaret.
Hucking. S. Mary. Lenham. S. Nicholas. Leeds. Loose. S. Mary. Langley. S.
Nicholas. Linton. All Saints. Maidesto^e. Colledge-Church S. Faith.
Parish Church. S. Michael. Marden. S. Mary. Sutton Vallence. All Saints.
Stapleherst. S. Mary. Thornham. S. Nicholas. Otham. All Saints. Vlcombe. S.
Giles. Wormshill.
Sittingborne-Deanry.
Bicknore. S. John Baptist. Bredgate. S. Peter and Paul. Borden. S.
Bartholomew. Bobbing. S. Lawrence. Bapchild. All Saints. Eastchurch. S.
Michael. Hartlip. S. Margaret. Halstow. All Saints. Iwade. S. Katherine.
Kingsdowne. S. Clement. Leisdowne. S. Trinity. Milton. All Saints. Morston. S.
Mary. S. Sexburgh. Minster. S. Mary. S. Cross. Milksted. S. Mary Newington. S.
Trinity. Queenborough. S. Margaret. Rainham. S. Nicholas. Rodmersham. S. Mary
Magdalen. Stockbury. S. Michael. Sittingbourne. S. Giles. Tongue. S. John
Baptist. Tonstall. S. Mary. Vpchurch. S. Margaret. Witchling. Wardon.
Ospringe-Deanrie.
Buckland. S. Peter and Paul. Boughton Blean S. Leonard. Badlesmere. S. Mary
Magdalen. Davington. S. John Baptist. Doddington. S. Mary. Eastling. S. Mary.
Feversham. S. Bartholomew. Goodnestone. All Saints. Graveney. S. Michael.
Hearnhill. S. Thomas Apostle. Hartey. S. Mary. Luddenham. S. Lawrence.
Leaveland. S. Peter and Paul. Linsted. S. Mary. Norton. S. Peter and Paul.
Newenham. S. Peter. Ore. S. Lawrence. Otterden. S. Peter and Paul. Ospringe. S.
Katherine. Preston. S. Mary. Selling. S. James. Sheldwich. S. Mary.
Stallesfield. S. Mary. Tenham. S. Michael. Throuleigh.
FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
ABbey, of S. Austins: See S. Austins. Abbots-Mill. 44 Adesham. 210, 433
Aelmesland, 436 Aghne 212 Aid, lent to the City by the Monks 292 Aldermanry, an
Office, and the nature of it 97 Aldermen, at Canterbury, from what antiquity
ibid Aldington 216, 427 All-Saints-Church 336 St Alphege-Church 326 Almnery, at
St Austins: See St Austins: at Christ-Church: See Cathedral. Andresgate 329 St
Andrewes-Church 332 Anselme Archbishop, his monument 241 Antiquity an ornament,
1, of Canterbury: See Canterbury: of Archbishops in general; and of the
Archbishop of Canterbury in particular: See Archbishops. Antiquitates
Britannicae; the commendation of it by Cujacius, 273 Apostolic^ sedis Ligatus,
that title, when first given to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and when it
ceased 243 Appledore, the mershes there inned. 290, the manor, 435
Archbishopric, at Litchfield 234 Archbishops: their antiquity in the Church,
223, number in England in former time and at this day, 227, Archbishops of
Canterbury, their antiquity, 227, a Catalogue of them from p. 229, to p. 274,
the form of their inthronization, 275 441, their Palace at Canterbury, 186,
their manors, 187, 241, 425, their burial in Christ Church discontinued 273
Archdeaconry of Canterbury: when, and of whom erected 65, 298, enlarged, 309,
310, 453, 456 Archdeacons there, a Catalogue of them, 298, etc. three at one
time in the diocese, 306, their house 310, composition with the monks, 411,
457, with the Archbishop, 319, fees for inducting Bishops 323 Archery,
commended 267, an Apology for it, 479 Archflamins 224 Arundell Archbishop, his
monument and chantery 268, St William, his monument, 184 Atwood, a family in
Canterbury 335 Austin-Fryers. See Friars St Austins Abbey, when and wherefore
founded, 46, by whom, ibid. their charters, 47, etc. Royal benefactors to it
53, Monks there, of what order 54, the estimate of their revenewes, ibid. Abbat
there, his dignity and privileges 55, Harms that befell it 56, by the Danes
ibid. by fire, 57, by water 58, by the law of Mortmaine, ibid, by the general
dissolution. 60. Its present remains, ibid. Almnery, ibid. Ethelberts Tower,
61, St Pancrace-Chapell, ibid. Churchyard, 63, a common footway thorough that,
17, common seals of the Abbey, 297, composition with the City, 338, 459
Authentic seals 288
B.
BAiliffs of Canterbury 366 Ballock lane 347 Barbican, where, and why so called
35 Barham 213, 214, bis Barnacle-Crosse 149 Barton: mill 45, manor 88, 214,
prison, 286, Elizabeth Barton. See No^nery. Beausherne 87 Becket Archbishop,
his murder 166, Tomb, 178, translation 245, Fair 246, shrine 247, jubilee
248, the Cities patron 250 Berewicke 437 Berksore 220, bis 241 Bertha 96
Bilsington-Priory, the parsonage there appropriated to it 263 Binne 213
Binnewith 101, a family in Canterbury so surnamed 102, 139 Bishop of St Martin
65, 299 Bishopric, the note of a City 240 Bishops Sees removed from villages
to Cities, 240, titular Bishops 105 Bixle 213, 430 Blacke-Fryers. See Friars
Black Prince, his chapel 176, his chantery 177, his monument 184, his
chantery-priests house 135 Blean: Wood 221, 382, Vicarage 118, 399 Bocholt 212,
bis Bocking 217 Bocton 428, 435, Malherb, whence so called 384 Borle 221
Bovyton 221 Boxley 245 Bradested 430 Bramling 211 Breakpotlane 108
Bredgar-Colledge 269 Brewerslane 28, 129 Bridewell 141 British-Bricks. See
Roman-Bricks Broke 220, 436 Brotewell 214, 217 Brownes, a family, Aldermen of
Westgate 97 Bulstake 146 Burgate 16, the Church there, ibid. 331, ward 146
Burial (and Burning) of the dead in Cities forbidden, 46, 231, and why 232,
when first permitted in England 233, of the Archbishops at St Austins, when
first discontinued 233, when at Christ-Church 273 Burn 212 bis. 213, 214, 426
Burricestune 430 Byri 214
C.
CAir, what it signifies 8 Cair-Kent. See Names of Canterbury. Cair-Medwag 25
Caldecote-manor 221, 260 Calvells, a family in Canterbury 68 Canterbury, the
antiquity of it. j, 39 368, 410, names of it, ij, famous in the Romans time,
iij, of whom founded, ibid. survey of it in Doomsday-booke, iiij, anciently a
hundred, 95, 96, Malmesbury his commendation of it, 150, spoiled by the Danes,
238, the cause of its decay, 246, made a County per se, 368, the Citizens of it
commended, ibid. the ecclesiastical government of it, 349, temporal 363,
Liberties of it, 502 Canterburies, a family 347 Canterbury-lane ibid Capgrave
John, a famous Friar 130 Sub deacon- Cardinals at Christ-Church 257 Castle at
Canterbury how ancient 33, common prison kept in it of old 34 Catalogue of
Archbishops of Cant. Archdeacons Majors Priors See Archbishops. Archdeacons.
Majors. Priors.

Cathedral at Canterbury, the antiquity and nature of the foundation, 151, a
Cathedral monastery 152, the first Church there, built by the Romans 154,
dedicated to our Savior, ibid. burned by the Danes, 155, reedified ibid. fired
a second time 156, reedified ibid. name changed to St Trinity 157, enlarged
ibid, fired a third time 159, reedified ibid, new-named, and called
Christ-Church ibid. the Campanile there 160, 190, Body new built, 161, 291.
Quire repaired and Beckets Crown 163, a Survey taken of the present Church,
164, Porch, ibid. Body, ibid. Martyrdom, 166, Lady Chapel, 167, St Michaels
Chapel 168. Quire, ibid. Quire-hangings, 169, Altars, 170, Beckets Chapel,
ibid. his Crown, 171, Vestry, 172, Treasury, 173, Deanes Chapel, ibid.
Library, 174, Windows, ibid. 385, Vndercroft, 175, French Church, ibid. Black
Princes Chapel, 176, Lady Chapel, 177, Beckets Tomb, 178, Chapter House 179,
^loister, ibid. Monuments, 180, Font, 181, Church precinct, 188, Churchgate,
193, Cimitery gate, 194, Schoolehouse, ibid. Honors, 196, Infirmary, ibid.
Dortor, 199, Refectory, 200, Courtgate, 205, Northhall, ibid. Stewards Court,
207, Almnery, 208, Mint and Mintyard, 124, 209, benefactors to this Church,
210, burial of the Archbishops procured to it, 234, that, when first
discontinued, 273, Tombs in it mistaken, 236, 243, 256, 262, 265, the several
seals of it, at several times, and for several uses, 158, 159, 250, 251,
297. Cellarar of Christ-Church, his office and charge 201, his Halimot, 203,
his hall and lodgings 204 Chamberlain there, his office and charge 201
Chantery lane 67 Chant^r of Christ-Church 290 Chapters rural 351 Charters, of
Ethelbert and Augustine questioned, 7, before K. Withreds time questionable,
and why, ibid. Charing 212, 428 Chart 212, 215, 218, 434 Chartham 434 Cheap,
what it signifies 149 Cheyham 217 Chiches, a family in Canterbury 145, Aldermen
of Burgate 97 Christ-Church. See Cathedral. Church Government in England,
Aristocraticall 225, 349 Churches, before the Conquest, mostly of wood 156, 324
Church matters, Laics' punished for meddling in them 268 Churchyards, their
beginning in England 233 City, a Bishops See, the note of it, 240 Clavering 379
Clementslane 347 Clergy, a discourse of the Privilege so called 250, 485 Clive
438 Clothmarket 130, 147 Cokyns, a family in Canterbury 116, Aldermen of
Worthgate, 97, a quondam hospital of that name in Canterbury, where, by whom,
and when founded ibid. Cokynslane ibid. 347 Combewell 245 Commendation of
Canterbury by Malmesbury 150 Commissary, and Commissariship of Canterbury 353
Compositions, between Christ-Church and St Austins, 160, 283, 288, 415, 448,
between the City and S. Austins, 338, 459, between the Archbishop and
Archdeacon, 319 between the Monks of Christ-Church and the Archdeacon 311, 457,
between the hospital of Poor Priests, and the Parson of S. Margaret 141, 413,
between the Gray-Fryers and Christ-Church 103 Conduit at Canterbury 274
Consistory at Canterbury 353 Controversy, between the Archbishop of Canterbury
and his Monks, 252 betwixt the Archdeacon there and them 304, 311, 313, 314,
315, between the King and the Monks of S. Austins 308, between the Archdeacon
and Commissary of Canterbury, 317, between the Archbishop and Archdeacon there,
319, between the City and S. Austins, 17, between the City and S. Gregory's 91
Copton 217 Cowlings 216 Cottons hospital 144 Court Christian 363 Courts of
Record 288 Crinemel^slane 101 Croydon, the hospital and school there 273
Cumbe 213 Curia Christianitatis 363
D.
DAnes, infest S. Austins Abbey 56, the miracle to the contrary fabulous ibid.
Invade and take Canterbury, burn the City and Cathedral, and tithe the
people, 155, 238, 471 Dapschecourt St Eustace 401 Davington 262 Deane of
Canterbury 357, 362, of Christ-Church, 275, the names of those of the new
foundation 297 Deanes rural 357 Decanus Christianitatis 362 Dedications of
Churches 510 Dei gratia, usual heretofore in the style of Archbishops, etc.
269 Derent 431 Diepham, 220, 222, 280. Difference. See Controversy. Digges, a
family in Canterbury 100, Aldermen of Newingate 97 Ditch about Canterbury how
ancient, and of what breadth primarily 31, the neglect of it late days 32
Division of parishes 230 Doccombe 220 Dodingdale: manor 75, tithery, 76, family
ibid. Doge Hamon, his Chantery 67, more of him 337 Doomsday book why so called
4 Dorobernia See Names of Canter. Dorovernia Durovernum Dorobr^vis 499 Dover,
whence it took it name, 37 the Priory there: See S. Martins Dudindale. See
Dodingdale, Dungeon: the manor 144, the hill ibid. S. Dunstans Church 342.
vicarage 466, his shrine searched, and why 237, 421 Durolevum 25
E.
EArhede 430 Earl of Gloucester, his office and fees at the Archbishops
inthronization 259 Eastbridge hospital: of whom first founded and endowed 110,
new founded 111, benefactors to it, 116, 118, 119. Chapel and Chantery there,
119, 120, 402. Eastry 213, 217, 222, 263, 432. Ebbeney 214 Ecclesiastical
government of Canter. 349 Ecclesiecdici 352 S. Edmunds Church 20, 343
Eghethorne 214 Einsford 431 Elizabeth Barton. See Nonnery. Encaenia 510 Old
Epitaphs, rare in England 242 Esshe 222 K. Ethelberts first charter to S.
Austins, 47, his second 48, third, 49 Etheredeshith 215 Royal Exchange at
Canterbury 121, 403 Eylwarton 217
F.
FAires 246. At Christ-Church, 268 Fairefield 222 Fawkshall 177, 221 Fearnledge
216, 438 Fermary, See Infirmary. Ferry. See Westgate. Feversham: Town, 244,
Abbey, when, of whom, and for whom founded ibid. names of some Abbats there,
245, Church: difference about the patronage of it 308 Fincux Sr John, 131, 184,
342 Firmins Barton 79 Fishmanschurch 148 Fishmarket ibid. 346 Flamins 224 Fogge
Sr Thomas 183 Folkstane 215, 218 Fordwich-Trouts 45 Fraternities 108, 341
Free-Schoole: at S. Martins, 165, At Canterbury 194, 416 French Church in
Canterbury 175 Freningham 222, 4^9 Friars, how distinguished from Monks, 99, in
margin 100 Augustine-^emit-Fryers, whence so called 127, their habit 128, their
first coming into England ibid. to Canterbury ibid. opposed by the Monks of
Christ-Church 129, and by the parson of S. George, ibid. John Capgrave a Friar
there 130, what benefactors they had 131 Black Friars, 106, whence called
Dominican-black, praedicant, ibid. their first coming into England, ibid. and
to Canterbury. Their governors title ibid. Gray- Friars, 99, whence called
Franciscans, Minors, Observants, ibid. Mendicants, 100, their governors title
ibid. when the first of them came into England, ibid. when first, where and by
whom seated in Canterbury, ibid. composition between them and Christ-Church,
103, their privileges, 104, benefactors ibid.
G.
Jail of the City. See Prison Gates of the City, their number and names 16
Geddinge 211, 212, 213 Geferscipes, what 364 S. Georges Church, 329, gate. See
Newingate. Gildhall in Canterbury 125 Gilds. See Fraternities. Gilingham 429
Godmersham, 213, 218, 222, 434 Goggeshall 218 Government of the City,
ecclesiastical, 349, temporal. 363 Graven^y 213, 214, 439 Gray Friars. See
Friars. S. Gregory's Priory, when and by whom founded 88, a house of Regular
Canons, 89, their habit, ibid. the endowment and revenewes, ibid. the value,
90, fired, ibid. controversy with the City, 91, articles of agreement between
them, 397 Guildford, the hospital there, 274, Sr John Guildford 183
H.
HAdleghe 214, 217 Hakynton 87, 309, 453 Halstow 222 Haltone 219 Hamme 215
Harghes 213, 214 Hawte Edmund 183 Hearne 258 Hengam Odmar 183 Henry the fourths
monument 185 Herbaldowne, the names original examined, 381, Hospital there
wherefore founded, 80, of whom, endowment, ibid. St Nicholas Church there 84,
Chantery 86, the foundation of it 378 Hermitage at Northgate 29 Heth 215, 218,
437 Hlyden 211, bis Holy-Crosse Church, 339, Vicarage, 463 Holy maid of Kent.
See Nonnery. Holingbourne 217, 221, 435 Horsleghe 218 Hospital of Eastbridge
St Jacobs St John's St Lawrence P^ore Priests.

See Eastbridge St Jacobs St John's St Lawrence Poor Priests

Hottewell 140 Hubert de Burgh 10 Hulecumb 4^2 Huntindune 440 Hurdles (or
Wattles) their use 10
I.
S. Jacobs Hospital, how ancient, and of what condition 77, the endowment and
revenewes, 78, 79, of what value 79, how far privileged from tithes, ibid.
Ickham 212, 216, 433, a family in Canterbury so surnamed 14, 330 Jesus
hospital 88 Jews in Canterbury 124 Iewry-lane ibid. Illegh 217 Impropriations
58 Infirmary and Infirmary Chapel. See in the Cathedral. Inthronization of
the Archbishops: See Archbishop. Ioane Lady Mohun 185 S. John's Church: 334,
Lane ibid. hospital: when and by whom founded 88, the endowment, 92, fired 93,
the Chapel there ibid. Irenarchae 359 Isabell Countess of Atholl 185
Judicature ecclesiastical, how exercised of old 349
K.
KIngsbridge: See Eastbridge. Hospital: See the same. Kingsmill 42
L.
LAics, their meddling in Churchmatters punished 268 Laling 217 Lambertslane 28,
129 Lamheth 211 Lanes in Canterbury 347 La^gdone, 214, Abbey there, 245, 262
Langport 436 S. Lawrence hospital, when, by whom and wherefore founded 72,
Founders charter 73, the endowment, ibid. Laza-hous^s about Canterbury 80
Leanham 216, 437, Mr Cambdens opinion touching it examined 22 At Lee Sir John
403 Leeds Castle 269 Leisdowne 2^0 Leprosy 80 Lex talionis 304 Liberties of
Canterbury 502 Liminge, land in Canterb. granted to the Nonnes there 324,
manor, 427 Little- Chert 434 Little-pet-lane 124 Liveland 437 Livingsbourne-
Chantery 119, 404 Loders- lane 460 Longport 67 Lose 214, 440 Lukedale-
Chantery, 66, foundation of it 476
M.
MAidstone, hospital, and college 254, 262, 265, manor, 429 Majors of
Canterbury, a Catalogue of them 366, etc. Malling 214, 431 Malmesbury, his
commendation of Canterbury 15 Manors: of the Archbishop: See Archbishop: of the
Monks of Christ-Church: See Monks. Manumission 182 St Margarets- Church, 344,
Officials court there when first erected 346, the parsonage of it granted to
Poor Priests- Hospital 137 Margaret Duchess of Clarence, her monument 184
Market- cross: See Bulstake. Market- field 149 St Martins: by Canterb. 64,
Bishops See there, 65, 299, School, 65, 195 416, by Dover, 220, when and of
whom founded, 24^, Buckland parsonage appropriated to it 263 St Mary Bredin
Church 343 St Mary Bredman Church 329 St Mary Castle Church 76, 333 St Mary
Magdalen Church, 331, Magdalen- Croft 332 S. Mary Northgate Church, 339,
Vicarage 462 S. Mary Queningate Church: See Queningate. Mayners, a family in
Canterbury 142 Spittle there, of whom founded, ibid. Chapel to it, ib.
revenew, ib. Meadlane 101 Medmilne 138 Meltons 213 Mepeham manor, 216, bis.
222, 438, Archbishop, his tomb mistaken 262 Mercats in the City, and Suburbs
147 Mersey 217 Mersham 219, 435 Mersteham 217 S. Michael of Burgate Church: See
Burgate. S. Mildreds Church 335 Milles upon Stoure 42 Mil^on 217, 218 Minchen-
wood, 69, Nonnes anciently called Minchens ibid. Mints at Canterbury 123, 209
Mohuns, a family 185 English Monasteries of two sorts 152 Monks, whereby
distinguished from Friars, 99, in marg. 100, their vow, 153, diet, 200,
employment, 262, those of Christ-Church, of what ^rder 153, their habit 154,
manors 187, 202, 241, 432, dyed all to five 235, banished, 282, restored, ibid.
distressed 289 Monksda^ 77 Monkish policy 64 Monkton 216, 222, 263, 433
Monuments in Christ-Church 180 Mortality great in England 256, 264 Mortimer Sir
Robert 280 Mortmaine 44 Mosaique- work 171 Mote 66
N.
NAmes, of Canterbury. See Canterbury, of the Cathedral several times
altered: See in the Cathedral. Newingate, 18, Ward 127 Newington by
Sittingbourne, 25, another Newinton 217 Newstreet 67, 460 S. Nicholas of
Herbaldowne. See Herbaldowne in Thanet 258 Niwenden 436 Nonnery of S.
Sepulchers, when and by whom founded 68, the Nonnes there enclosed, 70, their
number, 71, habit, ibid. Elizabeth Barton, the holy Maid of Kent, a name there,
here impostures 70 Nonnes anciently called Minchens 69 Northfleet 429
Northgate, 29, Ward 132 Northwood: See Barton. Archbishops Norwood, 427, Monks
Norwood, 432, Sir Roger Norwood 284 Notaries 287, 443, 445 Notaria 359
Noviomagus 24 Nunhelmestune 211
O.
OAten- hill 148 Odo Archbishop, his tomb mistaken 236 Offa King, his charter
to Christ-Church 234, 376 Officialls court. See S. Margarets Church.
Orgariswike 212 Orpintune 439 Osborne the Monk, his relation of the Danish
siege and massacre 471 Osterland 216 Otteford 41, 212, 214, 430 Out-aliens way
22
P.
PAgeham 211, 222 Palace (of the Archbishop) at Canterbury 186 St Pancrace-
Chapel 61 Parish- Churches in Canterbury, of them in general, 324, in
particular 325, etc. Parishes, their division 230 Pavement of the City, an Act
of Parliament about it 148, 410 St Paul's Church, 337, Vicarage 461 Pecchinges
216 Peckham, 216, 438, Archbishop, his tomb mistaken 256 Periodeutai 352 St
Peter's Church 330 Petham 426 Pikenot- alley 346 Pitsaeus, Balaeus his plagiary
277 Pluckley 429 Pococks- lane 347 Polres, a family in Canterbury, Aldermen of
Northgate 97 Pomoerium, what 32 Poore-Priests Hospital in Canterbury, when, of
whom, and for whom founded, 136, Chapel, ibid. spared by the Dissolution, 140,
when afterward surrendered, 141, granted to the City, ibid. The grant, 405,
Composition with the Parson of S. Margaret 141, 413 Porta machecollata (a
French word, as I have since learned) 29 Portr^ve of Canterbury 363 Portsoca 97
Posternes 31 Poultry 22 Prefect of Canterbury 363 Prestantune 216 Preston 217,
437 Princes Priests, their house in Canterbury: See Black Prince. Priors:
alien, suppressed, 262, of Christ-Church, a Catalogue of them 275, etc. Priors
Kay at Fordwich, 288, 450, a Lord Prior, 29, a spiritual Baron 298, the form
of his election and installation, 298, 452 Priory: of Christ-Church, fired 295,
dissolved 297, value, 298, of Dover, See S. Martin: of S. Gregory's: See S.
Gregory's. Prison, in the Castle. See Castle. City-Prison, 27, 28, called the
Spech-house 126, and why 127 Professions, of diverse Abbots 245 Prohibitions,
courses taken for their restraint 258 Provost of Canterbury 363
Q.
QVarell. See Controversy. Queningate, 29, Church, 30, market, 147, in the
margent, lane, 193
R.
RAculver, 216, 220, 239, 258, 424, 427 S. Radegunds- Abbey 245 Reculver. See
Raculver. Rents, of Church Lands, why so small 264 Rethercheape 149 Ridingate,
18, Ward 144 Risbergh 217 River of Stour, 37, the name, how ancient, and whence
derived, ibid. projects to enlarge it 38 Rochester, the Bishopric there, made
elective 304 Rode, between London, and Canterbury, how it lay in the Romans
time 21 Rokinge 212 Roman- bricks, 6, 62, 65, ports, 19, ways 23 Ropers, a
family in Canterbury 342 Ros Sir Thomas 118, 380 Rural- Deanes 357 Rush-
market 147
S.
SAcrist of Christ-Church, his office, and charge 172, 201 Saendling 439
Salcockslane 347 Salthill 148 Saltwood 43y Sandherst 212 Sandwich, the Port
there given to Christ-Church 155, resig^ed to the Crown 156, touching it again
217, 218, 219, 221, bis. 433 Sanguinis minutio, what, and why used of Monks 261
S. Saviors Church: See Cathedral. School: at Canterbury, 194, 416, at S.
Martin, ibid. and 65, of the Jews 124 Seals, not used here before the
Conquest, 158, Authenticke Seals, 288 Septvant, a family 182, 330 S.
Sepulchers Church, 71, Churchyard and Parish, ibid. Nonnery: See Nonnery.
Sesalter 222, 434 Shaffordsmill 45 Shaldeford 213 Sheld^ich 211 Shepeshanklane
347 Slindone 220 Smiths company 108 South Church 213 Spech-house, and
Spech-house. lane, 28, 126 Staple, of wool, at Canterbury 133 Staplegate, ibid.
a family in Canterbury 133, 328 S. Stephens. See Hakinton. Stystede 218, 220
Stodmersh, the parsonage of it granted to Poor Priests Hospital 137 Stour.
See River. Stoursaete 38, 425 Stourstreet 38 Stouting 218 Strangers, way, 22,
Church, 175 Streets, an Act of Parliament for paving them 148 Suburbs 45
Sudbury Archbishop, a worthy benefactor to our City, 11, 265, his tomb
mistaken 236, ^65 Summagium (or Summarium) bosci, in Blenwood, granted to S.
Sepulcres, 69, to S. Gregory's, ibid. to Herbaldowne- Hospital ibid.
Sunderherst 430 Sunnewineslane 347 Surling 440 Jewish Synagogue (or School) at
Canterbury. See School. Synods 351
T.
TAllage 284 Templares, their house in Canterbury 134 Temporal government of
Canterbury. See Government. Tenham 212, 309, 428 Terrings 216 Terstane 221
Testes Synodales 359 Theobald Archbishop, his Tomb mistaken 243 S. Thomas hill
87 Thorholt- wood 221, 260 Thoroughfare in S. Austins Churchyard 17 Thorough-
hall-lane 147 Thurrock 218 Tiernes, a family in Canterbury, Aldermen of
Worthgate 97 Tierne-crouch (or cross) 20, 344 Tilemannestune 432 Tithes, how
paid in Canterbury, 348, 468, 470 Titular- Bishops: See Bishops. Tombs,
anciently how situate, 252 diverse in Christ-Church, mistaken: See Cathedral.
Totius Angliae Primas, in the Archbishops title, when it first came up 240
Treasurer, of Christ-Church, his office, and charge 201 S. Trinity- Church: See
Cathedral. Turretts, in the City-wall, how many, 16, convenient for
Pest-houses ibid.
V.
VAgniacae 25 Verses, in Christ-Church-Windowes 174, 385 A Vicars stipend, what
of old 253 Vines 286 Vlcombe, the College there, of whom erected 253
Vnlawfullnesses of burial in Cities: See Burial. Vow of Monks, threefold 153
W.
Wales, laid to the province of Canterbury [252 Waleworth 216 Wall, about
Canterbury, 6. how ancient, ibid. repaired by Archbishop Lanfranc, 8, provision
to secure it, 10, benefactors to it, 11, 15, 327, a general tax throughout,
the City, for repair of it, 11, measured, and why, 13, the late neglect of it
censured, 14, Monks of Christ-Church, and their men, quit of murage 9, 10
Wardm^ 97 Wards, the City divided into them 96 Warelane 347 Warbam Archbishop,
his bad presage of a Thomas, 272, Erasmus testimony of him ibid. Waterlock-lane
135 Watling-street, in Canterbury 19 Wattles; See Hurdles. Well 435 Werehorne
217, 436 West-cliffe 223 Westerham ibid. Westgate 27, the prison there, ibid.
mill, 44, street, 94, Aldermanry, 97, ward 99, 193 Westwell 162, 223
Wheat-market 147 Willards-lane 347 Winchepe 149 Winchelsey Archbishop, where
entombed 257 Windows at Christ-Church, the Ironworke, and verses 174, 385
Wingham College: when, and of whom erected, 255, manor 427 Winulphus
Hospital: See Mayners-Spittle. Wodetone 211 Wood, a family in Canterbury: See
Atwood. Wooden Churches: See Churches. Worthgate, 21, ward 136 Wroteham 431
Wye College, when, and of whom erected, 271, surrendered, ibid. value, ibid.
Wyke 66
Y.
YElverton-Tithery. 310
FINIS.
(...)
