1607.

A true report of certain wonderful ouerflowings of Waters, now lately in
Summerset-shire, Norfolk, and other places of England: destroying many
thousands of men, women, and children, overthrowing and bearing down whole
towns and villages, and d^owning infinite numbers of sheep and other Cattle.



(...) London by (...) for Edward White and are to be sold (...)

To the Reader.
REader I have to these late accidents (whereby some parts of this our kingdom
have bin punnished) added some other, that happened in the year 1570. to the
intent that by comparing the one with the other, Gods Justice and mercy may
both be seen: If those Waters of his wrath (powered down then,) we are more
cruel then these. It is a sign (and a comfort let it be unto us) that he
does but still threaten and shake the rod, for no doubt but our faults at this
time are as great as in those days: If this affliction laid upon our
Country now, be sharper than that before, make use of it: tremble, before
warned, Amend* least a more fearful punishment, and a longer whip of
correction draw blood of us. Farewell.

News out of Summerset shire. ()
ALbeit that these swelings up and ouerflowings of waters proceed from natural
causes, yet are they the very diseases and monstrous byrthes of nature, sent
into the world to terrify it, and to put it in mind, yt the great God, (who
holds storms in the prison of the Clouds at his pleasure, and can enlarge
them to breed disorder on the Earth when he grows angry) can as well now drown
all mankind as he did at the first: But yt by these gentle warnings, he would
rather have us come unto him, and fly from the points of more deadly Arrows
of vengeance, than utterly to perish. He fills out the measures of his
chasticement according to the quality and proportion of our offenses: for as
the Waters transgress and break their bounds, to the destruction of the
fruits of the earth and to the taking away of the lives of man and beast.

So have we that should be subjects to the Almighty King, and (by our oath of
Christianity) ought and are bound to pay fea^ty and allegiance to our Lord and
Master, gone beyond the banks and limits of all obedience, to ye taking away
of his love, without which we cannot live, and to the unrecoverable undoing of
our own selves.

Sin ouerflowes our souls: the Seas of all strange impieties have rusht in
upon us: we are covered with the waves of abomination and uncleanness: we are
drowned in the black puddles of hellish iniquity: we swim up to the throats,
nay even above the chins in Covetousness, in extortion, in sensuality, in envy
one against ye other, in contempt of our Maiestrates, in neglect of our laws,
and in violation of those divine statutes, the breach of which is a
condemnation to death and that Death, and everlasting living in Hels fire.

Many a time have we bin summoned to an account for these riotous abuses and
missespending the talents put into our hands, we have shifted it off with
counterfeit sorrow for what we have done, and with promises to become faithful
servants, and new men; yet grow we worse at noone, than we were at ye suns
rising, and at his going down he blusheth to behold us in our nautines. To a
strict and strange audite therefore does God not only call some of our countrymen
now on ye soden) but also to afright us the more to make us look about, does he
strike our Cattle with diseases: he takes away the lives of our beasts fit for
labor: he destroies the Corne-fields, and threatens us with famine: he
undermines our houses with tempests, to make us fear a desolation. Read
therefore, and read with trembling these his late dreadful judgments, mock
not our selves with vain hopes, but know that if earthly fathers may be drawn
away to forget their own children, our heavenly father may by the vileness of
our souls be drawn to shake off his own people. Listen then how he menaceth,
and stand amazed at the wonders of his wrath.

In January last (toward the end of the month,) the sea at a flowing water
meeting with Land-floudes, strove so violently together, that bearing down all
things yt were builded to vvithstand and hinder the force of them, the banks
were eaten through and a rupture made into Somersetshire. No sooner was this
furious inuader entered, but he got up hie into the Land, and encountering with
the river Seuern, they both boild in such pride that many Miles, (to the
quantity of xx. in length, and 4. or 5. at least in breadth) were in a short
time swalowd up in this torrent. This Inundation began in the morning, and
within few hours after, covered the face of ye earth thereabouts (that lay
within the distance before named) to the deapth of xi. or xii. foot in some
places, in others more. The danger yt this terible tempest brought with it*
wrought much feat in the hearts of all that stood within the reach of it, but ye
soden and strange cruelty of it, bred the greater terror and amazement. Men
that were going to their labors were compelled (seeing so dreadful an enemy
approaching) to fly back to their houses, yet before they could enter, death
stood at the doors ready to receive them. In a short time did whole villages
stand like Islands (compassed round with Waters) and in a more short time were
those Islands vndiscouerable, and no where to be found. The tops of trees and
houses only appeared (especially there where the Country lay low,) as if at
the beginning of the world towns had been builte in the bottom of the Sea,
and that people had plaide the husbandmen under the Waters.

Who would not have thought this had bin a second Deluge! for (at one time
these inhabited places were sunk clean out of sight. Hunsfielde (a Market
Town in the said Shire) was quite drowned. Grantham a village utterly
ouer-flowne. Kenhouse another village covered all over. Kingson a third village
likewise lies buried in salt Water. So (besides other small cottages standing
in valies) is Brian Down a Village quite consumed. Add unto these peopled
places, the loss of Marshes, Corne-fieldes, Pastures, Meddowes, and so forth,
more then can he numbered: the misery of it no man can Express.

In this civil Wars between the Land and the Sea, many Men, women, and
Children, lost their lives: to save which, some climbed up to the tops of the
houses, but the rage of the merciles tide grew so strong, yt in many, yea most
of the Villages aforenamed, the Foundations of the buildlngs being washed away,
the whole frame fell down, and they dyed in the waters: Others got up into
trees, but the trees had their roots vnfastened by the selfsame destroyer,
that disioynted barnes and houses, and their last refuge was patiently to die.

A lamentable spectacle was it, to behold whole herds of Cattle, struggling
for life with the floods, Oxen in great numbers were earyed away with the
stream, and looked like so many Whales in ye Sea: their bellowing made a noise
in the water as if it had bin a tempest, and that ye Sea had roared. The flocks
of Sheep that are utterly destroyed by this Land-wracke are innumerable, none
knows the loss for the present but the owners of them: But the whole land will
I fear feel the smart.

A number of most strange shapes of danger did this monstrous birth of waters
bring forth: of which (for the rarenes) I will set down some, and none but
those that are true. There was a poor Man (a Householder) dwelling in one of
the Villages aforenamed, heaing seven Children: who (in this general peril)
not knowing how to bestirre himself, was desirous to save so much of his
goods as possibly he could: But the violence of the stream multiplying more
and more upon him: It came into his mind to provide rather for his Children:
his goods therefore he left to the mercy of that which has no mercy, and
loving one of his Children above all the rest, his fear drove him to run about
for the safety of that only. At last the danger that had round about (and
within doors) set upon him and his family, was so great, that he could
neither defend that his dearest Child, nor the rest, but having much ado to
get life for himself, he left them and his whole household perishing in the
torrent, he getting up to the top of the house, and so escaping. An infant
likewise was found swimming in a Cradle, some mile or two from ye place where
it was known to be kept, and so was preserved, for the Cradle was not of
wicker as ours are here, but of strong thick bordes, closely ioynted together,
and that saved the infants life. The ricks of pease in diverse places being
undermined at the bottomes, were lifted up mainely from the ground, and swum up
and down in the whole bulk, amongst which a company of Hogs, and Pigs, being
feeding upon one of the ricks, and perceiving it to go away more and more from
the^, they got up to ye top, and there maintained the^ in eating. Nay which is
more strange, conies in great numbers being driven out of their borroughes by
the tide, were seen to sit for safety on the backs of sheep, as they swom up
and down and at last were drowned with them.

A poor shepherd likewise being in the field, some of his sheep were
strayed from the rest, when the waters began to come in upon the Country,
which he perceiving, ran with all speed to fetch them in, hoping to save al:
but before he had done, having much ado to save himself, he was feign to leave
them, and with his bag and bolte, to climb up into a tree: there he saw the
confusion of his whole flock: they swom too and fro bleating for help, he
satte tearing his hair and beating his breasts; crying mainly out but could not
save the^: when they were all slain before his eyes, he wept then more
bitterly to think upon his own tragedy which he saw was now to be acted: he
feared drowning, yet he feared staruing more then drowning: he had some
victuals with him in the tree: but he knew not how long this siege of waters
would keep him in that rotten bulwark. At length (when he was almost pincht
to Death with cold) he espied a boat which the Country had sent out to save
others, to that he called, and in that recovered life.

Bristow.
NOw bend your eyes upon the City of Bristowe, and there behold as much cause
of lamentation as in any place of this realm, that has tasted of the like
misery. In the self same Month of January, and much about ye very day, did an
arm of the North seas break in (at a spring tide) which ouerflowed not only
the banckes, but almost all the whole Country round about.

All Brent-Marsh is covered over: between Barstable and Bristow the Sea
swelled up as hye as Bridgewater. All the low grounds are not only hidden with
this strange deluge, but in danger (by the opinion of men) to be utterly last.
Whole houses were removed from the ground where they stood, and sloat up and
down like ships (half sunk.)

Their Corne-mowes and hay-mowes are carried away with the stream and can never
be recovered. All their fat Oxen that could not swim are drowned: with such a
forcible assault did the Waters set upon the inhabitants, that they who were in
their houses, and thought themselves safest, could hardly make way for their
owns lives: by which means a number both of men, women, and children perished:
their dead bodies floate hourly aboue-water, and are continuallys taken up:
It cannot yet be known, how many have fell in this Tempest of Gods fearful
judgment.

Most of the goods both of Citizens here in London that were sent thither,
and of the inhabitants dwelling there, as also the Rugs and such other
commodity which came from Irelande, to the fair of Saint Paul, which was now
to be kept there, are (to an infinite value, and to the danger of many a
man's undoing) utterly spoiled and cast away. Goods in dry-fats, and whole
packes of Wares are daily taken up, but past all recovery ever to be good
again. This deluge has covered this part of the country by the space of ten
miles over in length, at least up toward Bridgewater, Many thousands of
pounds cannot make good the loss which the Country only has hereby
received. God grant there ensue no second misery upon this, worse to our
kingdom, than this Plague of Waters.

The miraculous delivery of a Gentleman from death when it had round beset him
in the midst of the waters.
A Gentleman dwelling within four miles of the sea (betwixt Barstable and
Bristow) walking forth one morning to view his grounds, cast up his eyes
toward the Seacoast, and on the sudden was struck into a strange amazeme^t,
for he beheld an extraordinary swallowing up of all the earth, that had wont
to lie visible and level to his sight: he could scarce tell certainly
whether he stood upon the ground which he was sure the day before was his own:
Hills, and valies, Woods, and Meddowes seemed al to be either removed, or to be
buried in the Sea: for the Waters a far off stood to his judgment many yards
above the earth: he took them at first for Mountains and heaps of clouds,
but fear being driven baeke (with a courage and desire in him to save himself
from this iminent danger) home comes he with all speed that he could to his
own dwelling: relates to his wife what he had seen, and the assured peril
that was preparing to set upon them, and (with all) Counsels her and his whole
Family to bestirre themselves, and to get (with such provision and Goods as
they could easily convey away) higher up into the Country, to some one of
his friends. All hands presently laid about them, (as if that enymies had bin
marching to beseidge the Town) to trusse up whai they could and be gone.

And behold, how swift is mischief when God drives it before him to the
punishment of the World? All were laboring to bear away some of the goods, but
before their burdens could be taken up, they were compeld to leave them, and
to look about for their lives. The fardels which they had bound up to save from
drowning, some of them were glad to leap upon to escape drowning themselves.

The Gentleman with his Wife and Children got up to the highest building of the
house: there sat he and they upon two rafters, comforting one another in this
misery, when their hearts within them were even dead to themselves from all
comfort: they now cared not for their wealth, so they might but go away with
their lives: and yet even that very desire of life, put him in mind to
preserve something, by which afterward they might live, and that was a Box of
Writings, wherein were certain bonds, and all the evidences of his Lands:
this Box he got, with the hard adventure of much danger: he tied it with
cords fast to (...) ^after, hoping what wrack soever should over browe the
rest of his substance, his main estate should be found safe, and come to
shore in that haven.

But alas in the midst of this sorrofull gladness, the Sea fell with such
violence upon the house, it bore away the whole building, rent it in the
middle from top to bottom, they that could not get up to the highest rooms,
were put to a double death, drowning and brayning. In this storm the Husband
and Wife lost one another: the Children and Parents were parted: the Gentleman
in this whirlwind of Waves, being forced from his hold, got to a beam, sat
upon that, and against his will rode post some three or four Miles, till at
length encountering with the side of a hill, (of which lighting place he was
joyful) there he crept up, and holding notwithstanding his safety still in his
hand: there sat he inuirond with death, miserably pouring out tears to
increase ye waters, which were already too abundant: and to make him disperate
in his sorrows, the tirranous stream presented unto him the Tragedy of his
dear Wife, and dearest children, She, they, and his Servants were whorried to
their deaths by the torrent before his face, and drowned doubly, in his tears,
and in the waves. Yet because he should not be altogether the only slave of
misfortune in this Sea Fight, nor be more tryumphed-ouer then others that fell
in the battle. At length (a little to fetch life into him which was upon
departing) he spyed his Box of writings (bound as they were to the rafter)
come floating toward him: that he ventured once again to save, and did so,
and in the end most myraculously came off likewise with his own life.

Of another Gentleman, that having a voyage to make on horseback, ended it
riding after a strange manner.
THere was another Gentlemanne in the same Country likewise, who being newly
married, determined one morning to take his Gelding, and to ride forth to a
Town not many miles dista^t from his own dwelling, there to be merry: his
horse for that purpose stood ready sadled and brideled, he himself had
drawn on one of his Boats, but before he could fit his Leg to the other, the
wind came about, the point of his compass was changed, his voyage by Land
was to be made by Water, or else not at al. For the Sea had so beegyrt the
house, broken in, lifted of the doors from their hynges, ran up into all the
Chambers, and with so dreadful a noise took possession of every Room, that
he yt was all this while but half a horseman, trusted more to his own legs
than to the swiftnes of his Gelding.

Up therefore he mounts to the very top of all the house, the waters pursued
him thither, which he perceiving, got astride over the Ridge and there resolved
to save his life, but Neptune belike purposing to try how well he could ride,
cut of the maine building by the middle, leaving the upper part swimming like a
Flemmish Hoy in foul weather.

The Gentleman being driven to go what pace that would carry him which he
sat upon, held fast by the Tiles, and such things as he could best lay hold
on, and in this foul weather, came he at length (neither on Horseback, nor
on foot, nor in a Vessel fit for the Water) to the very Town, where in the
morning he meant to take up his Inn.

A number of these strange Tragi-comicall Scaenes have been acted upon this
large Stage of waters: It would swell into a Massy Volume to Chronicle them
all: let these therefore which I have delivered unto you, be sufficient, as a
cast of Gods Judgments: these are enough to make you know he is angry, let
them likewise be enough to make us study how to allay his anger.

Add unto these, the ouerflowings in Herefordshire, Gloucester Shire, and in
diverse Shires in Wales, bordering upon the Sea, where many lives have been
lost, both of Man and Beast: of all which when the particulars are truly
known, they shall be truly published to our Country: till then make use of
these.

Norfolk.
NOr let other Countries insult over this: as if their robes of seeming purity
(invented by the Devil and his Iourney-men) were a defense or Armor of proof
against the Judgments of Heaven: they stand all within distance, this late and
fearful Inundation of water makes it apparent.

For just the same month of the year, week of the month, and almost day of
the same week, In the Country of Norfolk, not far from Kings Lyn, in a
place called March-land, happened accidents, though not altogether so violent
and mortal as those in Summersetshire, yet accompanied with much damage, and
no little danger. About the xx. of this present month of January Anno. Dom.
1607. The chief violence of winter, being (as they by many rural observations
had quoted) almost spent: The Marshes, and Fens, by reason of the years
temperature, somewhat dry, and more forward than in other years, every man
to his ability, laid out what money he could spare upon Heiffors, and such
other young ware, emptying their purses of Crowns to cram the Fens with
Cattle, little thinking the water would have made one, and like a new Broom
have sweeped all clean, as shortly it did.

The Fens thus stored with Cattle, Horse, and Bullocks, for it is not unknown
what hanocke the rot had made with sheep in the beginning of Winter, which
dyed in such abundance, that even Dogs grew weary of them.

The rot having begun, and in a manner made an end of Sheep, in comes the water
as a second and more violent inuader, and sweepes away what the rot had left
behind.

It happened upon a night, for when is danger more wakefull than when
prevention sleeps, and not so much as dreams of his Fury, A couple of
Hors-coursers, or to attire them in a courser litter, Horse-stealers, knowing
the night, a gown to cloak their villainy, came sneaking into the marrish
with an intent to make a Market of what was none of their own. And drove so
many of the Cattle as they thought sit up into the higher grounds: but in the
mean time they were hotly pursued with a fearful Hu and cry, not of
Constables, but swifter followers (Viz:) the water, which having broken out at
an old breach, in a quarter of an hour, or a very little portion of time,
ouerflowed the Marsh, and that with such unresisted violence, yt they were
enforced to leave their pray (which such fellows seldom use to do) fall to
prayer, and to take them to their heels, and of all the Cattle in that
Marrish, (being very many in number) few or none were preserved, but those
which they had fetched up with an intent to steal: for being overtaken, or
rather ouerrunne by the swiftness of the Water, they were driven some into
Creekes, some into Bushes, and some upon little Hillocks, and so eitheir lost,
driven away with the Water, or in conclusion drowned.

Theiwoo good fellows (against their wills made good) Seeing what present
danger, the water brought in with it, poasted to the Town whether the Water
(had they not made the more have) had brought the men before them: Raised the
Sexton, got the Keys of the Church door, and (as the custom in such
dangers) Iangled the Belles, and with a fearful outcry, raised the secure
Inhabitants: who imagining some House to be on fire, rose up distractedly in
their Shirtes, crying out Water, Water: of which Element (they were no sooner
up,) but they perceived they had too much: Yet were they still various in their
opinions, all fearing, yet none knowing truly what to fear: some got up to
the steeple, many thinking their had been theeus got into the upper rooms of
their Houses, shutting their safeties out, by locking themselves in. Some
thinking it had bin but a slight ouerflowing of a spring tide, laughed at the
rest.

The truth once known, it was no need to bid them make have: to express how
amazedly Men ran up and down, betwixt sleep and wake, asking what news, and
receiving no other answer but what news, was strange. In a word, in this
danger, every man laid first hands of what he loved best, some made away with
his Wife, some his Children, some careless both of Wife and Children, hurried
away his goods. He that had seen this troublesome nights work, would have
thought upon the miserable night of Troy. Here waded one up to the middle
loaded with wealth, when noting how the water increased, and calling to mind
his helpless Children, with a sigh as loath to part from what he so dearly
had loved, he throws it down, runs to Bed, wakens his Wife, and from her
sides snatches the sleeping infants. Here comes a Husband with his wife on his
back, and under either arm an Infant. The Son carries the Father, the
Brother the Sister, the Daughter the Mother, whilst the unmerciful conqueror
breaks down the Walls of the Houses, taking pity neither of aged nor Sex,
finds some at play, some a sleep in Chayers, many in their beds, that
never dreamed of misfortune till the Water waked them.

Not to stand long, the Water gave them but uery short warning, yet like a
merciful Conqueror, having taken the town, it gave them their lives, at
least all such as were willing to leave their goods. Some covetous to have all,
lost all, for striving to save their goods, they lost their lives.

In this night-massacre some few were drowned but their true names and certain
number, is not yet directly known. Up to a hill some half mile from the Town
they hasted, where that night, or rather piece of a morning, they reposed
themselves.

The next day they might behold their houses wading up to the middles in Water,
some calling for Boats out at Windows, and from the steeples top, some
swimming upon plankes, some upon Fetherheds, whom as they possibly could,
they relieved. Horses that were tied to the Mangers, at the Mangers were all
drowned, such as were loose swimming up and down, some recovered the land,
some drowned in striving to recover it, whole Barnes of Corn, which the
covetous owners horded up in hope of a dearth, the Water discovered and brought
forth, Household Stuff which the night before they packt out of the Houses in
hope to have saved, swamme up and down, with drowned people so confusedly
mingled, as men could scarce distinguish their goods, nor know their friends.

Nor did the Water thus confine his tyrranie, but joining with land Waters that
fell from the high grounds, It invaded two Villages more, but they having
warning of the Aproch, though not power to withstand it, had time to prevent
it, by conuaying all or most part of their goods and Cattle, to the vpland
Villages, leaving only the empty houses to the mercy of (that which is said
to have no mercy) the water.

Three Towns thus ouerflowed with water, could not but bring much loss to the
poor inhabitants, yet to increase it, their corn fields (and not only these)
but all along the coast and low Marshes of that country, to the number of
many thousand Acars in several places and fields are toombd and buried in the
huge grave of waters, that like a devouring gulf is never satisfied.

To this there is for the space of ten or twelve miles compass Marshes and
fens clean under water. The Cattle fed in those Marshes so suddenly taken,
that had they not fled to an Hill, some half mile in compass called
Thruehill, few or none of them could have escaped with life: yet being there,
their safety is very dangerous: for this hill being very high and narrow in
the top, is like a Rock in the Sea, girdled about with Water, so deep, that
on foot neither Man nor Beast can pass it, and yet not deep enough to
bear a Boat, by reason of muddy and old shrubs yt grow in it: by reason
whereof the poor beasts have fed the Hill so bare, as it affordes neither
grass nor wood, and so do their hunger increase, and sustenance decrease, as
they do eat the tops of Molehils, and the very earth it self, and with
lamentable bellowing complain, and as it were make moan to their owners, who
being willing can by no means relieve them. He that should see this
pitiful famine of Beasts, could not (except he were too leasiall himself)
but pity it.

At last they made shift by cutting away through the Shrubs and Bushes, to
bring abroad a Ferry Boat to the hill, to which the cattle would swim so
thick, yt they had much a do to keep it from sinking, others seeing their
fellows in the Boat, would throw themselves into the water, and like people
at a shipwreck, swarm so thick about them, and offer such mournful noyses,
that pitied ye fellows to hear, the Boat being full, other striving to swim
after them, being weak, for want of sustenance, were drowned at the Boats side.

In pity whereof, they concluded to fetch noe more of, but in those Boats
convey Hay, and such like fodder, to the Hill, and there feed them: such are
not too far spent and gone, by this means they hope to recover,
(notwithstanding the best help they can apply) they die in great numbers: the
fight is to be pitied, the loss grieved at, and the Judgment to be trembled
at. For with it, it brings this fearful expect of a hard and sharp dearth.
For Corn and Cattle, the two chief hopes of bounty taken away, what else can
we expect, but a fearful Ruin, and an inevitable desolation, which God for
his mercies sake auert.

YOu have all this while been Spectators of others sad and tragical events
which now (even by our friends, kinsfolks, and Countrymen) have been presented
on the Theater of the world: It shall not be amiss to turn your faces, and to
look back upon the head of time that is gone from us: weigh therefore those
miseries that were measured out in the last Queens reign in the year 1570.
with these in 1607. and you shall see our punishment greater, because our
treason against God is more horrible.

Bedford
THe fifth of October about midnight, the Water ouerflowed so much, that men
were feign to forsake their beds, and one woman drowned. Where also were lost a
great number of Sheep, Oxen, Kine, Horse, and other Cattle. Amongst other
there, one master Cartwrite Gentleman, having his House enclosed round about,
the water came in so much, that a Cart being lode^ with Thorns, did swim about
the ground. He lost by the same Flood, Sheep and other cattle, to the value
of an hundred pound. The same Gentleman had a close gate by the high ways
side, where the water ran over so extremely, that at the fall thereof it made
such an hole, that it was forty foot deep, so that no man could pass that
way without great danger. To the filling up of the said Hole, or Pit, was cast
in by the men of the said Town 25. loads of Fagots, and 20 load of Horse-dung,
which said Faggots and Horse-dung filled not up the hole.

Also one master Lee, at the Freers in Bedford having a fair yard, wherein was
great store of Elme-trees, whereof threescore were blown down, with the
roots pulled clean out of the ground. Also he had a close of Contes that were
clean destroyed.

In the County of Norfolk.
THe Sea brake in between Wis-bich and Walsockenne, and at the Crossekeies
drowning Tilny, and old Linne, Saint Mary Teding, Saint Mary Tid, S. John's,
Wawple, Walton, and Walsocken, Emney, Iarmans, and Stowe brinke, all being
within the space of ten Miles. At the Crosse-keyes the good man of the June
had built an house, with a strong Foundation joining unto another House being
old and not so strong, wherein were certain Guests, and when the water came in
so violently, the good man of the house being in the stronger House, called
the men out of the old House, and they would have gone down the stayres, but
the water was so high, that they could not get down, wherefore they went back
again, and brake an hole into the other House, where they went through, and the
last man was no sooner in, but the old House fell down. The Walls of the
houses were broken down, and the Horses that were tied at the Maunger, (which
was made fast in the ground) did swim in the water, when the Stable was clean
carried away, until the waters were assuaged, and were saved alive, and the
people were constrained to get up to the highest parts of the house, and to be
carried away in Boats.

At Yermoth a great part of the Bridge was carried away.

The house upon the Haven, called the Hauen-house, wherein was one Nicholas
Iosselin, the Haven man, and his son, with all their tools was carried into
the Marshes, vi. miles from the Haven, where it stood upright, where they
continued long time without meat or drink.

Item at Iermans brig street, was very much hurt done by extreme floods that
were there.

Item one Thomas Smith of Yermoth lost a ship, and vii men and a Boy in it.

Item at Newarke by Yermouth were lost vii. Sail.

Item a great Hulke laden with Oil and Pitch, was lost at Worry Sand, and
about xx. men lost therein and xxx. saved by the Hulk boat.

In the Bishoprike of Ely.
THese Towns and villages were ouerflowed that is to say, Wisbich, Guyhorn,
Parson, Drove, and Hobshouse. This Hobshouse being an alms house (and the
water breaking down the Walls of it) the wind blew the clothes of from the
bed of a poor man and his Wife, they being acold awaked, and suddenly stepped
out of his Bed to reach up his Cloths, and stepped up to the belly in water, and
then he thinking himself to be in danger (as he was indeed) and he knowing the
best way to escape the danger of the Water, took his wife on his neck and
carried her away, and so were both saved.

Item in Wisbich was a Garden, a Tenice play, and a Bowling Ally, walled about
with brick (which was worth twenty li. by year to the owner) quite destroyed
by the water.

Lincoln Shire.
MVmby Chapel the whole town was lost except three houses.

A ship was driven upon an house the Sailers thinking they had bin upon a
Rock, committed themselves to God, and three of the Mariners leapt out of the
ship, and chanced to take hold on the house top, and so saved themselves: and
the wife of the same lying in childebed, did clime up into the top of the
house, was also saved by the Mariners, her Husband and Child being both
drowned.

Item the Church was wholly ouerthrone except the steeple.

Between Boston and Newcastle were Xl. Sea Vessailes, as small Ships, Craiers,
and such like, lost upon the Coasts of Boston, Hummerston, Marshchappell,
Tetney, Stepney, Nercots, Kelby, and Grimsby, where no ship can come in without
a Pilate, which were all lost with goods, Corn, and cattle, with all the Salt
coats, where the chief and finest salt was made, were utterly destroyed, to the
utter undoing of many a man, and great Lamentation both of old and young.

Wentford Bridge being very strong of viii. Arches in length, had iii. of the
Arches broken, and clean carried away.

Master Smith, at the Swan, there had his house (being iii. stories high,)
ouerflowed unto the third story, and the walls of the stable were broken
down, and the horses ty^d to the Manger, were all drowned.

Many men had great loss, as well of Sheep, Kine, Oxen great Mares, Coltes of
the breed of the great horses, and other cattle innumerable, of which, the
names of many of them shall here follow. master Pella^ lost xiC sheep at Mumb
chapel.

In Summercote were lost v.C. sheep that were of the inhabitance there.

Item between Hummerston, and Grimsby were lost xilc. Sheep, of one master
Spencers, whose sheapheard about mid day coming to his wife, and asked his
dinner, and she being more bold then mannerly, said he should have none of
her, then he cha^ced to look toward the Marshes, where the sheep were, and saw
the water break in so ^^resly that the sheep would be lost if they were not
brought from thence, said yt he was not a good shepherd, yt would not venture
his life for his sheep, and so went straight to drive them from thence: both
he and his sheep were drowned, and after the water being gone: he was found
dead, standing upright in a ditch.

Master Thimbleby, lost CC.xx. sheep.

M. Dimock, lost cccc. sheep.

M. Marsh, lost ccccc. sheep.

M. Madison, lost a ship.

M. William Askugh of Kelsey, sir hugh Askugh M. Merin M. Fitz, Williams of
Maplethorp lost by estimation xx M. of cattle one and other.

Boorn was ouerflowed to the midway of the height of the Church.

Steeping, was wholly carried away, where was a waine lode of Willow tops, the
body of the wain with ye willowes, carried one away, and the Axiltree and
Wheels, an other way.

Huntington Shire.
IN the Town of S. Eeds, the water flowed into the Town in such abou^dance,
that it ran throw the Town and the Church, being in ye most thereof, having
about the Churchyard a Briek wall, of 2. yardes hie, was so ouerflowed that
boats were rowed over it without touching the same. Item a little from
Huntington, were in men riding upon the Causey being then ouerflowed (the water
on the Causey being not deep and thinking no danger therein) cha^ced to come
into a place where ye water had gulled away the Earth, and the Grauel, were
carried away with the water: and willows growing on both sides the way, two of
the caught hold on the willows and left their Horses, and saved themselves, and
the third chanced to catch a very little twig of a willow between his fingers,
having very little hold, for^aking his horse, which was carried a great way
(...), had much pain to keep his hold on the twig, and hold his head above the
water, and his Horse returning with force against the stream, came again unto
him, and under him, by which means he set his feet upon him, and gat better
hold of the Willow, and so saved himself, and the Horse was immediately carried
away, that he never saw him after.

Kent.
AT Broom Hill, in Romney Marsh, four miles from Rye, the water came in so
outragiously, that it brake down the Marsh Walls, one Master Bury, being owner
thereof, who lost by the same a thousand one hundred threescore and two of his
sheep, and it is thought that the Marsh is never like to be gotten again.

Item, at Erith breach, a Mariner riding by the Marshes, seeing two maids in
the marshes perceiving the Waters breaking in so fast, that the Maids were not
like to escape, rode unto them, and one of them gat up behind him, and the
other took hold on the Horse-taile, and by that were both saved from drowning.

In the same Marsh were drowned a great number of sheep.

Item, there in a Marsh land yt was sown, were two Boys keeping Cro^^s, in
the afternoon, saw the water breaking into rashly, gat them up into a cart,
that was not far from them, where they were fain to tarry until ye next ride,
which came in so boystrous^^ that it had like to overthrow both the Cart and
the Boys, and the one of them being more stranger then the other, kept the
other in hi^ (...), where he with cold, wet and fear, dyed so that he was
feign to let him fall from him into the water, when he perceived that he (...).

The (...) the Book.
Thus (...) do thou (...) bleeding Country: the sins of thy own soul
have (...) to the heart: there can be no better phys^^^^^ (...) own ame^dment
prepare thy receiptes therefore, (...) this mother of thine (and of many
Millions more) fa^^ sick to the death. It is to be feared that this swelling
of Waters in the womb of this (...) beautiful kingdom, will engender more
strange and more incurable diseases, and infecte the whole Nature. The earth by
this (...) is likely to grow (...) in stead of fruit does (...) must eat the
bread of (...), and drink our own tears in stea^ of wine. Cast up thine eyes
therefore, (...) to the ^^dgement (...), and (...) strive not (...) dry up
these showers of the Divine (...) do now reign upon our heads (...) ^^eepe in
the bosom of the cloude^ (...) us in the depth of Gods Judgment (...)
Farewell.


