The excellent and pleasant work of Julius Solinus Polyhistor. Containing the
noble actions of human creatures, the secrets and providence of nature, the
description of Countries, the manners of the people: with many marvelous things
and strange antiquities, serving for the benefitt and recreation of all sorts
of persons. Translated out of Latin into English, by Arthur Golding. Gent.



At London Printed by I. Charlewoode for Thomas Hacket. 1587.

The Right Honble. Charles Viscount Bruce of Ampthill (Son and Heir Apparent of
Thomas Earl of Ailesbury) and Baron Bruce of Whorleton

THE LIFE OF SOLINVS, WRITTEN BY JOHN CAMERTES.
THere is no certainty left in writing by them that are skillful, in what time
Julius Solinus flourished. which thing I believe to have happened because the
monuments of such as writ after him perrished almost universally, at such time
as the barbarous nations made hauock of all things. I marvel that the co^piler
of the Supplement of Chronicles (in all other respects a base wr^ter.) has
reported that this Solinus floris^ed in the time of Augustus Caesar to whom he
surmiseth him to have dedicated his Polyhistor. For it is evident that in this
work, Solinus makes mention of the Emperor Vespasians doings. Furthermore,
he speaks of Suetonius Paulinus, who^ Pliny saw as he witnesses himself.
Besides this, Solinus has drawn almost all his matter out of Plinies
fountains, and yet nevertheless in writing these things, he desires his
freende in the beginning of his work, to bear with his simplicity. But
forasmuch as he no where makes mention of Pliny, (by whom he was furthered) I
conjecture that Solinus wrate this work while Pliny was yet alive. And
therevppon (by likelihoode) it comes to pass, that he made no mention of his
author at that time living. By like reason it might fall out, that Pliny no
where makes mention of Dioscorides a famous wrighter of the same time that he
was, when notwithstanding it is apparent, that Pliny borrowed many things out
of him into his work. The same fault also might be imputed to Dioscorides (for
it might be found in Ammon which of them purloyned from other) if he
suppressing the name of Pliny, have filched so many things out of him. They
that have written most precisely of the lives and manners of Xenophon and
Plato, and sundry other things of the^, report that in all the numbers of
Volumes which each of the^ wrate, neither Plato made once mention of the name
of Xenophon, nor Xenophon of the name of Plato.

Believe ^e such is Enuies kind, that Readers very seeld.
To writers in their present times deserved thanks do yield.
For En^y feeds on the quick: but when that men be dead,
The sting of Envy stints, and has no poison more to shead.
Which saying of Naso is very true. What may be said of Macrobius, who diverse
times takes whole leaves out of Gellius? Or of Placidus, who boroweth of
Ser^ius? or of Acron, who steals from Porphyrio? What shall we say of six
hundred others, who in long treatises, suppressing the names of them from whom
they borrowed them, have word for word attributed all things to themselves? No
man doubts but that Aulus Gellius the very Diamond of the Latin tongue,
profited greatly by reading Liuie, and yet he will not in any wise that Liuie
the prince of Latin Historiographers, should be partaker of his Nights. Yet am
I not of the opinion of some me^, which think that Solinus made no mention of
Pliny, in hope that Plinies works should utterly have perished, and so his
collections only have remained, and in process of time no man should have bin
able to discover his filchings, as Florus and Iustine are thought to have
traveled to the like end and purpose* would God there were none other cause
then this of the loss of so many good Authors. Then to pass over the Greeks
by the way, the monuments of Cato, Varro, Nigidius, Salust, Higinius, Celsus,
Ennius, Furius, Varrius, Actius, Neuius, and Pacuuius, all noble Authors,
(which now are perrished, to the great hinderaunce of Students) should have
remained unto this day. But howsoever the case stands, Solinus courteously
confesses, that whatsoever he has comprehended in his Polyhistor, proceeds
out of most allowable Authors, and hechalengeth nothing for his own, in as
much as (says he) the diligence of men in old time has been such, that
nothing has continued untouched to our days. And again he says plainly,
that he leaves the auouchi^g of the truth of things, to such Authors as he
has followed in this work. Neither is it to be vpbraided to Solinus as a
shame, that he has every where followed Pliny, more then Virgill is to be
found fault with for translating into his work the verses of the ancient
Poets, and specially of Homer. For it is no small commendation to counterfeit
singulerly a singular Author.

That Solinus was a Roman, it is to be coniectured both by his phrase of
writing, and also for that commonly when occasion serves to speak of the
Romans, he is wont in most places to call them our men, or my countrymen.
Not only the latter writers, (as Sipontinus, Perottus, Domitius, Calderinus,
Angelus Politianus, Hermolaus Barbarus, Ianus Parrhasius, and diverse others
such like, whom not without cause a man might account among the ancient
writers.) But Seruius also in his second book upon Virgills Husbandry, and
Priscian, two of the six notable Gramarians, have cited the authority of
Solinus by name. Also the interpreter of Dennis, (whither it were Priscian or
Rhemninus) has oftentimes put whole sentences of Solinussis in his verses. If
I be not deceived, all that which Macrobius recites of the division of the
year, and of the odd days, are Solinussis. Moreover, the Doctors of the
Church, Ierom, Ambrose, and Au^ten, and other Doctors also, have many times
borrowed sentences word for word out of Solinus.

There are some that term Solinus by the name of Plinies Ape, in like manner
as Julius Capitolinus Plinius Caecilius, and Sidonius Apollinaris report, that
Titian was called the Ape of the Orators, and Arulen the Ape of the Stoiks. But
these men consider not, that such are wont to be called Apes, as either repeat
things written by others altogether in the same order without alteration, or
else such as counterfeit, not the Authors but their shadows. But Solinus has so
followed Plinies phrase, that (under correction be it spoken) there may scarce
any other be found, that has approached nearer to the majesty of Plinies
style. He entitled his Book (as is found in certain old Coppies) to his
friend Autius, to who also he delivered it to be corrected. Some hold opinion,
that he left other momuments also of his wit, which either by force of time are
perished, or else perchance lie hyd in some blind corner among Mothes.

Finis.
C. Julius Solinus sends hearty commendations to his freende Autius.
FOrasmuch as certain persons rather of too much eagerness then of good will,
have hasted to snatch up this little piece of work that I was in hand
withal, and have pulished it, being yet vnpullished, before the matter that I
had begun, could be fully finished: and now also do blaze abroad in
corrupted copies, the things that are disalowed, as though they had been well
allowed: slightlie ouerpassing such things as by further advise have been
added for the increase of knowledge: Least peradventure such a rude and
imperfect hochpotch should be brought unto your hands as a ^ooke by me well
ouerlooked: I have sent you this work in such sort, as you may know it to be
by mine own advise set in order. First, for that the process of the whole
discourse was to be referred to your discretion, and secondly to the intent
that the ilfauorednesse of that rustie publication might by the true edition
be abolished. The tytl^ of this work therefore shall be Polyhistor. For it is
my mind that the title which I had purposed upon at the beginning, (that is to
say, A collection of things worthy remembrance) should be abolished with the
rest of those things that I have disallowed. Wherefore when you shall compare
this Epistle with the Epistle which is in the beginning of the other coppie,
you shall understand that I have made the same account of you, as of him to
vvho^ I have dedicated the whole substance of my travel.

Farewell.
THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE of the Author written to the same Autius.
INasmuch as I understand, that both in favorable perusing the doings of
other men, and also in knowledge of the liberal Sciences, you excel all
others, whereof I my self also have had so good experience, so as I cannot seem
to have presumed unadvisedly upon your courtesy, any further then becomes
me: I thought to dedicate the web of this my little work specially unto you,
as at whose hand I hoped either for your learnings sake to be the sooner
allowed, or for your courtesies sake to be the easier borne withal. The book
is framed to a breefenesse, and (as far as reason would suffer) so
moderatlye abridged, that there is not in it, either too lauash abundance, or
to nigardly skantnesse. And if you consider it advisedly, you shall find it
rather leuened with knowledge, then vernished with eloquence. For I confess my
self to have studied earnestly certain choice Books, to the intent to
digress further of from things known, and to make longer tariance in things
more strange. Recital of places occupyeth the most part of this work, as
whereunto the whole matter is somewhat inclined of it self. And hereof I
minded in such wise to entreat, as I might set out the platts of the famous
Lands, and the notable Bays of the Sea, every one in their order, keeping the
accustomed distin^tion of the world.

Also I have interlaced many things some what differing (but not disagreeing)
from the matter, to the intent that (if nothing else, yet at leastwyse) the
variety it self might ease the wearines of the Readers* Heerewythall I have
expressed the natures of men and other living things. And not a few things are
added concerning strange Trees and Stones: concerning the shapes of farborne
people: and concerning the diversities of customs of unknown nations.
Moreover, there are diverse things worthy to be entreated of, which to pass
over, I thought had been a point of negligence, inasmuch as they be avouched
by the authority of most allowed writers, which thing inespecially I would your
wisdom should understand. For what can we callenge properly for our own,
since the dilygence of men in old time has been such, that nothing has
remained untouched unto our days. Wherefore I beseech you waygh not the
credit of this work that I put forth, in the balance of this present time.
For I ensuing the print of the old stamp, thought good rather to take my
choice of all the old opinions, then to alter them. Therefore if any of these
things shall sound otherwise to your understanding, then I wysh they should: I
pray you bear with my vnskylfulnes, and let those Authors which I have
followed stand to the auouching of the truth. And even as they that draw the
Images of men, setting all the rest aside, do first and foremost proportion out
the head, and meddle not with portraying out the other limbs before they have
taken their beginning (as ye would say) at the very topcastle of shape and
proportion: So will I also take my beginning at the head of the world, (that
is to weete) the City of Rome. And although the best learned Authors have
left nothing that may be spoken a new to the praise thereof, and that
therefore it be almost a superfluous matter to trace the pathe, that has been
trodden over in so many Chronicles. yet nevertheless, because it shall not be
altogether over slipped, I will set forth the Original thereof with as much
faythfulnesse as may be.

Farewell.
The first Chapter
of Caius Julius Solinus Polyhistor, entreats of the first foundation of the
City Rome.
THere are some which would have it seem, Opinions concerning the name of Rome.
that the name of Rome was given first of all by Euander: who finding there a
Town built before by the young men of Latiu^ which they called Valentia,
Valentia.
kept the signification of the first name, and called it in Greek Rhome, which
is the same that Valentia is in Latin. And forasmuch as the Arcadians planted
themselves there upon the highest top of an Hill, it came to pass that ever
after the Latins termed the strongest places of Cities by the name of Arces.
Heraclides is of opinion, that after the taking of Troy, certain Achiues came
by the River Tyber, and arrived in the place where Rome is now: and that
afterward by persuasion of one Rome a noble Lady (who was prisoner among them
and at y^ time in their company) they did set fire on their Ships, settled
themselves to abide, reared the walls, and called the Town Rome, after the name
of the Lady. Ag^thocles writes, that it was not this Rome the prisoner as is
a^oresaid, but the daughter of Ascanius and graundchild to Aen^a^, that was the
cause of this foresaid name of this City. There is also registered a peculiar
name of Rome: but it is not lawful to be published, forasmuch as it is enacted
among other secrets of our Ceremonies, that it should not be blazed abroad, to
the intent that the reverence given to the inacted secrecy, might abolish the
knowledge thereof. And Valerius Soranus (because he durst be so bold as to
disclose it contrary to the Law) was put to death in recompense of his
ouer-liberall talk. Among our auncientest Religions, we worship the Chapel
of Angerona, to whom we do sacrifice before the That is about the 19. day of
December.
twelfth day of the Calends of January, which Goddess (as the Governor of
silence) has her Image there with mouth closed, and lyppes sealed fast
together. As concerning the times of the building of the City, The time of
the buildinge of Rome.
it has raised doubtful questions, inasmuch as certain things were builded
there long before the time of Romulus. For Hercules Hercules.
(according to the vow that he had made for the punishing of Cacus, Cacus.
and the recovery of his Oxen,) dedicated an Altar to his Father Jupiter, whom
he surnamed ye finder. This Cacus inhabited a place named Salines whereas is
now the Gate called Trigemina. Who (as Coelius reports) being sent to ward
by Tarchon Tarchon.
the Tyrrhenian (to whom he came of Ambassade from King Marsias, Marsias.
accompanied with Megales the Phrygian) brake out of prison, and returning from
whence he came, raised a greater puissaunce, and subdued all the Country about
the River Vulturnus and Campane. Wherewith being not content, as he attempted
the conquest of those things that were come in possession of y^ Arcadians,
Megales a Ph^ygian the first founder of the art of Birdspelling among the
Sabines.
he was vanquished by Hercules, who by chance was there at the same time. And
the Sabines receiving Megales again, were taught by him the art of
Byrdspelling. Hercules also having learned of Nicostrate the mother of Euander
(who for her skill in prophesying, Nicostrate counted one of the nine Sybilles.
was also called Carmentis) that he should become immortal, erected an Altar
to his own majesty, which among our Bishops is had in very great reverence.
Moreover he made the consept, within the which he taught the Potits, how they
should solemnize his rites and ceremonies in offering Oxen. Hercules Chapel
is in the Oxe-market, Hercules Chapel, and the institution of his Ceremonies.
wherein are remaining the monuments of his banquet and majesty, even unto
this day. For such a gift is given it from Heaven, that neither dogs nor flies
can enter into the place. For at such time as he was offering the inwards of
his sacrifice, it is said that he cursed the God Myagrus, Myagrus the God of
Flies.
and left his Clubbe in the Porche, at the smell whereof dogs ran away, and
so it continues to this hour. The Church also which is called the Treasory of
Saturn, The Treasorie of Saturn.
was builded by his companions in the honor of Saturn, who^ they had learned
to have been an inhabiter of that Country. Furthermore they named the Hill
where now is ye Capitol, Saturnes Hill. Of the Castle also which they builded,
they named the Gate Saturnes Gate, The dwelling of Nicostrate.
which afterward was called Pandangate. At the foot of the Hill Capitoline,
was the dwelling of Carmentis, and there is now the Chapel of Carmentis,
whereof the Gate of Carmentis takes his name. Whereof the Roman Palace took
that name.
As for ye Palace it is not to be doubted but that the Arcadians were founders
thereof, who also before that time builded the Town Palanteum, which the
Aborigens inhabited a while, but afterward (for the noysomnesse of the fenne
and marrys which the Tyber running by it had made) left it up and removed to
Rhaeatee. There are that think this Hill took his name of the bleating of
sheep by changing of Letters, or of Pale the Goddess of Sheepeheardes, or
(as Silenus proves) of Pallas the daughter of Hyperboreus, whom Hercules
deflowred on that Hill. But howsoever these things agree: it is manifest that
the glory of the Roman name did cheefely spring out of that That is to sa^
of Romulus.
luckye fore^oken: specially seeing that the account of the years brings
good reason to ground the truth upon. For (as Varro a most exquisite Author
affirms) Romulus the son of Mars and Rhaea Siluta, or (as diverse other
suppose) of Mars and Ilia, builded Rome. And at the first Rome was called
square, because it was platted out by line and level. It begins at the
Grove that is in the floor of Apollo, and ends at the upper brew of Cacus
staiers, where as was ye cotage of Faustulus. And there dwelled Romulus that
luckely laid the foundation of the walls in the 18. year of his age, the The
time of the building of Rome by Romulus, the 19. of April.
eleue^th Calends of May between two and three of the clock, as Lucius
Tarutius the famous Mathematick has left in writing. Jupiter being at that
time in Pisces. Saturn, Venus, Mars, and Mercury in Scorpio: the Son in
Taurus: and the Moon in Lybra. And it was ever after kept for a custom, that
no sacrifice should be slain by men on their birth days, to the intent that
that day should be pure from bloodshed. The signification whereof (men hold
opinion) was taken of the deliverance of Ilia. The said Romulus reigned thirty
and seven years. The first Triumph.
He led the first triumph that ever was. And first he tryumphed over the
Ceninenses, and spoiled Acron their King, whose Armor he first dedicated to
Jupiter F^retrius, and hung it up in his Temple, terming it by y^ name of a
rich spoil. Secondly he triumphed over the Antenua^s: and lastly over the
Vien^s. Finally at ye Fen of Caprea he vanished away, the The second day of
July.
Nones of July.

Now will I show in what places the other Kings dwelt. Tatius king of the
Sabines.
Tatius dwelt in the Tower where as now is the Temple of Juno Moneta: who in
the fifth year after his coming into the City, being murdered by the
Laurents, departed out of this life, the 27. Olimpiad. Numa dwelt first on
Quirins Hill, Numa Pompilius the second K. of the Romans.
and afterward by Vestaas Church, in the Court, which yet still bears the
same name. He reigned 43. years, and is buried under Ianiculum, Tullus
Hostilius Tullus Hostiliu^
dwelt in Velia, where afterward was made the Temple of Household Gods. He
reigned two and thirty years, and died in the thirty five Olympiade. Ancus
Martius Ancus Martiu^
dwelt in the upper end of the holy street, where now is the Temple of the
Gods called Lares. He reigned thirty and four years, and dyed the 41.
Olympiade. Tarquine Tarquine the Elder.
the elder, dwelt at the Gate Mugonia, above the New street, and reigned
seven and thirty years. Seruius Tullius Seruius Tullius.
dwelt in the Exquilies above Olbyes Hill, and reigned forty and two years.
Tarquine Tarquine the proud.
the proud dwelt in the Exquilies also, upon Mount Pullus, by the Beechie
Lake, and reigned twenty and five years. Opynions of the time of the building
of Rome.
Cincius thinks that Rome was builded in the twelfth Olympiad. Fabius ^ictor
thinks it was builded in the eight. N^epos and Lacta^tius approouing the
opinions of Eratosthenes and Apoll^dorus) suppose it was builded in the second
year of the seventh Olympiad. Pomponius Atticus, and Marcus Tullius C^^ero,
hold opinion, that it was builded ye third year of the sixth Olympiad.
Therefore by conferring our time^ with the Greeks, we find that Rome was
builded in the beginning of the seventh Olympiad, the four hundred and three
and thirty year after the taking of Troy. For the gaming of Olympus (which
Hercules made in y^ honor of Pelops his great Grandfather by the mothers side,)
being left of, was by Iphiclus (one of his posterity) renewed after the
destruction of Troy, the four hundred and eight year. Whereupon it comes to
pass, that the first Olympiad is reckoned from Iphiclus. So letting pass six
Olimpiads between Iphiclus and the building of Rome, An Olimpiad and what it
contains.
of which every Olympiad contains four years, seeing that Rome was builded
in the beginning of the seventh Olimpiad, it must needs fall out that there
were just four hundred thirty and three years between the destruction of
Troy, and the foundation of Rome. To the proof of this argument makes, that
when Caius Pompeius Gallus, and Quintus Verani^s were Consuls, it was the eight
hundred and first year from the building of the City: which time of their
Consulshipp was registered in the common Records, to be the two hundredth and
seventh Olimpiad. Now multiply two hundred and six. Olimpiads by four* and
they shall amount to eight hundred and twentye four years, to the which must
be added y^ first years of the seventh Olimpiad, to make up full twenty and
five above eight hundred. Out of the which sum, abate twenty and four years
for the six Olimpiads that were behind: and the remnant shall appear to be
eight hundred and one years. Wherefore seeing that the beginning of the two
hundred and seven Olimpiad is accounted for the eight hundredth and first
year of the building of the City, it is to be believed that Rome was
builded the first year of the seventh Olimpiad. The which was governed by
Kings two hundred and one and forty years. Of the sundry governments in Rome.
The estate of the Tennement was erected the three hundred and second year.
The first Punick war was begun the four hundred fourscore and ninth year.
The second Punick war, the five hundred and thirty five year. The third Punick
war, the six hundred and four. The war of the Confederats, the six
hundred threescore and second year. Unto the year that Hircius and Pa^sa were
Consuls, there had passed seven hundred and ten years. In the time of whose
Consulship, Caesar Augustus Caesar Augustus.
was created Consul in the eyghteenth year of his age. Who so behaved
himself in the entrye of his reign, that through his circumspectnesse, the
Empire of Rome was not only in quiet, but also safe and free from all danger.
The which time was almost alone to be found, wherein wars for the most part
had longest discontinuance, and wits chiefly flourished. Undoubtedly to the
intent that during this vacation time, when wars ceased, the exercises of
virtue should not grow out of ure.

CAP. II.
Of the division of the year, and of the odd days added in the Leape-yeeres.
ABout this time was the orderly course of the year perceived, which from the
beginning of the world had been deeply hidden in darkness. For before
Augustus Caesar, men reckoned the year diversely and uncertainly. The
Aegiptians determined it in four months. The Arcadians in three. The
Acarnanians in six. The Lauinians of Italy in thirteen: and this their year
was reported to be of three hundred threescore and fourteen days. The
Romans at the first, accounted ten months for a year, beginning at March.
In so much that in the first day thereof, they kindled fire on the Altars of
Vesta, they shifted their old Baye Garlandes for Green, the Senate and people
chose new Officers, the Matrons served their servant at the Table, in like
sort as the Masters did at the feast of Saturn: the Matrons to the intent
through this courtesy to provoke the^ to y^ more obedience, the Masters as it
were to reward them in respect of their pains taken: specially seeing this
month is the first, and chief of all the rest, which may well be proved, in
that the fifth month from it was called Quintilis, and when the full number was
fulfilled. December did close up the whole circuit within the three hundred and
four day. For at that time this number of days accomplished the year, so
that six months were of thirty days a piece, and the other four had thirty
and one a piece. But forasmuch as that account before the coming of Numa
differed from the course of the Moon, they supplied the year to the
computation of the Moon, by putting thereto one and fiftye days. To the
intent therefore to make up full twelve months, they took from each of the
said six months one day, and put them to these one and fiftye, and so made
just fifty and seven, the which were divided into two months, whereof the
one contained twenty and nine days, the other twenty and eight. So the year
began to have three hundred fiftye and five days. Afterward, when they
perceived the year to be unadvisedly determined within the foresaid days,
forasmuch as it appeared that the Sun finished not his full course in the
Zodiac, before ye three hundredth threescore and fifth day, with the overplus
welneere of a quarter of a day: they added that quarter and ten days, to the
intent the year should consist of full three hundred threescore and five days,
and the fourth part of a day. Whereunto they were the rather induced for
observing the odd number, which (according to the doctrine of Pythagoras)
ought to be preferred in all things.

And heerevpon it comes to pass, that January for his odd days is
dedicated to the Gods supernal, and February for his even days as unlucky is
allotted to the Gods infernal. Therefore when as this order of account seemed
alowable to the whole world, for the exacter keeping of the said quarter, it
was of diverse Nations diversely added, and yet it could never be brought to
pass, to sal out even with ths time. The Greeks abated out of every year
eleven days, and the fourth part of a day: which being eight times
multiplied, they reserved to the ninth year, to the intent that the number of
nine being gathered into one gross sum, might be divided into 3. months
of thirty days a piece. The which being restored again the ninth year, made
four hundred forty and four days, which they called odd or superfluous
days. The Romans liked well of this reckoning at the first. But afterward
mislyking it in respect of the even number; they neglected it, and within short
space forgot it, committing the order of the addition to the Priests: who to
pleasure the tolegatherers in their accounts, did after their own fancy
shorten or lengthen the year as they lysted.

While things stood in this case, and that the manner of adding was sometime
too short, and sometime too long, or else dissembled and let slip altogether: it
happened oftentimes that the months which had been wont to pass in Winter,
fell one while in Sommertime, and another while in the fall of y^ leaf. Caius
Caesar therefore to the intent to set a stay in this variableness, did cut
of all this turmoyling of the times. And that the error foreslypped might be
reduced to some certain staidness: he added twenty and one days and six
hours at a time, by means whereof the months being drawn back to their
accustomed places, might from thenceforth keep their Ordinary and appointed
seasons. That only year therefore had three hundred and four and forty days,
and all the rest afterward had three hundred threescore and five days, and
six hours. This notwithstanding, then also was a default committed by
Priests. For whereas order was taken that they should every four year add
one day, which ought to have been done at the end of the fourth year,
before the fifte year began, they reckoned it in the beginning of the fourth
year, and not in the end. By means whereof, in thirty and six years,
whereas nine days had been sufficient, twelve days were reckoned. The which
being espied, Augustus reformed in this wise. He commanded that twelve
years should pass without leap, to the intent y^ those three days above the
nine, which were superfluously added, might by this means be recompensed. Upon
which discipline was afterward grounded the order of all times.
Notwithstanding, albeit that for these and many other things, we may think
our selves beholding to the reign of Augustus, The misfortunes of the
Emperor Augustus.
who was almost peerless in his government: yet there are to be found so
many misfortunes in his life, that a man can not easily discern whither
he were more miserable or happy. First, for that in his suit to his Uncle for
the Lieuetenantship of the horsemen, Lepidus the Tribune was preferred before
him, not without a certain foil of his first attempts. Secondly, for that he
was greatly anoied by the authority of Antony joined with him in the office
of the Threemen, and with the battle at Philippo. Thirdly for the hatred that
he raised against himself for proclayming the Noblemen Traitors: The
disheriting of Agrippa, (borne after the decease of his Father) whom he had
adopted before to be his Son, and the great repentance he took thereof
afterward, for the desire he had unto him. His shipwracks in Sicill: his
shameful lurking in a Cave there: the often mutinies of his Soldiers against
him: the thought he took in the siedge of Perusium: the detecting of his Her
(...)*
Daughters aduoutrie, and of the intent she had to murder him: and (as
shameful a matter as y^ other) the infamy of his Niece, blamed for the death
of her Sons: the grief of his solitariness for the less of his Children,
which was not a corzie alone: The pestilence y^ reigned in the City. The
famine through all Italy, in the time of his wars in Illirick: the narrow
shifts that he was driven to for want of Soldiers: the crazednes of his body
which was always sickly: the spightfull discention of Nero his Wives Son:
the unfaithful imaginations of his wife and her Son Tiberius: and many
other things of the same sort.

Notwithstanding, as though the World had bewailed this man's end, the evils
hanging over men's heads, were showed before by tokens nothing doubtful. For
one Fausta a woman of the meaner sort, brought forth at one burden four
Twins, Foretokens of the death of Augustus.
two Sons, and as many Daughters: prognosticatinge by her monstrous
fruitfulness, the great calamity that was to come. Howbeit that Trogus the
writer of Histories affirms that seven are borne together at one burden in
Egypt: Monstrous fruitfulness of Women.
which thing in that Country is not so great a wonder, forasmuch as the River
Nilus with his fruitful water, makes plentiful, not only the soil of the
ground, but also men's bodies. We read that Cneus Pompeius did show openly
in the Theater at Rome, one Eutichis a woman of Asia, Twenty Children at three
c^^ld beds.
with her twenty Children, which she was certainly known to have been
delivered of at three burdens only. And therefore I think it exp^dient to
treat in this place concerning the generation of Man.

CAP. III.
Of Man and of his birth: of men of wonderful strength: and of the stone
Alectorius, or the Cockstone.
FOr inasmuch as we are minded to make a note of things worthy to be touched,
concerning living creatures, as y^ Countries of each of them souerally shall put
us in remembrance. Reason would we should begin chiefly at that creature which
nature has preferred before al others in judgment of understanding, and
capacity of wisdom. Of Women, some be barren for ever: othersome by change
of Husbands become fruitful. Many bear but one Child: and diverse bring
forth either only Males, or only Females. After fifty years the
fruitfulness of them all is at a point: but Men begette Children until they
be fourscore, like as King Masinissa begat his Son He was also called
Methym^us.
Metymathnus, when he was of the age of fourscore and six years. Ca^^ when
he was full fourscore year old and upward, begat the Grandfather of Cato that
killed himself at Vti^a, upon the Daughter of his Client Salonius. This is
also found to be of a truth, that when two are conceived one somewhat after
another, the Woman goes out her full time of them both: like as has been
seen in Hercules and his broth^r Iphiclus, The birth of Hercules and Iphiclu^.
who being carried both in one burden, had notwithstanding like distaunce of
time between their birthes, as there was distance between their begetting.
And likewise in a wench called Proconesia, who committing aduoutry with two
sundry men, was delivered of a pair of Twins each of them resembling his
Father. This Iphiclus begat Iolaus, who entering the Island Sardinia and there
alluring unto concord the wavering minds of the inhabitants, builded Olbia and
other Greek Towns. They which after his name were called Iolenses, reared a
Temple over his Tomb, because he following the virtues of his Uncle, Of the
conception of Man.
had delivered Sardinia from many euilles. The tenth day after co^ception
will by some pain put the Mothers in remembrance that they be with Child. For
from that time forward, their heads shall begin to be disquieted, and their
sight shall wax dim. Also the appetite of their stomach shall abate, and they
shall begin to loathe meat. It is agreed upon among all men, that of the
whole flesh, the first part that is formed is the heart, and that it increases
unto the threescore and fifth day, and afterward diminishes again: and that
of gristles are made the backbones: and therefore it puts them in danger of
death if either of both those parts be hurt. Doubtless if it be a Malechild
that is in fashioning, the Women that bear them are better colored, and their
deliverance is more speedy, and finally it begins to stir at the forty
day. The Female stirs not before the fourscore and tenth day, and the
conception thereof dies ye countenance of the Mother with a pale color, and
also hinders the legs with a faint slownesse in going. In both kinds,
when the hear begins to grow, then is the greater disease, and the pain
is more breeme in the full of the Moon, with time also is always noisome to
the^ when they are borne. When a Woman with Child eats meats that are
ouersalt, the Child shall be borne without nails. At such time as the birth
being fully ripe approaches to the instant of deliverance, it greatly
avails the Woman that laboreth to hold her breath, for as much as yawning
does with deadly delay prolong the delivery. It is against nature for the
birth to come forth with his feet forward: and therefore as Children hardly
borne, Of such as are borne with their feet forward.
they are called in Latin, Agrippae. Such as are so borne, are for the most
part unfortunate and short lived. Only in one Man, namely Marcus Agrippa, it
was a token of good luck: howbeit not altogether so misfortunelesse but that
he suffered more adversity then prosperity. For with miserable pain of his
feet, and the open aduoutry of his wife, and certain other marks of ill luck,
he did abye ye foretoken of his awke birth. There is also an unfortunate
manner of birth in the Female kind, like as was seen by Cornelia the Mother
of the Gracchusses, who made satis-faction for her monstrous birth, The first
Caesar among the Romans.
with the unlucky end of her Children. Again the birth is the more luckie
where the Mother dies of it: as was seem by the first Scipio Affricanus, who
after ye death of his Mother, because he was ripped out of her womb, was the
first of the Romans that was called Caesar. Of Twynnes, if the one remain
still and ye other perrish by being borne before his time, he that is borne
at his full time is called Vopiscus.

Some are borne with teeth, as Cneus Papirius, Carbo, and Marcus Curious, who
for the same cause was surnamed the toothed. Some insteede of teeth have the
room supplied with one whole bone. After which manner Prusias King of Bythinia
had a Son. The teeth differ in number according to the difference of the
kind. For in men are more, and in women are fewer of those teeth which are
called dogteeth. Unto such as have two double teeth growing up upon the right
side of their mouth, it behighteth the favor of Fortune. And unto such as have
them on the left side, it betokens the contrary.

The first voice of Children after they be borne is wayling. For the
declaration of mirth is delayed to the forteth day. We know of none that
laughed the same hour he was borne, Zoroastres king of the Bactrians. Crassus.
but only one: that is to weete, Zoroastres, who became most skillful and
cunning in all good arts. But Crassus, the Graundfather of him that was slain
in the battle against the Parthians, because he never laughed, was surnamed
That is to say laughterlesse. Socrates.
Agelastos. Among other great things y^ were in Socrates, this is worthy to
be noted, that he continued always in one manner of countenance, even when
he was troubled with adversity. Heraclitus and Diogines.
Heraclitus and doggysh Diogenes did never abate one whitte of their stiff
stomachs, but treading under foot the storms of all casualties, continued
vnchaungable in one purpose, against all greefes and miseries. It is Registered
among other examples, that Pomponius the Poet, such a one as had been
Consul, did never rasp.

It is very well known, Examples of singular strength.
that Antonia the Wife of Drusis did never spette. We have heard of diverse
that have been borne with whole boanes not hollow within, and that such are
wont neither to sweat nor to be a thirst: of the which sort Ligdamus of
Syracuse is reported to be one: who in the thyrtie and three Olimpiad carried
away the first Garl^nd of victory in the Running leaping, buffeting, wrestling
and throwing of the Sledge
five exercises of actiuitie, from y^ gaming of Olympus, and his bones were
found to have no maroe in them. It is most certain that the greatest
substance of ^trength comes of the sinews: and that the thicker they be,
so much the more does the strength increase. Varro in his Register of
monstrous strength, noted that there was one Tritanus a Swordplayer a Samnite
borne, that had sinews both right out, and cross overthwart, and that not
only the bulk of his breast, but also his hands and his arms, were as it
were lattised with sinews: who foiled all his adversaries with a fillippe, and
almost with careless encounters: And that the Son of the same Man a Soldier
of Cneus Pompeiussis, being borne in the same sort, did set so light by an
enemy that did challenge him, that being himself unarmed, he over came him,
and taking him prisoner, carried him with one of his fingers into his Captains
Pa^ilion. Milo also of Croton is reported to have done all things above the
reach of Man's power. Of who^ this is left in writing, that with the stroke of
his bare fist, he felled an Ox stark dead, and eat him up himself alone
the same day that he killed him, without ouercharging his stomach. Hereof there
is no doubt. For upon his Image is an inscription in witness of the fact,
with these words. He died a conqueror in all attempts. There is a stone
called The Cockstone.
Alectorius, of the bigness of a Bean, like unto Crystal, found in the
bellies of Cocks, meet (as is reported) for them that go to battle.
Moreover, Milo flourished in the time of Tarquine the Elder.

CAP. IIII.
Of the likeness of shape and favor: of the tallnesse of certain personages:
of the measure of a Man: and of the reverence of the dead.
NOw who so bends his mind to consider the causes of likenesses, shall
perceive the wonderful disposition of the workmanshippe of nature. For sometime
such likenesses belong to some stock, and descend from issue to issue, into
the succession: like as diverse times young Children bear sometime Molles,
sometime scarres, and sometime any other marks of their ancestors. As among
the Lepids, of whom three of the same line (but not successively one after
another) are found to have been borne after one sort, with a A seely how.
filme over their eye. As in the famous Poet of Byzance, who having a Mother
that was the bastard of an Ethiopian, although there were nothing in her
resembling her Father, yet did he degenerate again into the likeness of the
Ethiopian that was his Grandfather. But this is the less wonder, if we
consider those things that have been seen betwixt mere strangers. One
Artemon a man of the baser sort in Syria, Of strangers that resembled one
another.
did so resemble King Antiochus in face, that afterward the Kings wife
Laodice, by showing this rascal fellow, kept close the death of her Husband
so long, until such a one was ordained successor of the Kingdom as she
listed to appoint. There was such likeness to all respects in personage and
making, between Cneus Pompeius, and Caius Vibius a man of mean birth, that
the Romans called Vibius by the name of Pompey, and Pompey by the name of
Vibius.

Rubrius the Stage Player did so fully express the Orator Lucius Plancus, that
ye people called him Plancus also. Mirmillo a Neatehearde, and Cassius Seuerus
the Orator did so resemble one another, that if they were seen together at any
time, they could not be discerned which was which, unless there were a
difference in their apparel. Marcus Messala Censorius, and Menogenes a fellow
of the very rascallest sort, were so like, that every Man thought Messala to
be none other then Menogenes, nor Menogenes any other than Messala.

A Fysherman of Sicill was likened to the Proconsull Sura (besides other
things,) even in the drawing or wringing of his mouth also. So fully did they
agree, in the same impediment of speech, and slow brynging forth of their
words, through the default of nature. Sometime also it has been a wonder to
see the indiscernable likeness of countenaunces, not only in strangers, but
also even in such as have been brought together from the furthest parts of
the whole world. For where as one Thoranius sold unto Antony bearing at that
time the office of Triumuir, for threehundred Sesterties, two Boys of
excellent beauty for Twynnes, of which he had gotten the one in France and
the other in Asia,) so resembling each other in all points, that they might
have been taken both for one, if their speech had not bewrayed them: and
that therefore Antonie was displeased, thinking himself to have been deluded,
because they were not Twynnes indeed. Thoranius pleasantly avouched, that that
thing was chiefly to be esteemed, which the Chapman found fault with. For it
had been no wonder to have had two Twyns like: But this was it which could by
no means be prysed according to the value, that being of two diverse Cou^tryes
so far distaunt, they were borne more like one another then any Twins. With
which answer Antonie was so appeased, that ever after he would tell men, he
had not any one thing of all his possessions, that he did set more store by.

Now if we shall move question concerning the personages of men, Of the
talenes and goodly personages of men in old time
it will manifestly appear, that antiquity has vaunted no lies at all of it
self: but that the offspring of our time being corrupted by succession growing
out of kind, has through ye decrease of them that are now borne, lost the
comeliness of the ancient beauty. Therefore although diverse do conclude,
that no man can exceed the stature of seven foot, because that Hercules was
no higher then so: yet notwithstanding, it was found in the time of ye
Romans under the Emperor Augustus, Pusio and Secundilla.
that Pusio and Secundilla were ten foot high and more: the corses of whom,
are yet to be seen in the Charnelhouse of the Salusts.

Afterward, in the reign of Claudius, there was one named Gabbara Gabbara
brought out of Araby, that was nine foot and as many inches high. But almost
a thousand years before Augustus, there was no such personage seen, neither
after ye time of Claudius. For what is he in our days y^ is not borne lesser
then his Parents? As for the hugenes of men in old time, the Relics of
Orestes Orestes.
do testify. Whose bones being found of the Lacedaemonians at Tegaea by the
information of the Oracle the fifty and eight Olympiad, we are assured were
full seven cubits long. A dead body of monstrous bigness.
Also there are wrytings Registered in remembrance of things done in ancient
time, which avouch the assuredness of the truth, wherein it is specified,
that in the Candian war, at such time as ye Rivers more outragiously flowing
than fresh waters are wont, had broken up the ground there, after the fall of
ye said waters, among many clifts of the ground, there was found a body of
three and thirty cubits. For desire to see the which, Lucius Flaccus the
Lieuetenant and Metellus himself also, being wonderfully amazed at the
strangeness thereof, went thither, and beheld the wonder with their eyes,
which they thought a Fable to hear reported. I may not let pass the Son of
Euthymines of Salymis, who grew three cubits high in three years. An
ouerswif^ growth.
But he was slow of gate, dull wytted, boystrous of voice, too soon ripe, and
immediately beset with many diseases: so as he recompensed his ouerhasty growth
with unmeasurable punishment of sickness.

The manner of measuring agrees two ways. For look how much a man is
between the ends of his two longest fingers stretching his arms out. The
manner of measuring a Man.
so long is he between the sole of his foot and the crown of his head: and
therefore the natural Philosophers deem man to be a little World. Unto the
right side is ascribed the handsomer moving, and unto the left side the
greater firmen^sse. And therefore the one is more apt to dancing and other
exercises of lyghtnesse, and the other better able to bear burdens.

Nature has decreed a kind of reverence to be observed even of bodies
disceased: Natural reverence in bodies disceased
so that if at any time it happen the carcasses of such as are killed, to be
borne up with the waves, Men's bodies fleet with their faces upward, and
Women's with their faces downewarde.

CAP. V.
Of swiftnes: of sight: of the valiantness of certain Romans: and of the
excellency of Caesar the Dictator.
But to the intent we may pass to the title of swiftness: Of Swiftnes.
the prick and prise in that behalf, obtained one Ladas, Ladas.
who ran in such wise upon the loose dust, that the sand houered still up,
and he left no printe of his footesteppes behind him. Polymestor Polymestor.
a Boy of Miletum being set by his Mother to feed Goats, ran after a
Hare in sport and caught it. For the which deed within a while after the
owner of the heard brought him to ye gaming in the forty and six Olimpiad,
(as Bocchus reports) and there in the race he gained the Garland. Phylippides
Phylippides.
ran one thousand, two hundred and fortye furlongs from Athens to Lacedaemon
in two days. Antistius a Lacedaemonian and Philonides the Lackies of great
Alexander, Antistius and Philonides.
iournied a thousand and two hundred furlongs from Sycion to Elis, in one day.
The same year that Fonteius and Vipsanus were Consuls, a Boy in Italy of eight
years old, went 45. miles between noone and night.

The quickest of sight was one Strabo, Quick^^^tednes. Strabo.
whom Varro avouches to have ouerlooked a hundred thirty and five miles, and
that he was wont exactlie to view from the watch Tower of Lyliby in Sicill,
ye Punicke fleet ^etting out of the Haven of Carthage, and to report the just
number of their Ships. Cicero makes report, that the Ilias of Homer was so
finely written in Uelame, that it might be closed in a Nutshell. Callicrates
Callicrates.
carved An^s of Iuory so finely, that some of the^ could not be discerned from
other Ants. Apollonides declares that in Scythia there is a race of Women
called Bythies, which have two balls in each eye, and do kill folk with
their sight, A race of strange Women.
if they happen to cast an angry look upon any body. Such there be also in
Sardinia.

That Lucius Sicinius the toothed excelled in valiantness among the Romans,
Valiantnes. Lucius Sicinius.
the number of his titles do declare. This man was one of the Protectors of
the cominalty, not much after the dryuing out of the Kings, when Spurius
Tarpeius, and Aulus Thermus were Consuls. He being vanquisher in eight
challenges hand to hand, had five and forty scarres in the forepart of his
body, and on his back part not one. He took spoil of his enemy four and
thirty times. In horsetrappers, pure spears, Bracelets and Crowns, he
earned three hundred and twelve rewards. He followed nine Grandcaptaynes in
tryumphe that had conquered by his means. Next after him Marcus Sergius Marcus
Sergius, the Father of Catiline.
serving twice in the wars, in the first time received thirty and three
wounds on the forepart of his body, and in the second lost his right hand, and
therefore made him a hand of iron. And whereas almost none of both his hands
were able to do him any service in sight, yet notwithstanding he fought four
times in one day, and got the victory with his left hand, having had two
Horses slain under him. Being twice taken prisoner by Hanniball, he escaped
away, when by the space of twenty months in which he had been prisoner, he
had at no time been without Gives and Fetters. In all the sharpest battles
which the Romans tasted of in those days, he being honored with warlike
rewards, brought Civil Crowns from Thrasymenus, Trebia, and Pauy, At the
battle of Canuas also, (out of the which it was counted a point of
valiantness to escape with life) he only received a Crown. Happy
doubtless had he been in so many aduauncements of honor, if Catiline his
next heir by lineall descent, had not defaced his so renowined praises with
the hatefulness of his cursed name.

As much as Sicinius or Sergius excelled among the Soldiers, C. Iulius^
so much among the Captains (or rather among all men) excelled Caesar Caesar.
the Dictator. Under his conducte were slain eleven hundred, fourscore and
two thousand enemies. For he would not have it noted how many he ouerthrewe
in the civil wars. He fought in piched field two and fifty times, alonely
surmounting. Marcus Marcellus, who in like sort had fought nine and thirty
times. Besides this, no man wrote more swiftly, nor no man read more speedily.
Moreover, he is reported to have indicted four Letters at once. He was of so
good a nature, that such as he subdued by battle, he more overcame them with
gentleness.

CAP. VI.
Who were notable for memory: who lost their speech by mischaunce, or got
it by chance, who flourished in eloquence: of the praise of manners, of
godliness, of chastity, and who has been judged happy.
CYrus was notable for the good gift of memory, Cyrus King of Persia.
who in the most populous army whereof he was Captain, could call every
several person by his name. The same thing did Lucius Scipio Lucius Scipio.
among the people of Rome. But we may believe that both Scipio and Cyrus were
furthered by custom. Cyneas Cyneas.
the Ambassador of Pyrrhus, the next day after he was entered into Rome,
saluted both the Knights and also the Senators by their propper names.

Methridates Methridates
King of Pontus ministered justice without an interpreter, to two and twenty
Nations that were under his dominion. It is manifest that memory may be made
by art, Memory made by Art.
like as in the Philosopher Metrodorus that was in the time of doggyshe
Diogenes: who furthered himself so much by daily practice, and beating with
himself, that he kept in remembrance what many men spoke at once, not only in
order of sense, but also in order of words. Notwithstanding it has been
often seen, The perishing and loss of memory.
that nothing may easiler be perished by fear, by falling, by chance, or by
sickness. We have found that he that was but stricken with a stone, forgot to
read. Surely Messala Coruinus Messala Coruinus.
after a disease that he had endured, was so stricken with forgetfulness, that
he remembered not his own name, and yet otherwise his wit was fresh enough.
Fear astonieth ye memory. And again fear Fear.
is an enforcement of speech, the which it not only sharpeneth, but also
extorteth although there were none before. Surely when Cyrus in the eight and
fifty Olympiad entered by assault into Sardis, Athis the Son of king Craesus.
a Town of Asia, where Craesus at that time lay hidden, Athis the Kings Son
(who unto that instaunt had always been dumb,) burst out into speech by
force of fear. For it is reported, that he cried out: Cyrus spare my Father,
and learn to know (at leastwise by our casualties) that thou art a Man.

Now remains to entreat of manners, Excellency of manners. Cato.
the excellentnes whereof appeared most in two men. Cato the founder of the
stock of the Portians was a very good Senator, a very good Orator, and a
very good Captain. Nevertheless, for diverse quarrelles picked unto him of
malice, he was endited and arrayned forty and four times, but yet was always
quitted. The praise of Scipio Aemilianus Scipio Aemilianus.
is yet greater: who besides the virtues for which Cato was renowned,
surmounted also in love toward the common weal. Scipio Nasica Scipio Nasica
was judged to be the best man then living, not only by the voice of the
commons, but also by the oath of the whole Senate, inasmuch as none could be
found worthier then he, to be put in trust with a mystery of chief
Religion, when the Oracle gave warning to fetch into the City the holy
Ceremonies of the mother of the Gods from Pessinus.

Many among the Romans flourished in eloquence, Eloquence or learning.
but this gift was not heritable at any time, saving to the house of the
Curios, in the which, three were Orators successinelie one after another. The
singular estimation of learning in those days. Archilocus the Poet.
Surely this was counted a great thing in those days, when eloquence was had
in chief estimation both of God and manne. For at that time Apollo bewrayed
the murders of the Poet Archilocus, and the deed of the felons was detected
by God.

And at such time as Lysander King of Lacedaemon besieged Athens (where ye body
of Sophocles the Tragedy Sophocles the Tragedy writer.
writer lay^ unburied) Bacchus sundry times warned the Captain in his sleep,
to suffer his darling to be buried, and never ceased calling upon him, until
Lysander having knowledge who it was that was departed, and what the God
demanded, took truce with the Athenians, until so worthy a corse might be
buried accordingly. Castor and Pollux standing without the door in the sight
of all men, called Pindarus Pindarus the Harper.
the Harper out of a place where he was making merry, (which was at the point
to fall) to the intent he should not perrish with the rest. Whereby it came to
pass, that he only escaped the danger that hunge over their heads. Next
unto the Gods is Cneus Pompeius to be reconed: who when he should enter into
the house of Possidonius, Possidonius the Philosopher.
the notablest professor of wisdom in those days, forbadde his Mace-bearer
to strike ye door as the custom was: and so holding down his sheaf, albeit
he had at that time dispatched the war against Methridates, and was
Conqueror of ye East. yet of his own free will he gave place to the Gate of
Learning. The first Scipio Affricanus commanded that the Image of Quintus
Ennius Quintus Ennius.
should be set upon his Tomb. Cato that slew himself at Vtica, brought
unto Rome two Philosophers, one when he was Marshall of the Host, and another
when he was Ambassador in Cyprus: alleging that in so doing, he had greatly
benifited the Senate and people of Rome albeit that his great Grandfather had
oftentimes decreede, y^ al Greeks should be utterly driven out of the City.
Dennis y^ Tyran of Sicill sent a Ship decked with Garlonds to meet Plato,
Plato.
and he himself in a Charyot drawn with four White steedes, entertained him
honorably at his first coming to land. Perfect wisdom was adjudged only to
Socrates Socrates.
by the Oracle of Apollo.

The proof of godliness Godliness.
and natural affection toward the parents shined in the family of the Metels.
But it was found most evident in a poor childbearing Woman. This Woman who
was of low degree, A poor childbearing woman
and therefore not altogether so famous, being with much adooe (and after much
serching oftentimes of the Gaolers, least she should have carried any meat
in with her) suffered to go to her father, (who was condemned to the
punishment of perpetual prysonne) was found to seed him with the milk of
her breasts: which thing consecrated both the deed and the place. For the
Father which was condemned to death, being given unto his daughter, was
reserved in remembrance of so worthy a deed, and the place being dedicated
to the power that wrought the deed, was made a Chapel, Chastity. Claudia.
Sulpitia,
and entitled the Chapel of godliness. The ship that brought the holy
mysteries out of Phrygia, in following ye hearelace of Claudia, gave unto her
the pre-eminence of chastity. But Sulpitia the daughter of Paterculus and wife
of Marcus Fuluius Flaccus, was by the verdite of all the Ladies in Rome
advisedly chosen out of a hundred of the vertuousest of them, to dedicate the
Image of Venus according as y^ books of Sybill gave warning to be done.

As touching the title of happiness, Happynes.
he is not yet found that may rightly be judged happy. For Cornelius Sylla
Cornelius Sylla
was happy rather in name then in deed.

Surely Cortiua judged only Aglaus Aglaus.
to be blessed: who being owner of a poor piece of ground in y^ narrowest
nooke of all Arcadie, was never found to have passed out of the bounds of his
natural soil.

CAP. VII.
Of Italy and the praise thereof: and of many peculiar things that are found
therein.
AS concerning Man I have said sufficient. Now to the intent we may return
to our determined purpose, our style is to be directed to the recital of
places: and chiefelie and principally to Italy, ye beauty whereof we have
already touched lightly in the City of Rome. But Italy has been written
of so thoroughly by all men, and specially by Marcus Cato, that there cannot
be found that thing which the diligence of former Authors has not prevented,
for the Country is so excellent, as it ministers matter of praise abundantly,
while the notablest writers consider the healthfulnesse of y^ places, the
temperatenesse of the air, the fruitfulnes of the soil, the open prospects of
the Hills, the cool shadows of the woods, the vnhurtful low grounds, the
plentiful increase of Uines and Olives, the Sheep courses, the pasture
grounds, so many Rivers, so great Lakes, places that bear flowers twice a
year, together with the Mountain Veseuus, casting up a breath of flaming
fire as if it had a soul, the Bathes with their springes of warm water, the
continual beautifing of the Land with new Cities, so goodly a sight of
ancient Towns, which first ye Aborigens, Arunks, Pelasgians, Arcadians,
Sicilians, and lastly the inhabiters of all parts of Greece, and above all
others, the victorious Romans have builded. Besides this, it has shoares
full of Havens, and coasts with large Bays and harboring places, meet for
traffic from all places of the world. Nevertheless, least it may seem
altogether untouched of our part, I think it not inconvenient to busy my
wits about those things that have been least beaten, and slightly to
travel through those things ye have been but lightly touched and tasted by
others. For who knows not that Ianiculu^ was either named or builded by
Ianus? Or that Latium was called so, The founders of the chief Cities and
places in Italy.
and Saturnia of Saturn? Or that Ardea was builded by Danace? Polydee by the
companions of Hercules? Pompeios in Campane by Hercules himself, because that
after his victory in Spain he drove his Oxen with a pomp that way? Or that
the stony fields in Lombardy took their names of that, that Jupiter fighting
against ye Giants, is supposed to have rayned down stones thither? Or that the
Region Ionica took his name of Ionee the daughter of Naulochus, whom Hercules
is reported to have slain, because he malepartlie stopped ye ways against
him? Or that Alcippe was builded by Marsias, king of the Lidians, which being
afterward swallowed with an Earthquake, was dissolved into the Lake Fucinus? Or
that the Temple of Juno of Argos was founded by Jason: Pisae by Pelops: the
Dawnians by Cleolans the Son of Minos: the Iapigians by Iapix the Son of
Daedalus: the Tyrrhenians by Tyrrhenus King of Lydia: Cora by Dardanus: Argilla
by the Pelasgians, Who brought Letters first into the shyre where Rome is.
who also brought Letters first into Latium: Phalisca by Halesus the Argiue:
the Phalerians by Phalerius the Argiue: Fescininum also by the Argiues: the
Haven of Parthenium by the Phocenses: Tybur (as Cato witnesses) by Catillus
the Arcadian the Admiral of Euanders fleet: or (as Sextius says) by the
youth of Argos? For Catillus the Son of Amphiaraus, after the monstrous
destruction of his Father at Thebae, being sent by his Grandfather Oecleus
with all his issue or ceremonies into Italy, begot there three Sons:
Tyburtus, Cora, and Catillus, who dryuing out of the Town the Sicanes of
Sicill y^ anncient inhabiters thereof, called the City after the name of the
elder brother Tyburt. Anon after was the Temple of Minerua builded by Ulysses,
among the Brutians.

The Island of Ligaea took his name of the body of the Meremaid Lig^a cast a
land there. Parthenopee was so called of the Meremaide Parthenopees Tomb:
which town it pleased Augustus afterward to call Naples. Prenestee (as
Zenodotus reports) took his name of Praenest the Nephewe of Ulysses, and
Son of Latinus: or (as the books of y^ Prenestines make mention) of Caeculus
whom the Sisters of the Digitians found by the fatal fires, as the brute
goes. It is known that Petilia was founded by Philoctete, Arpos and Beneuent
by Diomed, Padua by Antenor, Metapont by the Pylians, Scyllace by the
Athenians, Sybaris by the Troyzenians, and by Sagaris the son of Ajax, of
Locres, Salentum by the Lycians, Ancon by the Sicilians, Gabye by Galace and
Bius of Sicill, brothers: Tarent by the posterity of Hercules, the Island
Te^sa by the Ionians, rest by the Dorians, Croton by Myscell and Archia,
Rhegium by the Chalcidians, Cawlon and Terin, by the Crotonians, Locros by the
Naritians, Heret by the Greeks, in the honor of Juno whom they call Hera,
Aritia by Archilocus the Sicilian, whereof the name (as likes Cassius Hermina)
is derived.

In this place Orestes by admonishment of the Oracle hallowed the Image of
Diana of Scythia which he had fetched from Taurica, before he went with it to
Argos. The Zanclenses builded Metawre, and the Locrines builded that Metapont
which is now called Vibo. Baccbus says plainly, that the Vmbrians are the
ancient offspring of the Galls, Marcus Antonius affirms that they were
called Vmbrians in Greek, because that in the time of the general destruction
that was by water, they escaped the danger thereof. Licinius is of the
opinion, that the original of Messapia (which was given by Messapus a Greek)
was afterward turned into the name of Calabrie, which in the first beginning
Peucerius the Brother of Oenotrius had named Pe^ceria.

The like agreement also is among Authors, that Palynure took that name of
Palynure the Pylotte of Aenaeas his Ship, and Misene of his Trumpetor Misene,
and the Island Leucosie of his Systers daughter Leucosia.

It is fully agreed upon among all men, that Caiet took that name of
Caieta* Aenaeassis Nurce, and Lauine of his wife Lauinia, which Town was
builded the fourth year after the destruction of Troy, as Cussonius avouches.
The time of the coming of Aeneas into Italy
Neither must it be omitted that Aenaeas arryuing on the coast of Italy the
second summer after that Troy was taken (as Hemina reports) with no more then
600, in his company, piched his Camp in the fields of Laurent, and there
while he was dedicating the Image that he had brought with him out of Sicill,
unto his Mother Venus by the name of Aphroditee, he received the Image of
Pallas of Diomed, and anon after receiving five hundred Acres of ground of King
Latinus, he reigned three years in equal authority with him. After whose
decease, when he had reigned two years, he went to the River Numicius and was
never seen more.

The seventh year after, was given to him the name of Father I^diges.
Afterward were builded, by Ascanius, Alba longa, Fidenee, and Antium: by the
Tyrians, Sybill of Cumes
Nola: and by the Eubaeans, Cumes. There is the Chapel of the same Sybill
which in the fifth Olympiade was present at the Roman enterprises, whose book
our Bishops resorted to for Counsel, until the time of Cornelius Sylla: for
then was it together with the Capitol consumed with fire. As for her two
former books, she had burned them with her own hands, because Tarquine
the proud did offer her a more niggardly price then she had set them at.
Sybill of Delphos.
Her Tomb remains yet in Sicill. Bocchus avouches that Sybell of Delphos
prophesied before the battle of Troy, and he declares that Homer did put many
of her verses into his work.

After her, within few years space, followed Heriphylee of Aerythra, Sybill
of Aerithra.
who was also called Sybill for the affinity she had with y^ other in the same
kind of knowledge: who among other great things, warned the Lesbians that they
should loose the dominion of y^ Sea, many years before the thing came to
pass. So y^ very order of the time proves, that Sybill of Cumes was third
after this. The description of Italy.
Italy therefore (wherein sometime the ancient Country of Latium stretched
from the mouth of Tyber, unto the River Lyris) ryseth whole together from the
sides of the Alps and reached to the top of the Promonorie or headlonde of
Rhegium, and the Seacoast of the Brutians, where it shoots Southward into the
Sea. Proceeding from thence, it rayseth it self by little and little at the
back of the Mountain Appen^ne, lying in length between the Tuscane Sea and
the Adriatish Sea, that is to say, between the upper Sea and the nether Sea,
like an Oken leaf, that is to say, larger in length than in breadth, When it
comes to the furthest, it deuideth into two horns: whereof the one butteth
upon the Ionish Sea, and the other upon the Sea of Sicill. Between which two
heads it receives not y^ winding Sea in with one whole and maine shore, but
shooting forth as it were sundry tongues, it admits the Sea disseuered by
the heads running forth in to the deep.

There (to the intent we may note things here and there by the way) are the
Towers of Tarent, the Country Scyllaea with the Town Scylleum, and the River
Crathis the mother of Scylla as antiquity has fabled: the Forests of
Rhegium, the Ualies of Pesta: the Meremaids Rocks, the most delectable coast of
Campane, the playnes of Phlegra, the house of Circ^: the Island of Tarracine,
sometime environed with the wauing Sea, but now by continuance of time landed
up to the firm ground, having clean contrary fortune to the Rhegines,
whom the Sea by thrusting it self betwixt, has violently disseuered from the
Sicilians. Also there is Formy inhabited sometime by the Lestrigones, and many
other things entreated of at large by pregnant wits, the which I thought
more for mine ease to pass over, then not to set them out at the full. But the
length of Italy, The length of Italy.
which runs from Augusta Pr^toria through the City and Capua unto the
Town of Rhogi^^^, (...) to a thousand and twenty miles. The breadth of it
where it is broadest, The breadth of Italy.
is four hundred and ten miles: and where it is narrowest, a hundred and six
and thirty miles, saving at the Haven which is called Hanniballes Camp, for
there it exceeds not forty miles. The heart of the Realm is in the fields
of Rheatee (as V^rro testifies.) The compass of the whole circuit together,
The whole circuit of Italy
is two thousand, four hundred, fourscore and ten miles. In the which
circuit over against the Coast of Locres, is finished the first Coast of
E^rope. For the second beginning at the head of Laciuium, ends at the
Cliffs of Now called mount Cimera.
Acroceraunia. Further more Italy is renowned with the River Po, The River Po.
which Mount Vesulus one of the tops of the Alps, powers out of his bosom
from a spring that is to be seen in the borders of Now called Lombardy.
Ligurie: from whence Po issues, and sinking into the ground, ryseth again in
the fields of Vibo, not inferior to any River in same, and it is called of the
Greeks, Eridanus. It swells in the beginning of the dog days at such time
as y^ snow^^ and hoarefrosts of the former Winter begin to melt: and so being
increased with ye surplusage of waters: it carrioth thirty Ryuers with him
into the Adriatish Sea.

Among other things worthy of remembrance, A certain kindred privileged
from hurt of fire.
this is famous and notably talked of in every Man's mouth, that there are
certain households in the Countries of the Phalisks, (which they call Hirpes*)
These make yearly sacrifice to Apollo at the Mountain Soractee, and in
performing thereof, do in honor of the divine service frisks and dawnce up
and down upon the burning wood without harm, the (...) sparing them. Which
religious and devout kind of ministration the Senate rewarding honorably,
privileged the Hirpes from all taxes, and from all kind of service for ever. A
people unable to be hurt by Serpents.
That the Nation of the Marsyes can not be hurt by serpents, it is no marvel.
For they fetch their pedigree from the Son of Circee, and of the power
descended to them from their ancestors, they understand that venomous things
ought to stand in awe of them, and therefore they despise poisons. C* Caelius
says, that Octas had three daughters: Augitia, Medea, Circe, Augitia and Medea
the daughters of Octas King of Colchos.
and Circee, and that Circee possessed the Hills called Circes Hills, there
practicing to make sundry shapes and fashions through her sorceries and
charms. And that Augitia occupied the Country about Fu^num, and there (after
practicing the wholesome sciences of Leechecrast against maladies and diseases)
when she forewent this life, was reputed for a Goddess. And that Medea was
buried by Jason at Buthrote, and her Son reigned among the Marsyes. But
although that Italy have this customable defense: yet is not altogether free
from Serpents. Finally, the inhabiters chased the Serpents from Amycle which
the Amycleans of Greece had builded before.

There is great store of a kind of Uyper whose biting is incurable. A horrible
kind of Viper.
They be somewhat shorter then the rest of Uipers that are found in other
places of the world, and therefore while they be not regarded, they hurt the
sooner. Calabrie swarmeth with Snakes that live both by water and by land,
called Chersydres: and it breeds the Boa, A wonderful kind of Snake
which is a kind of Snake reported to grow to an unmeasurable bigness. First,
it seeks after Heardes of mylche Kyne, and what Cow soever yields most
milk, her dugs does he draw. And batling with continual sucking of her, in
process of time he so stuffeth out himself with ouerglutting him till he
be ready to burste, that at the last no power is able to withstand his
hugeness. So that in fine ravening up the living creatures, he makes the
Countries waste where he keeps. And in the reign of Claudius there was seen
a whole Child in the mawe of a Boa that was killed in the ^ilde which now is
called Vaticane.

Italy has Wolves which are unlike the Wolves Wolves
of other Countries, and therefore if they see a Man before a Man see them,
he becomes dumb, and being prevented with their hurtful sight, although
he have desire to cry out, yet has he no use of voice to do it withal. I
pass over many things willingly concerning Wolves. This is most certainly
tried, that in this beasts tail is a very fine hare, that has the power of
love in it, the which he is willing to loose, and therefore casts it away
when he fears to be caught, for it has no virtue unless it be pulled from
him while he is alive. Wolves go to sault not above twelve days in all the
whole year. In time of famine they feed themselves with earth. But those that
are called Hartwolues, Hartwolues.
although after long fasting when they have hardly found flesh, they fall to
eating it: yet if they happen to cast their eye upon any thing by chance,
they forget what they are in doing, and forsake their present abundance,
gadde to seek n^we relief wherewith to fill their bellyes. In this kind of
beasts is also rekoned the Lynxes, Lynxes. The stone Lyncurion.
whose Urine such as have narrowly searched the natures of stones, do uphold
to congeale into the hardness of a precious stone. Which thing that the Linxes
themselves do well perceive, is proved by this trial: that as soon as the
water is passed from them, by and by they cover it over (as much as they can)
with heaps of sand: verily of spite (as Theophrastus avouches) least such
matter issuing from them should turn to our use. This stone has the color
of Amber. It it draws unto it things that be near at hand, it qualifieth
the grief of the raynes: it remedieth the Kings evil, and in Greek it is
called That is to say, Lynxpisse. Dumb Grashop pers.
Lyncution. Grasshoppers are dumb among the Rhegines, and not elsewhere, which
silence of them is wonderful: and good cause why, seeing the Grasshoppers of y^
Locrines their next neighbors, cry louder then all others. Granius reports
the cause thereof to be this: that when they made a yelling about Hercules as
he rested there, he commanded them to cease their chyrping, whereupon
beginning to hold their peace, they continued mute from thenceforth to this
day. The The Sea of Genoa. Coral.
Lygusticke Sea brings forth shrubbes, which so soon as they be in the
deepes of the water, are lushe and almost like a grystle to touch. But as soon
as they come above the water, by and by degenerating from their natural sap,
they become stones. And not only the quality, but also the color of them is
turned, for straight way they look Red as Scarelette. The branches of them
are such as we see on Trees, for the most part half a foot long, but seldom
to be found of a foot long. Of them are carved many pretty things to were
about folks. For (as Zoroastres says) this substance has a certain
singular power, and therefore whatsoever is made thereof, is counted among
those things that are wholesome. Other folk call it Coral, and Metrodorus
names it Gorgia. The same man affyrmeth also that it withstandeth whirlwinds
and thunder and lightning. There is a precious stone dygged up in a part of
Lucanie, The Syrtite o^ sandstone.
so pleasant to behold, that it casts a Saffron color upon the stars
dimmed inwardly and glimmering under a myste. The same stone is called a
Syrtite because it was found first upon the Seacoast of the Syrts. There is
also the Veientane stone, The Veie^tane Stone.
so named of ye place where it is found, the color whereof being black, for
the more beauty of variety, is enterlaced distinctly with white lines, and
whitish strakes. This Island is now called S. Maryes of Trinity.
The Island which faceth the coast of Puell, is renowned with the Tomb and
Temple of Diomed, Diomedes birds The wonderful nature of them.
and alonely nourishes Diomeds birds. For this kind of Foul is no where else
in all ye world but there. And that thing alone might seem worthy to be
recorded, though there were not other things beside not meet to be omitted.
They are in fashion almost like a Coote, of color white, with fiery eyes, and
^oothed bylles. They fly in flocks, and not without order in their setting
forth. They have two Captains, that rule their flight: of whom the one flies
before, and the other behind: the sormost as a guide to direct them certainly
which way to fly, the hindermost as an ouerseear to haste forward them that
lagge behind, with continual calling upon them. And this is the order that
they keep in their fleeting. When breeding time is at hand, they dig pits
with their bills: and then bending wickers over them after the manner of
Hardles, they close in that which they have made hollow underneath.

And least they might be uncovered if paraduenture the winds should blow
away their wooden roofes, they coope this watling over with the earth which
they had thrown out when they dug the pittes. So they build their nestes
with two entryes, and that not at a venture: insomuch that they cast their
entries in and out, according to ye quarters of the heaven. The dor^ that they
go out at to their feeding, opens into the East: and that which receives
them home again, is toward the West. To the intent the light may both have
them when they make tariaunce, and also not fail them to return home by. When
they will purge their paunches, they mount aloft against the wind, to the
intent it may carry their ordure the further from them. They discern a
stranger from a man of the Country. For if he be a Greek, they approach unto
him, and as far as may be understood, do fawn gently upon him as their
Countriman. But if he be of any other Nation, they fly upon him and assault
him. They frequent the holy Church every day after this manner. They wash their
feathers in the water, and when they have wet their wings thoroughly, they come
flocking al on a deaw, and so shaking the moisture upon the Church, do purge
it. Then they rouse their feathers, and afterward, as having done their
devotion, depart again. Here upon it is reported y^ Diomedes companions were
^urned into birds. Certainly before y^ coming of y^ Aetolian Captain, they
were not called Diomedes birds, but ever since they have had that name.

The running forth of Italy through the L^burnians (which are a people that
came out of Asia,) Dalmatia and Illyrick are nov^ one country, and are called
Sclauoni.
extends to the foot of Dalmatia, and Dalmatia unto the borders of Illyrick,
in which coast y^ Dardanians have their dwelling, a people descended of the
line of Troy, but grown wild and savage, and degenerated into barbarous
manners. On the otherside it extends by the marches of Lombardie unto the
Province of Narbone, The founding of the City of Marsilles.
in which the Phocenses (being in old time chased out of their Country by
the coming of the Persians,) builded the City of Marsills in ye five and
forteth Olympi^d.

Caius Marius in the time of the war against the Cymbrians, did let in ye Sea
in Channels made with man's hand, and mittigated the dangerous sailing of the
river Rhone, The description of the River of Rhone.
which faling down from the Alps rusheth first through Swicerland carrying with
him a number of waters that meet him by the way, and afterward by his
continual increase becomes more troublesome then the very Sea wherinto it
falls, unless it be when the Sea is raised with the wyndes. Rhone is rough
even in calm wether, and therefore they account him among the greatest Ryuers
of Europe. In the same place also flourished Sexties bathes, sometim^ the
Consulles winter garrison, and afterward garnished with walls: the fervent
heat whereof being breathed out, is vanished away by continuance of time,
and it is not now according to the ancient report thereof. If we have a mind
to the Greeks, it is best to look to the Seacoast of Tarent, from whence,
(that is to say from the Promontorie or Headlonde Saint Mary of Leke.
which they call * Acra Iapigia) is the shortest cut for such as will sail to
Achaya-ward.

CAP. VIII.
Of certain base Isles of the Tyrrhene Sea, which lie against Italy: Of
Corsica, and of the stone Catochites.
FRom hence our style is to be directed another way, and other lands call us
to treat of their matters, and it were a long piece of work to go
leysurelie along the Seacoast to all the Islands that face the Promontories of
Italy, although for that they be scattered in most delectable outnookes, and
set by nature as it were to the show* they were not to be omitted. But how
far should I step aside, if delaying the chief things, I should of a
certain slothfulness treat of Palmaria or Palmarosa.
Pandataria, or of Procida
Prochita, or Elba.
Ilba plentiful of iron, or Caprara.
Capraria, which the Greeks call Aegila, or Pianosa.
Planasia so called of the leuelnesse of the Sea, or of Ulysses straying: or *
Dooue. Island, the mother of the birds that bear that name, or Ithacesia,
which is reported to have been the watch tower of Ulysses, or Ischia.
Anaria named of Homer Iuarimee, and other no less fruitful then these. Among
which, many having some what more largely treated of Corsica in writing, have
most exquisitlie comprised it to the full, and nothing is omitted which were
not superfluous to be touched again. As how the Ligurians sent first
inhabiters thither: how towns were there builded. How Marius and Sylla sent
people a new to refresh it: and how it is beaten upon with the Saltwater of
the The sea of Genoa,
Lygustick sea. But let all this geere pass. Nevertheless the Country of
Corsica, (which is a peculiar thing to that land) does only bring forth the
stone which they call Catochites, most worthy to be spoken of. It is bigger
the^ the rest, The Catochite
that are ordained to decking, and it is not so much a Jewel as a common
stone. If a man lay his hands upon it, it holds them down, so fastening it
self unto several substances, that it cleaves to the things that it is
touched of. For there is in it I cannot tell what, a kind of clammy glue and
gummishnesse. I have heard say, that D^mocritus the Abderite did oftentimes
use to boast of this stone, to prove the hid power of nature, in the
contentions that he had against the wyzardes.

CAP. IX.
Of the I Will Sardinia: of the Shonnsunne: of the herb Sardonia: and of the
wonderful power of waters.
SArdinia which we read of in Timaeus, by the name of Sandaliotes, and in
Chrysippus by the name of Ichnusa, is sufficiently known in what Sea it lies,
and who were first inhabiters thereof. Wherefore it is to no purpose to tell
how Sardus was begotten of Hercules, and Norax of Mercury: and how the one
coming from Lybye, and the other from as far as Tartesus in Spain into these
quarters: the Land took his name of Sardus, and the Town of Nora took his
name of Norax: Or how anon after, Aristaeus reigning over them, united the
people of both the races together into the next City Caralis which himself
had builded, and knitt the two sundry Nations which hitherto had been
disseuered, together into one order of living: in such sort as the strangeness
thereof made them not disdain to become his Subjects. This Aristaeus also
begatte Io^aus, who inhabited the Country thereabouts. Further more, we will
pass over both the Ilians and Locrines.

Sardinia is without Serpents. But look what noysomnesse Serpents bring to
other places, The Shonsunne
the same noysomnesse brings the Shonsunne to the Country of Sardinia. It is
a very little Worm and like to a Spyder in shape, and it is called a
Shonsunne because it shunneth the day light. It lies most in Silver Mines,
for the soil of that Land is rich of Silver. It treepeth privily, and casts
the plague upon such as sit upon it unawares. To the furtheraunce of this
mischief comes also the Herb Sardonia, The Hea^be Sardonia.
which grows much more plentifully the^ needs, in groves where springes
run. If it be eaten, it draws together the sinews, and wryeth the mouth,
so y^ such as thereby draw unto death, do die with resemblance of laughter.
Contrariwise, all the waters of that I Will, The wholesomnesse and commodity of
the waters of Sardinia.
do serve to diverse commodities. The standing pooles are full of fish. The
Winters rain is kept to relieve the Summers browght, and the Men of Sardinia
have much advantage of raynie water. For they gather it and keep it in store,
that it may do them ease when the springes fail them which served them for
their meat and drink. In some places do bubble up warm and holes^me
springes, which serve for cures in knitting of broken bones, A water that
discovers theft.
or expulsing y^ poyson^e sheadded by the Shonsunnes, or in dryuing away
diseases of the eyes. But those that remedy y^ eyes, have power also to
discover thieves. For whosoever denies the theft with an oath, washes his
eyes with this water. If his oath be true, his sight becomes the clearer: if
he forsware himself, the fact is detected by blindness: and he is driven to
confess his fault in darkness, with the loss of his eyes.

CAP. X.
Of Sicill, and the Land Pelorias, and the nature of the waters there: of the
Mountain Aetna, and many other wonders of that I Will: and of the seven Isles
called Vulcanes Isles.
ANd if we have respect to the order of the times or of the places: after
Sardinia, the matters of Sicill do call us next.

First, because that both those Isles being broughts in subjection to the
Romans, were made Provinces both at one time. For Marcus Valerius was made
Governor of Sardinia, and C. Flaminius Praetor of Sicill all in one year: and
secondly for that immediately after you are out of the straighte of Sicill, the
Sea bears the name of the Sardine Sea. Sicill therefore. The Plat of Cicilye.
(which thing is first and foremost to be marked) by reason of his heads
shooting forth, is platted three cornered. Capo passaro
Pachynnus looks toward, Morea
Peloponnesus and the South coast. The head of the fare.
Pelorus beholds Italy, butting Westward upon it. Capo Boey.
Lylibye shoots toward Afric. Among which, the Country about Pelorus is
commended, for the temprature of ye soil, inasmuch as it neither washes away
into dirt through overmuch moisture, nor crumbleth into dust through overmuch
dryness. Where it goes further into the maine land-warde, and enlarg^^h in
wydenesse, it has three Lakes Of the one, A Lake that serves both for hunting
and fishing.
that it is well stored with fish I count no great wonder. But the next unto
it, for that in the thirke groves among the shadowy shrubbes of young trees, it
nourishes wild beasts, and admits hunters by dry paths wherein they may
have access a foot by land, serving to both uses of hunting and fishing, is
numbered among the notable things. A strange Lake.
The third is proved to be holy by an Altar standing in the mids, which
deuideth the shallowes from the deepes. All the way that leads unto it, the
water is but midde leg deep. Whatsoever is beyond, may neither be gaged nor
touched. If it be: he that attempteth it is punished for his labor and look
how much of himself he puts into the water, so much he goe^h about to
destroy. They say that a certain man threw a line as far as he could into
the deepes, and y^ as to recover it again he thrust his arm into the water to
the intent to have ye more strength to pull, his hand became rotten. The coaste
of Polorias is peopled with inhabitants of Tauromiu^ which Men in old time
called Naxus. The town of Messana.
Messana is set di^ectly oueragainst Rhegium of Italy, unto the which Rhegium
the Greeks gave that name, by reason of the breaking of that place.

Pachinnum is most plentiful of Tunnyes and alother Sea fish, and therefore
there is always great fishing. The beauty of the Headlond of Lyliby, is the
Town Lyliby with the Tomb of Sybill. Long before the s^edge of Troy, The
first inhabiters of Sicill.
King Sicanus arryuing in the I Will with an Host of Spaniards, named it Sicanie.
Afterward Siculus the Son of Neptune called it Sicill. Into this land
re^o^ted many of the Cor^nthyans, Argiu^s, (...), Dorians and Men of Candy.
Among whom also the Archimedes.
Master of all Carpenters and Masons has the chief City, Syracuse, in which
even in winter season when fair wether is hidden, the Sun shyneth every day.
Moreover the Fountain Ar^thusa is in this City. The highest hills in it,
are Aetna and Eryx Mount Gibell and the wonderfulnesse thereof.
Aetna is hallowed unto Vul^ane, and Eryx, unto Venus. In the top of Aetna
are two chinkes which are named Cups, at which the vapor bursteth out, with a
great roaring going before. which runs rumbling a long while together in the
bowels of the earth, through the burning brakes of hollow holes within. Neither
do the flake of stror^se out, until such time as the roaring and rumbling
within have gone before. This is a great wonder. And it is no less wonder that
in that burning heat, nature is so stubborn, that it brings forth snow
mingled with the fire: and that although it boil in outrageous hear, yet the
top of it is white with snow, as if it were continual winter.

There is therefore aninuincible force in both, so that neither the heat is
abated by the cold, nor the cold assuaged by the heat. There are also two
hyls: Buckhyll and Neptunes hill. Upon Neptunes is a watchtowre that looks
into the Tuskane and Adriatish Seas. Buckhyll takes his name of the store of
read and fallowe Dear that walk up and down there in herds.

Whatsoever Sicill brings forth, whither it be by the nature of the soil,
or by the d^uice of Man, it is next those things that are judged to be the
best: saving that in the fruits of the earth, there is none comparable to the
fruit of Ca^torby.
Centuripe. Here was the Commedy invented: here came the sporting of Iesters
first upon the Stage: here was the house of Archimedes, who according to
the Sryence of Astronomy, was the first inuenter of Engynes.

Here was that Lais that had rather choose her Country then be known of
her Country. The great Caves under the ground bear witness of the race of
the Cyclops. The place wherein the Lestry^o^s dwelt, bears their name still.
Of that Country was Ceres the Lady of ^^llage and husbandry. In the self same
place is the field of That place is now called Anna.
Aenna continually full of Flowers, and fresh like the spring every day of
the year, by which there is a hole sunken into the ground, whereat Dis the
Father of Hell had free passage into the world (as ^ame goes) when he
ra^ished Proserpine.

Between Catanea.
Catina and Saragoza.
Syracuse is contention for the memorial of the two famous Brethren, whose
names each part chale^geth severally to themselves. If we give ear to the
Ca^nenses, it was Anapias and Amphinomus. If we credit that which the
S^acusans would willingly have, we must think they were Ac^^^nthius and
Crit^o. Nevertheless, the cause of y^ deed proceeded from the Country of
Catina. Into which at such time as the fire of Aetna had burst out, A notable
example of love toward the Parents.
two youngmen taking up their Parents, carried them out through the flames
unhurt of the fire. They y^ came after, did so reverence the memory of these
young men, that the place where they were buried, was named the field of the
godly.

As touching Ar^thusa and Alpheus, The Fountain Arethusa and the River Alpheus.
it is true unto this day, that the fountain and the River meet both in one
channel. In the River is the greatest store of wonders. If any man that is not
of chaste and clean life take of y^ water of y^ fountain Diana, The Well of
Diana.
which runs by Camerine, the liquor of the wine, and the liquor of the water
will not join in one substance. Among the Segestans, Herbesus.
the River Herbesus seething up suddainlye in the mids of the stream,
becomes exceeding hot. Acis, Acis. Hymerus.
for all that it issues out of the Mountain Aetna, yet can no River be colder
then it is. Hyme^us is altered with the Coast of the air. For while it runs
Northward it is bitter: but when it turns into the South if is sweet. There
is not more strangeness in the Waters then in the Saltmynes. Saltmynes.
If ye throw the Salt of Arigent into the fire, Gergent.
it me^^cth in burning: and if ye put water to it, it cracke^h as if it were
burned.

Aena bears salt of a purple color. In Pachynnus it is found so sheere,
that ye may see through it. The other Saltmynes that are near either to
Arigent or Centuripe serve in ste^de of quarries. For out of them they have
Images to the likeness of men or Gods. In the places where the who^e waters
are, is an Island that grows full of Reeds vorye mee^e to make pypes of all
manner of sorts: whither they be Precentories whose use is to play before the
shrynes of the Gods: or Vasks, which exceed the Prerentories in number of
holes: or maydenpipes, which have that name of their clear sound: or
Gingrynes, with though they be shorter. yet have they a shriler sound: or
Miluines which have sharpest sound of all: or Lydians which they call also
Turaries: or Cor^^thyans, or A^giptians, or any others, how diversely soever
they be named by Musicians, according to the diverse and sundry vs^s which
they serve for. A dancing Fountain.
In the Country Halesine there is a Fountain at all times quiet and calm*
when no noise is made, which rises up if a S^alme be played upon, leaping at
the sound and swelling over his brimmes as though he were in love with y^
sweetness of the Music. The Poo^e of ^e^on with his stinking savor, A
stinking Poole
dryueth away such as come night Also there are two springes, whereof if a
barraine Woman taste the one, she shall become fruitful and if a childbearing
Woman taste of the other, she becomes barrain. The Poole of the Petrenses is
hurtful to serpents, but wholesome to men. In the Lake of Arigent swimmeth an
Oil above. This fatnes through the continual wauing of the Reeds, cleaves to
the coppes of them: out of the sedgie hear whereof is gathered a medicinable
ointment against the diseases of great Cattle. Vulcans Hill, See how the
devil can work false miracles.
Not far from thence is Vulcans Hill, upon which when men do sacrifice, they
lay Uyn^sticks upon the Alters, without putting fire thereto when they cast on
the offalles.

If the God like well of it, (for that is the trial of the sacrifice) the
sticks (be they never so green) do take fire alone, and the God to whom the
sacrifice is made, causes it to burn without kindling. And as they are making
merry, the flame plays with them, and scoping out in wreathed flakes among
them sindgeth not any man whom it touches. but shows it self to be none
other thing then the Image of fire, declaring that the vow is rightfully
performed. In the same field of Arigent, do burste out quagmyres of mudde. And
as y^ veins of Fountains serve to make Rivers, so in this part of Sicill the
soil never fails, and earth with continual utterance casts out earth.
Sicill yielded first the stone The Agate.
Achates, found in the banks of the River Achates, which was of no small price
as long as it was found no where else. For the veins imprinted in it do
portrait such natural shapes therein, that when it is of the best making, it
represents the likeness of many things. For which consideration the Ring of
King Pyrrhus The Ring of king Pyrrhu^^
that made war against the Romans, was not meanly spoken of, the stone
whereof was an Agate, wherein were to be seen the nine Muses, every one with
their several cognisaunces, and Apollo with his vial in his hand, not
^^grauen by art, but grown by Nature. But now it is found in diverse other
places. Candy yields a kind of them which they call Corallagats, Coralagats.
because they are like Coral. It is powdered with drops glistering like Gold,
and it resists Scorpions. Inde yields of them expressing the proportions of
Forests and Beasts: the sight whereof comfort the eyes. And being
received into the mouth, it stauncheth thyrst. There are also of them which
being burned do cast a sent like Myrrh. The Achate is full of read spots
like blood. But those that are most set by, have the cleerenesse of Glass
as the Achate of Cyprus. For those that look like ware, (because there is
abundance of them) are as little esteemed as y^ stones in the streets.

The circuit of all this whole I Will, is three thousand furlonges about. The
whole circuit of Sicilie.
In the narrowest Sea of Sicill, are the Isles Hephestiae, five and twenty miles
distant from Italy. The Italians call them Vulcans. Isles. V^lcans Isles.
For these by reason of the whole nature of their soil, do either borrow fire
of the Mountain Aetna, or else minister fire unto it by privy intercourse
under the ground. Here was appointed the dwelling place of the God of fire.
They are in number seven. Lypara took that name of King Lyparus, who governed
it before Aeolus. Another they called Maretam
Hiera. The same is cheefely hallowed unto Vulcane, and burns most in the
night time with an exceeding high hill. The third named Strombolie.
Strongyle which was the Palace of Aeolus, stands toward the Sun rising.
It is least covered, and it differs some what from the rest in cleerenesse
of flames. Here upon it comes to pass that chiefly by the smoke thereof,
the inhabiters understand before, what winds are like to blow three days
after. And this is the cause why A^olus was believed leeued to be the God of
wyndes. The rest, Didymee, A^^cur.
Ericusa, Faelica^^^.
Phaenicusa, and Euonimon, because they be like the other, we have as good as
spoken of them already.

CAP. XI.
Of the third Coast of Europe: of the Countries and places of Greece: of many
things worthy to be recounted in them: and of the Nature of Partriches.
THe third Coast of Europe begins at the Mountains of Cimera of Albany.
Ceraunii, and ends at Hellespont. In this coast among the Molossians (where
as is the Temple of Jupiter of Do^on) is the Mountain Tomarus, renowned for y^
hundred Fountains y^ are about the foot of it, as Theopompus reports. In
Albanye. A well of strange nature.
Epyre is a holy well, cold above all other waters, and of approved
contrariety. For if ye dippe a burning brand therein, it quenches it: and if
you hold it a good way of without any fire on it, of it own nature it kindles
it. Dodon Dodon.
(as Maro says) is hallowed unto Jupiter. Delphos Delphos.
is renowned with the River Cephisus, the Fountain Castalie, The situation of
Acarnania.
and the mountain Parnasus. Acarnania vawnteth of Aracynth. This Country is
divided from Aetolia with the Mountain Pindus, which breeds Aclelous a river
anciently renowned among the chief Rivers of and not unworthily, considering
that among the little stones that lie glistring in his bancks, there is found
the The Galac^^^^ or Milkstone.
Galactite, which being it self black, if it be chased yields a white
juice that tastes like Milk. Being tide about a woman that gives suck, it
makes her breasts full of milk: being tide to a Child, it causes more
abundant swallowing of spettle, and being received into the mouth it melts,
but therewithal it perishes the gift of memory. This stone is found in Nylus
and Achelous, and not in any third place. Scioessa
Near unto the Town of Patrae, is a place called Scioessa shadowed with the
covert of nine Hylls, and not renowned for any other cause, then that the
beams of the Sun come almost never there. In The Country about Lacedemon.
Laconia is an issue out of the earth, called Taenarus.

Taenarus is also the Headlonde against Affricke, where as is the Chapel of
Arion of Methymna, The story of Arion the Mufician that was brought thither
through the Sea upon a Dolphins back.
who was brought thither by a Dolphin, as his Image of brass witnesses there
portrayted out lively according as the chance happened, and as the thing was
done indeed. Moreover, y^ very time expressed there, namely the twenty and
nine Olympiad (in which the same Arion is recorded victor at the gaming in
Sicill) a^oucheth the self same thing to have been done.

There is also a Town called Taenaron of noble antiquity. Furthermore there
are certain Cities, and among them Leutrae, somewhat famous by reason of the
shameful end that the Lacedaemonians made there of late: and Amyclae brought
to destruction in old time through their own silence: and Called also
Lacedemon, and now called Mi^ithra.
Sparta renowned with the Temple of Castor and Pollux, and also with the tytles
of Otryas a man of great fame: And Theramu^^ from whence first sprang the
worshipping of Diana: and Pitan^ which Arch^silaus the Stoicke (who was borne
there) did bring to light by the desert of his wyse^ome: And Anthea and
Cardamilee, where was sometime y^ City Thyre, which now is but the name of a
place, where was fought a notable battle between the Lacedaemonians and the
Argyues, the seventeenth year of the reign of Romulus. For the Mountain
Taygeta and the River Eurotas are better known then that they need to be
written of. Taygeta. Inachus.
Inachus a River of Achaia cutteth through all the Country of Argoly, which
took his name of Inachus the first founder of the nobility of Argos. Epidaurus
now called Rhagusia and Dubronik
The beauty of Epidaurus is the Chapel of Aesculapius, where sick and
diseased persons lodging, are informed by dreams of remedies for their
maladies. It is sufficient to put you in remembrance, that there is in Arcady
a town called Pallanteu^, which by means of Euander the Arcadian, gave the
name to our Palace.

In Arcady are the Mountains Cyllen, Ly^aeus, Arcady.
and Menalus renowned with the Gods that were fostered in them, among which,
Erymanthus is not obscure. Also among the Rivers is Erymanthus springing out of
the Hill Erymanthus, and the famous Ladon. Heereabouts the encounters of
Hercules are apparent. Varro affirms that there is a This Fountain was named
Phineus.
Fountain in Arcady which kills as many as drink of it. In this part of
the world we find this thing not unworthy to be mentioned concerning byrds,
that whereas in other places Mauisses be yellowe as gold, White Mauisses.
about Cyllen they are as white as milk. Neither is the stone to be despised
which Arcady sends. The stone called Asbest.
The name thereof is Asbest. It is of the color of iron: and being set on
fire, it cannot be quenched. Into the Baye of Megara shoots the Isthmos which
is renowned with gamings kept there every fifth year, The gamings of Isthmos.
and with the Temple of Neptune. The said gamings (as is reported) were
instituted in resemblance of the five coasts of Now called Morea.
Peloponnesus which are beaten upon with five sundry Seas. On the Northside
with the Ionian sea, on the West with the Sicilian Sea, on y^ Southweste with
the Aegean Sea, on the Northeast with the Myrtoan Sea, and on the South with
the Candian Sea. This pastime being put down by the Tyrant Cypselus, was by
the Corinthians restored to the former solemnity, in the forty and nine
Olimpiad. But the name of Peloponnesus declares that Pelops was king of that
Country. The description of Peloponnesus.
The platform of it, is like y^ leaf of a Plane tree with Creekes and nookes,
and it makes a divorce between the Ionian Sea, and the A^gaean Sea,
disseuering the one shore from the other, with a slender balke not above four
miles broad, which for the narrowness thereof man call Isthmos. From hence
begins Hellas, which properlye they would have to be the true Greece. The
true Greece.
That Country which is now called Attick, was in former time called, Actee.
Ther^in is the City Athens, near whereto adioyneth Scyrons Rock, Athens now
called Satmes
extending six miles in length, so named in honor of Theseus his victory,
and in remembrance of the notable punishment of Seyron. From this Rock Ino
casting her self headlonge into the deep* increased the number of the Gods
of the Sea. But we will not so slightlie pass over the Mountains of Attick.
There are Icary, Brilesse, Lycabet, and Aegialus. Mount Hymet
But Hymet does most woorthelie bear the bell among them all, because that
being very full of flowers, the Honny thereof excels y^ Honnie of all other
places, not only of foreign Lands, but also of the same Country, in
pleasant savor and taste.

They wonder at the Fountain Callyrhoee, The Fountain Cally^hoe.
and yet they make not therefore the less account of another Fountain called
^^unesos. The place of judgment among y^ Athenians is called Ariopagus. This
battle wa^ between the Persians and Athenians.
The plain of Marathon was made famous by y^ report of a most bloody battle
foughten there. Many Isles lie over against the maine Land of Attick, but
Salamis, Sunium, Cos, and Ceos which (as Varro witnesses) yielded the first
Garments of fine spynning y^ were made of wool for the decking of Women) are
almost suburbs to the City. Baeotia.
Baeotia is renowned with Thebae, which City was builded by Amphion. Thebae
now called Thiua,
Not that he drew stones together with the sound of his Harp, (for it cannot
seem likely that any such thing should be done) but for that with the
sweetness of his eloquence, he allured men that dwelt in Rocks (who were
altogether savage and unnurtured,) to become obedient to civil order and
discipline. This City glories in the Godds that were borne within her walls,
as they affirm which with holy verses do set out the commendations of
Hercules and Bacchus. At Thebae is the Grou^ Helicon, Helicon
the Forest Cytheron, the River Ismenius, and the Fountains Arethusa,
Ocdipus, Psamatee, and Dircee: but before all others Aganippe and Horsewell
Hippocren^e, which because Ca^mus the first inuenter of Letters found out as
he rode about to search what manner of Country he was come unto, the Poets
ran upon the bridle of liberty, publishing in their writings, both that the
one of them was raised by the stamping of a winged Horses hoof, and that the
other being tasted of, did endue men's minds with eloquence: and also that
the winged Horses hoof was opened, and that the waters there of being drunk,
inspired folk with learning.

The Island Negropon^.
Eub^a by shooting his side against the Coaste of the maine Land, does make
the Haven of Aulis, The Haven of Aulis.
renowned in all ages for rememberaunce of the confederacy of Greece. The
Baeotians are the same people that were the Lelegs, through whose Country
runs the River Cephisus and falls into the Sea. In this land is the Bay of
Oxus, the Town of Larissa, and Delphiramne also, wherein is the Chapel of
Amphiaraus, and the Image of Diana, which the Caruar Phidias did make. Varr^
supposes that there are two Rivers in Baeotia, Two wonderful Ryuers,
though of nature unlike, yet nothing differing in wonderfulnesse. If sheep
drink of the one, their fleeces change into a Russet color. If they drink of
the other: as many of their fleeces as were of a brown color, become white.
He adds moreover that there is a pit to be seen, that kills as many as
drink of it.

Where as Partriches in all other places are free like as the rest of birds be,
The Partriches of Baeotia
in Baeotia they are not free: neither are they at liberty to fly where they
list, but but have bounds in the very air, which they dare not pass,
Insomuch that they never go beyond their appointed limits, nor never fly over
into y^ Marches of Athens. The nature of Partriches in general
This is peculiar to the Partriches of Baeotia. For such things as are common
to all other Partriches, we will treat of generally hereafter. Partriches are
sly in trimming and fencing their nestes. For they hedge in their haunts with
pricking shrubs, and sharp sprigges, to the intent such beasts as are noisome
unto them may be kept off with the sharpness of the thorns. Under their
Eggs they lay dust: and they come and go privily, least their often haunting
should bewray the place. Many times y^ Hens re^ooue the eggs out of the way,
to deceive y^ Cocks, who trouble them out of all measure with their continual
flickering about them. There is fighting among the Cocks for the Hens: and it
is thought that those which are overcome, do abide the other to tread them as
if they were Hens. They are so rank of nature, that if the wind do but
blow from y^ Cocks, the Hens become with egg, even with the very sent of
them. And if any manne come near the place where they sit, the Hens
springing forth do offer themselves of their own accord to the comers, and
feygning some default in their feet or their wings, (as though they might be
by and by caught) they cou^ter^et a slow pace before them. By which subtiltye
they eg forth such as they meet, and mock them until they have tolled them
and drawn them a great way of from their neste. Neither are their young ones
less careful for their part, how to save themselves. For when they perceive
that they are seen, they cast themselves upon their backs, and take up
cloddes in their feet, with the covert whereof they hyde themselves so
subtillie, that they escape even when they are found.

CAP. XII.
Of Thessaly and Magnesia, and of the Towns therein: of the River Peneus: of
the plesantnes of Tempee: of the heyght of the Mountain Olimpus: and of him
that stroke out King Philips eye.
THessaly is the same country y^ bears y^ name of Aemonia, which Homer
calls Argos Pelasgicu^, where Hellen was borne, of whom the Kings were
called Hellens. At the back hereof stretches Pieria toward Macedonie: which
being conquered, came in subjection to the Macedons. Many Towns and many
Ryuers are there. Of Towns the notablest are Phthia, Larissa, Thessaha, and
Thebae. Of Ryuers, the notablest is Peneus, which running down by Ossa and
Olimpus, by means of the Hyls bowing gently on both sides with woody
bottoms, makes the Thessalian Tempee: and sweeping thence with broader
streams through Macedonie and Magnesia, falls into the Gulf of Thermy. Unto
Thessalie belong the playnes of Pharsaly, wherein were the thundering storms of
the Between Caesar and Pompey,
civil wars. And to the intent we go not altogether to known hyls: let them
buzie themselves about Othrys and Pindus, which seek for the original of the
Lapythes: or about Ossa which delight to linger in the Fables of the Centaures.
As for Pelion, the marriage feast of Peleus and Thetis have brought it so much
to knowledge, that it may be a marvel how it should be kept in huggermugger.
For the things that are to be seen in Olympus, Mount Olimpus
do declare that Homer did not celebrate it through unadvised rashness. For it
ryseth so big, with so high a top, that the dwellers by do call the knappe
of it heaven. There is on the top of it an Altar dedicated to Jupiter, where
upon if any part of the inwards be laid, they are neither blown a sunder with
blastes of the wind, nor washed away with rain: but when the year comes
about again, they are found the self same that they were left. And
whatsoever is once consecrated there unto the God, it is privileged for ever
from corruption of the air. Letters written in the ashes continue till the
Ceremonies of the next year. In the Country of Magnesia is the Town of Modon.
Methone, in the ^^edge whereof Phillip the Father of great Alexander of
Macedonie, lost his eye by the stripe of an Arrow, which a Townsman named Aster
shot at him with his own name, and the name of the party that he shot it at,
and the place that he wounded written thereuppon. That this people could skyll
of Archery, we may believe by Philoctetes, forasmuch as Melibaea is reckoned in
the foot of this Country. Philoctetes.
But to the intent we proceed no further then we have Poets for our defense,
the fountain Libethrus also appertains to Magnesia.

CAP. XIII.
Of Macedonie, and the succession of the Kings thereof: and of the stone
Peantis.
THe people which were sometime the Edonians, and that which was the Land of
Migdony, or the Country of Pieria, or Aemathia, is now in one entyre term
the Realm of Macedonie. And the partitions which heretofore were severally
disioyned, The bounds of Macedonie
being now united in the name of Macedo^es, are become all one body.
Macedonie therefore is bounded on the forepart with y^ Marches of Thrace. The
South Country of Thessaly is inhabited by the Epirots. On the Westside are the
The people of Seruia and Rascia*
Dardanians and Illyrian^. Where the North beats upon it, it is fenced in
with Paeony and Pelagony From the Triballs it shoots forth in Mountains to
the cold Northeaste wind. It is divided from Thrace by the River Strymon
which runs from y^ Mountain Haemus.

But to pass Rhodopee with silence which is a Mountain of Mygdony, and Athos
sailed through by the Persian fleet, and cut of from the maine Land, by the
mountenaunce of a mile and a half, together with the veins of Gold and
Silver, whereof there are dug up very good and great store in the fields
of Macedonie, I will speak of the Country Orestide. There are a people which
take the name of Orestides heerevpon. Orestes fleeing like an outlawe from
Mycene after he had killed his mother, The Orestides
forasmuch as he^ had determined to go further of, commanded that a young
Son of his, borne in Aemathia of Hermione whom he had taken to be his
companion in all adventures, should be brought up privily here. The Child
bearing his Fathers name, as he grew to man's estate so also grew in courage
and stomach meet for his royal race: and conquering all that extends to
the Coast of Macedony, and the Adriatish Sea, he called the Land (whereof he
was ruler) Orestide.

Phlaegra (in which place, before there was any Town there, The Giants war
against Heaven.
the report goes y^ a battle was fought between the host of Heaven and the
Giants,) does put us in mind to declare thoroughly with how great proofs of
sovereignty there, the tokens of that Heavenly warfare have and do continue
it unto this day. If at any time (as it comes to pass indeed) the brooks
rise with foul weather, and the excess of waters breaking their banks do
shoot themselves over violently into the fields: they say that even now
through the gulling of the water, are discovered ben^s like to men's carcasses,
but far bigger, which for the unmeasurable hugeness of them, are reported to
have been the bodies of that monstrous Army. And this opinion is furthered
with the evidence of excessyue great stones, wherewith heaven was thought to
have been assaulted. I will proceed to the residue which extend into
Thessaly and Aemony. For they be heigher then that in any place, the height of
the Mountain is able to reach therunt^. Neither is there any thing in any
Land under Heaven, that may woorthely be compared heere^nto in height, as
whereunto only the rage of water never attained when y^ flood overwhelmed all
things else with woozie moistness. There remain yet prints of no small
credit, whereby it appears that these places were above the stormy flood.
For in the dark Caves of the Hills, which at that time were eaten hollow with
the struggling of the water, the shelles of Fishes are left behind, and many
other things which are cast up by the working of the rowgh Sea: so that
although (to see to) the places be main Land: yet they have a resemblaunce of
y^ Sea shore.

Now will I speak of the Inhabiters. The descent of the kings of Macedoni.
Aemathius who was the first that obtained sovereignty in Amathia, (whither it
be because the knowledge of his pedigree is worn out by time, or because it is
a matter far fette) is counted to be bredde of the earth. After him the name
of Aemathia which proceeded from him, continued to the Realm of Macedony. But
Macedo the Nephewe of D^ucalion by the Mothers side, (who only with the
family of his household escaped from the general destruction) changed the
name, and called it Macedony, after himself. After Macedo followed Caranus
Captain of a company of Peloponesians: who according to the answer given by
Apollo, builded a City in the same place, where he had seen a heard of
Goats sit, and named it Which may be interpreted, Goteham.
Aegaea, in which place the custom was to bury their Kings: neither was it
lawful among the ancient Macedones, to bury their chief states in any
other place than there. After Caranus succeeded Perdicas in y^ two and twentieth
Olimpiad, who was the first that bare the name of King: after whom came
Alexander the Son of Amyntas, King Alexander, a lover of Music.
who was counted rich, and not without cause. For he had so good success in
increasing his substance, that he first of all men, sent Images of clean
gold for a gift, one to Apollo at Delphos, and another to Jupiter at Elis. He
was greatly given to delight his hearing: insomuch that for his pleasures
sake, he entertained with honorable pensions as long as he lived many that
were cunning upon Instruments, among whom was Pyndarus the Harper. From this
man Archelaus received the kingdom, King Archelaus a lover of Learning.
who was a politic Prince in feats of war, and the first deviser of
battle upon the Sea. This Archelaus was so great a lover of learning, y^ he
made Euripides the Tragical Poet, one of his privy Counsel. At whose burial,
he was not content to follow the Hearse only, but also he shore his hair, and
uttered in countenance the sorrow that he conceived in his heart. The same
Archelaus winning the wager in running with Chariots at the gaminges of Pythia
and Olimpus, showed himself rather to have the heart of a glorious Greek then
of a royal King, in seeking that kind of praise. After Archelaus the state of
Macedony being troubled with dissension, at last was stayed in the reign of
Amyntas, who had three Sons, of whom Alexander succeeded his Father: who being
dispatched out of the way, the fruition of that great pre-eminence was first
given to Perdicas: by whose decease the Kingdom was left by inheritance unto
his Brother Philip, who (as we told you before) lost his right eye at Methone,
of which maine there had gone a fore token before.

For at his marriage ^easte it is reported that the Musicians which served that
day, sung (as it were in sport) a song of the one eyed Giants, called Cyclops.
This Phillip begat great Alexander, King Phillip
howbeit that Olympias Alexanders Mother, coveting to purchase him a nobler
Father, avouched him to have been begotten by a Dragon. But howsoever the case
stood, Great Alexande^
Alexander so behaved himself, that he was believed to be the Son of a God.
He travailed over the world, using the direction of Aristotle and
Callisthenes. He conquered Asia the less, Armeny, Iberia, Albany, Cappadocia,
Syria, and Egypt. He passed over ye Mountains Taurus and Caucasus: He subdued
the Bactrians: he reigned over the Medes and Persians: He wan Inde, and went
beyond all that Liber and Hercules reached unto. He was of personage more
stately than Man, with long and straight neck, cheerful and clear eyes,
cheeks ruddy with a pleasantness, and comely featured in all proportions of
body, not without a certain majesty. Being conqueror of all men, he was
himself a thrall to wine and wrath. Through surfette of drunkenness he died
at Babylon, somewhat after a more base and uncomely sort then he had lived.
We find that those that came after him, were borne rather to increase the
glory of the Romans, then to inherit so great renown. Macedony brings
forth a stone which they call Paeantis. The common report goes, The stone
Paeantis.
that this stone does help Women, both in the time of their conception, and
in the time of their labor. It is found much about the Tomb of Tyresias.

CAP. XIIII.
Of the manners and customs of the Thracians. Of the places and peoples of
Thrace. Of Cranes and Swallows. Of Hellespont. Of the Island Clarob, and of
the Aegaeum Sea.
NOw it is time to take our iourneye into Romania
Thrace, and to set sail toward the puissantest Nations of Europe: The
manners and customs of the ancient Thracians.
which whosoever will look upon advisedly, shall easily find that there is a
contempt of life in the barbarous Thracians, through a certain discipline of
moother wytt. They agree all to die willingly: some of them believing that the
souls of them that decease return again, and othersome thinking that they
die not, but are in a more happy and blisful state. Among most of them, the
birth days are sorrowful, and contrariwise the burialls are joyful. In
so much that the Fathers and Mothers fall a weeping when they Children are new
borne, and rejoice when their are dead. The Men do glory in the number of
their Wives, and count it an honor to have many bedfellowes. Such Women as
are chare of their chastity, do leap into the fires where their dead
Husbands are burned, and (which they think to be the greatest token of
chastity that may be) run headlong into the flame. When Women come to the
time of marriage, they take not Husbands at the appointment of their Parents:
but such of them as excel others in beauty, set themselves forth to sale, and
making Proclamation who will give most, they marry not to him that is of best
conditions, but to him that is best Chapman. Those that are foul or deformed,
bring dowries with them to bie Husbands withal. When they feast, both sexes
of them go about the harthes, and cast the seed of certain Herbs growing
among them into the fire. The fume of which Herbs so strikes up into their
heads that it wounds their senses, and makes them like drunken folk,
whereat they have a good sport. Thus much concerning their customs. Now
shall ensue of their places and peoples. Along the River Strymo on the right
hand thereof, inhabit the Denselats. There are also many kinreds of the
Besses, even unto the River Nestus, which runs about the foot of the
Mountain Pangaeus. The soil of the Odryses sends forth the River Hebrus
which runs among the Briants, The River Hebrus.
Dolonks, Thynes, Corpills, and other barbarous nations, and touches also ye
Cycones. Then is there Mount Haemus, Mount Haemus
six miles high, the back part whereof is inhabited by the Maesians, Gets,
Sarmats, Scythians, and many other Nations.

On the sea coast of Pontus dwells the people of Sythony, the renown whereof
is augmented by Orpheu^ the Poet and Prophette that was borne there, who is
reported to have practiced the secrets (whither it were of his Music or of
his Ceremonies,) in the Promontorie Sperchius. Afterward is the Poole of
Biston, and not far from thence the Country of Marony, wherein was the Town
of Tyrada sometime the stable of Diomeds horses. But now it has given place
to time, and there remains no more but the foundation of the Tower. Not far
from thence is the City Abdera which Diomeds sister builded, Abdera.
and called so after her own name. Anon after, it became the house of
Democritus ye natural Philosopher, Democritus.
and therefore to (say the truth) it is the more renowned. This Abdera being by
time decayed, was restored to a greater countenance by the Clazomenians
coming out of Asia, the hundredth and one and thirty Olympiad, who abolishing
the things that had passed before, restored it to the old name again. The
coming of Xerxes made the place of Doriscon famous, because he mustered his
Army there. Mount Haemus has ye tomb of Polydore to show, on that side
which the Scythians Ar^teres do inhabit, and it has the City which in old
time was called Gerania, and is now called of the barbarous people Cattruza,
from whence the report goes that the Pygmaeans were driven by Cranes.

Surely it is manifest that Cranes in the winter time do fly in great herds
toward the North, Of the nature and order of Cranes.
and it shall not grieve me to declare whither, and in what sort they direct
their sight. They march in array as it were an Army under an Ensign. And
least the violence of the winds should drive them from the coaste to which
they direct their course, they gorge themselves with Sand, and balace
themselves by taking up stones of a measurable weight. Then they mount as
high as they can, to the intent from thence (as from a high watchtowre) to aim
the Lands which they would go unto. He that is surest of wyng goes before
the Heard, and with his clarying rebukes their slothfulness, and causes the
train behind to make haste after. When he wexeth hoarce, another takes his
room. When they shall pass the Sea of Pontus, they seek for the narrowest
places, which they may easily find by eye sight, and they are between
Taurica and Paphlagonia, that is to say between Carambis and the Rams head.
As soon as they know themselves to be past the mid channel, they disburden
themselves of the stones in their feet. So the Shipmenne report, who by
sudden adventure have oftentimes been rayned upon with their stony
showers. As for their Sand, they put it not up again before they be well
assured of their abiding. They are all alike rarefull for such as are weary.
Insomuch that if any of them tire, the rest flock altogether and bear them
up that faint, until they may recover their strength by resting. Neither are
they less circumspecte upon the Land. For they keep watch a nights, in such
wise that every tenth of them waketh. Those that watch, hold little weyghts
in their claws, which reprove them of sleep if they happen to let them fall.
If aught be to be avoided, they give warning thereof by clarying. Their color
bewrays their age, for the elder they grow, the blacker they wexe.

Let us come to the Promontorie It may be interpreted Goldenhorne.
Chrysokeras, renowned with the City Constantinople.
Byzance heretofore called Lygos, which is distaunt from Durazo.
Dyrrachium seven hundred and eleven miles. For so much is ye space between
the Adriatish Sea, and The Sea of Constant^nople
^ropontis. In the Country of Cenik not far from Flauiople a Town builded and
peopled with Romans, is the Town of Byzia in times past the Palace of King
Tereus, now hated and unhaunted of Swallows, The nature of Swallows.
and so forth of other byrds: although it be so that Swallows do shun to
come within Thebae also, because the walls thereof have been so often taken.
For among other things: that they have a kind of foreknowledge, it is known
hereby, that they will not come near a house that is like to fall, nor come
under the roof that by any means shall perish. Surely they are not chaced by
ravening fowls, neither are they a pray to any, but are as holy birds.

There is an other That is to say a narrow balke of ground between two seas.
Isthmos in Thrace of like straightness, and having a narrow Sea of like
wydenesse to that of Peloponnesus, upon the shores whereof stand two Cities,
on either side one. The shore toward the Sea of Constantinople is beautified
with the Town of Pactie, and Melane bay with the City It may be interpreted
Hartsted.
Cardy: which has that name because the platt of it is in fashion like a heart.
All the great Sea of Hellespont is straightened into seaue^ furlonges, which
space disseuereth the coast of Asia from Europe. Here also stand two Cities,
Abidos in Asia, and Sestos in Europe. And hard by are two Promontories one
over against the other: Mastusia of Chersonesus, where ends the third coast
of Europe, and Sygeum of Asia, where is a little Hill called Dogs Tomb or dogs
grave.
Cynossema the Tomb of Hecuba, and the Tower of Protesilaus, put to y^ use of
a Chapel.

On the Northmarches of Thrace, beats the River Danow or Tonware.
Ister, on the East Pontus and Propontis: and on the South, the Aegaean Sea.
Between Tenedos and Chius, is the Island Cla^os situate at such place as the
Aegaean Sea wydneth. On the right hand, as men sail to Antandros, there is a
Rock (for so it deserves to be called rather then an I Will) which (to them that
behold it a far of) seems to have the shape of a Goat, which the Greeks
call Aega, that is to say a Goat. Of this Rock the Aegaean Gulf takes his
name. From Phalarion a Promontorie of Cor^u.
Corcyra, hangs out a Rock of the likeness of a Ship, into the which Ulysses
bys Ship was believed to have been^ trans-formed. Cythera which is ^lue miles
from Malea, was heretofore named Porphyris.

CAP. XV.
Of Creta, and of many other things pertaining thereunto.
MOre easy it is to to treat fully of Now Candi^
Creta, the^ to say expressly in what Sea it lies. For ye Greeks have so
mingled the names of the Sea that enuironeth it, that while they thruste one in
an others place, they have almost drowned altogether. Nevertheless, I will
bestow my travel with as much faithfulness as I can, in buttelling it out,
to the intent that nothing may hang in uncertainty. It stretches out a great
length between ye East The situation of Candy
and the West, having Greece butting against it on the one side, and Cyrene on
the other. On the Northside it is beaten upon with the Or Gotesea
Aegaen Sea* and on the South with the Libicke and Aegiptian Seas. It was
garnished with a hundred Cities (as they report which have lauash tongues of
their own) but indeed with a hundred great and Lordly proud Towns: the
chief whereof were Gortim, Cydon, Gnoson, Therapne, The ancient names of Candy
and Scylletion. Dosiades reports that it was named Crete, of the Lady Crete,
the daughter of Hesperus. Anaximander says, it was so called of Cretes K. of
the Curets. Crates avouches that it hight, first Aeria, and anon after
Curetis. And many also affirm, that of the temperatenesse of the air, it was
called The blessed I Will. Of things first founded in that I Will.
Macaronesus. It was the first that could skill of seamatters and of shooting.
It was the first that comprehended words in writing. It was the first that
taught dancing in Armor, called the Pyrrhicke dance, of Pyrrhus the first
deviser thereof. It was the first that trained troops of Horsmenne to wind
and unwind themselves in way of sport and daliance, whereupon was afterward
founded the use of warlike discipline. The art of Music began first there,
by means of the Dactyles of Ida, who finding out the distinction of tunes by
the sounding and tinckling of brass, brought it in order of song, and sunge
ditties to it. It looks white by reason of the snowie tops of the
Mountains. Dictimus and Cadiscus, which are so exceeding white, that unto such
as sail a far off, they seem rather clouds then hills. Besides the
others, there is Ida, Mount Ida.
which before the rising of the Sun, sees the Sun.

Varro in his work entitled of the Seacoasts, affirms that in his time, The
manners and customs of the ancient Candians.
the Tomb of Jupiter was there to be seen. The people of Crete do very
deuoutlye worship Diana, whom in their own moother tongue they call
Brithomartis, which is as much to say in our language, as Sweet maid. No man
may lawfully enter into the Goddesses Temple, but barefooted. The said Temple
shows the workmanship of Daedalus. By Gortyn runs the River Laethey, at
the which the Gortynes say, that Europa was brought in upon a Bulls back.
The same Gortynes do worship Cadmus, Europas brother, of who^ they report
thus. He is seen, and meets folk, but in the shutting in of the Euenings
toward night, Illusion of the devil by walking Ghostes.
he offers himself to sight, with a countenance of much greater majesty.
The Gnosians account the Goddess Minerua to be a Countriwoman of theirs, and
affirm that Corn was first sown among them, standing boldly in contention
with the A^henians for that matter. What things Candy breedet^
The fields of Crete are well stored with wild Goats: but it wants Read
dear. It breeds not any where Wolves, Foxes, and other fourefooted Beasts
that be scarefull. There is no kind of serpents there. There is great store of
Uynes. The soil is wondrous batling. The increase of fruits of trees is
abundant. For in a part of this I Will only, Cypress Trees being felled do
spring again. There is an Herb called Hungarlesse
Alimos, whereof if a man champe a little, it keeps him from being a hungered
for one whole day, and therefore this also is peculiar to Crete. There is a
kind of Spider, called Phalangium. If ye demand what force it has, there is
no strength at all in the body of it, but if you would learn what power it
has, the man whom it stingeth dies of the poison. The stone also which is
called The Fingerstone.
Idaeus dactylus, is said to grow in this Island. It is of the color of
iron, and it is in shape like a man's thombe.

Crete has no night Owls, and if any by brought thither, they dye out of hand.

CAP. XVI.
Of Caristos, and the hot waters therein, and of the byrds called Carists. of
Chalcis, of the Circle Isles, and of the Islands Ios, and Delos,
CAristos has hot Bathes which they call Hellops, and birds called Carists,
which fly into the fire without sindging their feathers: and also a kind of
fine Lynnen which remains in the fire without perishing. This Island (as
Callidemus avouches) was in old time taken for Brasselande
Chalces, because Brass was there first found. That the Titans reigned there
time out of mind, the rytes of their Religions do declare. For the Caristians
do divine service to Briareus, like as the Chalcideans do to Aegaeon. For in
a manner all Negropont
Euboia was in subjection to the Titans. It is supposed that those Islands took
the name of Cyclads, because that although they be situate some further then
some from Sdiles,
Delos: yet they stand all in a Circle round about Delos, and the Greeks call
a circle Cyclos. Ios is more famous then the rest by reason that Homer is
buried there. It is here to be remembered, that after the first flood, which is
noted to have been in the time of Ogyges, when the day had continued as dark
as night, by the space of nine Months together: Delos before all other Lands
was lightened with the Sun beams, and thereof gate his name, in that it was
y^ first that was restored to light. Now between Ogiges and Deucalion is
accounted the space of six hundred years.

CAP. XVII.
Of the Island Ortygia, and of Quayles.
DElos is also called Quaylland.
Ortygia, the most renowned of all the Cyclads, being it self one of the
number of them, and is named diversely: sometime Asteria, of the honoring of
Apollo, there: sometime Lagia, of hunting: and Cynethus, and Perpole because
fire pannes, Of Q^ayle^ and of their propertyes.
and fire it self also were found there. In this Island were Quayles seen
first which byrds the Greeks call Ortyges. Men think that these fowls are in
the tuition of Latona. They are not to be seen at all seasons, but have their
time of coming, which is when Summer is gone. When they pass over the Seas,
they fly leysurely at ye first, cherryshing their strength with flying softly
for fear of a longer journey. But as soon as they spy Land, they cluster on
a flock, and thronging close together, make all the speed they can: which have
of theyrs does oftentimes turn to the destruction of them that are upon the
Sea. For it happens in the nights, that they rende the tackling, and bearing
the sayleclothes before them by violence and turn the bottomes of the keeles
upward. They never sett^ forth while the Southern wind blows, for fear
of the force of a more swelling foggie blaste. They commonly co^mitt themselves
to the Northern wyndes, to the intent that the gale thereof being more dry
and more vehement, may the easlyer carry their bodies which are somewhat
fat, and by reason thereof somewhat slow also. He that guydeth the flock, is
called The Quailguyde.
Ortygometra. As soon as he draws toward the Land, the Gossehawke (which
watches for the nonce) seazeth upon him, and therefore it is all their
seeking to get them a guide of a strange brood, by whom to escape the first
danger. Their chief delight is to feed upon the seed of venomous herbs,
and therefore wisemen have forbidden them their Tables. And this lyuinge
creature only (saving manne) suffers the falling sickness.

CAP. XVIII.
Of the I Will Eubaea, now called Nigropont.
THe I Will of Eubaea is disseuered with so small a cut from the maine land of
Baeotia, that it is to be doubted whether it be to be numbered among Islands or
no. For on that side which they call Eurypus, it is joined to the Land with a
bridge, and is gone unto a foot by the frame of a very short Engine. It
shoots into the North with the Promontorie Caeneum, and with two other it
extends into the South, whereof Gerastus faceth the Country of Athens, The
headlond of Capharew
and Caphreus looks into Hellespont, where after the destruction of Troy
(whether it were through the wrath of Minerua, or (as the certainer report
goes) through the influence of the Star Arcturus) the Gree^^i^h Navy
suffered great loss by shipwreck.

CAP. XIX.
Of the Island Paros, and the stone Sarda.
PAros is renowned for the Marble that is in it. Next Delos it is the best
inhabited with towns. But before it hadd y^ name of Paros, it was called Minoia.
For being conquered by Minos, as long as it continued under the Cretish
dominion, The Stone Sarda.
it was called Minoia. Besides the Marble, it yields the stone Sarda, which
is better then Marble, but yet accounted as basest of all Jewels. Eyghteene
mile from Delos is the I Will of Naxos, wherein is the Town of Srongyle. But
before it was called Naxus, Naxus now called N^xia
it bare the name of Dyonisia, either because it was the harborough of Bacchus,
or else because it excelled the rest in fruitfulnes of Uines. Besides these,
there be many more of ye Circle Isles, but y^ things that are chiefly worthy to
be remembered are in the Isles aforesaid.

CAP. XX.
Of the Island Icaros, and of the Philosopher Pythagoras: of the Islands Melos,
Carpathos, Rhodes, and Lemnos, and of the shaddowe of Mount Athos.
ICaros also is one of the Islands called Sporades, Now it is called Nicaria.
and gave the name to the Icarish Sea. This I Will shooting forth in Rocks
between Samos and Myconus, is altogether harbourlesse: and because it has no
Bay nor Haven to arryue at, it is ill spoken of for the daungerousnesse of the
Coasts of it. Varro therefore is of opinion, that Icarus of Crete perished
there by shipwreck, and that the place took his name of the misfortune of the
man. In Samos Samos.
nothing is more notable then y^ Pythagoras Pythagoras.
was that Countryman borne: who being ^ffended at the Lordlinesse of the
Tyrants, forsook his native Country, and arrived in Italy in the time that
Brutus which drove the Kings out of Rome was Consul Now called Mylo.
Melos (which Callymachus calls Melanis) hard by A^olia, is the roundest of
all the Isles. For Scarpanto.
Carpathus is the same whereof the Carpathian sea has his name. The air is
never so clowdye but the Sun shyneth upon the Rhodes. The Lemnians worship
V^ulcane, and therefore the chief City of Stalimene.
Lemnos is called Haephestia. There is also y^ town of Myrina, into ye
Marketsted whereof, the Mountain Athos casts his shaddowe out of Macedonie,
The exceeding height of Moun^ Athos.
which thing (not without cause) men have noted for a wonder, forasmuch as
Athos is fourscore and six miles of from Lemnos. Surely Athos is of such a
height, y^ it is supposed to be higher then from whence the rain falls.
Which opinion has got credit here upon, for that the ashes which are left
upon the Altars y^ stand on the top of it, are never washed away, nor do in
any wise diminish, but do always continue even in the same heap that they
were raked up in. On the top of it was sometime y^ Town Acrothon, wherein
the Inhabiters lived half so long again as the inhabiters of other places:
and therefore the Greeks call the people thereof Macrobians, which is as much to
say in our language, as longliued.

CAP. XXI.
Of Hellespont, Propontis, the Bosphor of Thrace and of the marvelous nature
of the fishes called Dolphins.
THe fourth coast of Europe begins at Saint Geo^ges arm.
Hellespont, and ends at the mouth of Maeotis. All the said wideness which
deuideth Europe and Asia a sunder, gathers into a straight of seaue^
furlongs. This is Hellespont, here did Xerxes make a bridge of ships and
pass over a foot. From thence stretches a narrow arm of the Sea to a
City of A^ia called Priapus, which Alexander the great sailed unto, and got
it into his hands, when he went about to conquer the world. From thence
wydning into a main Sea, it grows narrow again toward The Sea of
Constantinople.
Propontis: and by and by gathers into half a mile breadth, and is called
the The straighte of Constantiple, and it signifies the Oxeforde.
Bosphor of Thrace, at which place Darius conuaied over his army. These Seas
have many Dolphins, which have in them many strange things to be wondered at.
First and foremost, the Seas breed not any thing swifter or nimbler then them:
insomuch as ofttimes in their leaping up, The wonderful nature of Dolphins and
their love toward manne.
they shoot themselves quite over the topps of the maine sails of the ships.
Whersoeuer they become, they go by couples. They bring forth pigs, and the
tenth month is the full time of their farrying, and they farroe ever in
Sommertime, and give their pigs suck, and while they be very young they take
them in at their mouth, and they wayt upon them for a time till they wexe
strong. They live thirty years as has been tried by experience in cutting
of their tails for a mark to know them by. They have their mouths not in ye
same place where other Beasts have, but almost in their bellies, and contr^rie
to the nature of Fishes they only move their tongues. They have sharp
pricks on their backs, which stand up stife when they be moved to anger,
and are hidden as it were in a sheath when their minds be quiet. Men say they
don't not in the water, nor take any breath but above in the air. When ye
Northwind blows they be light of hearing, and contrariwise thick of hearing
when ye wind is in the South. They delight in Music, rejoicing to hear
shalmes, and whersoeuer is harmony, thither flo^k they together in herds. In
the reign of Augustus, a boy in Campane, first trained a Dolphin with shiuers of
bread, and did so much by custom that he was contented to be fed by hand.
Afterward when ye boy wexed bold in playing with him, he carried him from the
land into ye lake of Laurine, and bear the boy as it were on horsback from the
shore of y^ bay, unto Pozzolo.
Puteolis. This was done many years together, so long til ye continual
beholding thereof made it to seem no wonder. But when the lad was dead, the
Dolphin mourning for ye want of him, died for sorrow in y^ sight of al men. I
would be l^^he to vouch this thing, but y^ it is registered in ye wrytings of
Mecaenas, and Fabian, and many others. Anon after, upon the seacoast of
Afric at Hippon Dyarrhyton, a Dolphin being fed by ye men of Hippon, offered
himself to be handled, and ever now an then carried such as were set upon his
back. And this thing was not done by ye peoples hands only, for Flauianus ye
Proconsul of Afric handled him himself, and anointed him with ointments,
insomuch as the Dolphin being cast a sleep with y^ strangnes of the smell, was
tumbled hither and thither for dead, and many months after desisted from his
accustomed keeping of company. At Iassus a city of Babylon, a Dolphin fell in
love with a lad, and in following him over eagerly after their accustomed
sporting together, shot himself into ye sand and there stuck fast. Alexander ye
great interpreting it to have been y^ love of the Neptune.
God of the sea, made the lad chief priest to Neptune nere unto ye said city,
as Egesidemus makes report. Another child named Hirmias likewise riding on a
Dolphins back in the sea, and being drowned by violence of the waves, was
carried back again to land by the Dolphin, who took such repentance, that he
punished the fact with wilful death, and never returned more into the Sea.
There are store of other such examples, and yet I will not speak of Arion,
whose adventure is credibly avouched by Chronicles.

Furthermore, if their young pygs at any time play the wantons, their ancients
set one of the elder sort to be guide over the Heard, by whose instruction
they learn to slip from the assault of greater fishes that rush in upon
them, howbeit that in those Seas there be very few great Fyshes except it be
the Seal.

In Pontus there is great store of Tunnyes, and they breed not lightly else
where. Tunnyes.
For there is no place that they come sooner to their full growth in, then
there: and y^ is by reason of the plenty of sweet waters. Their coming into
the Sea is in y^ springtime, and they enter in by the right side of the shore,
and go out by the left side: which thing they are thought to do, because they
see better with the right eye then with the left.

CAP. XXII.
of Ister: of the beast called a Beuer, and of the precious stone of Pontus.
ISter rises in the Hills of Germany, Danow or Tonware.
and issues out of a Mountain that lies over against Turgew, a part of the
ancient Gall. It rec^iueth into it threescore Ryuers, almost all able to bear
Ships, and it falls into Pontus with seven mouths, whereof the first is
called Peuce, the second Narcustoma, the third Calostoma, and the fourth
Pseudostoma: for Boreostoma the fifth, and Stenostoma the sixth, are slower then
the rest: and as for the seventh, it is so dull and like unto a Poole, that it
has not any likelihoode of a stream. The first four are so great, that by
the space of forty miles together they are not intermedled with the Saltwater,
but keep their sweet taste with uncorrupted sauoure.

Through all Pontus there is great store of Beuers, (...)
which they call by the names of Fiber and Castor. This Beast is like an
Otter, and is a very sore byter, insomuch that if he fasten upon a man, he
will not let go his hold until he feel the bones crash between his teeth.

His stones are greatly coueted for the medicinablenesse of them, and therefore
when he finds himself put to the pinch, he byteth of his own cods, and
eats them up, to the intent men should have no good of them when he is taken.

^ontus yields also precious stones of sundry sorts, which of the Country
we call Pontiks: Agats and Porphyris.
for some have stars of the color of Gold, and some of the color of blood
in them, and they are counted among the sacred: for they are gathered rather
for a show, then for any use that they serve to. They are not besprent in
drops, but are interlyned with long strokes of sundry colors.

CAP. XXIII.
Of the River Hypanis, and the Fountain Exampeus.
THe River Hypanis springs among the They are now a part of Moscouia.
Auchets. It is the prince of Rivers in Scythia, pure and very wholesome to
drink^, until such tim^ as it entr^th into the bo^^ers of the May be
interp^eted Fayrfeete they are also a people of Mos^ouia.
Ca^^pods, where the Fountain Exampeus (which is justly defamed for the
bytternesse of his spring) being mingled with the clear stream, inferteth
the River with his fault, so that he falls into the Sea unlike to himself.

Heereuppon grows diversity of opinions among folk concerning Hypanis. For
they that know him at the beginning, do praise him: and they that taste of him
at the end have good cause to curse him.

CAP. XXIIII.
Of the River Bo^isthenes, and the people that dwell thereby: of the nature of
dogs: of the manners of the Scythians: of the precious stones called the
Emerawd, Cyanie and Crystal.
WIthin the Country of the Nepar. The Neuers are now a part of Moscouia.
Neuers springs the River The manners and customs of the ancient Moscouites.
Borysthenes, wherein are Fyshes of excellent taste, without any bones, having
nothing but very tender grystlys. But the Neuers (as we have heard) in the^
Sommertime are trans-formed into Wolves: and afterward when they have passed a
certain time limited for the continuance in that state, they return to
their former shape again. The God of this people is Mars: in st^dde of Images
they worship Swords: they off^r men in Sacrifice and with their boanes
(...) ^^re to burn the Sacrifices wy^hal^. Next Neighbors to these are the
These were afterward called Getes, and now are Tartarians.
Gelones: They make both raiment for themselves and furniture for their horses
of their enemies shinnes.

Upon the Gelones border the These also are now Tartaria^s
Agathyrses, painting their faces with a blewe color, and dying their hair
into a blewe color. And this is not done without a difference. For the better
man he is, y^ deeper color he dies himself: so that it is a token of low
degree to be lightly painted. After them are the Meneaters or Cannibals.
Anthropophags, who like cursed caytiues feed on Man's flesh. The which
custom of that wicked nation, the Countries adjoining bear witness of, by
lying continually waste, the inhabiters of them abandoning them, and running
away for fear of that cruel outrage: and this is the cause that from thence
to the sea which they call Tabis al along that coast which lies toward the
Northeast, the land is utterly without inhabiter and altogether wilderness,
until ye come to the Seres.

The Chalibyes and Dahyes which inhabit a part of that Scythia that is in Asia,
do differ nothing in cruelnesse from the most outrageous of all. But the Their
Country is now called Zuira and Seroan.
Albanes inhabiters of the Seacoast by the Caspian Sea, who will have
themselves thought to be the posterity of Jason) are borne with white hair,
and have hoar heads as soon as their hair buddeth, the color whereof has)
given name to the nation. The apple of their eyes is of color bright gray, and
therefore they see better by night then by day. The dogs that are bredde in
this Country, Wonderful dogs and of the nature and property of dogs in general.
excel all other beasts, for they pull down Bulls, kill Lions, and hold
whatsoever they are put at. In consideration whereof, they deserved to be
spoken of in Chronicles. We read that as Alexander was going toward Inde the
King of Albanie sent him two dogs for a present. Of which the one so disdained
Swine and Bears brought before him, that being offended with the baseness of
the pray he lay still a great while and would not once ^turre at them:
Alexander thinking him to be but a cowardly curre (because he knew not his
properties) commanded him to be killed. But the other at the information of
them that brought the present, being put to a Lion killed him. And anon after,
spying an Oliphant, he made a great leaping and skypping for joy, and being
put to him, first tired the Beast with cunning fight, and afterward (to the
great fear of them that looked on) pulled him down to the ground. These
kind of Dogs grows to a very large syse, and make a far terribler noise in
their barking, then is the roaringe of a Lion.

These things are peculiar to y^ dogs of Albanie: Examples of the love of
dogs toward their Masters.
the rest are common to all dogs. All dogs generally do love their Masters,
as is manifest by examples. In It is now called Albanie
Epyre a dog descrying the murderer of his Master in a great thronge,
bewrayed him by barking. When Jason of Lycia was slain, his dog forsaking
meat dyed for hunger. When the fire was kindled wherein the corse of King
Lysimachus should be burned, his dog threw himself into the flame, and was
consumed with him. Two hundred dogs brought home the King of the Garamants out
of exile, and overcame them in battle that withstoode them. The Colophonians
and Castabalenses carried dogs with them to the wars, Dogs used in battle.
and made their foreward always of them. In the time that Appius Iunius, and
Publius Silius were Consulles, a dog followed his Master that was condemned to
prison, and could not be driven away: and anon after, when he was executed,
he followed howling after him. And when the people of Rome for pity gave him
meat, he carried and laid it to his dead Masters mouth. Lastly when the
carcass was cast into Tiber, he swamme to it, and endeavored to bear it
above the stream. Only dogs know their own names, and remember the wales
that they have gone. The Indians when their Bitches go proud, tie them in the
Forrestes to have them limed by Tigers: of whom they cast away the first
litter, and likewise the second, as the which will serve to no purpose because
of their exceeding cruelnesse: the third they keep up. The dogs of Egypt
never lap of the Nyle but running, for avoiding the Crocodiles which lie in
wait for the^. Among the Anthropophags in ye part of Asia are numbered the
Essedons, who likewise are embrewed with the same ungracious food. It is the
manner of the Essedons to follow the corses of their Parents singing: The
Essedons deuourers of man's flesh.
and calling together a knot of their next Neighbors, to tear the carkesses a
sunder with their teeth, and dressing them with other flesh of beasts, to make
a feast with them. The skulles of them they bind about with Gold, and use
them as mazers to drink in. The Scythotaurians offer up strangers in
sacrifice. The Gr^syers.
Nomades give themselves to grazing.

The Tillmen.
Georges that are situate in Europe occupy Tillage. The Axiaks being likewise
situate in Europe, neither covet other men's goods, nor set any store by their
own. The Satarches utterly conden^ning the use of Gold and Silver, have
banished covetousness out of their Common weal for ever. The Scythians that
dwell more into the firm land, live much more straightly. They keep in
Caves: they make themselves drinking Cups, not as the Essedons do, but of the
skulls of their enemies: they love fighting: they suck the blood out of the
wounds of them that are slain: The manners of the Vplandish Tartarians in
old time.
their reputation increases by the number of slaughters, from which it is a
reproach among them to have clear hands: they make leagues by drinking each
of others blood: wherein they not only keep the custom of their own
Country, but also borrowe the manner of the Medes. In that war that was
held the forty and nine Olympiade, which was the six hundred and fourth
year after the wynning of Troy, between Alyattes King of Lydia, and Astiages
King of Media, the league was confirmed after the same fashion. Amphitus and
Telchius, the wagoners of Castor and Pollux, builded Sebast^ople.
Dioscorias the chief City of Colchos, from whence the nation of the
Henioches had their beginning. Beyond the Sauromats that are in Asia, where
Methridates hid himself, and from whence the Medes had their original.

The Thalians march upon those nations, which East ward lie upon the entering of
the Caspian Sea, The wonderful nature of the enterie into the Caspian Sea.
which entrance (after a marvelous manner) does emptye (...), and increase by
drowght. Out of the Mountains of ye Henioches issues Araxes, and out of ye
mountains of the Moscouits, issues Phasis. Araxes.
But Araxes rayseth his head a little way from the spring of Euphrates, and
from thence runs into the Caspian Sea. The Arimaspes, The Arimaspes.
which are ^ituat about Gesglithron, are a people that have but one eye.
Bey^nde them and the Mountain Ryphey is a Country continually c^uered with
Snow, called It may be englished Fetherlande.
Pteropheron. For the incessant falling of the hoar frosts and Snow makes
there a likelihood of feathers: a damned part of the world is it, and drowned
by nature it self in the cloud of endless darkness, and utterly shut up in
extreme cold as in a prison, even under the very Northpole. Only of all
Lands it knows no distinction of times, neither receives it any thing else
of the air, then everlasting Winter. In the the Asiatik Scythia are rich
Lands, but notwythstanding vninhabitable.

For whereas they abound in gold and precious stones: the Gryffons possess all,
Gryffons.
a most fierce kind of foul, and cruel beyond all cruelnesse: whose
outragiousnesse is such a stop to all comers, that hardly and seldom
arryue any there: for as soon as they see the^ they tear them in pieces, as
creatures made of purpose to punish the rashness of covetous folk.

The Arymaspes fight with them to get away their precious stones, the natures
whereof I will not refuse to treat of. This Land is the native soil of the
Emerawdes, Emerawdes
to which Theophrast gives the third place of estimation among precious
stones. For although there be of them in Egypt, at Chalcedon, in Media, and
about Lacedemon, yet those of Scythia are of chiefest reputation. The eye can
behold nothing more pleasant, nor nothing more wholesome than them, first
they glister green above the moist grass, and above the herbs that are in
the Ryuers, and secondly with the mildnes of their color, they refresh the
eyes that are wearyed with beholding other things. For they relieve and
sharpen the sight that was dymmed or dulled with the gloss of another stone. And
there is none other cause why men think it not good to have ought ingraued in
them, but least the beautye of them should be perished with the cuttings of
imagry: albeit that the right Emerawd will hardly be cut. They are tired in
this wise: if a man may see through them, if being round they cast their
color upon the things that are next them by reflection of the air, or if
being holow they resemble the faces of them that behold them, or if neither
in the shaddowe nor by candlelight, nor in the sunnelight is found any
alteration in them. Nevertheless they are of the best fashyon, which are
plain and level long. They are found when the Eastern wyndes called Etesiae
Etesia^
do blow, for then the wind discovers the ground, and they glyster through
the fine sand easily: for those Eastern wyndes do very much remove the
sands. Other of less value appear in the seames of stones in Rocks, or in
brassemynes, which they call brazen Emerawds. The refuse sort of them have
certain pranes within, like either to lead, or to hair, or to salt. They are
eased with Uineger, but they are much better amended with green Oil, although
they be spotted of nature. Cyanies.
And the best sort of the stone called Cyanie comes out of Scythia, it is of
the color of a bright Azure. They that be skilful Iewellers make two kinds of
it, the Male and Female. This should seem to be the stone called Lapis Lazulus.
The Females are of sheere brightness: but the Males are fretted with little
sparks beautiful to behold, having as it were dust of gold scattered
betwixt them. There is also Crystal, Crystal.
which although the greater part of Europe, and some part of Asia also do
yield, yet Scythia yields the best.

It is much used to make drinking Glasses of, for it abides heat best,
although it cannot well suffer any thing but cold. It is found six cornered.
They that choose it, covet the purest that no redness, no clowdynesse, nor
frothinesse, hinder a man to see through it: and moreover that the overmuch
hardness thereof makes it not subject to brittlenes. Some think y^ Ise
congealeth and hardneth into Crystal, but y^ is false. For if it were so,
neither Alaband of Asia, nor the I Will of Cyprus should engender this kind of
stuff, forasmuch as the heat in those Countries is mos^e ve^^ment. Liuia the
wife of Augustus dedicated among the gifts of the Capitol, a Crystal of a
hundred and fifty pound weight.

CAP. XXV.
Of the people called Hiperboreans.
SVndrye things that have been reported of the Hyperboreans had been but a
fable and a flying tale if ye things that have come from thence unto us had
been beleened rashly. But seeing the best Authors and such as are of
sufficient credit do agree in one constant report, no man needs to fear any
falshod. The Hiperboreans.
Of the Hyperboreans they speak in this wise. They inhabit almost the
Pteropheron, which we hear sa^e lies beyond the North pole, a most blessed
Nation. They ascribe it rather unto Asia then unto Europe, and some do place
it midwaie between the Sun rising and the Sun set, that is to wete,
between the West of the Antipodes, and our East, which thing reason
reprooueth, considering what a waste Sea runs between the two worlds. They
are therefore in Europe, and among them are thought to be the poles of the
world, and ye uttermost circuit of the stars, and half year light, lacking
the Sun but one day. Howbeit, there are that think the Sun rises not day
by day to them as it does to us, but that it rises in the springtime, and
goes not down again before the fall of the leaf, so that they have
continual day by the space of six months together, and by the space of
other six months continual night. The air is very mild, the blasts
wholesome, and no hurtful wind. Their houses are the wild fields or the
woods, and the trees yield them food from day to day. They know no debate,
they are not troubled with diseases, all men have one desire, which is to live
innocentlie. They have death, and by wilful fordooing themselves, prevent the
long taryance of their decease. For when they have lived as long as they would
desire, then feasting and anointing themselves, they throw themselves
headlong from some known Rock into the deep Sea, and they believe this to be
the best kind of burial. The report goes also, that they were accustomably
wont to send the first fruits of their increase to Apollo of Delos, by the
hands of their most chaste Maidens. But for because those Maids through the
treachery of them in whose houses they lodged, returned not undefiled: they
erected a Bishopric within their own Country for that devotions sake, for
the performance whereof they were feign before to send abroad.

CAP. XXVI.
Of the Arimphaeans, of the Caspian Sea, of the Tigers, Panthers, and Pards.
ANother Nation there is in Asia furthest Northeast, where the ridge of the
Mountain Ryphey fails, like the Hyperboreans, which are called Arimpheans.
^he Arymphae^an^.
These also delight in the leauie woods, and feed upon berryes.

The Men and women are both alike weary of their bayre, and therefore both
sexes of them d^o poll their heads. They love quietness and not to do any
harm They are counted holy, and even the wildest nations that be, do think
it an offense to touch them. Whosoever fears any danger among his own
Countrymen, The Cimmerians and Amazons.
if he fly to the Arimphaeans, he is as safe as in a Sanctuary. Beyond these
are the Cimmerians, and the nation of the Amazons, extending to the Caspian
Sea, which slyding along the back part of Asia, faleth into the Scythish
Ocean. Hircanie.
A great way of from thence is the mouth of the River Oxus: and there inhabit
the Hircans, a Country full of rowgh woods, plentiful of cruel wild Beasts,
and stored abundantly with Tigers, Of Tigers.
a kind of Beasts notable for the goodlye spots wherewith their coats are
powdered, and for their swiftnes.

Their color is a bright yellowe: which being powdered with drops of black,
make a very trim show by reason of the variety thereof. I am not able to say
whither it be their nimblenesse or their eagernes that furthereth their
swiftnes. For nothing is so long but they pass it over in short time: nothing
is gone so far before them but they overtake it by and by. But most of all
they show what they are able to do, when they have littered, and when they
pursue them that have stolen away their whelps. For though post horses be laid
by the way, and that they work never so subtillie to go clear away with
their booty, yet if the Sea ^e not at hand to rescue them, all their endeavor
is in vain. And it is noted in them oftentimes, that if perchance they see
the stealers that have carried away their welppes sailing away again: after
they have raged in vain, they cast themselves headlong into the Sea, as it
were to punish their own slownesse by wylful drowning themselves, and yet of
all their whelps (which are many in number) scarsely may one be co^^eied
away. Of Panthers also is great store in Hyrcanie, Panther^.
which are spotted with little round specks, in such sort that the hair of
their skins, which is either white or of a sky color, is beset with round
eyes of yellow. It is reported that cattle are wonderfully delighted with the
sent and beholding of the^, and that as soon as they perceive them, they
heard together in have, and are not afraid but only of the grimnesse of their
look. For which cause the Panthers hiding their heads, A Panther and a Lybard
is all one kind of Beast
set forth the rest of their bodies to look upon, to the intent that when
the Cattle are astonished in gazing, they may fall upon them and devour them
without danger.

But the Hyrcans (as man's nature is ever full of devises) kill them more
commonly with poison then with weapon. They steep flesh in ye juice of
Lybardbane, This Herb i^ also called Woolfwort
and cast it in the ways where diverse paths meet: the which as soon as the
Panthers have eaten, by and by their throats are troubled with ye squince, and
therefore the weed is called in Greek Pardalianches. But the Panthers against
this venom devour man's dunge, and so by a remedy of their own finding
withstand their destruction. They are very long in dying: in so much that they
live a great while after that their bowels are taken out. In these woody
countries, are also Lybards a second kind of Panthers, Lybarde^
sufficiently known, and therefore not to be entreated of with further
circumstaunce. Between these and the Lyonesses matching against kind, are
engendered bastard Lions without force or courage.

CAP. XXVII.
From whence the Midland Seas have their beginning.
FOrasmuch as we are in the matters of Pontus, it is not to be omitted from
whence the Mydland Seas do raise their heads. For some are of opinion that
they take their beginning at the streights of Marrok, and that they have none
other original than the waves of the Ocean breaking in at that place, the
lively operation whereof sheading it self abroad, canseth the flowings and
ebbings of the tides on diverse coasts of the mayneland; as for examples sake in
a part of Italy. They that are of the contrary opinion, say how all that
flowing comes from the mouth of Pontus: and this they auouche with no
tryfling argument, because the tide that comes out of Pontus never ebbeth
back again.

CAP. XXVIII.
Of certain Isles in Scythia.
FOurscore miles from the Bosphor of Thrace, is y^ I Will of the Apollonits,
situate on this side Ister, from whence Marcus Lucullus brought unto us the
Apollo of the Capitol.

Against the mouth of Now called Nepar.
Borysthenes is the Island of Achilles, with a Church wherein comes no bird:
and if any come by chance, she flies away again with all the speed she can
make.

CAP. XXIX.
Of the North Ocean, of the Caspian Sea, and of the Island Baltia,
THe North Ocean on that part where Paropamisus a River of Scythia washes into
it, The Frozen Sea.
is named of Hecataeus Amalchium: which in ye language of that nation,
signifies the Frozen sea. Phylaemon says, that from the Cimbrians to the
Promontorie Rubeas, it is called Morimarusa, which is as much to say, as the
dead Sea. Whatsoever is beyond Rubeas is called Cronium. That the Caspian Sea
on the otherside of Pontus beyond the Massagets and the Scythians called
Apellaeans, The water of the Caspian Sea is sweet of taste.
in the coast of Asia, is sweet of taste, it was tried by Alexander the great,
and afterward by Pomp^y the great, who in his wars against Methridates (as
Varro one of his fellow Soldiers reports) would needs know whither it
were true or no by drinking of it himself. It is reported that it comes so
to pass by reason of the number of Rivers, whereof there falls such a sort
into it, that they alter the nature of ye Sea.

I must not let pass, that at the same time the said Alexander was able to
come in eight days out of Inde from Bactria unto the River I^arus, which
runs into the River Oxus, and from thence to ye Caspian sea, and so by the
Caspian to pass into y^ stream of the River Cyrus which runs between the
marches of Iberia and Armenie. From Cyrus also conueying his Ships after him
by land, he came in five days at the most to the Channel of Phasis: at
whose issue it is manifestly proved, that those which come out of Inde may be
brought into Pontus. Xenophon of Lampsacum affirms that we may sail from the
sea coast of Scythia, to the Island It is now found to be many Islands.
Baltia in three days, the greatness whereof is unmeasurable, and almost
like unto a maine land, from whence it is not far to the Islands called Oones,
the inhabiters whereof, live by eggs of Sea-foules, and the seed of wild
Dates: and that other Isles adjoining thereunto do live after the same sort: or
which, the people that are called They may be called Egg Islands.
Hyppopodes, Hors-feete
being shaped in all points like men down to the instep, have feet like
horses. He says also how there are other Islands, and a nation called
Phanesians, whose ears are of such an unmeasurable syse, that they cover the
rest of their bodies with the^, and need none other apparel to clothe their
limbs with, Unmeasurable cares.
then their own flappes.

CAP. XXX.
Of Hearts and Tragelaph^s.
BBefore we step aside from Scythia, me thinks it a matter of conscience, to
pass over what beasts are peculiar to that Country. There is great store of
Hearts in this land, and therefore we will treat of Hearts Of the nature of
Hearts,
first. The male Dear of this kind, when rutting time comes, are madd fond
over the Hyndes. Although the Hyndes be bukt before, yet are they not with
fawn until the star Arcturus rise, neither do they bring up their young
^alues at adventure. For they hyde them very charily while they be young, and
beat them with their feet to make them lie still in the thick bushes or
weeds where they have laid them. When their strength will serve them to
follow about, they teach them to run by exercise, and enure them to leap
through places.

When they hear the opening of a Hound, they fly with the wind, that the
sent may go away with the^. They like well the noise of pypes. When their
ears stand up, they hear very lightly, and when they be down, they hear
nothing at all. They gaze at al things, and therefore it is an easy matter to
have a shoot at them. If they swymme over the Seas, they aim to land, not by
sight but by smelling. They set the weakest behind, and bear up the heade^
of them that are weary upon their haunches by turns. Of their horns the
right has most efficacy in Medicine. If thou will drive away Serpents, burn
which of them thou will, and besides that, the fume that ryseth of the burning
thereof, will evidently bewray if the falling sickness be in any body.
According to their years the tynes of their horns increase, which multiplying
continues six years. For after that time, their horns cannot increase in
number of tynes, but they may be thicker or broader palmed. If they be gelded
their horns never increase, neither do they cast them.

Their teeth bewray their years: for if they have few or none then they be
old. They swallowe Serpents, and with the breath of their nostrells draw the^
out of their l^rking hooles. The Herb Dittayne.
The herb Dyttaine they brought to light, while by feeding thereon they cast
out arrows and darts sticking in their bodies. The herb also which men call
an Artechoke they do eat of against hurtful weeds. The Artichoke
The curds that are in ye maw of one of their Fawnes killed in his dammes
belly, is a wonderful preservative against poison. A special preservative
against poison.
It is manifestly known, that they are never troubled with any Fever: and
therefore ointments made of their marroe, assuage the burning fits of those
that have the Agew. A remedy against the burning Ague.
We read that very many which were wont to break their fast a mornings with
read Dear lived a long time, and never had Ague: but it takes not effect,
unless the Heart be killed at one stripe. To dyscerne the continuance of their
life, great Alexander put collers about many Stagg^s ne^kes, which were caught
a hundred years after, and yet had not any lykelihoode of age in them. In
manner of the same shape are those which the Greeks call Tragelaphes, Gotebucks
(but they are not to be seen else where the^ about Phasis) saving that they
have long hair on their shoulders, and long rough beards under their chynnes.

CAP. XXXI.
Of Germany, and the wonderful birds therein, and of the Bugles, Vres* and
Alces. wild Beasts.
Germany takes his beginning at y^ Mountain Seuo which is great of it self,
The bo^nds the ancient Germani^
and not less then the Hills of Ryphey. This hill is inhabited by the They
were Indwellers.
Ingeuons, at whom first next after the Scithians begins the name of
Germans. It is a land rich of men, and inhabited with peoples innumerable and
altogether savage. It stretches from the Forest of Hertswalde
Hercinia, to the Hills of Sarmatia. Where it begins it is watered with Danow,
and where it ends it is watered with the Rhyne. Out of the inward parts
thereof, Elb.
Albis, Guttallus, and Wixell. Strange byrd^
Vistula very deep Ryuers run into the Ocean. The Forest of Hertswald
breeds byrds, whose ^ethers shine and give light in the dark, though the
night be never so close and clowdy. And therefore men of that Country, do for
the most part so lay their outgoings by night, that they may use the^ for a
help to direct their journey by: and casting them before them in ye open
paths, do find how to keep their way by the glystring of those feathers,
which show them which way to go. In this Region and in all the North coast,
The be also c^lled Buffles or wild Oxen
there is very great store of Bugles: which are in manner like Oxen,
brystled, with rough manes on their necks, they are far more swyfter then
Bulls, and which being taken will not by any mean^ be made to come to hand.
There are also Ures which the unskillful common sort call Buffles, whereas
Buffles are bredde in Afric almost altogether like a Heart. Vres.
But these which we call Ures have horns like Bulls, of such length, that for
the great receipt thereof, they are taken to make Cups for Kings to drink in.
There is also a beast called Alce much resembling a Mule, Al^^.
with such a long upper lip, that he cannot feed but he must go backward.

CAP. XXXII.
Of the Island Scandinauia, of Amber, of the stone Callais, and of the precious
stone called Ceraunius.
OVer against Germany is the Island Scandinauia, Sconeland
which breeds a beast Munster takes this beast to be the Alce
much resembling an Alce, which like ye Oliphant boweth not the nether joints
of his legs, and therefore lies not down when he sleeps, but rests
himself when he is drowsy, against a Tree, the which is sawne almost a
sunder, ready to fall, that when the beast leans to his accustomed stay, he
may fall down: and so is he caught, for otherwise it is a hard matter to
catch him by hand. For although his joints be so stiff, yet is he of
incomparable swiftness.

Of the German Isles, the greatest is Scandinauia, but there is nothing in it
great saving it self. The Island Now called Sudawe, Of Amber,
Glessaria yields Crystal, and also Amber, which the Germans in their
Country speech call Glesse. The quality of this kind of stuff is touched
briefly before. But at such time as Germanicus Caesar searched all the corners
of Germany, there was found a Tree of the kind of Pynes, out of whose pyth
every harvest issued a Gum. Ye may understand by the That is to say by the
latin name of it, which is Succinum.
name of it, that it is the juice of a Tree: and if ye burn it, the smell
will bewray y^ it comes of a Pyne Tree. It is worth the labor to proceed
somewhat further, least men might surmise that the woods about Po, did weep
stones. The barbarous nation brought Amber into Illyrik, which through
intercourse of Merchandise with the Paunonians, came to ye hands of the
Italians beyond the Po, now because our Men saw it there first, they
believed it had also grown there. Through the bounteousnesse of the Emperor
Nero, no attire was gorgeous without Amber, which was no hard matter for him to
do, sithence that at the same time, the King of Germany sent him three and
thirty thousand pound thereof for a present. At the first it grows rugged
and with a bark, and afterward it is boiled in the grease of a sucking Pigg*
and and so is pollished to that brightness that we see. According to ye
color, it has diverse names. It is called Melleum and Phaleruum, both which
names it has given unto it for the likeness it has to that kind of wine, or
to honnie. It is manifest that it gathers up leaves and draws chafe unto
it: and the art of physic has taught, that it remedieth many
inconveniences of men. Inde also has Amber, but Germany has the best, and
best store. Because we were come to the I Will of Glessaria, we began with Amber:
for in the i^ner parts of Germany is found a stone called Callais, The stone
Callais.
which men prefer before the precious stones of Arabie: for it passes them
in beauty. The Arabians say it is not found any where but in the nestes of
the birds which they call They may be interpreted black ^oppes.
Melancoryphes: which no man believes, forasmuch as they are to be found in
the Regions of Germany among stones, although very rarely. In respect of the
estimation and value of the Emerawd, it is of color a faint green. Nothing
does better beseem gold. Furthermore, of the Ceraunies are diverse sorts, The
Ceraunie or thunderstone.
that of Germany is white, with a bright blew: and if ye have it abroad, it
draws the brightness of the stars to it.

CAP. XXXIII.
Of Gallia, of the Countries of Rhetia and Noricum, of Pannonie and Masia, and
of the medicinable Oil.
CAllia is situat between the River Rhyne and the Mountains Pyrenyes, The
more part of it is now the Realm of France.
and between the Ocean and y^ Mountains The Mountain of Geneua, or the
Mountains of Auuerne.
Gebenua and The Mountain of Saint Claude.
Iura, fortunate for the fatnes of the soil, and rich of increase of fruits,
in many places also replenished with Uines and Orchyardes, and blessed with
store of all things for the behoof of man. It is well watered with Ryuers and
Fountains, and of those Fountains some in times past sacred and hot.

It is ill spoken of for the custom of the inhabiters, who (as is reported)
for I avouch not my self to have had trial of the truth, after a detestable
manner, (not to the honor, but rather to the injury of Religion,) offer men in
sacrifice. Out of this Country ye may go into what part of the world ye will:
Into Spain and Italy both by sea and land: into Afric by sea only. If ye
journey into Thrace, ye must come to the fair and fruitful fields of Sweuia.
Rhetia, renowned with the Lake The Lake of Constance.
Brigantine: from thence into Bauyer.
Noricum, a cold Country and less fruitful, but where it is far from the
Alps very plentiful: Then Austrich an^ Hungary
Pannonie, puissaunt in men, the soil champion and rich, and enclosed with the
two famous Rivers Drauus and Sauus, and lastly the Walachy
Maesians which our ancestors called worthelie the Gardner of Ceres. In one
part whereof, A wonderful Oil.
(namely of that which is toward Pontus) there grows (...) hear^e wherewith
they make an Oil that they call the Chirurgions Oil. This being set a
fire, if ye go about to quench it with water, burns the more, and cannot
be put out otherwise then by casting on of duste.

CAP. XXXIIII.
Of Britain and the other Isles about it, of the stone called Geate.
THe Sea coast of Gallia had been the end of the world, Britayne which now
is England and Scotland
but that the I Will of Brytaine for the largeness thereof every way, deserves
the name almost of an other World, for it is in length eight hundred miles
and more, so we measure it to the angle of Caten^sse
Calydon, in which nooke an Altar engraven with Greek Letters for a vow,
bears witness that Ulysses arrived at Calydon. It is environed with many Isles,
and those not vnrenowmed: whereof Ireland draws nearest to it in bygnesse,
Ireland and the manners of the Irish men in old time, not altogether altered to
this day.
uncivil for the savage manners of the inhabiters, but otherwise so full of
fat pasture, that if their Cattle in Summer season be not now and then kept
from feeding, they should run in danger of bursting. There are no Snakes, and
few birds: the people are harbourlesse, and warlike. When they have overcome
their enemies, they first be smeere their faces in the blood of them that be
slain, and then drink of it. Be it right or be it wrong, all is one to the^.
If a Woman be delivered of a manchilde, she lays his first meat upon her
Husbands sword, and putting it softly to his pretty mouth, gives him the
first h^msel^ of his food upon the very point of the weapon, praying
(according to the manner of their Country) that he may not otherwise come to
his death, then in battle and among weapons. They that love to be fine, do
trim the hylts of their Swords with the teeth of monsters that swymme in the
Sea: for they be as white and as clear as Iuorie. For the men do chiefly
glory in the beauty of their Armor. There is not any Be among them: and if
a man bring of the duste or the stones from thence, and strew them among Be
hyues, This is found now to be contrary.
the swarms forsake ye combs. The Sea that is between Ireland and Brytaine,
being full of shallowes and rough all the year long, cannot be sailed but a
few days in the Sommertime. They sail in Keeles of wicker done over with
Neats leather. How long soever their passage continues, the passengers
abstain from meat. Such as have discussed the cercertaintie of the matter
according to reason, have esteemed the breadth of that narrow Sea, to be a
hundred and twenty miles. The troublous Sea also deuideth the It should seem^
to be the I Will of Man.
Island of the Silures, from the coast of Brytaine: the men of which I Will keep
their old customs even unto this day. They utterly refuse buying and selling
for money, and give one thing for another, providing things necessary, rather
by exchange then for ready money. They worship the Gods very devoutly. As
well the Women as the Men boast of the knowledge of prophesying.

The I Will The I Will of Wight.
Thanatos is beaten upon with y^ French Sea, and is divided from Brytaine with
a very narrow cut, luckie for corn fields and fat soil, and not only
healthful to it self, but also to other places. For inasmuch as there is no
snake creeping there, the earth thereof to what place soever it be^ carried
from thence, kills snakes. There be many other Isles about Brytaine, of which
Iseland.
Thule is ye furthest of, wherein, at such time as the Sun is at the highest in
Summer, and passes through the sign of Cancer, there is almost no night at
all. Again in the dead of winter, when the Sun is at the lowest, the day is
so short, that the rising and going down of the Sun is both together.
Beyond Thule we learn is the dead and frozen Sea. From the Promontorie of
Calydon, Catenesse (...) Scotland.
to the Island Thule, is two days sailing. Next come the Isles called The West
Isles of Scotland, of them are now found above forty.
Hebudes five in number, the inhabiters whereof, know not what corn means,
but live only by fish and milk. They are all under the g^uernment of one
King. For as many of them as be, they are severed but with a narrow groope
one from another. The King has nothing of his own, but takes of every man's.
He is bound to equity by certain laws: and least he may start from right
through cocouetousnes, he ^earneth Justice by poverty, as who may have nothing
porper or peculiar to himself, but is found at the charges of the Realm. He
is not suffered to have any woman to himself, but whomsoever he has mind
unto, he borrows her for a time, and so others by turns. Whereby it comes
to pass that he has neither desire nor hope of issue. The second Harborough
between the maine land and the Hebuds, is the Orkney of them be now xxx,
Orc^des: which are from the Hebuds, seven days and as many nights sailing.
There be but three of them: no man dwells in the^: they have no (...) are
ouergrowne with rushye weeds: and the rest of them is nothing but sand and
bare Rocks. From the Orcades unto Thule is five days and five nights sailing.
But Thule is plentiful in store of fruits that will last. Those that dwell there
do in the b^ginning of the spring time live on herbs among Cattle, and
afterward by milk, and against Winter they lay up the fruite^ of their
trees. They use their women in common, and no man has any wife. The whole
circuit of B^itaine, is four thousand eight hundred, threescore and fifteen
miles. In which space are great and (...) and ho^e Bathes, Bathe
finely kept to the use of men, the souer (...) of which Bathes is the
Goddess Minerua, in whose Chapel the fire burns continually, and the
^oles do never ^urne into ashes, but as soon as ye embars wexe dead, it is
turned into ^alles of stone. Moreover, to the intent to pass the large
abundance of sundry metals, (whereof Britain has many rich veyn^s on all
sides) Here is store of the stone called Geate, Geate
and ye best kind of it. If ye demand ye beauty of it, it is a black Jewel:
if the quality, it is of no weight: if the nature, it burns in water, and
goes out in Oil: if the power, rub it till it be warm, and it holds such
things as are laid to it, as Amber does. The Realm is partly inhabited of
barbarous people, who even from their childhoode have shapes of diverse beasts
cunninglye impressed and incorporate in their bodies, so that being engraued
as it were in their bowels, as the man grows, so grow the marks painted upon
him, neither do those Nations count any thing almost to be a greater token of
patience, then y^ their bodies should by manifest scarres drink in the
deepest color.

CAP. XXXV.
Of Spain, and the Isles about it: Of the Ocean, and the Midland Sea, and of
their sundry names, and what the Philosophers have left in writing, concerning
the ebbing and flowing thereof.
Now that I am come again to ye maine la^d the matters of Spain call me. The
plentifulnes of Spain.
The coast of this Country is co^parable with the the best, and inferior to
none, whether ye have respect to the fatness of the soil, or to the
revenues of the Uyneyardes, or to the fruitfulnes of the Trees. It abounds
in all kind of things, whatsoever is costly of price, or necessary to be
occupied. If ye seek silver or gold, it has the^: the iron mines never
wast: it gives place to no Country for Uines: and for Olives it passes all
others.

It is divided into three provinces, and in the second wars against Carthage
it became ours. Nothing is in it idle, nothing barraine. Whatsoever ground is
not able to bear corn, bears good pasture, even the places that are dry
and barraine, yield stuff for ship men to make Cables of. They sees not salt
there, but dyg it out of the ground. They scour the fine sparks of dust and
make Sinople of it, and therewith dye their wool, that they may afterward make
it the better into a scarlet engraynde.

In Po^^ingale
Lusitania is a Promontorie which some call Artabrum, and some call it the
Promontory of Lysbone. It disseuereth both air, land, and Sea. By land it
finisheth the one side of Spain: and it deuideth the air and the Seas in such
wise, at the circuit thereof the French Ocean and the North coast begin, and
the Athlantish Ocean and the West do end. There is the City of Lysbone
builded by V lisses: and there is the River Tagus, preferred before other
Ryuers for his golden sands. In the marches of Lysbone the Mares exceed in
fruitfulness after a wondrous manner. For they conceive by the blaste of the
Southwest wind, This fable was made of the Genets because of their swiftnes
and their lust is as well spedde with the breath of the air, as if they were
covered with Horses. The River Iberus gave name to ye whole Realm of Spain,
and the River Granat and Andolosia.
Baetis to the province of Guadalqueuer
Baetica, both of them are famous streams. The Cittye Carthage in Spain, was
builded by the Carthagenenses of Afric, and replenished also with people of
that Country. The Scipios builded Tarracon, and therefore it is the head of
the province called Arragon.
Tarraconensis. The Seacoast of Lusitania has great plenty of the precious
stones called The thunderstone.
Ceraunie, which is preferred before the Ceraunie of Inde. The color of this
Ceraunie is like the Carbuncle: and the virtue thereof is tried by fire: the
which if it be able to abide without perrishing or blemish, it is thought to
be good against the force of ligtning. The Isles The Isles (...).
(...) rid^s but against y^ side of By^^ay
Celtiberia very fertile of lead: so (...) also the The (...)
fortunate Isles: of which there is nothing worth the noting save the name
only. Euisa.
Ebusus, one of the Isles called Baleares, which is distant from Dianiu^ sea^en
hundred furlongs, has no Serpent, for the soil thereof drives away Serpents.
But the I Will Adderlan^
Colubra^^^ which is toward Sucro, swarmeth with Snakes. The Mallorca and
Menorca.
Baleares were sometime ye king dome of Boccharis, and there was such store of
Connyes, that they utterly destroyed all kind of fruits. At the Heard of
Granad^
Betica where as is the vttermoste point of the known world, there is an
Island about seven hundred paces from the main land, which the Tyrians
(because they came from the red Sea) called Cales Male^
Erythraea, and the people of Afric in their language called Gadir, that is
to say the Hedge. There are many monuments to prove that Gerion dwelled here,
albeit some think that Hercules fetched his kyne out of another Island, which
lies over against Portinga^^
Lusita^^^. But the narrow Sea between Affricke and Spain, took his name of
the Islands called The streigh^ of Gibraltar (...) Marocke:
Gades. At that place, the Athlantish Ocean sends in our Sea which deuideth
the world. For the Ocean (which the Greeks so call because of the swiftness
thereof,) breaking in at the Sun going down, raseth Europe on the left side
and Affricke on the right: and having cut a sunder the Mountains Calpe and
Abila (which are called Hercules Pyllars) rusheth in between the Mores and the
Spaniards. And at this straight (which is in length fifteen miles, and in
breadth scarcely seven,) as it were at a gate, he opens the bars of the
inner Sea, and wyndeth himself into the mydlande coasts, which he beats
upon from place to place, even unto the East. Where it beats upon Spain,
it bears ye name of the Spanish and Balearish Sea, where it runs by the
province of Narbon, Now the Sea of France.
it is called the Sea of Gall: then The Sea of Genoa.
Lygusticum: and from thence to Sicill, Tuscane, which y^ Greeks call Ionian,
or Tyrrhaenia^, and the Italians the nether sea. From Sicill to the I Will of
Candy it is called the sea of Sicill: from thence to Pamphylia and the
Aegiptian Sea, Now the Candian Sea,
it is called the Cretish sea. The same gull of waters wrything his side first
into the North, and fetching great circuits by the Greek lands, and by Illyrik
through Saint Georges arm.
Hellespont draws into the straights of The Sea of Constantinople.
Propontis: the which Propontis disseuering Europe and Asia, extends to The
Sea of Zabacca.
Maeontis. Of the original of the names there is no one uniform reason. It is
called Asiaticke and Phaenician of the Countries: Carpathian, Aegaean, Icarian,
Balearick, and Cyprian of the Islands: Ausonian, Dalmatian, Lygustian, and
Thuscane of the nations: Adriatish, Argolicke, Corynthian, and Tyrian of the
Towns: Myrtoan or Hellespontian of the mischances of men: Ionian in
remembrance of a King of that name: Bosphor of the passing over of an Ox, or
of the streights which an Ox might swim through: of the natures of the
dwellers by Harboursome
Euxinus, or as it was called before Harbourlesse.
Axenus: and of the order of the flowing Propontis. The Egyptian sea is
allotted to Asia: the Gallik sea to Europe, and the Afric sea to Lybia: and
as the sea approaches to any of the several parts of these Countries, so takes
it name thereafter. These are in the bowels of the world. But the Ocean
beclippeth the uttermost coasts, which according to the shoares it beats
upon, is named Arabic, Persian, Indian, Eastern, Serick, Hercanish, Caspian,
Scythick, German, French, or British, Athla^tish, Lybick and Aeth^opick. Why
the tides be higher in the East parts of the world*
The flowing of the tides whereof, does rise exceeding high about the Sea
coasts of Inde, and make very great breaches there, which happens either
because the waters swelling by force of heat, are held up beyond their stint,
or else because that in that part of the world. is far greater abundance of
springs and Ryuers. The matter is yet in question, what should be the cause
that the Ocean should swel or why it should fall again into it self, Reasons of
the swelling of the Ocean.
considering the s^perfluitie thereof: and it is evident y^ many things have
been uttered, rather to show the wits of y^ disputers, then to the setting
forth of the truth. But to omit the doubtful debatings of the Demurrers, we
have found th^se opinions to have most likelihoode of truth. The natural
Philosophers hold opinion, that the world is a living creature, and that being
compact of the diverse bodies of the Elements, it is moved by a soul, and
governed by a mind: both which being shed through all the members, do put
in ure the force of their eternal^ moving: and therefore that like as in our
bodies there is an intercourse of the breath and the soul, so in the deepes of
the Ocean, there are as it were, certain nostrils appointed, at which ye
breach being sent out, or drawn in again, does one while puff up the
Seas, and another while call the^ back again. But they that follow the
knowledge of Astronomy, affirm that these goings and comminges are moved by
the course of the Moon, and that the interchaungablenesse of the ebbings and
flowinges, depend upon the increasing and decreasing of her, insomuch as they
keep not always one ordinary stint, but altar from time to time, according to
her approaching or going away.

CAP. XXXVI.
of Lybia: of the Orchyardes of the Sisters called Hesperides: and of Mount
Atlas.
OVt of Spain my next start is into Lybia. Of Afric and the sundry names
thereof
For when ye are loosened from Belon which is a Town of Betica, the next
arrival on the furtherside of that Sea which is three and thirty miles broad,
is Tanger.
Tingie now a Town inhabited with people of Mauritanie, Antaeus.
whereof Antaeus was the founder. Moreover, because in that circuit the Sea of
Egypt ends, and the Sea of Lybie begins, it has seemed good to me^, to
call Afric by the name of Lybie. Some notwithstanding have avouched, that
Lybie was so named of Lybia, the daughter of Epaphus, and Afric of Afer the
Son of Hercules the Lybian.

Li^. Li^
also another new inhabited Town stands on the same coast, where was
sometime the Palace of Antaeus: who being perfecter in wynding and vnwinding
of knots upon the ground then else where, as if he had been the native Son of
the earth, was there vanquished and put to death by Hercules. As concerning the
Orchyardes of the Hesperides, The Orchards of the Hesperides.
and ye waking Dragon, least the liberty of Fame might be infringed this is the
very truth. Out of the Sea comes a crooked arm with so wreathed and wynding
banks, that to such as behold the broken turnings of it a far of, it
resembles the glyding of a Snake: and it enuironeth the place that they called
the Orchyard. Whereupon interpreting it to be the keeper of the Apples, they
opened a gappe to devise lies upon. But this Island so wreathed about with the
wynding Channel running forward and backward, which is situate in a certain
circle of the Sea, has nothing in it to prolong the memorial of antiquity
with, saving a few Trees like wild Olyues, and an Altar consecrated unto
Hercules. But this is a greater wonder then the golden fruit Trees or the
leauie gold, that though the ground be lower then the level of the Sea, yet
the tide never ouerfloweth it: but the water being kept off by the providence
of nature as by a Iettie, stays at the very brimme, and the waves of their
own accord stand still in a circle at the innermost brewes of the Sea banks:
and so through the wonderful disposition of nature, the level ground
continues still dry, though the Seas come falling downward upon it. Upon the
River Sala stands the Town of Sala. From hence by the nation of the
Autolians the way lies to the The deserts of Nu^idie
wyldernes of Atlas.

The Mountain Atlas rising out of the mids of the waste and sandy Countries,
The description of Mount Atlas* called of those Countrymen D^ris.
and growing into a circle like the half moon, lifts his head above ye
c^wdes. Where it reaches to the Ocean that is named after him, no Fountains
spring out of him, but all lies horrible wast, all is steep cliffs and Rocks
all is loath some and barraine: the ground bare, and no grass growing thereon.
But where he turns back to Afric ward, he is rich of all kind of fruits
springing of their own accord, and he is shadowed with bygh Trees, the sent
whereof is rank, and ye leaves like Cypress leaves, and they are covered with
a kind of It should seem to be Cotton. The herb Fupho^bia which some suppose
to be Eybright,
down, of no less value then silk. On that side also grows plentiously the
herb ^^phrobia, ye juice whereof cleereth the eye sight, and many ways
preserves health, and greatly expulseth the force of venims. The top of this
hill is evermore covered with snow, the launes thereof are haunted with four
footed beasts, and Serpents, wyld beasts and Olyphants together. All day long
there is no noise* but al is whist not without an horror. But in the night time
he glystreth with fires, These seem to be all one with the Fayries which
appeared to men in the time of popyshe darkness.
and rings with the noise that the Egyptians make in dancing on a ryng. There
are also heard the sound of shalmes, and playing upon Cymballs all along the
Seacoast, it is distaunt from Lyx two hundred and five miles, and Lyx is from
the straights of Marock a hundred and twelve miles: sometime it was inhabited
as the plat of the place witnesses, and thoroughly occupied, as where there
remain a few Uines and Date trees for a token. Perseus and Hercules made
themselves passage over the top of it, but no man else came ever there, as the
inscriptions of the Altars do plainly manifest. Where it looks Westward,
between it and the River Anatis by the space of four hundred, fourscore and
sixteen miles together, is nothing but woods full of wild beasts. There are
Rivers about him, not to be passed over with silence, which though they be
separated a great way one from another, yet they serve all after a sort to
do the Mount Atlas pleasure. Asaua is brackish of fast like the Sea water.
Bambothum swarmeth with Waterhorses and Crocodiles: Waterhorses and Crocod^les
and beyond them another River, which being of color black, runs through
the innermost and scorched deserts, that are broyled continually with
unmeasurable heat of the parching sun burning, hoter then any fire, and is
never wythdrawne from the heat.

Thus much of Atlas: which the Mores call Dyris, according to the instructions
of the Books of Hanno of Carthage, and of our own Chronicles, and also of Iuba
the Son of Piolome, who held the kingdom of both the Mauritanies. Suetonius
Paulinus also has finished the certainty hereof, who first (and almost only
of all the Romans) advanced his banners beyond Atlas.

CAP. XXXVII.
of Mauritanie, Called Sanguia Draconis.
and of Oliphants, and Dragons and whereof Cinnabar is made.
Diverse are the provinces of Mauritanie. The province of Tingie where it
butteth upon ye Northwest, and where it extends toward the midland Sea,
ryseth with seven Mountains which of their likeness one to another, are called
Brothers, and butt upon the Sea. Oliphants and of the natures and properties of
them.
These Mountains are full of Oliphants. This kind of beast puts me in
remembrance from the beginning to entreat of the^. Oliphants therefore,
according to man's perceiueraunce, have understanding, and excel in memory, and
observe the discipline of the stars. When the Moon shines bright, they go
in herds to the rivers and there having washed themselves with water they
^alute the sunrysing with such gestures as they can, and then return again
into the Forests. There are two kinds of them: the nobler sort are known by
their greatness, the lesser sort are called bastards.

By the whytenesse of their teeth it is known that they be young: whereof the
one is ever occupied, and the other is spared, least being made blunt with
continual chaufing, it should have no force when they have need of it in
fighting. When they be chaced in hunting, they break them both, to the intent
y^ when the Iuorie is gone, they may be pursued no further: for they understand
that that is the cause of their danger. They go together in herds. The eldest
of them leads the band, and the eldest next him follows the train. When
they pass a River, they send the smallest before, least the treading of the
greater sort should wear the channel, and make deep gutts in the Foordes.

The Females go not to make before they be ten years old, nor the Males
before they be five. Two years they give themselves to generation,
whereabouts they spend five days in each year and not above: and they return
not to the heard, before such time as they have washed themselves in running
water. They never strive for the Females: for there is no adultery known among
them. They have in them the virtue of pity. For if they happen to find a man
going astray in the wilderness, they guide him into some beaten and known
way. Or if they meet with any Herds of Cattle as they are traveling,
themselves, they make way gently and courteously with their hand, because they
would not kill any beast that meets them.

But if it so chance that they must fight, they have no small regard of them
that be wounded: for they receive the wearyed and wounded into the mids of
them. When they are taken and come into men's hands, they become tame with
drinking meshes made of Malt. When they shall pass the Seas, they will not
take shypping before it be sworn to them that they shall return. The
Oliphants of Mauritanie fear the Oliphants of Inde, and as though their
consciences grudged at their own ^malnesse, they are afraid to come in their
sight. They grow in their dams bellies, not ten years (as the common
report goes) but two years as Aristotle determines. And they never engender
but one time, nor bring forth mo then one at that once. They live three hundred
years, but in any wise they can not away with cold. They eat the bodies of
Trees, swallowe stones, and love above all things to feed of Dates. Most of
all things they shun the savor of a Mouse: and they will not eat of any
thing that Mise have touched. If any of them by chance devour a Camaeleon
(which worm is a poison to Olyphants) he remedieth the mischief by eating a
wild Olive. The hyde on their backs is very hard, and the skin on their
bellies is but soft, and they are altogether smooth without hair. Between
them and the Dragons is continual enmity, and the ambush is laid for them in
this wily sort. The Serpents lurk by ye way sides, where the Olyphants use
to go customablie: and letting ye formoste slip by, they assail the
hindermost, to the intent the first should not be able to rescue the last, and
first they wrythe their tails in knottes about their feet, that having
snarled their legs, they may stay them from going away. For the Oliphants
if they be not prevented and stayed by this winding about their fete, do lean
themselves to trees or stones, and there with enforcing themselves, tread the
Dragons to drath. The chief cause of their fighting is (as men say) for that
Olyphants have great store of blood, which is colder then the blood of other
beasts, and therefore the Dragons do vnsatiatiably desire it in the excess
of heat. Finally, they never set upon them, but when they have drunk their
bellies full, to the intent when their veins be well stuffed with moisture,
they may suck the more out of them when they have ouercom them. They seek
nothing so much as the eyes of the^, which alonelie they know may be perished:
or else the inner parts of their ears, because that part cannot be defended
with their snow^e. But when the Dragons have sucked out their blood, they
themselves are also overwhelmed with the fall of the beast: and so the blood
that is shed from them both soketh into the ground, and all the earth that is
steeped therewith, becomes a vernish to paint withal, called Cinnabar. The
first time that ever Oliphants were seen in Italy, was the fourehundred,
threescore and twelfth year after the building of Rome, when Pyrrhus king of
the Epirhots made war against the Romans: and because they were seen in
Lucanie first, they called them Oxen of Lucanie.

In the Province Caesariensis is the Town of Caesarea, peopled with Romans,
sent thither by the Emperor Claudius, heretofore the Palace of king Bocchus,
which Town afterward by the bountifulness of the Romans, was given to King
Iuba for a reward. There is also the Town Seren.
Siga, where Syphax dwelled. But we must not pass mute from It signifies the
number of twenty
Icosium. For as Hercules passed that way, twenty that forsook his company,
chose a place, and laid foundation of the walls, and because no man should
boast peculiarly of gyuing the name by himself alone, the name was given it
of the number of the builders.

CAP. XXXVIII.
Of Numidia and of the Bears therein.
How much soever is from y^ River Ampsaga, is attributed to Numidia. The
Inhabiters hereof, as long as they straied abroad in grazing like wanderers,
were called That is to say. Grazyers.
Nomades. In it are many noble Cittyes, but Cirta excels them all, and next
Culloo, comparable to Tire in dying Purple. All this Region bordereth wholly
upon the marches of Zeugitane. In such part of it as is wooddie, it nourishes
wild Beasts, where it is high ground, it breeds Horses, also it is commended
for the excellent Marble that it has. The Bears of Numidie excel all other
Bears only in fiercenes and deep hair, Of the nature and property of Bears.
for the littering of them is like in all places, wheresoever they be bred. I
will speak thereof by and by. They couple not in like sort as other four
footed beasts do: but inasmuch as they are formed apt to embracinges, they
couple together as man and woman do. Winter stirs up their desire of
generation. The Males seuering themselves for the time, do reverence the
Females when they are bagged, and although they lie all in one den, yet they
lie seuerallye by themselves in couches divided one from an other with diches.
The time of their whelping is very swift for they go not past thirty days,
whereby it comes to pass, that their ouerhastie littering makes them bring
forth deformed whelps.

The things that they bring forth are little lumps of flesh, of color white,
without eyes. And (by reason of the hasty coming forth before it be ripe) it
is nothing but a shapelesse matter, saving that it has the proportion of
nails. These they fashion by little and little with licking, and sometimes
they cherrish them by laying their warm breasts to them, to the intent that
through the heat of their continual rucking upon them, they may gather the
breath of life. All that while they fast. Surely for the first fourteen
days, the dammes fall into so heavy a sleep, that they cannot be waked with
wounds. After they have whelped, they keep home by the space of four months
together. Afterward when they go abroad into the open day, they can so ill
away with the unaccustomed light, that a man would think they were blinded.

Bears have weak heads, and their greatest strength is in their fore paws,
and in their loins, whereby it comes to pass, that sometimes they will
stand upright upon their hinder feet. They lie in wait for Beehiues,
lusting greatly for the Combs, and they snatch at nothing more greedily then
at honnie. If they taste of the Apples of Mandrake they die. Nevertheless,
they prevent the mischief before it grow too strong, and devour Ants to
recover their health. If at any time they set upon Bulls, they know upon
what parts it is best for them to catch hold: and therefore they catch at no
part, but their horns and their nostrils: their horns to the intent to weigh
them down, their nostrilles to the intent to put them to greater pain in so
tender a place. In the time that Marcus Messala was Consul, Lucius Domitius
Aenobardus being Curulis Aedilis, showed a hundred Bears of Numidie, and as
many Huntsmen of Aethiop, in y^ great Theater at Rome: and that sight was
regystred among his honorable tytles.

CAP. XXXIX.
Of Afric, of Lions, of the Hyene, of the sundry sorts of Serpents, of
precious stones, of monstrous kinds of creatures, and of other notable things
of that Country.
ALl Affricke begins at the foot of Zeugitane, facing the Island Sardinia
from the Promontorie of Apollo, and butting toward Sicill from y^ Promontorie
of Mercury.

Thus shoots it forth with two heads, whereof the one is called the white
Promontorie, and y^ other which is in the region Cyrenaica, is called Phycus.
The same being situate directly against the I Will of Crete by the Cretish Sea,
shoots into the sands toward Taenarus of Lacedemon. The Syrts (...) whashes
of Afric.
Catabathmos windeth into Egypt. The next Country whereunto (which is
Cyrenaica) lies between the two Syrts, which the shallowe and uncertain Sea
makes inaccessible.

The rising and falling of which Salt water, it is no easy matter to find: so
uncertain is the moving thereof, one while breaking into shallow shelues, and
another while ouerflowing like a spring tide. Varro affyrmeth that the ground
being there loose, is ready to be perced with every wynd, by means whereof
the sudden force of the swift blastes, does either puff out or sowpe in the
Seas. All this coast is divided from Aethiope and the borders of Asia, by the
River (...)
Nygris, which is the mother of Nilus, and from Spain by the narrow Sea. On
that side that enclyneth to the South, it is void of springs and altogether
droughtie. On the other side that lies toward the North, it is watered
abundantly, insomuch that in the Country Bizacene which is two hundred miles
over or more, the soil is so rich, that the seed there sown yields
increase of a hundred times as much fruit. That many strangers have resorted
thither to inhabit, we will show you for a proof the Cittyes and places
there. The Promontorie Boreon which is beaten upon with the Northwynde, was so
named by Greeks that came thither. The Town of Bona.
Hyppon, (which afterward was called Rhegium, and the other Hyppon called
afterward Dyarrhyton of the narowe sea running by it, two noble Towns, were
builded by Knights of Greece. The Sicilians builded the City Coros.
Clypea, and named it first Aspis, they builded Venerie also, whereunto they
trans^ferred the religion of Venus of Eryx. The Achaeans in their language gave
the name of Trypolis, because of the number of ye three Cities Taphre, Tripolie
Abrotone, and the greater Lextis.

The Philene brethren took that Greek name, of the desire of praise. The
people of Tire were founders of Adrymet and Carthage. But now will I declare
what true books have reported of Carthage. Carthage
This City (as Cato in his Oration before the Senate, affirms) was builded
at such time as Hiarbas reigned in Lybia. Elyssa a Lady of the Country
Phaenicia, who called it Carthad, which in the Phaenician tongue, is as much to
say as a new City.

Anon after as their speech turned into Punicke, both she was called Elissa
and the City Ca^thage: which was utterly rased seven hundred thirty and
seven years after it was builded. Within a while after, being repaired again
by Caius Gracchus, and peopled with Italians, it was named by him Iunonia, and
continued for a certain time without estimation, in a low and faint state. At
length after a hundred and two years respit, in the time that Marcus Antonius
and Publius Dolobella were Cons^lls, it reco^ered the honor to be called the
second Carthage, the second bea^tie of the whole world next Rome. But to the
intent to return again to * Afric, it is an Angle severally enclosed by it
self. The inner parts thereof are possessed with many kinds of wild
beasts, but specially with Lions, Of Lions, and of the noble nature and
properties of them
which alonely of y^ kind of beasts y^ men call toothed beasts, with they (as
Aristotle affyrmeth) do see as soon as they be whelped. Of them there is
reckoned three sorts. For y^ shorter sort with curled manes, are for the most
part weak and cowardly. The longer sort with smooth hair, are more fierce
and strong. But those that the Lybards begette, are of the rascallest sort, and
have no manes at all. All of them alike forbear gorging of themselves: first
for that one day they feed, and another day they drink by turns, and
oftentimes, if they have not good digestion, they forbear meat a day longer:
and secondly for that if they feel themselves grieved with ravening too much
flesh, they put their paws into their mouths, and pull it out again. And
even the like also do they when they flee, if they be to full. The falling
away of their teeth, argues age. And there be many proofs of their
pittifulnesse.

For they spare them that humble themselves before them: and show their
cruelty rather against men then women. As for sucking Children they kill them
not, unless it be for extreme hungar. Neither are they without mercy. For by
daily examples from time to time it is manifest y^ they have showed mercy
inasmuch as many prisoners meeting with some Lions by the way, have
notwithstanding returned untouched into their Countries. And in the Books of
King Iuba is recorded the name of a Woman of Getulia, who by entretaunce
escaped unhurt from y^ Lions that she met. They engender backwarde: and not
they only, but also Lynxes, Camels, Oliphants, Rhynocerots, and Tigers. The
Lyonesses at y^ first lytter bring forth five Whelps, and every year after
they diminish their number by one, and at the length when the dammes come to
bringing forth but one at once, they become barraine for ever. The look and
the tail declare the courage of the Lions, like as the stomach of a horse is
known by his ears. For nature has given these two marks to every notable
beast to be known by. Their chiefest force is in their breast, and their
chiefest stedinesse is in their heads. When they be chaced with dogs, they go
away disdainfully, and now and then staying, dissemble their force with
pretense as though they cared not whither they went away or no: and this they
do when they be followed in open and champion fields. But in woody places (as
though they thought no body were able to bear witness of their cowardlinesse)
they run away as fast as their legs can bear them. When they themselves
pur^ue any thing, they further their pace with leapping. When they go at
leisure, they hyde the hooks of their talants between the flesh of their
toes, as it were in sheathes. And this they observe so warelye, that they run
not but with their talants turned inward. When they are environed and beset
with hunters, they look steadfastly upon the ground, to the intent they will
not be made afraid with the sight of the hunting staves. They never look a
squint, neither can they abide that one should look a squint upon them. They
fear the crowing of a Cock, and the rattling of wheels, but most of all they
fear fire. The beast called Lyons-bane.
We read that there are little beasts called Lyonsbanes, which are caught and
uncased, to the intent that flesh being powdered with the ashes of them, and
cast in the paths where ways meet, may kill the Lions, if they taste never
so little thereof. And therefore Lions pursue them with a natural hatred, and
when they get them at advantage, they forbear biting of them but they tear
them all to pieces with their paws. Scaeuola the Son of Publius was the
first that made a show of them, in the time that he was Curulis Acdilis.
Afric breeds the Hyene, The Hyene, and of his wonderful nature.
which beast cannot wrythe his neck a side, unless h^e move his whole body,
because his backbone is without joints, and runs so whole through his
neck. Many wondrous things are reported of it. First that it haunteth
shepherds cotages, and by continual harkning, learneth some name, the which
he expresses by counterfeyting man's voice, to the intent to work his wrath
upon the man whom he tolleth out by his policy in y^ night time. Also he
counterfetteth the vomiting of men, and thereby alluring out the dogs with his
false sobbing, deuoureth them. Which dogs if perchance they touch his shaddowe
in hunting of him, they loose their voice, and cannot bark. The same Hyene in
seeking men's carcasses, scrapeth up their graves: and therefore it is the
easier matter to take the Males. For the Females are of nature more subtle.
There is great variety in their eyes, and chaungablenes of colors, and in the
balls of them is found a stone called Hyenie, endued with such power, The
stone ^alled Hyeuie.
y^ under what man's tongue soever it be put, he shall prophecy of things to
come. But what living thing soever a Hyene compasses in thrice about, cannot
move it self: and therefore it has been avouched for a certainty, that there
is a magical power in him. In a part of Aethyop it coupleth with a Lioness,
and between them is engendered a Monster named a Crocute. A Crocute
Which in likeness also counterfetteth the speech of man. He never stirs
the balls of his eyes, but star^th continually without twinkling.

He has no gummes at all in his mouth, but one whole and maine tooth, which is
naturally closed up as it were in Caskets, because it should not be blunted.
Among those kinds of beasts that are called Grazers, the same Afric has wyld
Asses, in which kind every Male has his heard of Females. Wyld Asses.
They cannot abide that any other should have to do where they like. And
therefore they wait very narrowly upon their Mares when they be with foale,
that (if it be possible they may byte of the genetoryes from the Colts when
they be new foaled: to the end they be not apt for generation. Whereof the
Mares being ware, hyde their young ones out of the way. Serpents
Afric swarmeth in such wise with Serpents, that it may worthelie challenge
the pre-eminence in that mischief from all the world. The Caerasts peer with
four little horns, The Cerast or Horneworme
by showing whereof (as it were with a bayse) they allure birds to them, and
devour them. For they hide the rest of their bodies for the nonce in the sand,
discovering no part of themselves saving that only part wherewith they entice
the birds deceitfully to feeding, The Amphisbene or double^eade.
when they lie in wait to kill them for their labor. The Amphisbene rises with
two heads whereof one is in his accustomed place, and the other where his tail
should be. Whereupon it comes to pass, that with both heads forward at once
he creeps in a roundell. The Darter.
The Darters clymbe up upon trees, from whence whirling themselves with as
much violence as may be, they peerce through what beast soever happens to
come within their dint. The Scytale.
The Scytale has such a glystering and speckled hide, that the beauty of the
spots stay such as behold it, by means whereof, he catches them as they
stand gazing and wondering, whom he cannot overtake by his slownes in creeping.
Notwithstanding, as beautiful as his scales be, he is the first that casts
his winter coat. Red Adders
There are many and sundry kinds of read Adders, but they have diverse effects
in hurting. A Thirstworme.
The Dipsas kills with thirst The Hypuale kills with sleep, A Sleepeworme,
and Cl^opatra may bear witness, that it is bought to kill folk. The poisons
of others, forasmuch as they be curable deserve less fame. The Hemorrhoyd
byteth till it bleedes, The bloodworm
and thereby breaking the intercourse of the veins, draws out the life with
bleeding. The Prester
Whomsoever the Prester stingeth he is bloune, and being puffed up to
unmeasurable hugeness dies with swelling. Immediately upon the stinging of
the Seps ensues rotting. The rotworme.
There are also, A sandcreeper
Ammodits, A Leaperworme.
Cheuchries, A watersnake
Olyphantyes, The Earthdragon,
Chersydres, and * Chamedraconts. And finally as many sundry names as there
be, so many sundry deaths there are.

For Scorpions, Scinks and Lucerts, are accounted among unhurtful worms, and
not among serpents. These Monsters, if they drink, do sting the gentlier.
They have affections, for lightly they go not but by couples. If the one be
caught or killed, the other that scapeth runs mad. The heads of the
Females are finer, their bellyes rownder, and their venime more hurtful.

The Male is a like round in all places, and higher also, and more meek. All
Serpents are dull sighted They seldom look right before them: and not without
a cause, forasmuch as their eyes stand not in their foreheads, but in their
temples, so as they are lighter of hearing, then of seeing any thing. As
concerning the precious stone called Helitrope, The stone Helytrope or Turn
stone.
there has been contention between Aethyop, Afric, and Cyprus, which of
them should yield the excellentest of that kind: and it is found by mani^
trayals, that the stone of Aethiop or of Libie has y^ prerogative. It is of a
green color not altogether very fresh, but somewhat more clowdie and deep,
powdered above with spots of scarlett. The st^ne takes his name of his
operation and power. Being cast into a brass pan, it alters ye color of
the Sun beams, making them to have a bloody reflection: and it casts the
glymering brightness of the air out of the water, and turns it aside.
Moreover it is reported to have this virtue, y^ being mingled with the herb
of the same name, and consecrated before with the accustomable enchantme^ts, it
makes the bearer thereof to go invisible. They that travel the Syrts, The
alteration of the land like to the tides of the Sea.
though their journey lie by land, yet must they direct their course by the
stars, otherwise they shall never come to the place appointed. For ye ground
is so rotten, that the air alters the upper part thereof, and if there whiske
never so small a wynd, ye blaste thereof makes such an alteration, that it
leaves no token whereby to know a man's way. For it evermore turns vpside
down, the plats of the places in such wise, that those which were even now
full of high hills, sinck into valleys: and those that even now were valleys,
are heaped up with sand like hyls. And the maine land bears the nature of
the sea that beats upon it. Neither makes it any matter where storms rather
be, seeing that the elements conspyre the destruction of travelers, The Syrts
or Wha^hes.
so as the wynd rages upon the land, and the land as the sea. The two Sy^ts
are separated two hundred and fifty miles a sunder: the less of them is
somewhat calmer. We read that in the time that Cneus Seruilius, and Caius
Sempronius were Consuls, Meninx
the Roman fleet passed harmles between these shallowes. In this Coast is
the I Will Meninx, where Caius Marius hid himself after he came out of the Fennes
of Minturue. The Psylls
Beyond the Garamants were the Psylls, forti^^ed with a wonderful strength of
body against hurtful poison. They only dyed not of the biting of Snakes: and
although they were stunge with their deadly tongues, yet they continued in
vnappayred health. Yea they laid their new borne babes to Serpents, and if
they were misbegotten, the adultery of the Mothers was punished with the
destruction of y^ Children. But if they were right begotten, the privilege of
their fathers blood saved the innocent babes from death. Thus they put the
assurance of their issue to the trial of poison. But the Nasamons conquered
this country, and destroyed it, insomuch that now^ the Psylls have left nothing
whereby to be remembered, The Nasamones
saving only their bare name. The Nasamones yield a stone which is called a
Nasamonite, altogether blood shaddowed with black veins. In the innermost
part of the bigger Syrt, The Loteaters.
about the Philenes Altars, (as we learn) inhabited the Loteaters, and it is
so indeed. Not far from the Philenes Alters, is a Lake whereinto y^ River
Tr^ton runs, where men have believed that Minerua.
the Goddess of arts was first seen* The greater Syrt ^aunteth of a City
called Cyrene, Cyrene.
which Battus the Lacedemonian builded. the five and fortith Olimpyade, when
^ncus Marcius reigned over y^ Romans, the five hundred, ^ours^ore and six
year after she destruction of (...) the which Cyrene was the natyue Country
and dwelling place of Callimachus the Poet. Between this Town and the Temple
of Ammon, are fourehundred miles, hard by the Temple is a Fountain
consecrated to the Sun, which with the moisture of his water byndeth the
ground, and hardneth ashes also into a clod, wherein (not without wonder) the
place glistreth round about none otherwise then if it were the green fields.
There is also gathered the stone called Ammons horn. Ammons horn.
For it is so warpped and crooked, that it is shaped like a Rams horn. It is
as bright as gold. Being laid under a man's head when he sleeps, it is
said to represent unto him heavenly dreams. Ammoniacke.
Also there is a Tree called Metops out of which flows a clammy gum, which
of the place it comes fro, we call Ammoniack. Furthermore among the
Cyrenenses grows Syrpe ye roots whereof have a pleasant flauor, Syrpe.
and it is more like a shrubbie herb then a fruit Tree. Out of the stalk
thereof, yssueth in the summer time a fat dew, which cleaves to the beards
of Goats that feed thereon, and when it is there thoroughly dried, it is
gathered in dropps like Isickes to serve upon Tables, or rather to serve for
medicine.

It was first called the milk of Syrpe, because it ^zeth in the manner of
Milk. Afterward (custom drawing it thereunto,) it was named Laser. This Herb
was afterward almost utterly dygged up by the Inhabiters of the Country,
by reason of the intolerable burth^n of trybute that was laid upon them, when
their Country was wasted at the first invasion of strange nations.

On the left hand of Cyrene is This is Afric the less, where Carthage
stood.
Afric, on the right side Egypt, on the foreside the rough and harborowlesse
sea, on the backpart diverse barbarous nations, and a wilderness not to be come
unto, uninhabited and forlorn which breeds the Cockatrice, such a singular
mischief as is not in all the whole world beside. The Cockatrice and of his
horrible nature.
It is a serpent almost half a foot long, white, with, as it were a little
myter, proportioned in lines on his head. He is given to the utter
destruction not only of man and beast, or whatsoever has life* but also even
of the earth it self, which he stayneth and burns up, and seareth away,
wheresoever he has his deadly den. To be short, he destroys herbs,
kylleth Trees, and infecteth the very air: insomuch that no byrd is able to
fly over the place which he has in fected with his pestilent breath. When he
moves himself, he creeps with his one half, and with the other half
auaunceth himself aloft. All other Serpents are horiblie afraid to hear his
hyssing: and as soon as they hear him, they flee every one with as much
haste as they can, every one his way. Whatsoever is killed of his, biting, no
wild beast will feed of it, no foul will touch it And yet for all this,
God has provided a remedy for every mischief.
he is overcome of Weasels, which men bring thither, and send them into the
dens, where he lurketh. Notwithstanding, he wants not power even when he is
dead. The Citizens of ^ergamus gave a full * Sestertium for the carcass of a
Co^katrice, Five pound sterling.
and hanged it up in a net of gold in the Temple of Apollo, which was
notable for the great workmanshypp thereof: to the intent that neither Spyders
should spynne there, nor byrds fly in there About the uttermost nooke of the
Syrts, there runs by the Cittye Berenice the River Lethon, The River Lethon.
which (as is supposed) issues from the springes of hell, and is renowned
among the ancient Poets for his forgetful waters. Berenice.


The foresaid City was builded and fortified in the great Syrte by Berenice
that was married to the third P^olomie. All the large contry that lies between
Egypt Aethyope, and Lybia, as far as there is any woods to cast shaddowe, is
replenished with sundry kinds of Apes: and I would not that any man should be
grieved at the mistaking of the name. For surely it is not expedient to omit
any thing, wherein the providence of nature is to be seen. Apes.
Among these is the common sort of Apes which we see every where, not without
great aptness to counter^et, by means where of they are the easier taken. For
while they desirouslie practice the gestures of Hunters, who for the nonce
leave byrdlime to noynt them withal, they dawbe up their eyes as they had
seen them pretend to do before, and so when their sight is stopped up,
they are easy to be caught.

They make merry at the new of the Moon, and they become sad when she is
in the wane. They love their young ones out of all measure in so much as they
easiler loose the whelps that they are most chare over and carry in their
arms, because those that are not set by, do ever follow their dam hard at her
breech. The Moonkyes have tails: Monkyes Dogheads
and this is the only difference between them and the Apes. The Dogheads are
also of the number of Apes, most plenteous in the parts of Aethyop, sprightish
in leaping, cruel in biting, never so tamed, but that they be more rather wyld.

Among Apes are also accounted the Sphinxes, Sphinxes
shacke hayred, side and deep dugged, apt to be taught to forget their
wyldnesse. Satyrs.
There are also that men call Satyrs, very sweetefaced, and full of mopping
and toying continually. The fairhayres.
The Callytriches are almost altogether unlike the other. On their face is a
bearde, and on their rumpe a broad tail. To catch these is no hard matter,
but so bring them out of the Country is a rare thing. For they live not but in
the soil of Acthiop, that is to say in their own soil.

CAP. XL.
Of the nation of the Hammanients, and of the houses therein builded of salt.
BEtween the Nasamonits and the Troglodits, Cauecreepers
is the nation of the Hammanients, which build their houses of Salt, which they
heawe out of ye Mountains in manner of stone, and lay it with mortar. Such is
the abundance of this vain, that they make them houses of Saltstones. These
are the Hammanients which have intercourse of Merchandise with the Troglodits.
Carbuncles
The precious stones called Carbuncles are on this side the Hammanients, The
Asbysts
more nearer the Nasamones. The Asbysts live by Laser. This is their
nourishment, and this is their ^oode.

CAP. XLI,
Of the Garaments, and of a wonderful fountain among them.
Among the Garamants is the Town Debris, A wonderful Fountain,
with a wonderful Fountain in it, which by turns is ^old a day times and
hot a night times, one while seething like water on the fire, and another
while becoming as cold as Ise, both contrarieties proceeding out of y^ self
same veins. It is a marvelous thing to be spoken of, y^ in so short a time,
nature should so strangly disagree with her self, that whosoever tried her
doings in the dark, would think there were a continual fire in the spring: and
he that felt it in the day, would believe it were none other thing then a
winters Water continually frozen. By means whereof (not with out good cause)
Debris is famous among those nations, for that the waters change their
property according to the moving of the heaven, though after a manner clean
con^rarie to the disposition of the Planets. For whereas the euentide asswageth
the heat of the world: this spring begins to heat in such wise at the
Sun going down, that if ye touch it, ye shall find it scalding. Again,
when the Sun is risen above the ground, and all things are chauffed with his
rays, the water thereof is so exceeding cold, that no man is able to drink
it, be he never so thirsty. Who then would not wonder at a Fountain y^
becomes cold through heat, The Garamants.
and hot through cold? The head of the Garamant Regyon is Garaman* whereunto
for a long while the way was very combersome, and not able to be passed. For
the thieves covered the pyts with sand, so the intent that withdrawing ye
waters deceitfully for a time, no man might be able to travel to them for
famine and thirst. But in the reign of Vespasian, in the war that was
against the Oyans, this distress was taken away, by finding a nerer passage.
Cornelius Balbus was the first that subdued the Garamants, and for his victory
first tryumphed over them Surely he was the first of (...) (for (...) was
borne in one of the Islands Gades) that attained the honor of a tryumphant
conqueror. Strange Cattle.
The great cattle of this Countr^y feed with their necks awry, for if they
should graze with their heads right forward, their horns bowing down, with
the tynes into the ground, The Island Gaulos.
would hinder their feeding. On the same part that Cercina lies, the report
goes that there is an I Will called Gaulos, wherein breeds no serpent, neither
lives any yt is brought in thither. And therefore the dust thereof being
strewed in any place of the world, keeps away Snakes: and being cast upon
Scorpions, it kills them out of hand.

CAP. XLII.
Of Aethyop: of the filthy fashions of the people of that Country, and of
their monstrous shapes: of the Dragons, and other wild beasts of wonderful
nature there: of the spyce Cinnomom, and of the Iacint stone.
THe Aethiopians, and the Nations that inhabit the Countries bounding upon the
Mountain Atlas, are parted a sunder with the River Senega.
Nigris, which is thought to be part of Nyle.

It is so green with Rushes whereof paper is made it is so clad with Reed, it
brings forth y^ same kind of living things, it flows over at y^ same
times, and returns again with his banks even then when Nilus is content with
his own channel. The beastly manners of the Garmants of Aethyope.
The Garamants of Aethyop know no several marriage, but use their women in
common, who that list. Thereon it comes that the Children acknowledge only
their mothers. For the name of Father has no reverence at all among them. For
who is able to know his Father, where such incestous lechery runs at
large. Therefore are the Garamants of Aethyop counted a bastard people among all
nations: and not without cause, considering how they have infringed the
discipline of chastity, The Aethiopians
and by a wicked custom destroyed the knowledge of their succession. The name
of Aethiopians extends large.

On Afric side, where Lybie faceth the Island Meroe, there be many and sundry
nations of them. Of the number of them the Nomades The Nomads
live by the mylk of the Dogheades. The Syrbots The Syrbots,
are lazy things of a 12. foot long. The Asaches The Asaches
take Oliphants in hunting, and devour them. Among the Sambres The Sambres.
no fourfooted beast has ears, no not so much as the Olyphants. Their next
neighbors, make a Dog their King: by whose gesture they diuineg what he
co^mayndeth them to do. The Aethiopyans on the Sea coast are reported to have
four eyes a piece, but the truth is otherwise, namely that they are very
sharp s^ghted, and aim the throwing of their darts most certainly. The
Agriophages or wyldeaters,
Toward the West dwell the Agriophags which feed only on the flesh of Lybards
and Lions, and have a King that has but one eye, which stands in his forhead.
The Pamphags or eateals Meneaters or Cannibals Bytch ^ylkers
There are also Pamphags who feed of al things that may be chewed, and all
things that grow vnse^t. There be also Anthropophages, whose name expresses
their conditions. They say that the Cynamolgies have chaps like Dogs, and long
snowts. The Arthabathits, go groueling like four footed beas^es, Arthabathits.
and wander abroad without dwelling place, as beasts do. The borderers upon
Mauritanie gather Loeusts, in time of year, and powdring them, do lay them up
as their only food to live by: But none of them lives above forty years.
From this Ocean unto Guagu^ra.
Meroe (which is an Island that Nyle makes where be first parts and meets
again) are six hundred and twenty miles. Beyond Meroe toward the Sun
rising, are the The Macrobians or long lived and their manners.
Macrobian Aethyopians. For their life is longer then ours by the one half.
These Macrobians, execute Justice, love upright dealing, excel in strength,
are very comely and beautiful of personage, are decked with brass, and make
gives of gold for offenders. There is among them a place called The Suns
Table.
Heliutrapaeza continually furnished with dainti^ fare, whereof all men eat
without difference, for they uphold that they are increased by the power of
God. There is also in the same place a Lake, wherewith the bodies that are
washed, shine as if they were anoin^ed with Oil. This Lake is most wholesome
to drink. A strange Lake
Surely it is so sheere, that it will not bear the leaves fallen from the Trees,
but lets them sink down to the bottom, by reason of the thinnes of the
liquor. Beyond these lie desert and uninhabited wildernesses, Monstrous Nations,
even unto the coast of Arabie. And then in the furthest part of all the East,
are nations of Monstrous shape, some having ill favored visages, altogether
plain without noses: and othersome having their mouths grown together saving
only a little hole to put in an Oaten Reed, whereat they draw in their
sustenaunce. Some have no tongues: but use becknings and gestures in stedde of
speech. Certain of these nations never kn^we the use of fire, before the
(...) of (...) Lathyrus King of Egypt. Aethyop contains all y^ is from the
South east, to the South west. As much of it as is under y^ South coast, is
garnished with thick woods, which are greenest in winter. On the South part
there hangs into the Sea a high Hall* continually hot with gentle fire, and
burning on the top with restless flames, among which continual (...)*
fires, there is great store of Dragons. Furthermore, Dragons.
the true Dragons have small mouths, and not ga^ing wide to byte with, but of a
narrow conduit, by which they draw breath, and spirt out their tongues. For
their force lies not in their teeth, but in their tails, and they hurt with
beating, rather then with ^yting. The stone called Draconce
There is cut out of the Dragons ^raynes a Stone called Dracon^^, but it is not
a stone unless it be taken from them while they are alive. For it the Serpent
die before, the hardness resolves and vanishes away with his life. The
Kings of the East do chiefly v^unt themselves of the wearing thereof,
although it be so hard, that no man can devise to imprint or engraue any thing
in it: and whatsoever is beautiful in it, is not made by man's hand, because
there should none other color stayne the pure natural whiteness thereof. An
Author named Soth^^us, says that he has see^e this Jewel, and declares by
what means it is come by. Men of excellent courage and audacitie search out by
holes where the Serpents lie, and also their haunts. Then watching ^yll they
come forth to feed, and passing by them with as much apeede as they can, they
cast them herbs steeped in things that have as much force as may be so
provoke sleep. So when they be fast a steep, they cut the stones out of
their heads, and getting the booty of their heady enterprise, enjoy the^reward
of their rashness. The places which the Aethyopians possess, is full of wyld
Beasts, whereof one is the Nabis which we call a Cameloparda^is. The Nabis.
It is necked like a horse, footed like an Ox, headed like a Camel; and of a
bright ^ay color powdered with white spots. This beast was showed first in
Rome at the gamings that Caesar the Dictator made in the Lysts. Almost about ye
same time also were brought from thence monsters called Celphies, Celphies.
whose hinder feet from the ancle up to the top of the calfe, where like a
man's leg, and likewise his forefeete resembled a man's hand: notwithstanding,
these were never seen of the Romans but once. The Hornynose.
Before the shows of Cneus Pompeius: the Romans had never seen the
Rhynoceros openly. This ^east is of a pa^e ru^^et color: in his nose is a
horn that boweth upward: the which he makes sharp poi^ted like a bo^kyn, by
whetting it upon stones, and ^ighteth with it against the Olyphants, being
almost full as long as they, but some what shorter legged, and with this his
natural weapon he pusheth at their bell yes, The Catoblepe
as the only part which he (...) may be perced with (...). By the River
Nigris breeds the Catoblepe, a little s^uggish beast, with a great heavy
ioll, and a venomous sight For they that happen to come in his sight die.
Wonderful Ants.
There be Ants as big as a Mastiffe, that have talents like Lions, wherewyth
they scrape up sand of gold, which they (...) that no man may fetch it away,
and if any man (...), they pursue them ^o death. The Lycaon
The same Aethiop breeds y^ Lycaon, which is a woolfe with a mane on his
neck, and so pied, y^ men say there is no color, but he has part of it. It
breeds also y^ Tarand, of the bigness of an Ox, cloven footed, with tined
horns, headed like a stag, colored like a Bear, The Tarrand^
and shacke hayred. It is said y^ this Tarand changes his complexion for
fear, and y^ when he hides himself, he becomes like unto the thing y^ he is
next unto, whither it be a quarrie of white stone, or a grove of green trees,
or what thing soever it be, of any other likeness.

The same thing also does the Fyshe Polypus in the Sea, The Fish Polipus.
and the Land lions
Chameleons on the land. But the Polypus and the Chameleon have a sheere
skin, and therefore it is the easier for them to resemble things next unto
them, because of their thin smug skynnes, which are like glass. But it is a
strange and singular case, that harsh hair should alter color, hereby it
comes to pass, that they are hardly taken. The Woolues of Aethiop.
It is a peculiar property to the Wolves of Aethyop, to be as nimble in
leaping, as a bird, so as they rid not more ground by running, then by
going, but yet they never assault a man. In Winter time they are hayrie, and in
Sommertime naked. Men call them Thoes.

The Porkpine also is very ryfe in those Countries a beast like a Hedghog, The
Porkpyne
with a hyde full of rough brystles, which he oftentimes looseneth of his own
accord, and darteth them forth so thick as it were a shower of pricks, The
bird Pegasus.
and therewyth wounds the Dogs that pursue him. Of that coast is the bird
Pegasus: but this bird has nothing of a horse but his ears. So is also the
Tragop, a bird bigger then an Egle, vaunting himself with an armed head, The
Tragop or Goteface.
besett with horns like a Rams horns. Of Cynnamom
The Aethiopyans gather Cynnamom. This shrub grows on a short stalk, with
low and flat boughs, never above two cubits high. That which grows
slenderest is counted the excellentest: and that that swells into thicknes,
is nothing set by. But it is gathered by the priests, who make sacrifice
before. Which done, they take good heed that they begin not their harvest
before the Sun rise, nor continue it after the Sun set. He that is
Primate among them, deuideth the heaps of sticks with a spear, which is
consecrated to y^ same use. And so a portion of the faggots is dedicated to the
Sun, which if it be rightly divided, takes fire alone. Among these things
that we have treated of, is found the Iacin^, in color a bright azure, The
Iacin^.
a precious stone, if it may be found faultlesse: for it is not a little
subject to faultines. For diverse times it is either vernished with a violet
color, or darkened with a mistynesse, or wanzing into a watery sheerenesse, the
best fashion of it is, if it be not dimmed with two deep a die nor over lighth
with too pure a sheerenesse, but have a sweet orient color of lightsomenesse
and purple equally mixed together. This is he that feels y^ air, and
alters with it: insomuch as it is not a like bright when the wether is
clowdy, as when it is fair. Moreover, being put into ones mouth, it becomes
colder. And for ingrauing it is nothing meet, because it will abide no
cha^ing, yet is it not altogether invincible: for with a Diamonde a man may
write in it, Crysolamp.
and draw what he list in it. Where as is the Iacint, there is also the
Chrysolamp, which stone the light hydeth, The Haemati^e or bloodstone
and the dark discovers. For this diversity is in him that in the night he
is fiery, and in the day he is pale. Out of that soil also we take the
Haematite, a stone as red as blood, and therefore called the Haematite.

CAP. XLIII.
VVonderfull things of the nations of Lybia, and of the stone called
Hexacontaly those.
Whatsoever lies between Mount Atlas and the mouth of Nile called Canopitane,
which bears the name of Canopus the Master of Menelau^ ship who was buried in
that Island, which lies against the said mouth of Nyle, where Libie ends,
and Egypt begins, is inhabited by nations of sundry languages, which are
withdrawn into waylesse wildernesses. The Athlantians
Of these the Athlantians are altogether void of manners meet for men. None
has any proper calling, none has any special name. They curse the Sun at
his rising, and curse him likewise at his going down: and because they are
scorched with the heat of his burning beams, they hate the God of light. It
is affirmed that they dream not, and that they utterly abstain from all
things bearing life. The Troglodits dig them caves under the ground, The
Troglodites or Cauecreepers.
and house themselves in them. There is no covetousness of getting, for they
have bound themselves from riches, by wilful poverty. The stone called the
threescore stone, or the Sixtistone.
Only they glory in one stone which is called Hexacontalythos so powdered with
diverse sparks, yt the colors of threescore sundry stones are perceived in his
little compass. All these live by the flesh of Serpents, and being ignorant
of speech, The Augyles.
do rather iabber and gnarre then speak. The Augyles worship none but the
devils. The first night that they are married, they compel their wives to have
to do with as many as will come: and from that time forward, they bind them by
most straight laws to continual chastity. The Gamphasants abstain from
wars, The Gamphasants.
eschew intercourse of merchandise, and will not abide to intermedle with any
stranger. It is thought that ye Blemmyes (but not those Blemmyes that dwell by
the Red sea) are borne headless, The Blemmyes
and that they have their mouth and eyes in their breast. The Satyrs or
Woodwards. The Goatefeete The crookelegs
The Satyrs have no resemblance of man saving only shape. The Egypanes are
the very same that we see them painted. The Hymamtopodes having ye joints of
their legs bowed, do rather creep then go, and in walking use rather to
slide then to step.

The Pharusians having brought Hercules on the way as he was going toward the
Hesperids, The Pharusian^
were so weary of the journey, that they tarried there. And thus much of Lybie.

CAP. XLIIII.
Of Egypt, of the head, increase, and mouths of Nile, of the Ox Apis: of the
Crocodiles: of the bird Trochyle: of the Skinks, waterhorses, and the bird
Ibis, of the wonderful trees of Egypt, of Alexandria, and of Pyramyds or
Broches.
EGypt runs to the South inward, until it meet with the Aethiopyans. Of
Nyle.
Behind it flows Nile about the lower part thereof. The which River being
divided at the place that is named Delta, embraces a piece of ground within it
like an I Will, and it is almost unknown where the head is from whence it
comes, as we shall declare. It has his beginning from a Mountain of the
lower Mauritanie, that is n^ere the Ocean. Thus affirm the Punick books, and
so reported King Iuba as I understand. By and by therefore it makes a Lake
which they call Nilides.

And it is coniectured that Nile comes from thence. because this Poole
brings forth the same kinds of herbs, fishes, and beasts that we see in
Nyle, and that if Mauritanie from whence it has his original, happen to be
watered either with over deep snow, or rage of rain, the flood in Egypt is
thereby increased: But the Nyle when he runs out of his Lake is sucked into
the sands, and hydden in the loose moulde of the earth* and afterward,
bursting forth in the Cave of Caesarea, larger then he was before, brings
the same tokens with him which we noted in him at his first spring.

Afterward he sinketh down again, and venteth not above the ground, till
after a long weary journey, he come to the Aethyopians. Where it ryseth up
again, it makes the Ryu^r Nygris which we told you before bounded the borders
of Afric. The Inhabiters there call it Astapus, which is as much to say, as a
water flowing out of darkness. It inuironeth many and great Isles, whereof some
are of so large and huge bigness, that a man can scarce lakey through them in
five days, Now called Guaguera.
run he as fast as he can. The noblest of them is * Meroe, about which, the
River being divided, is named on the right Channel Astusapes, and on the left
Astabores. Then also traveling through great Countries a long journey, as
soon as ye Rocks meeting him by the way make him rough, he caryeth his waters
with such violence through the cragged cliffs, that he may seem to fall rather
then to flow, and at lenght when he has passed the last leap (for so the
Egyptians call certain straights of his) there is no danger in him. Then
leaving the name of Syris behind him, he runs from thenceforth plain
without any stop. Lastly he is divided into seven channels: and so turning
toward the North, is received into the Sea of Egypt.

Such as are ignorant of Astronomy and Cosmographie, Conjectures of the
increase of Nyle.
have aledged many causes of his increase. Some affirm that the East wyndes
called Etesiae, do drive great store of clouds to the place where the River
springs, and that the spring rising by the moisture coming from above,
afoordeth so much water to the flowing of the River as the clouds have let fall
moisture to the feeding of the spring. Othersome report, that being driven
back by the violence of wyndes, when he cannot utter his waves, which keep
their accustomed swiftness, the water being pent in the straight ouerfloweth
his banckes, and the more the blasts of the contrary wynds resist, so much the
higher does the swift River (being beaten back) mount aloft, because that
neither the accustomed course can empty the channel, and yet the weight of the
stream comes on still from the head of the spring upon the River which is
dammed up: And that thus by the agreeable violence of the Element on the
oneside stryuing forward, and on the otherside beating backward, the waves
swell, and gather into a heap, whereby is made the floodde.

Diverse hold opinion, that this spring which is called Phiala, is raised by the
influence of the stars, and that being haled out by the Sun beams, it is
heaued up by the celestial fire, but not without a sure and orderly custom,
that is to say, at the new of the Moon, howbeit that the Sun is the very
ground of his excess. For the first rising and swelling thereof begins
when the Sun moves through y^ sign of Cancer: and afterward, when the
thir^y parts thereof are run out, so as the Sun is entered into Leo, and
the star called Sirius ryseth: then the River flushing forth with so great a
violence, breaks over his bancks: which time the Priests judged to be the
birth day of the world, that is to weete between the The nineteenth day of
July.
thirteenth of the Calends of August, and the eleventh day of August, and that
afterward all the excess is called back again, when the Sun passes into
Virgo, and is driven clean again within his banks, when the Sun is entered
into Libra. They add this moreover, that he hurts both ways, whether he
swell too high or too low, forasmuch as his scantnes brings small store of
increase, and his over great abundance hinders the tyllage by to long
continuance of moistnes. They say that his greatest excess rises to eighteen
cubits, and his measurablest to sixteen: and y^ at fifteen wants no store
of fruit. But if it be under, it causes derth. They attribute also this
majesty unto him, that he should foreshewe things to come: grounding their
argument heerevppon, that at y^ battle of Pharsalie, it exceeded not five
fathom. This is most certain, that he only of all Rivers breaths forth no
airs. It begins to appertain to the Realm of Egypt from Syene, wherein is
ye uttermost bound of Aethyop, and so from thence until it fall into the Sea,
it keeps the name of Nyle. Among all the things that Egypt has woorthye to
be spoken of, they make a wonder specially of the Ox which they call Apis.

Him they worship as a God, Apis the God of Egypt.
and he is notable for the white specke which grows naturally on his right
side, representing the likeness of the horned Moon. The time is appointed
how long he shall live, which being expyred, he is drowned in the bottom
of a holy Well, because he should not live any longer then is lawful for
him. By and by not without solemn mourning of all the whole Realm another is
sought.

As Soon as he is found, a hundred Priests wait upon him to Memphis, to the
intent that taking orders there, he may begin to become holy. The Temples into
which he enters or where he rests, they misticallie name bryde Chambers.
He gives manifest foretokens of things to come: See how the devil can delude
Idolaters by false Miracles.
and that inespecially if he take meat of their hands that come to ask
counsel. By refusing Germanicus^ Caesar's hand, he bewrayed that which hung
over his head, for it was not long after, but Caesar was dispatched of his
life. The boys follow flocking after Apis, and suddenly, as though they were
moved with some spirit, they tell of things to come. Once in a year a Cow is
showed him, and she also is not without certain marks, the which is killed
the same day that she is found, as soon as she has been showed to him. The
people of Memphis solemnize the birth day of Apis, by casting a cup of gold
into Nyle. This solemnity is held seven days together, during which time
the Crocodyles keep as it were a truce with the Priests, and touch them not
in their washings. But the eight day, when the Ceremonies are now finished,
(as though open war were proclaimed again) they take to the^ their former
cruelty. Of Crocodyle^
The Crocodile a fourefooted myschiefe, has force both upon land and water
alike. He has no tongue, and he moves y^ upper Iaw. Where he byteth he
takes horrible fast hold, his teeth shutting Checquer wise one within
another. For the most part he grows to the bigness of twenty fathoms, and they
lay Eggs like Geece Eggs. He chooses a place to build his neste in, where the
water of Nyle cannot come when it is at the fullest. In cheryshing up their
young, the Male and Female keep their turns. Beside his wide chappes, he is
also armed with outrageous long talants. A nights he keeps in y^ waters, and
a days he rests upon the land.

He is clad in a marvelous strong hyde, in so much as a piece of artillarie
shot at him out of any engine reboundeth back again from his skin. There
is a little pretty bird called Trochylos, The bird called Trochylos.
which in seeking to feed upon the flesh that sticks in the Crocodyles
teeth, does by little and little scrape his mouth, and so delyghting him
easily with his soft tyckling, makes him gape, that he may stand between
his chappes. The beast called the Enhydre.
Which thing the Enhydre (which is a kind of water Ratte) perceiving, whyppeth
into the beasts belly, and eats up his inwardes, and then grating through his
paunche comes out again. There is also a kind of Dolphins in Nyle, The
Dolphins of Nyle.
that have finnes like sawes upon their backs. These Dolphins egg forth the
Crocodiles for the nonce to swymme, and then diuing subtillie, they poppe up
under them, and cutting their bellies kill them. Moreover in a certain Island
of Nyle, there dwell men of a very low stature, but of such a boldness, that
they offer to meet y^ Crocodyles, for these Monsters pursue them that flee
from them, and flee from them that follow them. Therefore are they caught, and
being made tame become slaves in their own waters, and when they be
throughlye brought in awe, they are so obedient for fear, that for getting
their wildness, they carry their Masters ryding on their backs. As soon
therefore as they escrye this Island or this nation by the smell, they flee far
of. In the water they are dull of sight, and on the land most sharp sighted.
All the Winter long they eat no meat: but from the beginning of the short
days, they continue fasting by the space of four Months together. There is
also about Nile great store of Skinks which are like Crocodiles, Skinks
but of a lesser making, and shorter, howbeit they are very necessary for the
preservation of health. For Physicions make drinks of them to ease the numnes
of sinews, and kill the force of poison. In the same River, and in the same
soil, breeds the Water horse, like a Horse in back, mane, and neying: with a
snoute turning upward, The Waterhorse
cloven clees, tushes like a Boar, and a writhed tail. He eats up the
Corn in the night, whereunto of a subtlety he goes backwarde, that by the
deceitful print of his foot, he may not be laid for in his way homeward.

The same beast, when he is ouerfull with feeding gettes him to the Reeds that
are new cut down, and trots so long up and down upon them, until the
sharp stumppes have so wounded his feet, that with bleeding he may abate the
burden of his bellye. Afterward he stops the wound with clay, until it
grow to a dry scarre. Marcus Scaurus was y^ first that brought Water horses
and Crocodiles to Rome. About the same banks is a Bird called Ibis, The bird
Ibi^
which makes havoc of Serpents Eggs, and carries them as a most delectable
meat to her young ones in her nest: by means whereof the increase of hurtful
things is diminished. Neither do these birds good within y^ coast of Egypt
only. For whereas swarms of winged Snakes come out of the Fennes of Arabi^
whose poison is so swift of operation, that men dye of their stinging before
they feel any pain, the birds being moved with a certain foresight
(wherewith they are endued for the same purpose) go altogether in array, and
before the said foreign mischief can waste the bounds of their own
Country, they meet the pestilent flocks in the air, and there devour all the
whole host of them. For which deserte they are counted holy, and no man may
hurt them. They lay their Eggs at their mouth. Only Pelusium breeds them
black, the rest of Egypt breeds them white. Of the trees which only Egypt
bears, y^ chief is the Fig tree of Egypt, which has leaves like a
Mulberrie Tree, The Fygtree of Egypt.
and bears fruit not only on the boughs, but also on the body of the Tree.
It is so ^o^^teous in fruitfulness, that in one year it bears seven times.
Wheresoever ye pull of one Fyg, by and by buddeth up another. The wood
thereof being put into the water sinketh down to the bottom: and afterward,
when it has lain long soking in the water, as though it were made lighter, it
ryseth up and fleeteth upon the brym: and clean contrary to the nature of
all other woods, moistnes makes it dry. The Date tree of Egypt, The Date Tree
of Egypt. Thirstlesse,
is also a thing worthy to be spoken of, properly it is called Adipsos, and so
it ought to be called: for being tasted it puts away thirste. The savor
thereof is like a Quince: but it stauncheth not thirst, unless it be gathered
somewhat before it be ripe. For if it be taken full ripe, it perishes the
memory, takes away ones going, makes ones tongue trippe, and weakening the
powers both of the mind and of the body, cou^terfetteth the vice of
drunkenness. A strange finding of the beginning of the year.
The Marches of Egypt where it ryseth in height toward the uppermost point of
Kakecaumen, are inhabited by a people, which find out the moment wherein the
year begins first his ordinary course by this device. There is chosen a
holy grove, whereinto they drive beasts of all kinds. These beasts, at such
time as the motion of heaven is come about to his determinate point, express
their understandings by such outward signs and tokens as they are able. Some
howl, some low, some roar, some bray, and diverse run together into the
mire, and their wallowe.

This experiment is a rule to them, whereby to find out the beginning of the
time. The same people report also, that it has been left unto them for a
certainty by the first founders of their Nation, that the Sun rising was
there, whereas is now the going down. Thebae of Egypt
Among the Cities of Egypt, Thebe is notable for the number of Gates, unto
which City the Arabians bring merchandise from all parts of the world.
Hereof the Country Thebaica takes his name. Abydos in Egypt.
Abydos also sometime renowned with the Palace of Memnon, and now beautified
with the Temple of Osyris. Both the hugeness of the work itself, and the King
of Macedonie the founder thereof, do ^nnoble Alexandria, Alexandria.
and Dimocrates the master of the works, deserved the second place of fame
next unto the builder, for setting out the platt thereof. Alexandria was
builded in the hundred and twelfth Olympiade, when L. Papyrius the Son of
Spurius and C. Petilius the Son of Caius were Consulles of Rome, not far
from the mouth of the River Nyle, which some call Heracleotick, and othersome
Canopick. There is also Pharos* Pharos
peopled with inhabiters set there by Caesar the Dictator, where lights are
set up a nights for men, to sail safely in and out of the Haven by. For
the coming to Alexandria is subtle, full of deceitful shelues, an vntertaine
Sea, and arriuable only at three Channels, Tegamus, Posidonius, and Taurus.
Hee^e upon therefore such beakons or engines as are framed in Havens to give
light, are called Phari. Pyramide^
The * Pyramides are Broches in Egypt, raised with sharp spyres above the
height of any thing that can be made by man's hand: and for as much as they pass
the measure of shadows, they have no shadows at all. Now let us turn our
talk from Egypt.

CAP. XLV.
Of Arabie and of the Frankencence and Myrrh in it, of the byrds called
Phaenix and Cynamolgies Of the manners of the Arabians, and of the kynds of
their precious stones.
Beyond the mouth of Nylus called Pelusiacum is Arabie stretching to y^ Red
sea, This is Arabie ^he Desert.
which Varro affirms to be called Erythraeum, of King Erythrus the son of
Perseus and Andromeda, and not only red of the color, thereof. The said
Author, avouches also, A strange spring
that on y^ shore of this Sea, is a Fountain, whereof if Sheep drink, they
change the color of their fleeces: and whereas they were white before, they
lose that which they had until they drunk, and afterward become a deep
yellow color. Upon the Red Sea, stands ^he City Arsinoe. And this
Arabie extends to that spicebearing and rich Land, Arsinoe.
which the Cutabanes and Dwellers in Tents.
Scaenits possess. The Arabians are renowned with the Mountain Casius. The
cause why these Scaenits are so named, is for that they dwell in Tents, and
have none other houses. Their Tents are covered with hairs made of Goats
hair wouen.

Moreover, they utterly abstain from Swynes flesh. Surely if this kind of
beast be brought thither, it dies by and by. This Arabie the Greeks call
Blessed (...) happy.
Eudaemon, and we call it by interpretation blessed. It is inhabited with a
Hill made by hand, between y^ River Tygris, and the River Eulaeus: which
springing among the Medes, The estimation had in old time to the water of the
River Eulaeus.
is so renowned for the cleerenesse of his water, that all the Kings of that
Realm, drink none other thing then the liquor thereof. That it was not
unworthily surnamed Eudaemon or blessed, ye may gather hereby: that besides
the spyces whereof it has great store, that Country only and none other,
yeeldest, Frankencence, and yet not all the whole Country neither. For in the
mids of it are the Atranits a shiere of the Sabaeans, Of Frankencence.
from whence about eight remoouings of, is the Country that bears y^
Frankencence. It is called Arabie, that is to say holy, for so the name
signifies by interpretation. What the word Arabie signifies.
These low trees are not common: but (which is a strange thing among barbarous
nations) they go by right of inheritance in the succession of certain
Families. And therefore those that have the possession of this grove, are
called in the Arabian tongue holy. The same persons also at such time as they
do either crop or fell^these groves, come not nigh any coarse, nor defile
themselves with the company of women. Before the truth of the matter was
certainly known, some likened this tree to the Mastick Tree, and some to the
Turpentine Tree, until such time as by the Books of King Iuba, written to
Caesar the Son of Augustus, it was plainly declared, that it was a Tree with
a crooked stock, and boughs like a Maple, yielding a juice like y^ Almond
Tree, and that it is wont to be cut in the beginning of the Dogdaies, when
the Sun burns hotest. In the same lands grows also Myrrh: Myrrh.
the roots where of do thrive with dyging, and delight to be proyned: and
when they be laid bare, they yield y^ fatter gum.

The juice that issues of his own accord is y^ more precious: and that which
is drayned forth by slitting the bark, is counted the worser. The bark
wyndeth round like a whirlepoole, and is full of rough pricks: the leaf is
like an Olife, saving that it is somewhat more rough. The uttermost height that
it grows unto, is five Cubits. The Arabians make fire with the shreddes of
it: the fume whereof is so noisome, that if they prevented not the mischief
with the sent of burnt Storax, diverse times they should catch incurable
diseases. Among the same people breeds the byrd called the Phaenix, The
Phaenix
of the bigness of an Eagle, his head garnished with a plume of feathers
sticking up like a crest, with tufted cheeks, and with a ring about his
neck, shyning like gold. All his hinder part is purple, saving his train, the
feathers whereof are of a rose color, meddled with a bright Azure. It is
proved that he lives five hundred and fortye years. He makes his hearse of
Cynnamom, which he trimmeth near unto Panchaia, bringing his pyle of sticks
into the City of the Sun, Hel^opolis. What a great year is.
and there laying it upon the Altar: It is a matter of doubtful credit among
Authors, whither a great year be accomplished with the life of this year or
no. The most part of the^ affirm, that a great year consists not of five
hundred and forty, but of twelve thousand, nine hundred fifty and four of
our years. Finally, when Quintus Plautius, and Sext^^ Papinius were Consuls,
the Phaenix ^lewe into Egypt, and being taken the eight hundredth year after
the building of the Cyttie, was by the commandment of Claudius the Emperor,
showed openly at the election of the Officers. The which deed, besides the
decree that remaynes concerning the same, is also enrolled among the Acts of
the City.

The Cynnamolgus likewise a byrd of Arabia, The Cinnamom Bird.
makes his neste of the twigs of Cynnamom in the trees that be highest,
whereunto because there is no clymbing by reason of the height of the trees,
and brittlenesse of the boughs, the inhabiters throw lines with plummets of
lead on the ends of them into the nestes, and so pulling them down, sell them
far deerer, because the Merchants like that Cynnamom better then any other.
The manners of the Arabians.
The Arabians have a large and a wide Country every way, and live after diverse
manners, with diverse kinds of Religion. Many go with powled heads, and hoodes
like myters, and in apparel fashyon like to the same: and some shave their
beards to the hard skyns. They give themselves to Merchandise: not bying other
folks wares, but uttering they^ own. For they be rich both in woods and
waters. The shadows which lie to us on the right hand, Not at all times of
the year, but openly while the Sun is in Cancer, and that is but in the South
part of Arabie only.
lie to them on the left. Some of them that live hardlye eat Snakes flesh.
They have neither regard of body nor soul, and therefore they are named
Ophiophags. From the Seacoast of this Country was brought unto King
Polycrates, a precious stone called a Sardonix, which first stirred up the
firebrand of excess in our part of the world. Snakeaters.
But the Sardonix Sardonix.
is so well known of all men, that I think not meet to make long process
about it. The vpperpart thereof is allowable if it be a sheere red: but it is
reproved if it be thick like dregs. The mids of it is girded with a whytish
circle, the grace whereof is if it neither shed his color into the next, nor
he himself borrow of the other. The rest of him is finished with a black,
which (if it give a light through it,) is counted a fault: but if it let from
seeing through, it gives it the greater grace. The Molochyte.
The Arabian also finds the Molochite of a deeper green then is the
Emerawde, having a native virtue against the perrills of infants. He finds
likewise the Iris in the Red sea, six cornered as the Crystal: The Iris or
Rainbow stone
which being touched with the Sunnebeames, casts out of him a bright
reflection of the air like the Raynebowe. The same Arabians gather the
Androdamant bright as Silver, The Androdamant or Male Diamond
with sides equally square, which ye would think to have borrowed somewhat of
the Diamond. It is thought y^ his name is given him of that he asswageth ye
passions of hot minds, and restrayneth the rage of anger. We have from
thence also the Arabish The Pederote called also Opalius,
Pederote: which (to see to) is like Iuorie, and will not be filed. It helps
them that bear it, against pains of the sinews. In the Pederote is conveyed
whatsoever is excellent, with a certain prerogative of comlines. It is clear,
like Crystal: it is ruddy like purple: glystring in the uttermost verges as it
were out of water, with a border yellowe like Saffron. With this sweetness it
rauisheth the eyes, allureth the sight, deteyneth the beholders: and for this
beauty, it pleases also the Indians. This is enough concerning Arabie, now
let us retire again to Pelusium.

CAP. XLVI.
Of Mount Casius: of the great Pompeis tomb: and of the Town Ioppa.
FRom Pelusium is Mount Casius, and y^ Chapel of Jupiter Casius, and also the
place of Ostracina, ennobled with the Tomb of the great Pompey. From thence
begins Edom
Idumaea, fruitful of Date trees. Afterward comes Now called Port Iaffe
Ioppa, the auncientest Town in all the world, as which was builded before
the general flood. In that Town is to be seen a Rock, which keeps yet the
print of the chains of Andromeda, who (as is reported, Of Andromada and the
Monster
and that by no vain rumor) was set forth there to be devoured of a
Monster.

For Marcus Scaurus in his Aedileshyppe showed the bones of that Monster openly
at Rome. The thing is regystred in Chronicles. The measure of the^ also is
contained in true Books: that is to say, that the length of his ribs was
more then forty foot, and that he was far higher then the Olyphants of
Inde. Moreover, every joint of his ridgbone were above half a foot broad.

CAP. XLVII.
Of Iewry: of the Ryuers and Lakes therein: of Balm: of Sodom and Gomor^he:
and of the Essaene Nations.
IEwrie is famous for waters, but all the waters are not of one nature. The
River Jordan.
The River Jordan being of excellent sweetness, and flowing out of ye fountain
Peneas, runs by most pleasant Countries, until that falling into the Lake
The dead Sea.
Asphaltites, which ingendreth Bitumen, it is there corrupted with the standing
water. This Lake has no living thing in it, nothing can drown in it. Bulls and
Cammels swym without danger in it. There is also a Lake called Genezar, The
Lake of Genezareth
sirteene miles long, besett with many goodly Cities, and himself fellow
with the best. But the Lake of Tyberias The Lake of Tyberias
is preferred before all these, wholesome for his mild taste, and effectual of
operation for health. The head of Iewry has been Jerusalem, Jerusalem.
but it is utterly destroyed. In stedde thereof, succeeded Jericho, Jericho.
and this also has ceased to be the head, since it was conquered in the wars
of Artaxerxes.

Near unto Jerusalem is the Fountain Fairestreame.
Callyrhoe, greatly commended for the medicinable heat thereof, which takes
his name of the renown of his water. Of Balm
Only in this Land grows Balm, which kind of Tree was not to be found
out of y^ compass of twenty acres of ground, unto the time that we conquered
the Country. But after that we had gotten Iewry, those groves were so spredde
abroad, that now very large Hills do yield us Balm.

The stocks of them are like vines: they are set of slyppes: they we^e lusty
with dygging about the roots: they delight in water: they love proyning, and
are shadowed continually with their own leaves which stick fast.

The wood of the stem being touched with iron, dies without delay: and
therefore they be cunningly slytted either with glass or with Knyues of boane,
and that only in the Bark, out of which issues a Gum of excellent
swiftness. Next after the Gum, the second place of price is given to ye
Apples, the third to the rynde, and the last to the wood. A great way from
Jerusalem lies a sorrowful coaste, which was stricken from heaven, as appears
by the soil thereof, which is black, and resolved into Ashes.

There were two Towns, the one named Sodom, Sodom and Gomorrhe.
the other Gomorrhe: and there grows an Apple which though it seem to be
ripe, yet can it not be eaten. For within the skin that goes about it,
there is contained a cindrye soote, which at every light touch puffs out
like a smoke, and crumbleth into loose dust.

The inner parts of Iewrye toward the West, The sect of the Esseyes.
are possessed by ye Essaenes: who using a notable trade of dyscypline by
themselves, have departed from the custom of all other Nations, ordained
heereunto (as I think) by the providence of the divine majesty.

There are no Women among them: they have utterly renounced fleshly lust: they
occupy no money, they live by Dates: no man is there borne, and yet there
wants no store of men. The place it self is deputed to chastity: whereunto
though many resort from all places about, yet is none admitted unless his
approved chastity and innocent life make him worthy. For he that is
guilty of never so light a fault, cannot get in there, make he never so much
suit: but is removed by the power of God.

Thus time without mind (a wonderful thing to be spoken) the nation
continues, and yet no chyldbeddes among them. Beneath the Essaenes was the
Town of Engaddie, which now is utterly rased. Nevertheless, the notable
woods keep their reputation still, and the high groves of Date trees are
nothing at all defaced, neither by time nor by wars. The uttermost bound of
Iewry is the Castle of Massada.

CAP. XLVIII.
Of the Town Scythopolis, and the Mountain Casius.
I Pass over Damasco, Philadelphia, and Raphana, and will tell who were the
first inhabyters, and who was the founder of S^ythopolis. Scythoplis.
At such time as Bacchus had buried his Nourse, he builded this Town, to the
intent by rearing the walls thereof, to advance the renown of her Sepulture.
And forasmuch as inhabiters wanted, he chose out of his company the Scythians:
and the more to encourage them to defend the City, he gave it their name.

In the Country Selucia is another Mount Casius, hard by Antioche, from the
top whereof a man may in the fourth watch see the Globe of the Sun, Mount
Casius.
and with turning his body about a little aside, behold day on his one side, by
means of the Sun dispersing the darkness with his bright beams, and on his
other side still night. Such a prospect is there out of Mount Casius, that ye
may see the light before the day appear.

CAP. XLIX.
Of the Ryuers Euphrates and Tygris, and of sundry sorts of precious stones.
EVphrates comes out of the greater Armenia, Euphrates
rising above Zimara under the foot of a Mountain that is next Scythia, which
the dwellers by call Capotes. This River receiving certain others unto him,
wexeth big, and being increased with foreign waters, wrestleth with the
straights of the Mountain Taurus, whom he cutteth through at Eligea, albeit he
withstand him twelve miles broad: and so running still forth a long way,
leaves Comagene on his right side, and Arabie on his left. Afterward,
sweeping by many Nations, he deuideth Babylon sometime the head City of
Chaldey. He enricheth Mesopotamia with the excess of his yearly ouerflowing,
and makes the soil fruitful by shedding himself upon the land, in the like
sort as the River of Egypt does. He passes over his banks in a manner the
same time that Nylus does, namelye when the Sun is in the twentye degree of
Cancer. And it falls again at such time as the Sun having travailed over
Leo, is setting foot into the uttermost Marches of Virgo.

The Cosmographers hold opinion, that it happens so unto like paralleles,
which by the plat both of the heaven and of the earth, meet just and even
together, according to the order of the imaginitiue line. Whereby it appears
that these two Ryuers, being situate plomme under one parallele, albeit they
flow out of sundry quarters, have nevertheless one self same cause of both
their increasings. Tygris.
It is convenient also to speak of Tygris in this place. In the Realm of the
greater Armenie, it lyfteth up his head with a marvelous fair and clear
spring, in a high ground, which is named Elongosine: and yet is he not bygge
from the beginning.

First he goes slowly, not with his own name: but as soon as he enters the
borders of Medea, he is forthwyth called Tygris: for so do the Medes call an
arrowe. He runs into the Lake Arethusa, which sustaineth all weyghts: A
strange Lake
the Fysh whereof never come within the Channel of Tygris, like as the Fysh of
Tygris never pass into the Poole of Arethusa, through which he shoots
unlike of color, and a very swift pace.

Anon after being let by the Mountain Taurus, he sinketh into a deep
Cave, and so running under him, venteth again on the otherside of him at
Zoroanda, bearing before him weeds and other dross, and a little way of
sinketh again, and afterward auauncing himself, he runs by the Adiabines
and Arabians, embraces Mesopotamia, receives the noble River Choaspes into
him, and carries Euphrates into the Sea of Persia. As many Countries as drink
of Euphrates, do glyster with sundry precious stones. The Smilax.
The Smilax is gathered in Euphrates own Channel, a Jewel like to the Marble
of Procomiesus, but that in the belly of this stone, there shynes a yellow,
like the ball of ones eye. The Sagda comes to us from the Chaldyes, not easy
to be found, but that (as they affirm) it offers it self to be taken. For
by the natural operation of the spyrite thereof, it ryseth out of the bottom
to the shyps that sail over it, and cleaves so fast to their Keeles, that it
can hardly be separated from them without scraping away part of the timber.
The Sagda
This Sagda for the effects that they know it has, is hyghly esteemed of the
Chaldyes: and it has such an orient green, that the beauty thereof makes it
to be liked above all others. The Myrrhite
The Myrrhite is common among the Parthyans. If ye should judge this stone by
the eye, it is of the color of Myrrh, and has nothing that may delight the
sight. But if ye try him thoroughly, and chafe him till he be hot, he has
as sweet a flauor as Nardus. In Persia is such abundance of stones, and such
variety, that it would be a long matter to report their names. The
Mythridax being stryken with the Sun, The Mythridax
glystereth with sundry sorts of colors.

The Tecolythe The Tecolythe
being like the kernel of an an Olive, is despised in sight: but in goodness
for medicine it excels the beauty of other stones. For being beaten into
powder and drunk, it breaks the stone, and eases the diseases of the rain
and ye bladder. The Ammochrise or goldsand.
The Ammochryse being meddled with sparks of gold and fine gravel together,
has here and there little square spots of goldfoyle and dust. The Aetite is
both yellow, and round of proportion, containing another stone within it, which
makes a noise when it is styrred, albeit that the cunningest Iewellers say, it
is not the little stone within it that makes that tingling, The Aetite or
Aeglest one.
but a spirit. This Aetite Z^roaster prefers before all other stones, and
attributes very great virtue unto it. It is found either in Egles nestes, or
else on the shoares of the Ocean: but most of all in Persia. Being worn about
a woman with child, it preserves her from deliverance before her time. The
Pyrrhite is of the color of gold, and will not suffer himself to be held
over close in ones hand, for if it chance to be strayned over hard, The
Pyrrhite or Fyrestone.
it burns ye fingers. The Chalazias or Haylstone.
The Chalazias pretends both the whytnes and the fashyon of a Haylestone, of
hardness most sound and inuinsible.

The Echite is spotted like a Uiper. The Dyonisias is brown, The Echite or
Adderstone.
besprinckled with red specks: the same being broken in powder and mingled
with water, The Dyonisias or Winestone
has the flauor of wine, and (which in that sent is a wonder) it resists
drunkenness. The Glossopetre or Tonguestone.
The Glossopetre falls from the sky in the wane of the Moon, like to a man's
tongue, and it is of no small power as the Magicians affirm: who think that
the motions of the Moon are stirred out of it. The Jewel of ye Sun is very
white, The Jewel of the Sun Venus hair.
after the manner of a streaming star and spreads out ruddy beams. The
hair of Venus is of glossy black, resembling inwardly the likeness of red
hayres. The Selenite is of a sheere white color, Selenite or the Moonestone.
meddled with the color of honny, containing in it the Image of the Moon,
which is reported to grow or diminish from day to day, The Meconite or Poppy
stone
according to the course of the Planet.

The Meconite resembles Poppie. The Myrmecite or Antstone
The Myrmecite is marked with the likeness of an Ant creeping. The
Chalcophthong or brasse^ounde.
The Chalcophthong ringeth like Brass beaten upon. Being carried chastely, it
preserves the voice clear. The Syderite or Ironstone
The Syderite (to see to) differs nothing from iron: but like a makebate,
wheresoever it is brought in, it styrreth discord. The Phlogite or flame stone
The Phlogite represents as it were flames of fire burning within it. The
Authracias or the colestone.
The Anthracias glistereth as it were with sparkling stars. The Enydros
sweateth in such wise, The Enydros or Waterstone
as ye would think there were some spring of water shut up within it.

CAP. L.
Of Cilicia, and the Den Coricium, and of the Mountain Taurus.
COncerning Cilicia which now is in hand, if we treat of it as it is now,
we shall seem to discredit antiquity. Again, if we ^ollowe the bounds it
had in old time, it is clean contrary from the state of things present. And
therefore to avoid both inconveniences, the best that we can do is to report
the states of both times. In old time Cilicia extended even unto Pelusium of
Egypt, The bounds of Cilicia in old time.
and the Lydians, Medes, Armenians, Pamphilians, and Cappadocians, were under
the dominion of the Cilicians. Anon after, being subdued by the Assyrians, it
was streightened into a narower room. It lies for the most part in Champion
ground, receiving the Sea of Issos in a large Bay: and on the back it is
enclosed with the ridges of the Mountains Taurus, and Amanus. It took the
name of Cilix, whom ancient time has hidden quite beyond the reach of
remembrance. They say he was the Son of Phaenix, who is counted auncienter
then Jupiter, and one of the first that ever was bredde upon the earth. It
has the mother of Cities Tarsus, Tarsus.
which Perseus the noble ympe of Danae founded. The River Cydnus.
The River Cydnus cutteth through this City. Some have left in writing, that
this Cydnus falls from the Mountain Taurus: and othersome say it is derived
out of the Channel of Choaspis: Choaspes.
the which Choaspis is of so sweet taste, that as long as it runs within ye
borborders of Persia, the Kings of Persia reserved it only for their own
drinking: and when they should go a progress any whither, they carried of the
water of it with them. Of such parent therefore does Cydnus take his wonderful
sweetness. Whatsoever is white the Syrians in their native language call it
Cydnus: whereof the name was given this River. He swells in the spring time
when the snowes are melted, the rest of the year he is slender and quiet.
About Corycus in Cilicia grows much Saffron, and very good, Corycus.
for though Sicill, though Syrena, though Lycia yield Saffron to, yet is the
Saffron of Cilicia ye most principal. It has a more fragrant smell, it is of
a more golden color, and the juice thereof is more eflectuous in medicine.

There is also the Town Coricus, A description of the Cave of Corycus
and a Cave which makes hollow the Mountain that butteth upon the Sea, from
the very top to the hard bottom, with a most large and open room within. For
having both sides pitched fast in the deep of the ground, it comes over the
midspace that is empty in manner of a vault, with green trees hanging inward
with their tops down. The descent into it is two miles and a half long,
having the open day al ye way, and springes of fountains flowing out on both
sides. When ye come to the bottom of the first vault, there opens again
another Cave: the entry whereof is at the first wide and lightsome, but after
ward in going further in, it waxes dark by reason of the narrownes.

In it is a holy Chapel of Jupiter: in the innermost retreit whereof, the
dwellers by do believe that the cowche of the Giant Typhon stands. There was
in Cilicia an ancient Town called Soloe: Soloe
the native place of Chrysippus Prince of the Stoic Philosophers: which being
won by Tygranes King of Armenia, was long after named Pompeyople by Cneus,
Pompeyus the great, who conquered Cilicia to the Roman Empire. The Mountain
Taurus rises first at the Indian Sea, The description of Mount Taurus.
and so bearing his right side toward the North, and his left side toward ye
South, and his frunt full into ye West, shoots himself between the Sea of
Egypt and the Sea of Pamphilia at the Rocks of Chelidonie.

It is manifest he would have continued the main Land still forth, but
for the deep Seas, which will not suffer him to extend his roots any further.

Surely they that treat of the natures of places, do prove that with his
promontories, he has assaide all means possible, to find passage. For
wheresoever he is washed with the Sea, he runs out in Promontoryes. But he
is stopped, sometime by the Phaenician Sea, sometime by the Sea of Pontus,
sometime by the Caspian or Hyrcan Sea: through whose resistaunce being often
broken of his will, he wrytheth toward the Lake of Maeotis: and being as it
were tired with so many distreses, joins himself with the Mountains
Riphaei. According to the diversity of nations, The names of Mount Taurus.
and variety of tongues that he passes by, he is diuerstie named. Among the
Indians he is called Imaus, and afterward Paropanisus: among the Parthians,
Choatras: from thence Niphates: then Taurus: and where he ryseth of greatest
height Caucasus. By the way also he takes names of peoples. On the right side
he is called Caspius or Hircanus, and on the left side Amazonicus, Moschicus,
and Scythicus. Besides these, he has also many other names, where he gapeth
with riuen cliffs, he makes Gates, whereof the first is called the Armenian,
the second the Caspian: and the third the Cilician. He bears his head
toward Greece also, where he is called Ceraunius. From the Coast of Cilicia,
he looks down into the Marches of Affricke. As much of him as lies to the
South, is scorched with the Sun, and whatsoever butteth upon the North, is
punished with wind and frost. Where it is woodye, is is replenished with wild
Beasts, and most cruel Lions.

CAP. LI.
Of Lycia, and the Fable of the Monster Chymaera.
THat which Vesuuius is in Campane, Mount Chimaera
and Aetna in Sicill, the same is Chi^era in Lycia. This Hill breaths up
smokie flames in the night times. Whereupon rose the Fable of the threeformed
monster among the common people, believing that Chimaera was a lively beast.
And because the place is of a fiery nature, the Lycians dedicated the next
City unto Vulcane. and called it Ephaestia, after the original of his name.
Among other things, there was also the noble Town of Olympus: but it is
de^^yed, and now it is but a Castle.

Beneathe the which are the Kings waters, a wonder to such as behold them,
for the beautifulness of them.

CAP. LII.
Of the lesser Asia: of the Temple of Di^na at Ephesus: of the birth of great
Alexander, of the famous writers of Asia: of Phrygia, of the fourefooted beast
called Bonasus, of the times of Homer and Hesiodus, of Memnons byrds, of the
Chameleon, of Storks: and of the original of the Galathians.
Now follows Asia: Asia the less now called Natolia.
but I mean not that Asia which being the third part of the world, is from
the Egyptian Sea bounded with the River Nyle, and from the Lake Maeotis with
the River Tanais: but I mean that Asia which begins at Telmessus of Lycia,
from whence the Gulf, of Carpathus also takes hy^ beginning. This Asia
therefore is enclosed on the East with Lycia and Phrygia, on the West with the
(...) Sea, on the South with the Egyptian Sea, and on the North with
Paphlagonia. Ephesus.
In it is the most famous City Ephesus. The beauty of Ephesus is the Temple
of Diana, builded by the Amozons, such a royal piece of work, that when
Xerxes (...) fire on all the T^mples of Asia, this one only he spared.

But this gentleness of Xerxes exempted not this holy Church utterly from that
mys-fortune. For one Herostratus to the intent (to purchase himself an
everlasting fame by his mischievous deed) did set this noble piece of work
on fire with his own hands, The desire of vain glory
and when he had done it, confessed it to win himself a continual name.

It is therefore noted that the Temple of Ephesus was burned the self same day
that Alexander the great was borne in Pella, The birth of Alexander the great.
which (as Nepos reports) was in the Consulshyppe of Marcus Fabius Ambustus
and Titus Quintius Capitolinus, the three hundred fourscore and fifth year
after the building of Rome. At such time as the Ephesians afterward repaired
it, more beautiful and stately then it was before. Dinocrates was chief
master of the works, Dinocrates
even ye same Dinocrates who by the commandment of Alexander builded
Alexandria in Egypt, as we told you before. The great ruins of Asia bear
witness that there never happened so continual earthquakes, and so many
overthrows of Cities in any place of the whole world, Horrible earthquakes.
as in Asia. In so much that in the raygne of Tiberius, twelve Cities were
overthrown at one time with earthquake.

The wyts of Asia have been renowned over all the world. First for Poetry
Anacreon: then Mimnermus and Antimachus: Famous Poets
after them Hipponax: then Alcaeus: and among them also one Sapp^o a woman.

For writing of Hystoryes, Xanthus, Hecateus, Herodotus, The famous writers of
Hystories
and with them Ephorus and Theopompus. Also of the seven Sages, there were
Bias, Thales and Pittacus, and of Philosophers, Sages Philosophers.
Cleanthes one of the excellen^^st Stoics, Anaxagoras a sercher of nature, and
Heraclitus also that bestowed all his time in the secrets of a subtiler
doctrine.

Next Asia, (...) in Phrygia: Phrygie.
wherein was Celenae* which having abolished his former name, fleeted into
Apamaea, a Town builded afterward by Seleucus.

Here was Ma^^^as borne, and here was he buried: of whom the River thereby
took his name. For in remembrance of his ungracious challenge, and over
malapart contention with the God of Music, in playing upon a shalme, there is
a Ualley with a Well in it not far from thence, which bears marks of the
thing that was done, and is a ten miles of from Apamaea, bearing the name of
Pypewell
Aulocrene unto this day. The crooked River Maeander
Out of a Mount of this Town, the River Maeander lifts his head: which
running forward and backward in crooked banks, falls headlong between
^aria, and Iconia, into the Gulf that deuideth Miletum and Priene.

Phrygia it self lies above Troas, Phrigya.
and bordereth Northwarde upon Galatia, and Southwarde upon Lycaoma, Pisidia,
and Mygdonia. The same is on the East, next Neighbor unto Lydia, and on ye
North to Mysia and Caria. On that side that is toward the midday, is the
Mountain Tmolus flourished over with Saffron, and the River Pactolus, Pactolus.
whom they call by another name Goldstreame The beast Bonasus.
Chrysoroa, because he caryeth gold in his stream. In these Countries
breeds a beast called Bonasus, who has the head and all the bod^e forth
on, like a Bull. Only he has a mane like a Horse, and his horns are so
many times twysted round one within an other, that if a man light upon them
h^ cannot be wounded. But that defense that the from (...), his pau^che
recom^^nceth. (...) ground: the heat whereof is such, that it scaldeth
whatsoever it touches, and so with his mischievous squirt, he keeps of such
as pursue him. The head of Ionia is Miletus, Ionia
sometime the house of Cadmus, the same that first found the order to write in
prose. Not far from Ephesus is the City Colophon, renowned with the Oracle
of Apollo Clarius. And within a little way of that, Colophon
ryseth Mount Mimas, which gives knowledge of the alteration of the wether by
the clouds that fly over the top of it. The head of Maeonia is Sypilus,
Maeonie
called heertofore Tantalis, and for the longer continuance of that name,
comes Niobe, borne to the loss of her husband and children. About Smyrna
runs the River Melas, The prince of all Ryuers in the lesser Asia.
without all controversy, the prince of all the Ryuers in Asia.

Through the fields of Smyrna, cutteth also the River Hermus: which rising at
Dorilaum in Phrigya, cutteth Phrigya of from Caria. Antiquity was in a
belief, Hermus.
that this Hermus also flowed with golden streams.

Smyrna (which is the greatest beauty of all to it) was the Country of the
Poet Homer, who departed out of this world, Homers byrt^^ and death.
the two hundred, threescore, and tenth year after the taking of Troy, Agrippa
Siluius, the Son of Tyberinus then reigning in Alba, which was the hundred
and threescore year before the building of Rome. Hesiodus
Between whom and the Poet Hesiodus (who dyed in the beginning of the first
Olympiad,) there were a hundred and eight and thirty years. In the Rhetaean
shore, the Athenians and Mytileneans at the Tomb of the Achille^.
Thessalian Captain builded the Town Achylleon, which is almost decayed. And
about a forty furlonges from thence, in another nooke of the same shore, the
Rhodians builded another Town in the honor of Ajax the Son of Telamon, which
they named Aeantion.

But hard by Troy stands the Tomb of Memnon, whereunto come certain Byrds
flying continually out of Aethyop in flocks, Memnons birds
which the Troyans call Memnons Birds. Cremutius is mine Author that these
Birds every fifth year, assemble in flocks from all quarters wheresoever they
be in all the world, to the Palace of Memnon. In the vplande Country, above a
part of Troas, Teuthranie.
lies the region of Teutranie, which was the first dwelling of the Mysians.
Teutranie is watered with the River Caicus. Through all Asia is great store of
The Chameleon or earthlyon.
Chameleons, a fourefooted beast, in making like a Lucert, but that he has
straight and somewhat longer legs growing to his belly, with a long tail
wrythed round in, with hooked talants finely bowing inward, slow of gate,
and in a manner trayling like a Snayle: rough bodyed, with such a hyde as we
see Crocodiles have, and hollow eyes suncke far into his head, which he
never shadoweth with twinkling. Moreover, he beholds things not with
rolling the bals of his eyes, but with staring continually forward. His mouth
is ever gaping, and serves to do no kind of thing with all: for he neither
eats meat, nor is nourished with drink but lives only by drawing in the
air, which is his only sustenaunce. His color is variable, and every moment
chaungable: so that to what thing so ever he leans himself, he becomes of
the same color. Two colors there are which he is not able to counterfett,
read and white: all other he counterfetteth with ease. His body is almost
without flesh, and his intrailes without spleen: neither is there any blood to
be found in him, save in his heart, and thereof is very little. He hydes
himself in winter, and comes abroad in the spring time. The Raven has great
spite at him, but if he taste of him, he being dead, kylleth his enemy
that has killed him. For if the Raven eat never so little of him, he dies by
and by. But the Raven has his defensive, by means of nature it self, which
puts forth her hand to heal him. For as soon as he feels himself
diseased, he eats a Bay leaf, and so recouereth his health.

There is in Asia a ground called Pythous Village.
Come, a plott in the Champion fields, to which at the very first time of
their arrival, the Storks assemble, Of Storks
and there all of them fall upon him that comes last, and tear him in
pieces. They say these fowls have no tongues, but that the crocking which they
make, is rather a sound of the mouth then a voice. There is in them a singular
naturalnesse. For look how much time they bestow in bringing up their young
birds, so much time do their birds bestow in cherrishyng them again. For
they are so fond in keeping their nestes, that by continuance of sitting,
they cast their feathers. They think it a heinous matter in all places to hurt
them, but specially in Thessaly, where is unmeasurable store of Serpents, which
they persecuting to feed upon, do greatly ease the Countries of Thessaly of
that mischief.

Galatia was in ancient time conquered by the old Inhabyters of Gallia,
Galatia.
namely by the Tolistobogians, Voturians, and People of Amiens.
Ambians, which names remain unto this day, albeit that Galatia by the very
sound of the name, declares from whence it is derived.

CAP. LIII.
Of Bythinia, and the rauishing of Hylas: and of the death and burial of
Hanniball.
BIthinia at the entrance of the Sea Pontus, toward the Sun rising,
oueragainst Thrace, welthie, and garnished richlye with Cities, takes his
beginning at the head of the River Sangarius. The names of Bithinia.
It was in old time named Bebrycia, afterward Mygdonia, and lastly (of King
Bithynus) Bithynia.

In this Country by the City Prusias, runs the River Hylas, and likewise
there is the Lake Hylas, wherein it is thought that the Child Hylas Hercules
delight whom the Nymphs had ravished was drowned. In remembrance of whom,
the people unto this day run solemnlie a scatterloping about the Lake, The
place where Hanniball was buried.
and cry Hylas as loud as they can. In Bithynia also is a place called
Lybissa, near to Nicomedia, registered in the Book of fame for the Tomb of
Hanniball, who after the judgment given upon him at Carthage, resorting first
to King Antiochus, and after the unfortunate battle of Antiochus at
Thermopyles and his utter discouragement through the inconstancy of Fortune,
being retained a guestwise by King Prusias, because he would not be
delivered to Titus Quintius who was sent into Bithynia for the same purpose,
and be carried prisoner to Rome: poisoned himself, and by wilful death
defended his body from the yrons that should have been laid upon him by the
Romans.

CAP. LIIII.
Of the Coast of Pontus.
IN the Coast of Pontus beyond ye straights of Bosphorus, and the River
Rhaesus, and the Haven of Calpas: the River Sangaris (called of many
Sangarius) which ryseth in Phrigya, The River Sangaris
makes the beginning of the Mariandine Gulf, wherein is the Town of
Heraclea, standing upon the River Lycus, and the Haven Acone, The Haven of
Acone.
so notable for the increase of wicked weeds, that of the name of that Town,
we call all hurtful herbs Aconite. Next unto that is the Cave of Acheruse,
The Cave of Acheruse.
where (as men say) is a dark deep hole, that goes down to hell.

CAP. LV.
Of Paphlagonia, and of the original of the Venetians
THe Marches of Galatia enclose Paphlagonia on the back part. This Paphlagonia
from the promontorie of Carambis, looks unto Precop
Taurica Chersonesus. It ryseth in height with the Mountain Cytorus, the space
of threescore and three miles, The original of the Venetians
famous for the place called Henett, from whence (as Cornelius Nepos affyrmeth)
the Paphlagonians passing over into Italy, were anon after named Venetians. The
Milesians builded many Cities in that Realm. And Mithridates builded
Eupatoria, which being subdued by Pompey, was named Pompeyople.

CAP. LVI.
Of Capadocia, and the nature of horses in the same.
OF all the Realms that border upon Pontus, Cappadocia draws furthest into
the firm land. The bounds of Cappadocia.
On the left side it lies all along both the Armenies and Comagene: on the
rightside it has the Marches of many people of Asia. It ryseth at the rydges
of Mount Taurus, and the sun rising. It passes all along by Lycaonia,
Pisidia, and Cilicia. It goes beyond the Coast of Syrya that is about
Antioche, stretching even unto Scythia at another part of the Realm, and is
divided from ye greater Armenie with the River Euphrates, which Armenie takes
his beginning at the Mountains Pariedrie. There be many famous Cities in
Cappadocia: But to pass over the rest, the River Halys runs by Archelais,
which Claudius Caesar peopled. The River Lycus washes by Neocaesaria.
Semyramis builded Melita. Mazacha which is situate under Mount Argaeus, the
Cappadocians call the mother of Cities. The which Argaeus being very high,
The River Lycus.
has his tops so covered with snow, that even in the whotest of all Summer he
is frozen, and the Inhabiters of the country believe there is a God dwelling
in it. This country is a special breeder of horses, and most commodious for
increase of them, the natures of whom I think meet to be treated of in this
place. The nature of horses.
For it is manifest by the sundry proofs, that there is discretion in horses,
forasmuch as there have been some found, that would not be acquainted with
any but with their first owners: utterly forgetting their accustomed tamenes,
if at any time they happened to change their old masters. They know who be
enemies to their side, in so much that in incountering in battle, they run
upon them with open mouth to byte them. But this is a greater matter, that
when they have lost their former Keepers whom they did cast a love unto, they
starve themselves for hungar. These conditions are found in the excellentest
kind of horses: for those that are of the baser sort, have showed no examples
of themselves.

But because we will not seem to take liberty to speak more then we are able
to auouche, we will propounde diverse examples.

Great Alexanders horse which (either of the stowrenesse of his look, or of
his mark because he had a Bulls head bronded on his shoulder, or else
because certain bunches like little horns swelled in his forehead when he was
angry,) Bucephalus the horse of great Alexander.
was called Beucephalus, whereas at all other times he would gently suffer his
keeper to ride him, as soon as the kings saddle was set upon his back, he
disdained to bear any man at all saving his Lord and Master. He showed many
proofs of himself in battles, by bringing Alexander safe, out of most sharp
incounters: for which his desert it came to pass, that when he dyed in Inde,
the king kept his funerals, and made a costly Tomb over him, and moreover
builded a Cittye which in remembrance of his horses name he called Bucephala.

The horse of Caius Caesar would suffer no man to take his back but Caesar.
The horse of Caius Caesar
And it is said, that his forefeete were like the feet of a man, as should
seem by the Image of the horse, which was placed by him in that shape, before
the Image of his mother Venus.

When one that killed a King of Scythia in combatt hand to hand, A Kings
horse of Scythia.
would have spoiled him, the Kings horse felled him with his heels, and tare
him in pieces with his teeth. The Country of Agrigent also has many Tombs of
horses in it, which burial they think was no more then the horses had
deserved. The sights in the great Theater bear witness y^ they have a delight
in pleasant things. For some of them at the playing upon shalmes, some at
singing, some at the variety of colors, and diverse also at the sight of
burning Cressets, are provoked to running.

That there is affection in horses their tears do declare. The horse of king
Nicomedes The horse of Centaretrius.
After that King Nicomedes was slain, his horse dyed for hunger. When
Antiochus had vanquished the Galathians in battle, as he was about to have
gotten upon the horse of their Captain Centaretrius, (who was slain in the
field) to have vaunted himself in a lusty bravery: the horse did set so
little by his rayning of him, that falling down for the nonce, he threw
himself and his ryder both to the ground. The sights that Claudius Caesar
showed in the great Theater, declared the wytt of horses, for when y^ wagoner
was overthrown, they ouerranne their adversaries that contended with them, not
more by swyftnesse then by pollicie^ and after running their full course
orderly, stayed of themselves at the races end, as it were to claim the
reward of victory. Moreover having so cast of their Ruler (who was named
Ratumena) they forsook the gaming place, and ran full flight to the
Capitol, never stinting (although they ^ad many lets by the way) before such
time as they had gone thrice about Jupiter Tarpeius righthandwise. In this
kind of beast the Males are longest lived. We read that a horse has lived
full threescore and ten years. And this is out of all question, that they
engender till they be three and thirty years old, and that after the
twentieth year they are purposely kept to cover Mares. A horse named Opus.
Also we find it noted, that a Horse named Opus, did hold out in serving the
race, until he was forty years old.

The lust of Mares is extinguished by shearyng their manes: and in the foles
there breeds a poison that provoke love, which is in the Colts foreheade
when he is new fol^d* and is of color yellowe like a dry Fig, and it is
named It is called the knappe.
Hyppomanes: and if the same be taken from the Colt, the Damme will never give
it su^k. The ^^ercer that any horse is, and of greater courage, the deeper
does he thrust his nose into the water when he drinks. The Scythians never
bring horses to battle, but Mares: because the Mares can state and ru^ never
the less. Mares do conceive and bring forth Colts by the wind, but those
never live above three years.

CAP. LVII.
Of Assyria, and of the first coming up of oyn^ments.
THe beginning of Assyria is Adiabene in a part whereof is the Country
Arbelite, The place of encounter between Alexander and Darius
which place the victory of great Alexander will not suffer to be
foreslipped. For there he vanquished the power of D^^ius, and (...) him, and in
ryffling his Camp, among other of his princelye furniture, Perfumes open the
Gate to excess.
found a Caskettfull of Ointments, which thing afterward opened first the gappe
of excess unto the Romans, to delight in foreign perfumes. Nevertheless we
were defended for a while from the allurement of vices, by the virtues of our
ancestors, and that even unto the Censureshippe of Publius Crassus, and Julius
Caesar, who in the five hundred threescore and fifth year of the building of
the City, forbid by open proclamation, that no man should bring foreign
Ointments into the City. Afterward our vices got the vpperhand, and the
Senate grew to such a delight in the pleasantness of the sents, that they used
them even in their (...) Chambers: as it appeared by Lucius Plo^ius the brother
of Lacius that had binne twice Consul: whom being proclaimed Traitor by the
Threem^n, the ^ent of his ointments be wrayed where he lay hidden in a hole at
Salerne.

CAP. LVIII.
Of the tree called Medica.
AFter this row of Countries follows Media, the Tree whereof has been
celebrated eue^ by the verses of Virgill. It is a great tree, and has leaves
almost like the leaves of a Crab^e Tree, saving only in this one point, that
they be rough with sharp pricks. It bears an Apple which is enemy to
venim, The Apple of Media,
of harsh taste, and of wonderful bytternesse* The sent of this odor is very
fragrant and exceedingly pleasant, and (...) a far of. But the Tree is so
plentiful of bearing, that it is always ouercharged with the burden of his
fruit. For as soon as ever his fruit is ripe and fallen of, new spring
forth, and it tarrieth no longer without increase, then while the first grown
fruit may fall of. Other nations have endeavored to plant these Trees in their
grounds, and slips and ymps have been fetched from thence and graffed. But
nature is so coye in that behalf, that no other soil could borrowe that
benefit from the Land of Media.

CAP. LIX.
Of the Gates of Mount Caspius.
ALl the Caspian Gates are a way cut out by man's hand, eight miles of length:
and it is scarce so broad as a Carte may go through. In these streights among
other things, this also is very difficult: that ye stones on each side which
are ragged, by means of the veins of salt that melt in them, yield forth
moisture abundantly, which soon after being hardened by force of heat,
congealeth into Ise. By means whereof it becomes so slypperie, that no man
can pass them. Moreover, by the space of eight and twenty miles, all the
Coaste. which way soever ye go from thence, has no wells nor springs, but
dry ground without any reskewe against thirst. Also the Serpents that breed in
all countries there about, flock thither as soon as ever the spring time
begins. Thus through the conspiracy of the difficultnesse and of the
daungerousnesse, there is no coming to the Caspians but in the winter.

CAP. LX.
Of Direum, and of the Country Margiana.
FRom the Caspians Eastwarde, is a place that they call Direum, to the
plentifulnesse whereof, there is no place any where to be compared: about which
dwell the Tapyres, the Anariaks, and the Hyrcanes. There bordereth also upon
it, the Country Margiana, not able for the wholsomnesse of the air, Margiana
and commodities of the soil, in so much as in all that large Coast, y^
Country only has vynes It is enclosed round about like a Theater with hyls,
the compass of a thousand and five hundred ^urlongs, almost impossible to be
come unto, for the sandy desert, which enuironeth it every way round about, by
the space of a hundred and twenty miles. Alexander the great liked so well of
the pleasantness of this Region, that he builded the first Alexandria there,
which was anon after rased by the barbarous people, and repayed again by
Antiochus the Son of Seleucus, who according to the name of his progeny
called it Seleucia: the circuit of which City contains threescore and
fifteen furlongs. Into this City did Orodes convey the Romans that were
taken at the slaughter of Crassus* Alexander reared another Town also among
the Caspians, which was called Heraclea as long as it stood. But this also
being beaten down by the same nations, was afterward repaired by A^tiochus,
and (as it liked him best) was named Achais.

CAP. LXI.
Of the River Oxus, and the nations about it: of the voyages of Liber Parer,
Hercules and Semyramis, of the bounds of King Cyrus, and of the nature of
Cammels.
THe River Oxus springs out of the Lake Oxus, the brimmes whereof are
inhabited about by the Henioches, Batenes, and Oxistages: but the chiefest part
is inhabited by the Bactrians. The Bactrians also have a peculiar River of
their own called Bactrus, The Bactrians*
and a Town thereupon which they inhabit named Bactrum. The nations that are
behind this, are environed with the hyls of Paropamisus, which ends against
the head of the River Indus: the rest is enclosed by the River Oxus. The
bounds of Liber, Hercules, Se^yramis and Cyrus.
Beyond these, is Panda a Town of the Sogdians, in the borders of whom great
Alexander builded the third Alexandria, to testify the bounds of his journey.
For this is the place where Altars were erected first by Liber Pater, secondly
by Hercules, thirdly by Semyramis, and lastly by Cyrus: and therefore it was
counted one of the greatest commendations of Alexander, that he set out the
bounds of his voyage so far as y^ place.

The River Iaxa^tes disseuereth the borders of all the Countries that lie in
that tract only: which River nevertheless the Bactrians only call Iaxartes,
The River Iaxartes.
for the Scythi^ns call it Silys. The Soldiers of great Alexanders host,
took this Iaxartes to be the same River that is ^anais. Demodam^^
But Demodamas a Captain of Seleuchus, and Antiochus, a sufficient Author in
this behalf, passing over this River, went beyond the tytles of all that were
before him, and found it to be another River then Tanais: in remembrance of
which his renowned enterprise, for the more aduaun^ment of his own fame, he
reared Altars to Apollo Didymaeus in the same place. This is the battable
ground where the Marches of Persia and Scythia, meet. The which Scythians,
the Persians in their language call Saks, and the Scythians on the otherside
name ye Persians Chorsars: and the Mountain Caucasus they call Graucasus, that
is to say white with snow. Numbers of people innumerable here abouts keep
the same Laws and customs that the Parthians do, if an universal consent
from the beginning, without breaking or alteration of order. Of which the
famousest are the Massagets, the Essedons, the Saks, the Dahes, and the
Assaeans. Beyond whom by reason of most cruel and barbarous nations that lie
betwixt, we find great uncertainty in the report of the customs of other
nations.

Out of Bactria come strongest Cammels, Of Cammels
albeit that Arabie bredde of them too. But this is the difference betwixt
them: that the Camels of Arabie have two bunches on their backs, and they of
Bactria have but one.

These do never were their feet: for the feet of the other have as it were
little palms of flesh turning back again. By means whereof they have a
contrary fault in their going, in that there is no help for them to set their
feet steadfast upon the ground, They serve to double use. For some be good for
the burden, and some are light and swyft in running. But neither will those
receive more then a reasonable burden, nor these go above their ordinary
pace. For desire of generation they become madd, in so much as they are
outrageous cruel when they would go to make. They hate horses, and they will
forbear drink by the space of four days together. But when the time serves
that they may drink, they hale in as much as will both staunche the drought
that is past, and moist them for the thirst that is long to come. They covet
soyled waters, and refuse the clear. And if it be not muddie of it self,
they will raise up the mudde with continual stamping, and make it troubled.
They endure an hundred years, unless it be so that they be conveyed into
strange Countries, and so the change of air make them diseased. The Females
are prepared for the wars, and means is found how to kill the desire of
generation in them by gelding them. For it is thought they become the stronger,
if they be kept from the Males.

CAP. LXII.
of the Seres and of their silks.
AS ye turn from the Sythick Ocean, and the Caspian Sea toward the East
Ocean: from the beginning of this Coast, first deep snowes, then long
deserts, beyond that the Cannibals a most cruel kind of people, and lastly
places full of most outrageous wild Beasts, make almost the one half of the
way vnpassible. The which distresses have their end at a Mount that butteth
upon the Sea, which the barbarous people call Tabis, beyond which, the
wyldernesses do nevertheless continue a great way on still. Of Sylke.
So in that Coast which faceth the Northeast, beyond those waste and
vninbabitable Countries, the first men that we have heard of, are the Seres:
who sprinckling water upon the leaves of their Trees, do by the help of that
liquor kembe of certain fleeces, and with moisture so card that fine Cotton,
that they make what they will thereof. This is that silk admitted to be worn
commonly, to the hinderaunce of gravity, and wherewith the lust of excess
has persuaded first women, and now also men to apparel themselves, rather
to set out the bodies to sale then to cloth it. The Seres are meek and very
quiet among themselves: but otherwise they eschew the company of all men
besides: insomuch that they refuse to have any traffic or intercourse of
Merchandise with other nations. For those that occupy y^ trade of merchandise
with them, do pass over the first River of their Country: upon the banks
whereof (with out any communication of talk between the Chapmen, the Seres
considering by eie-sight, the price that they bid for the things laid down,
utter their own wares, but by not ours.

CAP. LXIII.
of the Attacene Nations.
Now follows the Coast of Attacene, and the nation of the Attacenes who have
a singular prerogative for the temperat^es and gentlesse of their air. The
hills keep of the hurtful blasts: which hills being cast round about them
every way, do with their wholesome opennesse to the Sun, fence them from all
pestilent airs. And therefore (as Amomaetus affyrmeth) their life and the life
of the Hyperboreans is a like. Between these and Inde, the skylfullest
Cosmographers have placed the Cycones.

CAP. LXIIII.
of Inde, and the manners of the Indians of the temperate air of that Country,
of the Ryuers of Inde, of the wonderful beasts, trees, kynds of odours, and
precious stones in the same.
INde begins at the hyls called Emodii, The bounds of East India.
and extends from y^ south sea to the East Ocean, and from the North to ye
Mountain Caucasus, most healthful with the blastes of the South west wind.
It has Summer twyse a year, and twyse a year harvest: and in stedd of
Winter, it has the Eastern wyndes called Etesiae. Posidonius places this
Country directly against France, and surely there is no doubt at all in the
matter. For first being found by the wars of great Alexander, and since his
time traveled through and through by the diligence of Kings, it is now come
full and wholly to our knowledge.

Megasthenes having continued a good while among the Kings of Inde, wrate the
acts of y^ Country, to the intent to leave to his posterity the certainty of
those things that himself had seen with his eyes. Dennys also (who in
likewise was by king Philadelphus sent to see whither those things were true or
no,) wrytt the like.

Bacchus was borne of Jupiters thigh. Without the mouth of the River Indus, are
two Islands, Goldland
Chryse and Silver land
Argyre, so plentiful of metals, that diverse have reported them to have soyles
of gold and silver. The Manners and behauio^r of the Indians
All the Indians wear long hair, stained with a bluish or yellowish color.
Their chief attire is in precious stones.

No cost is bestowed in burial of the dead. Furthermore (as is expressed in
the books of King Iuba and King Archelaus) as much as the people disagree in
manners and conditions, so great difference is there in their attire. Some
wear lynnen garments some woollen, some go all naked, some cover but their
privy members, and many go clad in barks of trees. Some people are so tall,
that they will as easily vault over Oliphants, as if they were horses. Many
think it good neither to kill any living thing, nor to eat any flesh. Some
eat only fish, and live by ye Sea. There are that make as it were a sacrifice
of their Parents and kinsfolk, before they become bare with sickness or age,
and then make a feast with their flesh, which thing in that Country is not
counted a wickedness, but a godliness.

There are also that in extremity of sickness, or when diseases linger upon
them, get themselves into some secret corner far from resort, and there
quietly abide for death.

The Nation of the Aspagones The Aspagons
have goodly woods of green Bay and Box, and as for vynes and all other trees,
wherein is pleasure and beauty to delight, it has most plentious store of
them. The Indians have Philosophers whom they call Gynmosophists, Gymnosophists
who from the rising of the Sun to the gooing down thereof, behold the Globe
of that burning Planet with fixed eyes, serching in that fierye circle for
certain secret things, and standing all day long upon the scalding sand,
now on the one foot and now on the other. Strange kind of people.
At the Hill that is called Milo, dwell people that have their feet turned
backward, with eight toes on each foot.

Megasthenes says, that in diverse Mountains in Inde, are Nations that have
hands like Dogs, armed with talants, clad in hydes, having no likelihoode of
man's speech, but vttring a noise of barking, with rough chappes. We read in
C^esias, that certain Women bear Child but once, and that the Babes as soon
as they be borne, become by and by grayheaded: and that there is again another
nation which in their youth are hoare headed, and wexe black in their age,
which endures far beyond the race of our years. We read also of a people
called Monoscelans, The Monoscelans or one legged people.
borne there with one leg a piece, of singular swyftnesse: who when they will
defend themselves from the heat, lay themselves down upon their backs, and
shadow them with the largeness of their feet. They that dwell at the
fountain of Ganges, need no manner of victuals to feed upon. They live by the
sent of stubfruite and Crabbes, and when they have any long journey to go,
they carry the same with the^ for their bait, to refresh themselves with the
smell of the^ And if it happen them to take any corrupt air, certain it is,
that they die of it by and by. There is reported also to be a nation of women
which bear Children at five years of age, but their life endures not above
8. years. There are y^ want heads, and have their eyes in their shoulders.
There are also wild men, rough skinned, toothed like dogs, and that make a
terrible goarring. But among them that have some more care to live according to
reason, many women are married to one man, and when the husband is deceased,
each of them pleads before most grave Judges, concerning her deserts, and she
that by the sentence of y^ Judges is deemed to have been more dutiful and
seruicable then the rest, receives this reward of her victory, that at her
pleasure she may leap into the fire where her Husband is a burning, and
offer herself as a sacrifice upon his hearse. The rest live with infamy.

The hugeness of their Serpents is so excessyue, The hugeness of Serpents
that they swallow up Hearts, and other beasts of like bygnesse whole, yea and
as great as the Indian Ocean is, they swym through it, and pass over into
Islands a great way distant from the firm ^ande to seek feeding. And the self
same thing is a good argument to prove their hugeness, that they have force to
pass over such a breadth of salt water, and to attain to the places that they
aim at. There are many and wonderful beasts, out of the which multitude I
will pick some to treat of.

The Leucocrote passes all wild Beasts in swiftness. The Leucocrote.
It is of the bygnesse of an Ass, haunched like a Stagge, breasted and legged
like a Lion, headed like a Cammell, cloven cleed, mouthed up to both the
ears, and with one whole round bone insteede of teeth. Thus much as to his
shape. In voice he counterfetteth the speech of man. The Eale.
There is an Eale, otherwise like a horse, tayled like an Olyphant, of color
black, chapped like a Bore, armed with horns above a cubit long, pliable to
what use soever he list to put them. For they are not stife, but are bowed as
need shall require in fighting: of which he puts out the one when he
fights, and rolleth up the other, that if by any stripe the point of the one
be blunted, the other may succeed sharp in his room. He is compared to the
Waterhorses, and to say ye truth, he delights in waters to.

The Bulls of Inde are of color bright yellowe, The Bulls of Inde
exceeding wight of foot, with their hair growing the contrary way, and as
much mouth as head. These also bear horns pliable to what purpose they list,
so hard hyded, that nothing is able to enter, so vnmercifullie cruel, that
being caught, they kill themselves for moodinesse.

Among these breeds also y^ Manticora, The Manticora*
with three set of teeth in his head checkquerwise one against another, faced
like a man, gray eyed, sanguine colored bodied like a Lion, tayled like a
Scorpion with a stinging prick in the end, with so shrill a voice that it
counterfetteth the tunes of pypes, and the harmony of Trumpets. He seeks
most greedily after man's flesh. He is so swift of foot, and so nimble in
leaping, that there is no space so long that may forslowe him, nor any thing
so broad that can let him of his way. Strange Oxen
There are also O^en with one horn and three horns, whole hooued, and not
cloven cleed. But the cruellest is the Unicorne, a Monstar that belloweth
horribly, The Unicorn*
bodyed like a horse, footed like an Oliphant, tayled like a Swyne, and headed
like a Stagge. His horn sticks out of the midds of his ^orehead, of a
wonderful brightness about four foot long, so sharp, that whatsoever he
pusheth at, he strikes it through easily. He is never caught alive: killed he
may be, but taken he cannot be.

The waters also breed no less wonders. Strange Eeles
Ganges breeds Eeles of forty foot long, and Statius Sebosus says, that
the same River (among the chiefest miracles) swarmeth with worms both in name
and color gray. These have as it were arms not under six cubits long a
piece, so boystrous of strength, that with the hand thereof, they take hold
of Olyphants that come thither to drink, and hale them so rudelye, that they
pull them under the water. The Indian Seas have Fyshes called Thyrlpooles,
above the bygnesse of four Acres of ground. There are also which they call
Spowters
Physeters, which being huge beyond the measure of great Pyllars, lift
themselves above the sayleyards of Ships, and puff out the water that they
have haled in at their venting pipes, in such wise that many times they sink^
the vessels with the rage of water, that they let fall upon the Marryners.
Only Inde breeds the Poppiniey, Popinieyes and Parrets.
of color green, with a red list about his neck, whose byll is so hard,
that when he is thrown from high upon a stone, he saves himself upon his
byll, using it as an extraordinary defense of his infirmity. And his head is
so strong that if at any time he have need of stripes to put him in mind of
his lesson, (for he learneth to speak like a man) he must be knocked on the
pate with a wande of iron. While he is a Chicken, and as yet under two years
old, he learneth the things that are taught him more speedily, and bears
them more steadfastly in remembrance. Above that age he is somewhat more slow
of taking, forgetful, and v^apt to be taught. The number of toes makes the
difference between the nobler and the rascaller sort. The better have five
toes on a foot, the worse have three. His tongue is broad, and much broader
then the tongues of other byrds: and that is the cause of his perfection in
uttering words so distinctly. This nature of his made the Romans to have so
great pleasure and delight in him, that the barbarous people made a merchandise
of their Poppinieyes. The trees if Inde grow up in such an excessive height,
that they cannot shoot an arrowe over them. The Orchyards have Fig trees, the
bodies whereof are threescore paces about, Of Figtrees
and their boughs shadow two furlongs every way, the largeness of their
leaves is compared to the shield of the Amazons, and the fruit is of very
singular sweetness. The Fenny grounds bring forth a Reed Reeds.
of such grosenes, that between knot and knot they make boats of the^ to row
in. Out of the roots whereof, is pressed a sweet juice, as pleasant as honny.
The prerogative of the Island Tylos.
There is an Island of Inde called Tylos, which bears Date trees, brings
forth Olyues, and abounds in Uynes. It surmounteth all lands in this one
wonder, that what tree soever grows therein, is never without leaves.

There begins Mount Caucasus, which with his continual ridge, peirceth
through the most part of the world. The same hill on his front that faceth the
Sun, bears Pepper Trees: which men affirm to be like the Juniper Tree, and
to bring forth sundry fruits. Of Pepper and of the Pepper-tree,
That fruit that comes forth first, is like the agglets of Hasles, and is
called long Pepper. That which is uncorrupted, is called white Pepper. That
which has the skin wrinckled and scorched with the heat, is called black
Pepper. Lastly, that which falls down and is parched with the burning Sun,
takes ^ys name of his color. But that which is stripped of the Tree as it is,
is called white Pepper. And as only Inde yields Pepper, so alonely yeelddeth
it Ebonye: Ebony,
and yet not in all places but in a very little part of the Country does it
yield this kind of wood.

The Tree for the most part is slender, and growing many together, thin
branched, swelling to the bigness of the stock, with a houen rind, and very
full of holes with open veins, insomuch that for all the uttermost bark, the
very wood is scarce covered with a thynne rynde. All the wood of it is
medicinable, and it is, almost of the same fashion and color that is in the
Yeat stone.

The Kings of Inde have their Scepters hereof, and they make the Images of
their Gods of none other wood then Ebonye. They report also that no noisome
liquor can be contained in this kind of s^uffe, and that whatsoever is
hurtful, is disapointed by the touching hereof. And for this pleasure they
make Cups of Ebonye, wherefore it is no marvel though it be had in great price
in foreign Realms, considering it is so much honored in the place it comes
from, and where it grows. The great Pompey brought Ebonye first out of Inde
and showed it in Rome, when he tryumphed for vanquishing Methridates. Inde
yields also Calamus odoratus, Calamus odoratus.
a special remedy against greefes in the bowels. It gives many other sweet
Odours, acceptable for the pleasantness of their wonderful flauor.

Of the Jewels of Inde, the chief pre-eminence is in the Diamond, The Diamond
and the ^undry sorts and natures of them,
as which drives away franticknes, resists venims, and expulseth vain
fears from such as have qualmes coming over their hearts. This I though was to
be spoken first, of those things that have respect to profit. Now will show
how many and what sorts of Diamonds there be, and what color is best to be
liked in each of them. In a certain kind of Crystal, there is found this
kind of stuff: which grows after the likeness of most sheere water gently
gathering sharp at both ends to a sixcornered point, and it is never found
above the bygnesse of a Filberd kernel. The next unto this is found in the
excellentest gold, somewhat paler, and shyning more toward the color of
silver. The third is found in the veins of Copper, The Syderite
drawing toward the color of brass: which is very effectual in medicine,
and is called Siderites. The fourth is gathered in yro^ mines, of weightier
substance then the rest, but not like them in virtue. For both this and that
which is found in Copper may be broken, and for the most part they are peirced
through with another Diamond. But those that we spoke of first, can neither be
broken with iron nor hurt with fire. Notwithstanding, if they be steeped long
in Goats blood, (so it be warm and fresh bleeding from the beast,) at length
(with the breaking of some Hammers, and stythes before) they yield and shyuer
in pieces: which sparks are greatly sought for of engrauers to draw in any
precious stone withal. Between the Diamonde and the Lodestone is a certain
privy dissension of nature, The Lodestone
in so much as if they be laid near together, the Diamonde will not suffer
the Lodestone to draw iron unto him: or if y^ Lodestone have already drawn a
piece of iron to it, the Diamond snatcheth and pulls away as his bootye
whatsoever the Lodestone has taken hold of. Moreover, Inde brings forth the
Lychnite, the freshnes of whose light is furthered by the brightness of burning
candles: The Lychnite or Lampstone.
and therefore the Greeks have called it Lychnits. There are of two sorts: for
either it is of an orient purple color, or else it is shadowed somewhat with a
sheere scarlett. If it be pure, it admits an unstained cleerenesse through
all the inward part of it. Also it if be heat with the Sun beams, or catch
warmth by chasing between ones fingers, it draws hard to it either the
husks of chafe, or the shreds of paper, and it resists stoutly against
engrauing. And if at any time it be engraven, when a man seals therewith,
it holds part of the wax still, as it were some lively thing should byte it.
The Indians do grind their Beryll in pieces six square, to the intent by
reflection of the corners, The Beryll
to cheer up the dullness of his weak color. Of Beryll are sundry sorts. The
excellentest do with a certain equal mixture of ruddines and deep blew,
ouershadowed with a green, resemble the grace of the pure Sea. A degree
beneath these are the Chrysoberyes, The Chrysoberill, or goldberill The
ch^ysoprase or golden^eeke The bastard Iaci^ts,
which having a fainter gloss, are shadowed about with a golden cloud. The
Chrysoprases also (whose gloss is of gold and Leekgreene mixed together) are
judged to the kind of Beryll as well as the other. The bastard Iacints, that
is to say, those which in manner resemble the Iacints, are also allowed for
Beryls. But as for those that are like Crystal, and are stained with little
hayres running in and out, (for that is the name of their fault) the
skilfullest Lapidaries have accounted for y^ meanest sort. The Kings of Inde
love to fashion this kind of Jewels into very long rols: and making holes
through them they hang them at the brystles of their Olyphants in stedde of
poytrels and trappers, or else at their ears, on both sides of their heads,
set in bosses of gold, to the intent to flourish their withered color with a
more fulsome brightness, by means of the metal cunningly wrought about
them, (which as a foil) may cause them to gather a more glystring light.

CAP. LXV.
Of the I Will Taprobane, and by what means it came first to knowledge: what
manner of sailing is there: what is the custom of that Country in choosing
their King, also of the shelfishes Margarits, and perles.
Until such time as the rashness of man serching the Sea throughlye found the
truth of the matter, The first discouerers of the I Will of Taprobane now called
Zeilan,
men thought a great while, that the I Will of Taprobane had been another
world, and y^ very same which the Anticthones were believed to inhabit. But the
valiantnes of great Alexander, suffered not the ignorance of the common error
to continue any longar: but he spread the renown of his name even into these
unknown places. For One sicritus Admiral of the fleet of Macedonie serching
out this land, brought unto our knowledge how big it is, what it breeds
and in what case it stood. It extends seven thousand furlongs in length, and
five thousand in breadth. It is divided into two parts with a River. For part
thereof is replenished with beasts and Olypyants, greater than Inde bears,
and the rest of it is possessed by men. It is abundantly stored with moother
Perles and all precious stones. Margarits or moother perle^
It is situate between the East and the West. It begins at y^ Eastern
Sea, and lies full before Inde. From the Parsians a nation of Inde it has
been twenty days sailing thither. But forasmuch as they went in boats of
Reed and shyps of Nyle, A shalow Sea,
it is now abridged to seven days sailing of one of our shyps. Between them
and Inde lies a shallow Sea, not above six fathom deep, and yet in certain
Channels of such an exceeding depth, that there was never Ancor yet that could
come to the bottom thereof. There is no heed to be taken of the stars in
sailing there. For neither is Charles wayne seen there, neither do the seven
stars called They be also called Pleiades and Athlantides*
Vergiliae at any time appear there. They see the Moon above the earth, only
from the 8. day to the 16. There shines Canopos a bright star, and of very
great largnes. They have the sun rising on their right side, and ye sun setting
on their left. Sailing by the flight of birds
Wherefore as there is nothing for men to observe whereby they may sail to
arrive at ye appointed place: birds lead the^ whose flight in making to y^
landward, they use as a lodestar to direct their course. There is no sailing
thither but 4. momoneths months in all the year. Here is all that we knew
of Taprobane until the reign of the Emperor Claudius, at which time fortune
opened a wyder gappe of knowledge. For one that late before was the servant of
Annius Plocamus (who then was customer of ye red Sea) as he was sailing toward
Arabie, was driven by violence of the North wind along the Coaste of Now
called Rasigut
Carmanie, and the fifteenth day arrived at this shore and took harbrough in a
Haven called Hyppuros. There learning the language in six months, and being
admitted to the Kings speech, he brought word again, what he had found.
That is to say, how the king wondered at the money that was taken with him,
because the same being stamped with diverse faces, had nevertheless like
weight. At the contemplation of which equality, when he coueted more
earnestlye the freendhip of the people of Rome, he sent Ambassadors to us, A
description of the personages and manners of the people of (...).
of whom the chief was Rachias, by who^ all things were brought to our
knowledge. Those men excelled all others in talenesse of personage, and making.
They dye their hair, they are gray eyed, grym of countenance, and have a
terrible reere in speaking.

Such of them as are short lived, continue to the age of a hundred years: all
others live much longer, and far beyond the reach of man's frailty. They
sleep not from before the day break till the night be shut in, for they
ever rise before day. They make their houses but a little height above the
ground. Corn holds always at one stay. They know not what Uynes mean. They
have abundance of Apples, and such other kind of fruits. They worship
Hercules for their God. The choosing of their king
In choosing their King, nobility avails not, but the general consent of
the Country. For the people chooses such a one, as is of approved good
behavior, and rooted in gentleness from his cradle, and at that time an old
man. And this is chiefly requisite in him, that he have no children. For he
that is a Father, though his life be never so virtuous he is not admitted to
the kingdom. And if perchance in the time of his reign he beget a child, he
is deposed. For above all things this is most straightly observed, that the
kingdom go not by inheritance. The executing of Justice
Furthermore, although the King seem to be never so good a Iusticer, yet they
will not let him have the Law in his own hand. And therefore he admits
fortye Moderators, because he shall not sit alone upon matmatters of life and
death. Yea and if the judgment shall then also be misliked: appeal is made to
ye people, who appoint threescore and ten Judges, to whose determination there
is no remedy but they must needs stand. The King is apparelled in raiment
unlike the common fashion, The King is subject to the Laws,
called Syrma, a robe wherewyth we see Liber Pater was wont to be clad. If it
happen that the King himself be taken tardie in any offense, and thereof
convicted, he is punished with death: howbe it, not so that any man lays
hands upon him. But by the common consent of the whole Realm, he is utterly
forbidden the use of all things: yea even communication with any manne is
denied him after he is cast. Their pastyme^
They give themselves to good nurture universally. Sometime they spend the
time in hunting, and that of no rascal game, for they seek only for Tigers
or Oliphants. Monstrous Se^ Tortoyses
Moreover they ransacke the Seas in fishing, for delight to catch the Sea
Tortoyses: the hugeness of whom is such, that the shell of one of them will
make a house able to receive a great household of many persons without
pestring. The greater part of this I Will is parched with heat, and ends in
waste wilderness.

The Sea that beats upon the one side thereof, grows so full of shrubs
(and those of very green color) that sometime the tops of the trees are
brushed away with the sternes of shyps. From the tops of their Mountains
they behold the Sea cost of y^ Seres. They delight greatly in gold: and to
garnishe their Cups withal, they set them full of all kind of Jewels. Of the
Margarite or Moother perle, Of Perles,
They hew out Marble that is checkered, and gather great store of Moother
perles, and those of the greatest sort. They be shelfishes in whom this kind
of stones is sought, which at a certain time of the year when desire of
conception pricketh them forward, do thirst after the deawe as after their
milter: for desire whereof they gape, and when the Moon sheadeth most
abundance of moisture, they draw the desired humor by a certain sucking,
whereby they conceive and are great with youg, and according to the quality of
the thing they have glutted in, such is the disposition of the perles that they
breed. For if it be pure that they have taken in, their little round stones
are white: if it were troubled, either they have a faint pale color* or else
are stained with a red. Thus have they their seed rather of the air then of
y^ Sea. Finally, as often as they receive in the morning dew the pearl
becomes cleerer: and when they suck in the evening dew, they become dimmer,
and the more they have haled in, so much the stone grows greater If it
chance to lighten upon the sudden, they shut for fear, and closing fast
for sudden fearefulnes, they take in that which they loose again ere it be
ripe: for then they have very small stones, or else none at all. And the
shelfishes themselves have a kind of understanding, for they are afraid to
have their issue stained: insomuch as when the day is at y^ hotest, because
their stones should not be dimmed with the heat, they ducke under the water,
and diue into the deepes to save them from the heat. Nevertheless, age
forestandeth this foresight of theirs. For the whitnes decays by age, and as
the shelfishes wexe greater, the perles wex^ more yellowe. While the perle is
in the water it is soft, and as soon as it is taken out of the shell it
becomes hard. There are never found above one in shell, and therefore the
Latins call them Unions. Unions
They say they be never found above half an inche big. The shelfishes are
afraid to be laid for by the Fyshers: and thereon it comes to pass, that
they hide themselves for the most part, either among the Rocks or else among the
Dogfishes. They swymme in scoles. Some one is Captain of the whole scole. If
he be taken, even those that escaped return into the nett again. Inde
yields perles, Perles
and so does the Seacoast of Brytaine, as Julius Caesar (by the inscription y^
was written upon if) witnesses, that the brestplate which be dedicated to his
mother Venus in her Temple, was made of British perles. It is a thing commonly
known that Lollia Paulina, the wy^e of the Emperor Caius, had a gown of
perles valued then at four hundred thousand Sestertius: through covetousness
in getting whereof, her father Marcus Lollius for spoiling the Kings of the
East, offended Caius Caesar the son of Augustus, and was put out of the
Princes favor, for sorrow whereof ^e poisoned himself. This is also registered
by the diligence of old men, that perles were first brought to Rome in the time
of Sylla.

CAP. LXVI.
The Iournall of Inde.
FRom the Island In stedde of Ausea it should be Taprobane
Ausea there is a direct cut to the firm land. Therefore from the Island
Taprobane let us return back to Inde: for the things of Inde are worth the
seeing. But if I should make tariance about the Cities and nations of Inde, I
should pass the bounds of my prepurposed abridgment. Next unto the River
Indus, they had a City named Capissa, Arachosia
which Cyrus rased. Arachosia standing upon the River Arachota was builded by
Semyramis. Alexander the great builded the Town of Cadrusi^ by Mount Caucasus*
whereas also is Alexandria which is thirty furlongs wide. There are many other
also, but these are of the most renowned. After the Indians the Fisheaters
I^thyophags possess the Hill Countries: whom great Alexander subduing, forbad
them to eat fish, for they lived thereby before. Beyond these are the deserts
of Carmania, then Persia, and so a journey by Sea, The Island of the Sun
wherein is the Island of the Sun which is always red, and not able to be
come unto by any living creature: for it kills all living things that are
brought into it. As men return out of Inde, the first sight that they have of
Charlsis waine is at Hy^anis a River of Carmania. They say that the dwelling of
Achaemenides was in this Coaste. Rasigut
Between the Promontorie of Carmania and Arabie, is fifty miles. Then are
there three Isles: about which there come forth salt water Snakes of twenty
cubits long. The way from Alexandria in Egypt unto Ind^
H^ere it is to be declared, how the way lies from Alexandria in Egypt unto
Inde.

First ye must go by water up the Nyle with a Northeast wind unto Copton.
Then by land unto Hydreum. From thence passing over certain mansions, ye come
to Berenice whereas is a Haue^ of the red Sea. After that, ye must arrive at a
Haven of Arabie called Ocelis. The next arrival unto that is Muziru^, a Mart
Town of Inde, diffamed for Sea Rouers. Afterward by diverse Havens ye come to
Cottonare, to which Town they convey their pepper in boats made of one whole
Trunk. Those that go to Inde take water either before the beginning of the
dog days, or immediately after the beginning of them, in the mids of Summer.
And when they come back again they sail in December. The speediest wynd out
of Inde* ward is the Northeast. But when they come to the Red sea, then must
either a Southeast or a full South wind serve. The largeness of Inde is
reported to be seven thousand and fifty miles. The space of Carmania is a
hundred miles, a part whereof is not without Uynes. Moreover, they have a kind
of men that live by nothing else but by the flesh of Tortoyles, rugged and
hayrie all saving the face, which alonelie has a thynne skin, and they be
clad in skynnes of fishes. They are named Tortoys^ater^
Chelonophages.

CAP. LXVII.
of the Gulf of Persia, and the Gulf of Arabie, and of the Azanian Sea.
THe red sea breaks into these Coasts, and is divided into two Gulfs. The
Gulf of Persia,
Whereof, that which is toward the East, is called the Gulf of Persia, because
the Persians inhabit that coast. It is in compass six thousand and twenty
miles about. The other Gulf oueragainst which lies Arabie) is called the
Arabic Gulf, The Gulf of Arabie
and the Ocean that flows in there, is called the Azanian Sea. Upon Carmania
joins Persia, Persia,
which begins at the Island Aphrodisia, welthy of sundry sorts of riches,
translated sometime into y^ name of Parthians, stretching fifty miles along
the sea coast, where it faceth the West. The noblest Town of that Realm is
Susa, Susa,
in which is the temple of Susia Diana. A hundred and five and thirty miles
from Susa, is the town Babytace, all the inhabiters whereof (for the hatred
they bear to gold,) do bye up this kind of metal, and delue it deep in
the ground, to the intent they should not be defiled with the use thereof, and
so work unrighteously for covetousness sake. Heereabouts is most uncertain
measuring of grounds, The uncertainty of measuring in Persia,
and not without cause, inasmuch as some nations about Persis meet their lands
by Schaenes, some by Parasanges, and othersome after an unknown manner, so
that their uncertain order in meeting, makes that a man cannot tell what
measure to trust unto.

CAP. LXVIII.
of Parthia, and of King Cyrus tomb.
PArthia is so large a Country, that on y^ southside it encloseth the red sea,
and on the North side the Hyrcanian Sea. In it are eighteen Kingdoms which are
divided into two parts. Eleven of them which are called the upper kingdoms,
begin at the borders of Armenie, and pass along the Caspian sea coast, to
the land of the Scithians, with whom they live like good peaceable neighbors.
The other seven nether kingdoms (for so they term the^) have on the East the
Aries and Arians, on the South Carmania, on the West the Medes, and on the
North the Hyrcanians. And Media Media*
if self, running overthwart on the west side, encloseth both the kingdoms of
Parthia. On the North it is bounded with Armenia, on the East it beholds the
Caspians, on y^ South Persis, and from thence this Coast passes forth to a
Castle which the Wysemen call Passargada, and here is the Tomb of King Cyrus.

CAP. LXIX.
of Babylon, of the Athlantish Ocean* of the Islands of the Gorgons, and of the
fortunate Isles.
THe head of the Country Chaldea is Babylon, Babylon,
builded by Semyramis, so renowned that for the nobleness thereof, both the
Assyrians and Mesopotamians yielded into the name of Babylon. the City is in
compass threescore miles, environed with walls two hundred foot high and
fifty foot broad, every foot being longer then the foot which we measure
with, by the breadth of three of our longest fingers. The River Euphrates
runs through it. There is the Temple of Belus lupiter whom even the religion
it self that believes there is a God, reports to have been the founder of
that heavenly discipline. C^e^ipho^
In spyght of this City, the Parthyans builded Ctesiphon. But now it is time
to retire to the Coasts of the Ocean, and to call back my pen into Aethyop.
For as we have already told how the Athlantish Sea takes his beginning at
the west and at Spain: so it is also convenient to be declared, from whence
he begins first to bear the name of Atlas in these parts of the world
also. The Azanian Sea holds on unto the Coaste of Aethyop. The Ethiopian Sea
continues from thence to the Promontorie Mossylicum, and from thence forth it
takes again the name of the Athlantish Ocean. Therefore, whereas many have
held opinion, that all that part is not possible to be sailed by reason of
the exceeding heat: Iuba avouches the contrary. And for assured proof that
the matter is so indeed, The navigations from I^de to Spain
he makes a rehearsal of the Nations and Islands by the way: giving us to
understand, that all that Sea is saylable from Inde unto the straights of
Marrock: so as it be when the wind lies Southwest and by west, the blast
whereof is able to drive any Navy by Arabie, Egypt, and Mauritanie, so they
direct their course from that Promontory of Inde which some call Lepten acran,
and othersome name Drepanum. Moreover, he added the places of harbrough and the
distance of them one from another. For from the promontorie of Inde to the
Island Malachus, they affirm to be fifteen hundred miles. From Malachus to
Scaeneon two hundred twenty five miles. From thence to the Island Sadanus a
hundred and fifty miles: and so is made to the open Sea, eight hundred
threescore and fifteen miles.

The same I^ba so strives against the opinion of many which say that most
part of this Coast is vninhabitable of mankind by reason of the heat of the
Sun, that he affyrmeth the Merchantmen to be troubled in their passage out
of the Isles of Arabie, which the Arabians called Ascitae possess, For Askos in
Greek signifies a bottle or a Tubbe.
who have that name of their doings. For they join borders together, and
cover them over with Leather, and sailing forth in this kind of Ship,
assail the passeng^rs with venom^d Darts.

And he affyrmeth also that the scorched Countries of Aethiop are inhabited by
the nations of the I^thyophages and Troglodits, of whom the Troglodits The
Troglodits
are so swift a foot, that they overtake the wild Beasts whom they chase.
The Icthyophags are able to swim in the salt water as well as the very Beasts
of the Sea.

In serching the Athlantish Sea even to the west be makes mention of the Isles
of the Gorgons The Gorgon Isles.
also. The Gorgon Isles (as we understand) are over against the Promontorie
which we call The western horn.
Hesperionkeras. These are inhabited by the Monstars called Gorgons: and
surely a monstrous nation possesses them yet. They are distant from the maine
land two days sailing. Xenophon Lampsacenus has reported that Hanno King of
the Afers wasted over into them, and found women there as swyft as byrds and
that of all the number that were seen, but two could be taken, which were so
rough and rugged of body, that for a remembrance of the strange sight, he
hung up their two skins for a wonder among other gyfts in the Temple of Juno,
which continued there unto the destruction of Carthage.

Beyond the Gorgons are the Isles of the Hesperides, which (as Sebosus
affyrmeth) are withdrawn forty days sailing into the innermost heart of the
Sea. They report that the fortunate Isles lie against the left side of
Mauritanie, The Canaries
which Iuba says are situate under the South, but next unto the West. By
reason of the names of these, I suppose a great wonder is looked for: but the
matter is not equal to the same of the word.

In the first of them which is called Ombrion, neither is nor has been any
houses. The tops of the Hyls are watery with Pooles. Reeds grow up to the
bygnes of Trees. Those of them that be black, when they be pressed yield a
most bitter liquor, but thos^ that be white, yield a juice good to make drink
of. They say that another of those Isles is named Iunoma, wherein are a few
cotages ilfauoredly pyked at the tops. The third is near unto this and of y^
same name, but all is bare and naked. The fourth is called Goateland
Capraria, which swarmeth beyond al measure with monstrous great Lucerts.

Next follows Snowland
Niuaria, where the air is thick and clowdie, and therefore ever snowing. And
lastly Dogland
Canaria replenished with Dogs of exceeding hugeness, whereof two were
presented to King Iuba. In that I Will remain some foundations of buildings. There
is great plenty of byrds, fields full of fruitful Trees, places bearing Dates,
great store of Pyneapples, abundance of Honney, and Ryuers swarming with
Fyshes called Silures. Much like a Sturgion
Also it is said that the wauing Sea casts up monstrous beasts upon the
land, which lying still there and rotting, infect all things with an horrible
stinche, and therefore the quality of those Islands agree not altogether to
their name.

FINIS.

