DE REPVBLICA ANGLORVM. The manner of Government or policy of the Realm of
England, compiled by the Honorable man Thomas Smyth, Doctor of the civil laws,
Knight and principal Secretary unto the two most worthy Princes, King
Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth. Seen and allowed.

AT LONDON, Printed by Henry Midleton for Gregory Seton.

Anno Domini 1583.

To the Reader.
TO conceal the graces inspired by God, or the gifts ingraffed by nature, or
the virtues atchiued unto our selves by industry, in all ages and of all wise
men was accounted vnduetifulnesse, unkindness and impiety unto that common
wealth, in the which, and unto the which we are both bred and borne: but to
suppress the worthy works of any author, may justly be judged not only
injury to the person, but even envy at the whole world. Wherefore chauncing
upon this short discourse compiled by the honorable knight sir Thomas Smyth,
and considering that the same could not but be a great light unto the ignorant,
and no less delight unto the learned in the laws and policy of sundry
regiments: I thought it part of my duty, as well for reviving of the fame of so
notable a man, as for the public imparting of so pythie a treatise, to present
the same unto thy indifferent and discreet judgment. Wherein although the
errors and rashness of Scribes, appearing in the contrariety and corruption of
coppies, happening both by the length of time since the first making, as also
by the often transcripting might justly have been mine excuse or rather
discourage: yet weying the authority of the author together with the gravity
of the matter, I made no doubt but that the reverence due unto the one, and the
recompense deserved by the other would easily counteruail all faults committed
by a clarke and writer. And whereas some terms or other matters may seem to
dissent from the usual phrase of the common laws of this realm: not
withstanding to him that will consider that the profession of the maker was
principally in the civil laws, and therefore not to be expected as one
excellent in both, and also that the finishing of this work was in France
far from his library, and in an ambassad even in the midst of weighty
affairs, it cannot nor ought not without great ingratitude be displesant or in
any sort disliking. Wherefore (gentle Reader) accept in good part my zeal and
this honorable man's travail: assuring thy self that the same framed by an
expert workemaister, and forged of pure and excellent metal, will not fail
in proouing to be a right commodious instrument.

Vale.
DE REPVBLICA ANGLORVM. The manner of government or policy of the REALM of
ENGLAND.
Of the diversities of common wealths or government. CHAP. I.
THey that have written heretofore of Common wealths, have brought them into
three most simple and special kinds or fashions of government. The first
where one alone does govern, is called of the Greeks (...), Monarchia.
the second, where the smaller number, commonly called of them (...),
Aristocratiae.
and the third where the multitude does rule (...). Democratia.
To rule* is understood to have the highest and supreme authority of
commandment. That part or member of the common wealth is said to rule which
does controwle, correct, and direct all other members of the common wealth.
That part which does rule, define and command according to the form of the
government, is taken in every common wealth to be just and law: As a rule is
always to be understood to be straight, and to which all works be to be
conformed, and by it to be judged: I do not mean the Lesbians rule which is
conformed to the stone: but the right rule whereby the Artificer and the
Architect do judge the straightness of every man's work, he to be reckoned
to make his work perfectest, who goes nearest to the straightness.

What is just or Law in every common wealth or government. CHAP. 2.
NOw it does appear, that it is profitable to every common wealth (as it is
to every thing generally and particularly) to be kept in her most perfect
estate. Then if that part which does bear the rule, do command that which is
profitable to it, and the commandment of that part which does rule on that
sort, is to be accepted in every common wealth respectively to be just (as we
have said before): it must needs follow, that the definition which
Thrasimachus did make, that to be just which is the profit of the ruling and
most strong part (if it be meant of the City or common wealth) is not so far
out of the way, Just.
(if it be ciuilly understood) as Plato would make it. But as there is
profitable and likelyhoode of profit, so there is right and likelyhoode of
right. And as well may the ruling and Sovereign part command that which is not
his profit, as the just man may offend (notwithstanding his just and true
meaning) when he would amend that which is amiss, and help the common wealth,
and do good unto it. For in as much as he attempteth to do contrary to the
Law which is already put, he therefore by the law is justly to be condemned,
because his doing is contrary to the law and the ordinance of that part
which does command.

An other division of common wealths. CHAP. 3.
BUt this matter yet takes an other doubt: for of these manner of rulinges by
one, by the fewer part, and by the multitude or greater number, they which have
more methodically and more distinctly and perfectly written upon them, do make
a subdiuision: and dividing each into two, make the one good and just, and the
other evil and unjust: as, where one rules, the one they call a king or
(...), the other (...), a tyrant: where the fewer number, the one they name a
governing of the best men (...) or Remp. optimatum, the other of the usurping
of a few Gentlemen, or a few of the richer and stronger sort (...), or Paucorum
potestatem: and where the multitude does govern, the one they call a common
wealth by the general name (...), or the rule of the people (...), the other
the rule or the usurping of the popular or rascal and viler sort, because they
be more in number (...).

Example of chaunges in the manner of government. CHAP. 4.
IN common wealths which have had long continuance, the diversities of times
have made all these manners of ruling or government to be seen: As in Rome:
kings Romulus, Numa, Seruius: tyrants, Tarquinius, Sylla, Caesar: the rule of
best men, as in time when the first Consuls were: and the usurping of a few, as
of the Senators after the death of Tarquinius, and before the succession of the
Tribunate, and manifestly in the Decemuirate, but more perniciously in the
Triumuirate of Caesar, Crassus, and Pompeius: and afterward in the Triumuirate
of Octauius, Antonius, and Lepidus: The common wealth and rule of the people,
as in the expulsing of the decemuiri and long after, especially after the law
was made, either by Horatius, or (as some would have it) Hortentius, quod plebs
sciuerit, id populum teneat. And the ruling and usurping of the popular and
rascal, as a little before Sylla his reign, and a little before Caius Caesar's
reign. For the usurping of the rascality ca^ never long endure, but
necessarily breeds, and quickly brings forth a tyrant. Of this, has
Athens, Syracuse, Lacedemon and other old ancient ruling Cities had
experience, and a man need not doubt but that other common wealths have
followed the same rate. For the nature of man is never to stand still in one
manner of estate, but to grow from the less to the more, and decay from the
more again to the less, till it come to the fatal end and destruction, with
many turns and turmoyles of sickness and recovering, seldom standing in a
perfect health, neither of a man's body it self, nor of the politic body
which is compact of the same.

Of the question what is right and just in every common wealth. CHAP. 5.
SO when the common wealth is evil governed by an evil ruler and unjust (as
in the three last named which be rather a sickness of the politic body
than perfect and good estates) if the laws be made, as most like they be
always to maintain that estate: the question remains whether the obedience
of them be just, and the disobedience wrong: the profit and conservation of
that estate right and justice, or the dissolution: and whether a good and
upright man, and lover of his country ought to maintain and obey them, or to
seek by all means to abolish them, which great and hautie courages have often
attempted: as Dion to rise up against Dionysius, Thrasibulus against the xxx.
tyrants, Brutus and Cassius against Caesar, which has bin cause of many
commotions in common wealths, whereof the judgment of the common people is
according to the event and success: of them which be learned, according to the
purpose of the doers, and the estate of the time then present. Certain it is
that it is always a doubtful and hasardous matter to meddle with the
changing of the laws and government, or to disobey the orders of the rule or
government, which a man does find already established.

That common wealths or gouernements are not most commonly simple but mixed.
CHAP. 6
NOw although the gouernements of common wealths be thus divided into three,
and cutting each into two, so into six, yet you must not take that ye shall
find any common wealth or government simple, pure and absolute in his sort
and kind, but as wise men have divided for understandings sake and fantasied
iiii. simple bodies which they call elements, as fire, air, water, earth, and
in a man's body four complexions or temperatures, as choleric, sanguine,
phlegmatique, and melancolique: not that ye shall find the one utterly perfect
without mixtion of the other, for that nature almost will not suffer, but
understanding does discern each nature as in his sincerity: so seldom or
never shall you find common wealths or government which is absolutely and
sincerely made of any of them above named, but always mixed with an other, and
has the name of that which is more and ouerruleth the other always or for the
most part.

The definition of a king and of a tyrant. CHAP. 7.
WHere one person bears the rule they define that to be the estate of a king,
Rex.
who by succession or election comes with the good will of the people to that
government, and does administer the common wealth by the laws of the same and
by equity, and does seek the profit of the people as much as his own.
Tyrannus.
A tyrant they name him, who by force comes to the Monarchy against the will
of the people, breaks laws already made at his pleasure, makes other
without the advice and consent of the people, and regards not the wealth of
his communes but the advancement of him self, his faction, and kindred. These
definitions du contain three differences: the obtaining of the authority, the
manner of administration thereof, and the butte or mark whereunto it does tend
and shoot. So as one may be a tyrant by his entry and getting of the
government, and a king in the administration thereof. As a man may think of
Octauius, and peradventure of Sylla. For they both coming by tyranny and
violence to that state, did seem to travail very much for the better order
of the common wealth, howbeit either of them after a diverse manner. An other
may be a king by entry, and a tyrant by administration, as Nero, Domitian, and
Commodus: for the empire came to them by succession, but their administration
was utterly tyrannical, of Nero after five years, of Domitian and Commodus
very shortly upon their new honor. Some both in the coming to their Empire,
and in the butte which they shoot at, be kings, but the manner of their ruling
is tyrannical: as many Emperous after Caesar and Octauius, and many Popes of
Rome. The Emperors claim this tyra^nicall power by pretense of that Rogation
or plebiscitum, which Caius Caesar or Octauius obtained, by which all the
people of Rome did confer their power and authority unto Caesar wholly.

The Pope groundeth his from Christ ( cui omnis potestas data est in coelo and
in terra) whose successor he pretends to be: yet the general Councels make a
strife with him, to make the Popes power either Aristocratian or at the least
legitimum regnum, and would feign bridle that absolutam potestatem. Some men
do judge the same of the kings of France, and certain Princes of Italy and
other places, because they make and abrogate laws and edictes, lay on tributs
and impositions of their own will, or by the private Counsel and advise of
their friends and favorites only, without the consent of the people. Populus.
The people I call that which the word populus does signify, the whole body
and the three estates of the common wealth: and they blame Jews the xi. for
bringing the administration royal of France, from the lawful and regulate
reign, to the absolute and tyrannical power and government. He himself was
wont to glory and say, he had brought the crown of France horse de page, as
one would say out of Wardship.

Of the absolute king. CHAP. 8.
OTher do call that kind of administration which the Greeks do call (...),
not tyranny, but the absolute power of a king, which they would pretend that
every king has, if he would use the same. The other they call (...) or the
Royal power regulate by laws: of this I will not dispute at this time. But as
such absolute administration in time of war when all is in arms, and when
laws hold their peace because they cannot be heard, is most necessary: so in
time of peace, the same is very dangerous, as well to him that does use it,
and much more to the people upon whom it is used: whereof the cause is the
frailty of man's nature, which (as Plato says) cannot abide or bear long that
absolute and vncontrowled authority, without swelling into too much pride and
insolency. And therefore the Romances did wisely, who would not suffer any
man to keep the Dictatorship above fire months, Dictatorship.
because the Dictators (for that time) had this absolute power, which some
Greeks named a lawful tyranny for a time. As I remember, Aristotle, (who of
all writers has most absolutely and methodically treated of the division and
natures of common wealths) makes this sort of government to be one kind of
kings. But all comes to one effect: for at the first, all kings ruled
absolutely, as they who were either the heads and most ancient of their
families, derived out of their own bodies, as Adam, Noa, Abraham, Jacob, Esau,
reigning absolutely over their own children and bondmen as reason was* or else
in the rude world amongst barbarous and ignorant people, some one then whom
God had endewed with singular wisdom to invent things necessary for the
nourishing and defense of the multitude, and to administer justice did so far
excel other, that all the rest were but beasts in comparison of him, and for
that excellencio willingly had this authority given him of the multitude, and
of the Gentiles when he was dead and almost when he was yet living, was taken
for a God, of others for a Prophet. Such among the Jews were Moses, Joshua, and
the other judges, as Samuel, etc. Romulus and Numa amongst the Romances,
Lycurgus and Solon and diverse other among the Greeks, Zamolxis among the
Thracians, Mahomet among the Arabians: And this kind of rule among the Greeks
is called (...), Tyrannis.
which of it self at the first was not a name odious: But because they who had
such rule at the first, did for the most part abuse the same, wared insolent
and proud, unjust, and not regarding the common wealth, committed such acts
as were horrible and odious, as killing me^ without cause, abusing their wives
and daughters, taking and spoiling all men's goods at their pleasures, and were
not shepheardes as they ought to be, but rather robbers and deuourers of the
people, whereof some were conte^ners of God, as Dionysius, other while they
lived like diuils, and would yet be adored and accounted for Gods, as Caius
Caligula and Domitian: that kind of administration and manner also, at the first
not evil, has taken the signification and definition of the vice of the
abusers, so that now both in Greek, Latin, and English a tyrant is counted
he, who is an evil king, and who has no regard to the wealth of his people,
but seeks only to magnify himself and his, and to satisfy his vicious and
cruel appetite, without respect of God, of right or of the law: because that
for the most part they who have had that absolute power have been such.

Of the name king and thadministration of England. CHAP. 9.
THat which we call in one syllable king, in english the old english men and
the Saxons from whom our tongue is derived to this day calls in two syllabes
cyning, which whether it comes of cen or ken which betokens to know and
understand, or can, which betokens to be able or to have power, I can not
tell. The participle absolute of the one we use yet, as when we say a cunning
man, Vir prudens aut sciens: the verb of the other as I can do this, possum hoc
facere. By old and ancient histories that I have red, I do not understand
that our nation has used any other general authority in this realm neither
Aristocraticall, nor Democraticall, but only the royal and kingly majesty
which at the first was divided into many and sundry kings, each absolutely
reigning in his country, not under the subjection of other, till by fighting
the one with the other, the ouercommed always falling to the augmentation of the
vanquisher and ouercommer, at the last the realm of England grew into one
Monarchy. Neither any one of those kings, neither he who first had all, took
any inuestiture at the hand of The Emperor of Rome or of any other superior or
foreign prince, but held of God to himself, and by his sword his people and
crown, acknowledging no prince in earth his superior, and so it is kept and
holden at this day. Although king John (by the rebellion of the nobility aided
with the daulphin of France his power) to appease the Pope who at that time
possessing the consciences of his subjects was the^ also his enemy and his
most grievous torment (as some histories do write) did resign the crown to
his legate Pandulphus, and took it again from him as from the Pope by faith
and homage, and a certain tribute yearly. But that act being neither approved
by his people, nor established by act of parliament, was forthwith and ever
since taken for nothing, either to bind the king, his successors or
subjects.

What is a common wealth, and the parts thereof. CHAP. 10.
TO be better understood hereafter, it is necessary yet to make a third
division of the common wealth by the parts thereof. Respublica.
A common wealth is called a society or common doing of a multitude of free men
collected together and united by common accord and couenauntes among
themselves, for the conservation of themselves as well in peace as in war. For
properly an host of me^ is not called a common wealth but abusiuely, because
they are collected but for a time and for a fact: which done, each divides
himself from others as they were before. And if one man had as some of the
old Romans had (if it be true that is written) v. thousand or x. thousand
bondmen whom he ruled well, though they dwelled all in one city, or were
distributed into diverse villages, yet that were no common wealth: for the
bo^dman has no communion with his master, the wealth of the Lord, is only
sought for, and not the profit of the slave or bondsman. For as they who write
of these things have defined, a bondsman or a slave is as it were(saving life
and humane reason) but the instrument of his Lord, as the axe, the saw, the
chessyll and goluge is of the charpenter. Truth it is the charpenter looks
diligently to save, correct and amend all these: but it is for his own profit,
and in consideration of him self, not for the instruments sake. And as these
be instruments of the carpenter, so the plow, the cart, the horse, ox or ass,
be instruments of the husbandman: and though one husbandman had a great number
of all those and looked well to them, it made no common wealth nor could not so
be called. For the private wealth of the husbandman is only regarded, and
there is no mutual society or portion, no law or pleading between the one and
the other. And (as be says) what reason has the pot to say to the potter, why
made thou me thus? or why do thou break me after thou have made me? even
so is the bondsman or slave which is bought for money: for he is but a
reasonable and living instrument the possession of his Lord and master,
reckoned among his goods, not otherwise admitted to the society civil or
common wealth, but is part of the possession and goods of his Lord. Wherefore
except there be other orders and administrations amonst the Turks, if the
prince of the Turks (as it is written of him) do repute all other his bondmen
and slaves (him self and his sons only freemen) a man may doubt whether his
administration be to be accounted a common wealth or a kingdom, or rather to
be reputed only as one that has under him an infinite number of slaves or
bondme^ among whom there is no right, law nor common wealth compact, but only
the will of the Lord and segnior. Surely none of the old Greeks would call
this fashion of government Remp. or (...) for the reasons which I have declared
before.

The first sort or beginning of an house or family called (...). CHAP. 11.
Then if this be a society, and consists only of free men, the least part
thereof must be of two. The naturalest and first conjunction of two toward the
making of a further society of continuance is of the husband and of the wife
after a diverse sort each having care of the family: the man to get, to
travail abroad, to defend: the wife, to save that which is gotten, to tarry
at home to distribute that which comes of the husbands labor for the
nurtriture of the children and family of them both, and to keep all at home
neat and clean. So nature has forged each part to his office, the man stern,
strong, bold, aduenterous, negligent of his beauty, and spending. The woman
weak, fearful, fair, curious of her beauty, and saving. Either of them
excelling other in wit and wisdom to conduct those things which appertain
to their office, and therefore where their wisdom does excel, therein it is
reason that each should govern. And without this society of man, and woman,
the kind of man could not long endure. And to this society men are so
naturally borne that the prince of all Philosophers in consideration of natures
was not afraid to say that a man by nature is rather desirous to fellow him
self to another and so to live in couple, than to adherd himself with many.
Although of all things or living creatures a man does show him self most
politic, yet can he not well live without the society and fellowship civil.
He that can live alone says Aristotle is either a wild beast in a man's
likeness, or else a god rather than a man. So in the house and family is the
first and most natural (but private) appearance of one of the best kinds of a
common wealth, that is called Aristocratia where a few and the best do
govern, and where not one always: but sometime and in some thing one, and
sometime and in some thing another does bear the rule. Which to maintain for
his part God has given to the man great wit, bigger strength, and more courage
to compel the woman to obey by reason or force, and to the woman beauty, fair
countenance, and sweet words to make the man to obey her again for love.
Thus each obeys and commands other, and they two together rule the house.
Domus seu familia.
The house I call here the man, the woman, their children, their servants
bond and free, their cattle, their household stuff, and all other things,
which are reckoned in their possession, so long as all these remain together
in one, yet this cannot be called Aristocratia, but Metaphorice, for it is but
an house, and a little spark resembling as it were that government.

The first and natural beginning of a kingdom in Greek (...). CHAP. 12.
But for so much as it is the nature of all things to increase or decrease,
this house thus increasing and multiplying by generation, so that it cannot
well be comprehended in one habitation, and the children waring bigger,
stronger, wiser, and thereupon naturally desirous to rule, the father and
mother sends them out in couples as it were by prouining or propagation.
Prouining or propagation is when a man lays a bra^ch of a Vine or Osier, or
any other tree into the ground, so that it takes root of it self and may
live though it be cut then from the first root or stock. Pagus. Oppidum.
Ciuitas.
And the child by marriage begins as it were to root toward the making of
a new stock, and thereupon an other house or family. So by this propagation
or prouining first of one, and then another, and so from one to another in
space of time, of many howses was made a street or village, of many streets
and villages joined together a city or borough. And when many cities,
boroughes and villages were by common and mutual consent for their
conseruatio^ ruled by that one and first father of them all, it was called a
nation or kingdom. And this seems the first and most natural beginning and
source of cities, towns, nations, kingdoms, and of all civil societies. For
so long as the great grandfather was alive and able to rule, it was unnatural
for any of his sons or offprinst to strive with him for the superiority, or
to go about to govern or any wise to dishonor him, from whom he had received
life and being. And therefore such a one does bear the first and natural
example of an absolute and perfect king. For he loved them as his own children
and nephews, cared for them as members of his own body, provided for them as
one having by long time more experience than any one or all of them. They
again honored him as their father of whose body they came, obeyed him for
his great wisdom and forecast, went to him in doubtful cases as to an oracle
of God, feared his curse and malediction as proceeding from Gods own mouth. He
again used noriture: for each pain put upon them, he esteemed as laid upon
himself.

The first and natural beginning of the rule of a few of the best men called
in Greek (...) CHAP. 13.
But when that great grandfather was dead, the sons of him and brethren among
themselves not having that reverence to any, nor confidence of wisdom in any
one of them, nor that trust the one to the other, between whom (as many times it
fares with brethren) some strifes and brawlinges had before arisen: To defend
themselves yet from them which were walsh and strangers, necessarily agreed
among themselves to consult in common, and to bear rule for a time in order,
now one, now another: so that no one might bear always the rule, nor any one
be neglected. And by this means if any one failed during his year or time by
ignorance, the next (being either wiser of himself, or else by his brothers
error and fault) amended it. And in the mean while, at diverse and most times
when urgent necessity did occur, they consulted all those heads of families
together within themselves, how to demean and order their matters, best for
the conservation of themselves, and each of their families, generally and
particularly. Thus a few being heads and the chief of their families, equal
in birth and nobility, and not much different in riches, governed their own
houses and the descendentes of them particularly, and consulted in common upon
public causes, agreeing also upon certain laws and orders to be kept amongst
them. So the best, chiefest and sagest did rule, and the other part had no cause
to strive with them, nor had no cause nor appearance to compare with any of
them, neither for age nor discretion, nor for riches or nobility. The rulers
sought each to keep and maintain their posterity, as their sons and
nephews, and such as should succeed them and carry their names when they
were dead, and so render them being mortal by nature immortal by their fame
and succession of posterity: having most earnest care to maintain still this
their cousinage and common family as well against foreign and barbarous
nations, which were not of their progeny, tongue, or religion, as against
wild and sanage beasts. This seems the natural sourse and beginning or
image of that rule of the fewer number, which is called of the Greeks (...)
and of the Latins optimatum respublica.

The first original or beginning of the rule of the multitude called (...).
CHAP. 14.
NOw as time brings an end of all things, these brethren being all dead,
and their offpring increasing daily to a great multitude, and the reverence due
to the old fathers in such and so great number of equals failing by the reason
of the death or doting of the Elders: each owing their merits of education
apart to their fathers and grandfathers, and so many arising and such equality
among them, it was not possible that they should be content to be governed by a
few. For two things being such as for the which men in society and league do
most strive, that is honor and profitte, no man of free courage can be
contented to be neglected therein, so that they were feign of necessity to
come to that, that the more part should bear the price away in election of
magistrates and rulers. So that either by course or by lot each man in turn
might be received to bear rule and have his part of the honor, and (if any
were) of the profit, which came by administration of the common wealth. For
whosoever came of that old great grandfathers race, he accounted him self as
good of birth as any other. For service to the common wealth all or such a
number had done it, as they could not be accounted few. And if a few would
take upon them to usurp over the rest, the rest conspiring together would
soon be master over them, and ruinate them wholly. Whereupon necessarily it
came to pass that the common wealth must turn and alter as before from one to
a few, so now from a few to many and the most part, each of these yet willing to
save the politic body, to conserve the authority of their nation, to
defend themselves against all other, their strife being only for empire and
rule, and who should do best for common wealth, whereof they would have
experience made by bearing office and being magistrates. This I take for the
first and natural beginning of the rule of the multitude which the Greeks
called (...): the Latins some Republica by the general name, some populi
potestas, some census potestas, I cannot tell how latinely.

That the common wealth or policy must be according to the nature of the
people. CHAP. 15.
BY this process and discourse it does appear that the mutations and changes
of fashions of government in common wealths be natural, and do not always
come of ambition or malice: And that according to the nature of the people, so
the common wealth is to it sit and proper. And as all these iii. kinds of
common wealths are natural, so when to each party or espece and kind of the
people that is applied which best agrees like a garment to the body or shoe
to the foot, then the body politic is in quiet, and finds ease, pleasure
and profit. But if a contrary form be given to a contrary manner of people, as
when the shoe is too little or too great for the foot, it does hurt and
encomber the convenient use thereof, so the free people of nature tyrannized or
ruled by one against their wills, were he never so good, either fail of
courage and were servile, or never rest until they either destroy their king
and them that would subdue them, or be destroyed themselves: And again another
sort there is which without being ruled by on^e prince but set at liberty
cannot tell what they should do, but either through insolency, pride and
idleness will fall to robbery and all mischief, and to scatter and dissolve
themselves, or with foolish ambition and private strife consume one another and
bring themselves to nothing. Of both these two we have histories enough to
bear witness, as the Greeks, Romans, Samnites, Danes Uandals, and others.
Yet must you not think, that al common wealths, administrations and rulinges
began on this sort, by prouining or propagation, as is before written, but many
times after a great battle and long war the captain who led a multitude of
people, gathered peradventure of diverse nations and languages, liking ye place
which he has by force conquered, tarieth there, and begins a common wealth
after this manner, and for the most part a kingdom. As the Goths and Lumbardes
in Italy, the Frenchmen in Gaul, the Sarasins in Spain and part of France,
the Saxons in great Britain, which is now called England: of which when
that one and chief prince is dead, the nobler sort consult among themselves,
and either choose an other head and king, or divide it into more heads and
rulers, so did the Lumbards in Italy, and the Saxons in England, or take at
the first a common rule and popular estate, as the Zwisers did in their cantous
and do yet at this day, or else admit the rule of a certain few, excluding
the multitude and communaltie, as the Paduans, Veronenses, and Venetians have
accustomed.

The division of the parts and persons of the common wealth. CHAP. 16.
TO make all things yet clear before, as we shall go, there arises another
division of the parts of the common wealth. For it is not enough to say that
it consists of a multitude of houses and families which make streets and
villages, and the multitude of the streets and villages make towns, and the
multitude of towns the realm, and that freemen be considered only in this
behalf, as subjects and citizens of the commonwealth, and not bondmen who can
bear no rule nor jurisdiction over freemen, as they who be taken but as
instruments and the goods and possessions of others. In which consideration
also we do reject women, as those whom nature has made to keep home and to
nourish their family and children, and not to meddle with matters abroad, nor
to bear office in a city or common wealth no more than children and infantes:
except it be in such cases as the authority is annexed to the blood and
progeny, as the crown, a duchy, or an erledome, for there the blood is
respected, not the age nor ye sex. Whereby an absolute Queen, an absolute
Duchess or Countess, those I call absolute, which have the name, not by being
married to a king, duke, or earl, but by being the true, right and next
successors in the dignity, and upon whom by right of the blood that title is
descended: These I say have the same authority although they be women or
children in that kingdom, duchy or earldom, as they should have had if
they had bin men of full age. For the right and honor of the blood, and the
quietness and suertie of the realm, is more to be considered, than either the
tender age as yet impotent to rule, or the sex not accustomed (otherwise) to
intermeddle with public affairs, being by common intendment understood, that
such personages never do lack the counsel of such grave and discreet men as
be able to supply all other defectes. This (as I said) is not enough. But the
division of these which be participant of the common wealth is one way of them
that bear office, the other of them that bear none: the first are called
magistrates, the second private men. Another the like was among the Romans of
Partricij and plebei, the one striving with the other a long time, the patricij
many years excluding the plebes from bearing rule, until at last all
magistrates were made common between the^: yet was there another division of
the Romans into senatores, equites and plebs: the Greeks had also (...). The
French have also at this day, les nobles and la populare, or gentiles homes and
villains: we in England divide our men commonly into four fortes, gentlemen,
citizens and yeomen artificers, and laborers. Of gentlemen the first and chief
are the king, the prince, dukes, marquises, earls, vicountes, barrons, and
these are called (...) the nobility, and all these are called Lords and
noblemen: next to these be knights, esquiers and simple gentlemen.

Of the first part of gentlemen of england called Nobilitas mayor. CHAP. 17.
Nobilitas mayor.
DUkes, marquises, earls, vicountes, and barrons, either be created by the
prince or come to that honor by being the eldest sons, as highest and next in
succession to their parents. Eldest sons of dukes are not earls by birth,
but Lords, and take their place above earls, and so are eldest sons in
respect of barons.
For the eldest of dukes sons during his fathers life is called an earl, an
earls son is called by the name of a vicount, or baron, or else according as
the creation is. The creation I call the first donation and condition of the
honor (given by the prince, for good service done by him and advancement that
the prince will bestow upon him) which with the title of that honor is
commonly (but not always) given to him and to his heirs, males only: the rest
of the sons of the nobility by the rigor of the law be but esquiers,
Esquires of honor or Lords.
yet in common speech, all dukes and marquises sons, and the eldest son of
an earl be called Lords. The which name commonly does agree to none of lower
degree than barrons, excepting such only, as be thereunto by some special
office called. The barrony or degree of Lords does answer to the dignity of
the Senators of Rome, and the title of our nobility to their patricij: when
patricij did betoken senatores aut senatorum filios. Census senatorius was in
Rome, at diverse times diverse, and in England no man is created barron,
except he may dispend of yearly revenue, one thousand pounds or one thousand
marks at the least. Vicountes, earls, marquises and dukes more according to
the proportion of the degree and honor, but though by chance he or his son
have less, he keeps his degree: but if they decay by excess, and be not
able to maintain the honor (as senatores Romani were amoti senatu) so
sometimes they are not admitted to the upper house in the parliament, although
they keep the name of Lord still.

Of the second sort of gentlemen which may be called Nobilitas minor, and first
of knights. CHAP. 18.
NO man is a knight by succession, not the king or prince. And the name of
prince in england (...) betokens the kings eldest son or prince of wales:
although the king himself, his eldest son, and all dukes be called by
general name princes. But as in France the kings eldest son has the title
of the daulphine, and he or the next heir apparent to the crown is monsire,
so in England the kings eldest son is called (...) the prince. Knights
therefore be not borne but made, either before the battle to encourage them the
more to adventure their lives, or after the conflict, as advancement for their
hardiness and manhood already showed: or out of the war for some great
service done, or some good hope through the virtues which do appear in them.
And they are made either by the king himself, or by his commission and royal
authority, given for the same purpose, or by his liuetenaunt in the wars,
who has his royal and absolute power committed to him for that time. And that
order seems to answer in part to that which the Romans called Equites
Romanos, differing in some points, and agreeing in other, as their common
wealth and ours do differ and agree: for never in all points one common wealth
does agree with an other, no nor long time any one common wealth with it self.
For all changes continually to more or less, and still to diverse and diverse
orders, as the diversity of times do present occasion, and the mutabilitie of
men's wits does invent and assay new ways, to reform and amend that werein
they do find fault. Equites Romani were chosen ex censu, ye is according to
their substance and riches. So be knights in England most commonly, according
to the yearly reuenew of their lands being able to maintain that estate: yet
all they that had Equestrem censum, non legebantur equites. No more are all
made knights in England that may dispende a knights land or fee, but they
only whom the king will so honor. The number of Equites was uncertain, and so
it is of knights, at the pleasure of the prince. Equites Romani had equum
publicum: The knights of England have not so, but find their own horse
themselves in peace time, and most usually in wars.

Census equester was among the Romans at dinerse times of diverse value: but
in England whosoever may dispende of his free lands 40. l. sterling of yearly
revenue by an old law of England either at the coronatio^ of the king, or
marriage of his daughter, or at the dubbing of the prince, knight, or some such
great occasion, may be by the king compelled to take that order and honor, or
to pay a fine, which many not so desirous of honor as of riches, had rather
disburse. Some who for causes are not thought worthy of ye honor and yet have
ability, neither be made knights though they would, and yet pay the fine Xl.
l. sterling, at that time when this order began, makes now Cxx. l. of current
money of England: as I have more at large declared in my book of the
diversity of standards or the valor of moneys.

When the Romans did write senatus populusque Romanus, they seemed to make but
two orders, that is of the Senate and of the people of Rome, and so in the name
of people they contained equites and plebem: so when we in England do say the
Lords and the commons, the knights, esquires and other gentlemen, with
citizens, burgeses and yeomen be accounted to make the commons. In ordaining of
laws the senate of Lords of England is one house, where the Archbishoppes and
Bishops also be, and the king or Queen for the time being as chief: the
knights and all the rest of the gentlemen, citizens and burgeses which be
admitted to consult upon the greatest affairs of the Realm be in an other
house by themselves, and that is called the house of the commons, as we shall
more clearly describe when we speak of the parliament. Whereupon this word
knight is derived, and whether it do betoken no more but that which miles does
in latin, which is a soldier, might be moved as a question. The word soldier
now seems rather to come of sold and payment, and more to betoken a waged or
hired man to fight than otherwise, yet Caesar in his Commentaries called
soldures in the tongue gallois, men who devoted and swore themselves in a
certain band or oath one to another and to the captain, which order if the
Almains did follow, it may be that they who were not hired but being of the
nation, upon their own charges and for their advancement, and by such common
oath or band that did follow the wars, Vere Lantzknechti. lancearius: a
speareman
were (possibly) (...) called knights or milites, and now among the Almaines
some are called lanceknights as soldiers of their band not hired, although at
this day they be for the most part hirelings. Or peradventure it may be that
they which were next about the prince as his guard or servants picked or
chosen men out of the rest being called in the Almaine language, knighten which
is as much to say as servants: these men being found of good service, the word
afterward was taken for an honor, and for him who makes profession of arms.
Our language is so changed that I dare make no judgment thereof. Now we call
him knight in english that the french calls cheualier, Eques auratus. The
making of a knight.
and the lataine equitem or equestris ordinis.

And when any man is made a knight, he kneeling down is stricken of the prince,
with his sword naked upon the back or shoulder, the prince saying: sus or
sois chiualier au nom de Dieu and (in times past) they added S. George, and at
his arising the prince says, auauncer. This is the manner of dubbing of
knights at this present: and that term dubbing was the old term in this
point, and not creation. At the coronation of a king or queen, there be
knights of the bath made with long and more curious ceremonies: But howsoever
one by dubbed or made a knight, his wife is by and by called a Lady as well as
a barons wife: he himself is not called Lord, but has to his name in common
appelation added this syllable, Sir, as if he before were named, Thomas,
William, John, or Richard, afterward he is always called Sir Thomas, Sir
William, Sire quasi Senior.
Sir John, Sir Richard, and that is the title which men give to knights in
England. This may suffice at this time, to declare the order of knighthood, yet
there is an other order of knights in England which be called the knights of
the garter. King Edward the third, after he had obtained many notable
victories, King John of France, King James of Scotland, being both prisoners
in the tower of London at one time, and king Henry of Castle the bastard
expulsed out of his realm, and Don Petro restored unto it by the prince of
Wales and Duke of Aquitaine called the black prince, invented a society of
honor, and made a choice out of his own realm and dominions, and all
Christendom: and the best and most excellent renoumed persons in virtues and
honor, he did adorn with that title to be knights of his order, gave them a
garter decked with gold, pearl and precious stones, with the buckle of gold,
to wear daily on the left leg only, a kirtle, gown, cloak, chaperon,
collar, and other august and magnificall apparel both of stuff and fashion
exquisite and heroical, to wear at high feasts, as to so high and princely
an order was meet: of which order he and his succesors Kings and Queens of
England to be the sovereign, and the rest by certain statutes and laws among
themselves, be taken as brethren and fellows in that order, to the number of
xxvi. But because this is rather an ornament of the realm than any policy or
government thereof, I leave to speak any further of it.

Of Esquiers. CHAP. 19.
EScuier or esquier (which we call commonly squire) is a French word, and
betokens Scutigerum or Armigerum, and be all those which bear arms (as we
call them) or armories (as they term them in French) which to bear is a
testimony of the nobility or race from whence they do come. These be taken
for no distinct order of the common wealth, but do go with the residue of the
gentlemen: save that (as I take it) they be those who bear arms, testimonies
(as I have said) of their race, and therefore have neither creation nor
dubbing: or else they were at the first costerels or the bearers of the arms
of Lords or knights, and by that had their name for a dignity and honor
given to distinguish them from a common soldier called in latin Gregarius
miles.

Of Gentlemen. CHAP. 20.
GEntlemen be those whom their blood and race does make noble and known, (...)
in Greek, the Lataines call them all Nobiles, as the French Nobles. (...) or
Nobilitas in Latin is defined, honor or title given, for that the auncestor
has bin notable in riches or virtues, or (in fewer words) old riches or
prowes remaining in one stock. Which if the successors do keep and follow,
they be vere nobiles and (...): if they do not yet the same and wealth of
their ancestors serve to cover the^ so long as it can, as a thing once gilted
though it be copper within, till the gilt be worn away. This has his reason,
for the Etimologie of the name serves thefficacie of the word. Gens in Latin
betokens the race and surname, so the Romans had Cornelios, Sergios,
Appios, Fabios, AEmilios, Pisones, Iulio, Brutos, Valerios, of which who were
Agnati, and therefore kept the name, were also Gentiles: and remaining the
memory of the glory of their progenitors fame, were gentlemen of that or that
race. This matter made a great strife among the Romans, when those which were
Noui homines were more allowed, for their virtues new and newly showen, than
the old smell of ancient race newly defaced by the cowardice and evil life
of their nephews and discendauntes could make the other to be. Thus the
Cicerones, Catones, and Marij had much ado with those ancients, and therefore
said Iuuenalis: Malo pater tibi sit Tersites, dummodo tu sis
AEacidi similis vulcaniaque arma capessas,
Quam te Thersiti similem producat Achilles.


But as other common wealths were feign to do, so must all princes
necessarily follow, that is, where virtue is to honor it: and although virtue
of ancient race be earlier to be obtained, as well by the example of the
progenitors, which encourages, as also through ability of education and
bringing up, which enableth, and the lastly enraced love of tena^ts and neybors
to such noblemen and gentlemen, of whom they hold and by whom they do dwell,
which pricketh forward to ensue in their fathers steps. So it all this do
fail (as it were great pity it should) yet such is the nature of all human
things, and so the world is subject to mutability, that it does many times
fail: but when it does, the prince and common wealth have the same power that
their predecessors had, and as the husbandma^ has to plant a new tree where
the old fails, so has the prince to honor virtue where he does find it,
to make gentlemen, esquiers, knights, barons, earls marquises and dukes, where
he sees virtue able to bear that honor or merits, and deserves it, and so it
has always bin used among us. But ordinarily the king does only make knights
and create barons or higher degrees: for as for gentlemen, they be made good
cheap in England. For whosoever studieth the laws of the realm, who studieth
in the universities, who professed liberal sciences, and to be short, who can
live idly and without manual labor, and will bear the port, charge and
countenance of a gentleman, he shall be called master, for that is the title
which men give to esquires and other gentlemen, and shall be taken for a
gentleman: for true it is with us as is said, Tanti eris alijs quanti tibi
feceris: (and if need be) a king of Heralds shall also give him for money,
arms newly made and invented, the title whereof shall pretend to have been
found by the said Herald in perusing and viewing of old registers, where his
ancestors in times past had bin recorded to bear the same: Or if he will do it
more truly and of better faith, he will write that for the merittes of that
man, and certain qualities which he does see in him, and for sundry noble
acts which he has performed, he by the authority which he has as king of
Heraldes and arms, gives to him and his heirs these and these arms, which
being done I think he may be called a squire, for he bears ever after those
arms. Such men are called sometime in scorn gentlemen of the first head.

Whether the manner of England in making gentlemen so easily is to be allowed.
CHAP. 21.
A Man may make doubt and question whether this manner of making gentlemen is to
be allowed or no, and for my part I am of that opinion ye it is not amiss. For
first the prince loses nothing by it, as he should do it it were as in
France: for the yeomen or husbandma^ is no more subject to tail or tax in
England than the gentleman: no, in every payment to the king the gentleman is
more charged, which he bears the gladlier and dares not gainesaie for to
save and keep his honor and reputation. In any show or muster or other
particular charge of the town where he is, he must open his purse wider and
augment his portion above others, or else he does diminish his reputation. As
for their outward show, a gentleman (if he will be so accounted) must go like a
gentleman, a yeoman like a yeoman, and a rascal like a rascal: and if he be
called to the wars, he must and will (whatsoever it cost him) array himself
and arm him according to the vocation which he pretends: he must show also a
more manly courage and tokens of better education, higher stomach and
bountifuller liberallitie than others, and keep about him idle servants,
who shall do nothing but wait upon him. So that no man has hurt by it but he
himself, who hereby perchance will bear a bigger sail than he is able to
maintain. For as touching the policy and government of the common wealth, it
is not those that have to do with it, which will magnify them selves, and go
in higher buskins than their estate will bear: but they which are to be
appointed, are persons tried and well known, as shall be declared hereafter.

Of Citizens and Burgesses. CHAP. 22.
NExt to gentlemen, be appointed citizens and burgesses, such as not only be
free and received as officers within the cities, but also be of some substance
to bear the charges. But these citizens and burgesses, be to serve the common
wealth, in their cities and burrowes, or incorporate towns where they dwell.
Generally in the thyres they be of none account, save only in the common
assembly of the realm to make laws, which is called the Parliament. The
aunciet cities appoint iiii. and each borough ii. to have voices in it, and to
give their consent or dissent in the name of the city or borough, for which
they be appointed.

Of Yeomen. CHAP. 23.
THose whom we call yeomen next unto the nobility, knights and squires, have
the greatest charge and doings in the common wealth, or rather are more
travailed to serve in it than all the rest: as shall appear hereafter. I call
him a yeoman whom our laws do call Legalem hominem, a word familiar in
writtes and enquestes, which is a freeman borne English, and may dispend of his
own free land in yearly revenue to the sum of xl. s. sterling: This makes
(if the just value were taken now to the proportion of moneys) vt. l. of our
current money at this present. This sort of people confess themselves to be no
gentlemen, but give the honor to al which be or take upon them to be
gentlemen, and yet they have a certain pre-eminence and more estimation than
laborers and artificers, and commonly live welthilie, keep good houses, and do
their business, and travail to acquire riches: these be (for the most part)
fermors unto gentlemen, which with grasing, frequenting of markettes, and
keeping servants not idle as the gentleman does, but such as get both their
own living and part of their masters, by these means do come to such
wealth, that they are able and daily do buy the lands of unthrifty
gentlemen, and after setting their sons to the school at the Uniuersities,
to the law of the Realm, or otherwise leaving them sufficient lands whereon
they may live without labor, do make their said sons by those means
gentlemen. These be not called masters, for that (as I said) pertains to
gentlemen only: But to their surnames, men add goodman: as if the Surname be
Luter, Finch, White, Brown, they are called, goodman Luter, goodman White,
goodman Finch, goodman Brown, amongst their neighbors, I mean not in
matters of importance or in law. But in matters of law and for distinction,
if one were a knight they would write him (for example sake) sir John Finch
knight, so if he be an esquier, John Finch esquier or gentleman, if he be no
gentleman, John Finch yeoman. For amongst the gentlemen they which claim no
higher degree, and yet be to be exempted out of the number of the lowest sort
thereof, be written esquiers. So amongst the husbandmen laborers lowest and
rascal sort of the people such as be exempted out of the number of the
rascabilitie of the popular be called and written yeomen, as in the degree
next unto gentlemen. These are they which old Cato calls Aratores and
optimos ciues in Republica: and such as of whom the writers of common wealths
praise to have many in it. Aristoteles namely recites (...): these tend
their own business, come not to meddle in public matters and judgments but
when they are called, and glad when they are delivered thereof, are obedient
to the gentlemen and rulers, and in war can abide travail and labor as men
used to it, yet within it soon at an end that they might come home and live
of their own. When they are forth they fight for their Lords of whom they
hold their lands, for their wives and children, for their country and nation,
for praise and honor, against they come home, and to have the love of their
Lord and his children to be continued toward them and their children, which
have adventured their lives to and with him and his. These are they which in
the old world gat that honor to England, not that either for wit,
conduction, or for power they are or were ever to be compared to the gentlemen,
but because they be so many in number, so obedient at the Lords call, so
strong of body, so heard to endure pain, so courageous to adventure with
their Lord or Captain going with, or before them, for else they be not hasty
nor never were, as making no prosession of knowledge of war. These were the
good archers in times past, and the stable troop of footmen that affaide all
France, that would rather die all, than once abandon the knight or gentleman
their Captain, who at those days commonly was their Lord, and whose
tenauntes they were, ready (besides perpetual shame) to be in danger of
undoing of them selves, and all theirs if they should show any sign of
cowardice or abandon the Lord, Knight or Gentlemen of whom they held their
living. And this they have amongst them from their forefathers told one to an
other. The gentlemen of France and the yeoman of England are renowned, because
in battle of horsemen France was many times too good for us, as we again
always for them on foot. And gentlemen for the most part be men at arms and
horsemen, and yeomen commonly on foot: howesoeuer it was, yet the gentlemen
had always the conduction of the yeomen, and as their captains were either a
foot or upon a little nagge with them, and the Kings of England in foughten
battles remaining always among the footmen, as the French Kings amongst
their horsemen. Each Prince thereby, as a man may guess, did show where he
thought his strength did consist. What a yeoman is I have declared, but from
whence the word is derived it is hard to say: it cannot be thought that yeomen
should be said a young man, for commonly we do not call any a yeoman till he
be married, and have children, and as it were have authority among his
neighbors. Yonker in low dutch betokens a mean gentleman or a gay fellow.
Possible our yeomen not being so bold as to name themselves gentlemen, when
they came home, were content when they had heard by frequentation with low
dutchmen of some small gentleman (but yet that would be counted so) to be
called amongst them, yonker man, the calling so in wars by mockage or in
sport the one an other, when they come home, yonker man, and so yeoman: which
word now signifies among us, a man well at ease and having honestly to live,
and yet not a gentleman: whatsoever that word yonker man, yonke man, or yeoman
does more or less signify to the dutch men.

Of the fourth sort of men which do not rule. CHAP. 24.
THe fourth sort or class amongst us, is of those which the old Romans
called capite censij proletarij or operae, day laborers, poor husbandmen, yea
marcantes or retailers which have no free land, copiholders, and all
artificers, as Taylers, Shoomakers, Carpenters, Brickemakers, Bricklayers,
Masons, etc. These have no voice nor authority in our common wealth, and no
account is made of them but only to be ruled, not to rule other, and yet they
be not altogether neglected. For in cities and corporate towns for default of
yeomen, enquests and Iuries are impaneled of such manner of people. And in
villages they be commonly made Churchwardens, alecunners, and many times
Constables, which office touches more the common wealth, and at the first was
not employed upon such low and base persons. Wherefore generally to speak of
the common wealth, or policy of England, it is governed, administered, and
manured by three sorts of persons, the Prince, Monarch, and head gouerner,
which is called the king, or if the crown fall to a woman, the Queen
absolute, as I have heretofore said: In whose name and by whose authority
all things are administered. The gentlemen, which be divided into two parts,
the Baronie or estate of Lords containing barons and all that be above the
degree of a baron, (as I have declared before): and those which be no Lords, as
Knights, Esquires, and simplely gentlemen. The third and last sort of
persons is named the yeomanrie: each of these has his part and administration
in indgementes, corrections of defaultes, in election of offices, in appointing
and collection of tributes and subsidies, or in making laws, as shall appear
hereafter.

THE SECOND book.
Of the Parliament and the authority thereof. CHAP. 1.
THe most high and absolute power of the realm of England, consists in the
Parliament. For as in war where the king himself in person, the nobility,
the rest of the gentilitie, and the yeomanrie are, is ye force and power of
England: so in peace and consultation where the Prince is to give life, and
the last and highest commandment, the Baronie for the nobility and higher;
the knights, esquiers, gentlemen and commons for the lower part of the common
wealth, the bishops for the clergy be present to advertise, consult and
show what is good and necessary for the common wealth, and to consult
together, and upon mature deliberation every bill or law being thrice read
and disputed upon in either house, the other two parts first each a part, and
after the Prince himself in presence of both the parties does consent unto
and allows. That is the Princes and whole realms deed: whereupon justly no
man can complain but must accommodate himself to find it good and obey it.

That which is done by this consent is called firm, stable, and sanctum, and
is taken for law. The Parliament abrogateth old laws, makes new, gives
orders for things past, and for things hereafter to be followed, changes
rightes, and possessions of private men, legittimateth bastards, establishes
forms of religion, alters weightes and measures, gives forms of succession
to the crown, defines of doubtful rightes, whereof is no law already mads,
appoints subsidies, tails, taxes, and impositions, gives most free pardons
and absolutions, restores in blood and name as the highest court, condemns
or absolueth them whom the Prince will put to that trial: And to be short, all
that ever the people of Rome might do either in Centuriatis comitijs or
tributis, Alias Tribunitijs.
the same may be done by the parliament of England, which represents and
has the power of the whole realm both the head and the body. For every
Englishman is intended to be there present, either in person or by procuration
and attorneys, of what pre-eminence, state, dignity, or quality soever he be,
from the Prince (be he King or Queen) to the lowest person of England. And
the consent of the Parliament is taken to be every man's consent.

The form of holding the parliament. CHAP. 2.
THe Prince sends forth his rescripts or writtes to every duke, marquis,
baron, and every other Lord temporal or spiritual who has voice in the
parliament, to be at his great counsel of Parliament such a day, (the space
from the date of the writ is commonly at the least forty days): he sends
also writtes to the Sherifes of every shyre to admonish the whole shire to
choose two knights of the parliament in the name of the shyre, to hear and
reason, and to give their advise and consent in the name of the shyre, and to
be present at that day: likewise to every city and town which of ancientie
has bin wont to find burgesses of the parliament, so to make election that
they might be present there at the first day of the parliament. The knights of
the shyre be chosen by all the gentlemen and yeomen of the shyre, present at
the day assigned for the election: the voice of any absent can be counted for
none. Yeomen I call here (as before) that may dispende at the least xl. s. of
yearly rent of free land of his own. These meeting at one day, the two who
have the more of their voices be chosen knights of the shire for that
parliament: likewise by the plurality of the voices of the citizens and
burgesses be the burgesses elected. The first day of the parliament the Prince
and all the Lords in their robes of parliament do meet in the higher house,
where after prayers made, they that be present are written, and they that be
absent upon sickness or some other reasonable cause (which the prince will
allow) do constitute under their hand and seal some one of those who be
present as their procurer or attorney to give voice for them, so that by
presence or attorney and proxey they be all there, all the princes and barrons
and all archbishops and bishops, and (when abbots were) so many abbots as had
voice in parliament. The place where the assembly is, is richly tapessed and
hanged, a princely and royal throne as appertains to a king, set in the
midst of the higher place thereof. Next under the prince sits the
Chancellor, who is the voice and orator of the prince. On the one side of that
house or chamber sits the archbishops and bishops, each in his rank: on the
other side the dukes and barons. In the midst thereof upon woolsackes
sits the Judges of the realm, the master of the roules, and the secretaries
of estate. But these that sit on the woolsacks have no voice in the house, but
only sit there to answer their knowledge in the law, when they be asked if
any doubt arise among the Lords. The secretaries to answer of such letters
or things passed in counsel whereof they have the custody and knowledge: and
this is called the upper house, whose consent and dissent is given by each man
severally and by himself, first for himself, and then severally for so many
as he has letters and proxies, when it comes to the question, saying only
content or not content, without further reasoning or replying. In this mean
time the knights of the shires and burgesses of the parliament (for so they are
called that have voice in parliament, and are chosen as I have said before, to
the number betwixt iii C. and iiii. C.) are called by such as it pleases the
prince to appoint, into another great house or chamber by name, to which they
answer and declaring for what shyre or town they answer: then they are
willed to choose an able and discreet man to be as it were the mouth of them,
all and to speak for and in the name of them, and to present him so chosen by
them to the prince: which done they coming al with him to a bar, which is at
the nether end of the upper house, there he first praises the prince, then
makes his excuse of inability, and prays the prince that he would command
the commons to choose another. The chancellor in the princes name does so much
declare him able, as he did declare himself unable, and thanketh the commons
for choosing so wise, discreet and eloquent a man, and wills them to go and
consult of laws for the common wealth. Then the speaker makes certain
requests to the prince in the name of the commons, first that his majesty
would be content that they may use and enjoy all their liberties and
privileges that the common house was wont to enjoy. Secondly that they might
franckely and freely say their minds in disputing of such matters as may come
in question, and that without offense to his Majesty. Thirdly that if any
should chance of that lower house to offend or not to do or say as should
become him, or if any should offend any of them being called to that his
highness court: That they themselves might (according to the ancient custom)
have the punishment of them. And fourthly, that if there came any doubt,
whereupon they shall desire to have thaduise or conference with his Majesty or
with any of the Lords, that they might do it: All which he promises in the
commons names that they shall not abuse, but have such regard as most
faithful, true and loving subjects ought to have to their prince.

The Chauncelor answers in the princes name, as apperteyneth. And this is all
that is done for one day, and sometime two. Besides the Chauncelor, there is
one in the upper house who is called Clarke of the Parliament, who reads the
bills. For all that comes in consultation either in the upper house or in the
nether house, is put in writing first in paper, which being once read, he that
will, rises up and speaks with it or against it: and so one after another so
long as they shall think good. That done they go to an other, and so another
bill. After it has bin once or twice read, and does appear that it is
somewhat like as reasonable, with such amendment in words and peradventure
some sentences as by disputation seems to be amended. In the upper house the
Chauncelor asks if they will have it engrossed, that is to say put into
parchment: which done, and read the third time, and that eftsoons if any be
disposed to object disputed again among them, the Chauncelor asks if they
will go to the question: and if they agree to go to the question, then he
says, here is such a law or act concerning such a matter, which has been
thrice read here in this house, are ye content that it be enacted or no? If the
not contents be more, then the bill is dashed, that is to say the law is
annihilated and goes no further. If the contents be the more, then the Clarke
writes underneath: Soit baille aux commons. And so when they see time they
send such bills as they have approved by two or three of those which do sit on
the woolsacks to the commons: who asking license, and coming into the house,
with due reverence, says to the speaker: Master speaker my Lords of the upper
house have passed among them and think good, that there should be enacted by
Parliament such an act, and such an act, and so reads the titles of that act
or acts. They pray you to consider of them, and show them your advise, which
done they go their way. They being gone and the door again shut, the
speaker rehearses to the house what they said. And if they be not busy
disputing at that time in an other bill, he asks them streightwaie if they
will have that bill or (if there be mo) one of them.

In like manner in the lower house the speaker sitting in a seat or chair for
that purpose somewhat higher, that he may see and be seen of them all, has
before him in a lower seat his Clarke, who reads such bills as he first
propounded in the lower house, or be sent down from the Lords. For in that
point, each house has equal authority, to propounde what they think meet,
either for thabrogating of some law made before, or for making of a new. All
bills be thrice in three diverse days read and disputed upon, before they come
to the question. In the disputing is a marvelous good order used in the lower
house. He that stands up beareheadded is vnderstranded that he will speak
to the bill. If more stand up, who that first is judged to arise, is first
hard, though the one do prayle the law, the other diswade it, yet there is no
altercation. For every man speaks as to the speaker, not as one to an other,
for that is against the order of the house. It is also taken against the order,
to name him whom ye do confute, but by circumlocution, as he that speaks
with the bill, or he that spoke against the bill, and gave this and this
reason. And so with perpetual Oration not with altercation, he goes through
till he do make an end. He that once has spoken in a bill though he be
confuted straight, that day may not reply, no though he would change his
opinion. So that to one bill in one day one may not in that house speak twice,
for else one or two with altercation would spend all the time. The next day
he may, but then also but once.

No reuiling or nipping words must be used. For then all the house will cry,
it is against the order: and if any speak irreverently or seditiouslie against
the Prince or the privy counsel, I have seen them not only interrupted, but
it has been moved after to the house, and they have sent them to the tower.
So that in such a multitude, and in such diversity of minds, and opinions,
there is the greatest modesty and temperance of speech that can be used.
Nevertheless with much doulce and gentle terms, they make their reasons as
violent and as vehement the one against the other as they may ordinarily,
except it be for urgent causes and hasting of time. At the afternoon they
keep no parliament. The speaker has no voice in the house, nor they will not
suffer him to speak in any bill to move or diswade it. But when any bill is
read, the speakers office is as briefly and as plainly as he may to declare
the effect thereof to the house. If the commons do assent to such bills as be
sent to them first agreed upon from the Lords thus subscribed, Les commons out
assentus, so if the Lords do agree to such bills as be first agreed upon by
the Commons, they send them down to the speaker thus subscribed, Les
Seigneurs out assentus. If they cannot agree, the two houses (for every bill
from whence soever it does come is thrice read in each of the houses) if it be
understood that there is any sticking sometimes the Lords to the Commons,
sometime the Commons to the Lords do require that a certain of each house may
meet together, and so each part to be informed of others meaning, and this is
always granted. After which meeting for the most part not always either
part agrees to others bills.

In the upper house they give their assent and dissent each man severally and
by himself first for himself, and then for so many as he has proxy. When
ye Chaunceler has demanded of them whether they will go to the question after
the bill has been thrice read, they saying only content or not content,
without further reasoning or replying: and as the more number does agree, so
it is agreed on or dashed.

In the nether house none of them that is elected either Knight or Burges can
give his voice to an other nor his consent nor dissent by proxy. The more
parts of them that be present only makes the consent or dissent. After the
bill has been twice read, and then engrossed and eftsoons read and
disputed on enough as is thought: the speaker asks if they will go to the
question. And if they agree be holds the bill up in his hand and says, as
many as will have this bill go forward, which is concerning such a matter,
say yea. Then they which allow the bill cry yea, and as many as will not, say
no: as the cry of yea or no is bigger, so the bill is allowed or dashed. If it
be a doubt which cry is the bigger, they divide the house, the speaker saying,
as many as do allow the bill go down with the bill, and as many as do not
sit still. So they divide themselves, and being so divided they are numbered
who make the more part, and so the bill does speed. It chances sometime
that some part of the bil is allowed, some other part has much contrariety and
doubt made of it: and it is thought if it were amended it would go forward.
Then they choose certain co^mittees of them who have spoken with the bil and
against it to amend it, and bring it in again so amended, as they amongst
them shall think meet: and this is before it is engrossed, yea and some time
after. But ye agreement of these committees is no prejudice to the house. For
at the last question they will either accept it or dash it as it shall seem
good, notwithstanding y^ whatsoever the committees have done.

Thus no bill is an act of Parliament, ordinance, or edict of law, until both
the houses severally have agreed unto it, after the order aforesaid, no nor
then neither. But the last day of that Parliament or session the Prince comes
in person in his Parliament robes, and sits in his state: all the upper
house sits about the Prince in their states and order in their robes. The
speaker with all the common house comes to the bar, and there after
thankesgiuen first in the Lords name by the Chaunceller etc. and in the
commons name by the speaker to the Prince, for that he has so great care of
the good government of his people, and for calling them together to advise of
such things as should be for the reformation, establishing and ornament of the
common wealth: the Chaunceller in ye Princes name gives thanks to the Lords
and commons for their pains and travails taken, which he says the Prince
will remember and recompense when time and occasion shall serve, and y^ he for
his part is ready to declare his pleasure concerning their proceedings, whereby
the same may have perfect life and accomplishment by his princely authority,
and so have the whole consent of the Realm. Then one reads the title of
every act which has passed at that session, but only in this fashion: An act
concerning such a thing etc. It is marked there what the Prince does allow,
and to such he says: Le roy or la royne le veult. And those be taken now as
perfect laws and ordinances of the Realm of England and none other, and as
shortly as may be put in print, except it be some private cause or law made
for the benefit or prejudice of some private man, which the Romans were wont to
call priuilegia. These be only exemplified under the seal of the Parliament,
and for the most part not printed. To those which the Prince likes not, he
answers, Le roy or la royne saduisera, and those be accounted utterly dashed
and of no effect.

This is the order and form of the highest and most authentical court of
England, by virtue whereof all those things be established whereof I spoke
before, and no other means accounted vailable to make any new forfaiture of
life, member, or lands of any English man, where there was no law ordained
for it before. Now let us speak of the said parts when they be several.

Of the Monarch King or Queen of England. CHAP. 3.
THe Prince whom I now call (as I have often before) the Monarch of England,
King or Queen, has absolutely in his power the authority of war and
peace, to defy what Prince it shall please him, and to bid him war, and
again to reconcile himself and enter into league or truce with him at his
pleasure or the advice only of his privy consell. His privy counsel be
chosen also at the Princes pleasure out of the nobility or baronie, and of the
Knights, and Esquires, such and so many as he shall think good, who does
consult daily, or when need is of the weighty matters of the Realm, to give
therein to their Prince the best advice they can. The Prince does participate
to them all, or so many of them, as he shall think good, such legations and
messages as come from foreign Princes, such letters or occurrentes as be sent to
himself or to his secretaries, and keeps so many ambassades and letters sent
unto him secret as he will, although these have a particular oath of a
counselor touching faith and secrets administered unto them when they be first
admitted into that company. So that herein the kingdom of England is far
more absolute than either the dukedom of Uenice is, or the kingdom of the
Lacedaemonians was. In war time, and in the field the Prince has also
absolute power, so that his word is a law, he may put to death, or to other
bodily punishment, whom he shall think so to deserve, without process of
law or form of judgment. This has been sometime used within the Realm
before any open war in sodden insurrections and rebellions, but that not
allowed of wise and grave men, who in that their judgment had consideration of
the consequence and example, as much as of the present necessity,, especially,
when by any means the punishment might have been done by order of law.
This absolute power is called marciall law and ever was and necessarily must
be used in all camps and hosts of men, where the time nor place do suffer the
tariance of pleading and process, be it never so short, and the important
necessity requires speedy execution, that with more awe the soldier might
be kept in more straight obedience, without which never captain can do any
thing vaileable in the wars.

The prince uses also absolute power in crying and decreeing the money of the
realm by his proclamation only. The money is always stamped with the pinces
image and title. The form, fashion, manner, weight, finenesse, and baseness
thereof, is at the discretion of the prince. For whom should the people trust
more in that matter than their prince, seeing the coin is only to certify the
goodness of the metal and the weight, which is affirmed by the princes image
and mark? But if the prince will deceive them and give copper for silver or
gold, or enhaunce his coin more than it is worth, he is deceived himself, as
well as he does go about to deceive his subjects. For in the same sort they
pay the prince his rentes and customs. And in time they will make him pay
rateably or more for meat, drink and victualles for him and his, and for
their labor: which experience does teach us now in our days to be done in
all regions. For there ever has been and ever will be a certain proportion
between the scarcity and plenty of other things, with gold and silver, as I
have declared more at large in my book of money. For all other measures and
weightes, as well of dry things as of wet, they have accustomed to be
established or altered by the Parliament, and not by the princes proclamation
only.

The prince uses also to dispense with laws made, whereas equity requires a
moderation to be had, and with pains for transgression of laws, where the
pain of the law is applied only to the prince. But where the forfaite (as in
popular actions it chances many times) is part to the prince, the other part
to the declarator, detector or informer, there the prince does dispense for his
own part only. Where the criminal action is intended by inquisition (that
manner is called with us at the princes suite) the prince giueeth absolution or
pardon: yet with a clause, modo stet rectus in curia, that is to say, that no
man object against the offender. Whereby notwithstanding that he has the
princes pardon if the person offended will take upon him the accusation( which
in our language is called the appeal) in cases where it lies, the princes
pardon does not serve the offender.

The prince gives all the chief and highest offices or magistracies of the
realm, be it of judgment or dignity, temporal or spiritual, and has the
tenthes and first fruits of all Ecclesiastical promotions, except in the
Uniuersities and certain Colleges which be exempt.

All writtes, executions and commandments be done in the princes name. We
do say in England the life and member of the kings subjects are the kings
only, that is to say no man has hault nor moyenne justice but the king, nor
can hold plea thereof. And therefore all those pleas, which touch the life or
the mutilation of man, be called pleas of the crown, nor can be dooke in the
name of any inferior person than he or she that holds the crown of
England. And likewise no man can give pardon thereof but the prince only:
Although in times past there were certain county Palatines, as Chester,
Durham, Clie, which were hault iusticers, and writtes went in their name, and
also some Lord marchers of Wales, which claymed like privilege. All these are
now worn away. The supreme justice is done in the kings name, and by his
authority only.

The Prince has the wardshippe and first marriage of all those that hold lands
of him in chief. And also the government of all fools natural, or such as be
made by adventure of sickness, and so continue, if they be landed. This being
once granted by act of Parliament (although some inconvenience has been
thought to grow thereof, and since that time it has been thought very
unreasonable) yet once annexed to the crown who ought to go about to take the
clubbe out of Hercules hand. And being governed justly and rightly, I see not
so much inconvenience in it, as some men would make of it: diverse other rights
and preeminences the prince has which be called prerogatives royalles, or the
prerogative of the king, which be declared particularly in the books of the
common laws of England.

To be short the prince is the life, the head, and the authority of all
things that be done in the realm of England. And to no prince is done more
honor and reverence than to the King and Queen of England, no man speaks to
the prince nor serves at the table but in adoration and kneeling, all persons
of the realm be bareheaded before him: insomuch that in the chamber of
presence where the cloth of estate is set, no man dare walk, yea though the
prince be not there, no man dare tarry there but bareheadded. This is
understood of the subjects of the realm: For all strangers be suffered there
and in all places to use the manner of their country, such is the civility of
our nation.

The chief points wherein one common wealth does differ from an other. CHAP.
4.
NOw that we have spoken of the parliament (which is the whole universal and
general consent and authority as well of the prince as of the nobility and
commons, that is to say, of the whole head and body of the realm of England)
and also of the prince, (which is the head, life and governor of this common
wealth): there remains to show, how this head does distribute his authority
and power to the rest of the members for the government of this realm, and the
common wealth of the politic body of England. And whereas as all common
wealths and gouernmentes be most occupied, and be most diverse in the fashion
of five things: in making of laws and ordinances, for their own government:
in making of battle and peace, of truce with foreign nations: in providing of
money for the maintenance of themselves within themselves, and defense of
themselves against their enemies: in choosing and election of the chief
officers and magistrates: and fifthly in the administration of justice. The
first and third we have showed is done by the prince in parliament. The
second and fourth by the prince himself. The fifth remains to be declared.

Of the three manners and forms of trialles or judgments in England. CHAP. 5.
By order and usage of England there is three ways and manners, whereby
absolute and definite judgment is given, by parliament which is the highest
and most absolute, by battle, and by the great assise.

Trial or judgment by parliament. CHAP. 6.
THe matter of giving judgment by parliament between private and private man,
or between the prince and any private man, be it in matters criminal or
civil, for land or for heritage, does not differ from thorder, which I have
prescribed, but it proceeds by bill thrice read in each house and assented to
as I have said before, and at the last day confirmed and allowed by the
prince. Howbeit such bills be seeldome received because that great counsel
being enough occupied with the public affairs of the realm, will not gladly
intermedle it self with private quarrels and questions.

Trial of judgment by battle. CHAP. 7.
THis is at this present not much used, partly because of long time the Pope
and the clergy to whom in times past we were much subject, always cried
against it as a thing damnable and unlawful, and partly because in all common
wealths (as to the tongue) so to the manners, fashions, habites, yea and kinds
of trials and judgments, and to all other things that is therein used, time
and space of years brings a change. But I could not yet learn that it was
ever abrogated. So that it remains in force, whenever it be demanded. The
manner of it is described in Briton.

The trial by affise or xij. men, and first of the three parts which be
necessary in judgment. CHAP. 8.
THe two first iugdementes be absolute supreme and without appeal, and so is
also the judgment by the great affise. And because our manner of judgments
in England is in many things different from the fashion used either in
France, or in Italy, or in any other place where the Emperors laws and
constitutions (called the civil laws) be put in use, it will be necessary
here to make a little digression, to the intent, that that which shall be said
hereafter may be better understood. All pursuites and actions (we call them in
our English tongue pleas) and in barbarous (but now usual) latin placita,
taking* that name abusiue of the definitive sentence, whith may well be called
placitum or (...). The French uses the same calling in their language, the
sentence of their judges areste or arest: in which words nothwithstanding
after their custom they do not found the s. but we call placitum the action
not the sentence, and placitare barbarously, or to plead in english, agere or
litigare. Now in all judgments necessarily being two parties, the first we
call the impleader, suitor, demaunder or demaundaunt and plaintiff: In
criminal causes if he profess to be an accuser, we call him appellant or
appellour, and so accusation we call appeal. The other we call the defendant
and in criminal causes prisoner, for he cannot answer in causes criminal
before he do render himself or be rendered prisoner.

Index is of us called Judge, but our fashion is so diverse that they which
give the deadly stroke, and either condemn or acquit the man for guilty or
not guilty, are not called Judges but the xii* men. And the same order as well
is in civil matters and pecuniarie, as in matters criminal.

Of pleas or actions. CHAP. 9.
PLeas or actions criminal be in English called pleas of the crown, which be
all those which tend to take away a man's life or any member of him, for his
evil deserving against the prince and common wealth.

And this name is given not without a cause. For taking this for a principle
that the life and member of an Englishman is in the power only of the prince
and his laws, when any of his subjects is spoiled either of life or member,
the prince is endammaged thereby, and has good cause to ask account, how his
subjects should come to that mischief. And again for so much as the prince
who governs the scepter, and holds the crown of England has this in his
care and charge, to see the realm well governed, the life, members and
possessions of his subjects kept in peace and assurance: he that by violence
shall attempt to break that peace and assurance, has forfeited against the
scepter and crown of England: and therefore not without a cause in all
inquisitions and inditementes, if any be found by the xii. men to have offended
in that behalf, straight the prince is said to be party, and he that shall
speak for the prisoner shall be rebuked, as speaking against the prince.
Nevertheless it is never defended, but the prisoner and party defendant in
any cause may allege for him, all the reasons, means and defenses that he
can, and shall be peaceably heard and quietly: But in those pleas and
pursuites of the crown, procurer or advocate he gettes none, Saving in appels
and upon a special plea.
which in civil and pecuniarie matters (be it for land, rent, right, or
possession, although he plead against the prince himself) is never denied.

Pleas civil be either personal or real, personal as contractes or for
injuries: Actio is the parties whole suite* breue is the kings precept.
real be either possessorie to ask, or to keep the possession, or in rem,
which we call a writ of right. For that which in the civil law is called
actio or formula, we call writ in English: so the Greeks called it word for
word (...), and in our barbarous latin we name it breue.

And as the old Romans had their actions some ex iure civilly, and some ex
iure praetorio, and ordinarily praetor dabat actiones and formulas actionum: so
in England we retain still this, and have some writtes out of the chauncerie,
other out of the common place or the kings bench.

Of the chief Tribunals, benches or courts of England. CHAP. 10.
IN times past (as may appear to him that shall with judgment read the
histories and antiquites of England) the courts and benches followed the king
and his court wheresoever he went, especially shortly after the conquest. Which
thing being found very cumbersome, paineful and chargeable to the people, it
was agreed by parliament, that there should be a standing place where
judgment should be given. And it has long time been used in Westminster
hall, which king William Rufus builded for the hall of his own house. In that
hal be ordinarily seen 3. Tribunals or Judges seats. At the entry on the
right hand, the common place, where civil matters are to be pleaded,
specially such as touch lands or contractes. At the upper end of the hall, on
the right hand, the kings bench, where pleas of the crown have their place.
And on the left hand sits the Chauncelor accompanied with the master of the
Roules, who in latin may be called custos archiuorum regis, and certain men
learned in the civil law called Masters of the chauncerie, in latin they may
be named Assessores.

Of the times of pleading called terms, and of the Chauncelor and chauncerie.
CHAP. II.
TWo things may be moved in question here, how all England (being so long and
so large, and having so many shyres and provinces therein) can be answered of
justice in one place, and in 3. benches be they never so great? An other
(whereas the kings bench is exercised in criminal causes and in all pleas of
the crown, and the common place in all civil causes, real and personal)
what place then has the chauncerie?

The first question will seem more marvelous and have more occasion of doubt,
when I shall also tell that the law is not open at all times, no not the third
part of the year. But where all other cities and common wealths had all the
year pleas, suites, and judgments, except for certain holy days and
harvest and vintage, or when for some urgent cause the law was commanded to
be stopped, which is called Iustitium: Contrary in ours, it is but few times
open. That is only four times in the year which they call terms. After
Michaelmas about ten days, during five or six weeks at the least. After
Christmas about a month, enduring by the space of three weeks. Then from xvij
days after Easter by the space of three weeks and odd days. Likewise from
the sixth or seventh day after Trinity sunday, during two weeks and odd
days. All the rest of the year there is no pleading, entering nor pursuing of
actions. This small time, and all that but in one place may seem verse
injurious to the people, who must be feign to suffer much wrong for lack of
Justice and of place and time to plead* but unto that hereafter I entende to
answer more fully, and in the mean while that shall suffice which the wise
Cato answered to one who moved that the pleading place in Rome might be
covered over with canuas as their theaters were, to the intent that the
plaintifes and defendauntes that were there might plead their matters more at
ease, and not be in so much danger of their health by the heat of the sun
striking full and open upon their heads, which was no small grief and disease,
specially at Rome. Nay (says Cato) for my part I had rather with that all the
ways to the place of pleading were cast over with galthrops that the feet of
such as love so well pleading, should feel so much pain of those pricks in
going thither as their heads do of the sun in tarrying there: he meant that
they were but idle, whot heads, busy bodies, and troublesome men in the
common wealth that did so nourish pleading: good laborers and quiet men could
be content to end their matters at home by judgment of their neighbors and
kinsfolk without spending so their money upon procurers and advocates whom we
call attorneys, counselors, Sergeants, and generally men of law. Those be
accounted profitable citizens, who attend their honest labor and business at
home, and not stand waiting and gaping upon their rolls and process in the
law: as for the other by his judgment, it was no matter what mischief they
suffered. To the other question of the chancerie, this I answer: That our law
which is called of us the common law as ye would say Ius civil, is and
stands upon (...), that is Ius summum: and their maximees be taken so
straightly that they may not depart from the tenor of the words even as the
old civil law was. And therefore as that lacked the help of a Praetor
(which might moderari illud ius summum, give actions where none was, mitigate
the exactness and rigor of the law written, give exceptions, as metus, doli
mali, minoris aetatis, etc. for remedies, and maintain always aequum and
bonum:) the same order and rank holds our chauncerie, and the chauncellor
has the very authority herein as had the Praeter in the old civil law
before the time of the Emperors. So he that puts up his bill in the
chauncerie, after that he has declared the mischief wherein he is, has
relief as in the solemn forum. And for so much as in this case he is without
remedy in the common law, therefore he requires the chauncellor according to
equity and reason to provide for him and to take such order as to good
conscience shall appertain. And the court of the chauncerie is called of the
common people the court of conscience, because that the chauncellor is not
strained by rigor or form of words of law to judge but ex aequo and bono,
and according to conscience as I have said. And in this court the usual and
proper form of pleading of England is not used, but the form of pleading by
writing, which is used in other countries according to the civil law: and the
trial is not by xij. men, but by the examination of witness as in other
courts of the civil law.

Of Judges in the common law of England, and the manner of trial and pleading
there. CHAP. 12.
THe Prince out of the numbers of those who have been Counselors or Sergeants
at the law, which be those who in latin are called causidici or aduocati,
chooses two of the most approved for learning, age, discretion, and exercise,
of whom the one is called chief Justice of the Kings bench, or simply chief
Justice, the other chief Justice of the common place, and others to the number
of six or more, which have each an ordinary fee or stipend of the Prince.

These do sit at such days as be term, which may be called Dies legitimi
iuridici or fasti, in their distinct places as I have said before. There they
hear the pleading of all matters which do come before them: and in civil
matters where the pleading is for money or land or possession, part by writing,
and part by declaration and altercation of the advocates the one with the other,
it does so proceed before them till it do come to the issue, which the
latins do call statum causae, I do not mean contestationem litis, but as
the Rhetoritians do call statum, we do most properly call it the issue, for
there is the place where the debate and strife remains (as a water held in a
close and dark vessel issues out, is voided and emptied) and no where else:
that stroke well stricken is the departing of all the quarrelles. Issues or
status in our law be ordinarily two, facti and iuris.

Of the two manner of issues. CHAP. 13.
IF the question be of the law, that is if both the parties do agree upon the
fact, and each do claim that by law he ought to have it, and will still in
that sort maintain their right, then it is called a demurrer in law: where if
in the law the case seem to the Judges that sit doubtful, But sometimes it
is determined by the same court only.
it is called a checkerchamber case, and all the Judges will meet together,
and what they shall pronounce to be the law, that is held for right, and the
other party loses his action or land for ever. If the Sergeantes or
counselors do stand upon any point in the law which is not so doubtful, the
Judges who be taken for most expert biddes him go forward: and if he has no
other to say but stands upon that point of the law, This should be meant of
a respondes ouster, when the opinion is against him that takes an exception
which is not peremptory.
that bidding go forward is taken that he loses his action, and the
defendant is licensed to depart without a day: and this is where the issue or
question is of the law or Iuris. So is that case where the law is not
doubtful according to the matter contained in the declaration, answer,
replication, reioinder or triplication, the Judge out of hand decideth it. And
it is the manner that each party must agree to the other still in ye fact which
he cannot deny. For if he once come to deny any deed as not done, not his
writing, that the man by whom the adversary claims was not the adversaries
auncestor, He may deny it by protestation.
or the evidence which his adversary brings is not true, or that his gift
was former, or any such like exception which is vaileable to abate the action
or bar the party: and the other joins in the affirmative and will auerre
and prove the same, this is called the issue, and immediately all question of
the law cease as agreed by both the parties, that there is no question in
the law. Then as that issue facti is found by the xij men of whom we shall
speak heareafter, so the one party or other loses his cause and action: so
that contrary to the manner of the civil law where first the fact is examined
by witnesses, indices, torments and such like probations to find out the
truth thereof, and that done the aduocats do dispute of the law to make of it
what they can: saying, ex facto ius oritur: here the Sergeantes or counselors
before the Judges do in passing forewarde with their pleading determine and
agree upon the law, and for the most part and in manner all actions as well
criminiall as civil, come to the issue and state of some fact which is denied
of the one party, and auerred of the other: which fact being tried by the xij
men as they find, so the action is won or lost. And if a man have many
peremptory exceptions (peremptory exceptions I call only those which can
make the state and issue) because the xij men be commonly rude and ignorant,
the party shall be compelled to choose one exception whereupon to found his
issue, which chosen if he fail in that by the verdite of xij men, he loses
his action and cause, and the rest can serve him for nothing.

Having seen both in France and other places many devices, edictes and
ordinances how to abridge process and to find how that long suites in law
might be made shorter: I have not perceived nor read as yet so wise, so just,
and so well devised a mean found out as this by any man among us in Europe.

Truth it is that where this fashion has not been used and to them to whom
it is new, it will not be so easily understood, and therefore they may
peradventure be of contrary judgment: but the more they do weigh and
consider it, the more reasonable they shall find it.

How the issue, question or status iuris is decided, I have told: now I will
show how it is tried when it does come to the question, state or issue of the
deed or fact. And first I must speak more largely of the manner of proceeding
in the process, and of such persons as be necessary for the execution thereof.

Of the sheriff of the shire, and of the court of exchequer. CHAP. 14.
THe Romans had to execute the commandments of the magistrates Lictores,
viatores, accensos. The civil law since that time has other names, terms,
and officers. The execution of the commandments of the magistrates in
England is ordinarily done by the sherifes. The sheriff (which is as much to
say as the Reeue or Bailey of the shire) is properly word for word Questor
prouinciae: it is he which gathers up and accompteth for the profittes of
the shire, that come to the exchequer. The exchequer (which is fiscus
principis, or aerarium publicum, and I cannot tell in what language it is
called Scaccarium, some thinks that it was first called statarium, because that
there was the stable place to account for the revenues of the crown, as well
that which came of the patrimony which we call the demeasnes: as that which
comes of other incident acquisitions be they rentes, customs, tenthes,
quinziesmes, taxes, subsidies, wheresoever the Prince or his court be according
to the time and occasion) was a place stable, continual and appointed for to
reckon and account. The hearers of the account (who in latin may be called
tribuni aerarij) have auditors under them which the Latins do call
Rationales: but they are the chief for the accounts of the Prince, and may be
called Iuridicirationales, in English we call them Barons of the exchequer,
whereof is one who is called the chief Baron, as Tribunus or Iuridicus
rationalis primus or princeps. The chief of all is called high treasurer of
England, as you would say in latin Supremus aerarij anglici quaestor, or
Tribunus aerarius maximus. In this court be heard Quadruplatores (which we call
promoters) which be those that in popular and penal action be delatores,
having thereby part of the profit by the law assigned. In this court if any
question be, it is determined after the order of the common law of England by
the xij men as I have said: and all customers which were in latin called
publicarij in greek (...), do account in this office. The Sheriff of the shire
is called in our common latin vicecomes, as one would say vicarius comitis or
procomes, doing that service to attend upon the execution of the
commandments of the Tribunalles or Judges which the Earl or county should
do, which Earl or Countey for the most part was attending upon the Prince in
the wars or otherwise about the Prince as the word bears, Comes principis:
whereby it may appear that the chief office of the County or Earl was to
see the kings Justice to have course and to be well executed in the shire or
County, and the Princes revenues well answered and brought in aerarium
principis, which is called of us the treasury.

If any fines or amerciaments, which in latin be called mulctae, beleuied in
any of the said courts upon any man or any arrerages of accountes by the
latins called reliqua, of such things as is of customs, taxes, subsidies or
any other such occasions, the same ye sheriff of the shire does gather and is
respondent therefore in the exchequer. As for other ordinary rentes of
patrimoniall lands and most commonly for the taxes, customs, and subsidies,
there be particular receivers and collectors which do answer it into the
exchequer. The sheriff has under him an under sheriff at his charge and
appointment learned somewhat in the law, especially if he be not learned
himself, and diverse bailifes which he called errantes, whom he makes at his
pleasure, who can know each land and person in the shire, and their ability
to go upon enquestes, either to distreine or to summon him to appear whom
the sheriff shall appoint, and for this cause to the sherifes as to the minister
most proper of the law the writtes be directed.

When any thing comes to an issue of the deed or fact, there is a writ or
writing directed to the sheriff of the shire where the land is, whereupon the
controversy is, or where the man dwells of whom the money is demanded,
which writ is called venire facias. Then after the same effect an alias,
pluries or distringas according to the nature of the action to the return of
the sheriff. And if for any disobedience of not coming and appearing there be
a fine (which the latins do call Mulcta) set upon any jurors head, the sheriff
is charged with it, and takes the distresses which in latin be called Pignora,
and answers therefore to the exchequer. The sheriff also is ready by
himself or by his vndersherife to serve as well the Justices of peace in their
quarter sessions as ye Justices called Itinerantes in their great assizes, when
they come into the shire, which is twice in the year, to dispatch and void
actions criminal and civil depending at the common law, and which be come now
to the issue. He has also the charge of all the prisoners committed to ye
prison which we call the jail, and when any is condemned to die, it is his
charge to see the sentence executed. To be short, he is as it were the general
minister and highest for execution of such commandments according to the
law as the Judges do ordain, and this is enough for the sheriff.

Of the xij men. CHAP. 15.
OF what manner and order of men in the commonwealth the xij men be I have
already declared. The sheriff always warns xxiiij to appear, least
peradventure any might be sick or have a just cause of absence: and if there
be not enowe to make an enquest, the absentes be amersed. For although they be
called xii men as a man would say duodecim viri, yet if they be xvj, xx or the
whole number of xxiiij, that is no matter, xij they must be at the least to
make an enquest or as some call it a quest. An enquest or quest is called this
lawefull kind of trial by xii men. In actions civil which is either of
contractes or for land or possession when so many of those which be warned
appear at the call as be able to make an enquest, which as I said before be
no less then xii, either part when they be come takes their chalenges against
so many of them as they will, which be that he may not spend so much land a
year, he is alied, feed, or servant to his adverse party, he is his enemy
etc. And two of the whole number do try and allow or disallowe the rest. If
after exceptions there be so many rejected that there is not a full enquest, in
some cases that day is lost, in some the enquest is filled ex circumstantibus:
when the quest is full, they be sworn to declare the truth of that issue
according to the evidence and their conscience. Then the Sergeantes of either
side declare the issue, and each for his client says as much as he can.
Evidences of writings be showed, witnesses be sworn, and heard before them,
not after the fashion of the civil law but openly, that not only the xii, but
the Judges, the parties and as many as be present may hear what each witness
does say: The adverse party or his advocates which we call counselors and
sergeants interrogateth sometime the witnesses, That is not order but abuse.
and drives them out of countenance. Although this may seem strange to our
ciuillians now, yet who reads Cicero and Quintillian well shall see that
there was no other order and manner of examining witnesses or deposing among the
Romans in their time. When it is thought that it is enough pleaded before them,
and the witnesses have said what they can, one of the Judges with a brief and
pithie recapitulation recites to the xii in sum the arguments of the
sergeantes of either side, that which the witnesses have declared, and the
chief points of the evidence showed in writing, and once again puts them
in mind of the issue, and sometime gives it them in writing, delivering to
them the evidence which is showed on either part, if any be, (evidence here is
called writings of contractes autentical after the manner of England, that is
to say, written, sealed, and delivered) and bids them go together. Then
there is a baylife charged with them to keep them in a chamber not far off
without bread, drink, light, or fire until they be agreed, that is, till they
all agree upon one verdite concerning the same issue, and upon one among them
who shall speak for them all when they be agreed: for it goes not by the most
part, but each man must agree. They return and in so few words as may be
they give their determination: few I call vj or vij or viij words at the most
(for commonly the issue is brought so narrow, that such number of words may be
enough to affirm or to deny it) which done they are dismissed to go whither
they will. Courtisie and not duty.
The party with whom they have given their sentence, gives the enquest their
dinner that day most commonly, and this is all that they have for their labor,
notwithstanding that they come some xx some xxx or xl miles or more, to the
place where they give their verdite all, the rest is of their own charge. And
necessarily all the whole xij must be of the shire and iiij of them of the
hundred where the land lies which is in controversy, or where the party
dwells who is the defendant.

Of parties of Shires called hundreds, lathes, rapes, wapentakes. CHAP. 16.
AN hundred, or lath, rape, or wapentake be called of the divisions or parts
of shires in diverse countries diversely named after the manner and language of
each country. For the shires be divided some into x. xij. xiij. xvj. xx. or
xxx hundreds, more or less, either that they were at the first C. towns and
villages in each hundred: and although now they be but xvj. xx. xxx. xl. l. lx.
more or less, yet it is still called an hundred, or else there were but so
many at the first as be now, or a few more or less, and they did find the
king to his wars an hundred able men. Lath, and rape I take to be names of
service, for that so many towns in old time, and in the first poverty of the
Realm did meet together in one day to carry the Lords corn into his barn,
which is called in old English a Lath. Or that they met at commandment of
the Lord to reap his corn.

Wapentake I suppose came of the Danes or peradventure of the Saxons. For that
so many towns came by their orders then, to one place, where was taken a
mouster of their armor and weapons, in which place from them that could not
find sufficient pledges for their good abearing, their weapons were taken
away: weapen or wapen in old English do signify all arms offensive, as
sword, dagger, spear, lance, bill, bows, arrows.

Of the place where the monsters were taken or where the said services were
done, the hundreds, Lathes, Rapes, and wapentakes had and have yet their
names, which be most commonly good towns, and it is to be thought at the first
they were all such. But sometime now in places whereof the hundred has the
name, Hundreds were named of towns, hills, or other marks.
no mention nor memory of a town remains, such mutation time brings with
it of all things. A hundred has one or two high Constables, who has some
authority over all the lower, and particular Constables. Those high Constables
be made by the Justices of the peace of the shire, and each hundred has his
baylife, who is made by the Lord if any has that liberty, or else by the
sheriff of the shire for the time being.

Of the court Baron. CHAP. 17.
IT may appear strange that of xxxvj shires, whereof each shire is divided
into diverse hundreds, each hundred containing diverse parishes, all pleading
should be but in one place, that is in Westminster hall, and that but in
certain times of the year, making little more than one quarter of the year
in the whole. And one would think ye there should be much lack of Justice and
right, and much wrong taken without redress. But it is not so: The people
being accustomed to live in such an equality of Justice, and that in such sort
that ye rich has no more advantage therein than the poor, the process, and
proceedinges to the judgment being so short, and judgments also being
peremptory and without appellation: Yet to help for small matters, where no
great sum is in question there are other courts. In every shire from three
weeks to three weeks the sheriff for small things not passing xl. s. and in
certain hundreds and liberties the baylie likewise from three weeks to three
weeks holds plea. And whosoever is possessioner and owner of a manor, may
hold from three weeks to three weeks, or at his pleasure of his tennantes
and amongst his tennantes a court called a court Baron. And there his
tennantes being sworn make a Jury which is not called the enquest, but the
homage. These principally do enquire of the copy holders, and other free
holders that be dead since the last court, and bring in their heirs, and next
successors, and likewise of incrochment or intrusion of any of the tennantes
against the Lord, or among themselves. They make orders and laws amongst
themselves, the pain of them if they be after broken, comes to the Lord.
And if any small matter be in controversy, it is put to them, and commonly
they do end it. But these courts do serve rather for men that can be
content to be ordered by their neighbors, and which love their quiet and
profit in their husbandry, more than to be busy in the law. For whether
party soever will, may procure a writ out of the higher court to remove the
plea to Westminster.

In cities and other great towns there be diverse liberties to hold plea for
a bigger sum, which do determine as well as the common law, and after the
same manner, and yet for them that will, it may be removed to Westminster hall.

King Henry the eight ordained first a president, Counselors and Judges, one
for the marches of Wales, at Ludlowe, or else where: an other for the north
parts of England at York, where be many causes determined. These two are as
be Parliaments in France. But yet if there be any matter of great
consequence, the party may move it at the first, or remove it afterward to
Westminster hall, and to the ordinary Judges of the Realm, or to the
Chanceller, as the matter is.

These two courts do hear matters before them, part after the common law of
England, and part after the fashion of the chauncerie.

Of the Leete or law day. CHAP. 18.
LEete or law day is not incident to every manor, but to those only which by
special grant, or long prescription have such liberty. This was as it may
appear first a special trust and confidence and commission given to a few put
in trust by the Prince, as is now to the Justices of peace, to see men sworn
to the Prince, to take pledges and suerties in that manner of one for an other
to answer for obedience and truth, to enquire of privy conspiracies, fraies,
murders, and bloudsheddes, and to this was added the oversight of bread and
ale, and other measures. Many times they that be out of the homage and court
Baron of that manor and Lordship, be nevertheless astreined and answerable to
come to the Leete. This Leete is ordinarily kept but twice in the year, and
that at terms and times prescribed.

The Leete or Law day is all one, and betokens word for word, legittimum
or iuridicum diem. Law the old Saxons called lant or lag, and so by
corruption and changing of language from Lant to Leete, understanding day.
They which keep our full english term, call it yet law day.

Of the proceedinges of causes criminal, and first of the Justices of the
Peace. CHAP. 19.
BEfore the manner of proceeding in causes criminal can be well understood, it
will be necessary to speak of three persons, the Justices of peace, the
Coroners, and the Constables. The Justices of peace be men elected out of the
nobility, higher and lower, that is the Dukes, Marquisses, Barons, Knights,
Esquiers, and Gentlemen, and of such as be learned in the laws, such and in
such number as the Prince shall think meet, and in whom for wisdom and
discretion he puts his trust, inhabitants within the county* saving that
some of the high nobility and chief magistrates for honors sake are put in
all, or in the most of the commissions of all the shires of England. These have
no time of their rule limited but by commission from the Prince alterable at
pleasure.

At the first they were but iiij, after viij, now they come commonly to xxx or
xl in every shire, either by increase of riches, learning, or actiuitie in
policy and government. So many more being found, which have either will, or
power, or both, are not too many to handle the affairs of the common wealth
in this behalf. Of these in the same commission be certain named, which be
called of the Quorum, in whom is especial trust reposed, that where the
commission is given to xl or xxx, and so at the last it comes to iiij or
three, it is necessary for the performance of many affairs to have likewise
diverse of the Quorum. The words of the commission be such, Quorum vos A B. C
D. E F. vnum esse volumus.

The Justices of the peace be those in whom at this time for the repressing of
robbers, thieves, and vagabunds, of privy complots, and conspiracies, of
riotes, and violences, and all other misdemeanors in the common wealth, the
Prince puts his special trust. Each of them has authority upon complaint
to him made of any theft, robbery, manslaughter, murder, violence, complotes,
riottes, unlawful games, or any such disturbance of the peace, and quiet of
the Realm, to commit the persons whom he supposes offenders, to the prison,
and to charge the Constable or sheriff to bring them thither, the jailer to
receive them and keep them till he and his fellows do meet. A few lines
signed with his hand is enough for that purpose* these do meet four times
in the year, that is, in each quarter once, to enquire of all the misdemeanors
aforesaid: at which days the sheriff, or his vndersherife with his baylifes
be there to attend upon him, who must prepare against that time four
enquestes of xxiiij yeomen a piece of diverse hundredes in the shire, This is
not always and in all places observed, but only concerning the graund enquest.
and besides one which is called the great enquest out of the body of the
shire mingled with all. These five enquests are sworn before them to enquire
of all heretics, traitors, theftes, murders, manslaughters, rapes, false
moniers, extortioners, riottes, routes, forcible entries, unlawful games, and
all such things as be contrary to the peace and good order of the Realm, and
to bring in their verdict. If they among themselves upon their own knowledge
do find any culpable, they cause one of the clerks to make the bill. And if
any be there to complain upon any man for these faults, he puts in his
bil, which bil is presented first to the Justices sitting upon the bench, to
see if it be conceived in form of law, which done the complainant does
deliver it to one of these enquests, and after the complainant is sworn, he
declares to the^ what he can, for ye proof of it. And if they find it true
they do nothing but write on the backeside of it billa vera, as ye would say,
scriptum verum: or accusatio iusta, or reus est qui accusatur: Then he who is
there named is called indicted.

If they do not find it true, they write on the backside ignoramus, and so
deliver it to the Justices of whom it is rent into pieces immediately: he that
is indicted is accounted a lawefull prisoner, and after that time looked more
streitly unto. For this indictment is no conviction: and if he be indicted, and
be not already in prison, the sheriff if he can find him, brings him into
prison: if he cannot find him, process is made out against him, to render
himself prisoner, or else he shall be outlawed. The use of capias and exigent
upon inditementes is otherwise.
So he is called three times in diverse county days to render himself to the
law. The fourth is called the exigent, by which he is outlawed not rendering
himself, as ye would say: exactus or actus in exilium. The outlawe loses all
his goods to the King for his disobedience. But if after he will render himself
to answer to the law, and show some reasonable cause of his absence, many
times of grace his outlawerie is pardoned. These meetinges of the Justices of
peace four times in the year, They are put to fines.
be called quarter sessions or sessions of inquiry, because that nothing is
there determined touching the malefactors, but only the custody of them: and
this kind of proceeding which is by inquisition of the xij men within
themselves, and their own consciences, or by denunciation of him that puts
in his bill to the xii, is called at the kings suite, and the king is reckoned
the one party, and the prisoner the other. The Justices of the peace do meet
also at other times by commandment of the Prince upon suspicion of war, to
take order for the safety of the shire, sometimes to take musters of harnes
and able men, and sometime to take orders for the excessive wages of servant
and laborers, for excess of apparel, for unlawful games, for conuenticles
and evil orders in alehouses, and tauernes, for punishment of idle and
vagabund persons, and generally as I have said, for the good government of
the shire, the Prince puts his confidence in them. And commonly every year,
or each second year in the beginning of summer or afterward, (for in the
warm time the people for the most part be more unruly) even in the calm time
of peace, the Prince with his counsel chooses out certain articles out of
penal laws already made for to repress the pride and evil rule of the
popular, and sends them down to the Justices, willing the^ to look upon
those points, and after they have met together and consulted among
themselves, how to order that matter most wisely and circumspectly, whereby
the people might be kept in good order and obedience after the law, they
divide themselves by three or four: and so each in his quarter takes order
for the execution of the said articles. And then within certain space they
meet again and certify the Prince or his privy counsel how they do find
the shire in rule and order touching those points and all other disorders.
There was never in any commonwealth divised a more wise, a more dulce and
gentle, nor a more certain way to rule the people, whereby they are kept
always as it were in a bridle of good order, and sooner looked unto that they
should not offend, than punished when they have offended. For seeing the chief
amongst them, their rulers to have this special charge and do call upon it,
and if occasion so do present, one or two presently either punished or sent to
prison for disobedience to those old orders and laws, they take a fear
within themselves, they amend and do promise more amendment. So that it is as
a new forbushing of the good laws of the realm, and a continual repressing
of disorders, which do naturally rest among men. But as the invention of this,
and the use and execution thereof is the most benefitte that can be devised for
the common wealth of England: So when it shall be misused, dissembled with, or
be contemned, and be done pro forma tantum, and as they term it in France
par mainere d' acquit only, it will be the present ruin (though not at the
first apperceiued) of the common wealth. Of which the fault may be as well in
the commanders for not making good choice what and how they command, as in
the commanded, for not executing that which is commanded.

Of hue and cry and recognisaunce taking upon them that may give evidence.
CHAP. 20.
BY the old law of England if any theft, or robbery be done, if he that is
robbed, or he that sees or perceives that any man is robbed do levy hue and
cry, that is to say, do call and cry for aid, and say that a theft or
robbery is done contrary to the Princes peace and assurance: The Constable
of the village to whom he does come, and so make that cry, ought to raise the
parish to aid him and seek the thief, and if the thief be not found in
that parish, to go to the next and raise that Constable, and so still by the
Constables and them of the parish one after an other. This hue and cry from
parish to parish is carried, till the thief or robber be found. That parish
which does not his duty, but lets by their negligence the thief to
depart, does not only pay a fine to the king, but must repaie to the party
robbed his damages. So that every English man is a sergiant to take the
thief, and who shows himself negligent therein, does not only incur evil
opinion therefore, but hardly shall escape punishment: what is done with the
thief or robber when he is taken, I shall show you hereafter. The same
manner is followed if any man be slain, for straight the murderer is
pursued of every man till he be taken. So soon as any is brought to the
Justices of peace by this hue or cry, by the Constable or any other who does
pursue the malefactor, he does examine the malefactor, and writes the
examinations and his confession: then he does bind the party that is robbed
or him that sueth, and the Constable, and so many as can give evidence against
the malefactor to be at the next sessions of jail delivery to give their
evidence for the Queen. He binds them in recognisance of xl. xxl. xxxl. xll.
or C. l. according to his discretion, and the quality of the crime: which
certified under his hand, is levied upon the recognizance if they fail of
being there.

Of the Coroner. CHAP. 21.
But if any man, woman, or child, be violently slain, the murderer not
known, no man ought or dare bury the body before the Coroner has seen it.
The Coroner is one chosen by the Prince of the meaner sort of gentlemen, and
for the most part a man seen in the laws of the Realm to execute that
office. And if the person slain, (slain I call here, whosoever he be, man,
woman, or child, that violently comes to his death, whether it be by knife,
poison, cord, drowning, burning, suffocation, or otherwise, be it by his own
fault or default, or by any other) if (I say) the person slain be buried
before the Coroner do come (which for the most part men dare not do) he does
cause the body to be taken up again, and to be searched, and upon the sight
of the body so violently come to his death, he does empanell an enquest of xij
men or mo, of those which come next by, be they strangers or inhabitants,
which upon their oaths, and by the sight or view of the body, and by such
informations as they can take, must search how the person slain came to his
death, and by whom as the doer or causer thereof. These are not enclosed into
a streit place, (as I told before of other enquestes) but are suffered to go
at large, and take a day, sometime after xx or xxx days, more or less, as the
fact is more evident, or more kept close, to give their evidence, at which day
they must appear there again before the said Coroner to give their verdict.
So sometime the person slain himself, sometime the brother, the husband, the
wife, the sister, some of acquaintance or stranger, such as God will have
reueiled, be taken. For whosoever they do find as guilty of the murder, he
is straight committed to prison, and this is against him in the nature of an
indictment which is not a full condemnation, as ye shall see hereafter.

The empanelling of this enquest, and the view of the body, and the giving of
the verdict, is commonly in the street in an open place, and in Corona populi:
but I take rather that this name comes because that the death of every
subject by violence is accounted to touch the crown of the Prince, and to be a
detriment unto it, the Prince accounting that his strength, power, and crown
does stand and consist in the force of his people, and the maintenance of
them in security and peace.

Of the Constables. CHAP. 22.
THese men are called in the elder books of our laws of the Realm custodes
pacis, and were at the first in greater reputation than they be now. It may
appear that there was a credit given unto them not altogether unlike to that
which is now given to the Justices of peace. To this day if any affraie chance
to be made, the Constables ought and will charge them that be at debate to
keep the Princes peace: and whosoever refuses to obey the Constable therein,
all the people will set straight upon him, and by force make him to render
himself to be ordered. Likewise if any be suspected of theft, or receiving, or
of murder, or of manslaughter, the Constable may take such persons, yea enter
into any man's house with sufficient power to search for such men till he find
them: and if he see cause keep the suspected persons in the stocks, or
custody, til he bring them before a Justice of the peace to be examined. But
for so much as every little village has commonly two Constables, One or two
Constables, hedboroughes or tithingmen.
and many times artificers, laborers and men of small ability be chosen unto
that office, who have no great experience, nor knowledge, nor authority, the
Constables at this present (although this they may do upon their own
authority) yet they seem rather to be as it were the executors of the
commandment of the Justices of peace. For the Justice of peace as soon as he
understands by complaint that any man has stolen, robbed, slain, or any
servant or labourer without license has departed out of his masters service,
or any that lives idle and suspectly, knowing once in what parish he is, he
writes to the Constable of the parish, commanding him in the Princes name to
bring that man before him: the Constable dares not disobey. The man is brought
and examined by the Justice, and if the Justice do find cause, he commits
him to the same Constable to convey him further to the Princes jail, where the
party must lie till the Justices of peace do meet either at their quarter
sessions, or at their jail delivery, and that the law has either condemned
or acquitted him. These Constable are called in some places headborowes, in some
places tithingmen, and be like to them, who are called Consuls in many towns
and villages in France. The Constables are commonly made and sworn at the
Leetes of the Lords, chosen thereto by the homage, and they keep that office
sometime ij. iij or iiij year, more or less, as the parish does agree. What
headborow does betoken it is easily known, our language does declare him as
the head or chief of the borowe or village: likewise tithing man is the chief
of ye tithing. Constable seems to me to come of our old English word
kinnyng, which is Kinnyngstable, as ye would say a man established by the king,
for such things as appertains to pleas of the crown and conservation of the
Kings peace, and as I said at the first were in some more reputation,
approaching to that authority which the Justices of peace now does hold.

Of the sessions of jail delivery, and the definitive proceedinges in causes
criminal. CHAP. 23.
How thieves and murderers and other malefactors against the crown and the
peace are taken and brought into hold to answer to justice, partly by hue and
cry, partly by information, and partly by the diligence of the Justices of
peace and the Constables, and how that at the quarter sessions they be
indicted, or else by the Coroners ye have heard before. Enditement (as ye
may perceive by that which is also gone before) is but a former judgment of
xij men which be called enquirers, and no definitive sentence, but that which
in latin is called praeiudicium, it does but show what opinion the country
has of the malefactor: and therefore commonly men be endicted absent, not
called to it, nor knowing of it. For though a man be endicted, yet if when he
come to the arainement, there be no man to pursue further, nor no evidence of
witness or other trial and indices against him, he is without difficulty
acquitted. No man that is once indicted can be delivered without arainement. For
as xij, have given a prejudice against him, so xii again must acquit or
condemn him. But if the prisoner be not indicted, but sent to prison upon some
suspicion or suspicious behavior, and none do pursue him to the enditement,
first being proclaimed thus. A. B. prisoner stands here at the bar, if any
man can say anything against him, let him now speak, for the prisoner stands
at his deliverance; if no man do then come, he is delivered without any
further process or trouble, agreeing first with the jailer for his fees. And
these be called acquitted by proclamation. Twice every year the one is
commonly in lent what time there is vacation from pleading in Westminster hall,
the other is in the vacation in summer. The Prince does send down into every
shire of England certain of his Judges of Westminster hall, and some
Sergeantes at the law with commission to hear and determine jointly with the
Justices of the peace all matters criminal and all prisoners which be in the
gaoles. These Judges do go from shire to shire till they have done their
circuit of so many shires as be appointed to them for that year: at the end
of the term going before their circuit it is written and set up in Westminster
hall on what day and in what place they will be. That day there meets all the
Justices of the peace of that shire, the sheriff of that shire, who for that
time bears their charges, and asks after allowance for it in the Exchequer.
The shirife has ready for criminal causes (as I writ before at the sessions
of inquiry) iiii. v. or vi. enquestes ready warned to appear that day to
serve the Prince, and so many more as he is commanded to have ready to go in
civil matters betwixt private men, which they call Nisi prius, because that
word is in the writ.

In the town house, or in some open or common place, there is a tribunal or
place of judgment made aloft upon the highest bench, there sits the two
Judges which be sent down in Commission in the midst. Next them on each side,
sits the Justices of peace, according to their estate and degree. In a lower
bench before them, the rest of the Justices of the peace, and some other
gentlemen or their clerks. Before these Judges and Justices, there is a table
set beneath, at which sits the Custos rotulorum, or keeper of writtes,
Thexchetor, the vndershirife, and such clerks as do write. At the end of that
table, there is a bar made with a space for thenquestes and xii. men to come
in when they are called, behind that space another bar, and there stand the
prisoners which be brought thither by the jailer all chained one to another.
Then the crier cries, and commands silence. One of the Judges briefly
tells the cause of their coming, and gives a good lesson to the people.
Then the prisoners are called for by name, and bidden to answer to their
names. And when the Custos rotulorum has brought forth their enditements, the
Judges do name one or two or three of the prisoners that are endicted, whom
they will have arraigned. There the clarke speaks first to one of the
prisoners: A. B. come to the bar, hold up thy hand. The clarke goes on: A.
B. thou by the name of A. B. of such a town, in such a county, art endicted,
that such a day, in such a place, thou have stolen with force and arms an
horse, which was such ones, of such a color, to such a valor, and carried him
away feloniously, and contrary to the peace of our sovereign Lady the
Queen. What say thou to it, art thou guilty or not guilty* If he will not
answer, or not answer directly guilty or not guilty, after he has been
once or twice so interrogated, he is judged mute, that is dumme by contumacie,
and his condemnation is to be pressed to death, which is one of the cruellest
deaths that may be: he is laid upon a table, and an other upon him, and so
much weight of stones or lead laid upon that table, while as his body be
crushed, and his life by that violence taken from him. This death some strong
and stout hearted man does choose, for being not condemned of felony, his
blood is not corrupted, his lands nor goods confiscate to the Prince, which in
all cases of felony are commonly lost from him and his heirs, if he be
foreiudged, that is condemned for a felon by the law. If he confess the
enditement to be true, then when he is arraigned, no xii, men goes upon him,
there rests but the Judges sentence, of the pain of death.

If he plead not guilty, as commonly all thieves, robbers, and murderers
do, though they have confessed the fact before the Justice of the peace that
examined them, though they be taken with the manner, which in Latin they call
inflagranti crimine, howesoever it be, if he plead there not guilty, the
Clarke asks him how he will be tried, and tells him he must say, by God
and the Country, for these be the words formal of this trial after
Indictment, and where the Prince is party: if the prisoner do say so, I will
be tried by God and the Country, then the Clarke replyeth, Thou have been
endicted of such a crime, etc. Thou have pleaded not guilty: being asked how
thou will be tried, thou have answered by God and by the Country. Lo these
honest men that be come here, be in the place and stead of the Country: and if
thou have any thing to say to any of them, look upon them well and now
speak, for thou stand upon thy life and death. Then calls he in the first
Juror, B. C. come to the book, and so gives him an oath to go uprightlie
betwixt the Prince and the prisoner, etc. If the prisoner obiecteth nothing
against him, he calls an other, and so an other, till there be xii. or above:
and for the most part the prisoner can say nothing against them, for they are
chosen but for that day, and are unknown to him, nor they know not him, as I
said being substantial yeomen, that dwell about the place, or at the least in
the hundred, or near where the felony is supposed to be committed, men
acquainted with daily labor and travail, and not with such idle persons, as
be ready to do such mischiefs.

When the enquest is full, and the prisoner has objected nothing against them,
as in deed seldom he does, for the cause above rehearsed: The clarke says
to the crier, countes, (in French as ye would say reckon) and so names all
those that be on the quest. The crier at every name cries aloude, one, then
ij. iij. iiij. and so till the number be full of xii. or more, and then says
good men and true: and then says aloude: If any can give evidence, or can say
any thing against the prisoner, let him come now, for he stands upon his
deliverance. If no man come in, then the Judge asks who sent him to prison,
who is commonly one of the Justices of peace. He if he be there delivers up
the examination which he took of him, and underneath the names of those whom
he has bound to give evidence, although the malefactor has confessed the
crime to the Justice of the peace, and that appear by his hand and
confirmation, the xij. men will acquit the prisoner, but they which should
give evidence pay their recognizaunce. Howbeit this does seldom chance,
except it be in small matters, and where the Justices of peace, who sent the
prisoner to the jail, is away. If they which be bound to give evidence come
in, first is read the examination, which the Justice of peace does give in:
then is heard (if he be there) the man robbed what he can say, being first
sworn to say truth, and after the Constable, and as many as were at the
apprehension of the malefactor: and so many as can say any thing being sworn
one after an other to say truth. These be set in such a place as they may see
ye Judges and the Justices, the enquest and the prisoner, and hear them, and
be heard of them all. The Judge first after they be sworn, asks first the
party robbed, if he know the prisoner, and bids him look upon him: he
says yea, the prisoner sometime says nay. The party pursuiuaunt gives good
ensigns verbi gratia, I know thee well enough, thou robbedst me in such a
place, thou beatest me, thou tookest my horse from me, and my purse, thou
had then such a coat and such a man in thy company: the thief will say no,
and so they stand a while in altercation, then he tells all that he can say*
after him likewise all those who were at the apprehension of the prisoner, or
who can give any indices or tokens which we call in our language evidence
against the malefactor. When the Judge has heard them say enough, he asks if
they can say any more: if they say no, then he turns his speech to the
enquest. Good men (says he) ye of the enquest, ye have heard what these men
say against the prisoner, you have also heard what the prisoner can say for
himself, have an eye to your oath, and to your duty, and do that which God
shall put in your minds to the discharge of your consciences, and mark well
what is said. Thus sometime with one enquest is passed to the number of ij, or
iij. prisoners: For if they should be charged with more, the inquest will say,
my Lord, we pray you charge us with no more, it is enough for our memory. Many
times they are charged but with one or two. At their departing, they have in
writing nothing given them, but the enditement, the clarke repeating to them
the effect of it, and showing more, that if they find him guilty, they shall
enquire what goods, lands, and tenements, the said person had at the time of
the felony committed: and if they find any, they shall bring it in: if no,
they shall say so. If they find him not guilty, they shall enquire whether he
fled for the felony or no.

And there is a bailife to wait upon them, and to see that no man do speak
with them, and that they have neither bread, drink, meat, ne fire brought to
them, but there to remain in a chamber together till they agree. If they be in
doubt of any thing that is said, or would hear again some of them that give
evidence to interrogate them more at full, or if any that can give evidence
come late: it is permitted that any that is sworn to say the truth, may be
interrogated of them to inform their consciences. This is to be understood
although it will seem strange to all nations that do use the civil Law of
the Roman Emperors, that for life and death there is nothing put in writing
but the enditement only. All the rest is done openly in the presence of the
Judges, the Justices, the enquest, the prisoner, and so many as will or can
come so near as to hear it, and all depositions and witnesses given aloude,
that all men may hear from the mouth of the depositors and witnesses what is
said. As of this, so is it of all other prisoners after ye same sort. By that
time that the enquests for the prisoners be dispatched, it is commonly dinner
time, the Judges and Justices go to dinner, and after dinner return to the
same place: if the enquest be not ready for the prisoners, they go to some
other enquests of nisiprius, which be civil matters and private to drive out
the time. The enquests have no sooner agreed upon their charge one way or other
but they tell the Bailife, and pray to be heard, and considering that they be
themselves all this while as prisoners as I said before, it is no marvel,
though they make expedition. The prisoners be sent for again to the bar, the
enquest which has agreed, is called for each one of the Jury by his name, to
which he answers. Then the clarke asks if they be agreed, and who shall
speak for them. One or more says yea. He that speaks for them all is called
the foreman, and commonly it is he that is first sworn: then the prisoner is
bidden to hold up his hand. The clarke says unto him, Thou art endicted by
the name of A. of such a place, etc. being therefore arraigned thou pleadest
thereto not guilty, being asked how thou would be tried, thou saydst by God
and thy country. These honest men were given to thee by God and thy Prince for
thy Country: Hearken what they say. Then he asks of the enquest, what say
you? Is he guilty or not guilty? The foreman makes answer in one word,
guilty, or in two, not guilty: the one is deadly the other acquiteth the
prisoner. So that neither Judge nor Justice has to do, or can reuerse, alter
or change that matter, if they say guilty. The clarke asks what lands,
tenements, or goods, the prisoner had at the time of the felony committed, or
at any time after. Commonly it is answered that they know not, nor it shall
not greatly need, for the Sheriff is diligent enough to enquire of that, for
the Prince and his own advantage, and so is the excheator also.

Of him whom the xij. men pronounce guilty, the Judge asks what he can say
for himself: if he can read, demands his Clergy. For in many felonies, as
in theft of oxen, sheep, money, or other such things which be no open
robberies, by the high way side, nor assaulting one by night in his house,
putting him that is there in fear, such is the favor of our Law, that for
the first fault the felon shall be admitted to his Clergy, for which purpose the
Bishop must send one with authority under his seal to be Judge in that matter
at every jail delivery. If the condemned man demands to be admitted to his
book, the Judge commonly gives him a Psalter, and turns to what place he
will. The prisoner reads as well as he can (God knows sometime very
slenderly:) then he asks of the Bishops commissarie, legit vt clericus? The
commissarie must say legit or non legit, for these be words formal, and our
men of Law be very precise in their words formal. If he say legit, the Judge
proceeds no further to sentence of death: if he say non, the Judge
forthwith, or the next day proceeds to sentence, which is done by word of
mouth only: Thou A. have been endicted of such a felony and thereof
arraigned, thou have pleaded not guilty, and put thy self upon God and thy
Country, they have found thee guilty, thou have nothing to say for thy self,
the Law is, thou shall first return to the place from whence thou came,
from thence thou shall go to the place of execution, there thou shall hang
till thou be dead. Then he says to the Sheriff, Sheriff do execution: he that
claims his Clergy, is burned forthwith in the presence of the Judges in the
brawne of his hand with a hot iron marked with the letter T. for a thief, or
M. for a mansleer, in cases where Clergy is admitted, The delivery to the
Bishops prison, and the purgation is taken away by statute.
and is delivered to the Bishops officer to be kept in the Bishops prison, from
whence after a certain time by an other enquest of Clerks he is delivered and
let at large: but if he be taken and condemned the second time, and his mark
espied, he goes to hanging. He whom the enquest pronounces not guilty is
acquitted forthwith and discharged of prison, paying the gaolers fees: and if
he know any private man who purchased his indictment, and is able to pursue
it, They must be two at the least that conspired.
he may have an action of conspiracy against him, and a large amends: but
that case chances seldom.

Certain orders peculiar to England, touching punishment of malefactors. CHAP.
24.
FOr any felony, manslaughter, robbery, murder, rape, and such capital
crimes as touch not treason and laesam maiestatem, we have by the Law of
England no other punishment, but to hang till they be dead: when they be dead,
every man may bury them that will, as commonly they be. Heading, tormenting,
demembring, either arm or leg, breaking upon the wheel, empaciling, and
such cruel torments, as be used in other nations by the order of their law, we
have not: and yet as few murders committed as any where: nor it is not in the
Judges or the Justices power, to aggrauate or mitigate the punishment of the
Law, but in the Prince only and his privy Counsel, which is marvelous
seldom done. Yet notable murderers many times by the Princes commandment,
after they be hanged with cord till they be dead, be hanged with chains
while they rotte in the air. If the wife kill her husband, she shall be
burned alive. If the servant kill his master, he shall be drawn on a hurdle
to the place of execution: it is called petit treason. Impoisoners, Quere.
if the person die thereof, by a new law made in king Henry the eights time
shall be boiled to death: but this mischief is rare and almost unknown in
England. Attempting to impoison a man, or laying await to kill a man, though he
wound him daungerously, yet if death follow not, is no felony by the law of
England, for the Prince has lost no man, and life ought to be given we say,
but for life only. And again, when a man is murdered, all be principals and
shall die, even he that does but hold the candel to give light to the
murderers. For mitigation and moderation of pains, is but corruption of Judges
as we think. Likewise, torment or question which is used by the order of the
civil law and custom of other countries to put a malefactor to excessive
pain, to make him confess of him self, or of his fellows or accomplices, is
not used in England, it is taken for servile. For what can he serve the common
wealth after as a free man, who has his body so haled and tormented, if he be
not found guilty, and what amends can be made him? And if he must die, what
cruelty is it so to torment him before? Likewise, confession by torment is
esteemed for nothing, for if he confess at the judgment, the trial of the
xij. goes not upon him: If he deny, the fact, that which he said before
hinders him not. The nature of English men is to neglect death, to abide no
torment: And therefore he will confess rather to have done any thing, yea, to
have killed his own father, than to suffer torment, for death our nation does
not so much esteem as a mean torment. In no place shall you see malefactors go
more constantly, more assuredly, and with less lamentation to their death than
in England. Again, the people not accustomed to see such cruel torments, will
pity the person tormented and abhor the Prince and the Judges, who should
bring in such cruelty amongst them, and the xij. men the rather absolve him.
There is an old law of England, that if any jailer shall put any prisoner
being in his custody to any torment, to the intent to make him an approuer,
that is to say an accuser or Index of his accomplices, the jailer shall dye
therefore as a felon. And to say the truth, to what purpose is it to use
torment? For whether the malefactor confess or no, and whatsoever he says, if
the enquest of xij. do find him guilty, he dies therefore without delay. And
the malefactor, seeing there is no remedy, and that they be his country men,
and such as he has himself agreed unto it, do find them worthy death,
yeeldes for the most part unto it, and does not repine, but does acco^modate
him self to ask mercy of God. The nature of our nation is free, stout,
haulte, prodigal of life and blood: but contumely, beatings, servitude and
servile torment and punishment it will not abide. So in this nature and
fashion, our ancient Princes and legislators have nourished them, as to make
them stout hearted, courageous and soldiers, not villains and slaves, and
that is the scope almost of all our policy. The xij. as soon as they have
given their verdict are dismissed to go whither they will, and have no manner
commodity and profit of their labor and verdict, but only do service to the
Prince and commonwealth.

Of Treason, and the trial which is used for the higher nobility and Barons.
CHAP. 25.
THe same order touching trial by enquest of xij men is taken in Treason, but
the pain is more cruel. First to be hanged, taken down alive, his bowels
taken out and burned before his face, then to be beheaded, and quartered, and
those set up in diverse places. If any Duke, Marquis, or any other of the
degree of a Baron, or above, Lord of the Parliament be appeached of treason, or
any other capital crime, he is judged by his peers and equals: that is, the
yeomanrie does not go upon him, but an enquest of the Lords of the Parliament,
and they give their voice, not one for all, but each severally as they do in
Parliament, beginning at the youngest lord. Or rather high stewa^^ of England^
And for Judge one lord sits, who is Constable of England for that day. The
judgment once given, he breaks his staff and abdicateth his office. In the
rest there is no difference from that above written.

THE THIRD book.
Of that which in other countries is called appellation, or provocation, to
amend the judgment or sentence definitive, which is thought unjustly given in
causes criminal. CHAP. 1.
IF the enquest of xij men do seem to the Judges and the Justices to have gone
too violently against the evidence given in matters criminal, either it is
that upon slender evidence they have pronounced him guilty, who^ the Judges and
most part of the Justices thinks by the evidence not fully proved guilty,
or for some other cause, do think the person rather worthy to live than to
die. The enquest is nevertheless dimissed: but when the Judges should
pronounce the sentence of death upon the person found guilty, he will differ
it, which is called to repriue the prisoner (that is to say to send him again
to prison) and so declare the matter to the Prince, and obtains after a time
for the prisoner his pardon: and as for provocation or appeal which is used so
much in other countries, it has no place in England, after sentence given by
the xii, whereby the person is found guilty or not guilty: but without that
repriuing the sentence is straight put in execution by the sheriff. And if they
either escape or die an other death, the sheriff escapes not to pay a great
fine and ransom at the Princes mercy: if having pregnant evidence
nevertheless the xii do acquit the malefactor, which they will do sometime,
and especially if they perceive either one of the Justices, or of the Judges,
or some other man to pursue too much and too maliciously the death of the
prisoner, and do suspect some subornation of the witness, or them which do
give evidence, and sometime if they perceive the Judge would have the prisoner
escape, and in repeating the evidence do give them thereof some watchworde.
But if they do as I have said, pronounce not guilty upon the prisoner
against whom manifest witness is brought in, the prisoner escapes: but the
xii not only be rebuked by the Judges, but also threatened of punishment, and
many times commanded to appear in the starrechamber, or before the privy
counsel for the matter. But this threatening chances oftener than the
execution thereof, and the xii answer with most gentle words, they did it
according to their consciences, and pray the Judges to be good unto them, they
did as they thought right, and as they accorded all, and so it passes away for
the most part. Yet I have seen in my time (but not in the reign of the Queen
now) that an enquest for pronouncing one not guilty of treason contrary to
such evidence as was brought in, were not only imprisoned for a space, but an
houge fine set upon their heads, which they were feign to pay: An other enquest
for acquiting an other, beside paying a fine of money, put to open ignominy
and shame. But those doings were even then of many accounted very violent,
tyrannical, and contrary to the liberty and custom of the realm of
England. Wherefore it comes very seldom in use, yet so much at a time the
enquest may be corrupted, that the Prince may have cause with justice to punish
them: For they are men, and subject to corruption and parcialitie, as others be.

What remedy is, if the sentence be thought unjustly given. CHAP. 2.
IN causes civil there is another order: for if after the matter be pleaded to
the issue, and the xij men thereupon impaneled, the evidence brought and
pleaded before them on both the parties, the xij seem to be parciall, and to
have given sentence contrary to the evidence showed unto them: the party
grieved may bring against them, and the party for whom the sentence is given,
a writ of attaint: and where as before upon the first quest commonly they all
be yeomen, now upon this attaint must go xxiiij gentlemen dwelling within the
shire, and xij at the least of the hundredth where the land lies. The matter
is pleaded again before the same Judges. The party defendant is not only
now he, who claims the land, but also all and every of the yeomen, who by
their verdict did give it him. There must in the attaint no more evidence be
brought in, No more evidence on the behalf of the plaintiff, but of the
defendant there may.
but only that which was brought in, and alleged before the first enquest.
And if this second enquest of xxiiij gentlemen do adiudge as the first did,
the plaintiff shall not only lose the land, but also pay a fine to the Prince
and damages to the party. If this second enquest do find that the first
enquest has gone parcially, and against the evidence brought in before them,
the first enquest is called attainted, and accounted as perjured and infamed.
The Prince had before the waste of all their lands and possessions with other
punishments, The statute of 23. Henry 8. does not abolish common law, but
gives a more profitable for the plaintiff.
which at this present by a law made by parliament in the time of king Henry
the eight is abolished, and now by that law or act of parliament, beside other
punishment, each of the quest attainted pays unto the Prince and party v.
li. if it be under forty pounds: and if above, then xx. li. Attaints be
very seldom put in use, partly because the gentlemen will not meet to
slander and deface the honest yeomen their neighbors: so that of a long time,
they had rather pay a mean fine than to appear and make the enquest. And in
the mean time they will entreat so much as in them lies the parties to come
to some composition and agreement among them selves, as lightly they do, except
either the corruption of the enquest be too evident, or the one party is too
obstinate and headstrong. And if the gentlemen do appear, gladlyer they will
confirm the first sentence, for the causes which I have said, than go against
it. But if the corruption be too much evident, they will not stick to attaint
the first enquest: yet after the gentlemen have attainted the yeomen, if before
the sentence be given by the Judge (which ordinarily for a time is differred)
the parties be agreed, or one of them be dead, the attaint cease.

If at any time before the sentence be given or put in execution, there be
found some such error in the writ, in the process, or form (as our lawyers be
very precise and curious of their forms) that it may be reuocable, it is
brought afresh to the disputation by a writ of error, and all that is done
reuersed. But that is common to all other countries, where the civil law is
used, which they call de nullitate processus, and serves both in England and
in other places as well in causes criminal, as civil. Other kind of
appellation to revoke processes, and to make them of short, long, of long,
infinite, which is used by the civil law, we have not in our common law of
England. By supplication to the Prince and complaint to the Chauncellor upon
supposall of loss or lack of evidence, or too much favor in the country,
and power of the adversary, there is in our country as well as theirs both
stopping and prolongation of Justice. For what will not busy heads and lovers
of trouble never being satisfied invent in any country to have their desire,
which is to vex their neighbors, and to live always in disquiet? Men even
permitted of God like flies, and lise, and other vermin to disquiet them, who
would imploie themselves upon better business and more necessary for the
common wealth: these men are hated, and feared of their neighbors, loved and
aided of them which gain by process, and wax fat by the expense and trouble
of other. But as these men ordinarily spend their own thrift, and make others
against their wills to spend theirs: so sometime being thoroughly known, they
do not only live by the loss like evil husbands, but beside rebuke and
shame, by the equity of the Prince and courts sovereign, they come to be
extraordinarily punished, both corporally, and by their purse, which thing in
my mind is as royal and princely an act, and so beneficial to the
commonwealth, as in so small a matter a King or a Queen can do, for the
repose and good education of their subjects.

Of that which in England is called appeal, in other places accusation. CHAP.
3.
IF any man has killed my father, my son, my wife, my brother, or next
kinsman, I have choice to cause him to be endicted, by giving information to
the enquest of inquiry, (although he chance to escape the Constable or
Justices hands, and therefore not to be apprehended) and thereupon to procure
him to be outlawed, or else within a year and a day I may enter my appeal,
that is mine accusation against him. If I begun first to pursue him by
information or denunciation to enditement, I am now no party but the Prince,
who for his duty to God and his common wealth and subjects, must see justice
executed against all malefactors and offenders against the peace, which is
called Gods and his, and does in such manner as I have said before. If I leave
that and will appeal, which is profer my accusation against him who has done
to me this injury, the defendant has this advantage to put himself to the
Jury, which is to that which before is said to have that issue and trial by
God and his country, In appeal the battle is tried by the parties only, and
in writs of right by champions.
whereof the fashion I have at large declared: or to demand the trial by
battle, wherein both the parties must either themselves in person, or else
find other for them, who be called in our Law Champions or Campions, some
does interpret them (...) because they be men chosen, fat, lusty, fit to the
feate, or as the French do term them adroicts aux arms, which shall fight
it out by (...), or as now they do call it duellum, or the camp, which shall
have all things equal: but according as Mars gives the victory, so the Law
is judged the one as peractus reus, the other is calumniator to suffer the
pain of death. So that by the great assise there is no appellation but death
or life to the defendant, but this is more dangerous and equal, for the one
or the other must die. So it is not in the grande assise, for the reus or
defendaunt is only in danger of death. Short it is from day to sun set, the
quarrel is ended, or sooner who has the better fortune. This seems very
military (as in manner all our policy of England) and to have as small to do
with Lawyers as with Physicians, quickly to dispatche, and for the rest to
return, each man to his buisinesse, to serve the common wealth in his
vocation. The Popes of Rome, and men of the Church who of long time have had
dominion in our consciences, and would bring things to a more moderation, have
much detected this kind of trial and judgment, as reason is every man
misliketh that which is not like to his education, and cold reasoning by
Theology and Philosophy: they I say much mislike many things done
necessarily in whot policy. At the least a common wealth military must
adventure many things to keep it in quiet, which cannot seem to precisely
good to them which dispute thereof in the shadow and in their studies:
Howsoever it be, this kind of trial of long time has not been used. So that
at this time we may rather seek the experience of it out of our histories of
time passed, than of any view or sight thereof, of them which are now alive.
Nevertheless the Law remains still, and is not abolished, and if it shall
chance the murderer or mansleer (the one we call him that lies in wait, and
as they term it in French de guet appendaunt kills the man, the other who
by casual falling out and sudden debate and choler does the same which way
soever it be done) if he that has slain the man, has his pardon of the
prince, as occasion or the favor of the Prince may so present, The battle or
Jury is at the election of the defendant
y^ he may have it, yet the party grieved has these two remedies, I say to
require justice by grand assise, or battle upon his appeal and private
revenge, which is not denied him. And if the defendant either by great assise
or by battle be convinced upon that appeal, he shall die, notwithstanding the
Princes pardon. So much favorable our Princes be, and the law of our Realm
to justice and to the punishment of blood violently shed.

Of the Court of Star Chamber. CHAP. 4.
THere is yet in England an other court, of the which that I can understand
there is not the like in any other Country. In the Term time (the Term time
as I have heretofore showed, I call the time and those days when the Law is
exercised in Westminster hall, which as I have said is but at certain times
and terms) every week once at the least, which is commonly on Fridaies, and
Wednesdaies, and the next day after that the term does end, the Lord
Chauncellor, and the Lords and other of the privy Counsel, so many as will,
and other Lords and Barons which be not of the privy Counsel, and be in the
town, and the Judges of England, specially the two chief Judges, from ix. of
the clock till it be xj. do sit in a place which is called the star
chamber, either because it is full of windows, or because at the first all the
roof thereof was decked with images of stars gilted. There is plaints heard
of riots. Riot is called in our English term or speech, where any number is
assembled with force to do any thing: and it had the beginning, because that
our being much accustomed either in foreine wars, in France, Scotland, or
Ireland, or being overmuch exercised with civil wars within the Realm
(which is the fault that falls ordinarily amongst bellicous nations) whereby
men of war, Captains and soldiers become plentiful* which when they have
no externe service wherewith to occupy their buisie heads and hands
accustomed to fight and quarrel, must needs seek quarrels and contentions
amongst themselves, and become so ready to oppress right among their
neighbors, as they were wont before with praise of manhood, to be in
resisting injury offered by their enemies. So that our nation used hereunto,
and upon that more insolent at home, and not easy to be governed by Law and
politic order, men of power beginning many fraies, and the stronger by
factions and parties offering too much iuiurie to the weaker, were occasions of
making good Laws. First of reteiners, that no man should have above a number
in his Liuerie or retinue: then of the inquiry of routs and riots at every
Sessions, and of the law whereby it is provided that if any by force or by
riot enter upon any possessions, the Justices of the peace shall assemble
themselves and remove the force, and within certain time enquire thereof. And
further, because such things are not commonly done by mean men, but by such
as be of power and force, and be not to be dealt withal of every man, nor of
mean Gentlemen: if the riot be found and certified to the Kings Counsel, or
if otherwise it be complained of, the party is sent for, Sent for by Sub poena.
and he must appear in this star chamber, where seeing (except the presence
of the Prince only) as it were the majesty of the whole Realm before him,
being never so stout, he will be abashed: and being called to answer (as he
must come of what degree soever he be) he shall be so charged with such
gravity, with such reason and remonstrance, and of those chief personages of
England, one after an other handeling him on that sort, that what courage
soever he has, his heart will fall to the ground, and so much the more, when
if he make not his answer the better, as seldom he can in so open violence,
he shall be commanded to the Fleet, where he shall be kept in prison in such
sort as these Judges shall appoint him, lie there till he be weary as well of
the restraint of his liberty, as of the great expenses, which he must there
sustain, and for a time be forgotten, whiles after long suite of his friends,
he will be glad to be ordered by reason. Sometime as his deserts be, he pays
a great fine to the Prince, besides great costs and damages to the party, and
yet the matter wherefore he attempteth this riot and violence is remitted to
the common law. For that is the effect of this Court to bridle such stout
noble men, or Gentlemen which would offer wrong by force to any manner men, and
cannot be content to demand or defend the right by order of law. This court
began long before, but took great augmentation and authority at that time
that Cardinal Wolsey Archbishop of York was Chauncellor of England, who of
some was thought to have first devised y^ Court, because that he after some
intermission by negligence of time, augmented the authority of it, which was
at that time marvelous necessary to do, to repress the insolency of the
noble men and gentlemen of the North parts of England, who being far from
the King and the seat of justice made almost as it were an ordinary war
among themselves, and made their force their Law, banding themselves with
their tenaunts and seruauts to do or revenge injury one against an other as
they listed. This thing seemed not supportable to the noble prince King Henry
the eight: and sending for them one after an other to his Court to answer
before the persons before named, after they had had remonstrance showed them of
their evil demeanor, and been well disciplined as well by words as by
fleeting a while, and thereby their purse and courage somewhat assuaged, they
began to range themselves in order, and to understand that they had a Prince
who would rule his subjects by his laws and obedience. Since that time this
court has been in more estimation, and is continued to this day in manner as
I have said before.

Of the Courts of Wards and Liueries. CHAP. 5.
HE whom we call a ward in England, is called in Latin pupillus, and in
Greek (...). The guardian is called in Latin tutor, in Greek (...). A ward
or infant is taken for a child in base age, whose father is dead. The Romans
made two distinctions pupillum and minorem, the one to xiiii, year old, the
other was accounted from thence to xxv. And as pupillus had tutorem, so minor
had curatorem til he came to the age of xxv. These tutors or curators were
accountable for the revenues of the pupils minors lands, and great provision
and many laws and orders is made for them in the books of the civil Law, for
rendering just and true accounts. So that to be a guardian or tutor was
accounted among them to be a charge or trouble, a thing subject to much
encumbraunce and small profit, so that diverse means were sought for, to
excuse men from it. With us this is clean contrary, for it is reckoned a
profit to have a ward. For the Lord of whom the ward does hold the land,
so soon as by the death of the father the child falls ward unto him, he
seaseth upon the body of the ward and his lands, of which (so that he does
nourish the ward,) he takes the profit without accounts, and beside that
offering to his ward couenable marriage without dispergement before the age of
xxl. years if it be a man, or xiiii. if it be a woman. If the ward refuse to
take that marriage, he or she must pay the value of the marriage, which is
commonly rated according to the profit of his lands. All this while I speak
of that which is called in French guard noble, Guardian in cheualry, and guardian
in Socage.
that is of such as hold lands of other, by knight service, for that is an
other kind of service which we call in French guard returier, we call it guard
in socage, that is of such as do not hold by knight service, but by tenure of
the plough. This wardship falls to him who is next of the kin, and cannot
inherit the land of the ward as the uncle by the mothers side, if the land
do descend by the father and of the fathers side, if the land descend by the
mother. This guardian is accountable for the revenues and profits of the land,
as the tutor by the civil Law to the ward or pupil so soon as he is of
full age.

The man is not out of wardshippe by our law till xxj. year old, from thence
he is reckoned of full age, as well as in the Roman laws at xxv. The woman at
xiiij. is out of ward, for she may have an husband able to do knights
service say our books. And because our wives be in the power (as I shall tell
you hereafter) of their husbands, it is no reason, she should be in two diverse
gards.

Many men do esteem this wardship by knights service very unreasonable and
unjust, and contrary to nature, that a Freeman and Gentleman should be bought
and sold like an horse or an ox, and so change gardians as masters and
lords: at whose government not only his body but his lands and his houses
should be, to be wasted and spent without accounts, and then to marie at the
will of him, who is his natural Lord, or his will who has bought him, to
such as he like not peradventure, or else to pay so great a ransom. This is the
occasion they say, why many gentlemen be so evil brought up touching virtue and
learning, and but only in deintinesse and pleasure: and why they be married
very young and before they be wife, and many times do not greatly love their
wives. For when the father is dead, who has the natural care of his child,
not the mother, nor the uncle, nor the next of kin, who by all reason would
have most natural care to the bringing up of the infant and minor, but the
Lord of whom he holds his land in knights service, be it the King or Queen,
Duke, Marquess, or any other, has the government of his body and marriage,
or else who that bought him at the first, second or third hand. The Prince as
having so many, must needs give or sell his wards away to other, and so he
does. Other do but seek which way they may make most advantage of him, as
of an ox or other beast. These all (say they,) have no natural care of the
infant, but of their own gain, and especially the buyer will not suffer his
ward to take any great pains, either in study, or any other hardenesse,
least he should be sick and die, before he has married his daughter, sister or
cousin, for whose sake he bought him: and then all his money which he paid for
him should be lost. So he, who had a father, which kept a good house, But the
Lord shall be punished for the wast, by loss of the ward: or treble damages,
if that suffice not.
and had all things in order to maintain it, shall come to his own, after he
is out of wardshippe, woods decayed, houses fallen down, stock wasted and
gone, land let forth and plowed to the baren, and to make amends, shall pay
yet one years rent for relief and sue ouster le maind, beside other charges,
so that not of many years and peradventure never he shall be able to recover,
and come to the estate where his father left it. This as it is thought was
first granted upon a great extremity to King Henry the 3. for a time upon
the war which he had with his Barons, and afterward, increased, and
multiplied to more and more persons and grieuances, and will be the decay of
the nobility and liberty of England, Other again say, the ward has no
wrong. For either his father purchased the land, or it did descend unto him
from his auncesters with this charge. And because he holds by knights
service, which is in arms and defense, seeing that by age he cannot do that
whereto he is bound by his land, it is reason he answer that profit to the
Lord, whereby he may have as able a man to do the service. The first knights
in Rome, those that were chosen equites Romani, had equum publicum on which
they served, and that was at the charge of widows and wards, as appears by
Titus Liuius, because that those persons could not do bodily service to the
common wealth. Wherefore this is no new thing, but thought reasonable in that
most wise common wealth, and to the prudent King Seruius Tullius. As for the
education of our common wealth, it was at the first militaire, and almost in
all things the scope and deseigne thereof is militaire. Yet was it thought most
like, that noble men, good knights, and great captains would bring up their
wards in their own feats and virtues, and then mary them into like raze and
stock where they may find and make friends, who can better look to the
education or better skill of of the bringing up of a gentleman, than he who for
his higher nobility has such a one to hold of him by knights service, or
would do it better than he that looks or may claim such service of his
ward, when age and years will make him able to do it. That which is said that
this manner of wardship began in the time of King Henry the 3. cannot seem
true. For in Normandy and other places of France the same order is.

And that statute made in King Henry the thirds time touching wards, to him
that will wey it well, may seem rather a qualification of that matter, and an
argument that the fashion of wardship was long before: but of this matter an
other time shall be more convenient to dispute. This may suffice to declare the
manner of it.

Of VViues and marriages. CHAP. 6.
THe wives in England be as I said in potestate maritorum, not that the
husband has vitae ac necis potestatem, as the Romans had in the old time of
their children, for that is only in the power of the Prince, and his laws, as
I have said before, but that whatsoever they have before marriage, as soon as
marriage is solemnished is their husbands, I mean of money, plate, iuelles,
cattaile, and generally all moueables. For as for land and heritage follows
the succession, and is ordered by the law as I shall say hereafter: and what
soever they get after marriage, they get to their husbands. They neither can
give nor sell any thing either of their husbands, or their own. Theirs no
moveable thing is by the law of England constanti matrimonio, but as peculium
serui aut filijfamilias: and yet in moueables at the death of her husband she
can claim nothing, but according as he shall will by his Testament, no more
than his son can: all the rest is in the disposition of the executors if he
die testate. Yet in London and other great cities they have that law and
custom, that when a man dies, his goods be divided into three parts. One
third is employed upon the burial and the bequestes which the testator
makes in his testament. An other third part the wife has as her right, and
the third third part is the dew and right of his children, equally to be
divided among them. So that a man there can make testament but of one third of
his goods: if he die interstate, the funerals deducted the goods be equally
divided between the wife and the children.

By the common law of England if a man die intestate, the Ordinary (which is
the Bishop by common intendment) sometime the Archdeacon, Dean, or
Prebendarie by preuiledge and prescription, does commit the administration of
the goods to the widow or the child, or next kinsman of the dead, appointing
out portions to such as naturally it belongs unto, and the Ordinary by
common understanding has such gravity and discretion as shall be meet for so
absolute an authority for the most part, following such division as is used in
London, either by thirdes or halfes. Our forefathers newely converted to the
Christian faith had such confidence in their pastors and instructours, and
took them to be men of such conscience that they committed that matter to
their discretion, and belike at the first they were such as would seek no
private profit to themselves thereby, that being once so ordained has still so
continued. The abuse which has followed was in part redressed by certain
acts of parliament made in the time of king Henry the eight, touching the
probate of testamentes committing of administration and mortuaries. But to
turn to the matter which we now have in hand, the wife is so much in the
power of her husband, that not only her goods by marriage are straight made
her husbands, and she loses all her administration which she had of them:
but also where all English men have name and surname, as the Romans had, Marcus
Tullius, Caius Pompeius, Caius Julius, whereof the name is given to us at the
font, the surname is the name of the gentilitie and stock which the son does
take of the father always, as the old Romans did, our daughters so soon as
they be married loose the surname of their father, and of the family and stock
whereof they do come, and take the surname of their husbands, as transplanted
from their family into an other. So that if my wife was called before Philippe
Wilford by her own name and her fathers surname, as soon as she is married to
me she is no more called Philippe Wylford, but Philippe Smith, and so must she
write and sign: and as she changes husbands, so she changes surnames,
called always by the surname of her last husband. Yet if a woman once marry
a Lord or a Knight by which occasion she is called my Lady with the surname
of her husband, She is no Lady by the law although so called of courtisie.
if he die and she take a husband of a meaner estate by whom she shall not be
called Lady (such is the honor we do give to women) she shall still be
called Lady with the surname of her first husband and not of the second.

I think among the old Romans those marriages which were made per coemptionem
in manum and per aes and libram made the wife in manu and potestate viri,
whereof also we had in our old law and ceremonies of marriage, a certain
memory as a view and vestigium. For the woman at the Church door was given of
the father or some other man next of her kin into the hands of the husband,
and he laid down gold and silver for her upon the book, as though he did
buy her, the priest belike was in steed of Lipripeus: our marriages be esteemed
perfect by the law of England, when they be solemnished in the Church or
Chapel, in the presence of the priest and other witnesses. And this only
makes both the husband and the wife capable of all the benefits which our
law both give unto them and their lawefull children. In so much that if I
marie the widow of one lately dead, which at the time of her husbands death
was with child, if the child be borne after marriage solemnished with me, this
child shall be my heir, and is accounted my lawefull son, not his whose
child it is in deed, so precisely we do take the letter where it is said,
pater est quem nuptiae demonstrant. Those ways and means which Justinian does
declare to make bastardes to be lawefull children, muliers or rather melieurs
(for such a term our law uses for them which be lawefull children) be of no
effect in England, neither the Pope nor Emperor, nor the Prince himself never
could there legittimate a bastard to enjoy any benefitte of our law, the
Parliament has only that power.

Although the wife be (as I have written before) in manu and potestate mariti,
by our law yet they be not kept so streit as in mew and with, a guard as they
be in Italy and Spain, but have almost as much liberty as in France, and
they have for the most part all the charge of the house and houshoulde (as it
may appear by Aristotle and Plato the wives of the Greeks had in their time)
which is in deed the natural occupation, exercise, office and part of a wife.
The husband to meddle with the defense either by law or force, and with all
foreign matters which is the natural part and office of the man, as I have
written before. And although our law may seem somewhat rigorous toward the
wives, yet for the most part they can handle their husbands so well and so
doulcely and specially when their husbands be sick: that where the law gives
them nothing, their husbands at their death of their good will give them all.
And few there be that be not made at the death of their husbands either sole
or chief executrixes of his last will and testament, and have for the most part
the government of the children and their portions: except it be in London,
where a peculiar order is taken by the city much after the fashion of the
civil law.

All this while I have spoken only of moveable goods: It is auoidable after
the husbands death, except it be for xxi. years or three lives according to
the statute, or except they levy a fine.
if the wife be an enheretrix and bring land with her to the marriage, that
land descends to her eldest son, or is divided among her daughters. Also
the manner is, that the land which the wife brings to the marriage or
purchases afterward, the husband can not sell nor alienate the same, no not
with here consent, nor she her self during the marriage, except that she be
sole examined by a Judge at the common law: and if he have no child by her
and she die, the land goes to her next heirs at the common law: but if in
the marriage he have a child by her which is heard once to cry, whether the
child live or die, the husband shall have the vsufruite of her lands, that is
the profitte of them during his life, and that is called the courtisie of
England.

Likewise if the husband have any land either by inheritance descended or
purchased and bought, if he die before the wife, she shall have the vsufruite
of one third part of his lands. She shall be endowed at ye discretion of the
sheriff, except in few cases.
That is, she shall hold the one third part of his lands during her life as
her dowry, whether he has child by her or no. If he has any children, the
rest descends straight to the eldest: if he has none, to the next heir at
the common law: and if she mislike the division she, shall ask to be endowed
of the fairest of his lands to the third part.

This which I have written touching marriage and the right in moueables and
vnmoueables which comes thereby, is to be understood by the common law when
no private contract is more particularly made. If there be any private pacts,
covenants, and contracts made before the marriage betwixt the husband and the
wife, by themselves, by their parents, or their friends, those have force and
be kept according to the firmitie and strength in which they are made. And this
is enough of wives and marriage.

Of Children. CHAP. 7.
OUr children be not in potestate parentum, as the children of the Romans were:
but as soon as they be puberes, which we call the age of discretion, before
that time nature does tell they be but as it were parts parentum. That which
is theirs they may give or sell, and purchase to themselves either lands and
other moueables the father having nothing to do therewith. And therefore
emancipatio is clean superfluous, we know not what it is. Likewise sui
heredes complaints, de in-officioso testamento or praeteritorum liberorum non
emancipatorum have no effect nor use in our law, nor we have no manner to
make lawefull children but by marriage, and therefore we know not what is
adoptio nor arrogatio. The testator disposes in his last will his moveable
goods freely as he thinks meet and convenient without controlement of wife
or children. And our testamentes for goods moveable be not subject to the
ceremonies of the civil law, but made with all liberty and freedom, and
iure militari. Of lands as ye have understood before, there is difference:
for when the owner dies, his land discendeth only to his eldest son, all
the rest both sons and daughters have nothing by the common law, but must
serve their eldest brother if they will, or make what other shift they can to
live: except that the father in life time do make some conueiance and estates
of part of his land to their use, or else by devise, which word amongst our
lawiers does betoken a testament written, sealed and delivered in the life time
of the testator before witness: for without those ceremonies a bequest of
lands is not auailable. But by the common law if he that dies has no
sons but daughters, the land is equally divided among them, which portion is
made by agreement or by lotte. Although as I have said ordinarily and by the
common law, the eldest son inheriteth all the lands, yet in some countries
all the sons have equal portion, and that is called ganelkinde, and is in
many places in Kent. In some places the youngest is sole heir: and in some
places after an other fashion. But these being but particular customs of
certain places and out of the rule of the common law, do little appertain to
the disputation of the policy of the whole Realm, and may be infinite. The
common wealth is judged by that which is most ordinarily and commonly done
through the whole Realm.

Of Bondage and Bondmen. CHAP. 8.
AFter that we have spoken of all the sorts of free men according to the
diversity of their estates and persons, it rests to say somewhat of bondmen
which were called serui, which kind of people and the disposition of them and
about them does occupy the most part of Justinians Digestes, and Code. The
Romans had two kinds of bondmen, the one which were called serui, and they
were either which were bought for money, taken in war, left by succession, or
purchased by other kind and lawefull acquisition, or else borne of their bond
women and called vernae: all those kind of bondmen be called in our law
villens in gross, as ye would say immediately bond to the person and his
heirs. An other they had as appears in Justinians time, which they called
adscripticij glebae or agri censiti. These were not bond to the person, but to
the manor or place, and did follow him who had the manors, and in our law
are called villains regardants, for because they be as members, or belonging
to the manor or place. Neither of the one sort nor of the other have we any
number in England. And of the first I never knew any in the realm in my time:
of the second so few there be, that it is not almost worth the speaking. But
our law does acknowledge them in both those sorts. Manumission of all kind
of villains or bondmen in England is used and done after diverse sorts, and
by other and more light and easy means than is prescribed in the civil law,
and being once manumitted, he is not libertus manumittentis, but simply liber:
howbeit since our Realm has received the Christian religion which makes us
all in Christ brethren, and in respect of God and Christ conseruos, men began
to have conscience to hold in captivity and such extreme bondage him whom
they must acknowledge to be his brother, and as we use to term him Christian,
that is who looks in Christ and by Christ to have equal portion with them in
the Gospel and salvation. Upon this scruple, in continuance of time, and by
long succession, the holy fathers, Munkes and Friars in their confession, and
specially in their extreme and deadly sicknesses, burdened the consciences of
them whom they had under their hands: so that temporal men by little and little
by reason of that terror in their conscience, were glad to manumit all their
villains: but the said holy fathers, with the Abbots and Priors, did not in
like sort by theirs, for they had also conscience to impouerish and dispoyle
the Churches so much as to manumit such as were bond to their Churches, or to
the manors which the Church had gotten, and so kept theirs still. The same did
the Bishops also till at the last and now of late some Bishops to make a
piece of money manumitted theirs partly for argent, partly for slanders, that
they seemed more cruel than the temporaltie: after the monasteries coming
into temporal men's hands have been occasion that now they be almost all
manumitted. The most part of bondmen when they were, yet were not used with us
so cruelly nor in that sort as the bondmen at the Roman civil law, as
appears by their Comedies, nor as in Greece as appears by theirs: but they
were suffered to enjoy coppieholde land to gain and get as other serves that
now and then their Lords might fleese them and take a piece of money of them,
as in France the Lords do tail them whom they call their subjects at their
pleasure, and cause them to pay such sums of money as they list to put upon
them. I think both in France and England the change of religion to a more
gentle, humane and more equal sort (as the christian religion as in respects
of the Gentiles) caused this old kind of servile servitude and slavery to be
brought into that moderation, for necessity first to villains regardants, and
after to servitude of lands and tenures, and by little and little finding out
more civil and gentle means and more equal to have that done which in time
of heathenesse servitude or bondage did, they almost extinguished the whole.
For although all persons christians be brethren by baptism in Jesus Christ, and
therefore may appear equally free: yet some were and still might be
christianed being bond and serve, and whom as the baptism did find so it did
leave them, for it changes not civil laws nor compactes amongst men which
be not contrary to Gods laws, but rather maintains them by obedience. Which
seeing men of good conscience having that scruple whereof I wrote before, have
by little and little found means to have and obtain the profit of servitude and
bondage which gentilitie did use and is used to this day amongst Christians on
the one part, and Turks and Gentiles on the other part, when war is betwixt
them upon those who^ they take in battle. Turks and Gentiles I call them,
which using not our law the one believes in one God, the other in many gods,
of whom they make Images. For the law of Jews is well enough known, and at
this day so far as I can learn, amongst all people Jews be holden as it
were in a common servitude, and have no rule nor dominion as their own
prophesies do tell that they should not have after that Christ was promised to
them, was of them refused for when they would not acknowledge him obstinatly
for, taking their help in soul for the life to come and honor in this world
for the time present not taking the good tidinges, news, and euangill brought
to them for their disobedience by the great grace of God, and by the promise of
the Prophets ^ructified in us which be Gentiles and brought forth this
humanity, gentleness, honor and godly knowledge which is seen at this
present. But to return to the purpose.

This persuasion I say of Christians not to make nor keep his brother in
Christ, servile, bond and underling for ever unto him, as a beast rather than
as a man, and the humanity which the Christian religion does teach, has
engendered through Realms not near to Turks and Barbarians, a doubt, a
conscience and scruple to have servants and bondmen: yet necessity on both
sides, of the one to have help, on the other to have service, has kept a
figure or fashion thereof. So that some would not have bondmen, but ascripticij
glebae, and villains regardant to the ground, to the intent their service
might be furnished, and that the country being evil, unwholesome, and other
wise barren, should not be desolate. Others afterward found out the ways and
means, that not the men but the land should be bound and bring with it such
bondage and service to him that occupies it, as to carry the Lords dung unto
the fields, to plough his ground at certain days, sow, reap, come to his
Court, swear faith unto him, and in the end to hold the land but by copy
of the Lords court roll, and at the will of the Lord. This tenure is called
also in our law, villain, bond, or servile tenure: yet to consider more
deeply all land, even that which is called most free land, has a bondage
annexed unto it, not as naturally the lower ground, must suffer and receive the
water and filth which falls from the higher ground, nor such as Justinian
speaks of de seruitudinibus praediorum rusticorum and vrbanorum, but the
land does bring a certain kind of servitude to the prossessor. For no man
holds land simply free in England, but he or she that holds the Crown of
England: all others hold their land in fee, that is upon a faith or trust,
and some service to be done to an other Lord of a manor as his superior, and
he again of an higher Lord, till it come to the Prince and him that holds
the Crown. So that if a man die, and it be found that he has land which he
holds, but of whom no man can tell, this is understood to be holden of the
Crown, and in capitie, which is much like to knights service, and draws unto
it three services, homage, ward and marriage: That is, he shall swear to be his
man, and to be true unto him of whom he holds the land. His son who
holds the land after the death of his father, shall be married where it
pleases the Lord. He that holds the land most freely of a temporal man
(for frank almose and frank marriage has an other cause and nature) holds
by fealty only, which is, he shall swear to be true to the Lord, and do
such service as appertains for the land which he holds of the Lord. So that
all free land in England is holden in fee or feodo, which is as much to say as
in fide or fiducia: That is, in trust and confidence, that he shall be true to
the Lord of whom he holds it, pay such rents, do such service, and observe
such conditions as was annexed to the first donation. Thus all saving the
Prince be not viri domini, but rather fiduciary domini, and possessores: This
is a more likely interpretation than that which Litleton does put in his
book, Litleton did not interpret the word feodu simply, but rather define or
describe the nature thereof.
who says that feodum idem est quod haereditas, which it does betoken in no
language. This happens many times to them who be of great wit and learning,
yet not seen in many tongues, or marketh not the deduction of words which
time does alter. Litleton seen in the tongues as Sir Thomas Smith was in
Litleton.
Fides in Latin the Goths coming into Italy and corrupting the language,
was turned first into feed, and at this day in Italy they will say in fide, en
feed or ala fe. And some uncunning Law^ers that would make a new barbarous
latin word to betoken land given in fidem, or as the Italian says in feed,
or fe, made it in feudum or feodum. The nature of the word appears more
evident in those which we call to fef, feof or feoffees, the one be fiduciary
possessores, or fidei commissarij, the other is, dare in fiduciam, or fidei
commissum, or more latinely, fidei committere. The same Litleton was as much
deceived in withernam, and diverse other old words. This withernam he
interprets vetitum nauium, in what language I know not: whereas in truth it
is in plain Dutche and in our old Saxon language, wyther nempt, alterum
accipere, iterum rapere, a word that betokens that which in barbarous Latin
is called represalia, when one taking of me a distress, which in Latin is
called pignus, or any other thing, and carrying it away out of the jurisdiction
wherein I dwell, I take by order of him that has jurisdiction, an other of him
again or of some other of that jurisdiction, and do bring it into the
jurisdiction wherein I dwell, that by equal wrong I may come to have equal
right. The manner of represalia, and that we call withernam, is not altogether
one: But the nature of them both is as I have described, and the proper
signification of the words do not much differ. But to return thither where we
did digress: ye see that where the persons be free, and the bodies at full
liberty and maxim ingenui* yet by annexing a condition to the land, there is
means to bring the owners and possessors thereof into a certain servitude or
rather libertinitie: That the tenaunts beside paying the rent accustomed, shall
owe to the Lord a certain faith, duty, trust, obedience, and (as we term
it) certain service as libertus, or cliens patrono: which because it does not
consist in the persons, for the respect in them does not make them bond, but
in the land and occupation thereof, it is more properly expressed in calling
the one tenant, the other Lord of the fee, than either libertus or cliens can
do the one, or patronus the other: for these words touch rather the persons,
and the office and duty between them, than the possessions. But in our case
leaving the possession and land, all the obligation of servitude and service
is gone.

An other kind of servitude or bondage is used in England for the necessity
thereof, which is called apprenticehoode. But this is only by covenant, and
for a time, and during the time it is vera seruitus. For whatsoever the
apprentice gets of his own labor, or of his masters occupation or stock,
he gets to him whose apprentice he is, he must not lie forth of his masters
doors, he must not occupy any stock of his own, nor mary without his
masters license, and he must do all servile offices about the house, and be
obedient to all his masters commandments, and shall suffer such correction
as his master shall think meet, and is at his masters clothing and
nourishing, his master being bound only to this which I have said, and to
teach him his occupation, and for that he serves, some for vij. or viij.
years, some ix. or x. years as the masters and the friends of the young man
shall think meet or can agree: altogether (as Polidore has noted) quasi pro
emptitio seruo: nevertheless that neither was the cause of the name
apprentice, neither yet does the word betoken that which Polydore supposes,
but it is a French word, and betokens a learner or scholar. Apprendre in
French is to learn, and apprentise is as much to say in French (of which
tongue we borrowed this word and many more other) as discipulus in Latin:
likewise he to whom he is bound, is not called his Lord but his master, as ye
would say his teacher. And the pactions agreed upon, be put in writing, signed
and sealed by the parties, and registered for more assurance: without being such
an apprentice in London, and serving out such a servitude in the same City for
the number of years agreed upon, by order of the City amongst them, no man
being never so much borne in London, and of parents londoners is admitted to
be a Citizen or free man of London: the like is used in other great Cities of
England. Besides apprentises, others be hired for wages, and be called
servant or serving men and women throughout the whole Realm, which be not in
such bondage as apprentises, but serve for the time for daily ministry, as
serui and ancillae did in the time of gentilitie, and be for other matters in
liberty as full free men and women.

But all servant, laborers and others not married, must serve by the year:
and if he be in covenant, he may not depart out of his service without his
masters license, and he must give his master warning that he will depart one
quarter of a year before the term of the year expireth, or else he shall be
compelled to serve out an other year. And if any young man unmarried be without
service, he shall be compelled to get him a master whom he must serve for that
year, or else he shall be punished with stocks and whipping as an idle vagabond.
And if any man married or unmarried, not having rent or living sufficient to
maintain himself, do live so idely, he is enquired of, and sometime sent to
the jail, sometime otherwise punished as a sturdie vagabond: so much our
policy does abborre idleness. This is one of the chief charges of the
Justices of peace in every Shire. It is taken for ungentleness and dishonor,
and a show of enmity, if any gentleman do take an other gentleman's servant
(although his master has put him away) without some certificate from his
master either by word or writing, that he has discharged him of his service.
That which is spoken of men servant, the same is also spoken of women
servant. So that all youth that has not sufficient revenues to maintain it
self, must needs with us serve, and that after an order as I have written.
Thus necessity and want of bondmen has made men to use freemen as bondmen to
all servile services: but yet more liberally and freely, and with a more
equality and moderation, than in time of gentilitie slaves and bondemen were
wont to be used, as I have said before. This first and latter fashion of
temporal servitude, and upon paction is used in such countries, as have left
off the old accustomed manner of servant, slaves, bondemen and bondwomen,
which was in use before they had received the Christian faith. Some after one
^ort, and some either more or less rigorously, according as the nature of the
people is inclined, or has devised amongst themselves for the necessity of
service.

Of the Court which is Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, and in the book of Law,
Court Christian, or Curia Christianitatis. CHAP. 9.
THe Archebishops and Bishops have a certain peculiar jurisdiction unto them
especially in four manner of causes: Testamentes and legations, Tithes and
mortuaries, marriage and adultery or fornication, and also of such things as
appertain to orders amongst themselves and matters concerning religion. For
as it does appear, our ancestors having the common wealth before ordained
and set in frame, when they did agree to receive the true and Christian
religion, that which was established before, and concerned externe policy
(which their Apostles, Doctors and Preachers did allow) they held and kept
still with that which they brought in of new. And those things in keeping
whereof they made conscience, they committed to them to be ordered and governed
as such things, as of which they had no skill, as to men in whom for the
holiness of their life and good conscience, they had a great and sure
confidence. So those matters be ordered in their Courts, and after the fashion
and manner of the law civil or rather common by citation, libel, contestationem
litis, examination of witnesses privily, by exceptions, replications apart and
in writing, allegations, matters by sentences given in writing, by appellations
from one to an other as well a grauamine as a sententia definitiua, and so they
have other names, as Proctor, Advocates, Assessors, Ordinaries, and
Commissaries, etc. far from the manner of our order in the common law of
England, and from that fashion which I have showed you before. Wherefore if I
say the testament is false and forged, I must sue in the spiritual law, so
also if I demand a legacy: but if I sue the executor or administrator (which
is he in our law, who is in the civil law baeres or bonoru^ mobilium
possessor ab intestato) for a debt which the dead ought me, I must sue in the
temporal court. These two courts the temporal and the spiritual be so
divided, that who so ever sueth for any thing to Rome or in any spiritual
court for that cause or action which may be pleaded in the temporal court of
the Realm, Which ought to be tried in the temporal court.
by an old law of England he falls into a praemunire, that is he
forsetteth all his goods to the Prince, and his body to remain in prison
during the Princes pleasure: and not that only, but the Judge, the scribe, the
procurer and assessor which receives and does maintain that usurped pleading
does incur the same danger. Whether the word praemunire does betoken that the
authority and jurisdiction of the realm is provided for before and defended
by that law, and therefore it has that name praemunire or praemuniri, or
because that by that law such an attemture has had warning given before to
him of the danger into which he falls by such attempt, and then praemunire
is barbarously written for praemonere, praemoneri, (as some men have held
opinion) I will not define, the effect is as I have declared: and the law was
first made in king Richard the secondes time, and is the remedy which is used
when the spiritual jurisdiction will go about to encroch any thing upon the
temporal courts. Because this court or form which is called curia
christianitatis, is yet taken as appears for an externe and foreign court, and
differreth from the policy and manner of government of the Realm, and is an
other court (as appears by the act and writ of praemunire) than curia regis
aut reginae: Yet at this present this court as well as others has her force,
power, authority, rule and jurisdiction, from the royal majesty and the
crown of England and from no other foreign potentate or power under God (which
being granted, as indeed it is true) it may now appear by some reason that
the first statute of praemuni^e whereof I have spoken, has now no place in
England, seeing there is no pleading alibi quam in curia regis ac reginae.

I have declared summarily as it were in a chart or map, or as Aristotle
terms it, (...) the form and manner of the government of England, and the
policy thereof, and set before your eyes the principal points wherein it
does differ from the policy or government at this time used in France,
Italy, Spain, Germany and all other countries, which do follow the civil
law of the Romans compiled by Justinian into his pandects and code: not in
that sort as Plato made his common wealth, or Zenophon his kingdom of Persia,
nor as Sir Thomas More his Vtopia being feigned common wealths such as never
was nor never shall be, vain imaginations, fantasies of Philosophers to
occupy the time and to exercise their wits: but so as England stands and
is governed at this day the xxviij of March Anno 1565. in the vij year of the
reign and administration thereof by the most virtuous and noble Queen
Elizabeth, daughter to King Henry the eight, and in the one and fifteeth year
of mine age, when I was ambassador for her majesty in the court of France,
the scepter whereof at that time the noble Prince and of great hope Charles
Maximilian did hold, having then reigned iiij years. So that whether I writ
true or not, it is easy to be seen with eyes (as a man would say) and felt
with hands. Wherefore this being as a project or table of a common wealth
truly laid before you, not fained by putting a case: let us compare it with
common wealths, which be at this day in esse, or do remain discribed in true
histories, especially in such points wherein the one differs from the other,
to see who has taken the righter, truer, and more commodious way to govern
the people as well in war as in peace. This will be no illiberall occupation
for him that is a Philosopher and has a delight in disputing, nor unprofitable
for him who has to do and has good will to serve the Prince and the common
wealth in giving counsel for the better administration thereof.

Thomas Smyth.

FINIS.

