THE ART OF GVNNERIE. Wherein is set forth a number of serviceable secrets,
and practical conclusions, belonging to the Art of Gunnerie, by Arithmeticke
skill to be accomplished: both pretty, pleasant, and profitable for all such as
are professors of the same faculty. Compiled by THOMAS SMITH of Barwicke upon
Tweed Soldier.

LONDON, Printed for William Ponsonby. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE PERIGRIN BERTIE KNIGHT, LORD WILLOVGHBIE Beak and
Earsby, Lord Governor of her Majesty's Town and Castle of Barwicke upon
Tweed, and Lord VVardon of the East marches of England, for and anempst
Scotland, etc.
IT is a common opinion Right Honorable amongst a great number, who may be
termed more wayward then wise, that the Art of Soldiery may perfectly be
attained in two or three months practice, and that any common man in a few
weeks trayning, having seen two or three skirmishes may be called an expert
soldier. Not considering that a Mariner may sail seven years, and yet be far
from a Nauigator. A number of Mechanical Artificers may labor diverse years,
and yet be far from perfection; and a number of Soldiers may serve many
years, and yet have but the bare name of a soldier. He may well be called a
trained soldier, that knows by the sound of Drum, and Trumpet, without any
voice, when to march, fight, retire, etc. that is able in marching,
embattelling, encamping, and fighting, and such like, to perform, execute, and
obey the laws and orders of the field, that has some sight in the
Mathematicals, and in Geometrical instruments, for the conueying of Mines
under the ground, to plant and manage great Ordinance, to batter or beat down
the walls of any Town or Castle, that can measure Altitudes, Latitudes, and
Longitudes, etc. such a one may be termed in my opinion an expert soldier,
though he never buckled with the enemy in the field.

Such perfections is well known to be in your Honor, that you are furnished
with these and many morare qualities in the Art Military, and above all with
wisdom and noble courage, to perform and execute any honorable enterprise
whatsoever for the honor and service of God, your Prince and country, the
which our proud enemies have felt to their pain and your everlasting fame.

And although I my self be but one of the meanest soldiers in this Guarison
now under your Lordships government (whom we pray long to govern over us)
being brought up from my childhood under a valiant Captain in Military
profession, in which I have had a desire to practice and learn some secrets
touching the orders of the field, and trayning of Soldiers: as also concerning
the Art of Managing and shooting in great Artillery. I have thought it good
(hearing of no other that has done the like before) to frame together certain
Arithmeticall and Geometrical rules, to show in part how necessary
Arithmeticke and Geometry is for our profession, the which I have set down in
two little books, the one entitled Arithmeticall Military Conclusions, the
other; The Art of Gunnerie: the first I wrote two or three years since, and
bestowed on my Captain, Sir John Carry Knight, the which (God sparing life) I
mean to correct and enlarge, and perhaps put to the Press: This other I have
thought it my part, to offer to your Lordships good consideration, to be
shrouded under your Honorable buckler, to bear off the blows of envious
tongues, which are ever ready to spit their spite against any virtuous
exercise: which although it be unworthy to pass under so honorable a
protection, I hope your Lordship will in indifferent balance weigh my willing
mind, to do my country good, and your Honor any service my poor ability is
able to perform, which if your Honor allow of, I shall think my pains well
employed, and shall encourage me hereafter to bring this new found Art into
some better perfection, so far as my poor ability is able to put in
practice, or my simple skill in the Art will reach to. Thus loath to be tedious,
I cease: beseeching God to preserve your Honor with much increase of honor,
to Gods glory and your hearts desire.

Your honors dutifully at command, Thomas Smith Soldier.

TO ALL GENTLEMEN, SOVLDIERS, GVNNERS, AND ALL Favorers of Military
Discipline, Thomas Smith wishes increase of happiness.
GENTLEMEN, there was never Author nor practiced Gunner ever able (as I am
persuaded) to describe at full, or could show perfectly the efficacy and force
that Gunpowder is able to accomplish, it being a mixture of such a wonderful
operation and effect, as by daily experience we find. And although diverse men
in diverse ages, have invented diverse engines and Ordinance for offensive and
defensive services by Gunpowder to be performed, yet none has nor could ever
attain to that full perfection, to know precisely what strange effects the
said mixture is able to work. Also diverse learned men have invented many
excellent rules pertaining to the Art of Gunnerrie, and a great many of them
have and do err in the principals of their inventions: and the cause is, for
want of due practice therein. For the Art of Gunnery does require great
practice and experience, to declare the rare secrets thereof; which is not for
mean men to attain to, for that the charges is great.

And albeit, I am the least able of a great many to take any matter in hand,
pertaining to the same Art, being but a sworn scholar thereto, and my
ability far unable to put in practice that I would: yet because I have served
a prentizehood twice told since I took my oath, and never hearing of any that
has compiled any Arithmeticall rules or secrets (which is the fountain head
from whence all Arts or sciences do spring) into one volume, I thought it my
part and duty (according to my skill) to do the best I could therein, for the
benefit of others, and that in the plainest manner I could, that such as are not
well seen in numbers Art, might the sooner understand the same. And albeit I
have herein showed but a few Arithmeticall conclusions belonging to the Art of
Gunnerie, yet the experienced Gunner or skillful Mathematitian, by these few
may devise a great many more, for service offensive and defensive, by
Arithmeticke and Geometry to be performed. All which conclusions (gentle
Readers) I have thought best to frame in easy questions, showing the answers
or resolutions thereof. And although they be but meanly framed, I hope you will
accept the same in good part, the rather, for that they are a young Gunners
practices. And if there be ought herein that may profit you, yield me your
friendly censure, I crave no more: or if in any place I have erred, either
gently correct it, or pass it with silence, or in friendly sort admonish me
thereof, I deserve no less.

There is a great many that can spy a mote in another man's eye, that had need
to have a beam pulled from their own: some will scan very curiously, and
sooner find two faults then amend one. If you be of that mind (friendly
readers) I mind not to make you my judges.

The widows mite was as well accepted as the gifts of the wealthy. A soldier
in Alexanders camp, in the dry desert presented the king his helmet full of
cold water, saying, if I could have gotten better drink, your Grace should
have had part: the which the king gently accepted and liberally rewarded,
answering, I wey not thy gift, but thy willing mind. But I seek no reward for
my travel, but only you will wey my mind is willing to do my country good,
and to profit the readers: and not to carpe with Momus, nor disdain with
Zoilus, nor sooth with Zantippus. In so doing you shall encourage me to set
pen to paper, and to fly a higher pitch pertaining to this new found Art.
Otherwise, if you spit out your spite against me for my good will, I will as
meanly account of your malice, and so as I find you, look to have of me.

From my poor house in Barwicke upon Tweed this 2. of May, 1600. Your friend
and welwiller, Thomas Smith Soldier.

PETER LVCAS CANNONNIER in commendation of the Author and his book.
SHake silly pe^ to write of art, to him where art does dwell,
And say, the want of Eloquence does so thy hand repel,
That far thy Muse unable is to praise the Authors skill:
Nor can thou paint thy mind, nor finely tell thy will,
But as there needs no sign at door, whereas the wine is pure,
So need not I commend this work, it all men will allure,
To love the Smith that forged this work, who has such Art in store,
That better is then Art which tries gold from ore,
As our proud foes have found, and felt by Ordinance might,
And aid of the almighty Jove, who does defend our right.
Therefore good Zeal go post-hast unto Fame,
And bid her give this book an everliving name.
Peter Lucas Gunner.

Richard Hope Gentleman in commendation of the work.
TO tell a tale without authority,
Or feign a fable by invention,
The one proceeds of quick capacity,
The other shows but small discretion.
Who writes conclusions how to use a piece,
In my conceit deserves a golden fleece.
Who takes in hand to write of worthy war,
And never marched where any war was made,
Nor never hopes to come in any jar,
But tells the trial, knowing not the trade,
To write of war, and note not what it is,
May well be thought a work begun amiss.
But he that by his study makes it known,
What thing war is, and whereof it proceeds,
Defensive and offensive reasons showing,
To those that gape for honor by their deeds,
A worthy work who does not count the same,
In my conceit he does a Soldier shame.
If so: Smiths travel cannot well offend,
For so he meant before he set it forth,
And if it chance to come where Soldiers wend.
He it commands to seem of little worth:
For what he writes, he writes to honor those,
Which wade in wars to triumph over foes.
Richard Hope Soldier.

Richard Rotheruppe Gentleman in commendation.
THat man whom Martial attempts
May raise to honor hie,
Let him peruse with learned skill,
Smiths work of Gunnerie.
That fountain which such springs sends forth,
Can never dry remain:
I mean the Ground of Arts, from which
All science we attain.
As Grammar, Music, and Physic,
With high Astronomy:
And other Arts Mathematicke,
And brave Geometry.
This Art of Gunnerie likewise,
Amongst the rest let stand,
Whose godfather this Author is,
Which took the same in hand.
Whose knowledge in this famous Art,
Deserves eternal fame,
For his conclusions excellent
Does well deserve the same.
Richard Rotheruppe Soldier.

THE ART OF GVNNERIE.
A Table showing the deminite parts used for mensuration.
FOrasmuch as some of these measures are to be used in the treatise following,
it is requisite that I show what kind of measures are commonly used and now in
force, beginning with a barley corn, from whence all these hereunder and a
great many more do proceed, as An inch, contains 3 barley corns laid end to
end. a finger breadth, contains 4 barley corns in thickness. a hand breadth,
contains 4 fingers. a foot, contains 12 inches. a yard, contains 3
feet. an ell, contains 5 quarters of a yard. a span, contains 3
handbredths. a foot, contains 4 handbredths. a geometrical pace, contains
5 feet. a fadome, contains 6 feet, or 2 yards. 10 fadome, contains a
score, or 20 yards. a furlong, contains 123 paces. our English furlong
contains 132 paces, or 660 feet. a perch or rood, contains 5 yards or 16
feet. an aker, contains 160 perches, 528 paces, or 2640 feet a league,
contains 1500 paces. an Italian or English mile, contains 8 furlongs, or
1000 paces, or 5000 feet. a Germane mile, contains 32 furlongs. a score,
contains 20 yards. an hundredth, contains 600 feet, after 5 score to the
100. 24 grains of wheat dry, contains one penie of Troyes weight. 20 pence,
contains one ounce. 12 ounces, contains one pound. 20 grains of barley,
contains one scruple of haberdepois weight 3 scruples, contains one dram
8 drammes, contains one ounce. 16 ounces, contains one pound. 112 pound,
contains 100 weight. a tun, contains 20 hundredth


A Table showing how to weigh a great deal with few weights.
You may way any number of pounds from one to 40 with these 4 weights, 1. 3. 9.
27.
1 to 121 with these 5 weights 1. 3. 9. 27. 81.
1 to 364 with these 6 weights, 1. 3. 9. 27. 81. 243.



This rule of weighing many things with few weights proceeds of Geometrical
progression. The pounds to be weighed, are wayed with as many namelike weights,
to be done either double or threefold, sometime by adding one weight to
another, and sometimes by taking away and adding to the contrary balance.
Example in a double respect: All terms to 15 are weighed with 4 weights of
pounds: as, 1. 2. 4. 8. so in a triple respect, all pounds to 40 may be weighed
with 4 weights, as 1. 3. 9. 27. All pounds from 1 to 364 are to be weighed with
these 6 weights, 1. 3. 9. 27. 81. 243. and so infinitely.

Measures.
THe variety of measures are in a manner infinite, and yet are all comprehended
under three general kinds, proceeding from a point in Geometry, as
Arithmeticke does from an unite: that is to say, Lines, Superficies, Bodies.

Lines having but only length without breadth of thickness, do measure only
Altitudes, Latitudes, and Longitudes, etc.

Superficies, being limited by lines, bearing length and breadth, without depth
or thickness, in these are known the contents of Pauements, Glass, Board,
Land, etc.

Bodies, being bounden by Superficies, and containing length, breadth, and
thicknes, do make known the quantity of all solid or massiue things, as
timber, stone, etc. All which requires the aid of Arithmeticke, to be truly
measured. The definitions, terms, and orderly working of these and all other,
the Elements of Geometry will teach you.

Here I thought to have written briefly, or rather to have glaunced at the
wonderful strange effects that Arithmeticke is able to work and attain to,
but finding that that learned and famous man Master John Dee, in his
Mathematical preface upon Euclids Elements, does notably touch the same,
showing the rare properties and incredible mysteries that numbers Art can reach
to, affirming that the effects thereof, of man is notable fully to be declared,
it soon struck me in the dumps, feeling my self far unable to soar so high.

How to find the cubicall radix or root of any number.
AS in my book of the Art of war, entitled Arithmeticall military
conclusions, I began with the extraction of square roots, being a special
rule to work diverse feats belonging to the said Art: So in this Treatise I
have thought best to begin and show how to extract Cubicke roots, for that
diverse conclusions are to be done by the said rule, in the work following
letting pass all former rules, as less necessary, the which are commonly
known to every child, that has any sight in the Art of numbering.

To find the radix or root cubicall of any number, you must note how many
figures or numbers be in the total sum thereof, and then as is showed in the
rule how to extract the square root of any number, you make a prick or point
under every other number, beginning at the first number toward your right
hand: even so in this rule, in searching for the cubicall root of any number,
you must put a prick under the first number toward your right hand, and so
increase your number of pricks, under every third number, toward your left
hand, and your quotient will contain so many figures as there be pricks.

If your number propounded be cubicall, multiply your quotient cubically, the
product of that multiplication will be the number that was propounded.

To multiply cubically, you must do as this example shows. 5 multiplied in
himself is 25, which 25 multiplied again by 5, makes 125, and is a cubick
number.

A cubicall figure, is proportioned as these figures shows, for a cube is a
solid body of six equal squares or sides like a die.

Example.


It is requisite in learning to extract roots, to have in perfect memory all
those cubicke roots of digit numbers and the cubes they do make, the which
will be a great help in working, the which I have here set down in a table
after M. Records order. 1 1 2 8 3 27 4 64 5 125 6 216 7 343 8 512 9 729

Now to seek for the first figure or root, your table will show you what
number shall stand in the quotient, being due to the last prick, toward your
left hand, which figure so set in the quotient, multiplied cubickly, if it be
equal to the number or numbers above that last prick, it does show that the
said number or numbers are cubicke; but if it be more then a cube number, then
abate the greatest cube number, that the quotient will make from the said
numbers, and cancelling the same, let the remain stand over the head of the
said numbers, as is done in division of common numbers, and so have you done
with the first prick.













In this order you must work by every prick, how many figures soever the
numbers propounded contains.

To find a Denominator to the cubicke remain.
If the number propounded be not cubicall, and that you desire to know the true
denominator to the cubicall remain, you must square your cubicke root, and
then triple the said square, and after triple the root, adding all those
sums together, and to the total of the said addition, add one unity, so
have you the true denominator cubicall, the which you may abbreuiate into
lesser terms by Abbreuiation, according to your desire.

Or you may find the denominator cubicall, by multiplying the root in the
triple of another number that is more by one unite, nor the said root: and
then adding one unite to the product of the said multiplication, you have your
desire.

An example how to work, to find the cubicke root.
Admit the sum or numbers, whose cubicke root you desire to know be 32768. I
set the prick under 8, and under the figure 2 standing in the fourth place, as
in the work here you see, and I find that the greatest cubicke number in 32
is 27, and 3 is his root, which 3 I place in the quotient, and his cube being
27, I substract from 32, so rests 5. And so I have done with the first prick
toward my left hand, as here in the work you may see.

^

Then I triple the quotient 3, and it is 9, which I set one place from the last
prick nearer toward my right hand. And then I multiply the triple of the
quotient being 9, by the said quotient 3, arises 27, the which I place under
57, drawing a line under my deuisor 27, and then I seek how often I can have 27
the deuisor in 57, which is a part of the deuident, the which I can have but 2
times, which 2, I place in the quotient, and by the said 2 I multiply the
deuisor 27, so arises 54, which I place under the line under the deuisor, as
here you see.

^

And then I square the number last placed in the quotient being 2, and it is 4,
which square I multiply by the triple of the first quotient number being 9,
arises 36, which I place under 54, one place nearer toward the right hand, as
here you may see. And then multiplying the digit 2. cubickly arises 8, to be
set under the line one place nearer toward the right hand, and adding all
these sums together, there arises 5768, the which subtracted from the number
belonging to the first prick there remains nothing, so I say that 32768 is a
cubicke number, and 32 is the true root thereof. You may prove it by
multiplying the quotient cubickly, and abating the product from the number
propounded, there will remain nothing.

^

To find the nearest root of a number not cubicke.
Question.
I demand the true cubicke root of 117884.

Resolution.
The pricks placed in order as before, I find there will be but 2 figures in
the quotient, and that the cubick number of 117 is 64, whose cubick root is 4,
which 4 I place in the quotient, and his cube 64 being abated from 117, there
remains 53 to be placed over the last prick: then tripling the quotie^t 4,
arises 12 to be set down one place nearer toward my right hand, and then
multiplying the quotient by the said triple, does arise 48 for a deuisor, which
I set in his place, drawing a line under him as in the former work you see.
And then I make search how often I can have 48 in 538, which I can have many
times, but more then 9 times I must not take; and therefore I set down 9 in
the quotient, and multiplying the same by the deuisor 48, arises 432, to be
placed under the line under the deuisor, then I do multiply the said 9
squarely, arises 81, the which multiplied by 12 being the triple of the first
quotient, arises 972, the which I set down one place nearer toward my right
hand; and then I multiply 9 cubickly, arises 729 to be set down yet one place
nearer toward my right hand: and adding all those sums together, the total is
53649, which abated from 53884, rests 235. And thus I affirm, that 49 is the
nearest cubicke root in whole numbers of 117884, as here by the work you may
see.

^

Now to find a denominator for the 235 remaining, I square the root 49, so
arises 2401. Then I triple the said squared number and there arises 7203, and
then I triple the root 49, arises 147, to which I add one, and it makes 148.
Al which sums joined together, makes 7351, and so the true cubicke root of
117884 is 49 and 235/7351 parts of an unite.

Theormes showing the true proportion that a bullet of one metal bears to
the like bullet of a contrary metal, as also the proportion that the
circumference of any buller or globe etc. bears to the diameter, and of the
superficial content thereof to the diametrall square thereof, the which
according to Archimedes are thus proved.

All circles are equal to that right angled triangle, whose containing sides,
the one is equal to the semidiameter, the other to the circumference thereof.

The proportion of all circles to the square of their Diameter, is as 11 to 14.

All globes bear together triple that proportion that their Diameters do.

The circumference of any circle, is more nor the triple of his Dyameter, by
such proportion as is less then 1/7 and more nor 10/27.

A bullet of iron, to the like bullet of marble stone is in proportion as 15.
to 34.

A bullet of lead to the like bullet of iron, is in proportion as 28 is to 19.

A bullet of lead to the like bullet of marble stone is in proportion as 4 to 1.

The Diameter of any bullet etc. is in proportion to the circumference as 7 to
22.

How by knowing the true weight of any one bullet, and the diameter of the
piece due for the said bullet, to find out the weight of any other bullet
belonging to a contrary piece of Ordinance.
Question.
Admit a Demi Cannon of 7 inches Diameter shoot an iron bullet of 32 pound
weight, I demand what weight shall that bullet be of, that serves a Cannon of
9 inches diameter?

Resolution.
To answer this and such like, there is a general rule; for Ewclid in his sixth
book of geometrical elements, has demonstrated and proved that all globes
are in triple proportion to their Diameters, therefore I multiply the
proportion of each bullet cubically, and I find the cube of 7 is 343, and the
cube of 9 is 729. Then by the rule of proportion I say, if 343 yield 32 pound
weight, what shall that bullet weigh whose cube is 729? So multiplying 729 by
32 pound, the weight of the lesser bullet, arises 23328. which divided by the
343, being the cube of the lesser bullet, yields in the quotient 68 pound and
4/343 parts of a pound, so much shall that bullet, weigh, that serves a Cannon
of 9 inches diameter, as by working the rule you shall find.

Another easy conclusion, how by the weight of a small bullet known, to find
out the weight of a greater.
Question.
A bullet of 3 inches diameter weighing four pound weight, what shall a bullet
of the same metal weigh whose diameter is twice the height of the former
(that is 6 inches high?)

Resolution.
I work in the order of the former conclusion, multiplying the diameter of
each bullet cubically, and dividing as before is showed, the quotie^t is 32
pound weight, so much shall the greater bullet weigh.

Example.
In the last conclusion the weight of the greater bullet weighed 32 pound,
being 6 inches diameter, how shall I find the weight of a bullet of the same
metal that is but half that height.

Resolution.
I find the cube of 6 is 216, and the cube of 3 is 27, so framing the converse
rule of 3, I say: if 216 yield 32 pound weight, what will 27? And multiplying
27 by 32, and dividing the product by 216, the quotient yields 4 pound, the
true weight of the lesser bullet. And note that if you know the diameter and
weight of any bullet, and would know the weight of one that is but the height
of the first, the lesser shall be in weight but the part of the greater. Or
knowing the weight of any bullet, if you would know the weight of another of
the same metal, being twice the height of the former, the greater shall weigh
8 times as much as the lesser, as in a figure demo^stratiuely hereafter drawn
you may see.

How by knowing the weight of any bullet whose diameter contains both whole
inches and parts of whole, how you should work to find out the true weight of
another whose diameter ends with a fraction.
Question.
If a Sakeret shoot a bullet of 2 inches diameter, of 3 pound weight, what
shall a Culuering shot weigh of 5 inches diameter?

Resolution.
To answer this or such like, I reduce each bullet into his proper fraction,
and I find that the bullet of 2 inches diameter will be in a fraction 11/4 or
11 quarters, and the Culuering bullet of 5 inches height, will be 21/4 then I
multiply each of these 2 fractions cubically, and I find that the cube fraction
of the lesser bullet is 1331/4 and the cubike fraction of the greater is 9261/4
which known, I set down under three pound (the weight of the lesser bullet)
the unite 1, and it will represent a fraction thus 3/1, and then multiplying
and dividing by the golden rule in fractions, I find that the weight of the
Culuering shot of 5 inches diameter will weigh 20 pound weight and almost
pound, as in the working you may find.

How by knowing the diameter and weight of an iron bullet, to find the weight
of a bullet of marble stone of the like diameter: or how by knowing the weight
and height of a bullet of marble, to find out the weight of an iron bullet of
like height.
Question.
Admit an iron bullet of 4 inches height weigh 9 pound, I demand what shall a
bullet of marble stone weigh of like diameter.

Resolution.
In a theoreme before mentioned, I find that a bullet of iron to the like bullet
of marble stone, shall bear such proportion as 34 is to 15. And therefore I
multiply the weight of the iron bullet known being 9 pound by 15, (the
proportion the stone bullet bears thereto) so arises 135, which divided by
34, the quotient is 3 pound, and 33/34 parts of a pound: that is, 4 pound
wanting 1/34 part of a pound, so much shall the bullet of marble stone weigh
that is in Diameter and circumference, equal to the like bullet of iron. In
like order reducing the weight of the stone bullet into his proper fractio^,
you shall have 135/34 pound, which divided by 15, the proportion the stone
bullet bears to the like bullet of iron, your quotient is 9, the number of
pounds that the iron bullet weighs.

How by knowing the height and weight of an iron bullet, to find out the weight
and height of the like bullet of lead, or how to find the weight of an iron
bullet, by knowing the weight of a leaden bullet of like diameter.
Question.
There is a Cannon that shootes an iron bullet of 72 pound weight, what shall a
bullet of lead of the same diameter weigh?

Resolution.
To work this, I note that the theoreme before says, that a bullet of iron to
the like bullet of lead, shall bear such proportion as 28 is to 19, therefore
I multiply 72 (the pounds which the iron shot weighs) by 28, so arises 2016,
which divided by 19, the quotient is 106 pound 2/19, so much will a leaden
bullet weigh that is proportional to an iron bullet of 72 pound weight.

In this order by working as I have showed in the end of the last conclusion,
you may by knowing the weight of the leaden bullet, find out the weight of the
like bullet of iron.

How you may find out the weight of any stone bullet of marble, by knovving the
weight of the like bullet of lead, or how by knovving the weight of the
stone bullet to find out the weight of a leaden bullet of like proportion.
Question.
If a bullet of lead weigh 106 pound, what shall a bullet let of marble stone
weigh of the self like proportion?

Resolution.
To answer this, I find that a bullet of lead to the like bullet of marble,
bears such proportion as 4 to 1. Therefore multiplying 106 by 1, and dividing
the product by 4, the quotient will be 26 pound and showing the true weight of
a stone bullet, that is proportional to the like bullet of lead.

And now to find out the weight of the leaden shot, by knowing the weight of
the stone shot, reduce the stone bullet into his properfraction, you shall have
53/2, and setting 1 under 4 fraction wise, multiply the numerators together,
and likewise the denominators, and dividing the product arising of the
numerators by the product of the denominators, your quotient will be 106 pound,
showing the true weight of the leaden bullet.

If you have or do know the weight and true height of a bullet of stone, or any
other metal, and is desirous to know the weight and height of another bullet
that is greater or lesser, and of the same metal, in working as the first
conclusion shows, you shall have your desire.

To find out the circumference of any circle or bullet.
Question.
I demand how many inches is about the circumference of that bullet whose
diameter is 9 inches.

Resolution.
To work this or any such like, there is a general rule, as thus, that the
proportion of the diameter to the circu^ference is as 7 to 22, therefore
multiplying the diameter 9 by ^2 arises 198, which sum divided by 7, the
quotient is 28, 2/7 showing the true number of inches about the circumference
of a bullet of 9 inches diameter, as the figure here demonstrated shows.



How you may by knowing the circumference of any bullet, find out the height or
diameter of the same.
Question.
The circumference of the bullet in the last conclusion, contained 28 inches
2/7 as in the demonstration you may see, I would know how I should work to
find how many inches the diameter of the same is.

Resolution.
To answer this and all such like, I must work contrary to the former
conclusion, first reducing the whole number and broken being 28 inches 2/7 into
his proper fraction, and it will be 198/7 then multiplying by 7 according to
Archimedes doctrine, and dividing by 22, the quotient will be 9. so many inches
is the diameter of the same bullet.

In this order you may find out the diameter and circumference of all other
bullets.

How to find out the solid content of any bullet, etc.
Question.
There is a bullet of iron whose diameter contains 9 inches, how many square
inches is in the solid content thereof?

Resolution.
To know this and all such like, there is a general rule, as thus, to multiply
the diameter in his square, I mean cubically, and then multiply that product
by 11, divide the total sum by 21, the quotient shows the number of square
inches in that spherical globe or bullet, for 9 multiplied cubically arises
729, which augmented in 11 is 8019, that total divided by 21, yields 381
inches, and 6/7 so many square inches of iron will be in a bullet of 9 inches
diameter.

To find the true content of the superficies of any circle drawn upon a flat,
as on a table or paper, etc.
Question.
There is a circle whose diameter is 21 inches, I demand how many square
inches is contained within the circumference of the same?

Resolution.
To resolve this ofr such like, there is a general rule, in taking the
diameter, and multiplying it in the circumference, or squaring the diameter,
and multiplying the product by 11, and dividing the result by 14, the quotient
shows the Area or content of all the superficies within the circumference
thereof. Example:

The square of 21 is 441, which multiplied by 11 is 4851, that divided by 14,
yields in the quotient 346 inches. Or other ways, take the half of 21
inches, that is, 10 inches, and take of the circumference, which is 33 inches,
reduce them into fractions according to the rule, you have 21/2 for the
diameter and 33/1 for the circumfere^ce, then multiplying the one by the other,
the product is 1386/4, which divided by the denominator 2, yields in the
quotient 346 as before. In this order you may find out the content of the
plain of any circle.

To find out the circumference of any bullet or globe diverse and sundry ways.
Question.
How many inches is about the circumference of that bullet or globe, whose
diameter is supposed to be 21 inches high?

Resolution.
After you have with your callaper compasses, found out the height of the
diameter, multiply the same by 22, so there will arise 462, the which divided
by 7, the quotie^t will be 66 inches, the true measure of the circu^fere^ce

Another way.
Triple your diameter, and thereto add the 1/7 part of the same, your product
is the circumference. Example:

The triple of 21 is 63, and the 1/7 part of 21 is 3, which added to 63 is 66
inches, as before.

Another way to work the same.
Look how many times you can have 7 in the diameter, so many times must you
have 22 in the circumference. Example. The diameter being 21 inches, divided by
7, yields in the quotient 3, by which if you multiply 22, your product will be
66 inches, for the circumference, as before. In this order you may find out the
circumference of any bullet, or sphericall body, etc.

To find out the superficies of any round body, as bullet, globe, etc. diverse
and sundry ways.
Question.
I have a demi Cannon bullet of 7 inches diameter, I demand how many inches
the superficial content thereof is?

Resolution.
To answer this and all such like, I must in the order before showed, find out
the circu^ference of the bullet, and I find that a bullet of 7 inches diameter,
shall co^taine 22 inches in circu^ference, which circumference being multiplied
in the diameter, arises 154 inches, the true number of inches contained upon
the superficies of a bullet of 7 inches diameter.

Another way.
Multiply the square of the diameter of any bullet or globe by 22/7 the product
is your desire. Example: The bullet whose diameter was 7 inches being squared,
the square thereof is 49, which multiplied by 22, yields 1078 which sum divided
by 7, the quotient is 154 inches as before.

Another way.
Divide the square of the circumference of any bullet by 22/7 your quotient
numbers will show you the superficial measure of the same.

Example:
The circumference of the bullet aforenamed of 7 inches diameter contains 22
inches, the square thereof is 484 inches, that number divided by 22/7 as you do
in fractions, in setting an unite under the square number thus, 484/1 and
multiplying the said square number by the denominator of the other fraction
being 7, arises 3388, which divided by the numerator 22, the quotient is 154
inches, the superficial content thereof, as before.

How you may find out the solid content or crassitude of any round bullet or
globe, etc. diverse ways.
Question.
In the question before propounded of the bullet, whose diameter was 21 inches,
I would know how many inches is in all the solid or massiue content thereof?

Resolution.
I multiply the diameter cubickly, and after multiplieth that cubicke number by
11, so arises 101871, the which divided by 21, my quotient is 4851, showing
there is so many inches iu the solid content of a bullet or globe of 21 inches
diameter.

Another way.
Multiply the cube of the circumference by 49, and divide the product arising
thereof, by 363, your quotient will show your desire. Example: The
circumference of a bullet whose diameter is 21 inches, contains 66 inches,
the thereof is 33 inches, the cube whereof is 35937, that sum multiplied by
49 is 1760913, which divided by 363, the quotient is 4851 inches as before.

How you may by knovving the diameter and weight of any bullet, or other
round body, find out the diameter of any bullet or globe that vveigheth twice
the weight of the former.
Question.
There is a demi Culuering bullet of 4 inches diameter weighing 9 pound, I
demand the true height of that bullet which weighs 18 pound weight.

Resolution.
To work this and all such like demands, this rule is general in multiplying
the height of the lesser bullet whose weight is known cubically, then doubling
that sum, and extracting the cubicke root thereof, the quotient will answer
your question. Example. The bullet before named of 4 inches diameter being
multiplied cubically is 64, that sum doubled is 128, the cubicke root
thereof is 5 inches and a fraction remaining scarce the 1/30 part of an inch,
showing the true height of a bullet that weighs 18 pound. In this order if
you have a bullet that is 3 times as heavy as another of like metal, whose
weight is known, and that you desire to know the diameter of the greater
bullet: in tripling the cubicke number of the lesser bullet whose diameter is
known, and extracting the cubicke root thereof, you shall find out the true
height of the greater bullet. Or if you would find out the height of any bullet
of like metal, that weighs 4 times as much as an other bullet whose weight
is known, quatriple the cubicke number of the diameter of the lesser bullet,
and extract the cubicke root thereof, your quotient will satisfy you. Or if 5
or 6 times etc. in working as I have showed you may find your request.

How you may Geometrically find out the diameter of any bullet, that weighs
twice as much as another known bullet.
Take the true height or diameter of the lesser bullet whose weight you know,
and square the same as you see in the figure following. Then draw a line that
may divide the said square in 2 equal parts, in the 2 opposite angles, and
that line shall be the diameter of a bullet twice the weight of the other: then
divide that diametrall line in 2 equal parts, setting one foot of your
compass in the center or mids thereof, and with the other foot draw a circle,
and that circumference will represent the proportion of a bullet, twice as much
in weight as the lesser.



How you may Arithmetically prove this conclusion.
The dyameter of the lesser bullet is 5 inches, the square of it is 25. that
some dubble is 50. the square root of 50, is 7. 1/7 and so much is the
diameter of the greater bullet, as in the figure here drawn you may see.

Another way Geometrically, to find the diameter of any unknown bullet that is
double the weight of a known bullet.
Draw a straight line of what length you think good, as you see the line A. B.
then draw another cross line perpendicular to the ground line as you see the
line C. D. note the meeting or crossing of the lines, as is the point E. This
done, open your compass the just length of the diameter of the lesser bullet
whose weight you would double, setting one foot of the compass in E. and the
other in D. and measure toward B. twice that diameter, as is done in the
points F. G. Then divide the line E. F. in 2. equal parts in the point H. and
after divide the line E. H. in 2 equal halfes, as in the point I. And lastly
divide the line I. H. in 2 equal parts in the point K. Which done, open your
compass, placing one foot in K. and the other in G. draw a circle, as you see,
I do the semi circle L. C. G. After divide the line C. D. in 2 equal parts in
the point M. and opening your compass the just widenes of one of those parts,
set one foot in M. and with the other foot draw the line C. N. L. Which done,
the bullet whose diameter is the line L. E. will weigh twice as much as the
bullet whose diameter is the line E. D. as Ewclid in his 6. book of
Geometrical Elements does demonstrate and prove.



The greater circle O. does show the proportion of a bullet that weighs twice
as much as the lesser circle N. both the said bullets being cast of one like
metal.

Another demonstration to prove the former conclusion by numbers.
In a conclusion before set down, where the bullet of a demi Culuering of 4
inches diameter weighed 9 pound, I proved that a bullet whose weight was 18
pound should be more then 5 inches diameter. Even so I have hereunder divided
the line E. D. of the former conclusion, being supposed to be the diameter of a
bullet whose weight is known, into 4 equal parts or inches. And likewise
dividing the Diameter F. E. into the like divisions it contains 5 of those
parts, and almost the 1/30 part of an inch more, showing the true height of a
bullet that is twice as much in weight as the lesser bullet of 4 inches
diameter, as this figure shows.



As the upper face or side of any square being doubled, the square arising of
that doubled side shall be in proportion just 4 times as much as the first
square was, whereas a great many would think it would be but twice as much.
Even so the diameter of any circle being doubled, the Area or superficial
content of the flat of the same circle so doubled, shall be four times as much
as the other. Also any cube, globe or bullet, whose diameter is in double
proportion to another, the solid content of that bullet whose diameter is so
doubled, shall be in weight 8 times as much as the lesser, as these two
examples in the conclusions following figuratively drawn shows.

How by knowing the superficial content of the plain of any circle, to find
out the superficial content of another that is twice the diameter of the first.
Question.
There is two circles drawn, the one 7 inches diameter, the other 14 inches:
how much is the content of the greater circle more then the lesser?

Resolution.
To answer this or the like, by the theoreme before mentioned, I square the
diameter of the lesser circle being seven inches, so arises 49 inches, that
square multiplied by 11, yields 539, the which divided by 14, the quotient is
38 inches showing the superficial content of the circle of 7 inches diameter.
Also working in the same order, I find the content of the greater circle of 14
inches diameter to contain 154 inches, which divided by 38. the quotient is 4,
showing that the superficial content of the greater circle is just 4 times as
much as the lesser.

By knowing the weight and height of any one bullet to find out the weight of
another of twice the height of the former.
Question.
If a bullet of 4 inches diameter weye 9 pound, how much shall a bullet of 8
inches height weye.

Resolution.
To know this or the like, multiply the diameter of each bullet cubically, and I
find the cube of 4 is 64, and the cube of 8 is 512, which known, I frame the
rule of proportion saying, if 64 yield 9 pound, what will 512? and in
multiplying and dividing according to the rule, my quotient is 72 pound, the
weight of the greater bullet, (that is just 8 times the weight of the lesser
bullet.) For further proof behold these 2 figures in cubick form, where you
may see that the greater figure whose side is in double proportion to the
lesser, does contain 8 times the quantity of the lesser.



An easy rule to find out the diameter of any bullet, and how to know how much
one bullet is higher then another by Arithmeticke skill, without any callaper
compasses.
If you want a pair of callaper compasses, take a line or a garter etc. and
gird the bullet or bullets whose height you desire just in the mids, laying
that measure to an inch rule, noting how many inches or other measure the same
contains, then multiplying the said measures by 7, and dividing by 22, the
quotient will show you your request. And then abating the lesser diameter from
the greater, the remain will show you how much the one is higher then the
other.

Example.
Suppose the circumference of the one bullet be 16 inches, and the
circumference of the other 26 inches, in working as above is taught, I find the
diameter of the lesser bullet is 5 inches 1/11 and the diameter of the greater
bullet 8 inches 4/11, so abating the lesser from the greater, the remain is 3
inches and 3/11 parts of an inch, showing the greater bullet is so much in
height more then the lesser. The like is to be observed with any other.

By this rule you may know how much the circumference or any part of your piece
is higher then another.

A table showing the weight of all iron bullets from the Fawconet to the Cannon
in Habberdepoiz weight.
Height of the shot in inches and parts of inches. Weight of the shot in pounds
and parts of pounds. Height. Weight. 2. 1. 2/7 2. 1. 2. 2. 2. 3. 3/7 3. 4. 3.
5. 3. 6. 2/9 3. 7. 6/7 4. 9. 4. 10. 4. 12. 4. 14. 5/8 5. 16. 5. 19. 5. 22. 1/7
5. 25. 6. 29. 6. 32. 6. 36. 6. 40. 7. 46. 7. 52. 6/7 7. 56. 7. 64. 8. 70. 8.
76.

How you may Arithmetically know the true breadth of the plate of the ladle
that is due for any piece of Ordinance* by knowing the height of the bullet fit
for the said piece.
Take a line and compass the bullet in the mids, laying the same measure to an
inch rule, divide the same measure into 5 equal parts, 3 of those parts is the
just breadth you ought to make your plate of, which being orderly placed on the
staff, and bent circularly, serves to hold the powder in: the other parts
being cut and taken away, and so left open, serves to turn the powder into the
piece, the which to do Gunner like, as soon as you have filled the ladle so
full that you may strike the same with a rule, and put the same into the mouth
of the piece, fix your thombe upon the upper part of the staff, toward the
end next the tampion or head thereof, and so thrusting the ladle gently home
to the breech of the piece, turn the rammer staff, so as your thombe fall
directly under the staff, and so shall you empty your ladle orderly.

Now to know the parts of the bullets circumference, that you may make the
plate of your ladle orderly, and of that just breadth, lay the measure of the
whole circumference to an inch rule, and then multiply the same by 3, and
divide the product by the denominator 5, your quotient will tell you truly the
breadth that the plate of your ladle ought to be of.

Example.
A Cannon whose bullet is 7 inches high, will be 22 inches in the
circumference, that multiplied by 3 is 66, which divided by 5 the quotient is
13 inches, the true breadth that the plate for a cannon ladle of 7 inches
diameter ought to be of.

The length of the ladle is to be made according to the length, height, and
weight of the piece for which it is made, which in a table in the end of the
book you may find set down for all sorts of pieces.

How to make a ladle for a chamber-bored piece.
Open your compass the just diameter of the chamber, within part of an inch
thereof. Divide that measure in 2 equal parts, then set your compass to one
of those parts, and with the one foot fixed on a paper or smooth board, draw
with the other foot a circle, the diameter thereof will be a just quarter of
an inch shorter then the diameter of the chamber-bore, by the circumference
whereof, you may find out the true breadth of the plate of a ladle that is fit
for such a chamber-bored Cannon, by the rule before set down how to find the
true breadth of the plate of any ladle, for any other piece of Ordinance, in
taking the parts of the circumference thereof, the length ought to be twice
the diameter, and parts, to hold at 2 times the just quantity of corn powder
that is due to charge such a chamber-bored cannon with

Example.
The diameter of the circle drawn for any cannon whose chamber-bore is 7
inches contains 6 inches 9 the circumference whereof is 21 inches 6/7, the
parts thereof is 12 inches, and so much ought that ladle to be in breadth, and
in length it ought to be 18 inches. In this order you may work to make a ladle
in length and breadth for any bel-bored Cannon: and to find out the thicknes of
the metal at the touchhole, or the height of the bore thereof, the
conclusion following will show you.

How to find out the height or diameter of the chamber, in any chamber-bored
Cannon, or other piece of Ordinance, and how to find out the thicknes of the
metal round about the chamber thereof.
Take your priming iron, or else a straight piece of wire, and bow the end
thereof in manner of a hook, and then put the same into the touchhole, down
to the lowest part of the concauity of the piece, and then with your knife or
else with a piece of chalk, make a stroke upon the wire hard by the upper part
of the metal, without the piece at the touchhole, then measure by your inch
rule, how long the wire is from that stroke to the end. After put in the same
wire again, and pull it up, so as the bowed end may restor stay within the
cilinder or concaue of the piece: and make an other mark or stroke on the said
wire, hard by the upper part of the metal, the distance between those 2
strokes, is the just thicknes of the metal, round about the chamber, the
which abated from the length of the wire (I mean from the first stroke to the
lowest end) the remain is the true diameter of the chamber-bore in that piece.

Example.
Admit the length of the wire from the end of the concauity to the first stroke
contains 15 inches, and the distance between the 2 strokes is 8 inches: then
those 8 inches is the just thickness of the metal about the chamber; which
abated from 15 inches, restes 7 inches, the just diameter of the chamber in
such a piece.

By Arithmeticke skill, how to know whether the caryage for your piece be truly
made or no: or how the caryage for any other piece of Ordinance ought to be
made.
Measure the just length of the Cilinder or bore of your piece, the plankes of
your caryage ought to be once and a half that length. Also measure the
diameter of the piece, and the said plankes at the fore end should be in deapth
4 times the diameter, and in the midst 3 times and the diameter, and at the
end next the ground, two times and the diameter, and in thickness once the
diameter.

Example.
Admit a Culuering of six inches diameter is in length in the bore thereof
20 times that measure (that is 10 foot long,) then I say that the plankes of
her caryage ought to be 15 foot in length; and at the fore end next the piece
2 foot in breadth, and in the midst one foot three quarters, and at the
lowest end next the ground one foot and a quarter: and in thickness half a
foot. Also every caryage ought to have four transomes, and ought to be
strengthened with strong iron boltes.

The holes or centers wherein the trunions ought to lie, ought to be three
times and the diameter from the fore end of the caryage, and in depth parts of
the thickness of the trunions, which depth you may easily find out, as thus:
take the height or diameter of the trunions, and multiply the same measure by
2, and dividing by the denominator 3, the quotient will show your desire.

How by knowing the weight of any one piece of Ordinance, to find out the
weight of any other.
Question.
If a Saker of four inches diameter weigh 1600 pound weight, what will a
Culuering weigh that is six inches diameter?

Resolution.
Some would think that the rule of proportion plainly wrought, would answer
this question: but in that they are deceived, for the content of solid bodies
being massy, are Sphericall or Cubicall inproportion, therefore you must
multiply the diameters of every piece cubically, and set down the weight of
the piece known in the middle number, and so working according to the rule of
proportion, you shall find out the true weight of the greater piece.

Example.
4 inches the diameter of the lesser piece, multiplied cubically, arises 64
inches. Likewise the cubicke number of the diameter of a Culuering of 6 inches
high, is 216 inches: then framing the rule of proportion, I say, if 64 being
the cube of 4 yield 1600 pound weight, (being the weight of a Saker of 4 inches
bore) what will 216 being the cubicke number of 6 inches, so multiplying 216 by
1600, arises 345600. which divided by 64 yeeldes in the quotient 5400 pound
weight, so much weighs the Culuering of 6 inches diameter.

In working by the converse rule of proportion, you may not only prove this
conclusion, but also may find out the weight of any lesser piece of ordinance,
by knowing the weight of a greater.

Example.
If 216 being the cube of 6 inches, yield 5400 pound in weight, what will 64
being the cube of 4 inches? so multiplying 5400 by 64 there arises 345600.
which divided by 216, the quotient is 1600 pound weight, showing the true
weight of the Saker of 4 inches diameter, as before.

Or if the diameters of the pieces whose weight you would know, contain both
whole numbers and broken, in reducing each diameter into his proper fraction,
and multiplying the same cubically, setting down the weight of the piece
known, in the middle place, for the second number, and multiplying and
dividing as before is taught, the quotient will show you your request, as the
conclusion following will teach you.

Question.
If a demi Culuering of 5 inches diameter weigh 2600 pound weight, what will a
Cannon of 7 inches diameter?

Resolution.
I reduce the diameter of each piece into his proper fraction, and I find that
the broken number of 5 inches diameter contains 21/4, which multiplied
cubically arises 9261/4. Likewise I reduce the diameter of the Cannon, being 7
inches into his fraction, and it is 31/4;, whose cube is 29791/4;: then 1 set
an unite I under 2600, and it does represent a fraction thus 2600/1. Now to
find out the weight of the greater piece, I set down these 3 new made fractions
in the order of whole numbers, and working by the rule of proportion, I find
the greater piece weighs 8363 pound, and almost of a pound: for in
multiplying 29791 by 2600, there arises 77456600, the which augmented by the
denominator 4 makes 309826400 for the deuide^t or number to be divided.
Likewise the fraction of the lesser piece being 9261, multiplied by his
denominator 4, makes 37044 for a deuisor, which deuident being divided by the
deuisor, yields in the quoent 8363 pound, and certain parts of a pound, so
much will a Cannon of 7 inches weigh being proportional in metal to the
other piece.

How you may be Arithmeticall skill, know how much of every kind of metal any
brass piece of Ordinance contains.
Question.
Every Gun-founder does commonly use for every 100 pound weight of copper, to
put in 10 pound weight of lattine, and 8 pound weight of pure Tin: I demand
how many pound weight of every of those metals is in a Culuering of 5600 pound
weight?

Resolution.
To answer this or all such like, I join all the several mixtures together,
and they make 118 pound, which I reserve for my deuisor. Then I multiply the
weight of the piece by every mixture severally, and there arises of the 100
weight of copper being the greatest mixture, 560000, the which sum is to be
divided by the deuisor common (to wit, 118 pound) and the quotient is 4745
pound and 90/118 parts of a pound: so much copper is in the said piece. Now to
know how much latin is in the same, I multiply the whole weight of the piece by
10 the second mixture, and the product is 56000, which number divided by the
deuisor common, the quotient is 474 pound 68/118: so much latin is in the same
piece. And lastly to know how much Tin was in the same piece, I multiply the
weight of the piece by 8, arises 44800, which divided by the deuisor 118, the
quotient is 379 78/118: and so much Tin was put into the said piece.

Now to prove the work if it be truly wrought or not, I add all the 3
quotients together, and because they do all make the true sum of the whole
weight of the piece according to the proposition, I affirm the same to be
truly wrought.

The Gun-founders do hold and affirm, Note.
that the lattin does incorporate, and causes the piece to be of a good
color, and the Tin does strengthen and bind the other mixtures.

How you may know how far any piece of Artillery will convey her bullet at the
best of the randon, by knowing the utmost range and point blancke of another
piece, and how to prove the same: by which rule, you may know how far any piece
will reach at point blancke and utmost range.
Question.
If a Saker at point blanke convey her bullet 200 paces, and at the best of the
randon shoot 900 paces, what will that Cannon do which at point blancke shoots
360 paces?

Resolution.
To resolve this or the like, I set down the numbers proportional according
to the rule, multiplying 900 paces (the utmost randon of the Saker) by 360
paces, (the point blanke of the Cannon,) so arises 324000, which divided by
200 the number of paces the Saker shoots at point blanke, the quotient is 1620.
And so many paces will a Cannon shoot at the best of the randon, that at point
blanke rangeth 360 paces, as by working you may find, and by experience better
understand.

You may prove this conclusion by the converse rule of proportion, multiplying
900 the number of paces the Saker shoots at the best of the randon, by 360, the
paces that the Cannon shoots at point blanke; and dividing that product 1620
the number of paces the Cannon shoots at the best of the randon, the quotient
is 200. showing the number of paces that the Saker shall shoot at point blanke.
In this order you may work the like conclusion by any other piece of
Artillery, and find out the point blanke and utmost range thereof.

To know how much a bullet of iron will out fly a bullet of lead of the like
diameter, being both discharged out of one piece, with one like quantity in
powder.
Question.
If a bullet of lead of 24 pound weight, being shot out of a piece with parts
of the said bullets weight in powder, range at point blanke 240 paces, how far
will a bullet of iron of like height range, being discharged out of the said
piece at point blanke with the like quantity of powder?

Resolution.
The proportion between a bullet of iron and a bullet of lead of the same
height, I have showed by the theoremes and conclusions before set down: by
which I find that a bullet of iron being of equal diameter to a leaden bullet
of 24 pound weight, the said iron bullet shall weigh 16 pound 2/7 parts. And
for as much as the leaden bullet is shot with parts in powder of his weight,
that is, with 16 pound of powder, which is very near the full weight of the
iron bullet, I find that the said bullet of iron shall out fly the leaden
bullet part of the level range (that is) the iron bullet shall fly being shot
as before at point blanke 320 paces, that is, 80 paces further then the leaden
bullet rangeth at point blanke. But if the piece out of which the said bullets
were shot, had been mounted at any number of degrees of randon, the range of
the iron bullet would shorten somewhat of the of the overplus of the said
range: so that if the piece were mounted to the best of the randon, the said
bullet of iron would not out fly the leaden bullet, not the part of the said
range.

By knowing how much powder is sufficient to charge any one piece of Ordinance,
to know how much of the same powder will charge any other piece of Ordinance.
Question.
If a Saker of 4 inches diameter* require 5 pound of corn powder for her due
loading, how much of the same like powder will charge a Cannon of 7 inches
diameter?

Resolution.
The plain rule of proportion cannot resolve this conclusion, except you
multiply every number cubically, and then the quotient will show you your
desire.

Example.
The cube of 4 is 64, and the cube of 7 is 343. which multiplied by the weight
of the charge of powder due to load the lesser piece, arises 1615, which
divided by the cubicke number of the diameter of the lesser piece, yields in
the quotient 25 pound and almost part of a pound: so much corn powder must a
Cannon of 7 inches diameter have to charge her with. And note, that for as much
as now the shooting with Serpentine powder is not used, being of no great
force, and the making of corn powder never better known, nor of more force
then now it is made and daily used in shooting in great Ordinance; as also the
great Ordinance now cast, not so fully fortified with metal as they ought to
be, being made more nimble and lighter then in times past, therefore the
experienced Gunners do observe as a general rule to abate part of the
ordinary charge of corn powder in all pieces above 6 inches bore.

How by knowing how much Serpentine powder will charge any piece of Ordinance,
to know how much corn powder will do the like, or contrariwise by knowing how
much corn powder will charge any piece of Ordinance, to know how much
Serpentine powder will serve.
Question.
I demand how much corn powder will charge that Culuering that shoots 24
pound of Serpentine powder at a shoot?

Resolution.
You must note for a general rule, that 2 parts of corn powder will do as
much as 3 parts of Serpentine powder: so that the proportion between the
quantities or charges of these powders, is as 2 to 3, therefore I multiply 24
by 2, arises 48, which divided by 3, my quotient is 16 pound: so much corn
powder will charge the said Culuering. Or if you know how much corn powder
will charge her, you may know how much Serpentine powder will serve, in
multiplying 16 pound the due charge of corn powder, by 3, and dividing the
product by 2, your quotient is 24, as before. In this order you may do the
like by any other piece. And note that her due charge of corn powder, will
less hurt the piece, then of Serpentine powder, for if Serpentine powder be
ramd any thing hard, it is long a fiering. And a little heat long continued
(which the Serpentine powder will do) dangereth the piece more then a great
heat presently gone, which effect corn powder works.

How by knowing how far your piece will shoot with her due charge in powder and
shot, how to give a near estimate how far she will shoot with a charge more or
less then her common charge.
Question.
Admit a Culuering shoot a bullet of 18 pound weight 900 paces, being charged
with parts in powder of the bullets weight, I demand how far should the said
piece shoot that bullet if she had been charged with as much powder as the
bullet weighteth?

Resolution.
By the rule of proportion I find she should shoot part further then she did at
the first shot, being charged with part of more powder, that is 1200 paces: yet
it is known she will not drive the bullet full out the part of this range
further, although she will come very near it, and the reason is, because the
bullet flies in a circular proportion more or less, a part of the range,
after the insensible straight line or motion of the bullet be past, according
to the degrees of randon the piece is elevated at. Also the concaue of the
piece being filled up with the powder, wadd and bullet, further then it ought
to be, is a hinderance to the range of the bullet in proportion according to
that little quantity of the concaue which the overplus of powder and wad
fills up; which though it be but little in comparison of the whole concauity
to the range, yet it is a great hinderance in the bullets range, for that the
bullet being so much nearer to the mouth, is driven into the air before the
powder be all fiered, and have effected his force thereon: so that giving the
piece her bullets weight in corn powder, she will shoot much further nor with
an ordinary charge, but it will both put the piece in danger of breaking, and
those that are near thereto in danger of their lives, if the piece be not all
the better fortified with metal.

How by knowing how much powder a few pieces of Ordinance have spent, being but
a few times discharged, to know how much powder a greater number of the same
pieces will spend to be often discharged.
Question.
If 4 Cannons being twice discharged at any service, shoot 240 pound of
powder, how much powder will charge 5 Cannons to shoot every one 6 shots?

Resolution.
Work by the double rule of proportion, saying; If 4 Cannons shoot 240 pound
of powder, what will five Cannons? your quotient will be 300 pound: then say
again, if 2 times discharging yield 300 pound of powder, what 6 times? and
your quotient being 900 pound weight, shows that so much powder is due to 5
Cannons, to shoot every one 6 shots.

To know how much powder every Cannon spent in the former conclusion at one
shoot.
Question.
If 5 Cannons burn 900 pound weight of powder, being but 6 times discharged,
how much powder did every one shoot at one shoot?

Resolution.
Multiply 4 the number of pieces first propounded by 2, the times they were
discharged, arises 8, by which divide 240 the number of pounds in powder
spent, the quotient is 30 pound, and so much powder did every Cannon fire at
one shoot. Or else you may multiply the other 5 Cannons by the times they were
discharged, and dividing that product by the powder spent, you shall have 30
pound weight of powder in your quotient also.

How to know how much powder every little caske or firken ought to contain,
and how many of those caskes makes a Last of powder, and how many shots any
quantity of powder will make for any piece of Ordinance.
Every little caske or firken being empty, ought to weigh 12 pound, and being
filled ought to hold an hundredth pound weight of powder: so that the full caske
ought to contain 100 of Habberdepoize weight, and 24 of those caskes or
firkens filled makes a Last of power.

Question.
How many shots will one of those caskes filled with powder make to a Culuering
that shootes 15 pound weight of corn powder at one shot?

Resolution.
Divide the 100 pounds of powder in each firke^ by 15, the quotient will show
you that 100 weight of powder will be 6 shots to a Culuering that burns 15
pound of powder at a shoot, and 10 pound to spare.

How by knowing how many shots a firken of powder will make for a Culuering, to
know how many shots a Last of powder well make for a Canon.
Question.
If a firken of powder of one hundredth weight charge a Culuering 5 times,
shooting 20 pound of powder at every shot, how many of those shots will be in a
Last of powder (containing 24 hundredth weight) to a Cannon that shoots 30 pound
of powder at every shot?

Resolution.
Reduce 24 hundredth weight into pounds, you have 2400 pound; then say by the
rule of 3 direct; If 100 pound weight of powder be but 5 shot, what will 2400?
and you shall have in the quotient 120 shot, for the said Culuering that shoots
20 pound weight at one shoot. And whereas the question says the Cannon
shoots 30 pound of powder at a shot, you must frame the backer rule of 3, and
say if 20 bear proportion to 120. what will 30? so multiplying 20 by 120, and
dividing by 30, the quotient is just 80: so many shots of powder will be in a
Last for any Cannon that shootes but 30 pound weight at a shot. The like is to
be done with any other.

To know how many shots of powder will be in a Graund barrel for any piece of
Artillery.
Question.
If an ordinary Culuering shoot 15 pound weight of good corn powder at one
shoot, how many times will a Graund barrel full of powder serve to charge
her, the said holding 300 weight?

Resolution.
Divide 300 by 15, the quotient is 20, your desire: the proof is easy; for
multiplying 20 by 15, you have 300 the number first propounded: the like is to
be done if you would know how many shoots will be in a graund barrel, for any
other piece of Ordinance, in dividing the pounds of powder contained in the
said Barrel by the number of pounds of powder due to charge the said piece.

To know Arithmetically what proportion of every receipt is to be taken to make
perfect good powder, what quantity so ever you would make at a time.
Question.
The best ordinary corn powder made in these days, contains 12 parts of
Mr. 3 parts of cole, and 2 parts of Sulphur. The order how to compound and
make the same is not peculiar to this treatise, being mere Arithmeticall; I
demand how many pound weight of every sort is to be taken to make 1000 pound
weight of powder?

Resolution.
Add all the parts or pounds of the receipts together, arises 17 pound for
your deuisor. Then frame the golden rule saying, if a mixture of 17 pound
weight of powder, require 12 pound of the Saltpeter, what will 1000 pound
weight? In multiplying and dividing according to the rule, the quotient will be
705 pound, and 15/17 parts of a pound: so many pound of the Mt. is to be taken
to make 1000 pound weight. Again, say by the same rule, if that a mixture of
17 pound weight, do require 2 pound of Sulphur, what will 1000? your quotient
will show you, that 117 pound and 11/17 is to be taken. And lastly by the said
rule say, if a mixture of 17 pound take 3 pound of Cole, what will 1000 pound
take? and your quotient will tell you that 176 pound and 8/17 parts is to be
taken. The which 3 quotient numbers being all added together, will be just 1000
pound weight, and so proves the work to be truly done.

And note that the goodness or badnes of powder may be known diverse ways, as
by the color, the taste of the tongue, the quick burning, etc. Also the
brimstone is that material substance that is most apt to kindle with any
spark, the cole most fit to continue or maintain the flame, and the Mr. being
resolved into a windy exhalation works the effect, as chief and principal
of the three.

Before I frame these conclusions following, of the randon or range of the
bullet, and the diversity thereof, it is requisite to make known to the
Reader, how that diverse have written, and some will vaunt that by the range or
flight of the bullet out of any one piece of Ordinance known, they will or can
tell the utmost range of all other, thinking that the range of the bullet out
of any one piece, should be proportional to the bullet and charge of powder
out of any other piece. Also some do affirm, that out of any one piece of
Ordinance discharged with sundry quantities of powder, they can tell the utmost
range of the bullets discharged; and their reason is, that the range of those
bullets shall be proportional to the weight of powder wherewith they were
charged. And hereupon some have given out rules which are false and full of
errors: for the diversity of proportions cannot by the plain rule of
proportion be resolved, as they affirm: but this may they do; Out of any one
piece of Ordinance charged with one and the same like charge in powder and
bullet, find by the rule of proportion, the near difference or ranges of the
bullets, the piece being mounted or dismounted at any degree of randon; or by
knowing how many paces, yards, feet, or other measure any piece will reach at
point blanke, by knowing the point blanke and utmost range of another piece of
Ordinance, they may find the furthest range of the first. Or contrariwise, by
knowing the utmost range and point blanke of one piece, and the utmost randon
of another piece, they may find out the point blanke of that other piece, as by
the rules following shall be proved.

And it is to be noted that any piece of Ordinance being mounted to the best of
the randon or highest degree of the quadrant, the mouth and hollow cilinder of
the said piece, must be erected to 45 degrees, that is at the 6 point of the
skale in the quadrant (as the most part of quadrantes now are made:) but some
pieces will shoot as far at the 5 point, or at 41, 42, or 43 degrees according
as the wind is of calmness, for if any piece be mounted higher then 45
degrees, she shall shoot shorter in every degree about the 1/45 part of her
utmost range. And therefore to know how to work these conclusions, you must
buy an instrument Geometrical, or by some line of measure truly divided,
measure the distance from the piece to the place where the shot first fell or
grazed, noting how many pearches, paces, yardes, or other measure that distance
is; which known, divide that distance by the degrees in the best of the
randon, being 45, your quotient will tell you how many paces, yardes, feet, or
other measure your piece will shoot further or shorter in mounting or
dismounting a degree: the which known as I have said, by one truly measured,
you may before you shoot, know very near how far or short your piece will
shoot, at the raising or dismounting of any degree, allowing one and the self
like proportions in charging, both with powder, bullet and wad.

How by Arithmeticke skill you may know how with one and the self same like
charge in powder and shot, how much far or short, any piece of Ordinance will
shoot, in mounting or dismounting of any degree: whereby you may know how far
your piece will shoot at any degree of the randon, by knowing the distance she
shoots at the utmost grade.
Question.
If a Cannon at her utmost randon (that is, at 45 degrees) carry the bullet
1440 paces from the piece, how far shall the same piece shoot being dismounted
but one degree?

Resolution.
To answer this or all such like, I set down the numbers according to the
rule of proportion, and multiplying and dividing accordingly, I find she shall
shoot short in dismounting a degree, 32 paces, or 53 yeards, or 160 foot,
which subtracted from 1440, rests 1408 paces; so far shall the Cannon shoot
in dismounting her one degree of her furthest range. Or you may do the like in
framing the golden rule, saying: If 45 degrees range 1440 paces, what will one?
and you shall have 32 paces in your quotient as before.

How by knowing the distance to the mark, by the conclusion or rule before,
you may know whether your piece will shoot short, or over the mark, or you
may know how far it is from your platform to any mark, within the reach of
your piece, only by knowing the utmost range of your piece, and the degrees
she is elevated at.
Question.
Admit the same Cannon in the former conclusion, which ranged at the best of
the randon 1440 paces, having the like charge in powder, shot and wad, is laid
to shoot at a mark being mounted at 30 degrees, I demand how far it is from
the piece to the said mark, or how far the said piece does carry so mounted?

Resolution.
To answer this, I multiply the paces my piece reaches at the best of the
randon, by those degrees in the proposition (to wit) 30 degrees, and there
arises 43200, which divided by 45, my quotient is 960 paces, (that is 40 paces
less then a mile) so far will that piece shoot being mounted at 30 degrees.
And if you would know how much this is short of the utmost range, abate the
same from the said range, the remain is your desire. As 960 paces abated from
1440, rests 480 paces, so much does she shoot short of her best randon. In
this order by 2 shoots known, you may know what any piece of Ordinance will do
being mounted above 10 degrees to the best of the randon, but under 10 degrees
you should err something in this practice, because the range of the bullet
flies a great part of the way in an insensible straight line, and the piece
mouth elevated above 10 degrees, shootes or drives the bullet in a more
circular proportion.

The range or flight of the bullet by the draught in the next leaf may be
understood. And note that in service there is no piece of Ordinance lightly
mounted above 15 or 20 degrees, except mortar pieces, and such like.

The direct straight range at 90 degrees

This draught here drawn does show you the range or motion of the bullet
through the air, shot out of any piece of Ordinance at any degree of the
randon.



How to make a table of randons, or go very near to know the true range of the
bullet out of all sorts of pieces, being mounted from degree to degree.
Many Authors have taught how to make a table of randons, whereas some of them
never shot in any piece of Ordinance in their lives. And for as much as I find
their writing and reasons differing, I think it will be a very hard matter to
make a perfect table of randons, except the same be tried and experimented with
some piece of Ordinance in some convenient ground. I never heard nor read of
any that has as yet fully put the same in practice, the which would be much
auailable to every Gunner, to know what every piece would do at the mount of
every degree or point in the quadrant, the motion or range of the bullet being
something variable at the mount of every degree. You shall very near find out
the true range or randon of the bullet shot out of any piece of Ordinance, the
piece mounted at any degree of randon, as thus:

Charge your piece with her due loading, in powder, shot and wad, laying the
piece at point blanke, which you may easily try, by putting the rule of the
quadra^t into the piece mouth, and coining the piece at the breech, so as the
plu^met may cut the quadrant in the line of level, as you see in the first
figure hereafter drawn, that piece lies point blanke: which done give fire,
and mark where the bullet first grazeth, after bring your piece to the same
platform, so as the wheels and carriage stand neither higher nor lower then
they did the first shoot: and being charged with one and the self like
quantity in powder, bullet and wad as before, the piece being of like te^per
raise her mouth one degree, as the second figure shows: discharge her, and
mark where the pellet falls or grazeth first; then measure how far the
first graze of the second bullet is beyond the graze of the first bullet, so
much will the piece convey the bullet further at the mount of every degree, or
very near thereto. But being mounted above 20 degrees, she will shoot shorter
and shorter, a little at the mount of every degree to the best of the randon,
according to the height and circular motion of the bullet. If the piece be
mounted to the best of the randon, the plummet will cut the 45 degree of the
quadrant, as the 3 figure shows. Or you may make a table of randons like the
other, as thus: Measure the distance the piece co^ueyeth the bullet at the best
of the rando^, from which abate the distance the piece co^ueyeth her bullet at
point planke, divide the remain by 45, the quotient will show you how far the
shoot is carried at the mount of every degree: or dividing the said remain by
so many degrees as you would eleuate your piece at, the quotie^t will likewise
show you how far the bullet does range beyond point blanke.

Example.
If a Cannon at point blanke range 300 paces, and at the best of the randon
shoot 1500 paces, how far shall she shoot at the mount of one degree?

Resolution.
Abate 300 from 1500, rests 1200, which divided by 45, the quotient is 26 2/3,
so many paces shall she shoot at the mount of every degree.

This conclusion or rule, I do not affirm to be clean without error, for that
I never tried the same, yet it will come very near to this proportion, being
tried on a plain ground that is water leuel, for the piece being mounted from 1
to 10 degrees, conueyeth the bullet with little bending at the fall thereof, and
from 10 degrees to 20, as the motion of the bullet decreaseth: so it falls
more bowing then in the first 10 degrees. And mounted from 20 grades, to the
best of the randon, conueyeth the bullet in a more circular course. And it is
to be noted, that any piece of Ordinance having her due charge, will drive the
bullet more ground mounted at 20 degrees, then from 20 grades to the best of
the randon. And being truly laden and discharged at the best of the randon,
will drive the bullet 5 times the distance of her level range, or rather
better.



How you may Arithmetically know how much wide, over, or short, any piece of
Ordinance will shoot from the mark, by knowing the distance to the mark, and
how your piece is laid to shoot at the said mark.
Question.
If a Culuering or Cannon of 10 foot long, be shot at a mark 700 yardes from
the piece, the mouth of the said piece planted an inch wide, how far shall the
bullet light wide of the mark?

Resolution.
Reduce the measure of the length of the piece into inches, because the
denomination of wideness is by inches, and the piece of 10 foot length, will
yield 120 inches. Likewise reduce the length from the piece to the mark into
inches, you have 25200 inches. Then by the rule of propotion: say, if 120
inches shoot wide one inch, what will 25200 inches? And in multiplying and
dividing according to the rule, you shall find in your quotient 210 inches,
that is 17 foot: so much shall the bullet light wide of the mark. For this is
a general rule, that look how many times the length of the cilinder or
concaue of the piece is to the mark, so many inches shall the piece shoot
amiss, being laid over one inch, or under, or wide of the mark, if the wind
do not alter it. The like is to be done of any other.

A remedy to lay your piece straight, if she lie either over, under, or wide
of the mark.
Let a plumbe line fall perpendicularly over the middle part of the breech of
the piece, and with a hand-spike or lever, wind the carriage of the piece too
and fro till you epsy the middle part of the metal at the mouth of the
piece, and the said line divide the mark in 2 equal parts: so shall you make
a straight shot, giving the piece her true disparture and length.

Another way.
Or you may take the true diameter of the concaue at the mouth of the piece,
laying an inch rule to the same, divide the said diameter in 2 equal parts;
to the point of which division being the center of the cilinder of the piece,
let a thread and plummet fall, or else erect a squire, so as the containing
angle touch the center or middle point of the diameter, by the edge of which
rule or squire draw a line with the point of your knife, from the height of the
metal at the mouth: that line would cross in the center if it were
continued, and it is a perpendicular or plumbe line to the other, by which line
or strike so drawn, with a little piece of soft wax, set up a straight straw,
to reach a little above the metal. And knowing likewise the middle metal at
the breech of the piece, it is an easy matter to make a straight shot, if the
2 sights (to wit) the sight at the breech and mouth be laid so as they divide
the said mark in 2 parts: for this is general, that any three things that
the eye can comprehend at once, being equal with the eye, are in a straight
line from the eye, whether the same be at ascent or descent.

The line or strike thus drawn at the mouth of the piece, will show you
presently where and how to set up your disparture of your piece at any occasion.

In shooting without disparting your piece at any mark within point blanke, to
know how far the bullet will fly over the mark by knowing the distance to the
mark.
Question.
A Cannon or Culuering of 12 foot in length, having three inches more metal
at the breech on each side then at the mouth, shooting at a mark supposed to
be within the level range, and 600 yeards from the mouth of the piece, being
shot without her disparture, how much shall the shot fly over the mark?

Resolution.
It is a general rule, that look how much the piece is thicker of metal, in
any one side at the breech, then at the thickest part at the mouth, as also
look how many times the length of the piece is to the mark, so many times
that overplus of thickness shall the bullet fly over the mark, being no
higher then the piece, and the said piece discharged without her disparture.

Example.
Divide 600 yeards (being the distance from the piece to the mark) by 4, (the
length of the piece) your quotient is 150, which multiplied by 3 inches the
overplus of metal, arises 450 inches: so much shall the bullet fly over
that mark, the mark being placed on the side of a hill or bearing bank, and
within the level range of the piece.

In like manner shooting at any mark within the utmost range of the piece,
and not disparting your piece, you shall over shoot something, giving the piece
her due length and due loading.

How you may lay your piece point blanke without instrument.
If you bring the height of the metal at the mouth of the piece, and the
height of the metal at the breech, equal with the horison, the hollow
cilinder of the piece will lie point blanke.

How you may Arithmetically dispart any piece of Ordinance truly diverse ways.
If you measure with a pair of Callapers the greatest height of metal at the
mouth of the piece, and likewise at the breech, abating the less out of the
greater, the remainder is the just disparture.

Example.
A Culuering that is 19 inches high at the greatest part of metal in the
breech, will be 13 inches high at the greatest part of metal at the mouth:
which 13 inches abated from 19, rests 6, which divided in 2 equal parts, the
quotient being 3 inches shows the true disparture of that Culuering.

Another way to dispart any piece without Callapers.
Take a line and measure the greatest circumference of metal in the breech,
then multiply that measure by 7, dividing the product by 22, the quotient is
the diameter, or height of the circumference. Likewise measure the greatest
circumference of metal at the mouth, multiplying that measure by 7, divide by
22 as before, the quotient will show the diameter of the metal at the mouth:
substract that diameter last found, from the diameter at the breech, the
remain is the true disparture.

Example.
A Culuering whose greatest circumference of metal at the breech contains
66 inches, and at the mouth 44 inches, I demand how high is the diameter of
the metal both at the breech and mouth, as also what is the true disparture
of that piece?

Resolution.
Multiply 66 by 7, arises 462, divide by 22, the quotient is 21, the height of
the metal at the breech: likewise multiply 44 by 7, you have 308, divide by
22, the quotient is 14, the height of the metal at the mouth, which 14 abated
from 21 rests 7, the which 7 divided in 2 equal parts, yields 3 inches for a
part, the true disparture of that Culuering.

This is one of the principallest points belonging to a Gunner, to know truly
how to bring the concaue of the metal of his piece even: diverse other ways
there is to do the same. As for chambred pieces, there is no perfect or
general rule, but is to be considered according to the chamber or concaue of
the piece. Every reasonable Gunner may judge in that case.

How by Arithmeticall skill you may mount any great piece of Ordinance by an
inch rule unto 10 degrees of the quadrant, if you want a quadrant or other
instrument.
First you must measure the just length of the Cannon or bore of the piece:
reduce that measure into inches, and double the same: afterward multiply the
number of inches so doubled by 22, and divide by 7, and note what the quotient
number is, which quotient divided by 360 the degrees contained in the whole
circumference of every circle, the last quotient number will show you the
number of inches, and parts of an inch, that will make a degree in the quadrant
for that piece.

Example.
Admit there is a Saker or Fawcon, whose concaue or bore contains just 7
foot in length, and that you desire to know what parts of an inch rule will
mount her to one degree of the quadrant, you must reduce 7 foot into inches,
and you have 84 inches, that 84 doubled is 168, the which multiplied by 22
arises 3696, the which divided by 7, the quotient will be 528; that quotient
number being divided again by 360, will yield 1 7/15 (that is) one inch and,
wanting 1/15 part of an inch. So I affirm that any piece of Ordinance whose
chase or bore is but 7 foot long, being mounted by an inch rule one inch and
7/15 parts, that piece shall lie just the height she would have done if you
would have mounted her one degree of the quadrant. The like order is to be
observed in mounting any other piece of Ordinance by an inch rule, of what
length soever. And note that in mounting any other piece of Ordinance, to any
degree of the quadrant, by a Geometrical quadrant, you must put the rule of
the quadrant into the piece mouth, lifting the piece up or down with a leauer
or hand-spike toward the breech, till the plummet cut just upon that degree of
the quadrant you desire.

But to mount her by an inch, you must place the rule upon the highest part of
the metal at the breech of the piece, coining the piece up or down, till
through the sight or slit in your rule (be lifted to that part or deuisio^ in
your rule that answers the degrees you desire) you epsy the Carnoize or
highest part of the metal at the mouth of the piece, and the mark, all 3 in
a straight line.

If you would mount the same piece to 2 degrees of the quadrant by an inch
rule, you must multiply the measure in your rule last found, being 1 inch 7/15
parts by 2, in the order of fractions, and you shall have 44/15, the which 44
being the numerator of the fraction divided by 15 the denominator, the quotient
being 2 inches 14/15 is your desire; so may you affirm that 3 inches by the
rule wanting 1/15 part of an inch, will make 2 degrees by the quadrant.

And note, that look how much you would have your piece mounted by an inch
rule for to answer any number of degrees under 10, either multiply that number
by the number of inches and parts of an inch, that makes a degree of the
quadra^t, or else working as you did the first conclusion, multiplying the
first product by the number of inches desired, and dividing that product by the
numbers before mentioned, your last quotient will resolve you of your desire.

Example.
I demand how much the piece before mentioned should be elevated by an inch
rule, to answer to 8 degrees of the quadrant?

Resolution.
Reduce the length of the bore of the piece into inches, as before is showed,
doubling that measure, and it makes 168, as you see in the 1 conclusion: which
168 inches multiplied by 22, yields 3696 inches, the which product afterward
multiplied by 8, arises 29568, which sum divided by 7, the quotient is 4224:
the same divided by 360, yields in the quotient 11 inches 11/15 parts of an
inch, so many inches and parts of an inch must the same piece be elevated to
with an inch rule, to answer to 8 degrees of the quadrant, as by trial you
may find.

How by Arithmeticke skill you may know the true thicknes of metal in any
part of any piece of Ordinance.
Take a pair of callapers, and measure the height of the out side of the
metal in that place of the piece whereas you desire to know the thicknes of
the metal, then with an inch rule, or else a pair of straight compasses,
measure the diameter of the bore, or concaue of the piece, abating the height
of the said diameter from the height of the whole thicknes of that part of the
piece so measured. And note the remainder, the which divide in 2 equal parts,
and the one of those parts is the just measure of the thickness of the metal
in that part of the piece.

Example.
I proved this conclusion with a Culuering, whose bore or concauity at the
mouth was 5 inches height, and I found that the thicknes or height of the whole
circu^fere^ce of the said piece at the touchhole, was 16 inches, from the
which I abated 5 inches (fraction wise) rests 10 inches parts of an inch: that
divided in 2 equal parts, the quotient is 5 inches, and 5/12 or 5 inches
wanting the 1/12 part of half an inch, so thick was the metal of that
Culuering at the touchhole.

Likewise I searched for the thickness of metal in the same piece at the end
of the trunions, and I found that the thicknes or height of the superficies of
all the metal there contained 13 inches, from which I abated the diameter or
concaue at the mouth, being 5 inches, rested 7, which divided in 2 equal
parts, the quotient being 3 inches showed the true thickness of the metal at
the trunions. In this order you may find the true thickness of metal in any
part of any piece of Ordinance.

Another way to know the thickness of metal in any part of any piece of
Artillery.
Take a letherne girdle, and gird about that part of the piece you desire the
thickness of metal, lay the same measure to an inch rule, and note how many
inches or other measure the same contains: then multiply that measure by 7,
and dividing the product by 22, your quotient is the true measure of the whole
thickness of the piece in that place. The^ substracting the diameter of the
bore or concauity of the piece from that quotient, note the remainder. Divide
that remain in two equal parts, the one of those parts is the thickness of
the metal in that part of the piece so measured.

Example.
I proved this conclusion with a demi Cannon of six inches diameter, in
girding the same about with a line hard behind the trunions, and laying the
same to an inch rule, it contained 44 inches, which sum multiplied by 7,
amounted to 308 inches: that sum divided by 22, my quotient was just 14. And
so many inches was the height of the whole metal in that part of the piece,
out of which quotient I did abate the diameter or bore of the piece being 6
inches, and the remain was 8 inches, which divided in 2 equal parts, my
quotient being 4 inches, showed the true thickness of metal in that part of
the piece, being hard behind the trunions toward the breech.

And it is to be noted, that every piece of Ordinance if it be truly fortified
with metal, ought to contain as much metal in thickness round about, so
far as the chamber where the powder and wad lies, as the bullet is in height.

How to make a good shot in a piece that is not truly bored: or to know how
much any piece will shoot amiss, that is thicker of metal on the one side
then on the other, if you know the distance to the mark.
Question.
A certain Gunner having shot diverse times in a Cannon at a mark supposed to
be 500 paces from the piece, finds she shoots still toward the right hand,
and searching whether the fault were in him self, or some impediment in the
piece, he finds that the piece is 2 inches thicker of metal on the right
side then on the left. And therefore requesteth how to lay the concaue of the
piece (being 9 foot in length) equal with the mark, so as he may make a
straight shot.

Resolution.
To do this or the like, there is a general rule, that look how oftentimes
the length of the cilinder or concaue of the piece is to the mark, which is
easily done by dividing the distance to the mark, by the length of the concaue
of the said piece. And knowing likewise how much the one side of the piece is
thicker then the other, the one half of that overplus being multiplied by the
quotient first found, the product will show you how much the piece shoots
wide of the mark. And this is a general rule: that look which side of the
piece is thickest of metal, toward that side shall the bullet fall, for that
the thinner side is more smart, and the thick side more dull in heating.

Example.
The Cannon in this conclusion, is said to be 2 inches thicker of metal more
in thickness on the right side then on the left. And the distance to the mark
is supposed to be 500 paces, (that is, 2500 feet) the which divided by 9
feet, being the length of the hollow cilinder of the Cannon, yields in the
quotient 277 feet 7/9, the which multiplied by the super fluitie of the
metal being one inch, makes 272 feet 7/9 still, and so much wide of the
mark should the said piece have shot at such a distance, although she had
been laid full against the mids thereof.

How to remedy your piece being thicker of metal in one part then another to
make her shoot straight.
You must first search your piece with an instrument, to know which is the
thicker side, then divide the overplus of metal in 2 parts, setting the
disparture of your piece one of those parts toward the thickest side of the
piece mouth, and bringing the middle part of metal at the tail of your piece,
that disparture and the middle of the mark, all in one straight line, give fire
and you shall make a straight shot But beware of ouercharging of such pieces,
for they are dangerous.

If the thickest part of the metal be above, then you ought to make your
disparture one inch more: if under (I mean toward the carriage) an inch less.

To know the different force of any two like pieces of Ordinance planted
against an object, the one being further of from the said object then the other.
Question.
Admit there is a Castle or Fort to be battered, being situate upon a hill,
which hill is 50 paces in height, and that 140 paces from the said Castle
there is another hill, of equal height to that hill whereon the Castle is
built, and Ordinance planted thereon to beat or batter the Castle wall, and in
the valley at the foot of the said hill 180 paces off from the Castle hill,
there is Ordiance planted, and mounted at 20 degrees, to shoot and beat down
the said castle: I would know whether the Ordinance in the valley being 180
paces distance from the Castle, and mounted at 20 degrees, or the Ordinance on
the height of the hill, lying level to shoot a little above the base of the
wall, being distant therefrom 140 paces, shall work the greatest effect in
battering down the said Castle wall, the said pieces being of like length and
height, and having like charge in powder and bullet?

Resolution.
To resolve this or the like, a man would think that the piece planted on the
height of the hill, lying level to shoot a little above the groundwork of
the Castle, would batter sorest, because she is nearest: yet by experience we
find the contrary, for the Castle being a great way within the reach of both
the pieces, that piece shall not only shoot much further, that is any thing
elevated, but also pierce much sorer, by so much as she is able to over shoot
the other self like piece that lies level: albeit the said piece so
elevated, be planted furthest off from the said resisting object: for every
Gunner knows, and reason and experience does teach every reasonable man, that
no piece of Artillery will shoot so far at point blanke, as when the same is
elevated at any number of degrees; because the bullet being ponderous, flies
more heavily and sooner declineth, being shot out of any piece lying level,
then out of any such like piece mounted at any degree of the randon. So that of
force it must needs follow, that the piece planted in the valley 180 paces off
from the Castle, shall pierce and batter a great deal sorer then the like
piece planted on the height of the hill being but 140 paces from it.

Example.


Example.
Suppose a Cannon or Culuering at point blanke shoot 240 paces, and being
mounted at one degree outshoote the same 30 paces, what will the said piece do
being mounted 20 degrees?

By proportion I find, that if at the mount of one degree, any bullet range 30
paces beyond the level range, that at 20 degrees if shall outflie the same 600
paces: albeit the said bullet range not in every degree a just like number of
paces, yet the proportion will be very near thereto. And because the piece at
the foot of the hill is said to be 40 paces further from the Castle, then the
like piece planted on the height of the hill, I abate 40 out of 600, rests 560
paces: so far would the piece in the valley out shoot the other like piece
on the hill; so that it must needs follow, her bullet shall pierce sorest, for
that it has most strength to fly furthest.

Another exmaple or trial of the former conclusion.
The piece planted upon the hill, is said to be 140 paces from the Castle, and
the like piece at the soote of the hill 180 paces. Now suppose each of those
pieces being laid at point blanke, would not range above 240 paces, abate 140
paces (the length to the mark of the piece on the hill) from 240 paces her
level range, and the remain is 100 paces; and so many paces shall that piece
strike the mark before the end of her level range.

Now to find the like in the piece planted in the valley 180 paces from the
Castle, mounted at 20 degrees, I find by the conclusion before set down, that
she shall out shoot the other 600 paces: so that abating the distance from the
piece to the Castle, being 180 paces from 840 paces, her whole range mounted
at those degrees, there remains 660 paces. And forasmuch as the said piece
elevated at 20 grades, does strike the mark 660 paces before the full end of
the range of her bullet, it must of force pierce or batter sorer then the other
piece whose bullet beats the mark but 140 paces before the full end of his
range.

How you may having diverse kinds of Ordinance to batter the walls of any Town
or Castle, etc. tell presently how much powder will load all those Ordinance
one or many times.
Question.
There is a Castle besieged, and to batter the same there is appointed 4
Cannons, 6 demi Cannons, 6 Culuerings, 8 demi Culuerings, and 5 Sakers: these
pieces are charged every time with corn powder, the whole Cannons shootes at
every shot 32 pound of powder a piece, the demi Cannons 18 pound, the whole
Culuering 16 pound, the demi Culuering 12 pound, and the Sakers 6 pound a
piece. All which pieces being 10 times discharged, did make a breach sufficient
for 9 or 10 men to enter in by rank (a breach of such a wideness is thought
sufficient to be assaultable,) I demand how much powder was spent before the
breach was made?

Resolution.
To answer to this demand, I multiply the number of every sort of pieces, by
the weight in powder that one of them shootes, and the product shows me how
much powder every sort of the said pieces did spend at one bout: then I add
every number together, and the total of that addition shows me how much
powder will load all those pieces one time, which addition multiplied by 10,
being the times they were supposed to be discharged, the product shows the
just quantity of corn powder occupied at the said siege by the great
Ordinance.

Example.
I multiply 32 pound the weight of powder due to load every Cannon by 4 the
number of Cannons, arises 128. Likewise 18 pound of powder being the duty of
every demi Cannon multiplied by 6 the number of the same pieces, arises 108,
and 16 pound of corn powder being the duty of every Culuering multiplied by 6
the number of those pieces, is 96. And 12 pound of powder being the due loading
of every demi Culuering multiplied by 8. the number of the same is 96. And
lastly 6 pound of powder the duty of every Saker, multiplied by 5 the number
of that sort of pieces, is 30. These sums or additio^s put together makes 458
pound weight of powder: and so much will discharge all those pieces one time;
the which sum multiplied by 10, is 4580 pound of powder, that is, two Last of
powder wanting 220 pound. In this order if you have 20 Last of powder, by
knowing the number of every sort of several Ordinance, you may presently know
how many shots, or how many times the said powder will load all the said
Ordinance, as this table shows.

Names of the Pieces. Number of each sort of Pieces. Powder due to load each
sort of Pieces one time. Cannons. 4. 128. Demi Can. 6. 108. Culuerings. 6. 96.
Demi Culuer. 8. 96. Saker. 5. 30.

Sum 458 pound of powder, which multiplied by 10, makes 4580 pound weight.

And it is worthy the noting, that in planting of Ordinance to batter or beat
down any curtain, wall, or Cullion point, you must plant the same in 3 or 2
several places at the least, from the thing to be beaten down; so as the said
Ordinance be a pretty distance from other, upon convenient platformes, having
Gabbions or Baskets, about 8 foot high, ramd full of earth conveniently placed
between each piece, to save the Gunners and Laborers from the danger of the
enemies shot: which Ordinance would be planted within 200 or 240 paces of the
object to be overthrown, if it be possible to have convenient platformes and
to bring them so nigh the said object. The which Ordinance (if so you have made
3 mounts or platformes, the Ordinance from the 2 side mountes does coin or cut
out that which the Ordinance from the middle mount does batter or pierce, or
shake, as this draught here drawn shows.



The best shooting to batter down the broad side or curtain of any wall, is
to level something under the middle part of the wall, and after to shoot 2 or
3 foot higher: for the lower part being beaten down, the height or upper part
of the said wall must fall of necessity. And a special regard must be had to
give fire from each platform or mount at one instant, for that the bullets
beating all together, do more shake and batter the said wall, then lighting now
one and then another.

In the figure or draught which I have drawn showing how Ordinance may be
planted to ding down or batter the broad side or curtain of any wall,
Castle or Fort, the middle Ordinance placed on the middle mount or platform,
directly against the object to be beaten down, are called the peircers, and
are only to shake and beat the wall, and the Ordinance on the two other side
mounts, or platformes shooting something slanting, are to coin or cut out that
which the Ordinance from the middle platform does shake or loose. The Baskets
ramd full of earth being placed between each piece of Ordinance are to defend
the Gunners and Laborers from hurt of them that are besieged, as before I have
said.

And further it is to be noted, that to batter the coin or cullion point of
any wall, two places is sufficient to plant your Ordinance in. Also you may
batter and beat down the wall of a Town or Castle as well by night as day,
so as the enemy shall have no time to build up in the night that which was
dung down in the day, as thus: Lay your piece or pieces, to the mark in the
day light, and note well what degree of the quadrant she lies at, which is
soon done in putting the rule of your quadrant into the piece mouth, so laid
against the mark, letting a line and plummet fall to the ground from the said
point of your quadrant, and at the lighting of the plummet on the ground, there
drive in a stake or wooden pin; and letting a plumbe line fall likewise from
the middle part of the tail or breech of your piece to the ground, drive
therein another stake into the ground, then stretch a line from the said 2
pinnes, so as the ends of the said line may reach 2 or 3 yards further then the
pinnes at each end. And there make them fast in driving a pin of wood or iron
into the ground at each end, then bringing your piece or pieces to lie straight
above the said line or lines so drawn (which is easily done having a lantern
with a close cover) you may both charge and recharge, and shoot as well by
night as day, according to your desire.

How you may know the true weight of any number of shot, for several pieces of
Ordinance, how many soever they be, and how many Tun weight they do all weigh.
Question.
Suppose a Ship is laden with Bullets to be carried to the siege of a Town,
etc. in which ship is 500 shot for whole Cannons, 800 demi Cannon shot, 900
Culuering shot, 1000 demi Culuering short, 1100 Saker shot 1200 Minion shot,
and 1400 Fawcon shot, the question is to know the true weight of all the shot,
and how many Tun they do all weigh.

Resolution.
In the beginning of this treatise, I showed how to find out the weight of any
unknown bullet, by the weight of a known bullet of the like metal, so that
multiplying the number of every several sort by the weight that one of them
weighs, and adding all the products into one sum; and then dividing that
total by 2240 pound, which is the pounds in a Tun, the quotient will show you
how many Tun all those bullets weighs.

Example.
Admit the Cannon shot weigh 60 pound a piece, by which I multiply 500 (the
number of that kind of bullet) so arises 30000 pound weight, and then there is
800 demie Cannon shot of 32 pound weight a piece, which multiplied as before,
makes 25600 pound weight. And then there is 900 Culuering shot of 16 pound
weight a piece, which makes 14400 pound weight. And then 1000 demie Culuering
shot of 10 pound weight a piece, which makes 10000 pound weight. And then 1100
Saker shot of 5 pound weight a piece, which makes 5500 pound weight. And then
1200 Minnion shot of 3 pound weight a piece, which makes 3600 pound. And
lastly, 1400 Fawcon shot of 2 pound weight a piece, which makes 2800 pound
weight. All these sums added together makes 91900 pound weight, which divided
by 2240, yields in the quotient 41 Tun, and 60 pound weight remaining.

In this order you may know how many Tun weight any number of shot weighs, so
that knowing how many Tun any ship is of burden, you may easily know how many
shot will load the said ship.

How any Gunner or gunfounder may by Arethmiticke skill, know whether the
trunions of the piece be placed rightly on the piece or not.
Measure the length of the bore of the piece, from the mouth to the breech,
divide that measure by 7, and multiply the sum that comes in the quotient
by 3, the product will show you how many inches or other measure the trunions
ought to stand from the end of the lowest part of the concauity of the said
piece at the breech.

And note that the trunions ought so to be placed, as parts of the
circumference of the piece may be seen in that place whereas the trunions are
set.

Example.
Admit the cilinder or concaue of a Cannon, or other piece of Ordinance be 10
foot long, I demand where the trunions of the said piece ought to stand?

Answer.
Reduce the length of the concaue of the piece into inches, you have 126
inches, the which divided by 7, the quotient is 18, that multiplied by 3, makes
54 inches, or 4 foot, so far ought the trunions to be placed from the breech
or lowest part of the hollow concauity of the said piece.

Another way.
Or multiplying the length of the concaue of the piece by three, and dividing
the product by 7, the quotient will show the true place, how far the trunions
ought to stand from the lowest part of the bore or concauity of the piece.

Example.
126 inches the length of the concaue of the piece, multiplied by 3, makes 378
inches, which number divided by 7, the quotient is 54 inches as before.

And note that the trunions of every piece were invented to hold the piece up
in her carriage, to move her up and down to make a perfect shot, and to hold
her fast in her carriage, after she is discharged: for if the trunions be placed
too near the mouth, the piece will be too heavy toward the breech, so as the
Gunner appointed to serve with her, shall have much ado to raise her, to coin
her up or down, or being placed too near the breech, the contrary will happen.

How you may know what empty caske is to be provided to boy or carry over any
piece of Ordinance over any river, if botes or other provision cannot be gotten.
It is thought sufficient that 5 Tun of empty caske will swim and carry over
a Cannon of 8 or 9000 pound weight, 4 Tun will carry over a demi Cannon, 3 Tun
a Culuering, and 2 Tun a Saker, accounting all provisions to be made fast
thereto, as plankes, ropes, etc. so that knowing what number of Ordinance is to
be ferried or carried over any river, adding all their weights into one sum,
by framing the Golden rule, you may presently know what empty caske is to be
provided to ferry over all the said Ordinance at one instant.

Example.
If a Cannon of 8000 weight require 5 Tun of empty caske, how much empty caske
is to be provided to carry over so many Ordinance as is supposed to be 100000
weight?

Resolution.
I multiply 100000 by 5, so arises 500000, the which being divided by 8000,
the quotient is 62, so many Tun of empty caske is to be provided to carry over
so many Ordinance as weigeth 100000 pound weight. The which empty caske made
fast head to head a row on each side, by such as have skill in such services,
and planked above, would serve for a bridge to carry over a whole Army with all
provisions thereto belonging.

All which necessaries in time of service, and many more, belongs to the
Master of the Ordinance his office, to have in readiness, as also to be
provided of Trunkes, Arrows, Balls, and all kind of fire-workes, wet or dry,
and the receipts for making thereof. As also engines for mounting or dismounting
of Ordinance, wheels, Axeltrees, Bullets, Powder, Ladles, Sponges, Ropes,
Shouels, Anckors, etc. Also it is the duty of the Master of the Ordinance,
the Master Gunner, and every chief officer or quarter Master under them, to
be expert in the Art of Gunnery, the better to teach and instruct their
inferiors, the which without some practice in Arethmiticke and Geometry they
cannot well accomplish. They ought to have some sight in the Mathematicalles,
the better to teach and instruct such as would shoot at all randons, to know
what Ordinance is convenient for an Army, or to batter or beat down the
walls of any Town or Castle, to know what powder and shot is to be provided
for that or such like purpose, what carriage horses, laborers and other
necessaries is to be allowed for the same. They ought to practice all
Geometrical instruments, for the measuring of heights, lengthes, breadthes,
depthes, etc. To practice how to conueigh mines under the ground, and how the
same should be truly wrought, to blow up any Tower, Castle, etc. To know what
length the mine will contain with all his windings to and fro to the place
appointed. To have skill, in the handling of all engines and inventions
belonging to the Ordinance. To appoint to every piece of Ordinance in time of
seruice', Gunners that know perfectly how to manage their pieces, to charge,
shoot, cleanse, scour, wad and ram the same, and what laborers are to attend
thereon. To know in every platform appointed, how to place the baskets or
gabbions, and what proportion of wideness, height, or thickness they ought to
contain: and that the loopes have their due proportion of wideness. To see
that every Gunner be able to discharge his duty, and not for favor or
affection to prefer such as can say most, and do least: but that every man
be preferred to place of credit, and esteemed according to his honest
behavior and skill in this singular Art. That none be permitted to the
profession of a Gunner, but that he be first truly instructed in the
principals of the Art, by such as have skill therein. And not to make or suffer
every tagge and rag to be a Gunner, as is too much used in these days in
Towns of garrison, who was never practiced in the Art, nor bath discretion
nor desire to practice therein: a great number of such have but only the bare
name of a Gunner, although their standing has been of long time: for as a
great many of Mariners have saild 7 or 8 years and yet far from a
Nauigator, so a great many such have continued in pay a large prentise-hood,
and yet far from a good Gunner. Such in time of service would work as the
builders did at the Tower of Babell, when one called for one thing, he had
delivered a contrary thing. In service the Prince by such is not truly served,
the Art less esteemed, and themselves discredited.

The Art is like to a circle without end, or like to a Laberinth, wherein a
man being well entered in, knows not how to get out again, and therefore it
must be exercise and industry that must make a perfect Gunner. Many things
here could I write pertaining to the duty of a Gunner, and every officer
pertaining to the Ordinance, but for as much as the same is not peculiar to
this Arethmeticall treatise, and sufficiently handled by other Authors, I omit.

How to know the true time that any quantity of Gunmatch being fiered, shall
burn, to do an exploit at any time desired.
Take common match, and rub or beat the same a little against some post or
stool to soften it, and then either dip the same in saltpeter water and dry
it again in the sun, or else rub it in a little powder and brimstone beaten
very small and made liquid with a little Aqua vitae, and dried afterward. Now
when you would occupy the same, try how long one yard will burn, which
suppose to be part of an hour, then 4 yards will be a just hour in burning.
Now suppose you have laid some powder or balls of wild fire to burn some
house, ship, mine, corne-stacks, etc. or that you have placed the said powder
or balls in some secret place to burn some thing you are desirous to spoil,
and that you would be going from the place 3 hours before it effect, then
binding the one end fast to the balls, laying loose powder under and about the
same, or wrapping the one end like a wreath amongst the powder loosely, draw
out the other end, or lay it crookedly, or wrap it softly about something, so
as one part do not touch another, and fire it at the other end: which match so
drawn or rolled, being just 12 yards in length, shall kindle the thing you
would burn at the end of 3 hours, according to your desire: for the rule of
proportion shows, that if one yard require a quarter or of an hour, that 12
yards of match will burn out in 3 hours. The like order you may observe, to
answer to any time appointed.

How by Arithmeticall skill you may know what number of men, horses, or oxen,
is sufficient to draw any piece of Artillery, and how much every one draws a
piece, so as they all draw together.
Question.
If 90 men be able sufficiently to draw a Cannon of 9000 pound weight,
accounting carriage and all, I demand how many men is able to draw a Culuering
of 2500 pound weight, and how much every man drew for his part?

Resolution.
I answer: If a Cannon of 9000 pound weight, require 90 men, the quotient
shows me that a Culuering of 2500 weight requires 25 men to draw the same:
and dividing the weight of the piece to be drawn by the number of men
appointed to draw the same, the quotient will show you how much every man drew
to his part (to wit) 100 weight.

To know how many horses is to be provided to draw any Piece of Ordinance, and
how much every one draws.
Question.
If three horses draw a Fawcon of 900 weight, how many horses will draw a
Culuering of 3000 weight?

Resolution.
I say as before, if a piece of 900 weight require 3 horses, what will a piece
of 3000 weight? and in working according to the rule, the quotient is 10,
showing that 10 horses must be provided to draw a Culuering of 3000 weight.
Also dividing 3000, the weight of the said piece, by 10 (being the number of
horses) there will stand in the quotient 300, showing the draught of each horse.

To know how many Oxen is to be provided to draw any piece of Artillery.
It is to be noted that 3 yoke of oxen is thought to draw as much as three
horses, and that 3 yoke of oxen is sufficient to draw a Saker of 1400 weight.

Question.
How many oxen must be provided for a Cannon of 8000 weight?

Resolution.
In working as before, I find that 34 oxen, or 17 yoke of oxen, will serve to
draw a Cannon of 8000 pound weight. And note that whereas there does remain
2/7 parts of a whole number, neither men, horses, nor other cattle, can in any
such millitare questions be brought into a fraction, but yet the rule it
shows that 17 yoke of oxen is sufficient for the draught of a Cannon of 8000
pound weight, when 3 yoke of oxen serve for to draw a Saker of 1400 pound
weight.

If you divide the weight of the whole Cannon being 8000 pound weight by 34,
the oxen appointed to draw the same, the quotient is 235 pound 5/17: so much
did every ox draw.

How you may wanting both oxen and horses to draw any piece of Ordinance, know
presently how many men is able sufficiently to draw the same, either on plain
or marrish ground.
Question.
I showed in a conclusion before, that 3 yoke of oxen would draw a piece of
1400 pound weight, and that 90 men would draw a Cannon of 9000 pound weight;
now if there want both horses and oxen, or that you are occasioned to draw the
said piece through some marrish ground, whereas horses and oxen cannot pass, I
demand how many men is sufficient to hale a Saker of 1400 pound weight through
the said marish ground?

Resolution.
If a Cannon of 9000 weight require 90 men to draw the same, I find that a
Saker, weighing 1400 pound weight must have 14 men to draw the same, and every
one shall draw 100 weight for his part.

In drawing Artillery through any soft marrish ground it is requisite to have
in readiness, in the Master of the Ordinance his carts, which carries the
provisions for the Ordinance certain hurdels of boords, or rather flat
bottomed boats, in which any piece of Ordinance may be placed carriage and
all, and by force or strength of men may be drawn as easily, as to draw the
said piece on the firm land, for that the said boat is apt to slide or swim
on the soft owish, the ropes being made fast to the forestearne or sides of the
said boats, which boats do serve also for carriage of the Ordinance, and all
things thereto belonging, over any river or soft owish ground, etc.

How you may by the rule before, know how many oxen will draw any piece of
Ordinance, if you want men and horses.
I showed that 90 men is able to draw a Cannon of 9000 pound weight, and that
three yoke of oxen will serve to draw a Cannon of 1400 pound weight: now
wanting men and horses, I say if a Saker of 1400 pound weight require 6 oxen,
what will a Cannon of 9000? and in multiplying the weight of the Cannon by 6,
the number of oxen appointed to draw the Saker, and dividing that product by
the weight of the lesser piece, the quotient is 38 oxen or 19 yoke, so many
must be provided to draw a Cannon of 9000 pound weight, which weight divided by
the 38 oxen appointed to draw the same, the quotient shows that every ox
drew 236 pound weight.

How you may wanting men and oxen to draw any piece of Ordinance, know how many
horses is requisite to draw the same.
Also I noted before, that 3 horses would serve to draw a Fawcon of 900 pound
weight: I demand how many horses will serve to draw a Cannon of 9000 pound
weight? In working as before, the quotient is 30, so mamy horses is requisite
for that purpose: which piece, her weight divided by the number of horses
appointed to draw the same, the quotient shows that every horse drew 300
pound weight. In this order you may know what number of men, horses, or oxen,
is able to draw any piece of Ordinance, and what every one severally does draw.

How to know how many 100 of Haberdepoize weight any piece of Ordinance, or
other gross weight contains.
In the conclusions before set down, thou must note gentle reader, that every
100 weight of most things, is accounted after five score to the hundredth: but
if thou be desirous to know how many hundredth of Haber depoize weight any piece
of Ordinance or other gross weight contains, thou may by Arithmetike soon
be resolved, for every 100 of Haberdepoize weight contains 112 pound, the
half hundredth 56 pound, the quarter 28 pound, and the pound 16 ounces: so that
dividing the weight of any great piece by 112, thou may easily know how many
hundredth of Haberdepoize weight the same contains.

I would know how many hundredth of Haberdepoize weight is in a Cannon of 9000
pound weight, I divide the same by 112 as aforesaid, and the quotient being 80
40/112, shows that a Cannon of 9000 pound weight contains 80 hundredth of
Haberdepoize weight, one quarter and 12 pound.

A Tun contains 2000 of Haberdepoize weight.

How you may proportionally prove all sorts of pieces of Artillery for
service whether they will hold or no.
All pieces that shoot a bullet under 10 pound weight, and duly fortified
with metal, being shot 3 times, first with the whole weight of the iron
bullet. Secondly with 5/4 parts thereof, and lastly with 3/2 parts of the
same, will hold for any service, being charged with her ordinary charge,
albeit the said piece were discharged 100 times in one day.

How you may find out the proportional charge before named as thus.
Suppose a piece shoot a bullet of 6 pound weight, and that you desire to know
what 5/4 parts in powder of the weight of the bullet is: multiply the weight
of the said bullet by the numerator 5, and divide by the denominator 4, the
quotient is your desire.

Example.
6 multiplied by 5, is 30: the same divided by 4, the quotient is 7. The like
order you must use in giving her 3/2 parts in powder to the weight of the shot,
and your quotient is 9 pound.

How to prove any piece that shoots a bullet under 50 pound weight, and
above 10 pound weight.
Any piece that shoots a bullet above 10 pound in weight, and under 50 pound,
would for the first shot be charged with parts in powder of the pellets weight:
for the second shot with parts, and lastly with the whole weight of the bullet.

Example.
Admit a piece shoot a bullet of 40 pound weight, the parts thereof is 26
pound, and parts thereof is 33 pound parts.

And note that in proouing any piece of Ordinance, whether she be serviceable
or not, her mouth would be mounted to 20 or 30 degrees of the quadrant, or
thereabout.

To know how much one coyler rope, for the draught of any piece of Ordinance is
bigger then another, and how thick any of them is.
Take the compass of the lesser, and likewise the circumference of the
greater, abating the lesser out of the greater, the remain is your desire,
which known by the rule of proportion you may find out the height or
thickness of the lesser.

Example.
Suppose you have a coyler rope of 6 inches compass, and another of 4 inches
compass, abating 4 inches from 6 inches the compass of the greater, rests 2
inches, the diameter or height of the greater: which known, frame the rule of
proportion saying: If 6 yield 2, what 4? the quotient is one inch parts,
showing the true thickness or height of the lesser.

To know how much one coyler rope is more then another.
Take the compass of your rope, and multiply it in it self, and look how
much you would have the other greater, augment your product by the same
proportion, extract the square root, you have your desire.

Example.
A coyler rope of 6 inches compass squared, makes 36 inches. Now if you would
have one 3 times as much, then multiply 36 by 3, the product is 108, the square
root thereof is 10 inches and something better, and so thick ought a rope to
be that is 3 times the compass of the other.

How by knowing the weight of a faddome of one rope, to know the weight of a
faddome of any other.
A cable or coyler rope of 10 inches compass weighing 16 pound every faddom,
how much will a faddom of that rope weigh, that is 15 inches compass, and made
of the same stuff? I multiply the greater in it self, arises 225, and that
multiplied by 16 pound the weight of a faddom of the lesser rope, arises 3600,
the which divided by 100, being the square of the lesser rope, the quotient is
36 pound, and so much will every faddome of the greater rope weigh. In this
order by knowing what a faddome of the greater rope weighs, you may soon
find what a faddome of the lesser rope weighs.

How by knowing the quantity or compass of any small rope, to find out the
same in another that is many times that bigness.
Admit I have a small rope of 3 inches compass, and that it is required to
know the height of another that is 5 times that compass. I square the number
3. arises 9, which multiplied by 5 makes 45, the square root thereof is 6
inches so high is the greater. The like is to be done of all such like demands.

To know the weight of a whole coyler rope for the draught of any piece of
Ordinance.
Question.
There is a coyler rope of 8 inches compass weighing 12 pound every faddome, I
demand the whole weight of that rope being 20 faddome long?

Resolution.
Multiply the number of faddoms in the rope (being 20) by the weight of one
faddome, the product is 240 pound weight, your desire.

The length of a coyler rope for a whole Cannon ought to be 70 faddome or
thereabouts.

For an ordinary Cannon 64 or 66 faddome, and for a demi Cannon 60 faddome or
thereabouts.

For a Culuering 40 faddome, a demi Culuering 36 faddome, and a Saker 30
faddome, etc.

To find out the superficial content of the hollow concauity of any piece
If you multiply the length of the cilinder or bore of the piece, by the
circumference of the hollow concaue about the mouth, the product will show you
the superficial content of the cilinder of the said piece.

Example.
A Cannon of 7 inches diameter having her concaue or hollow cilinder 12 foot
in length, how much is the superficial content thereof?

Resolution.
Reduce the length of the hollow concaue of the pecce into inches, arises 144
inches, which multiplied by 22 inches, the circumference of the concaue at the
mouth of the piece, arises 3168 inches, the superficial content of the
metal compassing the concaue of the piece.

To find out the crassitude or solid content of the cilinder or concaue of any
piece.
First you must by the rules taught in the beginning of the book, find out the
content of the base or plain of the concauity at the mouth of the piece, in
multiplying, the diameter in half the circumference or else squaring the
diameter and multiplying that product by 11, and dividing the result by 14, the
quotient will also show you the content, the which multiplied in the length of
the cilinder of the piece, the product is your desire.

Example.
The Cannon above named of 7 inches diameter, wrought as is showed, yields 38
inches at the base or circular content of her mouth, which multiplied by 144
inches, the length of the cilinder, yields 8280 inches, the solid content of
the concaue of the said piece.

If you desire to know how many foot in square measure the solid content of
the empty or hollow concauity of the piece aforenamed or any other does
contain, you must work thus; divide the number of inches in the solid
content thereof by the number of inches in a foot square being 1728, the
quotient is your desire.

Example.
The solid content of the piece of 7 inches diameter above named, contains
8280 inches, which divided by 1728, the quotient is 4 57/72, that is 5 feet in
square measure wanting 15 inches. The like is to be done in any other piece, or
in measuring the cilinder or Cone in any other solid body.

How you may Arithmetically know how much any piece of Ordinances is
taper-bored, or whether the same be taper-bored or not.
Put upon your rammer staff a tampion of wood, that is just the height of the
hollow concaue of your piece, and thrust the same home into the piece; if it go
not home to the breech, then the piece is taper-bored, if it go home the piece
is not taper bored: if she be taper-bored, then put on such a tampion of wood
upon your rammer staff, as may fill the concaue of the piece in the narrowest
part where she is taper-bored, and be sure that it go home to the breech of the
piece, and afterward with your compasses, measure the diameter of either
tampion, abating the lesser measure out of the greater, the remain is your
desire.

And note that the tampion at the end of every rammer staff, is to thrust home
the wad and bullet close to the chamber or place where the powder lies, and
every rammer staff ought to have a sponge at the one end, to cleanse the piece
with, and a tampion of wood at the other end, to put home the bullet and wad
with, in the center of which ought to be a hollow screw wherein the Gunner may
screw in a wad hook to unload any piece at his pleasure.

How to shoot in any mortar piece.
Mortar pieces were invented only to annoy the enemy, when other Ordinance
cannot be used against them, as being charged with stone to beat down the
houses of the enemy, or to fall amongst men being assembled together, or charged
with balls of wildfire to burn the enemies ships, houses, or corn. To make
a perfect shot in one of these pieces, it is requisite you know 2 things
belonging to the same (that is to say) how far your mortar piece will carry a
bullet, or a ball of fire-worke, as she is to shoot at the best of the randon:
and likewise how far it is from your piece to the mark you intend to shoot at,
which known you may make a perfect shot, as thus.

Example.
If a mortar piece shoot a bullet or fire-worke 700 paces, and that the mark
which you intend to shoot at is but 500 paces; I demand at what degree of the
quadrant, shall the piece be laid at, to make a good shot?

Resolution.
To answer this and all such like, reason and experience teaches, that the
lesser ground you intend to shoot, you must raise the mouth of your mortar
piece so many degrees above the best of the randon, as is sufficient to reach
the mark desired: and therefore I say if 700 paces require 45 degrees of the
quadrant, what will 500? and the quotient tells me, that at 63 degrees of the
quadrant the mouth of the said piece must be elevated at, to cause the bullet
or fire-ball to light accordingly.

If you abate 45 degrees (being the best of the randon) from 63 degrees, that
the piece was elevated at, the remain is 18 degrees, and so many degrees of
the quadrant was the mouth of the mortar piece elevated at to reach the mark.

To know how far or short any mortar piece will shoot further or shorter, at
the mount or dismount of one or many degrees.
Question.
A mortar piece that shoots 450 paces at the best of the randon, I would know
how much shorter shall she shoot, being elevated one degree above the utmost
range?

Resolution.
Divide the distance of the utmost range being 450 paces, by 45 the degrees in
the best of the randon, the quotient is 10, so many paces will the said piece
shoot shorter, her mouth elevated one degree.

How you may know very near how far from your piece the bullet shall light,
the said mortar piece mouth being raised to what degree you think good.
Question
Suppose there is a Castle etc. besieged, and that the Gunners had brought
their Ordinance as near as they would wish, so that having discharged the
mortar piece in the former conclusion, at the mount of 60 degrees, they find
that the bullet falls in or about the mids of the said Castle or Fort. The
question is how far it is between the piece and the fall of the said bullet?

Resolution.
You must first seek what difference of degrees is between 60 and 45, and you
shall find 15, then by the rule of proportion say, if one degree abate 10
paces, what will 45? and you shall find 150 paces in your quotient. And in this
order by the help of Arithmeticke you may find how far it is from the piece
to the mark.

Also it is possible to shoot so directly upright in a quiet, fair, and calm
day, that the bullet shot out of your mortar piece, shall fall into the piece
mouth again or hard besides the same, if you raise the piece mouth just to 90
degrees of the quadrant, which albeit it be not serviceable, yet it is possible
to be done: For this is a general rule, that no piece of Ordinance whatsoever
can shoot a bullet to continue still in a straight line, during the motion of
the said bullet, except you eleuate or raise the concaue of the said piece
directly toward the zeneth of the sky, or else plumbe down toward the
center of the earth.

The diameter of the chamber mouth in every mortar piece, ought to be equal to
the semi-diameter in the mouth of the said mortar.

The length of every chamber in a mortar piece, ought to be once and a half
the diameter of the chamber.

The metal at the breech of every mortar piece, ought to be fortified equal
in thickness to the diameter of the mouth of the chamber within, and at the
trunions to the semi-diameter, and at the forepart or neck of the piece, to
the part of the diameter of the chamber mouth.

To mount a mortar piece by the quadrant, some use to put the rule of the
quadrant into the piece mouth, close to the metal, or inside of the piece,
noting at what degree the plummet hangs; but for as much as there be many
mortar pieces a little taper-bored at the mouth, (I mean the diameter at the
mouth is something wider then it is within) therefore it is the best to have a
rule made for the purpose, which among the experienced Gunners is common, the
said rule being about 18 inches length, at the middle point or prick whereof
is another shorter rule, framed artificially about a foot long, joined close,
and falling perpendicularly on the longer rule, whose containing angle lights
justly on the middle point or mids of the longer rule, from which point is
drawn by Art the part of a circle, and divided into 45 equal deuisions or
degrees, so as the 90 degree stands just on the center or middle point of the
longer rule: so that laying the longer rule cross the mouth of the piece, you
shall presently know at what degree the said mortar piece is elevated at by the
plummet, the piece being mounted at any grade above 45. And thus may you mount
your mortar piece, to shoot at what degree you think good. The pattern of
the rule this figure shows, plainly drawn.



The orderly flight or motion of the bullet or fire-ball shot out of any mortar
piece, by the figure or draught hereunder may be perceived.



Having planted Ordinance upon any mount or platform, to besiege any Town,
etc. and that you desire to make some little trench or ditch about the same for
the defense thereof, how you may know how much the earth and turfe that is cast
out of the said ditch, shall raise a wall in height, being laid orderly at the
brim of the said ditch, on the inside thereof, making the same wall to any
proportion assigned.
Question.
Suppose the General command the captain of the Pyoners, that a ditch be
made about the mounts or platformes where the Ordinance plays, making the same
18 foot in breadth at the brim, 12 foot in breadth at the bottom, and 8 foot
in depth, and that the earth and turfe dug out of the said trench be laid
orderly in the inside thereof at the brim of the said ditch, so as a wall may
be made in breadth at the bottom 12 foot, and at the top 8 foot, I demand
how high shall that wall be when it is finished?

Resolution.
To work this, there is a general rule, (as thus.) Add the wideness or
breadth of the brim, and the breadth or wideness at the bottom together, the
of that addition multiplied by depth of the ditch the product of that
multiplication shall be your deuident, or number to be divided. Now to find the
height of the wall, add the thickness of the bottom of the wall which you
mean to make, to the thickness or breadth that you intend to make it at the
head; the of that addition shall be your deuisore, which deuident divided by
the deuisor, the quotient will show you the height of the wall.

Example.
The trench in this conclusion is said to be 18 foot broad at the mouth or
brim thereof, and 12 foot at the bottom, which 2 numbers being added, makes
30, the half whereof is 15 feet, which 15 feet multiplied by 8 feet being
the depth, arises 120 feet for my deuident. Likewise, add twelve foot (the
thickness of the wall at the bottom) to 8 foot the breadth you mean to make
it at the head, so arises 20 feet, the thereof is 10 feet for my deuisor,
(and so thick the said wall will be in the mids: the which deuident being 120,
being divided by the deuisor 10, the quotient is 12, and so many foot in
height shall the earth and turfe casten out of the trench aforesaid, make a
wall being 12 foot broad at the bottom, 8 foot at the head, and 10 foot in
breadth at the mids: the said trench being 18 foot broad at the brim, 12 foot
broad at the bottom, and 8 foot deep.

In this order you may find out the height, breadth, or depth of any such like
wall or ditch, in making the same after any proportion assigned.

Brief observations of certain principals in the Art of Gunnery, for every
Gunner to consider of, to practice and learn, viz.
To know what disparture every piece of Ordinance ought to have in shooting
either at or within point blanke, or with an inch rule at any advantage.

To use a mediocrity in ramming and wadding, and in giving every piece her due
loading in powder and bullet.

To know the goodness and badnesse of powder, and how to mix and make perfect
good powder, and how to fine the peter, etc.

To consider the wind, whether it blow with you or against you, or on any side
of the piece, and how to weather your piece to make a good shot.

To consider the platform, whether it be flat, or else declining for the
recoile of your piece, and whether the mark be higher or lower then your
platform, as also to know the distance thereto.

To know whether your piece be truly bored or not, and how to make a perfect
shot in a piece that is not truly bored.

To consider whether the one wheel be more glad or reuerse faster upon the
axle-tree then the other, or whether the one wheel stand higher then the
other, lest you do shoot wide.

To know whether a short piece will outshoote a long piece or not, keeping the
length of the mark by the like degrees of the quadrant.

To know that leuelling with the quadrant toward a hill (the mark standing
higher then your platform) you shall shoot short: and shooting into a valley,
you do ouershoote the mark, but shooting on a level ground you keep the
length with the quadrant, and how you ought to lay your piece to make a perfect
shot with ^he quadrant at every mark.

To know that giving level with an inch rule (which some call the rule of
flat) it is erroneous in shooting in ^eeces of contrary length, as also at
several marks: observing one method.

To learn to know the distance to the mark, and what distance your piece will
shoot at point blanke, or mounted from degree to degree (which is the best
rule to snoote by.

To know whether the carriage or stock of your piece have her due length or
not, and whether the piece be truly placed therein or not.

To consider that in shooting diverse pieces from one platform, to discharge
that piece which stands to the ley wards first, and to set your match or fire
ever on the ley side, and your powder on the wind hand.

To know the true order in mixing and making all kind of fire-workes, wet and
dry.

To know the height and weight of all pieces of Ordinance, and whether the same
lie straight in the carriage or not.

To know the height and weight of all bullets of like metal, and the
circumference thereof: and what proportion a bullet of one metal bears to
the like or unlike bullet of a contrary metal.

To know how much Serpentine or corn powder is requisite to charge any piece
of Artillery.

To know what necessaries belongs to any piece of Ordinance, being in service
by land or sea; as ladles, sponges, hand-spikes, ropes, coins, etc. and what
laborers should attend the same.

To know likewise what men, horses, or oxen, is able to draw any piece of
Ordinance in service, or on the sudden.

To be circumspect of lighted matches and candles etc. for fear of powder,
being in sea-seruice: and to keep a perfect register of every thing pertaining
to your Ordinance, both what you have present, and what you have spent, to
keep your Ordinance dry within, and to have in readiness all kind of
serviceable fire-workes, which fire-workes ought to be made either in the boat
or on land, but not in the ship for fear of had I wist.

To know the use of all Geometrical instruments belonging to the profession of
a Gunner, as also to have some sight in Arithmeticke and Geometry, thereby to
shoot at all randons, and how to manage and handle all engines, for the
mounting or dismounting of any piece of ordinance, in or out her carriage, etc.

To know that every piece ought to be as thick of metal in every part from
the lowest part of the concaue at the breech, to that part of the chamber that
holds the powder, as the bullet due to that piece is in height.

A breuiary of certain secrets in the Art of Gunnery.
A bullet violently driven out of any piece of Ordinance by the force of the
powder, flies swiftest and streightest from the mouth, till it be past the
distance of the level range.

The great noise or rore that the piece makes in delivering the bullet (or
discharged without bullet) arises between the air within the piece,
violently driven out into the open air by the force of the fire (the Petre or
Master being resolved into a windy exhalation.) And according to the quantity
of the fire and air, bursting out of the piece, so is the crack more or less.

Any bullet shot out of a piece lying level, does fly more heavily, and
works less effect in piercing an object, then when the piece is elevated at
any degree or degrees of the randon.

A heavy bullet violently moving pierces sorer then a lighter bullet, having
the like motion.

A bullet of lead shall work as great effect against an object, as the like
bullet of iron, having the like motion, by reason of his overplus of weight.

A bullet shot out of any piece of Artillery, will pierce more against any
thing standing firm, then against a moveable object, and shot at an object a
reasonable distance from the piece, will pierce more effectually, then shot at
the same nearer hand.

Every bullet does make a long or short range, according to the elevation of
the piece out of which it is shot.

A bullet flies ever furthest in his straight motion (or in an insensible
straight line) the higher that the piece is elevated at the mouth.

Any piece discharged twice with one and the self like quantity of powder,
wad, and bullet, having one and the self like proportion in ramming and
wadding, and shot at one like degree of randon, the piece of like temper at
either shot shall make like ranges, but the said piece discharged as before, but
not of like temper, shall make several grazes.

Two pieces in all respects equal, save only that the one is something longer
then the other, discharged with one like quantity in powder and bullet, shall
make several grazes, according to the length of the cilinder of the piece, the
longer shall outshoote the shorter.

Two pieces in all respects equal, save only in length, discharged at a mark
of equal distance from each piece, and being within the range of both pieces,
the bullet shot out of the shorter piece, shall graze or beat the mark,
before the bullet shot out of the longer piece.

Two pieces proportional in all respects, being discharged with one like
quantity and kind of powder, but differing in bullet, as the one iron: the
other lead, and both bullets of like height, shall make several ranges, the
iron bullet shall outflie the leaden bullet, but discharged with a bullet of
metal, and afterward with a like bullet made of wood, observing one and the
like quantity in powder at every shot, the bullet of wood shall not fly so
far as the like bullet of metal.

A piece any whit elevated at the mouth, will shoot further in an insencible
steight line, then lying level: and by how much more any bullet is driven more
swifter through the air, by so much it is made the more lighter in the moving
or drift thereof.

Two pieces a like in every respect, shot with one like bullet, but different
quantity of powder, shall make several ranges. Also the said pieces and
bullets equal in all respects, and the powder also in quantity equal, saving
that the mixtures of the said powder is not alike, shall make several ranges.

One piece discharged diverse times with one like bullet, first with the
quarter of the weight of the bullet in powder, after with half the weight,
thirdly with parts of the weight, and lastly with the whole weight of the
bullet in corn powder, and the ranges differing at point blanke noted, the
ranges at the utmost randon differing, shall be proportional, one method in
charging, etc. being observed.

To every piece of Ordinance, according to the proportion of the diameter,
length of the cilinder, and weight of the bullet belonging thereto, there is a
due quantity of powder to be allowed, so that charging the piece with more or
less then the said due proportion, shall rather hinder then further the bullet
in his furthest range.

By how much the metal of any piece is made hotter by often shooting, then it
was before you made the first shot, by so much is the concaue or bore of the
piece made more attractiue, the metal more dulled and the piece works less
effect then in the beginning.

All pieces in whose metal is mingled most tin, lead, or copper, is more
attractiue a great deal then those pieces in whom is put most bel-mettall.

A brass piece made hot with often shooting, is more apt to break then when
it is cold; and any piece of Artillery is more apt to break at the first or
second shot in a hard frost being cold, then made hot with often shooting.

Any piece of Ordinance discharged, having her full charge in powder, will
range and pierce further, then wanting any part thereof; and having a little
quantity more then her due charge in powder, will ouershoot the other, but it
will danger the piece; but doubling the weight of the bullet in powder, shall
shoot less ground then having a mean proportional charge in powder (to wit
between parts and the whole weight of the bullet) for that the cilinder of the
piece is too much choked, and the bullet driven out into the open air before
the powder be all fired.

Every piece of Artillery ought to have her convenient length and weight of
metal, according to the proportion of the diameter or bore of the same, and
being made longer or shorter then her said due length, will rather hinder then
further her utmost range.

Any piece of Ordinance made hot through much shooting, will neither range so
far, nor pierce so deep, as being temperatly cold.

No piece of Artillery can shoot a bullet to range still in a perfect straight
line, except you shoot the same either directly upright toward the zeneth of
the sky, or else directly plumme down toward the center of the earth.

The right line of the utmost randon in all pieces, is more then the right line
of the level range; and the right line of the utmost range, is not so much as
the right line of 90 degrees.

The utmost range in all sorts of pieces, is not at just 45 degrees of randon,
as Tartallia and diverse others do affirm, but shooting with the wind in a
quiet or calm day, is at or about 45 degrees, but the wind against, or on any
side, or rough, or the air thick, etc. will range as far at or about 40
degrees.

Two pieces in all respects equal save only in length, discharged with a like
quantity in powder, wad, and bullet, and shot at a mark within the reach of
both pieces, mounted at like degrees of randon with the quadrant, the shorter
piece shall outshoote the longer.

The right lines made by any 2 pieces at one degree of randon discharged, are
proportional to the ranges of their bullets at the same degrees of randon, and
the right lines made by any 2 pieces at any randon, are proportional to their
utmost ranges.

Any piece of Ordinance first discharged with the whole weight of the bullet in
Serpentine powder, and after discharged with the weight of her bullet, in such
corn powder as shall cause the piece to range the same ground: and lastly
discharged with half the quantity of either sort of powder, the second ranges
shall not be equal, although the manner of charging and temper of the piece be
all alike.

Three pieces in all respects equal, save every one exceeds other in like
proportion in length, the utmost ranges of their bullets shall not be alike
proportional, although the form of charging be uniform and alike.

A piece twice charged, first with an iron bullet fit for the same piece, and
after with a leaden bullet of the like weight, but differing in height, and
with one and the like quantity in powder and wad, at either time the iron
bullet shall outflie the leaden bullet.

A piece discharged first with an iron bullet, and after with a leaden bullet
of like height, and at either time discharged with the weight of the bullet in
Serpentine powder, shall make unequal ranges.

A piece twice discharged at like degree of randon, first with an iron, and
then with a leaden bullet, and after discharged with any other quantity of
powder, the ranges of the bullets shall not retain the same proportion.

If 2 pieces of one length but differing in bore, the one discharged with an
iron, the other with a leaden bullet at one like randon, having the weight of
either bullet in course powder, do range both alike ground, and the said pieces
after discharged with half the weight of their bullets, of the same or any
other powder, shall not range one like distance of ground.

Two pieces of one metal and length, but of different bullets equally
mounted, discharged with any like quantity of one powder, shall not range
justly one distance of ground.

The proportion of the different ranges, that iron and leaden bullets make,
being found by experience in any one piece of Ordinance, the same proportion
will not hold in all other pieces of Ordinance of contrary length, that shootes
the same like bullet.

Any piece of Ordinance being thicker of metal on the one side then on the
other, discharged at a mark, will cast the bullet toward that side, that is
thickest of metal.

Two pieces of contrary length, but of like diameter, having both one like
charge, being shot off at a mark within the reach of both pieces giving level
with an inch rule, at one like height of the rule, shall make several grazes,
the shorter piece shall outshoote the longer.

Any piece of Ordinance will convey the bullet more ground, her mouth elevated
at 18 or 20 degrees, then from the said grades to the best of the randon,
although there be 7 degrees vantage in the latter.

Any piece of Ordinance having her due loading will convey the bullet more then
five times the distance of her level range.

A Table showing the contents of this book.
A Table of the deminite parts used in mensurations. 1. A table showing how to
weigh any great quantity with fevv weights. 2. How to extract the cubicke
radix or root of any number, and how to find a true denominator to the cubicke
remain, and how to prove if you work right or not. 4.5 Theoremes, showing the
proportion between a bullet of one metal, to a bullet of contrary metal,
and between the diameter and circumference thereof, etc. 8. How by knowing the
true weight of any bullet, and diameter of the piece due for the same, to find
the weight of any other bullet of like metal belonging to a contrary piece of
Ordinance. 8. How by the known weight of any small bullet, you may find out
the weight of a greater, and how to prove if you work right or not. 9. By
knowing the weight of any bullet, whose diameter contains both whole numbers
and broken, how to find the weight of any other of like metal. 10 By knowing
the diameter height and weight of an iron bullet, to find the height and weight
of a bullet of marble stone: or contrariwise, by knowing the height and weight
of a bullet of marble stone, to find the weight of the like bullet of iron.
11. By knowing the weight and diameter of an iron bullet, to find the height
and weight of a leaden bullet of the same proportion: or contrariwise, by
knowing the weight of a leaden bullet, to find the weight of an iron bullet
of like height. 12. To find out the weight of any bullet made of marble stone,
by knowing the weight of the like bullet of lead, or else by knowing the
weight of any leaden bullet, to find out the weight of a bullet of marble of
like diameter. 12. To find out the circumference of any bullet or round body,
etc. 13. By knowing the circumference of any bullet, how to find out the
diameter thereof. 14. To find the solid content of any bullet or globe. 15. To
find the superficial content of any bullet, etc. 15. To find out the
circumference of any circular body diverse ways. 16. How to find the
superficial content of any round body, as bullet or globe diverse ways. 17.
How to find the crassitude or solid content of any bullet, etc. diverse ways.
18. By knowing the diameter and weight of any bullet, etc. to find the
diameter of another of like metal, that is twice the weight of the first.
18. How you may diverse ways Geometrically find out the weight of any
unknown bullet, that is double the weight of a known bullet, and how to
prove the same conclusions by numbers. 19. 20. By knowing the superficial
content of the flat or plain of any circle, to find out the superficial
content of another, that is twice the diameter of the first. 23. By knowing the
weight and height of any one bullet, to find out the true weight of another
that is twice the height of the former. 24. How you may Arithmetically find
the diameter or height of any bullet, and to know how much any one bullet is
higher then another, without any callapers. 25. A table showing the weight of
all iron bullets, from the Fawconet to the Cannon, in Haberdepoize weight. 26.
How you may Arithmetically know the true breadth of the plate of any ladle due
to any piece of Ordinance, by knowing the diameter of the bullet fit for the
piece. 27. How to make a ladle for a chamber-bored piece. 28. To find out the
height of the diameter of the chamber in any chamber-bored Cannon, or other
piece: and how to find out the thickness of metal, round about the chamber
thereof. 29. How you may Arithmetically know whether the carriage for your
piece be truly made or not, and how the carriage for any piece of Ordinance
ought to be made. 30. By knowing the weight of any one piece of Ordinance, to
find the weight of any other. 31. How by Arithmeticke skill you may know
how much of every kind of metal is in any brass piece of Ordinance. 33.
How to know how far any piece of great Artillery will convey her bullet
at the best of the randon, by knowing the utmost range and point blanke of
another piece, and by the same rule how you may know how far any great
piece will range at point blanke and utmost randon. 35. To know how much a
bullet of iron will fly further then the like bullet of lead, being
discharged the one after the other out of any great piece, with one like
quantity in powder. 36. By knowing how much powder is sufficient to charge any
one piece of Ordinance, to know how much of the same powder will charge any
other piece of Ordinance. 37. By knowing how much Serpentine powder will
charge any piece of Ordinance, to know how much corn powder will do the
like: or contrariwise, by knowing how much corn powder will charge any
piece, to know how much Serpentine powder will serve. 38. By knowing how
far any piece shootes with her due charge of powder, to give a near
estimate how far the said piece will shoot, with a charge more or less
in powder then the other. 39. How by knowing how much powder a fevv pieces of
Ordinance has spent, being but a fevv times discharged, to know how much
powder a great number of the like pieces will spend to be often discharged.
40. How to know how much powder every little caske or firken ought to
contain, and how many of those caskes does make a Last of powder, and how
many shootes any quantity of powder will be for any great piece of Artillery.
41. By knowing how many shootes a firken of powder will make for a Culuering,
to know how many shootes a Last of powder will make for a Cannon. 41. To
know how many shootes of powder will be in a graund barrel, for any piece
of Ordinance. 42. How you may Arithmetically know what proportion of every
receipt is to be taken to make perfect good powder: what quantity soever you
would make at a time. 43. How by Arithmeticke skill you may know how with
one and the self like charge in powder and bullet, how much far or short
any piece of Ordinance will shoot, in mounting or dismounting her any degree,
whereby you may know how far your piece will shoot at any degree of the
randon, by knowing how far she will reach at the utmost randon. 46. By
knowing the distance to the mark by the conclusion above, you may know whether
your piece will shoot short or over the mark, or you may know how far any
mark is from your platform, being within the reach of your piece, only by
knowing the distance of the utmost range of your piece, and the degrees she is
elevated at. 46. 47. How to make a table of randons, or go very near to know
the true range of the bullet, out of all sorts of great pieces of Artillery,
being mounted from degree to degree. 48. How you may Arithmetically know how
much vvide, over, or short any piece will shoot from the mark, by knowing
the distance to the mark, and how your piece is laid to shoot at the said
mark. 51. How to lay your piece to make a straight shot at any mark. 51. In
shooting at any mark within point blanke, not disparting your piece, to know
how far the bullet will fly over the said mark, only by knowing the
distance to the mark. 53. How to lay your piece point blanke without
iustrument. 54. How you may Arithmetically dispart any great piece of
Artillery diverse ways. 54. How by Arithmeticall skill you may mount any
great piece by an inch rule to 10 degrees of the quadrant, if you want a
quadrant or other instrument. 55. How you may know the true thickness of
metal in any part of any great piece of Ordinance diverse ways. 58. 59.
How to make a good shot in a piece that is not truly bored, or to know how
much any piece will shoot amiss, that is thicker of metal on the one side
then on the other, if you know the distance to the mark: and how to remedy
your piece, being thicker of metal in one part then another, to make her
shoot straight. 60. To know the different force of any 2 like pieces of
Ordinance planted against an object, the one being further off from the said
object then the other. 62. How you may having diverse kinds of Ordinance to
batter the walls of any Town or Castle, etc. tell presently how much powder
will load all those Ordinance, one or many times. 65. How you may know the
true weight of any number of shot for several pieces of Ordinance, how many
soever they be, and how many Tun weight they do all weigh. 70. How any
Gunner or gunfounder may by Arithmeticke skill know whether the trunions of
any piece be rightly placed on the piece or not. 72. How you may know what
empty caske is to be provided to boy or carry over any piece of Ordinance over
any river, if boats or other provision cannot be gotten. 73. How to know the
true time that any quantity of gun-match, being fired shall burn to do an
exploite, at any time desired. 76. How by Arithmeticke skill you may know
what number of men, horses, or oxen, is sufficient to dravv any great piece of
Artillery, and how much every one draws, so as they all do their endeavor.
77. To know how many hundredth of Haberdepoize weight any piece of Ordinance
or other gross weight contains. 81. How you may proportionally prove all
sorts of pieces of Artillery for service, whether they will hold or not. 82.
To know how much one coyler rope is more then another, for to dravv any great
piece of Ordinance. 83. By knowing the weight of a faddome of one coyler rope,
to know the weight of a faddome of any other. 84. By knowing the quantity or
compass of any small rope, to find out the same in another that is many times
that bigness, and how to find out the weight of a whole coyler rope, for
the draught of any piece of Ordinance. 84. To find out the superficial content
of the hollovv concauity of any piece. 85. To find out the crassitude or solid
content of the cilinder or concauity of any piece, and how much the same
contains in square measure. 86. How you may know how much any piece of
Ordinance is taper-bored by Arithmeticke skill, or whether any great piece of
Ordinance be taper-bored or not. 87. A table wherein you may know the names
of all pieces of Artillery, their height and weight, and thickness of metal
in any part of them, and what men, horses, or oxen, is sufficient to draw the
same, and the height, weight, and compass of the bullet belonging to every
piece: and how much powder will charge every of the said pieces, and the
length and breadth of the ladle fit for any piece, and how thick, broad,
long, or deep, the carriage of every piece should be, and how long every
coyler rope should be, for the draught of any great piece of Ordinance. 87.
Conclusions for shooting in mortar pieces. 87. To know how much further or
shorter any mortar piece will shoot at the mount or dismount of one or many
degrees. 88. To know very near how far from your piece the bullet shall
light, the mortar piece raised at what degree you think good. 89. Notes to be
learned concerning mortar pieces. 89. To know how much the earth and turfe that
is dug and thrown out of any ditch, shall make a defencible ramper or wall
at the brim of the said ditch, making the same to any proportion assigned for
the better defense of the Ordinance in time of service. 93. Certain brief
observations of certain principals of the Art of Gunnery, to be known of
every gunner: with a breuiary of certain secrets of the same Art, very
necessary for all professors of the Art of Gunnery. 94.
FINIS.

