CHLORIS, or THE COMPLAINT of the passionate despised Shepherd.

By William Smith.

Imprinted at London, by Edm. Bollifant. 1596.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT and learned Shepherd Collin Cloute.
COllin my dear and most entire beloved,
My muse audatious stoupes her pitch to thee,
Desiring that thy patience be not moved
By these rude lines, written here you see,
Feign would my muse whom cruel love has wronged,
Shroud her loue-labors under thy protection,
And I my self with ardent zeal have longed,
That thou might know to thee my true affection.
Therefore good Collin, graciously accept
A few sad sonnets, which my muse has framed,
Though they but newly from the shell are crept,
Suffer them not by envy to be blamed.
But underneath the shadovv of thy vvings,
Give warmth to these yong-hatched orphan things.
Give warmth to these yoong-hatched orphan things,
Which chill with cold to thee for succor creep,
They of my study are the budding springs,
Longer I cannot them in silence keep.
They will be gadding sore against my mind.
But courteous shepherd, if they run astray
Conduct them, that they may the path way find,
And teach them how, the mean observe they may.
Thou shall them ken by their discording notes,
Their vveedes are plain, such as poor shepherds wear.
Unshapen, torn, and ragged are their cotes,
Yet forth they vvandring are deuoid of fear.
They which have tasted of the muses spring,
I hope will smile upon the tunes they sing.
Finis.
W. Smith.

To all Shepherds in general.
YOu whom the world admires for rarest style,
You which have sung the sonnets of true love:
Upon my maiden verse with savor smile*
Whose weak pend muse to fly too soon does prove,
Before her feathers have their full perfection,
She soars aloft pricked on by blind affection.
You whose deep wits, ingine, and industry,
The everlasting palm of praise have wunne,
You Parragons of learned Poesy,
Favor these mists, which fall before your sun,
Intentions leading to a more effect,
If you them grace but with your mild aspect.
And thou the Genius of my ill tun'de note,
Whose beauty urged has my rustic vain,
Through mighty Oceans of despair to flote,
That I in rhyme thy cruelty complain:
Vouchsafe to read these lines both harsh and bad,
Nuntiates of woe with sorrow being clad.
VV. Smith.

Sonnet 1.
CVrteous Caliope, vouchsafe to lend
Thy helping hand to my untuned song,
And grace these lines, which I to write pretend,
Compeld by love, which does poor Corin wrong.
And those thy sacred sisters I beseech,
Which on Parnassaes mount do ever dwell,
To shield my country muse and rural speech,
By their divine authority and spell.
Lastly to thee o Pan, the Shepherds King,
And you swift footed Dryades I call:
Attend to hear a swain in verse to sing
Sonnets of her that keeps his heart in thrall:
O Chloris weigh the task I undertake,
Thy beauty subject of my song I make.
Sonnet 2.
Thy beauty, subject of my song I make,
O fairest fair, on whom depends my life,
Refuse not then the task I undertake,
To please thy rage, and to appease my strife.
But with one smile remunerate my toil,
None other guerdon, I of thee desire.
Give not my lowly muse new-hatcht the foil,
But warmth that she may at the length aspire
Unto the temples of thy star-bright eyes,
Upon whose round orbs perfect beauty sits;
From whence such glorious crystal beams arise,
As best my Chloris seemly face befits.
Which eyes, which beauty, which bright crystal beam,
Which face of thine has made my love extreme.
Sonnet 3.
Feed silly sheep although your keeper pineth,
Yet like to Tantalus does see his food.
Skip you and leap, now bright Apollo shines,
Whilst I bewail my sorrows in yon wood.
Where woeful Philomela does record,
And sings with notes of sad and dire lament,
The tragedy wrought by her sisters Lord,
I Will bear a part in her black discontent.
That pipe which erst was wont to make you glee,
Upon these downs whereon you careless graze,
Shall to her mournful music tuned be.
Let not my plaints poor lambkins you amaze.
There underneath that dark and duskie bower,
Whole showers of tears to Chloris I will power.
Sonnet 4.
Whole showers of tears to Chloris I will power,
As true oblations of my sincere love,
If that will not suffice most fairest flower,
Then shall my sighs thee unto pity move.
If neither tears nor sighs can ought prevail,
My streaming blood thine anger shall appease,
This hand of mine by vigor shall assail,
To tear my heart asunder thee to please.
Celestial powers on you I invoke,
You know the chaste affections of my mind,
I never did my faith yet violate,
Why should my Chloris then be so unkind?
That neither tears, nor sighs, nor streaming blood,
Can unto mercy move her cruel mood.
Sonnet 5.
You Fawnes and Siluans, when my Chloris brings
Her flocks to water in your pleasant plains,
Solicit her to pity Corins stings,
The smart whereof for her he still sustaines.
For she is ruthlesse of my woeful song.
My oaten reed she not delights to hear.
O Chloris, Chloris, Corine thou do wrong,
Who loves thee better than his own heart dear.
The flames of Aetna are not half so hot,
As is the fire which thy disdain has bred.
Ah cruel fates, why do you then besot
Poor Corins soul with love when love is fled.
Either cause cruel Chloris to relent,
Or let me die upon the wound she sent.
Sonnet 6.
You lofty Pines copartners of my woe,
When Chloris sits underneath your shade,
To her those sighs and tears I pray you sho,
Whilst you attending I for her have made.
Whilst you attending, dropped have sweet balm,
In token that you pity my distress,
Zephirus has your stately boughs made calm.
Whilst I to you my sorrows did express.
The neighbor mountains bended have their tops,
When they have heard my rufull melody,
And Elues in rings about me leaps and hops,
To frame my passions to their iollitie.
Resounding Echoes from their obscure caves,
Reitterate what most my fancy craves.
Sonnet 7.
What need I mourn? seeing Pan our sacred King
Was of that nymph fair Syrinx coy disdained,
The worlds great light which comfort each thing,
All comfortless for Daphnes sake remained.
If gods can find no help to heal the sore
Made by loves shafts, which pointed are with fire.
Unhappy Corine then thy chance deplore,
Since they despair by wanting their desire.
I am not Pan though I a shepherd be,
Yet is my love as fair as Syrinx was.
My songs cannot with Phoebus tunes agree,
Yet Chloris does his Daphnes far surpas.
How much more fair by so much more unkind,
Than Syrinx coy, or Daphnes I her find.
Sonnet 8.
No sooner had fair Phoebus trimd his car,
Being newly risen from Auroraes bed,
But I in whom despair and hope did war,
My vnpend flock unto the mountains led.
Tripping upon the snow soft downs I spide
Three nimphs more fairer than those beauties three,
Which did appear to Paris on mount I Would,
Coming more near my goddess I there see.
For she the field nymphs oftentimes does haunt,
To hunt with them the fierce and savage bore,
And having sported virelaies they chaunt,
Whilst I unhappy helpless cares deplore.
There did I call to her, ah too unkind,
But tiger like, of me she had no mind.
Sonnet 9.
Unto the fountain where fair Delila chaste
The proud Acteon turned to a Heart
I drove my flock that water sweet to taste,
Cause from the welkin Phoebus began depart.
There did I see the nymph whom I admire.
Remembering her locks, of which the yellow hew:
Made blush the beauties of her curled wire,
Which Jove himself with wonder well might view.
Then red withire, her tresses she berent,
And weeping hid the beauty of her face:
Whilst I amazed, at her discontent
With tears and sighs do humbly sue for grace:
But she regarding neither tears nor moan,
Flies from the fountain leaving me alone.
Sonnet 10.
Am I a Gorgon? that she does me fly,
Or was I hatched in the river Nyle?
Or does my Chloris stand in doubt that I
With Siren songs do seek her to beguyle?
If any one of these she can object
Against me which chaste affected love protest,
Then might my fortunes by her frowns be checked,
And blameless she from scandal free might rest.
But seeing I am no hideous monster borne,
But have that shape which other men do bear,
Which form great Jupiter did never scorn,
Amongst her subjects here on earth to wear.
Why should she then that soul with sorrow fill,
Which vowed has to love and serve her still.
Sonnet 11.
Tell me my dear what mooues thy ruthlesse mind
To be so cruel, seeing thou art so fair?
Did Nature frame thy beauty so unkind*
Or do thou scorn to pity my despair?
O no it was not natures ornament,
But winged loves impartial cruel wound,
Which in my heart is ever permanent,
Until my Chloris make me whole and sound.
O glorious loue-god think on my hearts grief,
Let not thy vassaile pine through deep disdain,
By wounding Chloris I shall find relief,
If thou impart to her some of my pain.
She does thy temples and thy shrines abject,
They with Amyntas flowers by me are decked.
Sonnet 12.
Cease eyes to weep since none bemones your weeping,
Leave of good muse to sound the cruel name
Of my loves Queen which has my heart in keeping,
Yet of my love does make a jesting game.
Long has my sufferance labored to enforce,
One pearl of pity from her pretty eyes,
Whilst I with restles Oceans of remorce
Bedew the banks where my fair Chloris lies,
Where my fair Chloris baths her tender skin,
And does triumph to see such rivers fall
From those moist springs, which never dry have bin
Since she their honor has detain'de in thrall.
And still she scorns one favoring smile to show
Unto those waves proceeding from my woe.
A dream. Sonnet. 13.
What time fair Titan in the Zenith sat,
And equally the fixed poles did heat,
When to my flock my daily woes I chate,
And underneath abroad beech took my seat:
The dreaming god which Morpheus Poets call,
Augmenting fuel to my Aetnas fire,
With sleep possessing my weak senses all,
In apparitions makes my hopes aspire.
Me thought I saw the Nymph I would embrace,
With arms abroad coming to me for help,
A lust-led Satyr having her in chase
Which after her, about the fields did yelpe.
I seeing my love in perplexed plight,
A sturdy bat from of an oak I rest,
And with the rauishor continue fight
Till breathless I upon the earth him left.
Then when my coy Nymph saw her breathless foe,
With kisses kind she gratifies my pain,
Protesting never rigor more to show.
Happy was I this good hap to obtain,
But drowsy slumbers flying to their cell,
My sudden joy converted was to bale,
My wonted sorrows still with me do dwell.
I looked round about on hill and dale,
But I could neither my fair Chloris view,
Nor yet the Satyr which erst while I slew.
Sonnet 14.
Moornfull Amyntas thou did pine with care,
Because the fates by their untimely doom,
Or life bereft thy loving Phillis fair:
When thy loves spring did first begin to bloome.
My care does counteruaile that care of thine,
And yet my Chloris draws her angry breath,
My hopes still hoping hopeless now repine,
For living she does add to me but death.
Thy Phillis dying, loved thee full dear,
My Chloris living, hates poor Coryns love,
Thus does my woe as great as thine appear,
Though sundry accents both our sorrows move.
Thy swan-like songs, did show thy dying anguish:
These weeping truce-men show I living languish.
Sonnet 15.
These weeping truce-men show I living languish,
My woeful wailings tells my discontent,
Yet Chloris naught esteems of mine anguish,
My thrilling throbs her heart cannot relent.
My Kids to hear, the rimes and round delays
Which I on wastefull hills was wont to sing:
Did more delight the Lark in summer days,
Whole echo made the neighbor groves to ring.
But now my flock all drooping bleates and cries,
Because my pipe the author of their sport,
All rent and torn, and unrespected lies,
Their lamentations do my cares consort.
They cease to feed and listen to the plaint,
Which I power forth unto a cruel Saint.
Sonnet 16.
Which I power forth unto a cruel Saint,
Who merciless my prayers does attend:
Who Tiger-like does pity my complaint,
And never ear unto my woes will lend.
But still false hope dispairing life deludes,
And tells my fancy I shall grace obtain,
But Chloris fair my orisons concludes
With fearful frowns presagers of my pain.
Thus do I spend the weary wandering day,
Oppressed with a Chaos of hearts grief,
Thus I consume the obscure night away,
Neglecting sleep which brings all cares relief,
Thus I pass my lingering life in woe,
But when my bliss will come I do not knoe.
Sonnet 17.
The perils which Leander took in hand,
Fair Heroes love and favor to obtain:
When void of fear securely leaving land,
Through Hellespont he swam to Cestos maine,
His dangers should not counterpoise my toil.
If my dear love would once but pity show,
To quench these flames which in my breast do broile,
Or dry these springs which from mine eyes do flow:
Not only Hellespont but Ocean seas,
For her sweet sake to forde I would attempt.
So that my travels would her ire appeas,
My soul from thrall and languish to exempt,
O what is it not poor I would undertake,
If labor could my peace with Chloris make.
Sonnet 18.
My Love, I cannot thy rare beauties place*
Under those forms which many writers use,
Some like to stones compare their mistres face:
Some in the name of flowers do love abuse:
Some makes their love a goldsmiths shop to be,
Where orient pearls and precious stones, abound.
In my conceit these far do disagree,
The perfect praise of beauty forth to sound.
O Chloris thou do imitate thy self,
Selfs imitating passes precious stones,
Or all the Eastern Indian golden pelf:
Thy red and white with purest fair attones,
Matchless for beauty, nature has thee framed,
Only unkind, and cruel thou art named.
Sonnet 19.
The Hound by eating grass does find relief,
For being sick it is his choysest meat:
The wounded Heart does ease his pain and grief
If he the herb Dictamion may eat:
The loath some Snake renewes his sight again:
When he casts off his withered coat and hue:
The sky bred Eagle fresh age does obtain
When he his beak decaieth does renew.
I worse then these whose sore no salve can cure,
Whose grief no herb, nor plant nor tree can ease,
Remediless I still must pain endure,
Till I my Chloris furious mood can please:
She like the Scorpion gave to me a wound,
And like the Scorpion she must make me sound.
Sonnet 20.
Ye wastefull woods bear witness of my woe,
Wherein my plaints did oftentimes abound:
Ye careless birds my sorrows well do knoe,
They in your songs were wont to make a sound.
Thou pleasant spring can record likewise bear
Of my designs and sad disparagment,
When thy transparent billows mingled wear
With those downfals which from mine eyes were sent.
The echo of my still-lamenting cries,
From hallow vaults in treble voice resoundeth,
And then into the empty air it flies,
And back again from whence it came reboundeth.
That Nimphe unto my clamors does reply,
Being likewise scornd in love as well as I.
Sonnet 21.
Being likewise scornd in love as well as I
By that selfe-louing boy, which did disdain
To hear her after him for love to cry,
For which in dens obscure she does remain:
Yet does she answer to each speech and voice,
And renders back the last of what we speak,
(But 'specially if she might have her choice,
She of unkindness would her talk forth break.)
She loves to hear of loves most sacred name,
Although poor nymph in love she was despised;
And ever since she hides her head for shame,
That her true meaning was so lightly prised:
She pitying me, part of my woes does bear,
As you good shepherds listening now shall hear.
Sonnet 22.
O fairest fair to thee I make my plaint, my plaint,
To thee from whom my cause of grief does spring, does spring,
Attentive be unto the groans sweet Saint, sweet Saint,
Which unto thee in doleful tunes I sing. I sing.
My mornefull muse does always speak of thee, of thee,
My love is pure o do it not disdain, disdain,
With bitter sorrow still oppress not me, not me,
But mildly look upon me which complain. which complain.
Kill not my true-affecting thoughts, but give but give
Such precious balm of comfort to my heart, my heart,
That casting off despair in hope to live, hope to live.
I may find help at length to ease my smart, to ease my smart
So shall you add such courage to my love, my love,
That fortune false my faith shall not remove. shall not remove.
Sonnet 23.
The Phoenix fair which rich Arabia breeds,
When wasting time, expires her tragedy.
No more on Phoebus radiant raise she feeds,
But heapeth up great store of spicery.
And on a lofty towering Cedar tree,
With heavenly substance she her self consumes,
From whence she young again appeeres to be,
Out of the Cinders of her peerless plumes.
So I which long have fried in loves flame,
The fire not made of spice but sighs and tears,
Revive again in hope disdain to shame,
And put to flight the Author of my fears.
Her eyes revive decaying life in me,
Though they augmenters of my thraldom be.
Sonnet 24.
Though they augmenters of my thraldom be,
For her I live and her I love and none else:
O then fair eyes look mildly upon me,
Who poor despisde, forlorn must live alone else,
And like Amyntas haunt the desert cells
(And monilesse there breath out thy cruelty)
Where none but care and Melancholy dwells.
I for revenge to Nemesis will cry;
If that will not prevail my wandering ghost,
Which breathles here this love scorcht trunck shall leave,
Shall unto thee with tragic tidings post,
How thy disdain did life from soul bereave.
Then all too late my death thou will repent,
When murders guilt thy conscience shall torment.
Sonnet 25.
Who does not know that love is triumphant,
Sitting upon the throne of Majesty,
The gods themselves his cruel darts do daunt,
And he blind boy smiles at their misery?
Love made great Jove ofttimes transform his shape.
Love made the fierce Alcides stoop at last.
Achillis stout and bold, could not escape
The direful doom which love upon him cast.
Love made Leander pass the dreadful flood
Which Cestos from Abydos does divide.
Love made a Chaos where proud Ilion stood,
Through love the Carthaginian Dido did.
Thus may we see how love does rule and reigns,
Bringing those under, which his power disdaines.
Sonnet 26.
Though you be fair and beautiful withal,
And I am black for which you me despise,
Know that your beauty subject is to fall
Though you esteem it at so high a prise.
And time may come when that whereof you boast,
(Which is your youths chief wealth and ornament)
Shall withered be by winters raging froast,
When beauties pride and flowring years are spent.
Then will thou morn when none shall thee respect:
Then will thou think how thou have scornd my tears,
Then pitilesse each one will thee neglect,
When hoary gray shall die thy yellow hears.
Then will thou think upon poor Corins case,
Who loved thee dear yet lived in thy disgrace.
Sonnet 27.
O Love leave of with sorrow to torment me,
Let my hearts grief and pining pain content thee.
The breach is made I give thee leave to enter,
Thee to resist great god I dare not venture.
Restless desire does aggrauate mine anguish,
Careful conceits do fill my soul with languish.
Be not too cruel in thy conquest gained,
Thy deadly shafts has victory obtained.
Batter no more my forte with fierce affection,
But shield me captive under thy protection.
I yield to thee O Love thou art the stronger,
Raise then thy siege, and trouble me no longer.
Sonnet 28.
What cruel star or fate had domination
When I was borne, that thus my love is crossed?
Or from what Planet had I deriuation
That thus my life in seas of woe is crossed?
Does any live that ever had such hap
That all their actions are of none effect?
Whom fortune never dandled in her lap
But as an abject still does me reject,
Ah fickle dame, and yet thou constant art
My daily grief and anguish to increase,
And to augment the troubles of my heart
Thou of these bonds wilt never me release.
So that thy darlings me to be may know,
The true Idea of all worldly woe.
Sonnet 29.
Some in their hearts their Mistres colors bears,
Some has her gloves, some other has her garters,
Some in a bracelet wears her golden hears,
And some with kisses seal their loving charters.
But I which never favor reaped yet,
Nor had one pleasant look from her fair brow,
Content my self in silent shade to sit
In hope at length my cares to ouerplow.
Mean while mine eyes shall feed on her fair face,
My sighs shall tell to her my sad designs,
My painful pen shall ever sue for grace
To help my heart, which languishing now pines.
And I will triumph still amidst my woe
Till mercy shall my sorrows ouerflowe.
Sonnet 30.
The raging sea within his limits lies
And with an ebb his flowing does discharge,
The rivers when beyond their bounds they ries,
Themselves do empty, in the Ocean large:
But my loves sea which never limit keeps,
Which never ebs but always ever flows,
In liquid salt unto my Chloris weepeth,
Yet frustrate are the tears which he bestows:
This sea which first was but a little spring
Is now so great and far beyond all reason,
That it a deluge to my thoughts does bring,
Which overwhelmed has my ioying season.
So hard and dry is my Saints cruel mind,
These waves no way in her to sink can find.
Sonnet 31.
These waves no way in her to sink can find
To penetrate the pith of contemplation,
These tears cannot dissolve her hardened mind,
Nor move her heart on me to take compassion:
O then poor Coryne scornd and quite despized,
Loath now to live since life procures thy woe,
Enough thou have thy heart anatomized
For her sweet sake which will no pity shoe:
But as cold winters storms and nipping frost,
Can never change sweet Aramanthus hue,
So though my love and life by her are crossed;
My heart shall still be constant firm and true.
Although Erynnis hinders Hymen's rites,
My fixed faith against oblivion fites.
Sonnet 32.
My fixed faith against oblivion fights,
And I cannot forget her pretty elfe,
(Although she cruel be unto my plights)
Yet let me rather clean forget my self,
Then her sweet name out of my mind should go,
Which is the Elixar of my pining soul,
From whence the essence of my life does floe,
Whose beauty rare my senses all control,
Themselves most happy evermore accounting,
That such a nymph is Queen of their affection,
With ravished rage they to the skies are mounting,
Esteeming not their thraldom nor subjection,
But still do joy amidst their misery,
With patience bearing loves captivity.
Sonnet 33.
With patience bearing loves captivity
Themselves vnguiltie of his wrath alleging,
These homely lines abiects of Poesy
For liberty and for their ransom pleadging,
And being free they solemnly do vow,
Under his banner ever arms to bear
Against those rebels which do disallowe
That love of bliss should be the sovereign heir:
And Chloris if these weeping truce-men may
One spark of pity from thine eyes obtain,
In recompense of their sad heavy lay;
Poor Coryne shall thy faithful friend remain,
And what I say I ever will approve,
No joy may be compared to thy love.
Sonnet 34.
The bird of Thrace which does bewail her rape,
And murthred Itis eaten by his sire,
When she her woes in doleful tunes does shape,
She sets her breast against a thornie brire,
Because care-charmer sleep should not disturb
The tragic tale which to the night she tells,
She does her rest and quietness thus curb
Amongst the groves where secret silence dwells.
Even so I wake, and waking wail all night,
Chloris unkindness slumbers does expel,
I need not thorns sweet sleep to put to flight,
Her cruelty my golden rest does quell:
That day and night to me are always one,
Consumed in woe, in tears, in sighs and moan.
Sonnet 35.
Like to the shipman in his brittle boat,
Tossed aloft by the unconstant wind,
By dangerous rocks, and whirling gulfes does floate,
Hoping at length the wished Port to find:
So does my love in stormy billows sail,
And passes the gaping Scillaes waves,
In hope at length with Chloris to prevail
And win that prize which most my fancy craves:
Which unto me of value will be more,
Then was that rich and welthie golden fleece,
Which Jason stout from Colchos Island bore
With wind in sails unto the shore of Greece.
More rich, more rare, more worth her love I prize
Then all the wealth which under heaven lies.
Sonnet 36.
O what a wound and what a deadly stroke,
Does Cupid give to us perplexed lovers?
Which cleaues more fast, then Iuie does to oak,
Unto our hearts where he his might discouers.
Though warlike Mars were armed at all points,
With that tried coat which fiery Vulcan made,
Loves shaftes did penetrate his steeled ioints,
And in his breast in streaming gore did wade,
So pittiles is this fell conqueror:
That in his mothers paps his arrows stuck,
Such is his rage that he does not defer,
To wound those orbs from whence he life did suck.
Then since no mercy he shows to his mother,
We meekely must his force and rigor smother.
Sonnet 37.
Each beast in field does wish the morning light,
The birds to Hesper pleasant lays do sing:
The wanton kids well fed rejoice in night,
Being likewise glad when day begins to spring.
But night nor day are welcome unto me,
Both can bear witness of my lamentation,
All day sad sighing Corine you shall see,
All night he spends in tears and exclamation.
Thus still I live although I take no rest:
But living look as one that is a dying:
Thus my sad soul with care and grief oppressed,
Seems as a ghost to Styx and Lethe flying.
Thus has fond love bereft my youthful years,
Of all good hap before old age appeeres.
Sonnet 38.
That day wherein mine eyes cannot her see,
Which is the essence of their crystal sight,
Both blind, obscure and dim that day they be,
And are debarred of fair heavens light,
That day wherein mine ears do want to hear her,
Hearing that day is from me quite bereft,
That day wherein to touch I come not near her,
That day no sense of touching I have left,
That day wherein I lack the fragrant smell,
Which from her pleasant amber breath proceeds,
Smelling that day disdaines with me to dwell,
Only weak hope my pining carcass feeds.
But burst poor heart thou have no better hope,
Since all thy senses have no further scope.
Sonnet 39.
The stately Lion and the furious Bear
The skill of man does alter from their kind,
For where before they wild and savage were,
By art both tame and meek, you shall them find.
The Elephant although a mighty beast,
A man may rule according to his skill,
The lusty horse obaieth our beheast,
For with the Curb you may him guide at will:
Although the stint most hard contains the fire,
By force we do his virtue soon obtain,
For with a steel you shall have your desire,
Thus man may all things by industry gain;
Only a woman if she list not love,
No art, nor force, can unto pity move.
Sonnet 40.
No Art nor force can unto pity move
Her stony heart that makes my heart to pant:
No pleading passions of my extreme love
Can mollify her mind of adamant.
Ah cruel sex, and foe to all mankind:
Either you love or else you hate too much:
A glistring show of gold in you we find,
And yet you prove but copper in the touch.
But why? O why? do I so far digress?
Nature you made of pure and fairest molde,
The pomp and glory of man to depresse,
And as your slaves in thraldom them to hold*
Which by experience now too well I prove,
There is no pain unto the pains of love.
Sonnet 41.
Fair Shepherdess when as these rusticke lines
Comes to thy sight, weigh but with what affection
Thy servile does depaint his sad desines,
Which to redres of thee he makes election.
If so you scorn you kill, if you seem coye
You wound poor Corine to the very heart:
If that you smile you shall increase his joy:
If these you like you banish do all smart.
And this I do protest most fairest fair,
My muse shall never cease that hill to clime,
To which the learned Muses do repair,
And all to deifie thy name in rhyme.
And never none shall write with truer mind,
As by all proof and trial you shall find.
Sonnet 42.
Dye, dye, my hopes for you do but augment
The burning accents of my deep despair,
Disdain and scorn, your downfall do consent,
Tell to the world she is unkind, yet fair.
O eyes close up those euer-running fountains,
For pitilesse are all the tears you shed
Wherewith you watered have both dales and mountains,
I see, I see, remorce from her is fled.
Pack hence ye sighs into the empty air,
Into the air that none your sound may hear,
Since cruel Chloris has of you no care,
Although she once esteemed you full dear.
Let Sable night all your disgraces cover,
Yet truer sighs were never sigh't by lover.
Sonnet 43.
Thou glorious sun, from whence my lesser light
The substance of his crystal shine does borrow,
Let these my mones find favor in thy sight,
And with remorce extinguish now my sorrow.
Renew those lamps which thy disdain has quenched,
As Phoebus does his sister Phoebes shine,
Consider how thy Coryne being drenched
In seas of woe, to thee his plaints incline.
And at thy feet with tears does sue for grace,
Which art the goddess of his chaste desire,
Let not thy frowns these labors poor deface
Although aloft they at the first aspire.
And time shall come as yet unknown to men
When I more large thy praises forth shall pen.
Sonnet 44.
When I more large thy praises forth shall show,
That all the world thy beauty shall admire,
Desiring that most sacred Nymph to know
Which has the sheapherds fancy set on fire,
Till then my dear let these thine eyes content,
Till then fair love think if I merit favor,
Till then O let thy merciful assent
Relish my hopes with some comforting savor,
So shall you add such courage to my muse,
That she shall clime the step Parnasaes hill,
That learned Poets shall my deeds peruse
When I from thence obtained have more skill.
And what I sing shall always be of thee
As long as life or breath remains in me.
Sonnet 45.
When she was borne whom I entirely love,
The Immortal gods her birth-rites forth to grace
Descending from their glorious seat above,
They did on her these several virtues place.
First Saturn gave to her sobriety,
Jove then endued her with comelines,
And Sol with wisdom did her beautify,
Mercury with wit and knowledge did her bles,
Venus with beauty did all parts bedeck,
Luna therewith did modesty combine,
Diana chaste all loose desires did check,
And like a lamp in cleernes she does shine.
But Mars according to his stubborn kind,
No virtue gave, but a disdainefull mind.
Sonnet 46.
When Chloris first with her hart-robbing-eie
Inchaunted had my silly senses all,
I little did respect loves cruelty,
I never thought his snares should me enthrall:
But since her tresses have entangled me,
My pining flock did never hear me sing
Those ioly notes which erst did make them glee,
Nor do my kids about me leap and spring,
As they were wont, but when they hear me cry
They likewise cry and fill the air with bleating:
Then do my sheep upon the cold earth lie,
And feed no more, my griefs they are repeating.
O Chloris if thou then saw them and me
I Am sure thou wouldste both pity them and me.
Sonnet 47.
I need not tell thee of the lilly white,
Nor of the roseat red which does thee grace,
Nor of thy golden hairs like Phoebus bright,
Nor of the beauty of thy fairest face.
Nor of thine eyes which heavenly stars excel,
Nor of thine azurde veins which are so clear,
Nor of thy paps where Love himself does dwell,
Which like two hills of violets appear.
Nor of thy tender sides, nor belly soft,
Nor of thy goodly thighs as white as snow,
Whose glory to my fancy seems often,
That like an arch triumphall they do show.
All these I know that thou do know too well,
But of thy heart too cruel I thee tell.
Sonnet 48.
But of thy heart too cruel I thee tell,
Which has tormented my young budding age,
And does (unless your mildnes passions quell)
My utter ruin near at hand presage.
Instead of blood which wont was to display
His ruddy red upon my hearlesse face,
By over greeuing that is fled away,
Pale dying color there has taken place.
Those curled locks which thou wast wont to twist
Unkempt, unshorn, and out of order been,
Since my disgrace I had of them no list,
Since when these eyes no joyful day have seen,
Nor never shall till you renew again
The mutual love, which did possess us twain.
Sonnet 49.
You that embrace inchaunting Poesy,
Be gracious to perplexed Coryns lines.
You that do feel loves proud authority,
Help me to sing my sighs and sad designs.
Chloris requite not faithful love with scorn,
But as thou ought have commiseration,
I have enough anatomized and torn
My heart, thereof to make a pure oblation.
Likewise consider how thy Coryne priseth
Thy parts above each absolute perfection,
How he of every precious thing deuiseth
To make thee sovereign, grant me then affection.
Else thus I prise thee, Chloris is alone
More hard then gold, or pearl, or precious stone.
Sonnet 50.
Colin I know that in thy lofty wit
Thou will but laugh at these my youthful lines,
Content I am, they should in silence sit,
Obscurd from light, to sing their sad designs:
But that it pleased thy grave shepherdhood
The Patron of my maiden verse to be,
When I in doubt of raging Envy stood,
And now I weigh not who shall Chloris see.
For fruit before it comes to full perfection
But blossoms is, as every man does know:
So these being bloomes, and under thy protection
In time I hope to ripenes more will grow.
And so I leave thee to thy worthy muse,
Desiring thee all faults here to excuse.
FINIS.

