A most excellent new Dittie, wherein is showed the sage sayings, and wise
sentences of Solomon: wherein each estate is taught his duty, with singular
counsel to his comfort and consolation.
To the tune of Wigmoores Galliard.


THose that will run a Virtuous race,
and learn the Precepts of the sage
Those that true wisdom will embrace
and learn to live in youth and age:
Let him approach hereto with speed,
And to these Lessons give good heed:
for bearing well these things away,
the Lord will bless them night and day.
My Son, says Solomon the wise,
if thou true Wisdom wilt attain:
Then fear the Lord that rules the skies
for so the scripture tells thee plain.
Embrace his word, and him obey:
This is the chief and only way:
for they that do these things despise,
are fools to God, though worldly wise
Unto thy Father honor give,
and thou shall surely blessed be:
And be obedient while you live,
unto your Mother courteously:
Then God will send thee evermore
Sufficient wealth, and treasure store:
all things shall prosper in thy hand,
and song thou shall enjoy the Land.
The blessing of thy Father dear,
does cause the childrens good success:
But where the Mother does appear,
to curse the childrens wickedness,
Their whose foundation does decay,
Like withered leaves they fall away:
Then all good children learn of me,
to love your Parents faythfullie.
Set not thy mind on worldly wealth,
nor put thy confidence therein:
For Riches does consume by stealth,
and Covetousness is counted sin:
For while thou live on the earth,
Thou art uncertain of thy death:
and when that death does stop thy wind
then must thou leave thy goods behind
Be friendly unto every man,
but unto few familiar be:
And try thy friend if that thou can,
his inward thoughts to prove and see:
And if thou find him just and true,
Change not thy old Friend for a new:
For many promise much indeed,
but clean forsake thee in thy need.
If thou have Sons, instruct them well
but on thy Daughter never smile:
Their wanton ways do far excel,
let no affection thee beguile:
With due correction love them still,
And give not them their wanton will:
for if that they do stubborn grow,
their duty then they will not know.
Give honor to the Aged sort.
and to thy Betters always bow:
So shall thou win a good report,
for God him self does him allow:
Of hateful Pride likewise be ware,
And have an eye to after care:
be not too rash in any thing,
for that will soon repentance bring.
Lend not thy goods to Mighty men,
whose countenance passes thy degree
For it is hard to get again,
as we by daily proof may see.
For other men give not thy word,
No further then thou can afford:
least afterward thou chance to rue,
and pay the debt when it is oue.
With him that is a Maiestrate,
in any case go not to law:
Least thou repeut the same too late,
for he will hold thee still in awe:
Be always wary in thy words.
For spightfull congues are evil sworts
and look to whom thou do impare,
the thoughts and secrets of thy heart.
Be never ieolous of thy Wife,
least she thereby do mischief learn,
For so thou shall soon purchase strife:
then wisely do each thing discern.
And do no evil occasion give,
But louiugly together live:
For where the man and wife do hate,
the curse of God waytes at thy gate.
On Harlots cast not thou thy mind,
least thou thereby thy self consume:
And waste thy riches in the winte,
whilst thou in faunie fret and fume:
Their soul inticements brings death*
And poison comes from their breath:
their eyes are wandering too and fro,
and every one their fash^ons know.
Praise no woman for her beauti^^* sake,
nor discommende no man by light:
And with thy tongue no lying make,
fulfill thy promise just and right.
Be merciful unto the poor,
And God will thee reward therefore:
Keep not the Laborers wages ba^ke
but comfort such as comfort lack.
Grieve not the heavy hearted man,
nor joy not at thy enemies harm:
Rebuke thy Brother friendly than,
against no man use open charm:
Nor credit thou each tale in have,
Till trial prove the matter wast.
From hateful slander keep thy tongue
and work for age, whilst thou art young
Three things there are which God does hate
as holy Scripture do declare:
A man too proud in beggars state,
a Rich man for to lie and swear:
To see an Old Man given to just:
And those of God are sure acurst.
The lying tongue the soul does quest
but pride and just throws down to hell.
While you are living, call for grace,
thy self is like the fading Flower:
Death comes stealing on a pace,
thou shall not know the day nor hour.
Thy speech at all times shall not last,
Use well the time that now thou have:
and from repentance do not stay,
thou can no time with death delay.
If thou consider well the same,
and bear these Lessons in thy mind:
And thereunto thy self do frame,
great comfort surely thou shall find.
Plant well these sayings in thy heart,
And from these precepts never start:
So shall thou live in perfect peace,
and God will bless thee with increase.
FINIS.
At London printed by W. W. for T. P.


