A LOOKING GLASS FOR Married Folks. Wherein they may plainly see their
deformities; and also how to behave themselves one to another, and both of them
toward God. Set forth Dialogue-wise for the more tastable and plainness sake,
By R. S.

PROVERBS. 11.29. He that troubles his own house, shall inherit the wind,
and the fool shall be servant to him that lends.

PROVERBS. 12.4. A virtuous woman is the crown of her husband: but she that
makes him ashamed, is as corruption to his bones.

LONDON, Printed by N. O. for Henry Bell, and are to be sold at his shop on
Holburne Hill near the cross Keys. 1610.

THE AVTHOR TO the gentle Reader.
COurteous Reader, the special cause inducing me to take in hand this work,
and to bring my candle lighted into the glorious Sunshine of this age, and to
publish the same to the view of this famous commonwealth, was, that I have
seen and heard, with grief of heart, in many places whither I have come,
wicked and unquiet living between man and wife: the which caused me many a
time to consult with my self, how I might be a means to reform the same. I
considered and thought with my self, that many wanted means to be reconciled
one to another, and that there was no book extant of this subject in English;
and that for want of means many have lived ignorantly, and so of necessity
wickedly and discontentedly together, to the dishonor of God, the offense and
evil example of others, the loss of their credits, the wasting of their
goods, the corrupting of their children and servants; and finally to the
consuming of their own bodies; yea many to the destroying of their souls for
evermore. The consideration of these things moved me not to delay, but speedily
to seek out a remedy for them. And I pray God grant, that every one that is
infected with the aforesaid disease, when as this book shall come to their
hands, may apply it effectually unto themselves, that so they may expel the
poisoned malice of their cankered hearts. And all these patients I would have
to mark, that the more they give way unto their nature, or rather unnatural
affections, the more they shall be tainted with the horrible vices whereto they
are addicted. And again, the more they are infected with them, the more
venomous poison their children shall draw from them, not only whiles they are
in their mothers womb, but also much more afterward by their evil examples.
And howsoever it is little regarded that children can be infected with the
parents disposition while they are in the womb: yet daily experience does
show, that as they are formed and proportioned in body much like unto their
parents, so likewise in their nature and affections. Now therefore though thou
have small regard of thy self, yet for thy childrens sake, which are the fruit
of thy body, take heed, observe and practice good counsel herein contained;
which if thou do, I make no doubt but thou shall be a means to save both
thy self and many others: And moreover, pondering these things deeply with my
self, as I said, I called unto remembrance a Dialogue between two women to
this effect, written in Latin by the reverend learned man Erasmus; and
thinking it was not in English, I thought to publish the same in our mother
tongue for the benefit of my countrymem: but after considering further, that
that only concerned women, yea and that they might attain to all that which
he counsels there, and yet be damned; I have added thereunto the substance
of faith and repentance, with diverse other particular points and examples,
though briefly; which being practiced, are sufficient to life eternal. And
moreover, lest men by reading the former part of this book, which teaches the
duty of wives, should domineere too much over them, I have showed them also in
the later part thereof, the duties which they owe to their wives, drawn from
plain proofs, reasons and arguments of holy Scripture; so that they may both
learn how to behave themselves each to other, and both of them to God, as they
ought. And now if thou shall reap profit from thence, as I hope thou shall,
except the fault be in thy self, give glory to God, and counsel to thy
neighbors, as time and opportunity is offered: and in so doing, I doubt not but
God will give a blessing unto thee and thy directions; and by this means thou
shall be an instrument of a public and continual good, not only in making
good parents, but they by thy means also shall make good children, and good
servants: and this by Gods blessing shall successively go on from age to age,
even to the end of the world: and so by this means good parents which are
scarce, shall be multipled to the increase of Gods Church, and the flourishing
estate of the commonwealth. And further know this, that good parents are
special instruments to make godly children, and good servants; and godly
children and good servants will make religious men and women; and religious men
and women does make a flourishing church, and famous commonweal, set forth
Gods glory, and establish the Princes kingdom. Therefore I pray thee consider,
and lay it unto heart, what a common and continual good this peacemaking is
between married couples. Therefore by this premised, every one may easily see
how necessary, comfortable, and commodious this little book may be through
Gods blessing, to all sorts of men (high and low, rich and poor, religious and
profane) that some may teach, and some may learn, and all reap profit one
by another. And now gentle reader, if thou find any slips herein, as happily
thou may, I pray thee cover them with thy courtesy. Accept of my good will,
and receive that with thankfulness to God which may be profitable to thy
self; and if I shall hear that it shall be courteously received, and carefully
practiced, it shall be a means through Gods favor, to stir me up to
attempt a greater work, that shall be more profitable both for the Church of
Christ, and my dear country, for the wealth of both which I only desire to
live, and to have maintenance to manifest my love and duty which I owe unto
them.

But because I will not be tedious in the preface, I will conclude, lest I
weary thee before thou come to the Conference. Only this I desire of thee,
that thou will not only begin to read the book, but read it to the end. And
howsoeeuer some things may seem unsavory unto thee at the first: yet I fear
not but in fine thou shall find it profitable and comfortable. And thus I
commit thee and all thy good exercises to the blessing of the Almighty.

Studious of thine as of mine own quiet and profit, Robert Snawsel.

A LOOKING GLASS FOR MARRIED FOLKS: OR A profitable Conference, between
four women and one man, touching their behauiours toward God and their
husbands, and what they ought to be; and also the duty of husbands, toward
their wives.
The four women's names are, Abigail, the fathers joy. Eulalie, wel-spoken.
Xantip, a scold. Margerie, a proud malapert. Ben-ezer, an helper.


Eulaly. GOOD Morrow (neighbor Xantip) how do you to day? did you see my gossip
Margerie?


Xantip. No, I saw her not to day: but me thinks you are fairer then ordinary.


Eulal. What, do you begin to frump me?


Xant. No truly you seem to me to be very smug.


Eulal. Peradventure my new gown sets a gloss on my face.


Xant. I promise you you say true indeed, I have not seen a goodlier a great
while: I take it to be made of English wool.


Eul. The wool indeed is from England, but it was died in Venice.


Xant. Truly it is a most gallant gown, the softness of it passes silk:
and what a fine purple color is it of?


Eul. It is true, I like it well indeed: but look, who comes yonder?


Xant. It is Margerie, whom you asked for. Oh huge, how brave is she? you have
only a new gown, but she is new from top to toe.


Abigail. And yet, I fear me, her soul is as old as Adam; and as filthy as
the Serpent.


Xant. Where were you that we saw you not before now?


Abig. Little had you thought that I had been so near you, till you saw me.


Xant. No, for if I had, I would not have sworn so, as I did.


Abig. Alas I heard thee with grief, and thought to have told thee of it at
time convenient: but were you not afraid lest God should see you, and hear you
swear so horribly.


Xant. I know well, that God sees all things, but he is merciful.


Abig. And as he is merciful, so also is he just.


Xant. Welcome (Margerie) welcome.


Marg. God a mercy good Xantip; how do thou?


Xant. Better to see you so fresh and well liking; me thinks you are too too
brave, your gown is most stately made, your neckerchiefe is of the finest
cambricke, your stomacher is most gallantly wrought, and every thing about you
is so in print, that it does me good to look upon you.


Marg. Woman, I may speak it amongst us here, I will have it so.


Xant. And the more is my grief, that I cannot have it so too.


Abig. I pray you neighbors talk no more of those things; why should we
busy our minds so much about this outward apparel, which only sets out the
body, and many times makes us forget both God and our selves? Therefore I pray
you (good neighbors) let us regard this outward decking less, and the inward
adorning of our selves more.


Marg. What shall we have of you? a Puritan?


Abig. I pray you Margerie, use no more such scoffing speeches.


Marg. And I pray you Abigail tell me, do you not think better of your self,
then of any of us?


Abig. If you ask me to be bettered by my speech, I will tell you what I
think of my self.


Eul. Truly I do, Abigail.


Abig. I think in my conscience, that I am a poor, sinful, and miserable
woman, in my self not worthy to live upon the earth; only in and by Christ
Jesus, I hope to be made eternally happy.


Eulal. What, are you poor and miserable? have you not riches and the world at
will? and have you not a loving husband, which makes much of you?


Abig. Alack Eulaly, thou art an honest civil woman, I must needs say, but
yet thou speak very carnally. What is all my riches, if I had 10000 times
more then I have, if that I be not rich in Christ Jesus? and what though I
could rule the whole world, which way I would, if I have not peace of
conscience? and what if I have a loving husband, if I have not a good husband?


Eul. Are you not rich in Christ? have you not peace of conscience? and have
you not also a loving and good husband?


Abig. Because you protested, that you asked me to be bettered by me, I will
make my case known unto you in your ear. It is many times thus with me; when
I think upon my riches, and the abundance of wealth, which God has bestowed
upon my husband and me; then satan suggesteth evil motions in my heart, and
my corrupt affections break forth in my life, so that often I think better of
my self then I ought; and that I may neglect to work with my hands, and that
I may have this and that fashion of apparel, because other of my calling have
the same: and that I may eat this dainty thing or that; and that I may either
sit up idly in the night, or lie longer then ordinary in the morning. And on
the other side, while I thus pride my self in my apparel, and walk idly out
of my calling, and pamper this sinful carcass with delicious fare, I have not
respect unto some of my poor members, nay unto Christ's members, as I ought. I
speak this to my shame, that self love is so much in me, which quenches the
spirit of God, and depriues me many times of his favor, and the excellent
graces of his spirit, and then my conscience is troubled and disquieted; and
then it is such a grief unto me that I have not a good husband, howsoever I
confess indeed I have a loving husband.


Eul. What mean you by a good husband?


Abig. By a good husband I mean a religious husband, which should be my
partener, and helper, not only in bodily and worldly things, but especially in
spiritual and heavenly, that we might draw Christ's yoke equally together: that
so in and through Christ we might be glorified together. I tell you neighbor,
you will hardly believe, what a comfor it would be unto me, if he would
tender my soul as he does my body, nay if he would tender his own soul.
Indeed he will not be against any good thing I do, I thank God for it; but
here is my grief, that he will not be partener of the good with me, which is
the cause, when I am sick or afflicted in conscience, (as many times I am
humbled for my sins, I bless God for it) then, I say, he cannot minister
spiritual comfort to me. Only this he will say, how do thou wife? or God
help thee: which I take kindly: but alas it is far from that, which the
Apostle exhorts men unto; namely, that they should dwell with their wives, as
men of knowledge; that is, if the woman be ignorant as the most are, he should
instruct and inform her in the ways of the Lord; if she hear any thing
preached, or at public disputations, whereof she stands in doubt, she
should ask her husband judgment at home, and he should be able to resolve
her; he should be able through God to comfort her in affliction, and to rejoice
with her in prosperity: I do not mean any outward or fleshly joy, so much as
that, which is spiritual and heavenly.


Marg. What is that, which you two are whispering together of so long? I do
not think but it was about some religious matters, for Abigail loves to talk
of nothing else; and me thought I heard now and then a sound of some holy
words. My husband is much like unto her, they would have been very well matched
together.


Abig. Me thinks young women should not flout at any, much less at their
husbands or elders.


Eul. I pray you gossip tell us, what is the practice of your husband, I have
heard great commendations of him.


Marg. I warrant you he will not miss a Sermon, yea many times he will have
me with him against my will, when I had rather be walking abroad in the
fields, or else sit and talk with some of my neighbors: but sometimes I meet
with him; for I am so long time a dressing of me, that he is glad to go alone,
or else he should lose the best part of the Sermon. And when he comes home, he
will pray, and make such a long repetition of that which was preached, and then
such a several examination of every one concerning the points delivered, that
my heart grudges many times against him; and if it were not more for shame of
the world, then for fear of him, I would tell him on both sides, that he
troubles both himself and us more then he needs. But sometimes I get me out,
as soon as ever we come in, and other sometimes I lay the fault upon my
memory, when he does ask me, when I could, if I would, tell him; and then
afterward he goes to prayer again, and every morning he will be sure to
have us together at prayer; so after supper there must a chapter be read at
the least; and every one must tell some thing, either what the meaning of such
a verse is, or at least repeat some verse over that was read: and then he goes
to prayer again, and is so long commonly, that he make me so weary with
kneeling, that sometimes I am forced to sit, and sometimes to lean and kneel
again, and sometimes I am almost a sleep; so that he makes me wish many
wishes, that I will not utter.


Abig. You have uttered too much of your own evil disposition; truly I marvel
that you and such as you are do not fear lest the ground should open her
mouth and swallow you up, or the house fall upon your heads, or the Devil to
fetch you quick to hell, for this intolerable profaneness, contempt, and
abominable wickedness; that it will not only suffice you to abuse your
Christian husband, but God also and his worship, in such a horrible manner. I
dare assure thee, it does grieve me at the heart; and if it were not that I
received some strength and and comfort by the holy practice of your husband, I
think I should have fallen into a swound. Oh how does it grieve me that such
a good man is troubled with such a bad wife! But seeing nothing comes to pass
without Gods, providence, I hope it is only to exercise his patience, and that
he being crossed here with thee for a time, might live without thee in glory
for ever.


Eul. Why, but me thinks you are very earnest, and no less precise. It would
be irksome to any I think, never to have any pleasure, but to be ever
exercised, as she said her husband was.


Aibg. I tell thee my dear Eulaly, that it is the pleasantest and heauenliest
life in the world, the which does solace the soul, and rejoice the heart of a
Christian unspeakably; and there is no life of God in them, which lead not
this life.


Eul. Why, but do you think none shall be saved but those that do such
things?


Abig. Verily I think, that whosoever it is, that is ignorant of God and his
will, and without faith, cannot be saved. And again, whosoever it is, ye knows
the will of God, and will obstinatly either contemn ye practice of it in
others, or neglect it in them selves, is in the state of damnation.


Xant. She is ever of the mind of Master H.


Abig. I know, that it is not only our mind, but the mind of the holy Ghost,
and of all Christians, that are called to the knowledge of Gods grace; and I
wish in heart, that it were your mind, and if it pleased God, the mind of the
whole world. For if they did know certainly, that all those that are ignorant
of God, or contemptuously will scoff at the practice of holy duties in others,
or neglect it in themselves, are in the state of damnation, they would soon
change their minds, and say, We fools have been deceived; and so no doubt,
many of neglecters will become practitioners, and in steed of contemners of
Gods people, and their practice, would become frequenters and lovers of their
heavenly society.


Eul. I promise you, you say very well, I think there be but few women can
say so much.


Marg. Nay will you believe me, I think in my conscience, there are not many
me^ in our town can say so much. I wonder how you have thus grown in
knowledge within these few years.


Eul. I promise you, the more that I consider of her words, the more I marvel.


Xant. I will lay my life, that our sir John, nor sir William of B. cannot say
so much without book; it is pity yt you were not coupled to a preacher.


Abig. The greater is their ignorance, and the more shall be my punishment, if
my practice be not according to my knowledge; and therefore my hearts desire
and prayer to God is, that as he does increase in me knowledge, so he would
give me humility, and power to obey, that which I know.


Eul. Indeed you say true. For I remember our Savior Christ says, that he
which knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes.


Abig. O neighbor Eulalie, if you would but practice that which you know, I
should love you better then ever I did: for then I hope you would be a
Christian indeed.


Eul. Why, what will you make of me? have you known me thus long, and yet do
you think yt I am not a Christian?


Abig. It is not such an easy matter to be a Christian. But be not offended
with me, I will tell you what I think.


Eul. What think you, I pray you tell me?


Abig. I think you be an honest civil woman, and a Christian in name, but not
in nature and in deed.


Eul. Why, I was baptized, and go to Church, and I do not mock at the
Preachers and professors, as some do; I am neither whore nor thief; I pay
every one their own; I cannot abide to swear, etc. I hope you cannot accuse
me of deceiving any, nor of lying: what manner of people will you make
Christians?


Abig. Alas Eulalie, alas, I perceive you would be counted a Christian, and
that hitherto you have thought your self to be one. I must needs tell you
truly, that you have scarce set one foot in Christianity: for all which you
have said, you may do, and yet be damned.


Xant. Here is a sharp sentence.


Eul. I pray you tell me the right way, that so I may walk in the direct path
which leads unto Christ; that so I might become one with him, and an heir of
his kingdom.


Abig. With all my heart. The first step is repentance, and faith in Christ
Jesus.


Eul. What is repentance.


Abig. The Divines do define it in two words, mortification and vivification,
that is, a dying to sin, and living to righteousness.


Eul. And by what means must this be wrought in us.


Abig. By the powerful preaching of the word of God, which breaks and
softeneth the hard and stony heart, humbles the soul, and wounds the
conscience for sin which it has committed against the God of heaven, and
causes it unfeignedly to desire peace and reconciliation with him in his Son
Christ; with a detestation of all the sins which he has committed, and a
resolution to lead the rest of his life holy and unblameably, as in the sight
of God.


Eul. What is Faith?

It is the work of the Spirit of God in us, which does assure us of the free
pardon of our sins, and of the love and favor of God in Christ Jesus, with all
the benefits that come with him; as it is written: It is the Spirit of God
that bears witness unto our spirits, that we are the sons of God: and so
it is that spirit which causes us to apprehend and apply the mercies of God in
Christ, and our selves, to the obedience of his word.


Eul. I pray God that we may so do.


Abig. If you have an unfeigned desire (as you seemed to me to have) God has
promised to give you power, if you will give your endeavor therewithal: and so
I commit you to his grace.


Xant. Yea but Gossip, I pray you tell me, who gave you this new gown.


Eul. Your mind is more set upon my gown, then upon those heavenly matters
which Abigail spoke of.


Marg. I will lay twenty shillings, that Abigail has almost made her a
Puritan.


Eul. You think you may now talk your pleasure; when she was here, you had
not a word: she took you down I trow.


Xant. I hope if you have a new gown, we may without offense speak of it.


Eul. Shall I tell you how it is with me?


Marg. Yea.


Eul. Truly Abigails words were so gracious, that I could willingly have heard
her, though she should have sat with us all this day; her words are so sauoury
to my soul, that me thinks we should not put them out of our remembrance with
these outward things.


Xant. Well Margery, if she will not tell me who gave her her new gown, do you
tell me what cost your neckerchiefe a yard.


Eul. I think your mind runs thus upon these outward things, when you are at
prayer and at Sermons.


Xant. It is good to speak the truth; it does so indeed.


Eul. That ought not to be by no means: for thereby you much dishonor God, and
hinder your self, that the word cannot profit you.


Xant. Yea but will you tell me, who gave you your gown?


Eul. Why, who, I pray you, should give honest wives any such things but their
husbands?


Xant. And I pray you Margery, who gave you yours?


Marg. My husband also.


Xant. O happy women that happen on such husbands! For my part, I would I had
been married to a toad-stoole, when I married with my Ben-ezer.


Eu. O fie woman, what a wish is that? if Abigail had been here, you would have
vexed her to the heart; and I tell you truly, that you grieve me not a little.
For I remember well, what she said, and I hope shall do, whiles I live; namely,
that we which profess our selves to be Christians, should adorn the Gospel
of Christ by our holy conversation. And again, she said, that the Apostle
exhorts that our words should be gracious and poudred, that they might minister
grace to the hearers.


Xant. Yea you are happy, you have no cause to speak or complain, that have
all things you stand in need of.


Eu. I thank God we two do agree, and I am sorry that you two cannot, but that
every foot you are falling out.


Xant. I think I shall never fall in with such a fellow: you see how raggedly
he lets me go: I would I were dead, if I be not ashamed many times to go out a
door, when I see how finely other women are dressed, that are married to far
poorer husbands then mine is.


Eu. Well Xantip, well, I pray thee be contented; and if thou love me, nay if
thou love God or thy self, mark well what our good neighbor Abigail has
said out of the Apostle Paul, that the woman ought to be in subjection to her
husband. And again, the orname^t of a woman lies not in gay apparel, or in
any setting out of herself to sight, as S. Peter teaches: for I remember that
I heard awhile ago at a Sermon, that the ornament of a woman consisted in
chaste and honest conditions; and that the ornament of the minds or souls of
godly women, was love, meekness, faith, and patience, etc. And further, that
it is the guise of drabs and harlots to prancke and prick up themselves to
inueigle men's affections. Now then as for us, that would be counted honest and
religious matrons, we are neat enough, if we be cleanly, and can please our
husbands.


Xant. Yea, but this good man of mine is such a niggard, that he will not allow
me wherwithall I may go handsome, but prodigally he spends my portion, which,
though I say it, was no little one.


Marg. If I were as thou art, I would have better things, or else the house
should be too hot for him. My husband would not willingly let me have such and
such a thing, but I trow he shall never go to prayer quietly, nor have a
cheerful look till I have it.


Xant. Yea, but my husband does not only keep me without such trim attire as
you have, but he will not let me have that which is necessary, but spend that
we have in tippling and swilling, at dice, and cards, and amongst whores and
harlots.


Eu. Good words, good words: I think you surmise, and say more then is true.


Xant. It is too true which I say; and moreover when he comes home well
whitled in drink at midnight, after he has been a long while waited for, he
snorts like a swine when he is laid: and sir reverence casts up his drunken
gorge in the bed, to say no more.


Eu. O Xantip, you make my heart ache to hear you. Therefore mark this, that
when you do thus disgrace your husband, you shame you self.


Xant. I would I were dead, if I had not rather sleep with a sow, then lie by
his side.


Marg, But do you rattle him up at his coming home?


Xant. Yes, I handle him as he deserves, I make him know that I have a tongue
in my head.


Marg. And what says he again?


Xant. At the first he is as loud as I, thinking to bear me down with great
words.


Marg. But do you never fall from scolding to scuffling?


Xant. Once we were fallen out so far, that a little more would have made us
fight outright. He got up a great cudgel, and shaked it at me, threatening me
with thundering speeches.


Eul. O lamentable living between man and wife!


Marg. Wast thou not afraid then Xantip?


Xant. Afraid? no: on the other side, I took up the treuit; and if he had but
touched me with a finger, he should well have seen and felt, that I would have
laid about me lustily with both my hands.


Marg. I promise you, I commend you for your manly courage; you had got a new
kind of target, when you had the treuit, you did but lack your distaffe in
steed of a iauelin.


Xant. I would have made him have known, that he had met, and meddled with his
match.


Eul. O neighbor, this should not be so.


Xant. What tell you me of it? if he will not use me as his wife, I will not
entreat him as my husband.


Eul. But Paul, as I said before, teaches, that wives should be in subjection
to their husbands with all reverence, and not to be check-mates with them: and
Peter sets down Sarah for an example to women, who called her husband Lord.


Marg. We have heard of these things before as well as you: but the same Paul I
trow, teaches, that husbands should love their wives, as Christ did his Church.


Xant. Well, let him first do his duty, and then I will do mine.


Eul. But yet when the case stands thus, I think it is the wives part to yield
first to her husband.


Xant. Husband, quoth she, marry in good time; if he be a husband that makes
no more account of me, then of his kitchen girl.


Marg. But in kindness Xantip tell me: did he, when you stood so stoutly to
him, leave off to threaten you blows?


Xant. Did he? yes, and it was best for him too, I trow, or else as I am an
honest woman, I swear to you, I would have be labored my fellow well and
soundly.


Eul. O terrible mannish woman! I did not think that thou had been of such a
peremptory spirit. Thou do not remember that he has power over thee, and
that thou should let thy desire be subject to thy husbands.


Marg. It was well done Xantip; hold him out still at staves end, yield him not
an inch, lest he take an ell: let him not crow over thee.


Eul. You need not give her such wicked counsel; what, will you have all the
world to exclaim on our sex, and cry out upon women kind?


Marg. Why, none but men will speak against us; and if they do, we can give
them two words for one in the hottest manner.


Eul. Me thought you said your husband left his threatening: me thinks then
Xantip, in all equity and conscience, you should cease your scolding.


Xant. I mind not to leave it yet.


Marg. What does he, I pray thee, whilst thou art scolding?


Xant. What? sometimes he sleeps, flugge as he is; sometimes he falls a
laughing; sometimes he takes his fiddle, which has scarce three strings, and
thereon he strikes with his fidling stick as loud as he can, that he may
therewith drown the noise of me.


Mar. I am sure, this behavior of his angers thee to the heart.


Xant. It grieves me indeed to the very guts, and I so chafe sometimes that I
can hardly hold my hands.


Eul. I pray you good neighbor hold your tongue, and give me leave to speak
my mind a little to you.


Xant. Say on hardly, and speak your pleasure.


Eul. You shall be as bold with me when you please: me thinks we two for old
acquaintance sake should be very bold and familiar one with another.


Xant. You say true. For truly we have been play-fellowes from our cradles; and
of all that ever I had, there was none that ever I loved better then you.


Eu. Well then, this I say in love that I have toward you still, and my
request is even as you love me, to hearken unto me. You are married now unto
your husband, what manner of man soever he be, you have no liberty to change
him for another, or cast him off. In old time indeed, when couples could not
agree, diuorcement was permitted and appointed as an extreme remedy, but now
that is quite abolished. Ben-ezer must be your husband, and you Xantip his
wife, till one of you dye.


Xant. A vengeance on them, whosoever they be, that have taken away that law
and liberty from us.


Eul. Take heed what you speak, you wot not what you say, nor whom you curse.
It is Christ's pleasure I tell you, and no other man's, that it should be thus
henceforth.


Xant. I can hardly believe it.


Eul. Truly Xantip it is as I say, and therefore cry Christ mercy for thy
cursed blasphemy, and study to agree with thy husband henceforward, by applying
thy self unto his qualities.


Xant. Is it in my hands to make my husband a new man?


Eul. I can tell you Xantip, we wives may do much either in making or marring
our husbands.


Xan. Do you and your husband agree so well together?


Eul. Yes, now, God be thanked, we live in peace.


Xant. By your own saying it seems, that you could not well agree heretofore.


Eul. I must needs confess to thee, though I take shame to my self, the
fault most commonly was mine. For I was, as many other young women are, proud
and disdainful, scorning that my husband should reprove me; idle and
careless, seldom, or never, seeking to please him; but rather thought that
he should stoop and seek to me; and many times I would be lumpish and
lowering; and if at any time he spoke unto me any thing which pleased me not
well, I would snap him up shrewdly, and answer him crossely; with shame I may
speak it, God forgive me: yet after, as I grew in years, I grew in
experience, and coming acquainted with motherly and modest matrons, they gave
me grave and sage counsel, which I obeyed, and was much bettered by it: so
that after, there was never any tempest, I thank God. But yet as it falls out
commonly amongst married folks, some little clouds arose which might have made
a storm, except I had observed and practiced the wise and Christian counsel of
my loving religious neighbor Abigail, which made the clouds to vanish, and my
husband as meek as a lamb. For I considered that every man has his
qualities, and every woman her infirmity. I thought with my self how I might
behave my self best toward my husband for both our goods: and whiles I was
weighing seriously these things, and reuoluing the^ in my mind, these
sentences of Scripture came to my remembrance. A soft answer staieth wrath.
And again, A word spoken in due place, is like apples of gold with pictures of
silver. And further: In many words there cannot want iniquity, but he that
refraineth his lips, is wise. And again, A wise man waits his opportunity, but
a fool speaks whatsoever comes to his mind. And again, that which our
Savior says, that we shall give account of every idle word at the day of
judgment. And again: That by our words we shall be justified, and also
condemned. And moreover, the wise and gracious words of Abigail to king David,
came to my mind, whose words were so perswasiue and pithy, that they stayed his
fury, what time he was resolute, and at the point to commit a great and
horrible slaughter. And on the other side, I considered that we women are apt
to speak, and how the Apostle James wills us to be swift to hear, and slow
to speak. Hereupon I gathered what a grace and goodly ornament it is for a
woman to speak wisely and seldom, in modesty, and under correction: and
therefore I resolved to pray continually, that God would set a watch before my
lips, lest I should offend in my tongue: which though it be but a little
member, yet, as the Apostle says, if it be once kindled, is set on fire of
hell.

These, and such like sayings of the holy Ghost swaied with me, and drove me to
this consideration, that though my tongue be one of the least members of my
body, yet if it were not rightly used. I might offend the most by it; I might
much displease my husband, and hurt my neighbors, and destroy my own body and
soul for ever (all which ought to be more dear unto me then all the treasures
and pleasures in the world.) And on the other side, if my tongue were rightly
ordered, I might much glorify God, beautify his Gospel, and adorn my
Christian profession; speak in the behalf, and for the credit of my husband;
and for the good of my neighbors: and therefore I prayed unto God, that he
would open the door of my mouth, and give me utterance and wisdom, that when
I speak, my words might be directed by his Spirit, to put life and power into
them, and season them with wisdom, and to make them forceable, gracious, and
sauoury in the ears of the hearers. So that to conclude, always after I would
be careful what, and when to speak, the manner how, and to whom, yielding
that reverence to my husband, that is due to him. And I tell thee Xantip, these
things wrought so with him by the blessing of God, that since I do not
remember that ever we have had a cross word.


Xant. I promise you, I like your speech passing well. Well, now I wish in my
heart, that I, and all other women in the world, were of your mind: we may see
what it is to keep company with those that are wise and godly. I think our
neighbor Abigail did you more good then ever any woman did; and I thank God,
you have done me more good then ever any woman hitherto has done.


Eul. I rejoice greatly that God has made me an instrument to do you any
good, or any other. And this I pray you neighbor, if there be any good done
unto you by me through Gods mercy, show the fruits thereof in a holy life. For
I may tell you, be it spoken now to the glory of God, there were few that ever
thought you would have been reclaimed, you were so lavish of your tongue, and
so fierce, that you would have scared one with your words.


Xant. We may see the power of the Almighty, who can make of the lion a lamb,
and that a little child should play upon the hole of the aspe: and therefore I
pray you, pray unto God for me; yea and that also, when you are met together
with Abigail, and the rest of your Christian friends, that God would go on with
his good work which he has begun in me.


Eul. That is my duty. And to forget you in my prayer, were to forget my self
unto God. I pray you also, take all the means that may help you forward, and
renounce whatsoever may hinder you. You heard what holy and heavenly exercises
Margeries good husband used; use you the same, though she neglected and
loathed them. In any case cashiere her company, and the fellowship of such, til
you be stronger, or she better: for now she is a perilous woman, her evil
words and rotten speeches will corrupt good manners, and quench your good
motions: her religious husband is much vexed with her, even as just Lot was
with the unclean Sodomites. And again, I am to advise you, not to be dismayed
for those that will mock you for your profession, and because they see you
begin to make conscience of your carriage, who use to say, that we are a holy
sister-hood, and precise foolish women; which prattle and chat we know not
what. Bear them with patience, and be slow, yet sure, when you speak,
especially in the cause of Christ.


Xant. Blessed be God for this your love and good counsel: I hope I shall
make use of it, as God shall enable me. I pray you now show me some particular
directions how I and my husband may best live together in mutual love.


Eul. First of all I say to you, that many times love is clean lost between
couples, before they well know one the other; the maine reason of it is,
because they observe not one another qualities, and apply themselves
accordingly: and another, because they continue in strife when they are fallen
out, and do not betimes make up the breach. And the reason why they are
backward to make peace one with an other, arises from the stoutnesse of their
hearts, which being proud and stiff, will not stoop one to another; which
breeds heart-burnings betwixt them, and inward grudging and murmuring one at
another: and therefore these cursed seeds of dissentio^ and discord, being cast
once into the heart by the Devil, will spring up not only to roots, but trees,
and will hardly or never be helped, if at the first they be not speedily plucked
up by the roots.

Now then mark the use of this: you are yet but a young woman, and have been
married but a while, and I see with grief, that there have been bitter iars
betwixt you; and now you for your part, are desirous to have peace, and live in
amity with him, that so you might pass your lives with mutual joy. What
therefore is past let it be forgotten; and not only forget, but forgive all
unkindness. And if at any time your husband begin, either upon some cause or
no occasion to contend, answer him mildly, and with all modesty and
meekness: take heed that you put no fuel to the fire of his displeasure, for
if you do, it is a thousand to one but the flame will burn you both. The
tender twig is soon broken, but if it grow unto a tree, it cannot be stird
without an axe: which must cut it down. So likewise the nature of man is soon
pacified with a soft and gentle answer; but if it be asperate with bitter
speeches, nothing will assuage it, till it have had his course, which is
sometimes unto the destruction both of man and wife; except the mighty axe of
Gods word come in the mouth of his Minister, and cut it down. Therefore it
behooues us in the beginning to labor, what we can, to agree one with
another, and to strengthen our affections against evil dispositions, and to
holy actions. Now the only way to compass peace, is, that wives be buxom and
obedient to their husbands, and to use them kindly with gentle behavior. Now
whereas some women stand upon their pantofles, that is, either upon their
glistering beauty, their proper personage, great portion, and rich parentage;
alas it is nothing to lessen their loyalty and submission to their husbands.
And that man that sets his love upon his wife, for these outward things
especially, shall know, that as beauty passes, his love will pass with it;
and as riches wast, his love will languish: and as her parents die so, his love
will be buried in oblivion with them.


Xantip. Good gossip, tell me, what way went you to work to win your husband?


Eulal. I told you a little before: but to the end, that you may the better
remember it, and follow me, I will tell you again.


Xantip. If I can, I will do my endeavor to the uttermost, through the help
of God.


Eul. I make no doubt but that God will strengthen then you to any good work,
if you call upon him for his aid, and take those means which he has
appointed for the accomplishing of the same.


Xant. Well, I will.


Eul. First then this was my care; when he was pleased, how I might keep in
with him: and when he was angry, how I might appease him. And this was one
maine thing that I would continually aim at, to behave my self humbly and
meekly toward him, both in word and deed; also I would carry my self
cheerfully toward him, and I would look up and down, that there should be
nothing that might offend him. I also observed his disposition and inclination.
Moreover I had respect unto times and seasons, that his diet should be
provided in due time; and that he should have such delicates, as were most
comfortable for his heart, and pleasant to his mouth; and so by this means I
won both him and his love unto me; whereas before me thought he was as cruel
as a Lion, and terrible as a Dragon. Therefore I considered what those do that
take in hand to tame Lions, and Elephants, etc. which cannot be mastered with
strong hand; therefore they that go to the Elephant have a special care that
they be not clad in white; and they that go to Bulls, that they be not araied
in read; because it has been found by experience, that those creatures by
these colors, are made wilder and fiercer; and also Tigres by the sound of
Timbrels, by report are so enraged, that they rend themselves in pieces; So
they that break horses have their terms, their smackings, whistlings, and
clappings, whereby they make their stout nature tame. Why then Xantip consider
I pray you, how much more seemly and necessary it it, that we women should
acquaint our selves with such courses, whereby we may win our husbands to
goodness; by whom we should have the greatest comfort and defense next under
God.


Xant. It is true: say on, I pray you, say on.


Eulal. Having observed these things, I applied me to his nature, and I had
great care that nothing should be done that might displease him; nor nothing
left undone, that might offend him. Not only of my self had I this care, but
of all that was in in the house; and that not only in great matters, but also
in the least


Xantip. But how would you apply your self to him that would never tarry
within doors, or come every while drunken home?


Eul. Stay a while, I will speak of that by and by. First I will show you
forth my behavior toward my husband, because you desired to know it. When he
looked at any time very sad, and there were no fit time to speak to him, I would
not the^ laugh and dally with him, and play the tom-boy, as many women are wont
to do in such a case, but I put upon me a sad countenance also, and looked
heavily; for even as a looking glass if it be a good one, does show the
countenance of him that glasses himself in it: So it beseemes an honest wife
to frame her self to her husbands affection, and not to be merry, when he is
melancholy, nor iocund, when he is sad, much less flire when he is angry. And
if at any time he were stird, I would either pacify him with gentle speech, or
give way to his wrath, till it were somewhat alayed; or else I would keep
silence, til there were fit time for clearing my self, or aduising him with
reverence and discretion. This course also I took; if at any time he came
drunken home, I would not then for any thing have given him a foul word, but I
would cause his bed to be made very soft and easy, that he might sleep the
better, and by fair speeches get him to it.


Marg. Here are fetters for the legs, and yoakes for the necks of women: must
they crouch on this manner to their currish and swinish husbands? If I had such
an one, as he behaved himself like a swine, so I would use him like a beast.


Eulal. I had thought we had been rid of your company.


Marg. I stood behind, and heard you so long, that I could no longer hold my
peace. Are you a woman, and make them such dishclouts and slaves to their
husbands? Came you of a woman, that you should give the^ no prerogative, but
make them altogether underlings?


Eul. I pray you be patient: I have spoke nor counseled any thing but what I
have done my self; and I have done nothing, but that which is warranted by the
word of God.


Marg. I hope the word of God does shewmen their duties to wives, as well as
the wives toward their husbands.


Eul. It is so: but first we must show the one, before we can do the other.


Marg. You should have begun with the men first.


Eul. It might happily have been somewhat tedious, and women mostly are so
fickle, and will find themselves so many things to do, and are so soon weary
of hearing and reading any good thing, that they would scarce stay to hear the
beginning of their duty; therefore I thought best to begin with them first.


Marg. Trust me, you are a small friend to your own sex.


Eul. More then you are to your own self; for you are ignorant and careless
of that good, which you might have by your husband, if you would be loving and
submissiue to him.


Marg. Tell not me of the good, which I may have by my submissio^; for this is
the truth of it, I care not though he heard me: I never mean to have my neck
brought under his girdle, but I will rather make him buckle and bend unto me,
or else he shall have an vnquet life.


Eul. It is true indeed, that many such as you are will have their husbands bend
and crouch unto them. But how seemly or warrantable this is, let every one
judge. It is neither for the woman's credit nor profit, when the stream runs
with violence this way. What a horrible sin is it, that the woman should
usurp the man's authority, and the poor man dares not do any thing, but what
his wife will? and as she says so it must be, or else the house will not hold
her, neither will she look upon him without lumping and lowering; and if any
describe the vglines of her countenance in the time of her anger, she will
scarce be friends with them. Oh therefore, Oh therefore, that these masterly
dames would but glass themselves, that they might see their rugged brows,
their fiery eyes, pouching mouths, their black and poisoned tongues, which
utter horrible blasphemies both against God and men, especially against their
husbands, whom they should love most dearly. So here is the cause why many
men think it their greatest wisdom to possess their souls in patience, and
to pass by many grieuances in our sex. Only this is the refuge of those that
are godly, to comfort themselves in the Lord their God. Therefore well (says
Salmon) It is better to live in the wilderness with a dinner of green
herbs, then to have a stalled ox, or to live in a wide house with a
contentious woman.


Marg. I will be sworn, if there were but three or four more here; if they
were of my mind, we would teach you how to defame and shame us on this manner.


Eul. You defame and shame your selves, I only show, what shrewes are: and
those that will neither be ruled by God nor their husbands: as he that touches
not pitch shall not be defiled, so she that is not of this stock and lineage,
is not blamed.


Xant. Let her alone good Eulaly, and tell me how did you after your husband was
in bed.


Eulal. When his stomach was emptied, and he come to himself, when he was not
stirred in his affections, nor troubled with other actions, but he and I alone,
either in bed, or in some convenient place, I would gently admonish him, or
rather entreat him, that he would have a care of the health of his body, and to
avoid that sin, to be overcome with drinck; telling him of such young men, yea
gallant gentlemen as he knew, who got surfets by so ouercharging their
stomachs: also with weeping eyes I would entreat him, to have a care of his
estate and credit, children and servants, lest the one should be undone by his
spending their portions, and the other by following his unseemly course of
life. This was the manner of my proceeding with him, seasoning my speeches in
the best manner, that they might not be distasted but digested of him. Also
sometimes I was wont to use a preface, and make him promise me, that he would
have patience with me, if I a simple woman should put him in mind of
something, that might tend to his credit or welfare any way; and when I had
told him my mind, I would break off that talk, and fall into some other more
delightful to him. For gossip Xantip, I may say to you, that this is the
weakness of us women, that when we have begun to speak, we are so
talkatiue and full of words, that we wot not when to leave.


Xant. It is the pleasure of men indeed so to say of us, who have no better
sport, then to speak of, and report our infirmities: but say on I pray you.


Eul. I had also a special care of this, that I would not find fault with my
husband for any thing, in any bodies presence, nor complain of him abroad. A
matter is soon amended, that is but between two, and not blazed abroad. But
if the matter be of such a nature, that it cannot well be helped by the wives
counsel, it is a seemelier course that the wife make complaint to her husbands
parents, or some of his kindred, rather then to her own; and also that she
moderate her complaint and te^per her speech so, that she may seem not to hate
her husbands person, but only his ill conditions. Neither let her blab out all;
that so, when her husband comes to hear of it by his friends, that she has
spoken of his faults with the least, he may be forced to acknowledge his wives
courtesy, and kind dealing, and to say as Saul did of David: She is more
righteous then I.


Xant. She had need be an Academick, and brought up in their schools and
University, that should skill to do this as you have set down.


Eul. By this means we shall draw our husbands to show us the like kindness.


Xant. There are some husbands, whom no gentle entreaty will do any good.


Eul. Truly I think, there are few or none such: but say there be; first of
al, as I have said before, the husband must be borne, endured, and dwelled
with, though never so wretched and wicked, even a devil incarnate. Therefore
it is far better to bear with one like our selves, or that may be bettered
by our courteous carriage, then one, that will be worse every day then other,
by our overthwart and crabbed behavior. Come on Margerie, what will you say,
if I tell you of some husbands, that have reformed their wives on this wise by
their gentle carriage. If they do it, how much more the^ is it meet, that we
should do the same to our husbands?


Marg. If you can tell us of a truth of any such, I say they are rare swans,
and such husbands are hard to come by.


Eul. Why, there are many such geese as you are, will not be ruled by them,
but continually will be gagling at them.


Xant. She has such a swanne her self; if she had eyes to se him, or grace
to make use of him: I would I had such another; if I had, I would think I had
a rare Jewel.


Eul. I am acquainted with such another, who is both a learned and a noble man,
and of an excellent good courage. He married a young maid about 17. years old,
brought up continually in the country; as noble men you know have a kind of
felicity to dwell in the country, that they may there hunt and hawk. He would
make choice of a plain and homely wench, to the intent he might better bring
her to his bow. He began to teach her to read, and to play on instruments,
and by little and little to accustom her to make relation of some points
delivered in the Sermon, and to train her up in other matters, which were
commendable and profitable. Now because these were strange and uncouth to the
rude young woman, which had lived quitely in her mothers kitchen among men and
maid servants, she grew soon weary of them, and would not obey her husband (as
you Margery will not:) and when her husband urged her to them, she would like a
child, put fingar in the eye, and sometimes she would throw her self upon the
cold ground, and beat her head against it, as if she would have beaten out
her brains. She continued this course a good while; her husband very wisely
winkt at it, and kept in his displeasure. On a day he willed his wife for
recreations sake, to walk with him, into the country to her father. Oh she
was in heaven when she heard of that, and went with all her heart with him to
her fathers house. Being come thither, he left his wife talking with her mother
and sisters, himself went into the fields a hunting with his father in law;
and being there and no body by, he told his father in law, how he hoped, that
he had happened on a comfortable companion to have past his life withal; but
now he perceived, that he had one always puling and complaining, and
pitifully taking on, and that he could not help it, with whatsoever he could
say: Therefore he prayed his father to play the Physician, and to cure his
daughters malady. Her father made him this answer: Son says he, once in the
Church I delivered my daughter to you: if she will not be ruled by your
counsel, use your authority. Then the young man, thus replied: Father I know
very well, what I may do by my place and authority; but I had rather she might
be brought into order by your skill, and authority, then to use the extreme
remedy of Stafford law. Upon that his father promised him to do whathe could to
cure and physic his daughters crooked and perverse disposition. Within a day
or two therefore he picked out a fit opportunity both of time and place to deal
alone with his daughter. Calling her to him aside, and composing his
countenance in a grave and grim manner, and solemn sort, he began to show
her, what a hard favored woman she was, and of no lovely qualities, and how he
was often afraid, least he should never have bestowed her in marriage: and yet
says he, through the great care that I have had for thee, I have procured
thee such an husband, as the most courteous and beautiful damsel that is,
could not desire a better. To be brief, the fathers speech grew so hot, that
he could scarce hold his hands. The young woman moved partly with fear, and
partly with the truth of that her father told her, fell down at his feet,
praying him to forgive her, and promising ever after to be mindful of her
duty. Her father forgave her, and said further, that he would show himself a
right father, if she would do as she promised.


Xant. And what followed?


Eu. The young woman going from her father, returned to her chamber, finds her
husband all alone, falls upon her knees, and cried: O husband, unwise as I was,
I have not hitherto known you nor my self: hereafter you shall see me become
a new woman: only good husband forgive and forget my former disobedience. This
unexpected humble speech of his wife, he welcomed with a kiss, and promised
her all things, if she would still continue in this mind.


Xant. Yea, but did she so?


Eul. Yes to her dying day; neither was there any service so base, which she
would not willingly undergo at her husbands pleasure, howsoever Margery it may
be, you would have done it at your leisure. And there grew every day such great
love betwixt the^, that within few years she would often in company rejoice
and bless God that she was matched with such a husband, whom if she had not
married, she thought there should not have been a more miserable creature under
the Sun.


Marg. Such men as these are as rare as white crows.


Xant. Yet you have such an one.


Eul. The greater shall her judgment be, except she repent: for there are few
women in the country, I can tell you, that have such a religious husband, who
seeks by all means her salvation.


Xant. Have you no mo such examples?


Eul. Yes, that I have, and one especial one, which I hope will please
Margery, it being much in the comme^dation of a woman, as the other was of a
man.


Xant. I pray you let us hear it.


Eul. There was a neighbor of ours, a very honest man, but somewhat of a
hasty nature, and of a waspish and tetchy disposition: on a day he beat his
wife, a woman, by common report, of singular good carriage, and excellent
behavior, such an one as Abigail, being very well beloved of all her
neighbors. Being beaten and abused of her husband, she betakes her self into
her secret closet, and there she sits sighing and sobbing, so easing her
heart, and disgesting her grief. Soon after upon occasion her husband went
into that room, and finding his wife woefully weeping, says to her: Why
sit thou here fighing and sobbing, and crying, like a child? She then thus
prudently and patiently answered: Husband, said she, is it not better to do
thus, here to bewail my grief where no body hears nor sees, then to run
and cry out in the streets, and to exclaim on you, as others do on their
husbands? By this wise and gentle speech of his wife, the stout heart of her
husband was broken: he gave her his right hand, and promised that he would
never touch her again in any evil manner; neither did he.


Xant. I have brought my husband to that pass too, but yet another way then
she did.


Eul. But I think you cannot yet agree.


Xant. Why, what would you have me to do?


Eul. O Xantip, how often have I told thee how thou should behave thy self to
thy husband? I perceive thou have a bad memory, or at least, small list to
learn, since so soon thou forgettest thy duty. Well, once more I will tell thee.
First you must put up all injury at his hands.


Marg. Yea, so one might soon be made a fool and a footstool: I would
rather do him two for one.


Eul. Hold you your tongue Margery, I speak not to you but to Xantip. Then
Xantip you must labor to win his good will by doing all duties with
cheerfulness, and loving kindness: so shall you at last overcome him, or at
least you shall have him in a far better temper then he is in at this present.


Xant. Alas woman, he is far fiercer then he was before: I fear me, no
gentleness will prevail with him.


Eul. Fear not woman, there is no wild beast so savage, but by gentle handling
it may be tamed: be not then hopeless of a man; do but put in practice and ure
my advice for a few months, and then blame me, if you find not my counsel to
do you good. There are some small faults which you must wink at; and take
heed that you give no occasion of contention, and think no scorn to be
serviceable in those things which become you. There are some women that will be
ever frumping or whining, seldom or never using any amiable behavior toward
their husbands, which is a sign that they have not the love of God shed abroad
in their hearts. For if they had, it would cause them to love their husbands
unspeakably.


Xant. Indeed gossip, I must tell you plainly, I cannot show that love to my
husband that I should, and some do to theirs, he is so cross to me, and every
way so untoward.


Eul. But I hope it would be for your good, if he would leave his bad
qualities: suppose when you are angry with your husband, that then you could by
the art of Circes transform your husband into a swine, or a Bear, or any such
like beast, would you not do it?


Xant. I know I should not: but whether I would yea or no, its hard to say.


Eul. What, had you rather have a swine or a Bear to your hushand then a man?


Xant. You do not hear me say so; I trow, no.


Eul. Go to then, what if you could make him of a wine-bibber, a sober person;
of a ding-thrift a good husband; of a slothful, a painful person; of a
profane creature, a religious and zealous Christian, would you not do it?


Xant. There is a question indeed. Yes, with all my heart would I: but how
should I do it?


Eul. Xantip, Xantip, thou art like unto those women which the Apostle speaks
of, that are always learning, and are never taught: so thou art always asking
how shall I do this and that, and yet thou remainest still ignorant: and will thou know why thou art so ignorant still, and forgetful?


Xan. Yes, with a good will.


Eul. It is because you do not practice that which is taught you. I showed
before to you, that you must adorn the Gospel of Christ by your holy
conversation. Now if you be a Christian, as I thought you were, and suppose you
think no less of your self; of you the Apostle asks this question: What
know thou o wife, whether thou shall win thy husband? meaning, by thy holy
example, gracious words and counsel, prayers and patience, your conference and
community. Now if by any means you can win your husband, what a rich crown of
glory shall you obtain? what unspeakable joy and comfort shall you have both
in this life, and in the life to come? Set not your eyes so much upon his ill
conditions: for that makes them seem greater then they be; and to twit him
with them, is not the way to bring him to goodness, but to make him worse.
Before you were married to him, you should have considered what his ill qualities
were: for it behoues a woman not only to choose a husband by her eyes, but also
by her ears, and by experience of his qualities; neither is it a time after
once they be married, of complaining and accusing, but of curing their bad
husbands.


Xant. What woman knew you ever, that chose her husband with her ears?


Eul. She chooses a husband with her eyes, that respects nothing but his visage
and personage: and she chooses him by her ears, that warily and wisely weighes
what the world, especially the best sort, say of him; and she chooses him by
experience, who tries his love and constancy.


Xant. This is good counsel, but it is all too late.


Eul. But it is not too late to labor the reformation of your husband; and yet
it shall be in very good time, if you can profit your husband. For the way to
good manners is never too late; and you both shall find a double comfort of
it, if your husband shall have any children by you.


Xant. I have one already.


Eul. When, I pray you?


Xant. A pretty while ago?


Eul. How many months since?


Xant. Welneere seven.


Eul. How can that be? Is it possible that you should have a child in three
months?


Xant. Tush, it is longer.


Eul. It is not a day longer, if you begin your reckoning from the marriage
day.


Xant. Yea, but we had conference before.


Eul. Like enough; but I hope children are not gotten with conference. Is this
you that complain of your husband so much? I perceive one house is better
troubled with you then two. I fear I have bestowed all my labor in vain upon
you? what think you will our neighbor Abigail say, when she hears of this?
it will grieve her not a little.


Xant. We were sure together before.


Eul. The sin is something the less, but yet except it be repented of, and
that from the heart, God will punish you both for it; and therefore look to
it, and lament it, as also all other your misdemeanors. What is it, a boy?


Xant. Yes, a goodly lad, God bless it.


Eul. You must have a special care to bring him up in the fear of the Lord;
otherwise make your reckoning that he will be a great cross to you both: but
if you will catechize him now from his cradle, and so continually, no doubt but
he will be a means to set you at one, if that you will but incline a little to
your husbands mind. I pray you tell me, what do other men say of your husband,
your neighbors, and those that have dealing with him?


Xant. They commend him out of all cry for a courteous, liberal, and friendly
man.


Eul. This makes me hope that he will prove such an one as we would have him.


Xant. But I am sure that I find him not such an one to me, whatsoever they
say.


Eul. Yea but do you show your self such an one toward him, as I have
counseled you; and if he prove not such an one in time as I said, call me
Eulalie no longer, but Pseudolalie, or liar. Moreover remember, that yet he is
but a young man, not, as I think, above four and twenty years old; alas poor
soul, he knows not yet what belongs to a husband or housekeeping. You must
not think to be separated from him, as a great many do, if so be they cannot
agree upon every thing, then straight nothing but separation.


Xant. God forgive me, I have often wished it.


Eul. But repent of that; and if ever it come into your mind, consider with
your self how frivolous a thing it is for a woman to be divorced from her
husband, since so many inconveniences follow of it. Again, think with your
self, that it is the crown and commendation of a matron to be obedient to her
husband, as has been said; yea, that it is a thing ordained in nature, and
decreed by God, that the woman should wholly depend upon the man, and have him
as her head. Also remember the pretty little boy, the fruit of your womb; what
would you do with him, if you went away? would you carry him with you? then
you should deprive your husband of his right: would you leave him with your
husband? then you shall deprive your self of part of your self. Lastly, tell
me, have you any that bear you ill will?


Xant. Yes, I have a stepmother, and mother in law like her: for they hate me
so much, that I think they could wish I were at the Devil.


Eul. Then remember them also. For what could you do to make them rejoice more,
the^ if they should see you live alone like a widow; nay worse then a widow:
for those may mary again, but so could not you, but must live rather like an
harlot that is separated for adultery.


Xant. I must needs say your counsel is good, but I cannot abide to be thus
vexed every day.


Eul. But think with your self what great labor you took before you could
teach this parrot to pronounce some words.


Xant. It was a long time indeed.


Eul. And does it seem irksome and tedious unto you to take some pains to
make your husband a good man? You are not the woman I took you for: for I
always thought that you would have refused nothing that might be profitable to
both your souls and bodies, and that you might pass your days in peace and
pleasure. You have heard how great pains men take to break their horses, and
what curious means and devices they use to tame Lonys, Bulls, and Elephants,
and shall we think much to take a little pains to have good husbands?


Xant. What shall I do?


Eul. Truly, it grieves me to hear you. This is the foot of your song
commonly: What shall I do? Why this do. Be careful that your house be neat
and cleanly, that there may be nothing to drive your husband out of doors. Be
gentle, loving and kind to him: be always mindful of that reverence which is
due to him. Be not lumpish, nor yet to^boyish: be not sluttish, nor yet garish
in your apparel: let your meat be well dressed, and in due season: know your
husbands tooth: let him have that which will delight his palate: show your
self gentle and affable to his friends, bid them often to your house, and
see with chearfulnes all be ha^dsome. When your husband is merry, be not you
sad: and when he is melancholy, be not you merry: for contraries will not agree
together. Make his bed soft, and see that every thing which is good be
provided for him. By this means you shall have him keep home, and so save
idle expenses: for thus will he think with himself at length. Good Lord, what
mean I? what a fool am I that live ranging abroad with loss of my goods and
good name, by keeping drabbe, and drunken company, when I have such a good and
loving wife at home, which takes more pleasure in me, then this flattering
harlot? why then, much more should I be delightful to her, if I would quite
leave these truls, and swilling company. Well, I will resolve with my self
henceforth to leave this filthy and beastly course of life.


Xant. Do you think that I shall prevail?


Eul. You are very incredulous, and a woman of small hope: you would ill do I
perceive as a certain grave matron did, which I had thought to have told you
of before, but I let it then pass, because I would not be tedious unto you.


Xant. I pray tell me, what she did.


Eul. You are marvelous desirous of novelties, and inquisitiue to know: it
were an excellent thing in you, if you were as ready to practice what you
know, and to follow the good examples you hear of.


Xant. Well, I hope I shall do it.


Eul. I will briefly show you the same: not that I would have you to follow her
steps, but learn wisdom from her policy. There was an ancient Gentleman,
who gave himself to hunting, and as he was an hunting, he light upon a young
maid, a poor womans daughter. For love of her, he would leave his own house,
and frequent that. His wife suspecting some such matter, watched him one time
whither he went, and seeing him go to a poor cottage, thither she went one
day, when he was away, and got out of them what he did there, how he lay; she
could see nothing there but bare stone-wals, and mere poverty. She goes home
in have, and makes no less speed again, bringing with her a handsome bed, and
good provision, with silver plate, and also gave them money, willing them, if he
came any more, to make more of him and give him better entertainment; not
telling them all this wile, that she was his wife, but made semblance as though
she were his sister. Soon after she was gone, comes her husband privily, not
knowing what was done; and seeing the house richly furnished, his diet more
dainty, and greater plenty of it then ordinary, he asked them whence they had
all this furniture and provision. They told him, that a grave matron a
kinswoman of his brought it them, and charged them at her departure, to give
him better attendance and entertainment. By and by his heart smote him, and
told him, that it was his wife: he goes home in all have asking her, whether
she had been in such a place; she tells him yea; then he asked her, what she
meant by it, to carry bedding, and such a deal of good plate and provision
thither. O husband says she, you have been used ever since I knew you, to a
better diet and lodging, then I see any there; for you have there but bad
entertainment. Therefore I thought it my duty, since it was your pleasure upon
what occasion I know not, often to resort thither, that you should have better
provision when you came, then they could afford you. Now mark the issue, when
the man saw the tender love and care of his wife, he never stole out after, but
continually kept her company at home. Also I could make rehearsal of another,
if I thought it expedient, which invited home her husbands paramour; and if he
supped abroad with her, would send them some one dainty dish or other, and by
this means win their husbands love wholly to themselves. But howsoever this
fell out at sometime, yet it is not lawful to take the same course, though we
were in hope, our attempt should have success; for we must not do evil,
that good may come of it. But to this end I have alleged these two last, that
if women have won their husbands, which were lincked to harlots; then much more
may Christian women by their lovely and holy carriage, be in hope to win them,
which hate such strumpets, And thou Xantip, that say thy husband haunteth
harlots, this is my counsel to thee, to make much of him; not because he does
that wickedness, or to flesh him in his lust, but that thereby thou may
reclaim him from it: but in no case countenance thou his paramour.


Xant. I purpose to practice your precepts.


Eul. Look on me; I promise you, if you practice the^, as you have often said,
you shall find me a friend indeed, and I will go to your husband, and get
Abigail, that can give beter counsel then I, to go with me; and we will tell
him thoroughly of his duty, yea and that in such a manner, as I make no doubt,
but he shall accept of it.


Xant. I commend your course. But take heed he smell us not out; for if he
know, that I have made his faults known to you, he will be so outrageous, as
though he would bring heaven and earth together, and take on with me like a
mad man, and bedlem,


Eul. Fear not, we will bring the matter so cunningly about, and fetch him so
finely over, that I make no doubt, but that we will draw out of himself, what
broils have been betwixt you; and when we have drawn out all his corruptions
as clean as wine out of a vessel, then will we put into him the heavenly
liquor of holy doctrine, and tell him how he is to demean himself toward
you.


Xant. Christ prosper our enterprises.


Eul. We may be sure that he will give us good success, if we do not
cross our selves. So fare you well.


Abig. God speed neighbor Benezer, how have you done a long time?


Ezer. Welcome neighbors, welcome: how do you?


Eul. Tell us I pray you, how does your wife?


Ezer. Even like a shrew, for any thing I know.


Eul. If I may be so bold as speaks, it is better to be a sheep.


Ezer. I give you my word gossip, my wife is not a sheep, nay, I pray God she
prove not a wolf.


Abig. It pleases men many times to speak their pleasures of their wives,
though they be never so kind to them.


Ezer. Kind? my wife is so kind, that I Will warrant her she will never kill me
with kindness, for hers is contrary to nature and womannishnes; for I think
there is not a verier shrew, and horribler scold living upon the earth.


Abig. Yea but neighbor, I pray you give me live, you know that men are
sometimes hasty, and will move their wives to speak.


Ezer. Speak, say you? As the saying is, there is a difference between
staring and stark mad; so may I say, there is a difference between speaking
and scolding. For I will tell you neighbors, I was but forth the other night
somewhat late, with a friend or two of mine; but good Lord, when I came home,
what a life she kept? I had no sooner put my head within doors, but she gave
me such a terrible look, and uttered such an horrible voice, that I thought
verily that she would have flowne in my face, and have scratched out mine eyes;
uttering these speeches, Where the pox have you been all this while? Is not
this a fine time to come home at. You are welcome from your whores with a
murraine; a vengeance light upon you, and the devil in hell fetch you: I would
you might break your neck one night, that I might be rid of you some way or
other.


Abig. Is it possible, that she should be such a terrible woman?


Ezer. If you did but hear her sometimes, neighbors, you would bless your
selves; for I think in my conscience that she is as terrible as a Lion, as
subtle as a serpent, and as wicked as the devil himself; for what with her
scolding, what with her swearing, and with her tumults and burstling up and
down, you would think the very house would fall upon our heads.


Abig. O the unspeakable patience and mercy of our God, that he suffers such
things unpunished!


Eul. Good neighbor learn to bear with your wives weakness and infirmities.


Ezer. Infirmities? what call you infirmities?


Abig. The wives infirmity toward her husband is, when she cannot put up wrong
at his hands.


Ezer. Put up wrong? she will revenge two rather, then put up one. I think
she would vex the patientest man upon the earth: sometimes she moves me so
much, that I am ready to beat out her brains.


Abig. God forbid, I am very much grieved to hear of such bitter contention
berweene man and wife; and so, I am sure, is my neighbor Eulaly.


Ezer. I will tell you both but a little, how she has used me. If I spend but
a teaster or tweluepence, then she railes upon me, as if I were her prentice
boy, that had stolen it from her: or if I will not buy her this toy, or that
new-fangle, this dainty morsel or that; she takes on like a mad woman, saying
that such a woman can have this, and that for a word, and why may not she, as
well have the same? And if I be but forth a little, why then she will rail
upon me, as if I were her slave, yea a devil incarnate: though many times
she is forth half a day, yea a whole day together, she thinks I must say
nothing; if I do, it shall be spread abroad, and ten times more shall be made
of it, then either I said or thought. When she comes in, if I do but say in
all gentle manner: Xantip, or wife, where have thou been? straight she will
snappe me up with this answer, Why what care you? or what have to do? must I
make you accounts? (marry muffe:) can I go no whither but you must know it? I
will ask you leave, when you are dead, etc. Or if I ask her, why did thou
stay so long? she will answer, If I had known my staying would have angered
you, I would not have come yet, I will go and come when I list for all you. If
I speak her fair, she thinks I flatter her, and will begin to frump and
frown: if I threaten, then she will bend her fists, and tell me to my face,
that I shall have as good or worse then I bring; and will stand daring and
challenging me for the blood in my belly, etc. What man think you can endure
such a woman?


Eul. Indeed if al these things be true, which you have said, she has been
much to blame; but I hope neighbor that she will become now a new woman, if
that you would but a little bear with her.


Ezer. She is naught, stark naught, never speak for her: I have forborne her
too much and too long, and I perceive that if I give her an inch, she will
take an ell.


Abig. O neighbor, good neighbor, now be patient, and do but remember how
we deal with God, and yet he waits with patience, looking if at any time
we will turn unto him: and though we be obstinate still, yet he offers
himself unto us in love, whereas long ago justly he might have destroyed us in
the midst of our sins for ever.


Ezer. I promise you Abigail, you say true: if God indeed were not very patient
and exceeding merciful, it would be wrong with us.


Eul. Therefore the long patience and goodness of God, ought to lead us to
repentance, and to deal favorably and in tender compassion one with another.


Ezer. You say true, it should do so indeed.


Abig. Yea, and it must do so too, if we will be the Lords servants, as it is
written, Let your patie^t mind be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand. Now
if this one lesson were deeply written in our hearts by the holy Ghost, we
would not be so ready to take revenge one upon another, as we do, neither
should such bitter and poysonful speeches proceed from us, as commonly do;
neither would we put the evil day far from us, as the most do: but we would
with speed depart from iniquity, and wait diligently and continually for the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.


Ezer. Believe me, believe me, I would my Xantip were here, to hear you, I
hope your good words will do her good.


Abig. Alas sir, we are but simple women, little able to do either you or her
that good, which you might have reaped by the word of God preached: but yet if
it please you to give us leave, we will show our minds, what a comfortable
thing it is for man and wife to live together in love and charity.


Ezer. Indeed, I think no two women in the town, no nor in the whole country,
can show it better then you, because you know what it is by experience.


Abig. We thank God, we both have experience of it to our comforts, and so
would we, that you had, with the loss of the best horse or cow, that either of
us have.


Ezer. I thank you both, and I had rather then the best gelding in my stable
with twenty pound upon his back.


Abig. Seeing then that peace between man and wife is so comfortable, and you
would so gladly enjoy it with so great loss; will you be content to hearken,
and be thankful to God, if that we show you a direct way, how you and your
wife might agree together, as long as you shall live.


Ezer. Be contented, say you? yea and be glad of the time that ever you set
footing over my threshold. I have had so much unquietness already, that me
thinks a little peace, would be as a little paradise to my soul; but yet if
my wife did know, that I desired and labored for peace, she would be the
further off it, except God wrought above ordinary in her.


Abig. We are but women, and therefore something bashful, as it beseemes us,
to speak unto you being a man, of these matters; yet under leave and
correction, we will do our good will to declare those things which we have
learned and partly know by experience.


Ezer. You are both ancient, and I am but young, and my wife also; and
therefore I would you could direct and tell us a way how to live quietly.


Abig. First of all, before you can love one another as you ought, you must
labor for the love of God, which must be shed abroad in your hearts, the
which love, will cause you to love one another.


Ezer. I hope we have the love of God already, otherwise I am of the mind,
that he would either punish us, or else take his blessings from us.


Abig. Do you not think this a great punishment, that you cannot agree? Truly
I may safely say, that it is a punishment both to your bodies and souls.


Ezer. I confess indeed that it is a punishment, but yet I hope that God
loves many men and women, that yet fall out betwixt themselves.


Abig. Surely if there be continual strife, it is an evident sign, that the
Lord loves not the one of them, if not both.


Ezer. But how should we know whom it is that the Lord does not love?


Abig. They which are the cause of the continuing and breeding of the broiles.


Ezer. That is my Xantip.


Abig. But who will you be judged by?


Ezer. By God and the country.


Abig. Well, God judges the heart: and for your self we have heard that you
have a good report among your neighbors; therefore I have the better hope of
you: and therefore I pray you let me ask you one question.


Ezer. Ask me two if you will, I will tell you if I can, I like your talk so
well.


Abig. What think you is the love of God to his children?


Ezer. That is too hard a question for me to answer, I do not profess my
self a Divine.


Abig. But every Christian ought to be a Divine, especially in such principles
as the love of God is, without which none possible can be saved in this life,
nor in the life to come.


Ezer. I do believe verily that whomsoever the Lord loves not, them he hates,
and whomsoever he hates, upon them abides his wrath and heavy displeasure, till
he bestow upon them his love; and therefore I pray you, if you can, show me
what the love of God is, and I will gladly hear you.


Abig. The singular love of God unto his elect is that whereby he loves them
in himself, and has adopted them in his son Christ, before the foundations
of the world; and hereto pertaines predestination vocation, the gift of faith,
and of the spirit, justification, regeneration, and eternal salvation, with
whatsoever is good, comfortable and profitable for them in this life. And here
by your patience, it shall not be amiss to show likewise the love of Christ
unto his Church, because we are to fetch our light from his candle.


Ezer. I pray you do: for I have both good leisure and pleasure to hear you.


Abig. Our Lord Jesus Christ being in the throne of glory, yea, being the Lord
of glory, disrobed himself, and came down from heaven, and of God became man
for our sakes, taking our nature upon him; endured much misery for the space of
30 years and upward, was as an exile amongst his cruel enemies, which
reproched, buffeted, blasphemed, and persecuted him unto death: besides that,
he suffered the wrathful displeasure of his Father in his soul, and the
grievous torments of hell that were due unto us, that he might free us
therefrom, as it is written: The chastiseme^t of our peace was laid upon him,
and by his stripes are we healed. Esaias. 53. He was made a curse for the sin
of man, that so man might in him be blessed. Therefore neighbor how ought
these things to work upon our consciences, and to force every one of us
particularly to say: O miserable wretch that I am, that for my sin my Savior
should suffer such horrible punishment? o sweet Savior, how am I bound to
praise and thank thee? Who am I that thou should think, much less look
on me, or do any thing for me, seeing that I have so many ways offended thee?
But this is thy mercy, yea thine incomprehensible and unspeakable love, that
thou should not only free me from death and damnation, but bring me to life
and salvation, even to a better estate then Adam was in before his fall. O the
admirable mercy of God, and the incomprehensible love of Christ, how am I bound
unto thee? What thanks and praise is due unto thy majesty for these
unspeakable blessings? for that thou have not only freed me from eternal
misery, but have brought me unto everlasting happiness, and made me one with
thee, as thou art one with thy Father, that I might be glorified in thee, as
thou art in him; and to this end thou have made me bone of thy bone, and flesh
of thy flesh, so that thou art become wholly mine, with all things that belong
to thee.


Eul. O good neighbor consider of this unspeakable love of God and his Son
Christ toward his whole Church in general, and to every one of his children
in particular, how that the Lord of his free grace has wrought in us
repentance and faith, and has shed his love abroad in our hearts, and assured
us of the free pardon of all our sins, and of his everlasting love and favor
in his Son Christ Jesus our Lord: and has made us one with himself, and his
Son, and partakers of his divine nature, and has filled our hearts with
unspeakable comfort and joy of the holy Ghost, which we desired so much in
the days of our affliction. And further, has given unto us his Spirit, which
is the earnest penny of our everlasting happiness; and which does sanctify
us daily more and more, and strengthen us to every good work; and has
promised that no good thing shall be wanting unto us, if we will be obedient
unto him. How ought these things to cause us to love God again, and for his
sake to love one another? seeing that he of his mere mercy has made us
partakers of such happiness.


Ezer. They are happy indeed that have all these things bestowed upon them
which you have spoken of.


Abig. Every true Christian is in such a happy estate before they can find
sound comfort unto their souls, or before they can perform any duty pleasing
unto God, or before they can love their wives as they ought.


Ezer. Then there are but few that love their wives as they ought.


Abig. It is true indeed, and more is the pity. For some love their wives for
their lusts sake, some for their beauties sake, some for their riches sake,
some for their friends sake, some for natures sake, and some for necessities
sake; because they see if they should not, it would not stand with their quiet,
profit, and credit. But take once away the aforesaid causes, and their love
falls to the ground. If it be for lust, when that is satisfied, he rather
hates the^ loves her, as Ammon did his sister, 2. Sam. 13.15. if for beauty; as
that vanishes, his love decaieth; if for riches, nature, or friends sake; as
they lessen, his love lessens with them; if it be for necessity, it is
counterfaite: or if she win his love, as some do, by her fair language,
then it turns as the wind. Finally, if it be for any outward cause, or for
all the causes under the cope of heaven, without the love of God, it will be
uncomfortable, unconstant, and unsound: but if it be for the love of God,
though for no other cause in the earth, it will be undefiled, comfortable,
continual, and increase more and more. But all love else whatsoever that
proceeds from the husband to the wife, and from the wife to the husband, is
rebellion against God; and the more a man loves his wife, or the wife her
husband, the more they sin against God. Howsoever this may seem harsh unto
worldly men, yet that which does ensue will make it plain; for the more that
both husband and wife love each other without loving God, the more they will
seek to fulfill their fleshly lusts, though they be never so much against God,
and his word. Therefore it behoues every man to love his wife with such love, as
Christ did his Church.


Ezer. What manner of love was that?


Abig. It was not fleshly, but spiritual, not earthly, but heavenly.


Ezer. But must he not love her outwardly, and provide such things for her, as
are necessary, profitable, and comfortable, for the preserving and cherishing
of her body?


Abig. Yes, it is the part and duty of every man, chiefly of a Christian so to
do, (as I would have showed you anon) or else he shall not only sin against
her, but against God also.


Ezer. I pray you now show, how a man must first show his love to his wife, and
what is the first fruit of his love.


Abig. In the first place, he must give himself unto God with fasting and
prayer, that the Lord would bless his enterprises and proceedings; and when he
has humbled himself unto God he must not think much to humble him self to
his wife.


Eul. This will be harsh unto the most men, and they will hardly, or never, be
brought unto it.


Abig. But if they will be Christian men, they must do it, and that for these
causes. First, because it is not hurtful, but good and profitable not against
the word, but warrantable and commanded by it. And lastly, because Christ has
given them example so to do.


Eul. I pray you, if you can, show these things more plainly.


Abig. For the first, if you look from the beginning of Genesis to the latter
end of the Apocalypse, you shall never find it spoken against, either openly,
nor inclusiuely; and thereupon I gather, that seeing it is profitable, it may
be practiced in a civil and courteous manner. And again, humility is a
virtue, and the more eminent place a man is in, the more it does adorn him, if
he be endued with it. And further, though he be in never so high a place, he
is commanded to humble himself to his brethren; yea and to make himself, as
he is a Christian, equal with them of the lower sort. Now if it be his duty
to humble himself toward every one, and to make himself equal with those of
the lowest sort: then much more to his wife. Again, they are commanded to
honor their wives as the weaker vessels; that is, as I take it, not only to
bear with their wives infirmities, but to submit their minds unto them in
that which is good, and kindly to entreat them in humbleness of mind, and to
advance their credit and good name, and to stand in their defense against
whomsoever that oppose themselves against them. And lastly, by Christ's example,
they are to be lowly, and humbly to submit themselves unto their wives, as he
does unto his Church and people.


Ezer. How does Christ humbly submit himself unto his Church and people?


Abig. Christ does submit and humble himself unto his Church and people, both
in himself, and by others. His submissio^ is showed both by his words,
gesture, and actions. By his words, when he lovingly entreats her to leave her
corruptions, and to accept of his loving favor and kindness, which he offers
unto her as a token of his love and unfeigned desire he has that she should
be at peace with him; and to the end that he might win her love, he makes
many gracious and beauteous promises unto her; yea, he bestows many rich
treasures upon her, suing and wooing of her, and sometimes when she turns her
back upon him, he turns his face to her, saying: what ailes my love, my
dove, my undefiled spouse? when she is sad, he will make her joyful many times,
when she frowns, he will look upon her with a cheerful countenance. And
again, he attends and waits at the gates of her portall, saying: Behold I
stand at the door and knock, open unto me, my love, my dove, and undefiled.
And moreover for his Churches sake, which is his wife, he bended his knees, and
humbled himself unto the earth: yea, unto death, and that unto the most
shameful and horrible death of ye cross. What baesnesse did he refuse to
honor her? Consider the reproaches and indignities he endured, of the pains
and miseries which he underwent for the love he bare unto her, and to win
her unto him again; and still how he does send his messengers and ambassadors
to entreat his Church in his stead to be reconciled unto him.


Eul. One would think that these things should cause the heart of man to
stoop, and to bend his affections unto his wife.


Ezer. Yes verily, so think I too, little had I thought that any could have
made these things so plain.


Abig. If so be you think these things so evident, which I a simple woman have
opened unto you: how much more evident then think you, should they have been,
if a godly learned man had had the matter in handling?


Ezer. Well, seeing it is so plain as it is, what is the next course that I
must take, that there may be peace and continual love between me and my wife?


Abig. After you have done as I have set down, and declared your love unto
your wife, you then with wisdom and reverence, and in a loving manner, must
show unto her her miserable estate, which she stands in, and the judgments of
God due unto her for sin, that so she may be humbled.


Ezer. But if I should tell my Xantip of her miserable estate, she would be so
far from humbling her self, that she would rather be ready to fly in my face.


Abig. I hope not so. But hearken, I pray you. Men do many times fail in the
manner of their directions and admonitions unto their wives, which is the cause
that they profit no more then they do: for commonly in their anger they will
tell their wives of their faults, and that in such a hasty and hare-braind
sort as spoils all: or else when their wives are moodie, and troubled in
mind; so that it is no marvel that they do more hurt the^ good. The very
heathen would not fight nor reprove in their anger; how much more then ought
Christians to wait their oportunities, when they may do the most good?


Ezer. Why, but do you hold then that a man may beat his wife when he is
quiet?


Abig. Nay. Much less when he is angry.


Eul. There was never any that hated their own flesh, but nourished and
cherished it. Now the wife is the husbands own flesh, as it is written: They
twain shall be one flesh. Therefore, etc.


Ezer. Yea, but though he beat her, yet he need not hate her. And again, has
not the man as much power over his wives body, as the father has over the
child: but the father may correct and whip his child for his fault, and yet
love him too. For it is written in the Proverbs: He that corrects not his
child, hates him


Abig. The comparison is not equal, howsoever it be granted that the husband
has power over the wives body: yet it is not in that manner as the father has
power over the child's: he has power over the wines body for procreation, and
so she has power over his, and both over the child's for correction. So by this
kind of reasoning the wife has as great prerogative over the man's body, as
the man has over the wives. For so says the Apostle: The man has not power
over his own body, but the wife: nor the wife over hers, but her husband.


Ezer. Again, it is said, that S. Paul did beat down his own body, to bring
it under, when it would not be in subjection; from whence we may gather, that
the wife being as the man's own body, may be beaten, when she will not
otherwise be kept under, but be checkemate with him, that thereby she may be
brought into subjection to him.


Abig. By beating, the Apostle means not a striking, a flapping, or whipping
of himself, as the foppish Papists falsely imagine, but a taming of his body,
by abstaining from those things which might puff up his flesh: and so indeed
we grant, that a man in wisdom when he sees the stoutnesse of his wives
stomach, or the pride of her heart, and raging of her affections swell, either
against God or him, then, I say, he is to restrain her from those things
which might make her more malapert, and he may then use such holy means as
may keep her under.


Eul. Men, as Abigail showed, are to love their wives as Christ loved his
Church.


Ezer. Yea, but you know, though Christ love his Church, yet if it will not be
ruled by him, he will correct it, and that sharply: so by your own reason, is
a man to love his wife; yet if she will not be obedient to him, he may correct
her by Christ's example.


Abig. Howsoever it is said that the Lord corrects his Church if she will
not be ruled by him, he does not thereby give example or encouragement, that
any man should beat his wife, but it serves to awe us, lest we offend his
majesty; neither can any do it in that manner, nor bring profit thereby, as
Christ does. As for the manner of Christ's correcting his Church, it is in love:
but never was it heard, that ever any man did beat his wife in love. And
again, he should do to his wife as to himself; but every one would account
him a mad man yt would beat himself. Further, ye Church by Gods correction is
made better, but the wife would be made more unruly and outrageous by beating.
We are women, and have some experience of these things.


Ezer. I think you rather speak, because you would not have husbands to use
their authority.


Abig They have no such authority, neither will we for our parts give them
occasion to strain that which they have upon the tenters.


Ezer. I would my wife would give me no occasion neither.


Eul. I suppose by your speech, that you have had many bouts.


Ezer. Yea that we have, till the blood has run down the one of our faces.


Abig. O lamentable thing to be heard of in a Christian common wealth between
man and wife!


Eul. But how much the better has she been?


Ezer. Not so much as I have been the worse, and she also was worse and worse
rather.


Abig. I pray you neighbor, therefore follow our counsel though we be but
women.


Ez. What would you have me to do?


Abig. Suppose now that you had some deformity on your face, which did
dis-figure you so much, ye one would be loath to look upon you; and if you
could help it, what would you do?


Ezer. If that by any means I could help it, I would presently; and if I
could not, then I would cover it, that none should see it.


Abig. So likewise ought you to deal with your wife, for she is a special
member of your body, yea as has been said, she is as your self; therefore as
you help the deformity of your own face, or if you can not heal it, cover
it, so must you do unto your wives deformities. Again, if you had committed
some filthy and abominable sin which were not to be named, and there were
only one or two that did know it, what would you do in such a case?


Ezer. Surely, if possible I could, I would stop their mouths that they
should not utter it, lest I should be shamed.


Eul. Why then, if your wife commit not such ugly offenses, how much more ought
you to keep silence? and though one or two know of it, to entreat them to
make no words? seeing you have confessed, that the more ugly and grievous your
offenses are, the more careful you would be, lest they should be spread
abroad: therefore the more your wives infirmities are, the more you are to do
the office of a good physician; even to labor to cure them; and if you cannot,
at least to cover them, as it is written: Upon your uncomely members, put more
comeliness on, the which may not unfitly be applied to this matter. Thy wife
is one of thy principal members; if she be uncomely any way, put thou more
comeliness on; if she be not so beautiful, as thou desire, cover it with
contentation; if not so provident as she ought, cover that with thy good
husbandry; if she be not so wise, as thou wishest, cover that with thy
prudency.

If she be not so loving as is fit, cover that with the skirts of thy love; if
choleric, cover it with patience: and although she fail in duty, which
she ought, yet she may challenge yours as due debt, as long as she is your
wife you are bound to give honor to her as to the weaker vessel.


Eul. If these things were well considered of many men, much strife and
terrible broiles would be left between man and wife.


Ezer. Yea, but I must needs tell you that these things can hardly be digested;
for if we should yield thus much to our wives, they would make stark fools
of us.


Abig. No, not so sir, for you shoud see the blessing of God upon you, which
would mitigate the swelling and raging of your wives affections. I pray you
tell me sir, say that you had a soar arm grievously wounded, or had drunk a
cup of poison, or were sick near unto death, what would you do in these cases?


Ezer. If I had a soar, I would have a salve according to the nature and
bigness of the wound; or if I had drunk poison, I would presently seek a
remedy to expel it; or if I were sick near unto death, I would ask the
counsel of the physician, and follow the same, and the more sick that I
should be, the more would I make of my self.


Abig. Even so you must do to your wife; the greater that her soar is, the
better your salve must be, and the greater her wound is, the more must be your
plaster, and the skilfuller surgian is required; and the more her sickness is,
the more careful and tender you must be over her.


Ezer. Neither pains, care, nor cost should be wanting, if I were in hope to
do her good.


Abig. The captain cannot promise his soldiers victory, before they fight;
nor the physician his patient health, before he minister unto him: but yet
Christ Jesus our captain has promised you victory, if that you will be
directed by him.


Ezer. Yes, with all my heart.


Abig. This then is your precept, that you love your wife as he did his Church.


Ezer. I will try, if that I can win her by kindness.


Abig. That must be the way, if ever you win her, and the means whereby you
must keep her being won. Now seeing we have proceeded thus far, if you
please I will you show the causes, as I have heard of a learned and godly man,
wherefore the husband should love his wife.


Ezer. Do so then with a good will, and I would every cause were a cord to tie
me unto it.


Abig. The causes are so weighty, yea every one of them so mighty, that they
may not only be termed hempe^ cords, but rather strong iron chains to tie and
bind not only you, but every man to his wife, in the inseperable knot of love.
The first is because she is the creature of God, made of the same matter and
nature that you are. The second is, because she is your wife; and the third
is, because she either is, or may be a Christian. Now for the first, for that
she is the creature of God made of the same matter and nature that your self
is, you are to love her, though she be your enemy; as it is written: Love
your enemies; that is, as they are the creatures of God, and made in his image,
not for their own sakes: yet for Gods sake. Secondly because she is your wife:
For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and cleave to his wife, and
they shall be one flesh. This does so glue and join man and wife together that
no unkindness or wickedness, (except adultery) ought to separate them. The
third cause that ought to join man and wife in affection together, is in that
she either is or may be a Christian: if that she be, then you are to love her,
for that she is called unto the same profession, baptized with the same
baptism, sanctified and renewed by the same Spirit, bought with the same
price, partaker of the same hope, faith, and communion of Saints, and of the
same graces, and heavenly riches in Christ Jesus, and made heir of one and the
same kingdom of glory, for ever to reign with God and his Christ, in the
presence of his holy Angles world without end. These things I say ought to
cause a man to love his wife, to cherish, maintain, and provide for her like a
woman, and to comfort her, as his own bowels. Now where this true love is,
there will nothing, that is either necessary, profitable, or comfortable for the
wife be wanting, if that possible her husband can procure it; and I would all
husbands would mark this. For according to his love, will his care be, to
provide for her; and after his care, will his diligence be to please her; and
as he pleases her, so shall he have comfort by her.


Eul. This may serve to reprove the corrupt, proud, and churlish affections of
many men, which will rather seek to cross them in that which is good and
godly.


Ezer. It is true, and much more are they to blame, that tirannously will rule
yea ouerrule, and that without all rule, credit, or honesty.


Eul. Now I perceive neighbor, that your name and nature do agree well
together.


Ezer. What should I do? I must needs speak the truth, and that which I have
known by mine own experience; for I have been much inclined to offend this
way, God forgive me, and others also, whom I know have been twice as bad, as my
self.


Eul. The worse they are this way, the worse it is for themselves; for as it is
said, the hasty man never wants woe, so I think I may say, the tyrant shall
never want a shrew.


Abig. I would such men would but a little consider how the Lord does ^^tigate
their authority over their wives, when he says, that they should honor them
as the weaker vessels. And again, that man and wife make but one body; and
again, that they should draw the yoke equally together.


Eul. Your wish is very good Abigail; for want of due consideration is the
neglect of true practice of all duties.


Ezer. And truly neighbors it comes to my mind now, that the Lord laid these
duties of loving and honoring their wives upon men, partly because they are
stronger and more able to bear and support the infirmities and weaknesses of
their wives, then the wives are of the husbands. And again, that the husbands
should not swell too much with their authority, that they should not make their
poores wives as slaves, but should account of them as themselves. For the Lord
knew very well that men are of such natures (for the most part) that if he
gave the^ power, they would stretch it to the uttermost: and therefore he
abates their superiority, and makes it in some measure equal with the wives.
And further he would have man to know that this is his dignity to give honor
unto the woman, lest she through the loftiness of his mind should be used
crosly and unkindly.


Eul. Lo neighbor, lo, yonder comes your wife.


Ezer. Why how now wife, where have you been all this while?


Xant. Forsooth husband, I have been about some special business, that
concerns you and me.


Ezer. Why did thou stay so long?


Xant. I pray you good husband be not offended with me, and I will tell you.


Ezer. I am glad, that you are so humble and courteous; if you hold on thus
Xantip, I hope that we shall never fall out.


Xant. I hope that I shall not only continue, but increase in doing my duty
both to God and you.


Ezer. And then I make no doubt, but my love shall be more and more extended
unto thee: come and sit down here, and tell me, where have thou been?


Xant. If it shall please you husband, I have been much troubled in my mind
since I went forth, for some iars that have been between us.


Ezer. And I have been much quieted and comforted in my mind, wife, since thy
coming in, for the peace which I hope shall be between us: but proceed and
say one.


Xant. As I was coming home, I spied a solitary place, which I went unto, and
there powered forth my complaints to ye Lord, praying his majesty for pardon of
my disobedience toward you, and al my abusing of you with my tongue by railing
speeches, and that we might more quietly live together then we had done; for I
felt such horrible gripings within me, that I thought my heart would have
burst: and then came the trifling occasions of my falling out into my mind,
which made such horrible broiles and hurly burly between us, the which at ye
first I might have stopped with a patient word; but sinful wretch yt I was, I
rather opened a fountain, by my railing tongue. And thus as I was bewailing my
miserable estate, and thinking what a hell it was, for man and wife to be at
ods, there comes by Master T, who seeing me all alone, asked me what I did so
solitary. I could scarce speak to him for weeping. He often asked me what I
ailed, saying merrily it was more strange to see me weep the^ fight; and
further asked if we had fallen out, and now I had got ye foil? I told him no, we
were not fallen out, but I was much grieved that we could keep no more in; at
which words he wondered, and yet rejoiced to see me mourn. And when he
perceived that I was much afflicted in spirit for my offenses, he comforted me
with these and such like words, saying: Blessed are they that mourn, for they
shall be comforted. Blessed are they that go on their way weeping, for they
shall return, and bring their sheaues with them. And applied unto me the
sweet promises of God in Christ Jesus, saying, Christ says: Come unto me ye
that are thirsty, and buy of me wine without silver. And again: If any man
sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Christ Jesus the righteous. And when
I cried, I have sinned against my husband, and more against God, what shall I
do? what shall I do? he would bid me possess my soul in patience, and
believe in the Lord Jesus, and take hold of his mercies by the hand of Faith,
and then, though my sins were as red as scarlet, they should be as white as
woolle; and that the Lord took no pleasure in ye destruction of sinners; but
if they would turn from their evil ways unto him, and continue in well doing
unto ye end, they should undoubtedly be saved. And when he had somewhat pacified
my wounded spirit, he persuaded me to go with him to a Sermon. I paused a
little, but at last went with him, in a blessed hour I thank my God: for I
reaped more profit and comfort thereat, then ever I did at any before.


Abig. The cause, neighbor Xantip, or rather the fault I may say, has been in
your self heretofore, in that you have not gone so humbled, and with an
unfeigned desire to know, and do your duty.


Xant. I acknowledge it to be so, good neighbor Abigail, and I pray God
forgive me that, and all my other sins.


Abig. God has promised to forgive all that unfeignedly repent, of whom I make
no doubt, by that I have now heard from your own mouth, that you are one.


Eul. What did ye Preacher handle?


Xant. He spoke of the mutual duties of man and wife, and of both their duties
toward God.


Ezer. That was most excellent doctrine for us, wife.


Xant. Yea indeed husband, I thank God, it was most profitable, and
comfortable, I wished you many a time there.


Ezer. I thank God and our good neighbors, we have been well exercised here
this afternoon also: for I hope they have done me more good then ever I
thought women could have done to man in that kind.


Xant. I thank God also for it, and I rejoice at it in my soul.


Ezer. Well wife, here is my hand, and give me thine, and let us renew our
covenant which we have broken with God, and toward each other. And now let us
here vow both before God and our good neighbors, Abigail and Eulalie, through
his grace to keep the same inuiolate while we live.


Xant. Here husband, here is both my hand and my heart.


Abig. Blessed and praised be our gracious God for his exceeding mercy now
showed to you both: and I beseech his Majesty that you may both keep your
covenant with him, and one with another while breath is in your bodies; that
when it shall be his pleasure to take you hence, he may receive your souls
and bodies into his glorious kingdom.


Ezer. And blessed are you, which through Gods mercy have been special
instruments to do us good; and I with my wife, accordingly as we are bound,
will not cease to praise God, and to pray to him for you, that he would of
his rich grace preserve and bless you both, with us and all the rest that love
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be all praise and thanks for
ever. Amen.



