THE BRIGHT MORNING STAR: OR, The Resolution and Exposition of the 22.
Psalm, preached publicly in four sermons at Lincoln. By JOHN SMITH Preacher
of the City.

Apoc. 22.16. I am the root and the Generation of David, and the Bright
Morning star.

Printed by JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1603. And are
to be sold at the sign of the Crowns in Paul's Churchyard by Simon Waterson.

blazon or coat of arms of William Wray EMMANUEL

^^^d^n (...) in Christ Patris Will^^^ (...).

Coll Emman. Cantab.



To THE RIGHT Worshipful, religious, and courteous Knight, Sir William Wray,
my approved good friend and benefactor, salutations in the Lord Jesus.
SIr: it seems a thing very reasonable to me, that seeing every bald tale,
vain interlude, and pelting ballad, has the privilege of the Press, the
sermons and readings of ministers may challenge the same: the world is full of
Guy of Warwick, William of Cloudeslee, Skoggins, and Wolners jests, and
writings of like quality: and therein men take great delight to read, and so
make themselves merry with other men's sins, bestowing to this purpose much
vain time and superfluous expenses: and J think the Stationers shop, and some
men's shelues are better furnished with such trifles, which deceive the mind
and affection as the bait does the fish, then with wholesome writings of
nature, art, or religion. In which respect in seems to have been less
hurtful to mankind, if Printing had never been invented, saving that the use
of a thing is not to be forbidden because of the abuse: these things
considered, have imboldened me to publish my meditations and readings to the
worlds views and seeing that Printing is a trade whereby diverse good Christians
maintain their charge, and that for want of better employment they sometime
are compelled to prostitute their Presses to ^^^s and vanity: seeing also the
truth may better appear by writings of diverse men, which perhaps one or two
or more could not readily discover: therefore I have thought good in some part
to prevent the danger of the one, and promote the benefit of the other. J have
not varnished my writing with the superficial learning of words, and figures,
tongues, and testimonies of men (which not withstanding I do not disalow) but
because I purposed to apply my style to the understanding of the simple, I
endeavor to utter matter with all plainness of words and sentences. Now
because I have experienced your self to be under the Kings Majesty a
principal professor and protector of religion in these quarters: (for what a
multitude of faithful ministers are debtors to you in the flesh?) and for that
I among the rest have rested under your shaddowe, your name came first to my
mind in this writing: wherefore I beseech you vouchsafe to entitle it with your
name, and I shall acknowledge my self graced thereby. The Lord increase in your
self and your virtuous Lady and children all manner of heavenly graces and
blessings.

Your Worsh. humbly in all manner of Christian affection, John Smith.

The resolution of of the 22. Psalm, which may be entitled the Bright Morning
Star.
THe time when this Psalm was penned is unknown in special: generally
notwithstanding it may seem to be, when the Prophet was in some great conflict
of conscience, and temptation to despair, whence he gathering consolation,
recouereth at the length.

The Argument of the Psalm is a description of the estate of every true
Christian and godly heart in the person of David: also a type of the sufferings
and glory of Christ.

The psalm contains two parts:

The title or inscription. The matter or substance.
The title contains four particulars.

1 The manner of writing, which is in form of a Psalm. 2 The person that
composed it, who was David. 3 The person to whom it was committed to be kept,
set, and song: who is called the master musician. 4 The matter and argument of
the Psalm, which is concerning the morning star.
The matter and substance of the Palm comprehends a: Complaint: Prayer.

The complaint contained in the two first verses has 2. things. 1. the person
to whom he complayneth: (God:) amplyfied by an argument of relation. (my God)

2 The thing whereof he complayneth, which is that God has forsaken him. Which
the prophet avouches by 2. reasons.

The first, that seeing God did not help him, but was far from his health:
therefore he forsook him.

The second, that seeing God heard not the words of his roaring nor gave
audience to his prayer: therefore he forsook him.

This prayer which the prophet professes he made to the Lord, in the time of
this his woeful desertion has two adiunctes: 1 His prayer was fervent. 2. His
prayer was continual.


The feruency of his prayer has two parts.

faith: (my God.) desire: (roaring cry.)
The continuance of his prayer: (day and night.)

This is the first part of the psalm the complaint.

The second part of the psalm which is the prayer follows.

The prayer has a

1 Supplication: containing also a deprecation. 2 A Gratulatio^ or
thanksgiving.
The supplication is continued to the 22. verse, wherein is expressed both the
faith and assurance the prophet conceaueth to obtain: and the desire: which
are the two essential parts of a fervent prayer.

The faith of the prophet is grounded upon 4. arguments to the 11. verse: The
first argument or ground of faith is in the 3. verse taken from the nature and
office of God, which is to sanctify and redeem the Church that he may be
praised and glorified by his church: concluded thus.

If thou will sanctify the church and be praised by the church, then deliver
me the redeemer of the Church, without whose deliverance, neither thy self can
be glorified, nor thy church redeemed or sanctified.

But thou will sanctify the Church (for thou art holy) and thou will be
praised by the Church ( for thou inhabitest the praises of Israel.)

Therefore deliver me verse. 11.

Thus the argument is applied to Christ: to David thus.

Thou Lord art holy sanctifying thy children: therefore sanctify me, and
deliver me from the power of sin and thy wrath, that I may praise thee with all the true Israelites, whose praises are offered up to thee, as to the only
owner and possessor thereof.

The second argument or ground of faith is in the 4. and 5. verses framed thus.
If the fathers that trusted in thee, and called upon thee are saved and
deliuerd and were not confounded: then save me also who am their savior.

But the fathers of the old testament etc. are saved.

Therefore also save and deliver me verse. 11

The reason of this argument is: for that Christ necessarily must be saved and
delivered, seeing the fathers were saved by virtue of his sacrifice: whereas
they could not so have been, if he had perished.

Thus the argument is applied to Christ: to David thus.

As God has dealt with others: so will he deal with me.

But God delivered our fathers that faithfully prayed.

Therefore he will deliver me also that pray faithfully: and so this argument
is taken from the experience of Gods goodness to others.

The third argument or ground of faith is in the 6.7. and 8. verses taken from
Relation of Gods mercy to man's misery: disposed thus:

The most merciful God will relieve the miserable creature calling upon him
faithfully.

But I am a most miserable creature. etc. and thou a merciful God.

Therefore relieve and deliver me. verse. 11.

The minour of this argument is amplified comparatively and simply.

The comparison is taken from a worm. As a worm is exposed to all wrong and
injury, and of base account: so am I.

The simple arguments are the parts of Christ's misery, which are three: 1. he
was shamed. 2. contemned. 3. derided.

He being God most glorious, was shamed and dishonored by man, that is, Adam
dust and ashes.

He that should have been accounted of, as the only Savior of his people,
was contemptible to the people.

He* whom men should have gloried and rejoiced in, was derided and mocked by
all men that beheld him.

Christ was mocked by gestures, and speech.

The mocking gestures are two, mowing and wrying the mouth: and nodding the
head.

The skoffing speech contains an ironical co^trarietie: for they say one
thing that mock Christ, and mean the clean contrary: thus they speak,

God will deliver him that he loves, and that trusts in God.

But he is beloved of God, and trusts in God: ergo God will save him.

But their meaning is contrary to this speech: which is this.

God will deliver him that he loves, and that trusts in him:

But God does not deliver him: ergo, he neither is loved of God, nor trusts
in God.

Thus the third argument is applied to Christ: to David also in the same sense.

The fourth argument or ground of faith is in the 9. and 10. verses, taken from
the experience of Gods goodness to himself in time past, framed thus:

As thou have dealt with me before, so deal with me now.

But thou have hitherto preserved and delivered me: ergo do so now.

The minor of the argument is amplified by a distribution or enumeration of
parts, thus: thou have preserved me in my life, birth, and conception.

Thus the fourth argument is applied to Christ: and in the same sense also to
the Prophet.

Hitherto the Prophet has uttered his faith, which is the first essential
part of his prayer: his desire which is the second essential part follows.

The desire of the Prophet is expressed in the 11. verse: [Be not far from me]
and urged by a reason, a relatis paribus, thus:

If help be far off, then thou will be near to help thy servants.

But help is far off: ergo be near to help. Or thus:

Thou will help the afflicted and helpelesse:

But I am afflicted and helpelesse: ergo help me.

Now furthermore, both the Prophets desire and this reason whereupon it is
enforced are handled by inuersion of method, for first the reason is handled,
then the desire.

The reason is handled to the 19. verse, where the desolatio^ and extreme
misery of the Prophet is propounded in 2 kinds: First that which properly and
immediately seized upon his soul, which by sympathy only affected his body.
verse. 12, 13, 14, 15.

Secondly, that which directly and properly seized upon his body, and by
compassion only affected his sensitive faculty. verse. 16, 17, 18.

The proper affliction of his soul is delivered in three arguments, viz. the
cause, the adiunct, and the effect.

The causes are the devil and his angels, allegorically figured under the
names of Bulls and Lions.

These devils are of two conditions: some ministers and servants to their
master the principal: other the chief or master devil.

The ministering devils conveniently are allegorized under the terms of Bulls,
as being creatures inferior in strength and rage to the lion the king of the
beasts of the forest.

These deuillish Bulls are described by their qualities and effects: their
qualities are 3: young, fat, strong, verse. 12.

1 Young: vz. such as are not cicured or tamed, but are without the yoke, eue^
Belial: not subject to any order.

2 Fat and large limmed. such as were bred in Bashan, where was the largest
breed, and the fattest fed cattle, Deu. 32.14. which insinuates the
insolency, arrogance, and pride of these devils.

3 Strong and mighty being principalities and powers, as the Apostle terms
the^, Ephesians. 6.12. prevailing against the world of the ungodly.

These are their qualities: their effects are two, verse. 12.13.

First they enclose him about with terror and temptation.

Secondly they gape upon him with their mouths ready to swallowe him up body
and soul; the body in the grave or corruption: the soul in despair and
hellish torments, as much as in them rests.

These are one sort of Devils, that minister: the principal and Arch-deuill
even Beelzebub the prince of the devils is termed a ramping and roaring lion.
verse. 13.

A lion, as the king of all the hellish fiendes to whom they voluntarily
become serviceable.

Roaring, as now ready to devour the pray (for so is the use of lions Amos.
3.4. to roar when they are upon the pray.)

Ramping, that is hungerbitten and so most eagerly violent upon the pray, as
the lions that were kept fasting for the devouring of Daniell. These are the
causes of Christ's afflictions upon the soul properly. The adiunct and effects
follow.

The adiunct is the quantity of his misery uttered by comparison to water
spilt upon the ground, which cannot be gathered up again, even so (says the
prophet) my misery is irrecouerable. v. 14.

The effects are in number five:

First effect is the dissolutio^ of the Animal faculty, which is by this
misery interrupted: verse. 14. the sinews, ligamentes, brawnes, and tendons,
which are the instruments of sense and motion being forsaken by the animal
faculty of the soul, and so the bones which are as it were the studs of the
body were laxed and untied (for the disioyning of the bones is expressed, ver.
17.)

Second effect: that his heart which (as anatomy teaches) is in the midst
of the bowels, was melted like wax: that is the vital faculty was
interrupted: whose principal seat is in the heart, from whence vital spirits
by the arteries, whose original is the heart, are diffused to every living
part. This vital faculty was molten and quailed so as the soul ceased the
execution thereof for a season.

Third effect: that his strength was dried up like a potsheard that is, the
humidum radicale or natural moisture which is the oil to the lamp of life
being the foundation of our strengh and vigor, withered and spent, and so the
natural faculty decayed, there being not much more moisture in the parts of
the body then in a potsheard baked in the oven.

Fourth effect: that his tongue claue to his laws, he being scarce able through
the fierce assaults of Gods wrath to move his tongue: so that here probably
may be co^iectured that the faculty of reason, whose instrument is the tongue,
was suspended: though we deny not but also by this phrase the prophet may
signify his immoderate drought.

These four are the special effects of the torment which now he suffered,
now follows one general effect, vz. that he was brought into the dust of
death, that is, unto the grave. verse. 1.5. but this effect is solitarily here
attributed unto the Lord, and remoted from the former causes: for the prophet
by Apostrophe, turns his speech unto the Lord: saying. Thou have brought me.
etc.

This is the affliction which immediately seized upon his soul, yet by
simpathy also upon the body, by these effects,

Now the affliction which entered upon his body privately, and by compassion
upon his soul follow: where consider also: the causes, and practice thereof.
The causes are the wicked, Jews and Gentiles which co^spired and procured his
death, who are called dogs according to the custom of the scripture and
expounded to be the wicked. v. 16.

The parts of this affliction are five.

First the wicked enclose him, that is whippe him, spitte upon him, smite him
with fist and rod, crown him with thorns, and such like mentioned in the
gospel (for here the sign is put for the thing signified, it being the
custom of the people to slocke about the person upon whom execution is done.)
verse. 16.

Secondly they pierced or dug his hands and feet, when they nailed him to
the cross, which insinuates the great wounds that were mad in his hands and
feet, as if they had been dug with the talentes or paues of a lion, as the
old translatour has it from the corrupt hebrew word. v. 16.

Thirdly they wrack him, and disioynt all his boanes, so as they may be
nombred, and discerned severally each from other, as is customable to the^ that
are wracked: here is signum pro signato: v. 17.

Fourthly they behold and look upon him without pity and compassion yea they
mock and scoff at him with taunting bitter sloutes, and reuiling speech, here
is less spoken and men signified: signum pro signato. v. 17.

Lastly they take from him his garments and strip him naked: a vild indignity:
now his garments appertayned (as it is in use with us) to the tormentors, who
were the soldiers: they therefore first divide his under garments and every
one takes, his part: but his upper garment being without seame is not divided
or cut in pieces, but for it they cast loves to whom it shall appertain: and
falling to one the other lost their parts. v. 18.

This is the affliction that immediately seized upon his body, but compassiuely
also upon his soul:

Thus the reason co^firming the prophets desire is handled.

Now follows the prophets desire which is handled also v. 19.20.21. wherein
consider four particulars.

First the person to whom he offers this his desire, which is the Lord,
whom he intituleth his strength, because he ministered unto him strength to
bear all that was laid upon him.

Second: the thing he prays for, expressed in diverse phraeses (be not far of:
hasten to help, deliver, save, answer.)

Third: the person for whom he prays expressed thus: me, my soul, my desolate
one.)

Fourth: the evil from which he desires deliverance: expressed diversely: from
the sword, from the power of the dog, from the lions mouth, from the horns
of the unicorns.

Thus the prophets desire or request is handled: and so the supplication.

The gratulation or thanksgiving, which is the second part of the prayer
follows.

This thankfulness is 1. promised: 2. prophesied.

It is promised to the 26. verse:

This promise of thankfullnes is propounded and then repeated and concluded. It
is propounded and handled to the 25. verse, and that in the parts, or signs,
or declarations of thankefulnes which are three.

1 Sign of thankefullnes: is Confession, which is a declaring of Gods (name
or) attributes, as his mercy, and justice etc. to the members of the Church
which are Christ's brethren according to the flesh Heb. 2.12.

2 Sign of thankefullnes: is a commendation of the excellency of these
attributes to the honor and praise of God and that in the open assembly.

3 Sign of thankefullnes: is the Inciting and provoking of them that fear
God, the seed of Jacob and Israel: to praise and magnify and fear the Lord:
to be a means to bring others to god also.

These three parts or signs of thankefullnesse are amplified by a reason,
enforcing the performance of the promise made before: which reason is taken a
paribus. and is set down Negatiuely and Affirmatively.

Negatiuely in 3. phrases: he has not 1. despised, 2. abhorred. 3. hid his
face from the prayer of the poor. ergo: thankfulness must be performed.

Affirmatively: he heard when the poor and humbled in spirit prayed: and
therefore thankfulness must be performed.

Thus the promises of thankfulness is propounded and handled: It is also
repeated verse. 25. and that in two parts thereof before handled, v. 22. The one
part of thankefulnes, praise, and commendation of God is further enlarged by
the circumstance of the place: the great congregation.

The other part of thankfulness, Confession is expressed in a new phrase
[paying of the vowes] which were voluntary sacrifices.

Thus thankfulness is promised.

Thankefulnes also is prophesied to the end of the Psalm: which shall be
performed by the subjects of Christ's kingdom, who are in the sequel of the
psalm described and distributed into their several kinds.

First they are described by 6. arguments in the 26. verse.

1 Adiunct: the poor, that is, such as are poor in spirit, Mat. 5.3.

2 Is an effect: shall eat, that is, believe in Jesus Christ. Ioh. 6.35.

3 Adiunct: shall be satisfied, that is, shall have peace and joy spiritual,
Mat. 5.6. Ioh. 7.38.

Is an effect: shall seek after the Lord, that is, shall carefully use the
means of salvation, whereby God is sought and found, Mat. 7.7.

5 An effect: shall praise the Lord by a godly life, and with heart and voice
singing Psalms of praise: Math, 5.16. Coloss. 3.16.

6 An adiunct: your heart shall live for ever; which is life everlasting the
reward of all the former. John. 4.14.

Thus the persons of whom thankfullnes is prophesied are described.

Furthermore the person of whom thankfullnes is prophesyed, namely the members
of Christ, and Subjects of his kingdom, are distributed into their several
sorts and kinds, thus:

Persons prophesied to be thankful are,

Parents and progenitors.

Children and posterity.

Perents (and so consequently children) are distinguished by two adjuncts:

1 Is their nation: they shall be Gentiles and not only Jews. 2 Is their
condition: they shall be of the poorer sort, as well as of the rich.
The Gentiles are described both by the parts and cause of their
thankfulness: the parts of the thankfulness of the Gentiles are three. v.
27.

1 They shall remember themselves, and take notice of their sinful and
accursed estate, and so humble themselves.

2 They shall turn unto the Lord forsaking their idols and other sins.

3 They shall worship the Lord in holiness and righteousness.

The cause of the Gentiles thankfulness is expressed, v. 28. where there is the
preventing an objection which might thus be made by a Jew.

Object. Shall the Gentiles also become subjects of the kingdom of the Messiah,
who were sometime execrable?

Sol. There is nothing impossible to God: for seeing he is king, and so rules
among the heathen, he is able to convert the Gentiles also, and of stones to
raise up children to Abraham.

This is the first distinction of the persons by their nation.

The second distinction is, that poor and rich also shall be thankful: and
that is expressed. v. 29.

The rich who are called the fat men of the earth have their actio^ of
tha^kfulnes assigned the^: eating, and worshipping.

Poor or afflicted persons are of two sorts,

1 Such as go down into the dust, that is beggars and basse persons. 2 Such
as cannot quicken their own soul, that is persons condemned to die, or
persons sick of deadly diseases etc.
All these afflicted persons have their thankful actions assigned them, which
is that they shall bow before him: (signum pro signato, Metonymia) namely they
shall worship him.

Thus the parents which are the first sort of persons with their thankful
actions, are propounded.

The children and posterity also have their thankful actions. (...) the reason
thereof assigned:

The thankful actions of the posterity are two.

1 They shall serve the lord in the obedience of his law, which is set out by
the circumstance of time, ( for ever they shall be reckened to him. verse 30. 2
Action of thankfulness is that when they are come into the Church by
effectual vocation, they shall declare his righteousness;
The reason of these thankful actions of the posterity of the gentiles is for
that God has wrought righteousness for a people to be borne, that is either for
their posterity, or some other straung people that as yet are unborn by
spiritual regeneration.

This thankfulness is prophesied: and so the whole psalm is resolved.

In the Complaint and the Supplication Christ's priesthood is described both in
his sacrifice and intercession.

In the promise of thankfulness, Christ's prophecy is comprised.

In the prophecy of thankfulness Christ's kingdom is comprehended.

Finis.
ANNOTAtions and observations out of the 22. Psalm.
Of the Title of the Psalm.
A Psalm:
THis Psalm contains a pitiful complaint, a fervent prayer, a promise and
prophecy of thankfulness, and yet the Prophet penned it in the form of a
Psalm: whence thus much may be noted, that it is not unlawful to sing
doctrine, exhortation, complaints, supplication, prophesies, and such like
matters, as well as thankesgiuings: briefly to sing any portion of holy
Scripture, so be that understanding and edificatio^ be not hindered: and this
collectio^ arises out of this place by analogy.

The Prophet David is here to be considered. Of David.
1. in his own person 2. sustaining the person of a godly man. 3. as a type of
Christ, whose sufferings and glory, whose priesthood in his sacrifice and
intercession, with his prophetical office in teaching, and kingdom in
gathering and guiding his Church in all ages, places, and times, are here not
obscurely figured: whence we may note that kings and mighty men of the earth
are not to scorn religious exercises, as David did not, the whole book of the
Psalms witnesses, but with the Prophet to acquaint themselves with holy
meditatio^s, of their own estate, how the matter is betwixt God and their own
souls: of the condition of the Church which shall suffer with Christ, before
it be glorified with him, and of the doctrine of the Gospel in the offices of
Christ, the sum of the Psalm.

to the chief or master musition.
The Musicians and Singers office principally consisted in setting and singing
the Psalms of the Prophets, for the instruction and edification of the church:
as also in keeping these holy writings safe for the use of the Church in time
to come, in regard of which office the Church is called the pillar and ground
of truth: wherefore when the Prophets had composed any Psalms, they sent them
to the singers and musicians, specially to the principal Musician of any order,
who had the oversight of the rest of his order, that they might bring them in
public for the comfort and instruction of the whole church: whence this
collection might be made, that if music were lawful for the Jews, it is now
for us: and if vocal music be lawefull by consent of all, why not
isntrumental also? always remembering that edification must not be hindered
but furthered: for music being one of the liberal arts, why is there not
use of music in furthering us in the worship of God, as well as of Grammar,
Rhetoric, or Logycke, etc: and music is not a parcel of the ceremonial
law: and the Lord commanded it in the Church, and it was used by Christ and
his Apostles.

Again hence might be observed, that it is lawful to pray the prayers composed
by other men; which was customable to the Church of the Jews: who used to
bring other men's psalms, which sometime were prayers, into the public
assembly, as for example this psalm: and if it be said that they, were used
only dogmatically; the answer is, that is not so: for they praised God with the
words of David and Asaph, and they bowed themselves and worshipped as it is
evident. 2. Chron. 29.30. where besides the meditation of the matter, no doubt
they had holy desire and wishes suitable to the words of the prayers or
thanksgiuings, as the words of bowing and worshipping do plainly import in the
place alleged: and therefore (howsoever some think) it seems to be very
lawful, to pray accordingly to a set form: and so to say and pray the Lords
prayer: so be that we insinuate our understanding and affections into the
matter of that set prayer which we use, making it our own when we pray it.

Concerning the morning star.
To think these words (aijeleth hasshachar) to be the name of an instrument is
neither warrantable nor reproueable, but coniectural: I know not what can be
said for it or against it.

To think them the tune of a common song, or the tune of some civil ballad
seems to be to accuse the holy ghost for not keeping decorum, which is when
holy psalms are song in the tunes of common, and it may be profane ballads
also.

To translate with Tremellius and Iunius ad primordium aurorae, is very good,
for the words may bear that reading and then they import the time of using the
psalm, the early morning, the time of the morning sacrifice, so that this
psalm was an exposition and co^mentarie of the sacrifice: the sacrifice was a
type of Christ; this Psalm teaches the signification of the sacrifice: and so
this Psalm annexed to the sacrifice did every day train up the Church of the
Jews with a continual meditation and expectation of the promised Messiah,
whose sufferings and glory are in psalm expressed.

Yet notwithstanding there is another exposition which may best befit the
argument of the psalm, which is this (concerning the Morning star) and
aijeleth signifies Stellam matulina^ as well as, ascensum aurorae. Now seeing
that this Psalm is a prophecy of Christ, and that Christ is expressly called
the Bright Morning star, Apoc. 22.16. the day star by the Apostle, 2. Pet.
1.19. and the day spring from an high, Luk 1.78. The argument of the Psalm,
and this translation will very well sort together as we see.

Of the complaint the first part of the psalm.
In the complaint comprised in these two verses may be observed thesed six
several points to be handled, My God, my God why have thou forsaken etc.
which will clear unto us the true meaning of the words, which are dark, and
darkened more by some.

1 How Christ could pray unto God, he being himself God equal to the father.
2 How Christ could pray in faith, seeing he could not believe in himself? 3
How it can be said that Christ was not heard by God when he prayed? 4 How
Christ can be said to be forsaken of God?
These four points appertain to Christ, the other two concern David, and the
godly.

5 How god forsook David; and how he may be said to forsake his children? 6
Lastly the properties of faith here expressed.
Verse. 2. O my God I cry.
First how Christ God, could pray unto God?

For the clearing of this point consider we that Christ was God, and so
paraduenture could not pray unto his father, for that might seem to employ
some disparagement to God the son being equal to the father, and open a gap
for the heresy of Arrius: but furthermore Christ also was man, and so made
under the law, and so could and might, yea and ought to pray, as being a
creature bound to worship the creator: yet besides this Christ being the
mediator of the Church according to both his natures, he therefore prayed
according to both his natures: My (...) Go^ (...) tho^ (...) etc. (...)
thus: his manhood actiuely pouring forth prayer, his godhead dignifying his
prayer, and making it meritorious and purchasing audience.

Christ prayed to his father therefore, as man, and as the mediator.

Now if it be alleged that seeing himself was God he must therefore pray unto
himself, which may seem absurd, or else if he do exclude himself, then
committ idolatry: the answer is that he prayed to his father directly and
primarily, in respect of order the father being the first person in Trinity
ordine; but indirectly, inclusiuelie, and secondarily he prayed to himself,
and the holy Ghost also: here the distinction of nature and person must be
admitted necessarily: again it may be supposed that no absurdity would
follow, if we say that the second person in the trinity did pray unto the
first, that is, did testify his will to have the Church saved: but that is
abusiuely in very hard Catachresis.

In sum: it is no absurdity to say that a man may pray to himself, that is,
persuade himself to grant that which is for his own advantage: for as
affection or desire sometime obtains of a man that which his judgment
disalloweth: (which is a kind of prayer or entreaty:) or contrariwise, as the
judgment persuades the affection that which it disliketh: so Christ-man may
ask something of Christ-God: and no absurdity (as it seems) be admitted,

Secondly: how Christ could pray in faith? V. 1* 2, My God


For the further enlightening of this doubt a distinction of faith must be
remembered. Faith is legal and evangelical; of the law, and of the gospel.

Faith required in the law Adam had in paradise and Christ had when he prayed
whereby the creature relieth it self upon the creator for all manner of good
things and deliverance from all evil, if Christ had wanted this faith he had
not presently obeyed the law, which to say were to blaspheme.

Evangelical faith or the faith required in the gospel is that whereby the
creature relieth it self upon God, through Christ and his mediator: believing
to obtain all good things from him, by the means of Christ: now although
Christ were made under the law, yet he was not made under the gospel, for he
was not bound to faith and repentance as sinners are, himself being without
sin: he is the matter and author of the Gospel: wherefore to the Christ to
the obedience of the law through and by virtue of the Gospel as we are tied,
is to suppose him sinful by making him his own savior.

Wherefore to answer directly: Christ prayed a legal prayer as Adam did but
Christ prayed not an evangelical prayer: (except we understand an
euangeli-praier in this sense, that he made intercession for us, which may
rather be called a meritorious prayer:) Christ prayed in faith of gods infinite
mercy, but not in faith of the pardon of sin through a Savior, which he
needed not: and which we need.

Thirdly: How was Christ not heard when he prayed? V. 2 But thou hear not.
V. 1. Far from the words of my roaring,


There is no contradictions in holy scriptures: although there may so^time
seem show of opposition: we read in the Heb. 5.7. that Christ was hard from
that which be feared: here in this place we read that god did not hear Christ,
but was far from the words of his roaring: in show here is an opposition,
but in substance, things being aright distinguished, there is none.

The art of reason teaches that one rule of opposition is, that the things
opposed be opposite in the same sense: ( secundum idem as the logicians say)
now Christ was hard in one sense, and he was not heard in another sense: and so
the prophet and the Apostle are not opposite: wherefore thus these two places
are both verified, and may well be reconciled.

Christ was heard in that he was not swallowed up of the wrath of god, but was
delivered from it, and from the power of our spiritual enemies: and again.
Christ was not heard in that gods wrath lighted upon him, and possessed his
soul a competent season: or thus:

2. Christ was heard in regard of the conditions of his prayer, (if it be
possible, and if it be thy will:) and again:

Christ was not heard in regard of the petition absolutely considered, without
conditions: or thus.

3. Christ was heard, as the children of God are heard, to whom sometime the
Lord denies the very particular thing they ask, and in liewe thereof gives
them a thing as good or better then it: 2. Cor. 12.8, 9. So the Lord did not
deliver Christ from his wrath: for he tasted the cup of his wrath, as he
says, Math. 20.22. But the Lord gave him power and strength, and grace to
bear it, and to vanquish it at the length: for even then did he overcome the
wrath of God when Gods wrath killed him.

These things being thus distinguished, we see the Prophet in this psalm, and
the Apostle in the Hebrews are not at variance, and so we perceive also how
Christ was not heard when he prayed.

My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me: art art so far^e from my health?
Fourthly: how Christ was forsaken of God? That this point may the better be
conceived, let it be considered: Negatiuely, how he was not forsaken: and
affirmatively how he was forsaken.

Negatiuely thus: Christ was not forsaken any of these four ways following.

First the essence of the godhead was never severed or excluded from Christ the
man, but it dwelt in him at all times fully: Coloss. 2.9.

Secondly the personal union of the two natures was never dissolved: and so
the person of the son never forsook the humanity of Christ.

Thirdly, the power of the godhead also was always present with him, enabling
him to bear the full vial of Gods wrath.

Fourthly, the gracious assistance of Gods spirit was never wanting, inabling
Christ without the least impatiencie, distrust, etc. to bear whatsoever was
inflicted upon him for our sins.

Thus Negatiuely Christ was not forsaken of the nature, person, power, and
grace of God. How then was he forsaken?

Affirmatively therefore he was forsaken: both positiuely in that God the
father powered upon him the infinite sea of his wrath, which he now felt: and
priuatiuely in that he was bereft and forsaken of all comfortable: presence;
the godhead for a season shaddowing it self under the cloud of Gods wrath,
that the manhood of Christ might feel the intolerable burden thereof: and
thus Christ being destitute of consolation complains that he was forsaken.
But Christ being thus forsaken, he sustained the wrath of God, striued with
it, and subdued it; that is, he delivered both himself and us from it, and so
perfectly finished the work of our redemption.

But if any man think it a thing unreasonable, or rather a blasphemy, that it
should be avouched that Christ suffered Gods wrath which is commonly called
the pains of hell, he must remember a distinction which ought to be made
betwixt the pains of hell, and the damnation of hell: Christ suffered not the
damnation of hell but the pains of hell.

The pains of hell are only the sense of exquisite torments, and the want of
all comfort and consolation: commonly called, paena and damnum.

The damnation of hell are certain necessary consequents which follow the
foresaid pains of hell in the mere creature: as for example, the soul of
Judas now in hell: besides that it is deprived of all comfort, which is a
loss: and tormented with most exquisite tortures which is the pain:
despaireth, wants faith, hope, love, the fear of god, patience, and is
affrighted with an accusing and gnawing conscience, and besides all this, is
bound in everlasting chains to the judgment of the great day in a certain
place which is called Hell.

Now for the application of the distinction: Christ if he had been a mere
man, could not have escaped part of the damnation of hell, when gods wrath was
so fully powered out upon him: but it should have fallen out to him as it
falls out with the devil and reprobates: but because Christ was God also,
his godhead did infinitely strengthen and grace his manhood, so as none of all
these accidents which necessarily grow upon a mere creature, seized upon
him, as despair, impatience, etc. therefore to say that Christ suffered the
wrath of God which may be called the pains of hell, is neither blasphemous nor
unreasonable, this distinction of hell pains and damnation being admitted.

Thus the four points appertaining to Christ are cleared: now the other two
concerning David follow:

Fifthly: How God forsakes David and his children? Forsaken me.


God forsakes his children two ways principally.

First by giving them to their own hearts lusts in part, and permitting them to
the temptations of the devil: and suffering them to fall into some sins
which wrack and torment the conscience: against which David prays, Psalm.
119.8. And Christ teaches us to pray in the last petition of the Lords prayer:
Lead us not into temptation, etc.

Secondly by causing them to see and feel the wrath of God in some measure and
for some time, till humiliation be wrought in them thoroughly for some sins.
So David was humbled Psalm. 6. and 15. and so are all the children of God in
some measure: and thus the Lord forsook David, both by permitting him to fall
into sin, and causing him to feel the smart of Gods wrath as a means of
humiliation for that sin: and thus the Lord forsakes his children often times,
as they have experience of: which may teach us charity in censuring men whom
we see straungly cast down with fearful humiliation, they may be
nevertheless dear children of God, although it may be also that they have
fallen into some grievous sins as David did: and yet happily also this
humiliation may grow upon infirmities with some tender heart: and for such
uncharitable critickes that thus intemperately censure humbled consciences,
they are to know that some kind of despair is better then hardness of heart.

Sixthly, what are the properties of faith here noted? My God, forsaken me.


Two properties of faith evidently appear in the prophet.

The first is, when God forsakes, then to hold fast, when God kills then to
trust in him as Job. 13.15. who professes that though the L. should stay him
yet he would trust, and David else where says, that though he was sometime
afraid yet he trusted in god for faith holds fast sometimes when all reason
fails as Abraham (Rom 4.18.19.) believed a thing in nature and reason
impossible that a woman of nintie years, should conceive with child of a man
that was an hundred year old: so does David in this place: God forsakes him,
and yet he calls him his god.

The second property of faith is particular application, whereby Christ with
all his merittes are appropriated by the believer to his own soul in special
and he is truly assured of the pardon of his sin and the salvation of his soul
To. 8.38. Ioh. 20.28. some think it presumption for any man so to say: and none
have ever attained to this certain assurance but those to whom god has
revealed it: but we are to know that there must be difference made between
faith, and conjecture: Faith is kowledge which has a certainty in it whose
genus is scientia: Conjecture is knowledge which has uncertainty in it, whose
genus is opinio: wherefore they that deny the certainty of faith and
salvation, make faith coniecturall and confound faith and opinion which is
absurd.

Now indeed faith is never without doubting, and yet faith is certain still: for
persuasion and knowledge is either a true persuasion, or a full persuasion: a
true knowledge, or a full knowledge: as there is difference betwixt a true man,
and a perfect full and complete man: a man wanting a hand is a man indeed:
(...) but not (...): even so of faith, and assurance: True persuasion is fides
(...) where in there is no hypocrisy. Full persuasion is fidei (...) which
has no doubting, which no man living has or can have till love be perfected,
when also faith shall be cast out, yet we are to strive against doubting, and
still to pray: Lord increase our faith.

That which some might comment upon the expostulation of Christ, Why forsakest,
etc.
whereas he asks a reason why God forsook him also? the two adiunctes of his
prayer, that he prayed with roaring and crying, and day and night and had no
ease, I omit as ordinary matters: only thus much.

Christ expostulateth and debateth the matter of his desertion with God, not
for that he knew not wherefore he was forsaken, but complaining most
pittiously of his extreme misery: neither is here any suspicion of impatiencie
at all: no God forbid:

Again Christ's roaring and crying, that is, his fervent prayer, also his
continuance in prayer day and night, are for our example in the like cases,
that in our extremities we never cease crying till God give ease.

The grounds of the Prophets faith. V. 3. Thou art holy, and do inhabit
the praises of Israel.


God is holy Effectiue and subiectiue: for he is both the worker of holiness
and the fountain of holiness: now both these are here signified by the
Prophet: namely, that God is the author and worker of holiness in the Church.
And the Emphasis of the speech is to be observed, in the pronoune attah (thou)
which is exclusive, as if the Prophet had said (thou only:) which is the
golden sentence written in the high Priests Miter, Exodus 28.20. Holiness to
the Lord.

The sanctification of the Church is the work of God only: Doctrine.
which doctrine for that it is a very material point, is first to be
expounded, and then confirmed. It may be expounded or amplified by the
particular causes of sanctification, wherein the Lord has the maine stroke, or
else the work succeeds not; as by induction appears thus.

1 God is the original and fundamental cause of the redemption, purgation and
sanctification of the Church, who of his own love and compassion to man's
misery provided redemption for us, there being nothing out of himself to move
him thereunto.

2 Christ's sacrifice is the meritorious and purchasing cause, for he paid the
price of redemption for us.

3 Christ's kingdom that is his resurrection, ascension, session at the right
(hand) of his father is the effectual, operative, and working cause.

4 The word in the ministry of teaching, praying, celebrating the sacraments
and discipline ecclesiastical is the isntrumental cause, where if any man
think that the means are any thing without God give the increase he
forgets the Apostles speech 1. Cor. 3.7. for the word which is the power of
God to salvation is not the bare sound or letter, but it is the inward spirit
of powar and grace annexed thereto: which is Christ's Scepter.

So that seeing the love of God, the sacrifice, kingdom and scripture of
Christ are the only causes of our anctification, it is plain that the
redemption sanctification and clensing of the church is gods work only.

The doctrine thus cleared may also be proved and confirmed by induction of
those things which are in or with sin, the which none but God can take away
and they are these four.

1 Transgression which respects Gods law and justice which in sin is
violated for sin is the transgression of the law etc. 1. Ioh. 3.4.

2 Corruption respecting the sinner; which follows the transgression as the
necessary effect thereof: as in Adam.

3 Guilt whereby the person transgressing and corrupted is culpable of
judgment.

4 Punishment the just wages and desert of sin, which is Gods wrath and the
curse of the law Gal. 3.10

Now no creature can take away any of these, it is the work of god alone
therefore was it that our redeemer was God.

Remission of sin, which is the taking away of the guilt and punishment of
sin is that work of God only. Micah 7.18. Exodus 34.7. Mar. 2.7. Esaias.
43.25.1. Ioh. 3.8.

Again sanctification which is the purgation and stain of sin which is
imprinted in our souls (whether it be a quality positive, or privative) is
the only work of god. Job. 13.4.1. These. 5.23.

Seeing then the corruption, guilt, and punishment of sin which are three
principal matters appertaining to sin are only taken away by god, because
they containing the violation of an infinite justice, are after a sort,
infinite and so cannot be taken away but by some person infinite, Gods infinite
justice being able to ouerwhelme a mere creature every way finit, it
follows therefore by inevitable consequence that sin also is taken away by
God only: for the corruption, guilt, and punishment of sin being abolished,
the auomie or transgresion is removed and reckoned as not done, which is also a
fruit of remission of sin, and of this the Lord says that he will cast it
into the bottom of the sea, he will forget and remember it no more, Micah.
7.19. Ierem, 31.33. Ezech. 18.22.

The doctrine thereof is thus confirmed and cleared: and it has an excellent
use to us not only for coniectatio^ of the papists, which avouch temporal
punishment sustained by the creature to be sufficient satisfaction for some
sins and that good works shall deserve grace, and that the priest can
iudicially pardon sin, all which are so many blasphemies against the mercy of
God, the sacrifice kingdom and scepter of Christ, but especially it serves
for our instruction to teach us to quake and tremble at the fearful condition
of sin, which can no other way be abolished but by the omnipotent power of
God encountering (as it were) the infinite wrath of God, and vanquishing it, to
teach us to take heed of committing the least sin, which none but God can
abolish: which also called the Lord Jesus Christ from heaven; for this caus^
appeared the son of God that he might dissolve the works of the devil: for
the papists deem too lightly of sin that think some sins venial in
their own nature, and the profane multitude offer violence to Gods justice in
threatening kindness upon his mercy, saying of small offenses as Lot said of
Zoar oh it is but a little one; and God is merciful: is it suppose we a small
sin that, for redeeming whereof, God must needs become man and die?

God is the owner and possessor of his Church, and so consequently of the
praise and worship which is in the church offered him continually: for God
decreeing from all eternity the glory of his mercy and justice, and the rest
of his most excellent attributes (which are commonly called his Name in the
scripture decreed also to have a Church; and a savior for his Church: without
whom neither could he have a church, nor be glorified out of himself if he
wanted a Church: Wherefore Christ prays thus: if thou will be glorified and
praised out of thy self, thou must have a Church: if thou will have a Church,
thou must have a savior: if thou will have a savior, then save me who
am-appointed the Savior: and so the sorites is concluded: if thou will be
praised, save me.

But thou will be praised etc. ergo save me.

Doctrine.
Gods gloly and praise is the end of the world, the Church, and of Christ
also. For to this end has God created the world, redeemed his Church, and
appointed Christ the Savior of the Church, that he might be glorified: as the
wise man says: God made all things for his glory: Prou. 16.4. So says the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 3.22.23. All things are yours, you are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods: that is to say, Christ has redeemed all things for your use, that you
may worship Christ, and God through Christ may be glorified.

The use of this doctrine is to teach us to glorify God which is attained by a
godly life, and two reasons may be alleged for this purpose.

1 Necessity: for if we do not glorify God mercy by godliness and honesty
in this life, he will be glorified by us in his justice in our utter
destruction after this life: for every man shallbe either an instrument of
glorifying god in his mercy, or serving for matter of the glory of his justice.

2 Analogy and proportion: for we see all the creatures by natural instinct
without resistance and rebellion are carried readily and speedily to there end,
there place, and use; as the sun etc. Psalm. 19.4.5. and Psalm 104. toto: so
that if we degenerate from this end which God has appointed us we are the only
irregular persons of the world, and indeed men and angels are so: wherefore if
gods love, Christ's death, everlasting life will not, yet let fear and shame
move us to obedience.

To conclud this verse seeing god sanctifies his church and children, and will
surely sanctify them that he may be praised by them, hence does arise matter
of consolation and thankfullnes.

1 Of consolation thus; if we be cast down with the consideration of sin
committed and reigning in us, so as that, though we pray and hear, and read,
and partake in the sacraments, and discipline our own souls, and watch our
heart and senses with all diligence, yet we cannot obtain conquest over our
sins, the^ we may have recourse unto the Lord, and comfort our selves with
consideration of his holiness; that though we cannot ouermaster our own
corruption, yet the Lord can and will in due time, for holiness appertains to
the Lord.

2 Of thankfulness thus: therefore does the Lord deliver us from the bondage of
our spiritual enemies therefore does he redeem, purge, and sanctify his
Church that he might be glorified by his Church; so does the prophet reason
psalm. 103. v. 1.2.3.4. and so does Zachary. Luke 1.74.

V. 4. Our fathers trusted in thee, they called upon thee, and were delivered
and not confounded.
God is immutable and unchangeable in his love and he remains as firm in his
faith to the Church as ever he was: for he keeps his fidelity for ever and
with him there is no variablenes, nor shadow of change; and seeing therefore
the fathers in the old testament were delivered through the mercy and truth of
God through the promised messiah, now also the posterity, and namly Christ
himself the promised seed must needs also be delivered from perishing.

From this place then we learn diverse instructions.

First that Christ was the la^b slain from the beginning of the world. Apoc.
13.8. and he by his blood purged the sins of the former testament: Heb 9.15.
and therefore howsoever the Papists teach and deliver that there was Limbus
Patrum, a certain skirt of hell, where the fathers were reserved until Christ
had overcome death, and opened heaven, yet we may confidently believe, and
constantly avouch by this consideration that there was no such thing, for
seeing the fathers trusted in God and called upon him, they were therefore
delivered, and not confounded, as the text says: but if they were in Limbo,
they were confounded and not delivered: for there as the Papists dream is
paena damni, though not paena sensus, it is a dungeon of darkness, and a pit
that will hold no water, as they will needs have it.

V. 4. Our fathers trusted in thee and were delivered.
Secondly: that by analogy and proportion the efficacy of Christ's death also,
must be stretched to the worlds end, as well as to the world of beginning. For as
the Apostle says, Psalm. 110.
out of the Prophet, Christ is a priest for ever, after the order of
Melchizedech, as well as he was a lamb slain from the beginning of the world:
and as his blood served for the purgation of the sins of the former testament
which lived before Christ was slain, so also it serves for the clensing of the
Church which now stands up after his death: for it is mere blasphemy to
include the virtue of Christ's sacrifice within the compass of a few hours
wherein he suffered his passion: whence another popish opinion has the neck
broken also, which is, that there needs a daiely sacrificing of Christ in the
mass after an unbloody manner, which is as doltish a distinction as that
other of a sacrifice applicatorie and not propitiatory: for so far forth as
the Eucharist applies, it is a Sacrament and not a sacrifice: and so far
forth as the sacrifice is unbloody it is Eucharisticall, and not propitiatory:
for without blood there is no propitiation.

Thirdly. Faithful prayer is never disappointed but always obtains, V 5.
They called upon thee and were delivered.
as Christ says, Mat. 7.7. Ask and ye shall receive, but we must ask in
faith: for otherwise though we ask we shall not receive, because we ask
amiss, as James says. Therefore faith is the necessary condition of
obtaining: and so of true prayer: but faith is grounded upon Gods word which is
his will: and Gods word and will is, that we ask nothing contrary to his
glory, the good of the church, or our own souls health; for when we ask any
thing derogating from gods glory, our prayers are so many blasphemies: and
when we desire any thing hindering the salvation of our own souls, or the
Churches good, we curse our selves and the church: Wherefore we must always
remember to examine our petitions by gods word, that finding them agreeable
thereto, we may be bold to present the^ before God; finding them otherwise, we
may learn to deny our selves, our wits and wills, and all we have, and so cast
down our selves at Gods feet, and say as Christ said, Thy will be done and not
mine: thus if we do in prayer, we shall obtain what we ask, as Christ also
did when he prayed that prayer: Hebr. 5.7.

Lastly, V. 4. Our father, etc.
it is profitable for us to observe the dealing of God with his children in
time past: and from thence to gather hope to our selves: for seeing God is as
able, merciful, and true, as ever he was, therefore we may assure our selves
of help from god in time of need being Gods servants, as well as our
forefathers: remembering always the Apostles rule. Romans 15.4. that we may have
hope; But that we may obtain hope, we must have the consolation of the
examples of Gods goodness revealed in the scriptures to his children, and
especially to Christ the head of the church, as that place imports, and
further also we must have patience, that when we have done the will of God we
may obtain the promise. Heb. 10.36.

v. 6.7.8. But I am a woman and not a man: a shame of men and the contempt of
the people.

All that see me have me in derision: they make a mow, and nod the head:
saying.

He trusted in the Lord, let him deliver him: let him save him seeing he
loves him.


The prophet David was either anointed or crowned king without question when
this psalm was penned, and yet we se he was thus shamfully abused by wicked
men; Christ himself the most holy and righteous man and the most excellent and
worthy person that ever the earth carried, yet we se is exposed to the
contumelious mocks of wretched me^; For this is the portion of Gods children
(as it was one part of Christ's sufferings) to be dishonored, contemned, and
derided: the history of the Gospel is plentiful in this point, they dishonor
him in charging him with blasphemy, with breach of the Sabbath, with
surfeiting and drunkenness, with Samaritanisme, which is to cast out devils by
the devil, etc. when he was condemned to die they mock him, attiring him
despitefully as a king, with a crown of thorns, with a garment of purple,
with a scepter of a reed: as if he had been a king amongst fools, boys, or
Pigmies: they buffet him, they spit upon him, they smite him, whip him, and in
sum, they mock at his kingdom and prophetical office: this befell Christ
the head of the church, the master of the house: and shall his members or
hou-shold servants think to escape? it is enough for the servant to be as his
master is: and the foot must not think to escape the piercing with nails,
when the head was crowned and wounded with thorns.

Now the reason why Christ was thus content to be abased was, that he might
deliver us from eternal shame and confusion, which is the due desert of sin:
and to sanctify the evil name and slander, which we sustain now for his
sake, and for our own good, that though an evil name be evil, and a curse,
yet the Lord has by his reproach taken away the malignitie of reproach and
slander from us: yet he has left shame for us still to sustain, that we
might fulfill the remnant of the afflictions: he has drunk the full cup, and
we must pledge him in the bottom of the cup: we must therefore learn to
deny our selves, and namely (as this argument implies) our good name and fame:
not that a man may not by all good means preserve his good name, but that a man
be not too popular without measure and by unlawful means to seek a good
name, many me^ being too greedy (as Aesops dog) catch at the shadow and
loose the substance, while they seek fame and report, they leese a good name:
for he that immoderately and vnlawefully seeks to get and keep his credit
with all sorts of persons, shall get a fame from the wicked, which is but the
shaddowe, and leese a good name from the godly, which is the substance. A good
name is the reward of humility and the fear of God: Prou. 22.4. and God will
honor them that honor him: 1. Sam. 2.3. And by faith we shall obtain a good
report as the Elders did, Hebr. 11.2. By such means we may seek to get a good
name, which will be a good ointment to the children of god refreshing them with
comfort of a godly life, Eccles. 7.1. But if any of Gods children are too
curious of their credit, and too much addicted to be popular, the Lord will
really teach the to deny themselves in this point, and by causing wicked men
to slander them, will teach them by a real sermon that which by the word and
instruction they cannot learn: which is to forsake their credit for Christ's
sake, as Christ did forsake his own excellency, and dejected himself to the
greatest indignities that a man could suffer, for our sakes: in so much as the
scripture says, he did annihilate himself, that is, he was content to be in
no account; that we might be pretiously esteemed.

(...) and nod the head.
The wrying of the mouth, and nodding the head are uncivil, foolish, and
despitefull gestates, such as civil, discreet, and moderate men would have
been ashamed to use: but if malice have got the bridle in the neck, how will
not wicked men transgress the law of civil and courteous behavior? yea the
fence of nature and humanity they will trample flat to the ground, as if they
lost both civility and manhood: which point may further appear in the mocking
speeches which they utter against Christ now hanging upon the cross: Let him
deliver him, etc.
which mocking gestures and speeches show more then barbarous despite, and
brulish malice: for a person that is condemned to die, yea now in execution is
pitied and prayed for by all the beholdders, yea even the hearts of Adamant
then will soften to here a man in extremity of pain ready to die, yet then
these monsters of men and nature are never a whit assuaged toward him, but
rejoice then at his woe, and scoff at his fall: saying: God has forsaken him,
he loves him not, he never did trust in god, as he pretended: for then surely
God would not suffer him to perish, but would deliver him: or if he himself
were a savior he would save himself and others and come down from the
cross, that we might know him to be the savior and believe in him: but we are
to know these things are otherwise, for God may love a man, and a man may trust
in God, and yet still continue in affliction: so we se the martyrs die for
Christ and periss;h in regard of the outward man, and that the love God, and
God loves the^ still: and so was it with Christ a which may serve to mussel the
mouths of the wicked worldlings, that presently think gods children, forsaken
of god, and that they are naughty persons because they sustain the cross and
sometime fall under it: nay contrariwise they should think it a sign of Gods
hatred not to be under the cross as it fares with many wicked men, that thus
the Lord fatteth the^ for the day of slaughter.

Verse 9 and 10
But thou did draw me out: of the womb: thou gave me hope as my mothers
breast.

I was cast upon thee eue^ from the womb: thou art my god from my mothers
belly.

Howsoever these murderers (...) of Chirst (...) with him that he assures
himself of Gods favor and merciful protection still, seeing that he had so
graciously preserved him, even from the birth, the womb, and the conception:
For God did by an especial providence watch over Christ in all ages and times
of his life, yea even at his conception, when he was to be framed in his
mothers womb: which thing may a little be considered of in this manner following.

The Lord preserved Christ in his conception from the contagion of sin, he
being framed of the substance of the virgin by the power or the holy ghost
without the help of m^n, by reason whereof the course of original sin was
stayed which is derived to us in generation: wherefore in this se^ce Christ had
no father.

In ^his birth also he was preserved by the special providence of God, that
he perished not, though he was borne in the stable and laid in the cratch, and
wanted the other ordinary helps which women in such cases have for their
child at there natiuite: for it is probable they wanted a fire, the stable
being no fit place for that purpose, besides the vnhealthsome savor of the
stable etc.

In ^his education and nourishing, he was kept from the conspiracy of Herod
that sought his life, when his mother fled into Egypt to save his life: also
when the innocents were slain: when he was lost by his parents and found
again disputing with the doctors in the temple. In ^his life when he was
called forth to the execution of the mediatorship after his baptism, he was
preserud from many conspiraces of the high priest and the pharisees, and the
rulers of the people, who sought to have slain him, but he was preserved by
the Lords providence till the appointed time.

Wherefore seeing god had watched over him all his days hitherto he now
fully assures himself of Gods protection and assistance at this brunt also.

And as this is true in Christ the head so also after a certain manner is it
true in his members, all the children of God, over whom the Lord watches by
his gracious preservation, and that in there conception Job. 10.10.11. and
Psalm. 139.13.14.15.16. which two places being viewed do largely express this
point: as also in there whole life: Psalm. 121. toto. Which may serve to comfort
the poor members of Christ, that peradventure might think by reason of there
base respect themselves unworthy to be regarded by God, seeing the world so
little regard them; surely they are to know that he has nombred there bones,
and all there members are written in his book, yea he knows the number of
the hears of their head: and therefore in this regard they may be comforted:
Lazarus was poor and yet the Lords angels ministered to him. lu. 16

Lastly from the force of the argument, used here to confirm the faith of the
prophet in assurance of future mercy grounded upon former experience thereof we
are admonished to cro^icle and record up, and as it were hang upon the file,
all the favor of Gods mercy vouchsafed us, that from thence in time of need,
we may gather faith and comfort: for our faith is weak, and a little thing will
not comfort us in extremity, we had need therefore to write a book of
remembrance of all the former experience of Gods mercy thereby to support our
infirmity: so David did when he was animated to encounter with Goliath.

The request or petiton of the Prophet propounded.
V. 11. Be not far from me, because trouble is near, and there is none to
help. etc.


Out of this verse two things may be gathered: first that a Godly man may be
troubled and helples: as was Christ, and the prophet in this place. All Christ's
apostles forsook him, even Peter that professed the contrary, and at the first
seemed more forward then the rest by fighting for him: yea and John whom
Christ loved came away without his coat where Christ was apprehended: The
Apostle Paul. 2. Tim. 4.16 says that when he was to appear before Caesar all
men forsook him: for indeed there be very few or none to be found that dare
and will stand out boldly to help in time of need, that dare cherish a man
that is persecuted for the truth: although they wish the cause and the person
well, yet they dare not be seen thoroughly in the matter, but then Christ shall
shift for himself, if his life be once called in question: now therefore if we
se gods children thus afflicted and helpeles, condemn them not, conclude not
there upon that they are naught, for the dear children of God, yea Christ
himself was afflicted and desolate that that is helpless.

Secondly hear note we, that though the world offoard no help to Gods
childrens though all forsake them, yet the Lord will not forsake them: so says
the Apostle, 2. Timoth. 4.17. So says Christ, Ioh. 16.32. though Christ were
alone and desolate in regard of man's help and comfort, yet he was not alone,
but the father was with him, and though Paul was helpelesse when he appeared
before Nero the Emperor, yet God delivered him out of the Lions mouth; for God
will either deliver, or give strength and patience to bear the affliction:
which is matter of consolation: this the three children knew right well, Dan.
3.17, 18* which were threatened with the fiery furnace, which ministered comfort
to them in deadly danger: with this the Prophet encouraged himself. Psalm. 23.
To walk fearlesly through the valley of the shaddowe of death, considering
Gods presence with him.

The affliction that immediately seized upon Christ's soul.
Verse. 12, 13, 14, 15.
12. Many Bulls have compassed me, mighty bulls of Basha^ have closed me about.

13. They gape upon me with their mouths, as a ramping and roaring lion.

14. I am like water powered out, and all my bones are dissolved: mine heart is
like wax, it is molten in the mids of my bowels.

15. My strength is dried up like a potsheard, and my tongue cleaves to my
laws, and thou have brought me into the dust of death.


The Apostle Peter: 1. Pet. 5.8. calls the devil a roaring lion, who goes
about continually seeking whom he may devour: and in this place the Prophet
says, that his enemies gaped upon him like a ramping and roaring lion: whence
probably may be coniectured (the two properties of a lion fitting so well
together both here in the Prophet, and also in the Apostle) that the enemies
that now afflicted Christ were, the devil and his angels.

1. Pet. 5.8. (...).

Psalm. 22.13. arich -- shoag -- toreph.

Wherefore we will take it as granted, that in this place the Prophet
foretells the sufferings that directly and properly and primarily befell
Christ's soul: which may further be proved by the strange effects which the
prophet rehearses, verse. 14.15. that followed his affliction: as the
dissolution of all the faculties of the soul, or the intermitting their
functions, which the compassing and enclosure and gaping of his enemies, could
not work in him: and again whereas in the v. 21. he desires to be delivered
from the lions mouth, how can this be expounded but of the power of Gods wrath,
now urged and enforced by the devil against him: in regard whereof he
desires to be delivered: all these things compared together carry me easily to
think that here the affliction proper to Christ's soul is expressed. Therefore
the might, malice, and mischeife of the devils are here to be considered, who
in this place are called mighty Bulls, and a raping and roaring lion, there
being one devil the chief, and the rest consenting and conspiring with him.

The power of the devils appears in this, that they are angels, and although
through their fall they have lost grace and glory, yet their other qualities
which the Lord endowed them with in their creation remain: as namely their
strength: now the strength of an angel is wonderful great (though not
infinite:) as may appear, in that the angel ouerthrewe in the host of the
Assyrians in one night, an hundredth four score and five thousand, Esaias, 37.36.
Also in the time of David seauentie thousand in three days, 2. Sam. 24.15. And
in Egypt evil angels destroyed all the first borne of Egypt. Psalm.
78.49.50.51. And as it may seem in a piece of a night: yea surely it is
likely, that if God should permit, the devils were able to destroy all the men,
and all the creatures in the world, and mingle heaven and earth together.

The malice of the devil is as great if not greater then his power, which may
appear in two particulars: first in that he sets himself against God and
Christ, whereas he knows he gets nothing by it, but vengeance. Secondly in
opposing against the Church of God, and his servants: whereas he knows he
cannot hurt them, nay rather he does them good: he afflicted Job, and yet he
knew Job by Gods own commendation to be Gods servant: he tempted Christ, whom
he knew to be the Messiah and Savior of mankind.

The mischeife of the devil also is a great, as it proceeds from him, and as
it seazeth upon some persons: he brought Christ to death, Job to beggerie: he
works mischeiuously by the witch to destroy the goods and children of men
both good and baddes he brings men into sin and keeps them in it, and so
works their destruction and damnation, which is the greatest part of his
mischeife, howsoever it is not so easily observed.

As the devil is thus mighty, malicious, and mischeiuous, so undoubtedly he
bestird himself with all his skill to afflict Christ, and he even to the utmost
he could do, no doubt wrecked himself upon Christ, to spoil him if it had bin
possible: and so does he and will do to all gods children: yea he carrying an
universal hatred to mankind and al Gods creatures, will work what villainy he
can upon them: he carried the swine headlong into the sea: he caused the man
that was possessed to beat himself with stones, etc. Here therefore we see the
goodness of God toward us, and toward mankind in general, who represseth and
bridleth the devil, and chaineth him so as he cannot do what he list: for
the^ we should not keep our cattle from his hands, nor money in our purses, nor
any of our goods for our use: nay our bodies should be sure to be tormented
stra^gely, and worse then that, if god should lay the raines in his neck: all
men therefore good and bad are to consider Gods goodness toward them thus
far forth, that they are moderately preserved by him in their outward estates
from the devils tyranny.

It may be demanded how far forth the devil could and now did prevail
against Christ in this place: They comp^^, enclose, and gape upon me.
or whether the devils were the executioners of Gods wrath, now upon our
Savior Christ: whereto answer may be made thus; First it seems that the
inflicting of Gods wrath upon the creature is Gods work only, and there is no
creature that can pour Gods wrath upon another; for the wrath of God being
the curse of the law to be inflicted upon the transgressors of the law, for
the breach of the law, whereby Gods justice is violated, and this curse, or
this wrath of God being the effects of his justice, it is not convenient to
assign the execution thereof to the devil. For the devil being himself
subject to, and tormented with the sense and feeling thereof, and there being
no superior power to torment the devil, but God, he himself must needs be
the executioner of the devils: and there being a kind of infiniteness in Gods
wrath, so at the devil thereby is overwhelmed, how shall it be said with
reason, that he that is very unable to sustain it, should inflict it, he that
cannot bear it himself should lay it upon others? and as he that is hanged
cannot be hangman; no more can the devil that is tormented with Gods wrath,
torment others therewithal. Therefore the Lord with his own hand does
immediately inflict his wrath upon the creature, whether men or Angels: and as
God had the help of no creature in the creation, redemption, justification,
sanctification, and salvation of the Church, no more has he any help in the
damnation of any creature.

Wherefore the devils were not Gods instruments of pouring his wrath upon
Christ, and yet Christ suffered immediately from the devils, as it is here
recorded, for they tempt him, and terrify him, they compass him about, and
enclose him with temptation, they gape upon him with their mouths as ready to
devour him and tear him in pieces, that is, they urge and enforce the wrath
of God with all possible argument and reason, aggravating it to the utmost of
their skill. And it is evident that they tempted Christ, and no doubt Christ
could not sustain the urging of the temptation without some sorrow and grief
and vexation of heart, as every godly man has experience, when he resists a
temptation: for conclusion of this point, the devils did not execute Gods wrath
upon Christ, but the devils did te^pt and terrify Christ otherwise.

I am like water powered out, my bones dissolved, etc.
The effects that followed upon the torture which Christ sustained, proves the
stra^genesse and extraordinarinesse thereof, to omit the effects which are
set down in the story of the gospel, whence should the dissoluing of the
faculty of sense and motion proceeded in so much as that the bones being
untied were severed each from other? surely even as Baltashar when he saw the
hand writing had his joints, through the feeling of some divine power that in
justice smote him for his sins, loosed, so as his knees beat together, the
animal faculty for a season being suspended, even so was it in Christ.
Again whence came the melting of the heart like wax, the drying up of the
strength like a potsheard, but from the intolerable heat of Gods fiery wrath
which now pierced our savior Christ, and consumed him as the fire that came
down from heaven consumed the sacrifice into ashes: which was a tipe of this
fire which thus dried and scorched our Savior Christ and melted his heart, as
wax melts at the sun: How came it to pass that Christ's tongue claue to
his Jaws? My tongue cleaves to my Jaws.
was it immoderate drought that caused it? but then it should have been said:
to the palate: but the prophet says to the laws: according to the latin
phrase vox faucibus haeret, Christ was not able to speak, but his words were
half words, words sounding a far of, faintly, his tongue faultred as it were
in speaking it may be that Christ was dry but that drought signified in the
Gospel when they gave him viniger mingled with gal should have been mentioned
in the 16. verse in due place when he suffered upon the cross, and not here
where the effects of an other torture are repeated, namely of that which
imediately affected his soul, as has been said; surely in all likelihood of
reason some extraordinary tortures are here employed which produce so strange
effects, and make such deep impressions in all the faculties of the soul,
animal, vital, natural, reareasonable: whereby the parts of the body
serviceable to the soul for the execution of her faculties are forsaken.

The use of this doctrine is to teach us carefully to avoid sin which wrought
such strange affectes in Christ satisfying for sin, being god also: alas how
shall we vild wretches be able another day if it fall to our Lot for our
sins to sustain the least hellish torment? it is no marvel though the rich
glutton in hell cry out of his tongue, and though Baltashars knees knock to
gether, though Judas hanged himself, and Cayn blasphemed, and Saull fell upon
his sword, seeing there are such intolerable effects follow the warth of God
even in the son of God himself as are here mentioned. Thou have brought me
into the dust of death.


Here the prophet turns his speech unto the Lord: and whereas before he had
made a narration of the might malice and mischief of his enemies how they had
afflicted him, by terour and temptation, and how straungelie this affliction
tortured him, that it caused the faculties of the soul to intermit there
functions in there proper parts of the body, now he makes an apostrophe as it
were unto the Lord, and tells him, that it was he that had brought him to his
death, for though his estate now was in all likelihood of reason irrecouerable
and remediless, being spilt like water upon the ground, which cannot be
gathered up again, yet all this sorrow did not kill him, but he changes his
speech, and says: thou have brought me into the dust of death: whence two
things may be observed: the one is, that God had a stroke in the death of
Christ, not only by permitting the Jews to kill him, which shall be handled
afterward in the 16. and 17. verses, but by pouring his wrath upon him, which
hastened his death the sooner, in so much as the history in the gospel says,
he was dead sooner then the thieves who died the same death with him, as is
likely: which hasty death of Christ's was caused no doubt by some inward
cause, which was Gods wrath, that had wrought the former strange effects in
Christ: that it may be properly said that God killed Christ rather then the
Jews, though the Jews also tortured his body, so as that in time he should
have died. The other thing that we note here is, that all the might, malice,
and mischeife of the devils, and the Jews which was expressed in the torturing
and tormenting of Christ, could not have killed Christ, except God had killed
him. For Christ being God, could if it had pleased him, and if the decree of
god had not been otherwise, have retained his spirit, cured his wound, or
destroyed his enemies that they should not have been able to wound him: in
regard whereof he says. Ioh. 10.18. that he had power to lay down his life
and to take it up again, and that his life was not wrested out of his hand but
seeing God had decreed it otherwise therefore Christ must needs die, and yet
the principal crucifier of Christ (that I may so speak generally) was God
himself, who besides that he used the Jews, and the Devils as his
instruments to murder Christ yet he retayneth in his own hands one sovereign
torture, the most fearful wrath of God to be inflicted upon Christ our
surety, in regard whereof the propet says of Christ, thou have brought me into
the dust of death.

Summarily (to end the torments which immediately tortured Christ's soul) we
may here observe that Christ was thus afflicted as is rehearsed already, both
willingly, and necessarily: willingly in that he suffered the Devils thus to
assault him with terour and temptation: necessarily in that God had a hand in
killing him, and bringing him to the grave which is deaths dust: and indeed
Christ did willingly and yet necessarily suffer all that he suffered: hence
then two consequents follow immediately.

1 Christ infinite love that was content and willing to suffer such hardship
for us wretched caitifes: and.

2 That no less then that which Christ suffered was sufficient for our
redemption and reconcilation to God, seeing that he suffered all that he
suffered necessarily: for if it be supposed that the least suffering of Christ
had been enough to have appeased God toward us, then it is superfluous and
unnecessary that Christ should come into the dust of death: should have such
straung effects in his body before his death; should be subject to the terour
and temptations of the devil: to the wounds and stripes of the Jews: but
because it was necessary that Christ should suffer all these things and so
enter into his glory, therefore the least suffering of Christ was not
sufficient. This also might call into question the law of God to his beloved
son in that he would bring him to the dust of death, if it were not
necessary: and if it were necessary that Christ should die and that by Gods
own hand (rather and more then by the Jews wounds, and the Devils work) as
is here noted, I would know what that hand of God was, if it was not the wrath
of God working the former straung effects in Christ's body: and if Christ must
of necessity die, why must he not of necessity suffer Gods wrath properly?
shall we say Gods love would not suffer that? But Gods Justice did require it:
and Gods love would suffer him to die: but necessity urged a despensation?
What necessity I pray you? even this perhaps that if Gods wrath had seized upon
Christ, he would have been forsaken of God: why? he was forsaken of God Psalm.
22.1. all comfort was secluded from him, and yet all grace was present with
him: but it was impossible that Christ should suffer gods wrath? wherefore
impossible? because he was God? therefore also it was impossible that he should
die, but possibility admitted his death: and why not Gods wrath? for neither
the Godhead died nor suffered Gods wrath, but the manhood only and the
hypostaticall union was never dissolved and there is no danger of fearing any
absurdity to ensue upon the suffering of Gods wrath rather then upon the
suffering of death: for despair, want of faith, love, etc. are not to be
feared.

The affliction that immediately seized upon Christ's body.
V. 16.17, 18.
16. For dogs have compassed me; and the assembly of the wicked have enclosed
me, they pierced my hands and my feet.

17 I may tell all my bones, yet they behold and look upon me.

18 They part my garments among them and cast lottes upon my vesture etc.


These words contain that affliction which directly and immediately was
inflicted upon Christ's body, which no doubt pierced the sensitive part of the
soul, which was inherent in the parts of the body wounded, for we see wounds
in the parts of the body are sensible, and so very grievous: the reason is;
for that the object and the instrument of sense are joined together without a
medium, whereas there ought to be a competent distance, and a convenient
medium, which is called Cuticula.

Here in the first place the persons inflicting these bodily torments upon
Christ, are to be considered, who are called dogs, whereas the devils in the
former part of Christ's torments were compared to Bulls and Lions: and the
comparison has in it excellent conueniencie and proportion, for as it is an
easier matter to encounter a dog, then a mighty mad Bull, and a lion, so the
conflict which Christ had with the wicked, which were but a company of curre
dogs, was nothing in comparison of the combat he had with the devil and his
angels, whose malice, might, and mischeife against Christ surpassed the
villainy of the Jews, as far as the lion rampeth and roareth more cruelly
then the dog barketh: and yet Christ suffered more then that also, which was
the co^pleme^t of al misery.

The wicked in the Scripture are compared to dogs in respect of two
properties which dogs have, wherein wicked men are answerable to them: the
one is churlishnes the other is filthiness: for the dog will snarle at him
that beats him for his fault, yea though he be his master, Mat. 7.6. and he
will also turn again and eat the carrion which he has vomited, 2. Pet.
2.22. which notes out unto us two sorts of wicked men: one is open persecutors
that revile and persecute them that smite them with holesom reproves, when
they are faulty: another is temporizing hypocrites, that having made a show
of godliness, as if they had vomited sin out of their souls, yet at length
return again, and take up their former sins, which only for a time in
hypocrisy they forsook.

Further this place warranteth (and innumerable more) that the assemble of
wicked men that are temporizers or persecutors may lawefully be called dogs,
or a kennell of hounds: men now a days that serve times, and persecute the
church take it in dudgin (as we say) that they should be called dogs, or swine,
or lions, or bears, etc. and yet they have all the properties of these brutish
creatures, as if brute beasts were metamorphized and changed into men, as the
heathen have allegorized: of such persons. I would dema^d this question;
whether is worse to be a dog, or to be called a dog? may not a man call a dog a
dog? Wherefore if such me^ be dogs, I know no reason but they may be so
called, especially the h. ghost going before, whose example is our instruction
in the same case: either therefore let such men cease to be dogs, or if
they still continue dogs let them be called dogs.

Again some take the prick when they are not pricked at all in the ministers
intentio^-althogh they are pricked in the Lords disposition: for sometime the
minister intends in his ministry that which never pearceth: and sometime
God causes that to pearce in his ministry that which he never intends,
yet it may be known that Paul's planting, and Apollos watring is nothing except
God give increase: There are men called by the names of beasts, as lion, fox,
heart, hare, hound, or so forth, and these men are some good some bad, as our
own experience may inform us well enough: now sometime it falls out that
the minister in his ministry is occasioned by the scripture to unfold the
evil properties of wicked men in regard whereof they are compared to beasts as
the lions properties are pride and cruelty, the foxes craft and subteltie, the
hearts fearefullnes, etc. and it may fall out that some wicked man called lion
has the lions pride and cruelty, some wicked man called fox has the foxes
craft and subteltie etc. now if these men take themselves either named or aimed
at in the ministry, where as it may be the minister never dreameth thereof;
or if the minister intend such a thing, whence should a man say this
proceeds? without doubt either gross folly, or an accusing conscience, or
mere malice, or brutish ignorance bring me^ into these surmises: howsoever it
be gods word, it is a sharp two edged sword; and the minister by gods
providence, which to him perhaps is chance medley, sometime shall wou^d him
whom he never aimed at, or harden him, whom he never thought of: for the word
of God is both a savor of life and of death to several sorts of persons. These
are the persons that afflicted Christ, let us further consider what afflictions
befell him: they crucify him, and mock him, they strip him naked, and dispoile
him of his garments: all which are so many sufferings of Christ for our good:
he was crucified, and suffered the most accursed death of the cross, to
deliver us from the curse of the law, Gal. 3.13, he was mocked to make us
honorable, he was robbed to make us rich, and was stripped naked to cover our
nakedness: al these benefits we have from all Christ's sufferings, though not
each of them severally from the like suffering in Christ, howsoever
allegorically thus applied.

They pierced my hands and my feet, I may tell all my bones.
But one thing especially is here to be considered concerning the crucifying of
Christ, in what sense Christ being upon the tree, and there put to death, was
accursed: for exposition whereof, we are to know, that to die upon a tree is not
a thing indeed accursed, either in nature or civil constitution, or of it
self. Nature does not teach us, that to hang upon a tree is a thing accursed,
more the^ to be thrust through with a sword, or to be pressed to death, or to be
burnt, or so forth.

Again no positive or civil laws of any nation under heaven have accursed
those persons that have been hanged upon a tree until their bodies have died,
indeed the death is something more base and vilde then some other kind of death
is, in reputation among some persons, whence in our nation it seems that
noble men have some privilege that way, that they die not as other sorts of
persons die. And lastly, the death of the tree has no curse in it self: we
read of diverse men that were godly men that died upon the tree; as the
penitentiarie that died with Christ, and Christ himself also: and experience
teaches us that eeuery year: for many men betwixt their condemnation and
execution have been deeply humbled for there sins, and so have died the
true servants of God: where fore the death of the cross (which Christ
suffered) was not thus accursed: how then was it accursed? surely by the
judicial and ceremonial law of Moses and not otherwise: that law which
Moses gave from God the lawgiuer of the Jews Deuteronomy 21.23. conteyneth a
prohibition with a reason annexed thereto: The prohibition is in these words:
Thou shall not suffer his body that is hanged upon the tree to remain all
night upon the tree: and this prohibition is a meare Judicial law of Moses the
which the people of the Jews only, were bound to observe; which law if the
people of the Jews had violated, they sinned so against God, that the land was
defiled with the sin, Deuteronomy. 21.23. The reason of that prohibition is in these
words: For the curse of God is on him that is hanged: and this reason is a
mere ceremonial law: (for it has bin proved, that neither by the law of
nature, by civil or positive law, or of it self, to be hanged upon a tree is
accursed;) it is therefore a mere ceremony: but we know that Christ is the
substance of every ceremony: wherefore the Lord foreseeing that Christ should
die upon a tree, and upon the tree suffer the curse of the law due unto our
sins, as our surety: therefore he typically figured out this curse in the
death of malefactors among the people of the Jews, that were hanged upon the
tree: so that every malefactor that was hanged among the Jews, was a type of
Christ, and therefore was accursed: not really (for it is want of charity to
think so) but ceremonially and typically, represe^ting unto us Christ, who was
truly and really accursed for us: in that he sustained gods wrath which is the
curse of the law, which we should have sustained: wherefore seeing Christ was
really accursed as has been proved by this discourse, therefore he
undoubtedly suffered gods wrath which is the curse. Yet they behold and look
upon me.


When they had nailed Christ to the cross and wrackt his joints so as that his
bones might be numbered they heap upon him all other indignities they can:
and therefore first they behold and look upon him: alas it was a pitiful fight
for one that had any manhood in him, to see a man nailed hands and feet with
great nails (as they must needs be seeing the hebrew word signifies such a
pearcing, as was more like diggig: or such a pearcing as a lion makes with his
claws); to see the blood issue abounly out of the wounds; to see his body
strecht so as that one joint was severed from an other which is an extreme
torture, for a bodily torment; and yet they behold and look upon him without
any pity at all; nay they mock and derid him as appears plain in the
history of the Gospel, and when he would have had a little drink to assuage
his thirst, they gave him viniger mingled with gaul to increase his thirst the
more, gaull being a thing biter of it self; all these shameful outragies
they offered to Christ now in dying; whence we may consider; not only the
barbarous cruelty of these persons, but further the nature and property of him
which is to grow one from degree to degree, till it come to an height and a
fearful excess; these persons first contemned Christ a doctrine, depraved
his life, consented to his death, now most cruelly murder him, and yet that
does not satisfy them, but they mock at him in the midst of his misery: and
will not affoard him any ease at al: It is good to gainstand sin at the
first, least if it get ground of us at length it conquer and subdue us: for the
Lord sometime accustometh to punish one sin with another, and when men will
not prevent small sins, they shall be plunged into a sea of fearful
impiety: as the Gentiles because when they knew God they did not glorify him
as God, fell to Idolatry and after that to sin against nature: and they in
the seat of Antichrist because they received not the love of the truth,
therefore are given over to strange delusions to believe lies that they might
be damned. Romans 3.2. These. 2. when they had thus shamefully handled Christ,
They part my garments and cast lottes one my vesture.
they proceed to the dividing of his garments (for they stripped him of his
clothes when they crucified him) and here we may observe diverse points worth
our noting: for what should be the reason that the holy Ghost should thus
carefully express this practice of the soldiers in dividing his garments and
casting lottes for his vesture? no doubt this is some special matter even in
this their practice, especially seeing the Evangelist also testify the same
thing to be done by the soldiers: some allegory the matter after this manner:
the garments of Christ (say they) are the scriptures: the vesture of Christ is
his Church, the soldiers are heretics: For although the heretics rend the
scriptures with false exposition etc. yet they cannot dissolve the unity of
the Church with there errors: This doctrine is true, but it is not intended in
this place. It is a mere folly and dotage thus to abuse the scriptures, though
the allegory be never so witty. But we are to know that one reason why the
Evangelists express these things is for the verifying of the prophecy: that
the event might declare the truth of the prophecy: other profitable
considerations may hence be raised.

1 The soldiers deal as thieves which have gotten a booty: they make no
conscience of robbing a man and yet they make a scruple in dividing the spoil:
the soldiers make no bones to kill Christ, and rob him of his garments, yet
they are curious in the dividing his apparel amongst them: for it is a right
property of an hypocrite to swallow a carnell, and to strain at a gnatt: to
tith mint, cummin and annise seed, and to neglect Judgment, mercy, and faith:
the soldiers never strain curtesy to injury Christ, but they will not injury
one another.

2 Again the Holy Ghost seems to lay another fault among the soldiers that
they cast lottes for trifles, as if men should card and dice for a coat: we
never read in all the scriptures that lottes were used but in weighty matters,
and it seems to be to take the name of God in vain, to sport our selves with
his immediate providence, as lots are.

3 Furthermore (if that be not assented unto) yet here is another thing flatly
reproueable, that by lottes (as it were cards and dice) they would compass
parts of their maintenance, getting away from another man by lot that which
before was not theirs or where to they had no title: for one of the soldiers
must needs have the whole coat (for seeing it was without seame they would
not cut it) and so the other three soldiers lost their parts and he that got
the coat by lot, was a thief to the other three: for god has appointed men
to get there goods by labor and lawful contractes not by carding and dicing
and lotting, as the soldiers do in this place.

4 Lastly: it seems that Christ's coat was worth something, as also his
garments for otherwise the soldiers would not have regarded the^ thus as they
do; and Christ was not so poor and beggarly, as some begging friars might
peradventure suppose him to be: neither is begging a state of perfection,
better then possessing and using riches: we read that Paull had a cloak which
he left at Troas, and it is like he carried another with him, except we say he
borrowed one or went in his Ierkin: and though some men's riches are a snare unto
them, yet that is not in their riches, but in their corupt hearts which are set
upon their riches: some man's poverty also is a snare unto him but that is in
the wickedness of his own heart also rather then in poverty.

Of the request and petition of the prophet repeated.
19. But be thou far of O Lord my strength: hasten to help me.

20 Deliver my soul from the sword, my desolate soul from the power of the
dog.

21 Save me from the Lions mouth, and answer me in saving me from the horns of
the unicorns.


Hitherto the sufferinges of Christ have been discussed: now it follows to
entreat more largely of the prayer that Christ makes, the substance whereof is
here set down by the prohet and it accords with the prayer which the
Evangelist sets down Math 26. and Ioh. 12. Let this cup pass from me. etc.
save me from this hour etc. where this question comes to be scanned: what
Christ prayed for in this place, and in these two places of the Evangelists:
or what Christ prays against: for the on of these include the other, and the
supplication includes the deprecation: for solution whereof: It must
necessarily be granted that he prays either against a bodily death, or
against Gods wrath; if it be said, that he prayed against a bodily death, then
also it must needs be that he prayed either that it should not light upon him,
or that it should not triumph over him; that is that the power of death should
not hinder him from rising again, that he should not be held of the sorrows
of death, Act. 2.24.

Again if it be said that he prayed against Gods wrath, then one of these
three things must of necessity be granted: namely that he prayed.

1 Either that Gods wrath should not light upon him.

2 Or that it might depart from him being already upon him.

3 Or that it might not swallowe him up and ouerwhelme him and eternally
detayne him, and so cause him either to forfeite, or not to accomplish our
redeption.

There being thus a sufficient enumeration of parts, let us proceed further
and inquire against which of al these he prayed.

First therefore he prayed not against death that he migh not taste it: for God
had determined that he should suffer death, and he knew it very well it
being figured in the sacrifices of the old law, whereof he was the substance
prophesied by the prophets, signified to the disciples by himself. Mat. 16.
and to say that he prayed against that, for which he knew he came into the
world were to make him pray against his knowledge, and against the express
will of God revealed in the word, which were blasphemous to say of Christ in
whose mouth there was found no guile.

Secondly also he prayed not against Gods wrath, so as that it should not light
upon him: for Matthew. 20.22. he says plainly, he must taste of that cup:
wherefore he did taste it when he prayed it might pass from him, Math. 26. and
the condition which is expressed in this prayer argues so much: for in the place
of Mat. 26.42. Christ says thus, If this cup cannot pass from me, but that
I must drink it, thy will be done: which words plainly import thus much: that
whereas before the first time he prayed this prayer, he directly said: let this
cup pass from me, adding the conditions: Math. 26.39. There was some
opposition betwixt his natural will and gods will: now the second time he
prayed, Christ's will is wholly submitted and subjected to Gods will, to drink
the cup prepared for him by God: as if Christ had said, Father if it had been
possible, and agreeable to thy will, I could wish that this cup of thy fierce
wrath might pass away, so as that I might not taste it, but seeing it cannot
pass till I have drunk it. I submit my self to thy will. And this prayer in
the same words he utters the third time: Math. 26.44. Where the changing of
the words of the prayer in the verse, 42. is to be carefully noted: which
change is retained the third time he prayed, v. 44. as if Christ had now
vanquished nature by grace; for there was in Christ both nature and grace, and
that this second prayer was a correcting of the former: not as though his first
prayer were simply bad, but that nature seemed to carry a greater sway in the
first, then in the second, and grace thoroughly corrected nature in the second:
other correcting I mean none: wherefore here Christ prayed not that Gods wrath
might not at al light upon him.

Thirdly therefore, and for conclusion, he prayed against the other 3. parts of
the distribution mentioned before: against the dominion and continuance of gods
wrath, and death. Against the dominion of death and gods wrath he prayed
undoubtedly, and that properly as our intercessor, that neither himself the
head, nor we co^seque^tly the members, should be subdued and overwhelmed of
them: but that himself, and we by him might conquer and vanquish them, and
triumph over them: Heb. 5.7.
and so he was heard from that which he feared. One doubt will here arise, how
Christ could fear the dominion of death and Gods wrath, for then Christ wa^ted
faith, and doubted, which to say were blasphemy: for answer whereof, we must
distinguish betwixt fear and doubting. A man may fear that which he assuredly
knows shall not befall him: Adam in Paradise might fear the wrath of god,
and fear his apostacy and falling from God, which was in him a virtue, and
yet surely Ada^ had faith and a persuasion of gods love, and assurance to
continue in grace, if he would: so likewise Christ might fear least the wrath
of God might ouerwhelme him and us, and yet be fully assured of deliverance
from it: Fear is a natural affection: and no natural affection is contrary
to grace, but subordinate to it: and Christ feared these things naturally; and
furthermore the word (...), Heb. 5.7. signifies a fearful and careful
declining and avoiding some imminent danger, by reason whereof the mind is
possessed with a great anxietie and solicitude, intending it self, with all
the powers thereof to gainstand the impendent mischeife: and thus Christ feared
the dominion of death and gods wrath, and for this purpose prayed against it,
he being carefully and reverently bufied about the recovery of himself, and
the redeeming of us from the power of death and the sorrows of hell: and
because prayer is one excellent means to furnish a christian captain against
the enemy for obtaining the victory: therefore Christ prays with strong
crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death eternal, and
was heard from that which he naturally feared, or rather from that, for
declining whereof he was reverently accumbred: nature working in him fear of
it, and grace stirring up prayer against it: and there is no absurdity to say,
that Christ prayed against that which he certainly and fully knew should
never befall his Disciples.

And as Christ prayed against the dominion of death and gods wrath, so he
prayed also that the wrath of God might not stay longer upon him, he being now
already tormented therewithal, and so he says, let it pass from me: save me
from this hour. For further explication whereof consider 3. propositions or
axioms following.

1 Christ sustaining the full wrath of God in his soul, was wholly busied in
his whole soul, and all the faculties thereof in apprehending, feeling, and
bearing it, so as the soul and faculties thereof were distracted from all
their objects, and wholly applied hereunto: as appears by the strange
intermitting of the functio^s of the soul in the parts of the body, mentioned,
v. 14.15.

2 We must distinguish nature and natural infirmities from sin and sinful
infirmities: it is a natural infirmity for a man to sleep and be weary, and
so also sustaining Gods wrath, to desire to be released from it: but it is no
sin at all.

3 We must know that Christ as he was man was ignorant of some things, as
namely of the day of judgment, Mar. 13.32. for some ignorance is no sin: as
for a minister to be ignorant of the manuarie trades: for a man to be ignorant
where hell is, of the orders of angels. etc.

Now for application of these three axioms: sure it is that when Christ
prayed, he prayed without the least spotte of sin: and either of these
axioms rehearsed will justify Christ prayer from the least suspicion of
sin: as it is thought.

The first axiom justifies a certain oblivion or forgetfulness in Christ,
when all the faculties of the soul were interrupted through the sense of Gods
wrath: and wholly seized with the intolerable pain thereof: this I dare not
peremptorily say, every way to be good and sound, neither do I reprove it:
only thus much, it may seem to be a fault for a man to forget when the ought
to remember; and to say that Christ had now a holy forgetfulness, when he
should most of all remember, even when he was to make the vp-shotte (that I may
so speak) of our redemption, is not presently without further inquisition to
be admitted.

In regard of the second of these axioms it may be more probably answered,
that Christ sustaining the wrath of God, and having the nature of a man in him,
which desired releife from so extreme torment (which is a natural sinlesse
work) said to his Father, Let this cup pass, save me from this hour, etc.
and in the very self same moment of time that nature desires, grace seasoneth
and qualifieth nature, saying, Not my natural will, but thy will be fulfilled:
therefore came I into this hour. So here there is first a difference betwixt
nature and grace; then a subordinating of nature to grace: also it may be a
correcting of nature by grace, not as if nature were evil simply but a less
good: for it is good tor the creature to preserve it self: it is better to
obey gods will by suffering according to his will: especially considering the
coincidence of nature and grace in the same time and prayer: for nature makes
the request, grace adds the conditions.

Nature says thus:

Father let this cup pass from me: save me from this hour. Grace says:

If it be possible: and not my will be done, but thine; and therefore came I into
this hour In regard of the third axiom aforesaid, it is thus answered, that as
Christ was ignorant of the day of judgment, so without error it may seem, we
may say he was ignorant of the time how long or how often he should suffer the
wrath of god: and so being under the hand of God, and not knowing what space
of time god in his everlasting decree had set down for enduring it, or how often
it should make incursion upon him; he prayed, Let it pass, etc. that is, let
it depart from me, I having now sustained it; or let it not seize upon me
again, I having already suffered it; sure it is, that Christ did undergo gods
wrath a competent time, and diverse times, as Ioh. 12. Once Gods wrath like
lightning did flash upon his face; also Math. 26. The second time gods wrath
most furiously assaulted him, which wrought in him that strange agony and
sweat: lastly, hanging upon the cross, when he cried out, My God, my God; why
have thou forsaken me? and this third assault was the Co^plement of all his
woes, for whereas before in the Garden an angel comforted, and so God had not
clean forsaken him, now God utterly withdrewe from him all comfort; and so
there was nothing but wrath devouring him and praying upon him without all
mercy and comfort: but exquesitely to determine how often, or how long at any
time Gods wrath was upon Christ, seeing the scripture has not expressed it, is
mere curiosity; and if any man object that Christ prayed against Gods will
nevertheless in praying thus; it is answered that he prayed against Gods
secret will it may be and that is no sin; and his prayer had conditions, and
so it was not against gods will; It is no sin for the son to pray for the
life of his father, which shall shortly die, he praying co^ditionally.
Wherefore to end all this discourse of Christ's prayer; it is justifiable as we
see, in diverse respects by saying either he forgatt through the interrupting of
the soul; or that nature corrected with grace made this request; or that he
prayed through ignorance, contrary to Gods secret will conditionally.

These things being thus discoursed the meaning of these words in the psalm
is very easy; as if the prophet should have said more plainly and without
allegory thus all the powers of darkness* now rage against me, (the dog the
lion the unicorn the sword) the Jews, the devil (which is the ramping and
roaring lion:) thy wrath and the curse of the law: now father I do not
desire that I may not encounter with them but that I may not be overcome by
them, save me from the dominion of death and thy wrath (from the power of the
dog, from the lions mouth, from the horns of the unicorns) let the Jews
(the dogs) crucify and kill me, let the Devil and his angels (the lyo^ the
unicorns) tempt and terrify me: let thy wrath and the curse of the law (the
sword) seeing it must needs torture me: but yet father save me, and by me thy
whole Church from perishing under thy wrath: Yea father if I now have
sustained thy wrath long enough and often enough (as that is hidden from me, as
is the day of judgment) release me from it: but if it must needs still rest
upon me, I am content to bear it still patiently, and that for the full and
perfect redemption of thy Church.

From these words paraphrastically thus expounded may arise a doubt: V. 20.
Deliver my soul from the sword.
why Gods wrath is called a sword, or how that exposition is justifiable: for
satisfying whereof we must consider the place, Zachar. 3.7. Arise o sword, and
smite the sheapheard, which place is applied by the Evangelist, Math. 26.31. to
the death of Christ, also consider the phrase: the prophet prays that his
soul may be delivered from the sword: his soul does not signify his life,
but his very soul indeed the fountain of life: for Christ did not pray
against death that he might not taste it: but that his soul might not be
swallowed up of death: therefore this must needs be the meaning of the place:
let not thy wrath ouerwhelme my soul: for we cannot say properly let not death
ouerwhelme my soul, but let not death ouerwhelme my body. The soul dies not
but the body only.

Summarily then to end; this is not the meaning of the words: deliver my life
from death: Supra probutum.

Nor this; deliver my soul from death, for the soul cannot die, it is
immortal.

Nor this: deliver my body from the grave: for it is absurd and impertinent to
this place.

Therefore this is the meaning: deliver my soul from thy wrath (my soul from
the sword) but the sword did smit the shepherd: ergo Gods wrath did torture
his soul.

Desolate (soul.)
The meaning of this Epithet (desolate) is expressed v. 1. for Christ's soul was
desolate, because God had now forsaken him, and neither himself, man or
angel or any creature did comfort him but all had forsaken him.. v. 11.

My strength
Although Christ was desolate of all comfort, yet he had strength and grace
sufficient to bear whatsoever was inflicted upon him by God as our surety.
And therefore nevertheless he intitleth god his strength, though he
complains that God had forsaken him, and did not hear when he roared. verse.
1.

The promise of Thankfulness: and first of Christ's Prophecy.
Ver. 22, 23, 24, 25.
22 I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation
will I praise thee, (saying.)

23 Praise the Lord ye that fear him, magnify ye him all the seed of Jacob,
and fear ye him all the seed of Israel.

24 For he has not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the poor: nether
has he hid his face from him, but when he called unto him he heard.

25 My praise shall be of thee in the great congregatione my vows will I
perform before them that fear him.


The Prophet having before set down the sacrifice and intercession of Christ
both in the torments which he sustained partly in his soul directly and
properly from the devil, and from God himself, partly in his body from the
Jews that murdered him, as also in the vehement prayer which he made, partly
for himself, and partly for us, seeing the fruit thereof wholly redoundeth
unto us: now he proceeds to the prophecy and kingdom of Christ: and first
the prophetical office of Christ is expressed in these four verses. Verse. 22. I
will declare thy name unto my brethren.


The principal work of Christ's prophecy is to declare Gods name, that is, his
excellent attributes, and his whole will unto his brethren the Jews, and so to
the whole Church, for so this place is brought, Heb. 2.12. to prove the
humanity of Christ: whence we consider that Christ is designed by God the
father for the only Prophet, Doctor, and teacher of the Church, he is the
great Bishop of our souls: God has commanded us to hear him: and he is the
only lawgiver that is able to save and destroy: which is thus to be
understood, that he alone has revealed his fathers will to the Church by the
ministry of the prophets in the old Testament, by his own, and the Apostles
ministry in the new testament, who spoke as the H. ghost directed the^, for
Christ Jesus has in his breast hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,
who is therefore called the wisdom of God: and therefore we are not to add
to, or detract any thing from the written word of god, or to alter any whitte
thereof, which whosoever presumes to do, derogateth from the prophetical
office of Christ: the scriptures indeed may be expounded, but they must not be
altered, augmented or diminished.

Hence also follows it by due proportion: that the ministers and Pastors of
the Church, who stand up in Christ's stead (he being ascended up on high, and
having given gifts unto men) are to open and publish Gods will sufficiently
revealed by Christ in the Prophets and Apostles writings) to the people of God
for their conversion and salvation. Finally also by like analogy Christians
must without fear or shame confess and profess the truth of Gods word, not
only before the friends of the Church, and those specially over whom they
have charge, but also before the enemies of the Church being called and urged
thereunto.

This is the principal work of Christ's prophecy to teach the Church: now the
effects thereof follow, which are the praise of God, and the conversion of men's
souls: which are subordinate each to other: for by the conversion of men's
souls God is glorified.

The first effect of Christ's prophetical office, V. 25. Let the seed of Jacob
and Israel, fear, praise, and magnify god.
and so of the ministry of the prophets, Apostles, and Pastors of the church,
is the conversion of men's souls: otherwise called the gathering together of
the Saints, the edification of the body of Christ.

The second effect of the Prophecy of Christ, V. 22. In the mids of the
congregation I will praise thee.
and so of the ministry, is the praise of God, for therefore must ministers
preach and teach that God may be glorified in the conversion of men's souls:
thus Christ says, I honor my father: and again, I have glorified thee on the
earth: Where the ministers, Pastors, and teachers of the Church are to learn
in their functions to aim at these ends, that they may save souls which is a
great point of wisdom, and gloryfie God which is the end of all things; where
those pastors are reproueable that seek rather to wine their own praise by
inkhorne learning, by darkning and obscuring their preachings with the clouds
of philosophy and the tongues, drawing as it were a vale before Christ
crucyfied, and covering Moses face with a scarf; that men should not with open
face see the glory of God, then the prase of god, and the conversion of men's
souls, who are rather by this kind of preaching still kept in the dungeon of
ignorance and palpable darkness that the day star Jesus Christ cannot arise
in their hearts; so that this kind of preaching is rather to put out, then to
open the eyes of the blind.

Hitherto the prohet has declared the prophetical office of Christ in
revealing Gods will to the Church with the two effects thereof, the conversion
of men's souls and the glory of God (for the hardening of the wicked is no
proper effect;) now the prophet rendereth a reason of Christ's prophetical
office, wherefore he will reveal his fathers will to his Church; or wherefore
the Church ought to praise God being converted because that when Jesus Christ
being poor and in great humiliatio^ sustaining the wrath of God for the
redemption of the Church called unto his father, he heard: V. 24. He has not
despised the affliction of the poor: but heard his prayer.
and did not abhor or despise his affliction, but with a pitiful eye
regarded him and at length when he had satisfied gods justice delivered him.

Hence then we may learn two instructions.

First that the prophetical office of Christ is a fruit of his preisthood, of
his redemption, sacrifice and intercession: for if Christ had not died for us,
he had never revealed his fathers will unto us: according as the aposte (Ephesians.
4.) does reason Christ ascended up on high and led captivity captive, and gave
gifts unto men: but before he ascended he descended and suffered death for us.

Secondly hence we must learn everlastingly to* magnify the work of our
redemption which is the fountain of all our good: for without it we had still
remained in blindness and ignorance without the knowledge of Gods word, and so
we had groped in the palpable darkness of Aegipt: for the prophetical office
of Christ principally reuealeth unto us the redemption of Christ which is the
principal work of his preisthood, so that Christ's sacrifice is the half of
the matter of his prophecy the doctrine of the law also through Christ
prophecy is restored unto us sound and perfect which through the transgression
of Adam was wonderfully defaced, and the condition of the law is qualified
also by the conditions of the gospel, that the Lord does not now require
perfect obedience in quantity, but in quality: and so through the redemption of
Christ. The Gospel is wholly revealed, a matter altogether unknown to man by
nature, and the law is restored, and qualified and made possible to the
penitent and believers.

He heard when he called.
Here a question may be made how God heard Christ when he prayed: seeing in the
first and second verses it is said that god heard not: that doubt is answered
before in the complaint: and therefore it is needelesse here to repeat it
again.

In this 25. verse there are two phrases to be observed: Verse. 25. My praise
shall be of thee in the great congregation.
first what should be meant by the great congregation: it seems that the
Prophet has reference to that which should be practiced by Christ in his
prophetical office: we read in the book of the Law, Deuteronom. 16. that
all the males were commanded to come up to Jerusalem thrice in the year, now
that was no doubt a great congregation when all the males came thither to
worship: now there is an express place in the Evangelist, John, 7.37. that
Christ preached and prophesied in the last and great day of the feast of
Tabernacles, which was one of those three great assemblies: and so that place
of John and this of the prophet are parallel in sense: A second phrase
doubtful is: what is meant by Christ's vows? My vows will I perform.
In the old testament vows were of such matters and of such a condition as
that before they were made, they were in a man's power, but after they were
vowed they became necessary, Eccles. 5.3.4. Act. 5.4 probably therefore it may
be said that Christ's vows were that voluntary submission of Christ to become
our mediator, our prophet and king and priest, which was most free and willing
and uncompelled in him. Ioh. 10.18.

Of Christ's kingdom: or kingly office: and his subjects.
26.27.28.29.30.31.
26 The poor shall eat and be satisfied, they that seek after the Lord shall
praise him, your soul shall live for ever.

27 All the ends of the world shall remember themselves and turn to the Lord,
all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before thee, 28.

28 For the kingdom is the lords and he rules among the nations.

29 All they that be fat in the earth shall eat and worship: all they that
go down into the dust shall bow befere him: eue^ he that cannot quicken his
own soul.

30 There seedd, shall serve him, it shall be counted to him forever.

31 They shall come and shall declare his righteousness: because he has done it
for a people to be borne.


In the kingdom of Christ the subjects are first to be considered who are
first described by two properties: which are indeed Properties every way,
wherein the wicked have no part nor portion at all: which are these following.

1 Humiliation 2 faith 3 peace of conscience 4 desire of increase of grace 5
Glorifying God 6 life everlasting: of each of them something.

Humiliation or contrition or sorrow for sins is the first grace that
appears sensibly in the soul of a Godly man, this is the sacrifice that is
well pleasing in gods sight; v. 26 The poor.
and the Lord has promised to dwell with the man that has a broken and
contrite heart; and blessedness is promised by Christ to them that are poor in
spirit; and Christ inuiteth all those that are weary and laden with their sins
to come to him for refreshing; and he came to call such sinners to repentance,
whose hearts melt at the consideration of their sins whereby they offend a
God that is most merciful and just.

Faith is the second grace which follows humiliaton, the property whereof is
to eat Jesus Christ, Shall eat.
to apprehend and apply the sacrifice of Christ particularly to it self: for
faith is not a vast and indistinct apprehension of Christ, or a confused and
indefinite conceit of Gods mercy to the world: but a distinct appropriating
and applying of gods mercy and Christ's merit to my self, knowing in some
measure, and being assured that Christ has nailed, crucified, and buried my
sins to his cross, and in his grave, and to do this is all the difficulty.

And be satisfied.
Third property is joy and peace and quietness or conscience, when a man is
assured of the pardon of his sins through faith, a man knows that God
loves him, and does accept of his person, and watches over him to do him
good, he knows that he is freed from death, and damnation through the
redemption of Christ, that life everlasting, appertains to him, under hope
whereof he rejoices yea in the midst of affliction, though sometime this peace
be disturbed thorough some sins wherein to the children of God fall through
temptation: this is termed here satisfying, not for that a man that has it,
never desires grace more: but because nothing in the world can satisfy him
til he have comfort in the assurance of his sins pardoned, when a man is once
thoroughly humbled; or because a man never is barren and dry, and clean void
of grace and comfort after, that once has it.

Fourth property is desire of increase of grace, Seek after the Lord.
which is obtained by seeking the Lord where and how he is to be found, that
is, in the word and the means of grace: for he that wants grace can never
desire it, only he that has it, and has felt the sweetness of it longs for
it still, like unto the man that finding the treasure hid in the field, and the
pearl, never rests till he get both: by this also a man may know the truth
of grace in his soul: for he that never regards the word, never atte^deth
upon instruction, nor watches to prayer, that man wants grace: for the
heavenly covetousness and dropsy of grace is insatiable: and therefore the
Church is sick of love unto the Lord Jesus Christ in the Canticles.

A fifth property is the leading of a godly life according to gods
commandments, Shall praise him.
with a constant profession and confession of the truth to the praise of God,
that others may see our good works, and glorify God also. Also a thankful
heart whereby a man in himself blesses God for all his goodness, saying with
the Prophet, All that is within me praise his holy name.

Everlasting life is the last property, Your (...) shall live for ever
which is the reward of all the former: and which is the complement of our
happiness and felicity.

After the description of the subjects of Christ's kingdom by their properties
follow the several sorts of them: Gentiles as well as Jews, poor as well as
rich: malefactors condemned to die, as well as guiltless persons; the children
as well as the parents. Yea and the kingdom of Christ consists of all other
sorts of persons that may be rehearsed: as bond and free, man and woman,
master and servant, etc. Generally hence may be noted two instructions.

First, wherefore the church is called Catholic; because it consists of al
sorts of persons, it is in all places: it is at al times. v. 27.29.30, 31.

V. 29. All that be fatt all that go down into the pit.
Secondly that grace is universal no sort or estate of men excluded form
Christ's kingdom: ethe poor have intrest to grace and Christ as well as the
rich, the gentill as well as the Jew, women as well as men: yet we must know
that the note of universality must not be stretched to every particular man, but
to every estate and condition of man. For it is more then gross absurdity to
say that all and every particular rich man, and poor man shall be a member of
Christ, shall eat and worship, that is believe and serve God: wherefore this
doctrine serves to admonish first the welthie and fatt men of the earth not to
contemn and despise the poor, and the lean and needy soul: and the poor
not to envy the rich, and malice the wealthy: but both to serve together in
their places, and to preserve the communion of saints mutually, remembering the
Apostles rule, Iam. 1.9.10. that the poor is exalted, and the rich is made
low in Jesus Christ: that though the rich be the poor man's masters, yet he is
Christ's servant: and though the poor man be the rich man's slave, yet he is the
son of God, and fellow heir with him, and with Christ of the kingdom of
grace and glory. Besides these general instructions, certain particular
observations also are here to be noted which follow.

The Prophet says, Verse 27. The ends of the world. The kindreds of the nations.
that the Gentiles shall become subjects to Christ's kingdom: which prophecy we
see verified amongst us at this day, whereupon we are to be stirred up to
glorify the mercy and truth of God, who has cast off his own people, and
received us, that were wild branches of the wild olive, that were strangers
and aliants from the common wealth of Israel: without God in the world: which
must also teach us not to be hie minded, but to fear, and look to our selves
that we stand fast.

Again, the conversion of the Gentiles is here noted out unto us in the 3.
parts thereof.

1 They shall remember themselves, Shall remember.
that is, their sinful and accursed estate: they shall take notice of it by
the powerful preaching of the Gospel: humiliation.

Turn to the Lord.
2 They shall turn to the lord: forsaking their false way of Idolatry and other
sins and turning their feet into the truth, and walking in obedience of Gods
laws: obedience.

3 They shall worship before God, Worship before thee.
by partaking all the means of salvation, as the word, prayer, sacraments. etc.
publicly and privately as good christians: adoration.

Va^. Kingdom i^ the Lords.
Now because this may seem a very staunge thing to the Jews that the gentiles
should be admitted into the fellowship of the Church, the partition wall being
broken down and one people being made of two: the prophet renders a reason
hereof, designing out the principal worker of this conversion of the gentiles
and the means? the workman is the Lord: who is able to raise up children unto
Abraham even of the stones: who is able to put life into the dead bones in the
Churchyard: and the means whereby God will effect and bring to pass this
great work is his rule and dominion which he exercises among the nations, He
rules among the nation.
by his word and spirit which breaths where it lists: whence that doctrine
may be noted that was handled before. v. 3. that conversion is Gods work.

Furthermore not only we that now live, Verse 10. Their seed shall serve him, etc.
but eue^ our seed and posterty that shall succeed us in time to come shall
serve the Lord: for the Covenant of grace stretches not only to us, but to
our seed also: even to the thousand generation on of them that love God, does
the Lord promise mercy: and the promise is made to us, and our children, and
to all that are afar off, even to as many as the Lord our God shall call: which
gives us hope for our children as well as for our selves, yea for our infants
that die before years.

Yea and here is one thing more, They shall be counted to him for ever.
wherein it seems we have a privilege beyond the Jews, that the Church of
God shall abide among the Gentiles to the worlds end: not as though no
particular Church shall be cast off, for we see that otherwise, but that the
Church shall not utterly fail among the gentiles for over, as it did among the
Jews; for although the church of Ephesus; Colossa; Gallatia etc. failed, yet
from the time of calling the gentiles hitherto there has bin some church of
the gentiles. And although the Jews were cut of and we grafted in; yet we
shall not be cut of and they grafted in, but we shall remain, and they shall be
grafted to us and both of us stand and grow up together: and as they were a
means to bring us into the Church, so we again shall be a means to bring
them unto the fellowship of the gospel (as it were a recompense unto them.

Ver. 31 They shall declare his righteousness.
Again the church of the gentiles being gathered shall perform one principal
office which is, being come home into the bosom of Christ, by effectual
vocation and true faith, shall declare the righteousness of Christ God-man, that
righteousness which he has wrought for us, in suffering and obeying the law:
manfully auouching it against the Turks and Papists that deny imputative
righteousness, and mock at a crucified Christ: which must cheer us up in
this spiritual conflict against that man of sin, that we fail not in
defense of Gods righteousness.

If any man list to understand by righteousness that which God exercised in
the whole work of our redemption, showing himself most righteous therein, he
may for me.

He has wrought it for a people to be borne.
The foresaid work of the church of the Gentiles in auouching Christ's
righteousness must be performed eue^ to a people that is not yet borne by
spiritual regeneration; to a people unbaptized: for we are to labor by all
possible means to bring home the Jews and the Turks, and all other barbarous
nations where we traffic, to the knowledge and love of the truth: that they
may partake in this righteousness which Christ has wrought for as many of
them as appertain to his election.

If any man think better to expound a people to be borne, such as are not
borne by natural generation, we may observe, that it is our duty to teach our
children and posterity especially the article of justification by faith only,
least the subtle and crafty Jesuits the supporters and pillars of popery
wrest it from us, who labor to persuade the meritt of good works and so to
shoulder the Lord Jesus Christ his righteousness out of doors.

Thus the kingdom of Christ also is described.

FINIS.
The Author does entreat the gentle reader in the behalf of the Printer, to
pardon and to correct these faults ouerseene in printing.
Page, 19 lin 23. for p iuately, read primarily. p. 20 l 2. for practice, read
parts. p. 21. l. 23. for men, more p 32 l. 23. for this, thus p. 34. A I salme
p 35 of David these two clauses are wanting on the margents of these two pages.
p. 45. l. 9. for in very, in a very p. 47. l 2 and, is supe fluous. p. 62. l 9.
For faith, fe^re. p. 6^. l. 18. the note of interrogation is so perfluous. p
66. l 13. for Scripture, scepter. p 68. 1 9 for, and, read of the. p. 69. l.
22. for conie^ation, confutation. p. 78 l 13. for world of beginning read
worlds beginning. p 83. l 1. for woman, worm. p. 91. l. 24. are denied and are
superfluous p. 92. l. 1. for that, yet p.121. l 6. for law. love. p. 128. l.
15. for yet, that. p. 137. l. 16 for him read sin.


