A GODLY TREATISE containing and deciding certain questions, moved of late in
London and other places, touching the Ministry, Sacraments, and Church.

Whereunto one Proposition more is added.

After the end of this Book you shall find a defense of such points as M.
Penry has dealt against: And a confutation of many gross errors broched in
M. PENRIES last Treatise.

Written by Robert Some Doctor of Divinity.

Ephesians. 4. verse 15. Let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow
up into him, which is the head (that is) Christ, etc.

Imprinted at London by G. B. Deputy to Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1588.

To the Reader.
TWo sorts of Recusantes are in this land: the one Popish, the other
Anabaptisticall. They give out, that we have no ministry, no Sacraments, no
visible Church. These men labor of two diseases: the one is great pride, the
other gross ignorance. Their pride appears in their behavior, which is void
of humility: their ignorance in their Arguments, which hang together like a
sick man's dream. That her Majesty may and ought to compel these Recusants
to frequent our Church assemblies, I make no question. There is an other sort,
which either deny or doubt, whether unpreaching ministers do deliver a
Sacrament: upon better advise, some of them confess, that ignorant ministers,
do administer a Sacrament: but they add this, that such as receive any
Sacrament at their hands, do sin grossly and pollute themselves. I will
hope well of these men: for they err, only for want of judgment. The holy
Sacrament is one thing, the ministers ignorance is an other thing: the Lords
Sacrament brings singular comfort to the worthy receiver: the ministers
ignorance can neither pervert the Sacrament, nor pollute the receiver. The
Donatistes taught otherwise in the former time, and the Anabaptists in our
time: but they are notably confuted by two famous men, Augustine and Calvin.
What account I make of ignorant ministers, appears in this treatise. It
pleased God to direct my heart and pen in this holy labor: therefore I
assure my self of his gracious blessing.

London, Maij. 6. 1588. R. S.

A Table of such points as are conteiin this Treatise.
1 A Godly Prince may and ought to compel his subjects (if any refuse) to the
external Service of God. 2 A godly Prince may not suffer any Religion, but the
true Religion, either publicly or privately in his Dominions. 3 Able teachers
ought to be provided (so much as can be) for the Churches. 4 The teachers of
religion must have maintenance. 5 Almighty God blesses those kingdoms with
peace, which promote and embrace his Religion. 6 The child of God is not
polluted, though he be present at, and partaker of the public Prayers,
Sacraments, etc. at such time as wicked men are present at, and partakers of
them. 7 They which were baptized in the Popish Church by Popish Priests,
received true Baptism touching the substance of Baptism. 8 They are the
Sacraments of Baptism and the holy Supper, which are delivered in the Church
of England, by unpreaching Ministers. 9 The godly are not polluted which
receive the Sacrament at the hands of an unpreaching Minister. 10 The Church
of England is the visible Church of Christ.
1. A GODLY PRINCE may and ought to compel his Subjects (if any refuse) to the
external Service of God.
IT is the Princes duty to provide able men to teach the Lords Religion in
his dominions. So did Iosaphat the king of Judah. 2. Chro. 17. and Artaxerxes
the king of Persia. Ezra 7. therefore, it is the Princes duty, to provide
that his Subjects do hear and learn the Lords religion. Teachers and
learners are relatiues.

Great outrages were committed against both the tables of the commandments, as
appears in the book of Judges: for, every man did that whih was good in his
own eyes: Judge. 17. and 19. cha. The reason of these absurdities is set out
lively and often in these words: There was no king in Israel. Judge. 17.18. and
19. Chap. by which words it is manifest, that if a religious Prince had been in
place, Idolatry and wicked behavior had been suppressed, and the Israelites
pressed to serve the Lord. That Princes do not pass their bounds in this, it
is clear by that which Augustine reports of and commends in the King of
Babylon. Contra Cresc. gram. lib. 3. cap. 51.

The Prince is bound to sanctify the Sabbath: so are his subjects: the Lords
commandment is flat for this: Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy:
Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work: But the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy
son, nor thy daughter, thy man servant, nor thy maid, nor thy beast, nor thy
stranger that is within thy gates, etc. Exo. 20. If none are exempted by
almighty God, none can be dispensed with by man, for all are charged to
present themselves in the holy assemblies. And, least any, either prince or
subject, should forget this duty, the Lord himself is their remembrancer in
these words: Remember, that thou sanctify the Sabbath etc. that is, the
sanctification of my Sabbath, is a matter very important, it concerns my
honor, but thy comfort, therefore remember and forget it not. If any refuse,
they may and ought to be compelled: for the breach of the Sabbath is a heinous
sin. Iere. 17. Nehem. 13.

Faith comes by hearing of the word, Romans 10. therefore refusal to hear,
hinders both the beginning and growth of faith. The Samaritanes heard Philippe
in Samaria: they believed. Acts 8. Lydia heard Paul at Philippos: she
believed, Act. 16. Augustine was a Manichee nine years: he heard Ambrose the
Bishop of Mediolanum, and was converted. August. confess. lib. 4. cap. 1. and
lib. 5. cap. 13. and 14. If any shall ask me why all that hear, believe not: I
answer, Arcana Deisunt adoranda, non scrutanda: That is, Gods secrets are not
to be searched, but adored: and, that unless Gods spirit touch the heart, as
the word does pearce the ear, Gods holy Truth is a dead letter unto us.

Asa, Josias, were famous kings of Judah. Asa commanded Judah to seek the Lord
God of their fathers, and to do according to the law and commandment, 2.
Chron. 14. Josias compelled his subjects to serve the Lord their God, 2. Chron.
34. So did Manasses after his conversion. 2. Chron. 33. If it were lawful for
these Kings of Judah, to command and compel their subjects, it is not
unlawful for ours to do the like. If it be not lawful to compel recusants,
why are Asa, Josias, Manasses, commended by the holy Ghost for this excellent
course?

Ezra was a learned Scribe: he was authorized by the King of Persia, to teach
them beyond the river Euphrates the Law of God, which did not know it, and
to punish such as refused to learn. Artaxerxes vvarrant is set down in this
sort: And thou Ezra (after the wisdom of thy God, that is in thine hand,) set
Judges and arbiters, which may judge all the people that is beyond the river,
even all that know the Law of thy God, and teach ye them that know it not:
And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Kings law, let him
have judgment without delay, whether it be unto death, or to banishment, or to
confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. Esra. 7. verse 25, 26. And least any
should take exception against Artaxerxes commandment, Ezra clears it of all
suspicion of vnlavvfulnesse, in these words: Blessed be the Lord God of our
fathers, which has inclined the Kings heart to beautify the House of the
Lord that is in Jerusalem. Ezra 7. verse 27.

Augustine the Bishop of Hippo in Afric, was a very famous man: he was
sometimes of opinion, that heretics were to be pressed by argument, and not
by the Magistrate: his reason then was, Ne fictos Catholicos haberemus, quos
apertos hereticos noueramus, That is, least we should have them counterfeit
Catholics, whom we knew to be notorious heretics. But after weighty
consideration, he changed his former opinion, and is very resolute, that
Recusants may and ought to be compelled by the Magistrate. August. Epist. 48.
204.

Siterrerentur and non docerentur, improba quasi dominatio videretur: Sed
rursus, Si docerentur, and non terrerentur, etc. August. Epist. 48. that is, to
punish and not to teach, were tyranny: again, to teach and not to punish,
were to harden them in their ancient custom, and to make them slow to enter
the path of salvation.

Exi in vias and sepes, and compelle intrare, Luke 14. Qui compellitur, quo non
vult cogitur: sed quum intrauerit, iam volens pascitur: August. Epist. 204.
that is, Go out into the high ways, and hedges, and compel them to come in:
he that is compelled, is compelled to enter against his will: but when he is
entered, he is fed willingly.

Ad caenam tanti patrisfamilias, si sponte non vultis, intrare compellimus.
August. contra. 2. Gaudentij Epist. lib. 2. cap. 28. that is, to the supper of
so great an householder, if you will not of your own accord, we compel you to
enter.

Quod autem vobis videtur, inuitos ad veritatem non esse cogendos, etc. August.
contra 2. Gaudentij Epist. lib. 2. cap. 17. That is, where as ye think, that
men are not to be compelled to the Truth against their vvilles, ye err, not
knovving the Scriptures, nor the power of GOD, which makes those vvilling,
though they be compelled against their wills.

Qui phreneticum ligat, and lethargicum excitat, ambobus molestus, ambos amat.
Aug. Epist. 48. That is, he that binds a frantike man, and awaketh him that
has the lethargy, loves both, though he be grievous to both.

2. A GODLY PRINCE MAY not suffer any religion but the true religion, either
publicly or privately in his Dominions.
THe exercise of false religion is directly against the sanctification of the
Lords Sabbath: Exo. 20. therefore the Prince may not at any hand suffer it.
The Moral law, as it teaches the worship of Almighty God in the first, and
honesty of life in the second table of the commandments, is perpetual, and
binds us unto the worlds end.

The Israelites being in captivity in Egypt, were required by Pharao to
sacrifice to Almighty God in Egypt: Moses refused etc. Exodus 8. The Israelites
being in captivity in Babylon were required by the Chaldeans to sing one of
the songs of Sion. They refused and answered thus: How shall we sing the Lords
song in a strange land? Psalm. 137. Of these places I gather my argument thus:
It was not lawful to sacrifice in Egypt, and to sing the Lords song in
Chaldea, which were polluted lands: therefore it is not lawful to suffer
Idolatrous and popish service in England, which is a holy land. That professed
papists are Idolaters, it is manifest: first, they worship false gods: for they
worship Angels and Saints deceased which are no gods, Secondly, they worship
not the true God aright: for they do not worship him according to his written
word.

Confession and consent in the true religion, is Vinculum ecclesiae, the chain
and bond of Gods Church: for the Apostle says, there is but one faith. Ephe.
4.5. therefore dissension and difference in religion is a dissolutio^ of Gods
Church. But no prince may have any, either hand or little finger in dissoluting
Gods Church: for Kings and Queens are the nursing fathers and mothers of the
Church. Esai. 4.9.

It is the Princes duty to provide for the safety of the bodies, therefore
much more for the safety of the souls of his subjects. If for the safety of
their souls, then they may not suffer them to poison their souls. True
religion is the food of the soul. It is but one. To swerve from that, is the
bane of the soul. It leads to hell. The Shipmaster and shepherd must keep
his ship and sheep from rock and wolf. Qui non scruat si potest periturum,
occidit.

The prince is bound to serve the Lord in fear. Psalm. 2. therefore he may not
suffer almighty God to be dishonored by any of his subjects. God is notably
dishonored, when false worship is suffered either publicly or privately.

The Angel of the Church of Pergamus is reproved by Christ for having such in
Pergamus as maintained the doctrine of Balaam, and the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans which God hated. The Angel of the Church of Thyatira is reproved by
Christ for suffering Iezabel etc. to teach and to deceive. Apocal. 2. therefore
Princes sin grievously which suffer the exercise of a false religion.

A godly prince may not suffer a wilful breach of his own laws: therefore
not of Gods laws. Almighty God is greater then all Princes. His laws do as
far pass the princes, as the gold of Ophir the clay in the street. Besides,
they which hate Gods religion, and consequently sin against the first table,
are easily induced to disobey their prince, which is a sin against the second
table. It was a famous speech of the Emperor Constantius the father of
Constantinus the Emperor: How can they be fast and true to the Emperor,
which are Traitors to Almighty God? Eusebius. lib. 1. de vita Constant. King Asa
deposed Maachah his mother from her regencie, because she had made an idol in
agroue: Asa brake down her idol, and stamped it, at the brook Kidron. 2.
Chron. 15. Ezechias and Josias were famous Kings of Judah. They destroyed the
groves and temples of the idols. They destroyed the groves and temples of the
idols. They took a direct course for Gods religion. Almighty God may not be
dalied with in his service. There must be no parting of stakes. He will either
have all or none. Ezech. 20. The Lords Altar and Baals Altar must not stand
together. Judge. 6.

Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon made a decree, that every people, nation
and language, which spoke any blasphemy against the God of Sidrach, Misach and
Abednago, should be drawn in pieces, and their houses made a Iakes, etc. Dan.
3.

Constantinus the Emperor did not suffer I dolatrie in any part of his
dominions. Eusebius. lib. 4. de vita Constable. The Emperors Theodosius and Gratianus
did not suffer Arianisme etc. Theod. lib. 5. cap. 16. Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 12.
and 4.

Edward the sixth, a Prince of famous memory, was dealt with by his honorable
counsailours that the Lady Mary which succeeded in the kingdom, might have
popish mass etc. Arguments were used to induce his Majesty to like of that
course. His answer and resolution was negative. So does master Fox report in
the Acts and monuments in these words: In the days of King Edward the sixth,
Carolus the Emperor made request to the said King and his Counsel, to permit
Lady Mary (who after succeeded in the crown) to have Mass in her house
without prejudice of the Law. And the Counsel on a time sitting upon matters of
policy, having that in question, sent Cranmer then Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Ridley then Bishop of London, to entreat the king for the same: who
coming to his Grace, alleged their reasons and persuasions for the
accomplishing thereof. So the King hearing what they could say, replied his
answer again out of the scriptures, so groundedly, gravely and fully, that
they were enforced to give place to his replication, and grant the same to be
true. Then they, after long debating in this manner with his Majesty, labored
politikely in an other sort, and alleged what dangers the denying thereof
might bring to his grace, what breach of amity of the Emperors part, what
troubles, what unkindness, and what occasions sundry ways it would enforce
etc. Unto whom the king answered, willing them to content themselves: for he
would (he said) spend his life and all he had, rather then to agree and
grant to that he knew certainly to be against the truth. The which when
the Bishops heard, notwithstanding they urged him still to grant, and would by
no means have his nay. Then the good king seeing their importunate suite, that
needs they would have his Majesty to consent thereto, in the end his tender
heart bursting out in bitter weeping, and sobbing, desired them to be content.
Whereat the Bishops themselves, seeing the kings zeal and constancy, wept
as fast as he, and so took their leave of his grace: and coming from him, the
Archbishop took master Cheek his Schoolmaster by the hand and said: Ah
master Cheek, you may be glad all the days of your life, that you have such a
scholar, for he has more divinity in his little finger then all we have in
all our bodies etc. Thus far master Fox.

3. ABLE TEACHERS OUGHT to be provided (so much as can be) for the Churches.
GOds people are the Lords sheep, spouse, city: therefore they must be
fed, garnished, watched over, with the Lords food, furniture, weapons. This
cannot be done without able teachers.

The work of the ministry is a famous work. Ephe. 4. It passes Moses
Tabernacle, and Salomons Temple: therefore it is to be committed to skillful
and faithful men: by it Dagon, Diana are cast down, and the Lord's Ark and
religion are set up: by it ignorance, darkness, are removed, and knowledge and
light are planted: by it, many wandering sheep are brought to the Lords fold,
and many sheaues of corn into the Lords barn. This appeapeared notably in
Samaria, Ephesus, Corinth, etc.

The Ambassadors of earthly Princes, either are or should be men of choice:
otherwise, they dishonor their Princes, and become ridiculous: therefore, the
ministers which are the Ambassadors of the highest prince, Mal. 2.2. Cor. 5.
must have some metal in them. If they have not, how either can, or shall
they deliver the Lords commission?

A learned teacher is a singular blessing: for he feeds Gods people with
knowledge and understanding. Iere. 3. Such were Ezra amongst the Israelites,
Epaphroditus at Philippos, Epaphras at Colossos, Apollos at Corinth: such are
many (thanks be to God) in this land: therefore an ignorant minister is a
grievous plague, for he cannot strengthen the weak, heal the sick, bind
together the broken. Ezech. 34.

The Popish and Anabaptisticall sort have done great hurt in this land. This is
as clear as the sun: the way to heal this sore, is to provide such, as by
sovereign plasters and medicine out of the Lords Eden may remove this
dangerous infection, and plant in the peoples hearts the Lords holy religion.

Where teaching is not, the people are in a woeful case. Solomon says, Where
prophecy (that is, the expounding of Gods word) is not, the people perish.
Proverb. 29. Almighty God says, My people perish for want of knowledge. Hos.
4. Our savior Christ says, This is life eternal, that they might know thee,
the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Ioh. 17.

Where sound teachers are placed, these commodities are apparent. First,
Almighty God is notably served. Secondly, the prince is duetifully obeyed.
Thirdly, the enemy to religion is either won or descried. Where the people are
not taught, these absurdities do follow: First, they cannot serve God, for
they do not know God. Esaias. 19. Prius est Deum scire, consequens colere.
Secondly, the prince is not so dutifullie obeyed: the rebellion in the North,
is a proof of that. Lastly, the enemy to religion cannot be won: for faith
comes by hearing. Romans 10. nor so easily descried: for the holy word is a
searcher. Hebr. 4.

All which love the religion, have and do desire a greater number of able
teachers, that our church may have more beauty, our prince more honor, our
people more heavenly comfort. None mislike this, but such as make Gods Church
either a mark to shoot at, or a carcass to feed upon. The one sort are
professed enemies: the other, graceless hypocrites. For they prefer mire
before pearls, earth before heaven, and their filthy swine before Jesus
Christ, as the Gergesens did, Mat. 8.

4. THE TEACHERS OF Religion, must have maintenance.
TO show kindness to the Lords house, is an excellent work: so did
Nehemias a courtier. To provide maintenance for the teachers, is to show
kindness to the Lords house, Nehem. 13. verse 14. What then is their
kindness, which sell Church livings as Judas did Christ? The abominable sale
and merchandise of Church livings is cried out against in Court, City, and
Universities. Propter abundantiam, as one said of late, nonpotest, and propter
impudentiam non vult celari: that is, the polling and sale of Church livings is
so common that it cannot, and so shameless that it will not be hid.

To forsake the house of God, is a heinous sin: not to provide for the
teachers, is to forsake the house of God, Nehem. 10. and 13. Chap. How great
then is their sin which rob the Church and Churchmen? It is a gross sin
to spoil either the soldier or the mercha^t aduenturer, which in their places
are a singular defense to their country by sea and land: therefore it is a
heinous sin to rob Churchmen, which (as Elias) are the Chariots and
horsemen of the common wealth. The weapons of our warrefare (says the Apostle)
are not carnal, but mighty through God, to cast down holds, casting down the
imaginations, and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of
God, and bringing into captituitie every thought to the obedience of Christ,
and having ready the vengeance against all disobedience. etc. 2. Cor. 10.

The repairing of Churches is to be performed carefully: So was it in king
Ioas time, therefore much more provision for the teachers: the Priests
maintenance in Ioas time, neither was nor might be abridged for repairing of
the Churches: the reason of it is contained in these words, The money of the
trespass offering, and the money of the Sin offering was not brought into the
Lords house: for it was the Priests. 2. Kings. 12.

Skillful teachers do plough the Lords field, and are the Lords, both mouth
and hands to deliver his blessings and treasure unto us: therefore they ought
to have defense and maintenance, and not to wander as Michas Priest did. Judge.
17. Students cannot live of the air as the Chamelion does. Church pollers shut
up the kingdom of heaven before me^: for they themselves go not in, neither
suffer they them that would enter to come in: therefore the woe denounced by
Christ against the Scribes and Pharisees, seazeth upon them. Matthew. 23.

Ezechias the King of Judah commanded that the Priests and Levites should have
maintenance, and that their wives, children and families should be provided
for. 2. Chron. 31. verse. 4, 18. Thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah, and did
well and uprightly, and truly before the Lord his God. And in all the works
that he began for the service of the house of God, both in the Law and in the
Commandments, to seek his God, he did it will all his heart, and prospered.
2. Chron. 31. verse. 20, 21.

Diverse famous Princes have had some Churchmen to be of their honorable
Council: Iehoiada was in King Ioas Court. 2. Chron. 24. Zadok and Abiathar, in
David and Salomons Court, 2. Sam. 20. 1. King. 4. Daniel in Darius Court. Dan.
6.

It is Queen Elizabeth's pleasure, that the worthiest men should be advanced
for the government and service of the Church. That very mean choice has been
made of diverse Churchmen, the land sees, feels, and cries out of.

Question.

Whether such things as were given for the maintenance of idolatry, may, and
ought to be converted to the service of God?

Answer.

They may, and ought. My reasons are:

If men should convert them to their private use, it might be justly thought,
that in abolishing superstition, private gain is the mark which is shot at,
and not the advancing of Gods religion. August. epist. 154.

When such things are converted, not to private, but common uses, or to the
honor of God, that falls out in them, which in men themselves, when of
Church robbers and wicked men, they are converted to true religion. August.
epist. 154.

Eleazar the Priest took the brazen censers, which they that were burnt had
offered, and made broad plates of them for a covering of the Altar. Numb. 16.

The gold, silver, the vessels of brass and Iron in Jericho, were brought into
the Lords treasury. Ios. 6.

Gedeon did offer unto the Lord, a bullock which had bin fed for Baals
service, and did use the wood of the grove a dioyning. Judge. 6.

If such things as were given to the maintenance of Popery, may not be
converted to the service of God, then pull down Churches and Universities,
take away their lands etc. And let Atheism be in stead of Gods religion, and
Macciauell in the place of the new Testament.

5. ALMIGHTY GOD blesses those kingdoms with peace, which promote and
embrace his religion.
THe holy host sets out in lively colors, the co^sequents of teaching and
embracing the Lords religion. They shall break their swords into mattockes,
and their spears into siethes: they shall sit every man under his vine, and
fig tree without fear of the enemy. Mich. 4. The prophet Esaias sings the
same song: The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb: The Leoparde shall lie with
the kidde, the Cow and the Bear shall feed together. Esaias. 11. That is,
wicked men which in cruel affections resemble the Wolf, the Leoparde, the
Bear, shall cast off the chain of pride, and the garment of cruelty, and
shall go hand in hand with the godly, who for their innocence are compared
to the Lamb, the Cow, the Kidde. The reason is: For the earth shall be filled
with the knowledge of the Lord. Esaias. 11.

The Egyptians and Assyrians were deadly enemies: they denied traffic one to
an other, and all passages were shut up between Egypt and Assyria. Esaias
describing a great alteration of minds in them of Egypt and Assyria, says,
that There shall be apath from Egypt to Assure: and Assure shall come into Egypt,
and Egypt into Assure. The reason of their agreement, is set down in these
words: The Egyptians shall worship (the Lord) with Assure. Esaias 19.

Where idolatry is advanced, no peace can be looked for. They chose new
gods, says Deborah, Then was war in the gates. Judge. 5. The Israelites for a
long time were without the true God, without Priest to teach: In that time,
says the Prophet Azariah, there was no peace: for nation was destroyed of
nation, and city of city. 2. Chron. 15. The Reubenites, Gadites, and half
tribe of Manasseh, transgressed against the God of their fathers, and went a
whoring after the gods of the people of the land, whom God had destroyed
before them: The God of Israel stirred up the spirit of the kings of Assyria,
who carried them away captive, etc. 1. Chron. 5. Iehoram the king of Judah, did
forsake the Lord God of his fathers: the consequents were: Edom, Libnah,
rebelled: the Lord stirred up against Iehoram, the spirit of the Philistines
and Arabians. 2. Chron. 21. King Ahaz was a notable idolater: He sacrificed to
the gods of Damascus: the Edomites, and Philistines invaded the cities of Judah,
and prevailed: Yea, the king of Aslyria, whose help Ahaz desired, and
accounted greatly of, did trouble and not strengthen him. 2. Chron. 28.
Iehoiakim the king of Judah, did evil in the sight of the Lord his God: The
king of Babel came up against him, and bound him with chains to carry him to
Babel. 2. Chron. 36.

They which dissent in religion, cannot be knit fast together. The Samaritanes
and Jews differed in religion: they contended about the Temple. Ioh. 4. The
stir between them was very great. Some in the Apostles times after Christ
ascensio^, urged circumcision as necessary unto salvation: other condemned it
as an absurd and gross error. The stir was great in the Churches of
Antiochia and Galatia. Arius erred blasphemously about the godhead of Christ:
Alexander the bishop of Alexandria, both misliked and condemned his filthy
heresy. Socrat. lib. 1. ca. 6. There was hot stir in the church of
Alexandria. The Lord's ark, and the Philistines Dagon: the Ephesians Diana,
and Paul's preaching: Popery, and the Gospel cannot stand together.

Asa was a religious Prince: he suppressed idolatry and planted Gods religion.
The kingdom was quiet before him, and he vanquished the Ethiopians. 2. Chron.
14. and 15. Chap.

Iosaphat was a zealous promoter of the Lords religion. Almighty God crowned
him with this blessing: The fear of the Lord fell upon all the kingdoms of
the land that were round about Judah, and they fought not against Iosaphat:
the Philistines brought to Iosaphat gifts and tribute silver: the Arabians
brought him flock, both of rams and goats. 2. Chron. 17.

Vzziah the King of Judah, prospered so long as he sought the Lord. Almighty
God helped him against the Philistines and Arabians: the Ammonites gave him
tribute, and his name was famous even unto Egypt. 2. Chron. 26.

Ezechias was a careful aduancer of Gods religion. The land had great
quietness, and was notably delivered from the Assirians. 2. Chron. 32.

Queen Elizabeth has planted the Lords religion, Popes, Gregory, Pius,
Sixtus, have cursed her Majesty: the Popish enemies have been and are
maliciously bent against her, and this land, as Sennacherib and Rabsakeh
against Ezechias and Jerusalem: but God has blessed, and miraculously
preserved her Highness and Dominions, as he did Ezechias and Jerusalem: the
greatest enemies of the English nation, are the sins of the English nation:
but if we desire and obtain pardon for our sins at Gods hands, and shall
serve our God, and sanctify his Sabbath more carefully then we have done, the
Lord will go forth with our armies, our captains and soldiers shall amaze and
vanquish our Popish enemies, as Gedeon did the Madianites, Iephthe the
Ammonites, and David the Philistines: and our gracious God will cover both
Prince and people with the shield of his Justice, and defend us with the sword
of his Judgment.

Objection.

When the Gospel is preached, stirs do grow: that appeared in Jerusalem.
Act. 7. in Iconium. Act. 14. in Rome. Act. 28.

Answer.

I grant that stirs appear sometimes, when Gods truth is delivered: the
fault is not in the seed, but in the ground. It was not Elias that troubled
Israel, but Achab and his fathers house, which forsook the Lords
commandments, and followed Baal. 1. King. 18. The holy preaching resembles
medicine, daylight, and the heat of the sun. It is not the medicine, but
evil humors which distemper the body: variety of colors are not made, but
discerned by the day light. The heat of the sun is not the cause, but the
descrier of the stink of a carrion.

6. THE CHILD OF GOD is not polluted, though he be present at, and partaker
of the public prayers, Sacraments, etc. at such time, as wicked men are
present at, and partakers of them.
IN the Prophets time, there were many and gross corruptions at Jerusalem. The
magistrates, Priests and people were greatly disordered: The Lords religion
was partly contemned, and partly defiled. Did the holy Prophets sever them
selves from them of Jerusalem in Salomons temple? Did they build new, either
Churches to assemble in, or Altars to sacrifice upon? It is certain, they did
not, and yet they were not polluted.

Our Savior Christ was presented to the Lord in Jerusalem. An oblation was
given. Luke 2.22. He was afterward partaker of the Sacrifices in Salomons
temple, with the Scribes, Pharisees, and ungracious people of Jerusalem. My
reasons are: First, Christ was subject to the law. Gal. 4.4. One branch of the
Law was, to be partaker of the Sacrifices in Salomons temple. Secondly, Christ
in the dialogue with the woman of Samaria, speaking of himself, and the Jews,
uses these words: We worship that which we know. Ioh. 4.22. Under the word
(worship) are contained the sacrifices. Calu. contra Anabapt.

The Churches of Corinth and Galatia, had many and gross sores in them. Saint
Paul, I confess, deals very roundly with them: yet he does not, either
license, or call upon Gods servants in Corinth and Galatia, to sever themselves
from the assemblies. If to be present in the assembly had brought pollution,
the Apostle would not have failed in this Christian duty.

Let a man examine himself. 1. Cor. 11.28. The Apostle does not say, Let
every man examine the rest of the communicants: which no doubt he would have
given in charge, if the lewdness of others did pollute Gods servants.

He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to
himself. 1. Cor. 11.29. Saint Paul says (to himself) not to others.

The Apostles received the Lords supper with Judas. Aug. contra Lit. Petil.
lib. 2. cap. 11. and 23. and lib. 3. cap. 106. But they were not partakers of
Judas theft. Aug. contra Cresc. Gram. lib. 4. cap. 26. or Judas treason.
Acceditur ad vitium corruptionis, vitio consensionis. Aug. contra Don. post
Coll. lib. That is, to consent to vice, is to be corrupted with vice. That
Judas was a thief, Saint John reports. Ioh. 12. verse. 6. That the Apostles
did know before the partaking of the holy supper, that Judas should betray
Christ, appears manifestly in the Evangelist Matthewe. Matt. 26. verse. 21,
23, 25.

The most famous men, before, and in our time, are of my side. Augustine in his
writings against Petilian, Parmenia^, Cresconius, the Donatists: and Calvin in
his treatise against the Anabaptists, are very peremptory in this Argument.
None can, or will mislike it, unless they be already, or mean to be
Donatistes, or Anabaptists.

Objection.

The Apostle commaundes us to withdraw our selves from every brother that
walks inordinately. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.

Answer.

We must withdraw our selves, Quoad priuatam consuetudinem, non quoad publicam
communionem: that is, touching private conversation, not touching public
partaking of the word and Sacraments. Calvin is of this Judgment, in his
treatise against the Anabaptists.

If any shall gather of this I have set down, that I am content to admit
notorious sinners to the holy table, he does me great wrong, and is refuted in
my treatise of the Sacraments, where I use these words: It is a great sin
for a known wicked man, either to minister the Lords supper, or to present
himself to the holy communion: and such lewdnes must be severely punished,
by them in whose hands it is to redress it. But if this gross sin be
practiced, and no medicine used to cure it, the godly must content them selves
with grief for these enormities, and remember that the Sacrament seals up
Gods sweet promises to them, which the wicked sort at no hand are partakers of.

7. THEY WHICH WERE baptized in the Popish Church by Popish Priests,
received true Baptism, touching the substance of Baptism.
THe Popish priests do retain the essential form of Christ's baptism, that
is, they do baptize in the name, not of Pope or idols, but of the holy
Trinity: therefore it is not man's, but Gods baptism, which is delivered by
them. If it be Gods baptism, I am sure it is true baptism. Master Calvin
calls them Catabaptistes, which deny that we are rightly baptized in the
Popish Church. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 15. Sect. 16.

Objection.

The Popish priests have no lawful calling: therefore, it is no true baptism
which is delivered by them.

Answer.

The Argument follows not. I confess that the Popish priests have no lawful
calling: yet, they have a calling, though a faulty one. They which are not
lawfully called unto the ministry, and yet sit in the chair of the
ministry, are to be accounted in an other place then they which have no
calling. Caiphas was not in deed the lawful high priest: for he entered by
money, and the priesthood in his time was rent in pieces: yet, because he sat
in the high priests chair, he was accounted the high priest. A faulty
vocation may hurt him that usurps an office, but it does not defile those
things which are done by that party.

This is master Bezaes Judgment in his 142. question.

If any shall gather of this, that I allow the Popish priesthood, he deserves
rather a Censor, then Confuter: for I confess that Sacerdotium papisticum est
sacrilegium: that is, that the Popish priesthood is Sacrilege.

8. THEY ARE THE SAcraments of Baptism and the holy Supper, which are
delivered in the Church of England, by unpreaching ministers.
IF such as were baptized in the popish Church, received true baptism, I trust
they are rightly baptized in the Church of England, which are baptized by
unpreaching ministers.

If such as were baptized by popish priests in the popish Church, and by
unpreaching ministers in the Church of England, received no sacrament, many
gross absurdities would follow. First, very many are unbaptized: and if they
be unbaptized, they sin grievously, in not presenting themselves to the holy
Sacrament. Secondly, a great number have sinned grossly in partaking the holy
supper. My reason is: None uncircumcised might eat the Passover. Ezodus 12.
verse 48. therefore none unbaptized may receive the holy supper. Thirdly, many
excellent men have usurped the preachers office. My reason is: It is unlawful
for any man to be a public teacher in the visible Church, which is not by
baptism graft into, and so become a member of the visible Church. Our Savior
Christ was baptized of John in Iordane, before he preached. Matthew. 3. and 4.
Chap. The Apostle Paul was baptized of Ananias in Damascus, before he
preached. Act. 9.

The unpreaching Ministers do add the word unto the Element in the
administration of Baptism: therefore it is the Sacrament of Baptism which is
delivered by them. Accedit verbum ad elementum, and fit Sacramentum. Aug.
Tract. 80. in Johan. that is, The word is added to the Element, and it becoms
a Sacrament. By (word) in Baptism, is understood the word of Institution,
which is, to Baptize in the name of the father, the son, and the holy Ghost,
etc. Of this judgment are Beza confess. Cap. 4. Art. 47. and Musculus de sig.
Sacram. Art. 4.

Objection.

Christ said to his Apostles, Go and teach all nations, baptizing etc. Matthew.
28. verse. 19. therefore, if the word preached, be not added to the Element, it
is no Sacrament of Baptism.

Answer.

The argument is very weak. I confess, that Christ commanded his Apostles,
first to teach such as were of years and alients from his religion, and then
to baptize them. If the Gentiles had not been first taught, they would not have
offered the^ selves, nor the Apostles have admitted them to the holy Sacrament
of baptism. If any will conclude of this place in Saint Mathewe, that none
whatsoever may be admitted to baptism before they be taught, they shut our
infants from the holy Sacrament, and therefore are Catabaptists.

The unpreaching ministers do add (verbum adificans) that is, an edifying
word, to the Elements in the administration of the holy supper, therefore etc.

That there is verbum aedificans, I prove it thus.

The sum of Christ's sermon in the Institution and administration of the holy
supper by himself, is the word of Institution in the administration of the
holy Supper in the Church of England: therefore, unless we will deny the sum
of Christ's Sermon, to be an edifying word, (which no learned man will deny) we
must confess, that we have verbum aedificans in the administration of the holy
supper with us.

If any will conclude of this, that I mislike preaching before the
administration of the Sacrament, he does me great wrong.

Objection.

Vnpreching ministers are not apt to teach: therefore they are no Sacraments
which are delivered by them.

Answer.

The argument follows not. My reason is, Many Jewish Priests were both
ignorant and dissolute in Esaias and Christ's time. Esaias 28. verse. 7. Matthew. 9.
verse. 36. But the Sacrifices offered, and the Sacraments reached by them, were
both Sacrifices and Sacraments: otherwise, the Prophets which were at
Jerusalem, when the Jewish Church was full of corruption, would not have been
present at, and partakers of the Sacrifices in Salomons Temple. Calu. Institut.
lib. 4. cap. 1. sect. 18, 19.

Objection.

Ignorant ministers are not apt to teach: therefore no ministers, and
consequently, they are no Sacraments which are delivered by them.

Answer.

The argument follows not. I grant that it is of the substance of a lawful and
good minister of God to be apt to teach: but it is not of the essence of a
Minister simply: for which it is sufficient to have the Churches calling. This
appears clearly in the Magistrate. The holy Ghost requires that none
should be chosen a Magistrate, unless he were a man of courage, fearing God,
dealing truly, and hating covetousness. Exodus. 18. verse 21. When such are
advanced as defile their hands, either with filthy bribes, as Felix did, or
with barbarous cruelty, as Abimelech and Herod did, shall we say that they
are no Magistrates? I confess, they are not singled out by the electors
according to Almighty Gods direction in his holy Bible: but they are
Magistrates notwithstanding, and we are commanded by the Lord to perform all
duty unto them, Saluo officio, that is, our duty being reserved to the
highest Magistrate, which is God himself.

If any shall gather of this I have set down, that I undertake the defense of
Ignorant ministers: my answer is, that my writings and sermons, are not Ajax
shield to cover them, but the Lords sword to cut them. I confess freely,
that I am very far from opening either the Church door to ignorant
Ministers, or the Pulpit door to unskillful preachers: which unskillful
preachers give Gods religion a greater blow then the ignorant Ministers: for
in stead of dividing the word of truth aright, they speak at al adventures,
yet very boldly: and as unskillful Apothecaries, deliver quid pro quo, chafe
for wheat, and strange fancies for Gods holy truth. By such absurd fellows,
many Churches and excellent men in this land have been greatly disquieted,
and the good course of religion has been greatly hindered. The cause of this
sore, is intolerable pride, and gross ignorance in these bad companions, and
want of care in the Magistrates.

If any shall ask me what the true causes are, why so many unfit men are
the Churches Ministers: I answer, either great want of judgment, or great
corruption in such, which do ordeine and prefer them. The sin of these men
is very great: for they dishonor Almighty God, and do grossly abuse the people
of the land. This disease will be healed, when the Churches maintenance is not
disposed of by them which have the golden dropsy, but is freely given to
worthy and painful students, which will neither fish with the silver hook,
nor open the Church door with a silver key.

9. THE GODLY ARE not polluted which receive the Sacrament at the hands of an
unpreaching Minister.
THE Sacraments are Gods ordinance: the Ministers ignorance cannot pervert the
nature of Gods ordinance.

A Sacrament can never be without promise of salvation: therefore, the worthy
partaker of the Sacrament receives a blessing: if a blessing, then no
pollution. That he receives a blessing, the Apostle teaches us: We are buried
with Christ (says S. Paul) by baptism into his death, etc. Romans 6. verse 4.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? 1. Cor. 11. verse 16.

The parents of Christ went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the
Passover, Luke 2. verse. 41. their going to Jerusalem, was to testify their
religion, and to be partakers of the sacrifices. There were at that time in
Salomons Temple manifold corruptions, the high Priesthood was sold for money,
many of the Jewish Priests were ignorant, yet Joseph and the virgin Mary were
not polluted. Calu. Luc. 2. verse. 41.

The godly which receive the holy Supper of an unpreaching Minister, are not
partakers of the Ministers unworthiness, but of the holy Sacrament, which is a
pillar of our faith: therefore the unworthiness of the Minister does not
defile the Communica^t. Alterius, sieve Pastoris, sieve priuati indignitate, non
laeditur pia conscientia, etc. Calu. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 1. Sect. 19. that
is, A godly conscience is not hurt by the unworthiness of an other, either
Pastor, or private man: neither are the mysteries less pure and healthful to
a holy man, because they are then handled of such as be impure. Ille qui
accipit, si homo bonus ab homine malo, si fidelis a perfido, si pius ab impio:
perniciosumerit danti, non accipienti. Illud quippe sanctum male vtentem
iudicat, been accipientem sanctificat. Aug. contra Cresc. gram. lib. 2. cap.
28. that is, he which receives, if a good of an evil man, if a faithful of a
faithless man, if a godly of a wicked man, it will be hurtful to the giver,
not to the receiver: for that holy thing (he means the sacrament) does judge
him which uses it ill, but does sanctify him which receives it well.

Circumcision was one of the Lords Sacraments in the Jewish Church. The Jews
which were circumcised of impure priests, and Apostates, received no hurt:
therefore no pollution. Calu. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 15. Sect. 16. The
Sacraments neither are, nor can be the worse for the ignorance or
unworthiness: or better for the learning or worthiness of any man whatsoever.
Whosoever thinks otherwise, is a Donatist.

Touching this point of the Sacrament, I rest wholly in Augustines judgment:
his words are these. Ego dieo, melius per bonu^ ministru^ quam per malu^
dispensari sacramenta diuina: verum hoc propter ipsum ministrum melius est,
vteis rebus quas ministrat, vita and moribus congruat, non propter illum, qui
etiam si incurrerit in ministrum malum dispensantem veritatem, securitatem
accipit a domino suo monente ac dicente: Quae dicunt facite, quae autem
faciunt, nolite facere: dicunt enim, and non faciunt. Addo etiam ad hoc esse
melius, vt ille cui ministratur, ministri boni probitatem ac sanctitatem
diligendo facilius imitetur: Sed non ideo veriora and sanctiora sunt quae
ministrantur, quia per meliorem ministrantur. Illa namque per seipsa vera and
sancta sunt, propter Deum verum and sanctum cuius sunt, and ideo fieri potest
vt accedens ad societatem populi Dei, alium inueniat a quo facile baptizetur,
alium eligat quem salubriter imitetur. Certus est enim sanctum esse Sacramentum
Christi, etiamsi per minus sanctum, vel non sanctum hominem ministratum est, se
autem eiusdem ipsius sacramenti sanctitate puniri, si indigne acceperit, si
male vsus fuerit, si ei non conuenienter and congrue vixerit. August. contra
Cresc. Gram. lib. 4. cap. 20. The sum of Augustines words is, that the
Sacrament is administered better by a good, then by a bad Minister: yet that the
Sacraments of themselves are true and holy, etc. by what minister so ever they
be delivered, etc. If any shall ask me whether it be lawful to omit the
partaking of the holy Sacrament in such Churches over which ignorant ministers
are set, and to present our selves and our infants to the holy Sacrament in
other Churches: my answer is, that I refer them to the Magistrate and
Governors of our Churches, etc.

Objection.

By whom a thing ought not to be delivered, by another it ought not to be
received: but ignorant ministers ought not to deliver the Sacraments,
therefore, etc.

Answer.

The Mayor is false. My reason is: An evil man ought not to deliver the word
of God, but we ought to receive it. An evil man ought not to give alms, but
a poor man may receive it. An absurd minister ought not to deliver the
Sacrament, but they are not polluted which receive it.

Objection.

They, of whose ministry there is a Nullitie before God, although they have
an outward calling, ought not to be accounted ministers: therefore not to be
communicated with. I. Penry. page 43, 44.

Answer.

I deny your Antecedent. My reasons are: First, there was a Nullitie before
God of Caiphas Priesthood: for he entered by money, and the Priesthood was
divided between him and Annas, against the Lords order. Calu. Luc. 3. yet
Caiphas is called the high Priest, by the Evangelists. Mat. 26. Ioh. 18.
Secondly, there was a Nullitie before God, of the ministry of some in
Philippos, which preached Christ of contention, and to add more affliction to
Paul's bands. Philip. Chap. 1. verse 15, 16. But these are accounted ministers
by the Apostle. verse. 15, 18. If any shall deny that there was a Nullitie
before God of their ministry, I prove it thus: They had not an inward
calling. M. Penry says, that an inward calling is contained in the
fufficie^cie of gifts, and willingness to practice them. page 45. If M. Penry
mean the practice of gifts to Gods glory, I say, Amen, unto it. I confess
that they of Philippos had gifts in some measure, but they had not
willingness to practice those gifts to Gods glory: which willingness etc.
is one of the necessary branches of an inward calling. That they of Philippos
had not this willingness, etc. it is manifest: for they sought themselves, and
practiced their gifts wholly to increase the Apostles affliction. Lastly, if
your Antecedent be true, what say you to this proposition? They, of whose
Magistracy there is a Nullitie before God, though they have an outward
calling, ought not to be accounted Magistrates. Do you not think this
proposition to be very dangerous? I could press and follow this very far,
but I abstain of purpose.

Objection.

The Sacrament may not be received at his hands which wants outward
calling: Therefore not at his hands, who is destitute of the inward graces. I.
Penry. page 46.

Answer.

Your Antecedent is true, and makes against the Anabaptists. I deny your
Argument. My reason is: Omnia Sacramenta, cum obsint indigne tractantibus,
prosunt tamen per eos digne sumentibus. August. contra epist. Parmen. lib. 2.
cap. 10. That is, All Sacraments, though they hurt such as do handle them
unworthily, yet they profit such as do worthily receive them at their hands.

Objection.

We have no warrant to receive an extraordinary Sacrament: But that which is
administered by ignorant ministers, is an extraordinary Sacrament, if it be any:
Therefore, we have no warrant to receive it. I. Penry. page 49.

Answer.

I deny your Minor, and do add this: First, that it is a Sacrament by your
own confession, page 50, 51. which is administered by ignorant ministers.
Secondly, that it is no extraordinary Sacrament, which is delivered by them,
unless you will call Baptism and the holy Supper, extraordinary Sacraments.

If any will conclude of these my answers, that I mislike M. Penryes desire of
a learned Ministry in Wales, he takes up that which I never let fall: for I
desire with all my heart, and the Lord for his Christ's sake grant it, that not
only Wales may be furnished with worthy governors and pastors, but all other
parts of her Maiestics Dominions, that Gods graces may be more and more
multiplied upon us and our posterity, and his holy hand watch over us.

10 THE CHVRCH OF England is the visible Church of Christ.
THE Church of Galatia which erred in a fundamental point of doctrine, is
called the Church of God, Gal. 1. therefore, the Church of England, which
erreth not in any fundamental point of doctrine, is the Church of Christ. That
the Church of Galatia erred in a fundamental point of doctrine, it is
manifest: for they joined Circumcision and Christ together. If any do think
that the Church of England do hold an error in any fundamental point of
doctrine, let him set down the particular.

The Church of England has Christ for her head and foundation: for she
receives and reuerenceth the Canonical Scriptures, and confesses Christ's
righteousness to be hers, and that salvation is compassed by Christ alone,
with whose grace nothing may be matched. Christus aut totus aut nullus. Gratia
Dei aut tota suscipitur, aut tota reijcitur. Gratia nullo modo esset gratia,
nisi esset omni modo gratuita.

That the preaching of the holy word and administration of the Sacraments are
the essential marks of the Church of Christ, I have proved in my Treatise of
the Church, to which book I refer you: but these essential marks of the
Church, are in the Church of England: therefore, etc.

Objection.

The discipline used in the Primitive Church, is not in the Church of England:
therefore the church of England is not the Church of Christ.

Answer.

I deny the Argument. My reasons are: First, S. Luke setting out the
extraordinary blessing which God gave to Peter's sermon in Jerusalem, has these
words: Then they that gladly received his word, were baptized: and the same
day, there were added (to the Church) about three thousand souls. And they
continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and
prayers. Acts. 2.41, 42. No man endued with Gods spirit, will deny that this
assembly which was baptized and continued in the Apostles doctrine, etc. was
the Church of God, and yet no Deacons were at that time chose^, or Consistories
of Seniors erected. Secondly, they which do urge the discipline most
earnestly, do confess that the discipline is not an essential part of the
Church. Their reason is: The discipline resembles the wall of a City, and
hedge or ditch of a Vineyarde. It is a City, though the wall be wanting: it
is a Vineyarde, though hedge or ditch be wanting. Lastly, I would gladly
know, whether it be either possible, or safe, to plant that discipline in
this land, before that Gods holy Truth be soundly both taught and received,
and that there be fit Churchmen and people to execute the discipline.

Objection.

The Ministers in England are not chosen by the Parishes over which they are
set: therefore they are no ministers, and consequently there is no
administration of the word or Sacraments, no worship of God, nor visible
Church in England, as some Anabaptists have given out of late.

Answer.

I deny the Argument. My reason is: if this Argument of theirs were good,
these absurdities would follow. First, that Gods Church is necessarily tied in
all places and times to one form in the external calling of the ministers.
Secondly, that the excellent assembly in the Primitive Church, Acts 2. verse
41, 42. was not the Church of God: for at that time, the Ministers were not
elected by the Presbitery and people. Thirdly, that the worthiest Preachers in
this land, are no Ministers. Lastly, that very many parts of England are like
to have no teachers, because they are utterly unfit to make choice of their
Pastors. If it be said that some Bishops in ordeyning, and some Patrones in
presenting ignorant Ministers, have erred as grossly as any Parish can: my
answer is, that I neither dare, nor will defend such, either Bishops or
Patrons: I do rather exhort them to unfeigned repentance: for this great sin
of theirs has, and does cry very loud for some notable vengeance.

Cipri. de vnitate Ecclesiae. Haereses (Diabolus) inuenit and schismata, quibus
subuerteret fidem, veritatem corrumperet, scinderet vnitatem. Quos detinere non
potest in viae veteris caecitate, cirrumscribit and decipit noui itineris
errore. Rapit de ipsa Ecclesia homines, and dum sibi appropinquasse iam lumini,
atque euasisse faeculi noctem videntur, alias nescientibus tenebras rursus
infundit, etc.

A DEFENSE OF SVCH POINTS IN R. SOMES LAST TREATISE, AS M. PENRY has dealt
against: And a refutation of many Anabaptistical, blasphemous and Popish
absurdities, touching Magistracy, Ministry, Church, Scripture and Baptism,
etc. contained in M. Penryes treatise, etc.

By R. SOME Doctor of Divinity.

ROMANS chap. 16. verse. 17.18. I beseech you brethren, mark them diligently
which cause division and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have
learned, and auoy de them.

For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
bellies, and with fair speech and flattering deceive the hearts of the simple.

Imprinted at London by G.B. Deputy to Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1588.

TO THE READER.
I Did publish a short Treatise in May last. It has pleased one M. Penry to
examine part of it, and (as an other Aristarchus) to censure it. His book was
sent me. I have viewed it, and do find strange things in it. Advise was given
me, not to vouchsafe an answer, because M. Penry is very ignorant, and his
Treatise very silly and corrupt stuff. I considered waightely of it, but
resolved to take some pains. The reasons which induced me, are: First, S. Paul
vouchsafed in Gods cause to deal with Demetrius the silver, and Alexander the
copper smith. The Prophet Ezechiel in the like cause, did set himself against
certain wicked women etc. Ezech. 13. Secondly, many have been mislead by his
absurd fancies. To cure these, if God will, and to stay other, my labor is not
amiss. Lastly, I am personally both charged and challenged by him: therefore it
became me to take pen in hand. M. Penries book is a fardle of gross errors.
None account of it, but such as are of the fantastical crewe: men extremely
both proud and ignorant. He has as many learned men of his side, as H. N. the
prince of the family of Love had of his: that is, never a one: therefore a
little Arithmetique will serve to number them. If it had pleased him to have
considered of, and rested in the judgment and direction of very famous men and
Churches, he had not swarued from Gods book, he had sailed by a sure compass,
he had not broched such fancies, as Gods Church with one voice condemns.
Nestorius was an absurd heretic: he had some sparkles of eloquence by nature:
he was in his own opinion learned, but in deed very ignorant: his pride was
such, that he vouchsafed not to read any interpreters. Socrat. lib. 7. cap.
32. I assure my self, that M. Penry is very far from Nestorius heresy: I
would he were as clear ofpride and contempt of writers. Calvin, Beza, etc.
men of excellent learning, are cast off by him, eue^ in those weighty causes,
wherein they shake hands with all the Churches of God. I do not belie him, I
charge him justly: it shall appear so by Gods grace in this Treatise. The
question between him and me, is not whether ignorant men may either enter
into, or continue in the holy ministry: for, my resolution is negative, that
is, that they ought not: but the question is, whether such as were and are
baptized by Popish priests and ignorant ministers, have and do receive a
Sacrament: and whether the godly communicant is polluted by receiving the
Sacrament at the hands of unpreaching ministers. The most famous men and
Churches, are peremptory for me, and against him. Yea, M. Penry himself
joins with me in many parts of his Treatise: in some other parts, I
confess, he sings an other song, absurd for matter, and out of tune for
manner. This inconstancy of his proceeds from a vain humor, which as a
whirle-winde, does strangely carry and ouer-carrie him. It is not in my
hands to heal him: if it were, I would with all my heart. I will pray unto
God to cure him. Cathedram in coelo habet, qui corda docet. All that I desire
of the godly Reader, is, that he will read my Treatise before he give sentence.
Otherwise, I may justly charge him, to bring not iudicium, but praejudicium,
that is, to be very partial. Let him, in Gods Name, compare my arguments and
answers with my adversaries, and weigh them in equal balance: if he does
not see clearly, and feel sensibly his gross errors and Anabaptisticall
fancies, his eyes are dim, his fingers are benumbed. That he may have present
and speedy view of the pearls in his book, I have set down in a Table,
diverse strange particulers. If they seem harsh and rough-hewen, blame M.
Penry: for they come out of his forge. Yea, I dare be bold to say, that if the
Spiders web be good cloth, and the Cockatrice eggs wholesome meat, then such
points as I refute in this Treatise, are very excellent Divinity. I am not
alone of this judgment: the worthiest Divines in this land iumpe with me, and
do mislike and condemn his absurdities. It pleased God to assist me
graciously in the pains I have taken: I thank his Majesty very humbly for
it: I doubt not, but that he will give a blessing unto it. The Lord give us
grace to see and know our ignorance, to be truly humble, to grow in godly
knowledge, and not in Anabaptistical and blasphemous fancies. London. September.
19. 1588.

Necessaria ignoramus, quia non necessaria discimus. A TABLE OF SOME Principal
particulers, contained in this treatise.
Almighty God never called any to be Magistrates, but he furnished them
accordingly. Chap. 3. page 59. 60. 61. Magistracy is Gods ordinance, not a
devise of man. Chap. 13. page 136. 137. The reading of the holy Scriptures,
does edify. Chap. 4. page 62. 63. 64. The Scripture is of credit in it self.
Chap. 8. page. 102. The Popish church is a church, though not a sound Church.
Chap. 17. page 147. 148. 149. 151. and Chap. 23. page 176. Whosoever says or
writes that our Queen is a Schismatique for separating herself and her
subjects from the popish Church, (if the popish Church be a Church in any
regard) makes a gross and Popish collection: and is at the least an
undutiful subject. Chap. 17. page 151. Whether no more fellowship is to be
had with papists in religion matters, then with pagane Idolaters. Cap. 23. pa.
181. Amightie God never called any to the holy ministry either in the old or
new Testament, but he furnished them with gifts fit for that holy function.
Chap. 2. page 55. 56. etc. Such as are in the ministry, and have gifts in no
measure, ought to be removed by the Magistrates and governors of the Church.
Chap. 9. page. 110. None unbaptized may be a public teacher in the visible
Church. Chap. 8. page. 93. Popish priests have a calling, though a faulty one.
Chap. 18. page 154. 155. The approbation of the Church, makes him a minister
to us, which is not called by almighty God. Cap. 12. pa. 132. They were
sacrifices and Sacraments, which were delivered by the ignorant Leuiticall
Priests. Chap. 8. pa. 104. The godly are not polluted which receive the
Sacraments at the hands of unpreaching ministers. Chap. 9. page 108. 110. 113.
114. 115. and Chap. 14. page 138. A Sermon is not required necessarily to the
essence of a Sacrament. Chap. 7. page 84. They amongst us which are unbaptized
do sin grienously, if they do not present themselves to baptism. Chap. 8.
page 88. They which are once baptized, must not be baptized again Chap. 19.
page 156. They which were baptized of Popish priests in the Popish Church,
received true baptism etc. chap 7. page 79. and chap. 8. page 88, 89. and
chap. 20. page 156. 157. The false profession of Christ in popery, does not
prove that the true Christ is not in popish baptism. cap. 23. pa. 174. Whether
infants ought rather to be kept unbaptized, then to be presented to popish
baptism. chap. 23. page 180. The infa^ts of papists may be baptized in a
reformed church, if some of the religion do present them to baptism, and do
undertake the godly education of them. cha. 17. page 150. There has been, and
may be true baptism out of the church. chap. 21. page 158. Though true
baptism was amongst the Donatists out of the Church, August. did not give
leave to any of the church, to present their infa^ts to be baptized there. cap.
21. pa. 159. They are the Sacraments of Baptism, and the holy Supper, which
are administered by unpreaching ministers in the church of England. chap. 8.
page 88. 89. 95. 98. None unbaptized, may receive the holy supper. chap. 8.
page 90. 91. 92. It is lawful to administer the holy supper in a private house,
if some cautions be observed. chap. 15. page 141. 142. Every legal uncleanness
was not joined with sin. chap. 9. page 113. The regenerate cannot fulfill the
law of God. cha. 26. pa. 199
A TABLE OF DIVERSE gross errors and Anabaptisticall fancies, contained in M.
Penryes Treatise, etc.
Master Penry says, That the life of the Magistracy is neither prescribed in
the word (for so there could be no Magistrates out of the Church, nor any in
the Church, but such as are prescribed in the word, which were impious to
think) nor contained in the gifts of the Magistracy, nor yet separated from
his outward calling: For the very outward calling, is it that gives life unto
the Magistracy, though the person susteining it, want gifts to discharge the
same. The reason hereof is evident, because the Magistracy being an human
constitution, as the holy Ghost says 1. Pet. 2.13. is appropriated unto his
possession, upon whomsoever man bestows the same, if he be capable to
possess (though unfit to execute) what is a lotted unto him. In his addition
page 48.

This speech of M. Penryes is very gross. His first reason is this: there may
be Magistrates out of the Church, therefore the life of the Magistracy is not
prescribed in the word. M. P. Antecedent is true: For Pharao, Nero, Julian were
magistrates out of the Church. I deny his argument: My reason is: the gifts of
courage, fearing God, dealing truly, hating covetousness, which are the life of
the Magistrate, are prescribed in Gods book, Exo. 18.21. Deu. 1.13. If you say
they are not the life of the magistracy, you dissent from all the learned, and
therefore must set down what God requires of him, that should be his
Magistrate.

His second reason is this: There are and may be magistrates within the Church,
which are not garnished with the above named gifts: therefore the life of the
Magistracy is not prescribed in the word. My answer is, I confess that
absurd Magistrates have been and are many times advanced in the Church, (I
grant they should not) either by the corruption or error of the electours:
But I deny your argument: My reason is: It is great wickedness to think,
because gross Electours prefer unfit men and so fail in their duty, that
Almighty God has failed in prescribing what kind of men he would have to be
his lieutenants.

M. Penry adds, that the life of the Magistracy is not contained in the
gifts of the magistracy. I dissent from him in this. If he had said, that the
birth of the magistracy is not contained in the gifts of the magistracy, he
had hit the white.

M. Penry writes that the life of the magistracy is not separated from his
outward calling: for the very outward calling, says he, is it that gives life
unto the magistracy. If this were true, then the life and birth of the
magistrate are idem tempore, that is, twins: and consequently whosoever has
the outward calling which is the birth, has the inward calling which is the
life of the magistrate. So is Gods furniture tied to the electours voices, as
to the chair, and the inward and outward calling of the magistrate confounded,
which is a palpable error. If there be an outward calling to the magistracy,
without the which no man (howsoever furnished within) may presume to execute
the office of the magistrate, I am sure there is an inward calling to the
magistracy: For the outward calling does import an inward. If there be an
inward calling which is by God himself, what I beseech you is it but such
furniture and gifts, as are prescribed and required in the holy word?

The foundation whereupon M. Penry has built his former absurdities, is a very
rotten post, that is, a gross deprauing of a text of Scripture, viz. The
Magistracy is an human ordinance, 1. Pet. 2.13. that is, a devise of man,
and not an Ecclesiastical constitution prescribed in the word. That the
magistracy is not any devise of man, but Gods ordinance for the benefit of
man, is a clear truth in Gods book. None doubt of it, unless they be
Anabaptists or extremely ignorant.

M. Penry says that the word barely read and to no other purpose then to
edify by reading, is not wholesome doctrine. Chap. 8. page 99.

This is a blasphemous absurdity. M. Penryes reasons for it are most absurd
and childish. I refer you to my answer. Chap. 8. page 100. 101. and to a
proposition which I have handled. Chap. 4. page 62. etc.

M. Penry writes that it is false to say that the recital of the sum of
Christ's Sermon, that is, the word of institution, etc. is an edifying word: he
says it mainteyneth charming. Chap. 8. page 88. 89.

This is a blasphemous absurdity. If every part of the Canonical Scripture
does edify, I trust the sum of the Lord Jesus Sermon ought to have singular
allowance. If it ought to have singular allowance, it may not be indicted and
arraigned for maintenance of charming.

M. Penry says that the people cannot sanctify a Sabbath without a Sermon.
His words are these: They are no ministers, whose flocks by their ministry can
not sanctify the Sabbath: our Readers are such, etc. In his addition. page 60.

M. Penry accounts the public reading of the holy Scripture and public
prayers, no part of the sanctification of the Sabbath. If he had said that the
Sabbath is not so well sanctified without, as with a godly Sermon, I would
have agreed unto him.

M. Penry makes the person to give credit to the holy word. His words are
these: The word of God uttered, is not an edifying word, unless it be uttered
according to the ordinance, both in regard of the persons that utter the same,
and the end wherefore it is uttered. Chap. 8. page 99.

This is a Popish error: for the Scripture is (...), that is, of credit in it
self. Read my answer. Chap. 8. page 102.

M. Penry says that there is no Church at all in Popery. Chap. 23. page 175.
176.

This is a gross error, condemned of very famous men and all reformed
Churches. If there be no church at all in Popery, these absurdities will
follow: first, the Pope is not Antichrist: Secondly, the infants of Papists
may not be baptized in any reformed Church, though some of the Religion do
present them to Baptism, and publicly undertake the good education of them.
Read that which I have written, Chap. 17. page 147. 148. 149. and Chap. 23.
page 176.

M. Penry says that if there be a Church in Popery, our Magistrates, etc. are
Schismatiques, inasmuch as they have separated themselves from the Church of
Rome. Chap. 17. page 151.

This is a gross and Popish collection, and cannot stand with the duty of a
subject. Read my answer. Chap. 17. page 151. 152.

M. Penry writes that men in the Popish Church are not ingraffed by Baptism
into a true Christ. His words are these: Where there is no true Christ
whereunto men can be ingraffed by Baptism, there true Baptism as touching the
substance cannot be gotten, etc. But in Popery there is no true Christ
whereinto men may be ingraffed, etc. Chap. 23. page 173.

This is a gross error condemned of all famous writers and Churches. Read
that which I have written. Chap. 23. page 173. and 174. and cha. 20. page 156.
157.

Master Penry writes that if baptism administered by unpreaching ministers,
were denied to be a Sacrament, he would wish none to offer themselves to that
holy Sacrament for six causes.

First, we are already received into the bosom of the Church, and acknowledged
to have the seal of the covenant, in as much as we were once offered and
received into the number of the godly by the outward eleme^t, though
corruptly. To what end then should baptism serve us again? In his exhort. to
the gouernonrs, etc. of Wales. page 31.

If this be true which M. Penry says, the outward and bare element delivered
by him, which in M. Penryes judgment, is no minister, is the seal of Gods
covenant: Which is a most absurd heresy.

Secondly, the absolute necessity of baptism to salvation, by this means
might seem to be maintained.

False: They which require men unbaptized, to offer themselves to Baptism, are
persuaded that the contempt of the Sacrament is damnable: they do not think
that all which die without Baptism, (if contempt be absent) are damned.
Besides, Baptism is necessary in respect of our obedience: but, what
obedience is performed, when Baptism is refused?

Thirdly, least we should seem to agree with the heretical Catabaptists. If
no Baptism was delivered by unpreaching ministers, M. Penry is an heretical
Catabaptist, if he dehort any such from holy Baptism, as were baptized by
unpreaching ministers.

Fourthly, other Churches have not publicly decided the cause.

They needed not. They made no question of it: for, with one voice they
condemn your Anabaptisticall fancies.

Fifthly, that the practice should not enforce them to be rebaptized, which
have been already baptized, by such as had commission from the Lord to deal
in those mysteries.

If they be already baptized, no reason they should desire a second Baptism:
for Baptism may not be iterated. I have proved this point in my Treatise of
the Sacraments, and in this book. Chap. 19. page 156.

Lastly, they, who (being now in the age of discretion) have been baptized by
Idol ministers, are either called or not called to salvation. If called, why
should they be rebaptized, seeing already they have been made partakers of the
outward element, and accounted in the number of Christians? If not called,
neither should they be baptized, until they declared by their works that they
were Gods children.

If they received the Sacrament before, they need not. If they received no
Sacrament, they cannot abstain from Baptism, without intolerable, both
sin, and vengeance. None that are effectually called, either have or will
refuse to offer themselves to Baptism: which Baptism, before, they had not.
Cornelius example, does teach us that, Acts. 10. Yea, I dare be bold to say,
that her Majesty's subjects which are unbaptized, and do not offer themselves
to Baptism, are not as yet effectually called, whatsoever either they or you
pretend. The reason is, None are effectually called, which are not within the
compass of Gods covenant. The words of Gods covenant are these: I will be thy
God and the God of thy seed. Genesis 17. Are they within the compass of this
covenant, which either wittingly omit, or wilfully refuse Baptism, which is
the seal of Gods covenant?

M. Penry says, that the preaching of the word is necessarily required in the
administration of Baptism. chap. 7 page 82.

If this were true, al such as were Baptized without a Sermon, received no
Sacrament. I refer you to my answer, Chap. 7. page 84.

M. Penry says that Baptism is not out of the Church. Chap. 23. page 176.

This is a gross error. Read that which I have written. Chap. 21. page 158.
etc.

M. Penryes judgment is, that Queen Elizabeth and many thousands in England
are unbaptized.

That his judgment is such, I prove it by his own words. He writes thus,
etc. In Popery there is no true Christ whereunto men may be ingraffed, etc. And
a little before: What Baptism is that which is not an ingraffing into the true
Christ? Chap. 23. page 173. A little after he has these words: There is no
Church at all in Popery. chap. 23. page 175. 176. And in an other place, etc.
that Baptism is not out of the Church. If M. Penry shall answer that it was
Baptism in the Popish church yesterday, but it is not so either to day or to
morrow, because the Christ professed now in Popery is not a true but a divided
Christ, I must needs tell him that Christ in the Popish profession was divided
as well when her Majesty, etc. was Baptized, as he is divided in the Popish
profession in this day. Besides M. Penry writes that the Popish church was
never the Temple of God since Antichrist planted his pestilent chair therein.
Chap. 22. page 165. To conclude, seeing there is in M. Penryes judgment no
Church, no Baptism, no Ministry in the Popish church, etc. I may be bold to
affirm that in M. Penryes judgment her Majesty and many thousands more are
unbaptized.

M. Penry says that the holy Supper is an extraordinary Sacrament which is
delivered privately by a Minister. Chap. 14. page 139.

This error is condemned by M. Calvin, whose resolution is, that it is lawful
to administer the holy Supper privately, if certain cautions be observed. I
rest in his judgment. I refer you to chap. 15. page 141. 142.

M. Penry says that they which communicate with unpreaching ministers, approve
the sin of the unpreaching ministry. Chap. 10. page 119.

This is an Anabaptisticall fancy: for S. Paul (as M. Penry writes)
communicated after his conversion with those priests which were as unlearned
as ever any. chap. 11. page 128. I refer you besides to my answer. chap. 10.
page 119.

M. Penry is bold to control Almighty God, for barring the uncircumcised
Israelites from eating the Paschall lamb: His words are these, why should the
godly of the family be excluded from the action, the cause why they were
uncircumcised not being in them? Chap. 8. page 89.

This is intolerable sauciness: It becomes not dust and ashes to dispute
with, and to cou^termand the Majesty of God. Read my answer, chap. 8. page
91. 92.

M. Penries judgment is, that the touching of a dead man, which was a legal
uncleanness, was sin, Chap. 9. page. 110.

For proof of this error, he quoteth two textes of Scripture most absurdly. I
refer you to my answer. chap. 9. page. 111. 112. 113.

M. Penry says, that Caiphas high priesthood was the Lords ordinance. Chap.
10. page 122.

This is an error: for the Lords ordinance was, that only one should be the
high priest: and it is manifest in the text, that Annas and Caiphas were high
priests together, luke 3.

M. Penry says, that he is assured that popish priests are no ministers, that
is, that they have no calling at all. Chap. 22. page 160. 162. 163.

If this were true, first, a great number are unbaptized. Secondly, Calvin,
Beza, and other famous men and churches (which I do not think) do err grossly.
Lastly, only M. Penries judgment is sound, which (I am sure) is a most absurd
judgment. Read my answer, cap. 22. page 161. 162. 163. and cap. 18. page 154.

M. Penry affirms readers to be no ministers, and for any thing that is
revealed in the word, that they can deliver no Sacrament, and yet that which
has been done by them, may be a Sacrament: and what contrariety (says he)
is there in these assertions? In his exhort. to the Governors etc. of Wales,
page 32.

Then yesterday a Sacrament, and to morrow none. Goodly divinity. Such Saint,
such shrine.

M. Penry says, that he has no ministry, which sins in executing the
works of the ministry, as administering Sacraments etc. His words are these:
the calling of an unpreaching minister, is not the calling of the ministry,
because he sins in intermedling with the works thereof. Chap. 25.

If this were true, the contentious ministers of Philippi, were no ministers:
for, they sinned in executing the works of the ministry. That appears in
these words of the Apostle: Some preach Christ through envy and strife, Phi.
1.15. Besides, M. Penries ignorant Levites were no priests in the old
Testament: for they sinned in executing the priesthood.

That the outward approbation of the Church, does not make a minister. Chap.
12. page 131.

If he mean, that it does not furnish a minister with knowledge, I grant it.
If he mean that it does not make him a minister to us, then were the ignorant
Leuiticall priests no priests in the Jewish Church. Which ignorant Leuiticall
priests, in M. Penries judgment, were lawful priests, though not good
priests. Chap. 11. page 125. read my answer, chap. 12. page 132.

M. Penry says, that unfitness to teach, made not a nullitie of the
Leuiticall priests office. Chap. 11. page 125.

M. Penry says in an other place, that no ministry is separated from a gift.
Again, whosoever preserves not knowledge in his lips, is no minister: in
his addition page 57. 58. Again, to make a minister, there be two things
required: First, a being or life, which the Lord only can give: Secondly, a
birth, which the Church, as an instrument of the ordinance of God, is to
bestow upon him by his outward calling. These two things are so essentially to
be required in a minister, that whosoever wants either of them, he cannot
possibly be a minister. Again, be it, that a man have the outward calling of
the Church: yet in deed, he is no minister, unless the Lord has given him
the life of a minister, by committing the word of reconciliation unto his
hands: in his addi. page 45. 46. M. Penry erreth greatly either in his first,
or last propositions. If he can reconcile them, he can work miracles. The
toughest glewe that is, can not make them cleave together.

M. Penry offers disputation. Chap. 16. page 143.

Inscitia audax: none so bold as blind bayard. Read my answer. Chap. 16. page
143. 144.

M. Penry has these words: I dare arrest and attaint of high treason against
the majesty of the Highest, all both men and Angels, who either defend the
communicating with unpreaching ministers, lawful, or communicate with them: in
his addition page 65.

Sesquipedalia verba: every word as big as a house: Great smoke, but no
fire, thanks be to God. Your arrest is like Goliaths curse: it is not so
fearful as paper shot.

Thus M. Penry has troubled HEAVEN, CHVRCH, COMMONWEALTH, and HIMSELF.
HEAVEN, for he being dust and ashes, has been too bold and saucy with God
himself: CHVRCH, for he has offered unto it for treasure, not coals, which
had been very base, but poison, which is very dangerous: COMMONWEALTH, for he
has undermined the chair of the Magistrate: I hope such conies will be looked
unto: HIMSELF, for he has contrived and broched many proud, blasphemous, and
Anabaptisticall fancies. I perceive it is true which that famous man M. Calvin
has written, viz. that an Anabaptisticall head is immensum deliriorum mare, a
vast Sea of dotages. Calu. contra Anabapt.

CHAP. 1. A DEFENSE OF SVCH points in R. SOMES last treatise, as M. Penry has
dealt against.
R. Some. Before that I answer M. Penryes book, I am to desire the godly
Reader to consider weightily of this little which follows. My two first
propositions which M. Penry deals against, are.

1. They which were baptized in the Popish Church by Popish Priests, received
true Baptism, touching the substance of Baptism.

2. They are the Sacraments of Baptism and the holy Supper, which are
delivered in the Church of England by unpreaching ministers.


I. Penry. YOu handle two needelesse points. First, that They which were
baptized by Popish Priests etc. Secondly, that They are the Sacraments of
Baptism, etc. In these two points M. Some, you have proved nothing that my
writings have denied.


R. Some. I do see as yet no difference between us. If M. Penry denies them
not to be Sacraments which are administered by Popish priests and unpreaching
Ministers, he can not deny Popish priests and unpreaching Ministers to have a
calling, etc. For it is a rule in Divinity: Sacramentum nullum sine ministro,
that is, No Sacrament without a minister. My third proposition which M. Penry
censureth, is.

3 The godly are not polluted which receive the Sacrament at the hands of an
unpreaching Minister.


I. Penry. Paul communicated since his conversion with those Priests that were
as unlearned as ever any. Which he would not have done if inabilitie to teach
had made them no Priests.


R. Some. Then in M. Penryes judgment, the holy Apostle was not polluted by
communicating with unpreaching Ministers. Can any man (if he have but half an
eye) suspect that M. Penry dissenteth from me in judgment? What then may I
think, against whom he has written? Well, I must be content with the measure
he offers me. My comfort is, that he shall gain, and I lose nothing by it.
Yea, I assure my self by Gods grace that Gods Church shall gain by this
difference. He pretends great desire of a learned Ministry: but his eagre
defense of ignorant Leuiticall priests, bewrays him. If I had written so much
for ignorant Ministers, the great bell had been rung out before this. I should
have had it on both sides of mine ears. I have dealt very earnestly and humbly
by writings and speech for a learned Ministry. I have received very
comfortable answer of very great and honorable personages: who have already
(thanks be to God) employed some, and will, I doubt not, employ more in the
Churches service. The Lord increase that blessing for his Christ's sake. The
mark, I fear, which M. Penry leauels at, is, simply to condemn the outward
calling of the Ministers in our Church: and so to shake hands with the
Anabaptisticall Recusants. Though he hit not that white, he will hardly miss
that Butte. If he be thoroughly searched, it is not unlike to fall out so.
Some part of his writings look shrewdly that way.


CHAP. 2. ALMIGHTY GOD NEVER called any to the holy ministry, either in the
old or new Testament, but he furnished them with gifts fit for that holy
function.
THE Israelites lived in slavery and drudgerie in Egypt. They were as rude and
gross as might be. When the Lord would make his Tabernacle, he furnished
Bezaleel and Aholiab of the tribes of Judah and Dan, for that excellent work.
He gave them skill in working all kind of broiderie, Exo. 31. and 36. chap.
When Salomons Temple should be built, Almighty God furnished Hiram of Tyrus
for that stately work, 1. Kin. 7. If Almighty God; for the framing and
building of the Tabernacle and Temple, which were figures of the Church, did so
excellently beautify Bezaleel, Aholiab and Hiram: it is great wickedness to
think, that his Majesty did ever send any unfurnished to build his spiritual
Tabernacle and Temple, which is his spouse, body, City, etc.

When the Lord commanded Aaron, Eleazar, etc. to be consecrated his Priests,
and consequently to teach, to pray for the Israelites, and to offer sacrifices,
(in which three branches, the Priests office consisted) he furnished them with
excellent furniture for that honorable service. The words of God himself are
clear for this: My covenant was with Leui of life and peace, and I gave him
fear, and he feared me, and was afraid before my Name. The Law of truth was
in his mouth, and there was no iniquity found in his lips: he walked with me
in peace and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity. Mal. 2.

It is a positive law of Almighty God: The Priests lips shall keep knowledge,
etc. Mal. 2. It is a Canon of the Apostle: A minister must be apt to teach, 1.
Tim. 3. If Almighty God had by any warrant of his, commended the Israelites
heretofore to the charge of ignorant Levites, or his Church since to ignorant
ministers, he had broken a statute law and Canon of his own, and had bin
greatly touched in honor.

Those Leuiticall priests were sent of God, and pastors according to his heart,
which were able to feed Gods people with knowledge and understanding, Iere. 3.

Those Leuitical priests which were unfit to teach, were never of Gods sending,
though they were of the line of Aaron. Almighty God disclaimes them in these
words: My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou have
refused knowledge, I will also refuse thee, that thou shall be no priest to me,
Hose. 4.

Esaias was a famous man for birth and eloquence. Before that he was sent to
denounce and deliver Gods judgments and mercies to Jerusalem and Judah etc, the
Lord did singularly furnish him with knowledge, speech, courage etc. Esa. 6.
and 50. Chap.

Jeremy was an excellent Prophet. When the Lord would use his service, he
touched his mouth, furnished his heart, etc. Iere. 1. In like sort dealt
Almighty God with Micheas: he made him a complete man, Mich. 3.

Elizeus attended on the plough, 1. Kin. 19. Amos on the herd, Amos 1. and 7.
Chap. The Lord did not use the ministry of Elizeus and Amos, until he had
furnished them with skill, wisdom, courage, etc.

Our Savior Christ did not send any university men at the first to preach the
Gospel, least the conversion of men should be attributed to learning and
eloquence. He called rude and base men from their occupatio^s to be his
Apostles. Before he sent them to be his trumpets, and to deliver his message,
he cast them (as it were) into a new molde, he gave them special furniture,
John 20. Act. 2. If the Lord Jesus had not dealt thus with them, how could
they have acquitted themselves in preaching and disputation as they did? for
they attended before, on fishing and other trades.

Saint Paul setting out in orient colors, the largess and bounty of our
Savior Christ to his Church after his Ascension, has these words: He gave
some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers, for the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the
ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. If these
here mentioned had bin unfurnished: First, Christ's gift had been no benefit,
but a burden. Secondly, how should the Saints have been gathered, his body
built, his sheep fed, his spouse garnished?

Those Princes and Captains which send unskillful Ambassadors and untrained
soldiers on ambassade and warfare, do greatly stayne and dishonor
themselves. Almighty God, which is the greatest Prince and most valiant
Captain, did never fault in this. If he had, he had given his glory and the
Church a grievous blow. I confess, God gives not to all his servants, like
furniture. Some have ten, some, five: some, two: some, one talent, which
tale^ts must neither be buried in the earth, nor wrapped in a napkin. If they
be used, they will multiply as the loaves in the Gospel. They which cannot
feed with manchet, must feed with barlie bread. Rams skins and goats
hair were amongst the holy offerings, as well as gold, silver, brass, purple,
etc. Exodus 25.

If none are called by almighty God to the holy ministry, but such as he
has furnished with gifts in some measure: it is the duty of the civil and
ecclesiastical magistrates to provide, that ignorant men which are not
acquainted with Gods book, be kept and thrust out of the holy ministry,
unless they will be partakers of great sins, and consequently of great
plagues. A sufficient teacher is a rare blessing: for he sets the Lords
plough forward, and is Gods hand to deliver heavenly treasures. If good care
shall be had by our Prince, our Bishops, our Patrons, to go on in advancing
and making choice of such both governors and pastors: Gods religion, Church,
Universities, will flourish more notably, and consequently Gods glory: our
gracious Prince shall be more soundly honored: the people of the land shall be
singularly encouraged to serve God, to fight for the religion, for their
Prince, for their country, against any, either foreign or home enemy: and
Gods favor and blessings shall be multiplied upon our Queen, upon us, and
upon our posterity. Almighty God will accept this at our hands for great
thankfulness for his late mercy in preserving the English both fleet and nation,
and amazing and dispersing the popish fleet, by his mighty hand. This gracious
and notable favor of God has danted Gods and our enemies in all popish
kingdoms and churches: and has put life into Gods servants, in all nations
and Churches that profess the religion. The Lord for his Christ's sake grant,
that we may be reverently mindful of, and humbly thankful to his majesty for
this deliverance. And, that as in the time of danger, we used the 83. and 68.
psalms, to entreat Gods favor: so we may ever sing the 124. and 46. psalms,
to publish Gods mercy, and to testify our thankfulness for this gracious
conquest.

CHAP. 3. ALMIGHTY GOD NEVER called any to Magistracy, but he furnished them
accordingly.
THe Egyptians were hard masters to the Israelites. They kept them very short
in Egypt. When almighty God would bless the Israelites with freedom and
government, he furnished Moses notably for that excellent service. He gave him
singular wisdom, courage, etc. If he had not, Moses had been utterly unfit
for such a famous match.

Moses complained unto the Lord, that he alone was not able to govern the
Israelites. Almighty God, for the ease of Moses appointed 70. Elders of Israel
to help in that government. That those Ancients might carry themselves
profitably in that charge, the Lord did garnish them accordingly. Number. 11.

Moses before his death, desired the Lord to appoint one to succeed him in
the government, that the Israelites might not be as sheep without a shepherd,
Number. 27. Gods pleasure was that Joshua should be the man, Deuteronomy. 34. He did so
assist and furnish him with the fear of God, with the spirit of wisdom,
courage, etc. that he became very famous, in peace, in war, at, and after his
dying day.

The Church and common wealth of the Israelites, decayed greatly, and were at a
low ebb in king Saul's time. That both Church and common wealth might be
revived, the Lord advanced his servant David to the kingdom. He did beautify
him with extraordinary graces, as with precious Diamonds. David was very
religious, very wise, very valiant: very religious, for he brought home the
Lord's Ark: very wise, for his royal throne was a seat of Justice: very
valiant, for he vanquished many enemies.

Salomo^ succeeded his father David in the government of the Israelites. That
he might carry himself accordingly in that great charge, he desired and
obtained at Gods hands, a wise and understanding heart. 1. King 3.

Shebna was a great officer in Ezechias Court. His course was cunning and
dangerous to the common wealth of Judah. Almighty God could not bear him,
therefore sent a notable vengeance upon him. In his stead, Eliakim was
appointed under the King of Judah: A man singularly furnished by the Lord, for
he was a father of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of the house of Judah. Esaias
22.

Joseph was advanced in Egypt: Nehemias in Persia: Daniel in Chaldea. They
dealt excellently in their government: for, almighty God did notable furnish
them.

Gedeon was a very mean man: he attended on the flaile. In his time the
Madianites were heavy to the Israelites. 7. years. That the Lord might
deliver his people from the tyranny of the Madianites, he furnished Gedeon for
that service in extraordinary sort. Judge. 6. and 7. chap. There were in Gedeon
which ought to be in every Captain both by sea and land, Scientia rei
militaris, virtus, authoritas, faelicitas. Cic. pro lege Manil. That is, skill
in warlike affairs, virtue, authority, felicity.

They which are inwardly called to the Magistracy, are such as are furnished
by the Lord with good parts for that weighty function. They are not brambles,
as Abimelech was, nor sots, as Maximinus was, nor fools, as Candaules was.
They are vine, fig, olive trees, as David, Ezechias, Iosaphat, Constantinus
were. These are such Magistrates in whom God delights, and which are best
welcome to Gods people: for, they are rare ornaments both of Church and common
wealth. God increase the number of such in this land, that both Church and
common wealth, may shine continually as stars at home, abroad, etc. to the
glory of God, the honor of the Prince, the terror of the enemy, and the
comfort of the English nation.

CHAP. 4. THE READING OF THE holy Scripture does edify.
MOses commanded the Priests in this sort, etc. When all Israel shall come to
appear before the Lord thy God, in the place which he shall choose, thou shall
read this law before all Israel, that they may hear it. Gather the people
together: men and women, and children, and thy stranger that is within thy
gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the Lord your
God, and keep, and observe all the words of this law. And that their children
which have not known it, may hear it, and learn to fear the Lord your God,
etc. Deuteronomy. 31. I gather my argument out of this place thus. By reading of the
law of God, the Israelites did learn and fear God: therefore they were
edified. If you reply that all the Israelites did not profit by this reading,
I answer, no more did all profit by the preaching of the Prophets, of Christ
and the Apostles. The fault was not in the seed, but in the ground. Unless
Gods spirit touch our hearts, as the word does pearce our ears, Gods truth
either read or preached is a shut book, and as a sealed letter unto us.

When he shall sit upon the throne of his kingdom, then shall he write him
this law repeated in a book, by the Priests of the Levites. And it shall be
with him, and he shall read therein all days of his life, that he may learn
to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of this law, and
these ordinances, for to do them: That his heart be not lifted up above his
brethren, and that he turn not from the commandment, to the right hand or to
the left, but that he may prolong his days in his kingdom, he, and his
sons in the mids of Israel. Deuteronomy. 17. I frame my argument thus. The king is
commanded to read the law of God, that he may learn to fear God, and
decline pride: therefore the reading of the law of God does edify.

In king Josias time, the book of the law was found by Hilkiah the Priest.
This book was read in the Lords house. The king was present: so were all the
men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the Priests, and the
Levites, and all the people from the greatest to the smallest, etc. 2. Chron.
34. I make my argument thus. The book of the law was not read in vain in the
Lords house, etc. 2. Kings 22. therefore it did edify.

All the words of my mouth are righteous, there is no lewdness, nor
frowardness in them. They are all plain to him that will understand, and
straight to them that would find knowledge. Prou. 8. Therefore the holy
Scriptures both read and preached, do edify. His salubriter, praua
corriguntur, paruanutriuntur, magna oblectantur ingenia. Aug. Epist. 3. The
holy Scripture has in it, milk for babes, and stronger meat for them that
are of age. Heb. 5. The holy Scripture, is a shallowe water, where in the lamb
may wade, and a great sea, wherein the Elephant may swim.

The Law and the Prophets were read in the Churches of Antiochia, and
Jerusalem. Act. 13. and in Nazareth. Luke 4. If the reading of the holy
Scriptures do not edify, why were the law and Prophets read in the Temple and
Synagogues?

The Apostle writes thus to the pastors and people of Colosse: Let the word
of Christ dwell in you plenteously, etc. Coloss. 3. Therefore Gods people are
not to be barred from the reading of the holy Scripture. If it does not
edify, they were justly barred by the Popish Clergy.

Victorinus was an Orator in Rome. By reading the Scriptures he became a
Christian: Mirante Roma, gaudente ecclesia: that is, Rome marueyled at
Victorinus conversion: Gods Church was glad of it. Aug. Confess. lib. 8. cap. 2.

Gods speech unto us, I am sure, does edify: when the Scriptures are read, God
speaks unto us. The holy Scriptures are Dei Epistola. etc. that is, Gods
Epistle unto us.

By reading the Scriptures, Gods people do more easily receive Gods holy truth,
and epsy Popish absurdities and Anabaptisticall fancies.

They which mislike the reading of the scriptures, are Zwingfildians, that is,
absurd heretics. What then is master Penry, which writes that the word
barely read, and to no other purpose then to edify by reading, is not
wholesome doctrine?

If any shall gather of this I have set down, that I am an enemy to the
preaching of the word, he deserves no answer. My judgment is: If the
reading of the holy scriptures does edify, that sound preaching does edify
much more. By sound preaching, I understand the giving of the true sense of the
scripture, and applying it to the profit of the auditors. Thus did Ezra,
Christ, the Apostles, preach. This course, I am sure, does highly please God,
and brings many sheep into the Lords fold. The Lord increase the number
of such teachers, that Gods religion may flourish as Aarons rod did, and that
Popish and Anabaptisticall errors may be devoured as the rods of the
Egyptian sorcerers were.

Ille huic doctrinae inimicus est animus, qui vel errando eam nescit esse
saluberrimam, vel odit aegrotando medicinam.

Agust. Epist. 3. CHAP. 5. A DEFENSE OF THAT which has been written in the
questions of the ignorant ministry and the communicating with them:
By JOHN PENRY.

THere be two things (M. D. SOME) wherein you by oppugning that truth, which
out of the word of God I had set down, concerning the two former questions,
have been wanting both unto your self and to the cause: the defense whereof
you undertook. The former want of the two, appears by your spare dealing in
a matter of such great weight: wherein you have dealt with so illiberal a hand,
that what has been written by you, might seem to proceed rather from any
then from a man whose gifts and learning seemed to promise the affording of
greater and more weighty matters, then any set down in that treatise.

R. Some. Your beginning is full of courage. I do not wonder at it. He that
runs alone, is always foremost. You accuse me to withstand Gods truth. A
sore charge. If true, I must reuerse my judgment: if untrue, true, you have
dealt injuriously with me. When Ioas was advanced to the Imperial Crown of
Judah, Athalia cried, Treason, Treason. 2. Chron. 23. A hard speech against king
Ioas, Iehoiada, etc. But Athalia her self was the Traitor. You shall apply
this. I have dealt, you say, very sparingly in a matter of great importance.
If I have so, your advantage is greater. If the seed sown in my book, were
like yours, I might be justly thought to be very prodigal. My treatise, I
perceive, is not for your tooth: it is simple in your eye. Aquila non capit
muscas. It has pleased many, I thank God, of excellent learning and wisdom
to like of it: That is my comfort. Instar mill, Platonis calculus. I make very
mean account, as yet, of your judgment. You are not read, you are to seek in
the principles of divinity, you have broched gross errors, you know not your
ignorance. For that knowledge which Almighty God has given me, I thank his
Majesty very humbly. It is more, I confess, then I am worthy of. God give
me grace to use it to his glory.


I. Penry. The number of my reasons were many: you only have touched two of
them, the rest are not dealt with. And therefore the cause as yet remains
whole. For, be it you had answered these two as you have not, yet had you not
satisfied the doubtful conscience of those, that know not in these points
which way to turn them, as long as any one of my reasons remained unanswered.


R. Some. Your reasons, I confess, have number: but they want weight. I have
confuted three of them. The first of the three, is accounted by you a pillar of
marble. But I have not, you say, dealt with the rest. Content yourselfe: I have
made no fault. I answered such and so many, as were delivered to me by some of
your faction. When I had finished my treatise, your book was brought me:
before, I knew not that you were the father of them. You deny that I have
answered any of your reasons. It is easy to say so, and you might worst have
said it. A party is unfit to be a Judge. Your reasons are all of one stamp:
therefore the overthrow of the principal, is the overthrow of all. Your
followers which know not which way to turn them, may thank both you and
themselves: you, for sowing: themselves, for reaping such giddie fancies. It is
an easy thing to lead and fall into an Anabaptisticall maze. They will not
be satisfied, you say, before every one of your reasons be answered. A
peremptory resolution. They are pinned be like on your sleeue. I hope we
shall not have a Pythagoras of you. Would you have your boisterous speech go
for an Oracle, and carry all as a violent stream before it? God forbid. It were
a hard case. I trust you desire it not. If you do, you are not like to have it.


I. Penry. In this point there is also another want, which I would had been
redressed. And that is of two sorts. First, a manifest going from the
controversy: for the question being, whether ignorant men, not ordained of God
for the gathering together of the Saints, be ministers or no: you leave that,
and prove the Sacraments administered by them, viz. by popish priests, and our
dumb ministers, in the days of blindness and ignorance, to be sacraments,
which is no part of the matter in controversy, but an other point to be
discussed (if men will be gotten at all to enter thereunto) when the former is
determined and decided.


R. Some. Your speeches are very idle. I swerve not one jot from the cause I
dealt in. For proof of this, consider what I write. Certain in London gave
out in my hearing: first, that such as were baptized by Popish Priests in the
Popish Church, and by unpreaching ministers in our Church, received no
baptism: Secondly, that the Godly were polluted, which received any Sacrament
at the hands of unpreaching ministers. To heal these sores, I was desired to
provide a plaster. I did so, and God has given a good blessing unto it. All
this time your book was as great a stranger to me, as it is now to the Duke
of Medina. What say you M. Penry? Have I faulted as you imagine? Had you any
the least cause so roughly to seize upon me, and to charge me with going from
the point? Be judge your self: yea, I refuse not the judgment of your
disciples, if they have any dram of equity in them.


I. Penry. Secondly, your reasons are so few, and so commonly known unto al,
that for their number a small deal of paper might conteyne an answer unto
them: for their novelty, they could not put a man that had according unto
knowledge, but once allowed of the cause, to any great labor in answering
them. As being things so commonly objected by all, learned or unlearned, that
hold our readers to be ministers, and think it lawful to communicate with
them, as by course of speech they fall unto that discourse, where all men may
easily see, that there was a great oversight committed by M Some, in deeming
that the oppugning of a cause countenanced by most of the Godly learned, would
be taken in hand by any, who could not answer the reasons which he might be
sure would be objected by all. And who could be ignorant, that the odious
controversy, concerning the profanation of baptism, both by Popish Priests,
and our dumb Ministers, would offer it self in the forefront to withstand
the truth? that the civil Magistracy, the ministry of the dumb Levites,
the corrupt outward calling of our readers would require an answer, which
are the reasons, and the only reasons used by you.


R. Some. If my arguments be few, I have done you pleasure: for they are
sooner answered. They have, you say, no novelty: I like them the better: for
they are as I desired. If they be not for your diet, I do not pass: my
thought is taken. If nothing were good or bad, but that which you like or
mislike, precious pearls should go for tile sherdes, and pebble stones for
Diamonds. Tichonius a Donatist said of himself and his fellows: Quod volumus,
sanctum est. Your music, I hope, is not like his. If it be, you are too
imperial: You will not be abidden. What, and how weak my reasons are, must
be decided hereafter: for, your words are no arguments. If my reasons were
suitable to your answers, they were very woeful. Your odious speech that I
withstand the truth, is used often: it is a special flower in your book.
This course hurts you and not me. It hurts you: for it bewrayes your humor. It
hurts not me: for your tongue cannot disgrace me.


I. Penry. The last want I find in you, is contained in the insufficiency of
your reasons, which evidently show the insufficiency of the conclusion, that
would be inferred by them. Your reasons are all of them faulty, either because
they desire that for granted which is the question, or make those things of
like nature, wherein there is a great dissimilitude. From the first of the two
faults it comes to pass, that you take for granted, that the writings of
reverend and godly men, as of Augustine, M. Beza, etc. will prove that which
the word of the eternal God does not warrant. Hence you take it granted, that
Popish Priests were ministers: that the outward approbation of the Church,
makes a Minister: that, whenever the word of institution is pronounced with
the outward element, there must presently be a Sacrament: that, I take an
evil Minister for no Minister: that, there was a nullitie both of Caiphas
ministry, because he came in by briberie, and of the litigious Ministers in
the Church of Philippi, etc. Howsoever you take those things as granted
principles, yet they are the points in controversy, and so far from being
yielded unto by me, that I have showed every one of them to be manifestly false.


R. Some. You find many faults. You are a hard man: you cover none. Moates
with you are beams, and molhils mountains: yea, no moates and no molhils are
beams and mountains, if they appear at your bar. It pleases you to give
out that all my reasons are faulty. If you mean in your eye, I do easily
grant it: If you mean in the eye of the learned, you mistake the matter. But
what are the faults which you pursue so hotly? Forsooth, I take that, you say,
for granted, which is the question: viz. that Popish priests were ministers:
that whenever the word of institution is added to the element, there is a
Sacrament: and that such a thing is thus and so, because Augustine and Beza
write so. Your tongue is no slander. Did I ever say or write that Popish
priests had a lawful calling? I have written (I confess) that Popish priests
have a calling, though a faulty one. Of this judgment are Beza, Calvin, the
reformed Churches: But all these are wide of the Butte: only you do hit the
white: you will teach them. Sus Mineruam. It becomes not the house. Did I ever
say or write, that whenever the word of Institution is added to the eleme^t,
there must presently be a Sacrament? There is no syllable in my treatise, that
looks that way. You imagine I say so: and of this absurd conceit, you
conclude that private men, children, women, idiots (in my judgment) may
administer a Sacrament. You pretend great sincerity: but your dealing with me
in this and some other points, is neither honest nor scholerlike. It shall
appear so by Gods grace in this book. These particulars, and that of Caiphas
priesthood, and of the contentious ministers of Philippi, shall be handled in
their several places.


I. Penry. The dissimilitude is in the reasons drawn from the Leuiticall
priesthood, and the civil magistracy: with whom if you compare the ministry
of the new covenant, you shall find, first, that you bring in a similitude to
show that which is not proved: and secondly, that you make those to be
twins, which all men must needs grant to be as unlike, as crooked and
straight lines are unmatchable.


R. Some. My second fault is, as you say, in drawing an Argument from the
Leuiticall priesthood to the ministry of the new Testament. Is this a fault?
no, no: the fault is in your eye, not in my pen: but, why may I not draw an
argument, as I did from the Leuititical priesthood, to the ministry of the
new Testament? Your reason is: the Leuiticall priesthood and the ministry of
the new Testament are not twins, are unmatchable, they cannot stand together:
therefore a reason cannot be drawn from the one to the other. You take this, I
am sure, to be an invincible argument: but it is as strong as a rope of sand. I
deny your argument. My reasons are: first, Aaron did not take the priesthood
upon him before he was called: therefore none in our time, may enter into the
ministry, unless he be called. This argument is grounded upon these words of
the Apostle: No man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of
God as Aaron. Heb. 5. Secondly, the Leuiticall priests ought to be furnished
with knowledge, therefore the ministers of the new Testament etc. The ground of
this reason is set down by the Prophet Malachi in this sort: The priests
lips shall preserve knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at his mouth: for
he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts. Mal. 2. You see now, I hope, that
an argument may be framed from the Leuiticall priesthood to the ministry of
the new Testament: if you do not, you are stark blind: if you do, confess
your ignorance. Thirdly, the ministry of death and condemnation, and the
ministry of the spirit and righteousness: that which should be abolished,
and that which remains, are things very far and greatly different: yet an
argument may be drawn from the one to the other in this sort. The law which
was the ministry of death, of condemnation, and which should be abolished,
was glorious: therefore the Gospel which is the ministry of the spirit and
righteousness, and which remains, is more glorious. This argument is, as the
Logicians call it, a comparatis: and is soundly gathered out of these words of
the holy Apostle: If the ministration of death was glorious, how shall not the
ministration of the spirit be more glorious? If the ministry of condemnation
was glorious, much more does the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory:
if that which should be abolished was glorious, much more shall that which
remains be glorious. 2. Cor. 3. What say you now master Penry? do you not
perceive by this I have set down, that an argument may be drawn very aptly
from one thing to another, wherein there is great dissimilitude: which are not
twins, which are vnmatcheable? if you do, be wiser hereafter in the name of
God. Whether an argument may be drawn from the civil magistracy, shall
appear in an other place.


I. Penry. And thus much I thought needful generally to set down concerning
your manner of dealing: not that I would any way disgrace you, whom I
reverence: for that is no part of mine intent, the Lord is my witness. Nay I
would be loath to let that fillable escape me, that might give you, or any the
least occasion in the world, to think that I carry any other heart toward you,
then I ought to bear toward a reverent learned man fearing God. And
howsoever, unless you alter your judgment, I can never agree with you in
these points, because I am assured, you swerve from the truth: Yet this
disagreement shall be so far from making a breach of that bond of love,
wherewith in the Lord I am tied unto you, that I doubt not, but we shall be at
one in that day, when all of us shall be at unity in him that remains one
and the self same for ever.


R. Some. It is gently done of you: when you have broken my head, you give me a
plaster: but I refuse your surgerie. You will not, you say, disgrace me: You
reverence me: Good words. A foul hook under a fair bait. If you reverence
your friends on this fashion, what shall your enemies look for? Philippides
cudgelled his own father. A monstrous son. Being asked why he did so, his
answer was: he did it for love: strange love. I will account somewhat better of
your reverence. If I swerve from the truth, as you assure your self, you have
great reason to dissent from me: Gods truth must be preferred: It is more
excellent then any creature: but if I have any learning, you do toto coelo
errare. You are strangely wide: for, you have set down absurd errors for
clear trueths, and have condemned sure points of divinity for gross errors.
I see little hope of agreement between you and me in these particulars. I am
resolute in my judgment: if you be so in yours, I am sorry for you. God give
you an other mind.


CHAP. 6.
John Penry. Now I am to come to your book: from the 20. page whereof unto
the 28. laying the foundation of the reasons you use against me, to prove the
lawfulness of communicating with dumb ministers, you handle two needelesse
points. First, that they which were baptized by popish priests, have received
true baptism as touching the substance. Secondly, that they are the Sacraments
of baptism, and the holy Supper of the Lord, which are delivered in the Church
of England by unpreaching ministers. In these two points, M. Some, you have
proved nothing that my writings have denied: but you have quickened a dead
controversy, not unlikely to give the wrangling spirits of this age, cause to
breed greater sturres in the Church. I see no other effect, which the handling
of these questions can bring forth but this. And it is to be feared that the
slendernes of the reasons used in your book, to prove that which you have
undertaken to show, will give occasion unto many, who of themselves are too too
ready to iangle, to doubt of that whereof before they made no question. So that
by seeking to stay the course of a needeful controversy, you have both given
it a larger passage, and opened the door unto a question very fruitless in
our time. You know I deal in neither of these points. If you cannot be
stayed from entering into controversies that are very odious, and more
impertinent unto the matter in hand: it were good that the Church were further
and more soundly satisfied by you in these two points, which you alone in our
Church have publicly called in question. And for mine own part, when you
have done, I know not who will be your adversary. I see no reason why I
should deal in controversies of so small gain. Of this I am assured, that
neither Popish priests, nor any other ignorant guides are Ministers. Whether
the Element administered by them, be a Sacrament or no, look you to that, which
have in your Treatise debated that, which my writings never called into
question. If you will needs prove readers to be Ministers, because you cannot
get me to deny that which has been administered to be a Sacrament, you shall
but press that which will prove nothing. Your reason is, as if you should say,
that either all they which supply the places of ministers are ministers, or
else an inconvenience is likely to follow. A strange manner of demonstration:
Gods ordinance must needs be thrust out of the doors, because an
inconvenience would be likely to ensue the admitting of it. The cause will not
be thus answered at your hands, and I am sorry that a man so reverend in mine
eyes, has dealt so vnsubstantially, in a matter belonging to the service of
the everliving God: the slenderness of the reason is apparent. In the latter
end of the book I have further showed the same: thither I am to refer you
and the reader.


R. Some. You are come at the last to my treatise. In Gods name. You give out
that I dealt in two needelesse points. Not so, by your leave: for some in
London and other places, being seduced by unskillful teachers, denied them
both. You do not so, your words are as clear as the day, and are these: In
these two points M. Some etc. you have proved nothing that my writings have
denied. I thank you for this. You are now in a very good mood: but you will
not be so long. Virtutes latere no^ possunt. Full vessels will burst, if they
have not a vent. If you deny not that true baptism was delivered by popish
priests and unpreaching ministers, you cannot deny popish priests and
unpreaching ministers to have a calling. My reason is: Nullum Sacramentum sine
ministro: that is, No Sacrament without a minister. The wrangling spirits you
write of, are the more because of your absurd writings: but they are not so
many, thanks be to God, as you imagine. They which are so forward in iangling
of these points, are either of your humor, which is very bad, or
Anabaptisticall recusants, which is somewhat worse. You add these words, A
strange manner of demonstration etc. They do proclaim your ignorance: they do
not answer my reason. I perceive an argument ab absurdo, is a pille that will
not down with you. The slendernes of my reasons is repeated by you every
handwhile. It is like the Cuckoes song. It pleases you again to reverence me.
You are at more cost then I would have you. This reverence is either a burden
or a benefit. If a burden, lade some other with it: If a benefit, beneficium
non datur inuito, I will none of it.


I. Penry. Now I could well ouerpasse these two points, because of
themselves they contain nothing that I have withstoode: but in as much as you
have not only grounded them upon false principles, and such as in no wise can
be warranted by the Canon of the word, but also infer upon their grant,
that our readers are ministers, and consequently that it is no sin to
communicate with them: I am first to set down the state of the question, which
in deed is and ought to be decided between you and me concerning the Element
administered both by popish priests, and other unpreaching ministers: and
secondly to examine the grounds whereby you prove the Element already
delivered by them to be a sacrament, which you know I do not deny to be so.


R. Some. Because I have an ill memory, you tell me again and again, that you
deny not the sixth and seventh proposition of my treatise. It is well done of
you. I would you would keep you there. Only you mislike the foundation I
built on, and some consequents. I am sorry for your heaviness. My grounds, you
say, shall be examined. Spare them not. Arraigne them if you will. But what shall
I reason of, or look for at your hands? To be acquitted? no hope of that. To be
condemned? It is certain: for, it has pleased you to give sentence before
examination. Hard dealing: but I must abide it.


I. Penry. The question therefore is not whether the one or the other of them
have delivered a Sacrament in respect of the action done, but whether a
Christian going unto them for those holy seals, may be assured, that he can
receive the same at their hands. I affirm that we cannot: M. Some takes it
granted that we may. My warrant is out of the word, because there is no
promise made to us therein, that the action celebrated by such men, is a
Sacramental action: and where there is no promise, there can be no assurance,
because our assurance arises only of faith, which must be grounded upon the
promises set down in the word. We have no promise that they can deliver us
a Sacrament, because they are no ministers. For they only are enjoined by our
Savior Christ to deliver a Sacrament, neither do we know what he can deliver
which is no minister.


R. Some. No marvel though you dissent from me. Conueniet nulli, qui secum
etc. You are at war with your self. Your words agree like harp and
harrowe. One while, you deny not that popish priests and unpreaching
ministers have delivered a sacrament: An other while you know not what they
can deliver: for, they are, as you say, no ministers. To that end you deprave
Christ's speech in S. Matthew etc. What dealing is this? Sacrament, and no
Sacrament, and all with one breath? What? can such as are no ministers, deliver
a Sacrament? If you say, No: then popish Priests and unpreaching ministers,
neither have nor can deliver a Sacrament: for they are, as you say, no
ministers, that is, they have no calling at all. Your disciples are fit vessels
to receive any liquor of yours: but men of learning and wisdom, are otherwise
affected. They see clearly, that your dealing is absurd and dangerous.
Absurd: for it is void of truth. Dangerous: for it would breed confusion.
The magistrates, thanks be to God, neither do nor will suffer this bad
course of yours. If they should, fancies would (as weeds) grow too too fast,
and this noble land should receive more hurt then your head is worth. I doubt
not of their godly wisdom. The miserable estate of Germany heretofore, by
reason of Sectaries, may and will awake them. If you be restrained for your
gross errors, as some other are very justly: you may not cry, persecution,
persecution: your note must be poena perfidiae, that is, that you are justly
met with. Otherwise you sing out of tune.


I. Penry. So that the question is now grown to this issue, Whether Popish
priests and our unpreaching Ministers, be Ministers or no: whom if I can prove
to be none, then the matter is clear, that no man going unto them for the
Sacrament, can assure himself there to have the same. And this shall be a
general reason, equally belonging unto both the points handled by you, the
particulers whereof shall follow in their places.


R. Some. If you can prove that, I will commend and prefer you before
Martyr, Bucer, Calvin, Beza, and other very famous men and Churches. Yea, I
will deny her Majesty and a great number of her excellent subjects to be
baptized, which I am sure are baptized. The mark you level at, is (as I take
it) either to send many thousands to the Font again, or to make them guilty
of contempt of Baptism. One of these two must needs fall out, if Popish
priests, and unpreaching Ministers (without any calling) did administer a
Sacrament. You may level and level again at this mark: but you shall never
hit it. The Bow you shoot in, is too strong: and your arms are very weak.
Besides, you would feign have me confess that either Popish priests and
ignorant Ministers, are lawful and good Ministers of God: or that no Sacrament
was or is delivered by them. I will grant you neither. Not the first, for I
abhor that defense: Not the second, for I detest your Anabaptisticall
fancies. The next thing you deal in, is, that neither Popish priests nor
unpreaching Ministers are ministers. In which Treatise you bewray intolerable
both pride and ignorance. What I like or mislike in that discourse, appears
in the end of this book. Thither I refer you. I will now set down that part
of my Treatise which you fight against.


CHAP. 7. THEY WHICH WERE baptized in the Popish Church by Popish Priests,
received true Baptism, touching the substance of Baptism.
R. Some. THe Popish priests do retain the essential form of Christ's
baptism, that is, they do baptize in the name, not of Pope or idol, but of
the holy Trinity: therefore it is not man's, but Gods baptism, which is
delivered by them. If it be Gods baptism, I am sure it is true baptism.
Master Calvin calls them Catabaptists, which deny that we are rightly
baptized in the Popish Church. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 15. Sect. 16.


I. Penry. Now to the examination of your reason brought to prove that they
which were baptized in Popery, have received true baptism. Your conclusion,
you must remember, I do not deny, though your reason proves not the same,
which is thus framed. Whosoever deliver Gods baptism, they deliver true
baptism: But Popish priests deliver Gods baptism, therefore true baptism.
You have changed the conclusion from that which was done, unto that which is
done: But this oversight I omit. The assumption you prove thus: Whosoever
baptize in the name not of Pope or Idols, but of the holy Trinity, they
deliver Gods baptism: but Popish priests do baptize in the name of the holy
Trinity, therefore they deliver Gods baptism. Your proposition in this last
Sillogisme is most false, and such as upon the grant whereof, not only the
communicating with unpreaching ministers might be aduouched, but also Gods
whole ordinance in the institution of his holy Sacraments quite overthrown.
For if it were true, that there were no more required to make substantial
baptism (as you here require no more) but to baptize in the name of the
Trinity: then these impious absurdities would follow thereof. 1 That an
Amalekite might deliver true circumcision, as touching the substance. 2 That
true baptism might be administered unto a substance not capable of baptism:
But this odious instance I will not urge. 3. That a woman, 4. That any man not
being a Minister, as a child of five years old, a Turk, or Jew, might
deliver true baptism as touching the substance. For these pronouncing the
words of Institution, might retain, by your reason the essential form of
Christ's baptism, and so to use your own words, they baptizing not in the
name of Pope or of Idols, but of the holy Trinity, should deliver Gods
baptism and not man's? If Gods baptism, then true baptism I am sure: in like
manner, by this reason they should be Catabaptists, which deny men to be
rightly baptized by Turks or women.


R. Some. You deny not my conclusion. I must you say remember it. You have
sung this song very often. It needed not. A word had been enough if it had so
pleased you. You tell me, You will omit an oversight of mine. You deserve no
thanks for this courtesy: therefore I will give you none. But what I beseech
you is my oversight? Forsooth, I do account it as true baptism, which is
administered now as heretofore in the Popish Church. Call you this an oversight?
Was it true baptism yesterday and is it none to day? A marvelous case: This
is like those absurd fellows, of whom Tertullian writes in an other case:
Hodie presbyter, quicras laicus. De prescr. aduersus Haer. That is, to day a
Minister, but to morrow none. You are one of the stra^gest Divines that ever I
hard of. Very ignorant: very bold: very absurd. You are such a one as the
Apostle mentions, 1. Tim. 1.7. To proceed: my reason you say proves not my
proposition. In the judgment of any learned man it does: if not in yours, the
matter is not great: for your judgment is not worth a rush. The argument I
made is in deed M. Caluines, and a very sure one. It is allowed of all
Churches, that I can hear of. It pleases you to set down my reason thus:
Whosoever deliver Gods baptism, they deliver true baptism: But Popish priests
deliver Gods baptism, therefore true baptism. You say I prove my Minor thus:
Whosoever baptize in the name not of Pope or idols, but of the holy Trinity,
they deliver Gods baptism: But Popish priests etc. Your answer is that my
Mayor proposition is most false, and that upon the grant of it, many
absurdities would follow, etc. Your dealing with me is most absurd. It shall
appear thus. My Minor proposition set down by you, was: Popish priests
deliver Gods baptism. You say I prove it thus: Whosoever baptize in the name
not of Pope or idols, but of the holy Trinity, they deliver Gods baptism.
Upon this you infer many co^seseque^ts at your pleasure: viz. that Turks,
Jews, women, private men, children, might deliver true baptism touching the
substance. You pretend great sincerity. Answer me directly. I appeal to
your conscience, if you have any. Did I ever deliver such a Mayor proposition?
If I have, quote the page, set down the words. If I have not, (which I am well
assured of) you have grossly abused me. You may as easily fetch oil out of a
flint, as any such consequents out of my writings. The godly reader may see by
this little, how near you are driven, when you use such beggarly shifts to
bumbast your Treatise. Honest Matrones use no painting: but harlots do. Simple
truth needs no lies to welt and guard it: gross errors have need of such
Vermilion. They which have either heard my Sermons, or read my writings, do
know very well, that I allow none whatsoever without a calling, to administer
a Sacrament or preach the word, therefore neither woman nor private man. Yea,
mine own words in this present chapter are as clear as the sun: viz.
Popish priests do retain the essential form of Christ's baptism, etc.
which Popish priests have a calling though a faulty one. It is very strange
that you could not see this. I perceive, the veil of malice did hinder your
sight. The odious instance you mention, does best become your Spirit. It is
suitable to the rest of your writings, that is, most absurd and childish.


I. Penry. I would be fulsory, that the errors of the Catabaptists or
Anabaptists, could not be confured by you with sounder reasons, then this you
have brought: and I would be also sorry, that you should defend such absurd
consequents as I will drive you unto whether you will or no, unless you revoke
(as I hope you will) that which you have written. Pardon me, I pray you. I
deal as reverently as I may with you, retayning the majesty of the cause I
defend, and I deal not against you, but against an erroneous assertion, which
I now leave: desiring you very earnestly, that you would consider how
irreverently the ordinance of God in the holy Sacraments is dealt with, when
the same is made to depend upon the pronouncing of a few sill ables, without
any consideration either of the person who is to administer, or of the
substantial form of consecration contained in the exposition of the holy
institution of baptism, and the invocation of the Name of God, all which are
necessarily required in the administration of baptism, and could not possibly
be in Egypt, where all was and is covered under the darkness of a strange
tongue.


R. Some. You pretend great sorrow for me. I do not thank you for it. Be sorry
for your own absurdities, which are many and gross. The absurd consequents
which you will drive me perforce unto, unless I reuerse my writings, are
easily numbered. They are not one, thanks be to God. Your lusty speech can not
daunt me. It is but a visour. I have been long acquainted with the boisterous
speeches of such ignorant and bold companions as you are. Touching the
argument now in hand between us, spare me not: I desire no favor: I will not
revoke any jot I have set down. You desire pardon of me. If you recant your
Anabaptisticall errors, you shall have an easy suit: Otherwise, I do and will
account very basely of you. Has the cause you deal for, Majesty in it? You
might have spared the name of Majesty very well. It is too costly a garment
for such a leprous body, as your Treatise is. But I must bear with you. It is
the manner of Sectaries to use maiesticall and lofty words, that their ignorant
followers may commend them above the skies. The reverend dealing you talk of,
is idle speech. I have and do refuse it. The erroneous assertion which you
fight against, is not mine: I did never so much as once think of it. It is
yours: use it as you list. You may be bold with it. You give out, that I make
the Sacrament to depend upon the pronouncing of a few sillables, without
consideration of the person who is to administer it. My answer is, that you
are a wicked slaunderer. You require three things necessarily in the
administration of baptism. First, one which has calling to administer it. I
agree with you in this. Secondly, the substantial form of consecration
contained in the exposition of the holy institution of Baptism. I dissent from
you in this, and yet do like sound preaching as well as you. Lastly, the
invocation of the name of God. I say Amen to this. Then you add this Minor:
but these could not possibly be in Egypt, that is, in the Popish Church, etc.
Will you stand to the second branch of the three? If you do, I may justly
conclude, first that you account Consecration, not Christ's words in baptism,
as you ought, but some gloss upon Christ's words, which you ought not:
Secondly, that you deny any Sacrament to be delivered by Popish Priests, and
unpreaching Ministers; etc. And yet you have said often, and have desired me
to remember that you deny it not. I do not wring your words, and pull them
out of joint, as you do mine. Such dealing is an argument of a vile nature and
wrangling spirit. It is very far, I thank God, from me: I do detest it. If
I were of your humor, I could chase and pursue you hotly, for your
inconstancy and error: Inconstancy, for affirming and denying one and the
self same particular: Error, for giving out that the word preached is
necessarily required to the Essence of the Sacrament. If a sermon were
necessarily required to the Essence of a Sacrament, these absurdities would
follow: First, the Sacraments are dead Sacraments, that is, seals without
writing, and plain blankes, if there want a sermon: Secondly, if Baptism be
no sacrament without a sermon, then can it not regenerate or be effectual to
any which either have been, or are baptized without a sermon.

Objection of the fantastical crew.

The Popish Priests have no lawful calling: therefore it is no true Baptism
which is delivered by them.


R. Some. The Argument follows not. I confess that Popish priests have no
lawful calling: yet they have a calling, though a faulty one. They which are
not lawfully called unto the ministry, are to be accounted in another place
then they which have no calling. Caiphas was not in deed the lawful high
Priest: for he entered by money, and the Priesthood in his time was rent in
pieces: yet because he sat in the high Priests chair, he was accounted the
high Priest. A faulty vocation may hurt him that usurps an office, but it
does not defile those things which are done by that party. This is M. Bezaes
judgment in his 142. question.

If any shall gather of this, that I allow the Popish Priesthood, he deserves
rather a censor, then confuter. For I confess, that Sacerdotium Papisticum est
sacrilegium: that is, that the Popish Priesthood is Sacrilege.


I. Penry. Your distinction that Popish Priests have a calling, though a
faulty, is a begging of the question. For as I have showed, Popish Priests
have no calling at all in the Church, and therefore how can they sit in the
chair of the ministry? Is there a ministry out of the Church? Caiphas
priesthood comes afterward to be considered of.


R. Some. The distinction which you say is mine, is in deed M. Bezaes. It is
termed by you a begging of the question. Nay rather, your answer to M. Beza
is beggarly, and none at all. If Popish priests (as you write) have no calling
at all: first, Luther, which had imposition of hands in the Popish Church, had
no external calling at all: Secondly, in your judgment, either no Baptism
was delivered by Popish Priests in the Popish Church: or, Baptism, if any were
in the Popish Church, was administered by private men: for they which have no
calling at all, are private men. I need not drive you to absurd consequents:
you cast your self headlong into them, as into a dangerous quauemire. Your
Treatises wherein you have sown gross errors thick and threefolde, are
witnesses enough of this. Are not your disciples most unhappy, which depend
on you as on another Pope? You ask whether there is a ministry out of the
Church. What my judgment is, appears hereafter. In the mean time, you deny
not, that there is true baptism (therefore consequently a ministry) in the
Popish Church which (you say) is no Church. Caiphas Priesthood has both
searched and found you out. It bewrays your gross ignorance.


CHAP. 8. THEY ARE THE SACRAments of Baptism and the holy Supper, which are
delivered in the Church of England, by unpreaching Ministers.
I. Penry. YOu know M. Some, what I mean by an unpreaching Minister, namely
every one, learned or unlearned, that cannot show himself by the good trial
of his gifts, to have that fitness to reach, whereof we read 2. Tim. 2. 1.
Tim. 3. Which ability the Lord does not ordinarily bestow upon any in these
our days, without the knowledge of the Arts, especially the two handmaides of
all learning, Rhetoric, and Logique, and the two original tongues wherein
the word was written.


R. Some. If none are to be accounted ministers ordinarily, which are not
furnished, as you prescribe and require: many in the primitive Church after
Christ's Ascension were no ordinary ministers: Valerius a godly man, whom
Augustine succeeded at Hippo in Afrique, was no ordinary minister. Possid. in
vita Aug. cap. 5. Samsucius, a godly Bishop, was no ordinary minister. Aug.
epist. 168. Augustine, which was a famous man, was no ordinary minister. Many
profitable pastors in this age, are no ordinary ministers. Yea, M. Penryes
ignorant Leuiticall priests, whom he allows and defends to be lawful
Priests, were no ordinary ministers.

If such as were baptized in the popish Church, received true baptism, I trust
they are rightly baptized in the Church of England, which are baptized by
unpreaching ministers.


I. Penry. The rest of your book is now to be examined. Your conclusion, page
22. that they which were baptized by unpreaching ministers, are rightly
baptized as touching the substance of baptism, I do not gainesay. Your
reasons are weak: for how could we prove your conclusion, if men should
deny popish baptism, to be true baptism, as I do not, you know, and he
should do me great injury, which would lay that to my charge. Were it
sufficient for us to say they were Catabaptists which deny popish baptism?
how could this be proved? and this should not prove the matter doubted of.


R. Some. Do you answer of this fashion? this is as far off, as York from
London. The sum of your answer is, that my reasons are weak, and that you
deny not my conclusion. Are my reasons weak, because you say so? If they were
like your senseles answers, they were strange stuff. If you deny not the^,
which were baptized by unpreaching ministers, to be rightly baptized: it is a
necessary consequent, even in your own judgment: first, that either
unpreaching ministers are ministers, or that private men may deliver a
Sacrament: secondly, that it was and is a Sacrament, which is administered
without a Sermon. They which deny that such as were baptized in the popish
Church, received true baptism, touching the substance of baptism, are
Catabaptists in the judgment of all learned writers and reformed Churches. I
rest in their judgment.


R. Some. If such as were baptized by popish priests in the popish Church, and
by unpreaching ministers in the Church of England, received no Sacrament, many
gross absurdities would follow. First, very many are unbaptized: and if they
be unbaptized, they sin grievously, in not presenting themselves to the holy
Sacrament.


I. Penry. Shall we say that they sin, in not presenting themselves to be
baptized? To whom should they present themselves? who would baptize them?


R. Some. What mean scholar in either of the Universities? yea, what Russet
coat in the Country would shape such an answer? In stead of answering my
reasons, you ask me two questions: I must be content to answer, there is no
remedy. Your first question is: Shall we say that they sin in not presenting
themselves to be baptized? My answer is: they do sin: no learned and godly
man doubts of it: my reasons are: First, Baptism is externus character, that
is, the outward mark and badge of a Christian. so writes that famous man M.
Fox, Cap. 14. in Apocal. Secondly, the contempt of circumcision was grievously
punished, Genesis 17. Yea, the Angel would have killed Moses, because his son
was not circumcised, Exodus 4. Thirdly, they in the primitive Church which had
excellent graces, presented themselves to baptism: which baptism before, they
had not. So did many in Jerusalem after Peter's sermon, Act. 2. many in Samaria
after Philips sermons, Act. 8. many in Corinth after Paul's sermons, Act. 18.
Your second question is: to whom should they present them selves: who would
baptize them? my answer is: after a public profession of their faith in the
christian assembly, they must present themselves to be baptized of the
minister. So did Cornelius in Caesarea, Act. 10. Lidia in Philippi, Acts. 16.
Crispus and Gaius in Corinth. Act. 18.1. Cor. 1. and a Jew of late years in
London. I speak now of such as be of years, and are unbaptized. I hope you
will not gather of this, that I shut our infants from the holy Sacrament of
Baptism: if you should, you deserve rather to be censured by the Magistrate,
then to be confuted by argument.


R. Some. If such as were baptized by popish priests in the popish Church, and
by unpreaching ministers in the Church of England received no Sacrament, a
great number have sinned grossly in partaking the holy Supper. My reason is:
none uncircumcised might eat the Passover, Exo. 12.48. therefore none
unbaptized, may receive the holy Supper.


I. Penry. Admit they sinned in receiving the Lords Supper, before they were
baptized, should they therefore be bereaved of the comfort of baptism? to
affirm that this were a going backward, is no reason, because they were
persuaded that they had baptism, otherwise they would not have been so far
on their journey, until they had been accompanied therewith: But they omitted
baptism of ignorance, and not of contempt: theref^^e they deny the receiving
of the Lords Supper, to have been a sin any more, then it would be a sin in
them now to receive the Lords Supper, if they could not have Baptism.
Baptism they would have, if they could orderly come by the same. Because men
will be so injurious unto them, as to deny them the comfort of baptism, which
they cannot have, should they deny to themselves the comfort of the Lords
Supper which they may have? Yea, but no uncircumcised might eat the pascal
lamb. Exodus 12.48 True: But what shall we say unto those that were
uncircumcised in the wilderness forty years almost? Ios. 5.5. Did they never
eat the passover all that time? If they did, the place of Exodus will be
quickly answered. It is plain that the passover was celebrated in the
wilderness once at the least. Nom. 9.1. If every year, why should the godly
of the family be excluded from the action, the cause why they were
uncircumcised not being in them?


R. Some. You answer very strangely. Your wits, I think, were a wool
gathering. If they sinned in partaking the Lords supper before they were
baptized, there is great reason they should abstain from the holy table,
until they be baptized: which Baptism (if the case so required) might
orderly and easily be come by. But they omitted baptism, you say, of
ignorance, not of contempt: therefore they sinned not, which being unbaptized
did partake the holy Supper. I deny your argument: My reason is: Ignora^tia
excusat non a toto, sed a tanto: that is, Ignorance makes the fault less, it
does not make it none. M. Penry at the length touches one part of my reason:
but by his leave I will first set down my whole reason, and then his answer.
My reason is this: None uncircumcised might eat the passover. Exodus 12.48.
therefore, none unbaptized may receive the holy Supper. M. Penryes answer is
contained in these words: True, But what shall we say unto those that were
uncircumcised in the wilderness forty years almost. Joshua. 5.5. Did they
never eat the Passover all that time? If they did, the place of Exodus will
be quickly answered. It is plain that the Passover was celebrated in the
wilderness once at the least. Nombers 9.1. If every year, why should the
godly of the family be excluded from the action, the cause why they were
uncircumcised not being in them? Call you this answering? There was never any
such I am sure in Cambridge or Oxford. It came I think out of Barbary. I hope
you are ashamed of it by this time. You ask me whether they which were
uncircumcised in the wilderness almost forty years, did all that time never
eat the Passover? My answer is, that no such thing appears in the text:
and where the holy Ghost stays his pen, it becomes us to stay our
tongues. Yea, it is clear in Iosue, that the Israelites, after they were
circumcised, did keep the feast of the Passover. Ios. 5.8.10. You add, If
the Israelites being uncircumcised, did partake the Passover, that the place
in Exodus will be quickly answered. You say true. If the sky fall, you shall
catch Larkes. When you prove this (if) of yours, I will accept your answer.
Till then, you shall pardon me. You proceed in this sort, It is plain you say
that the Passover was celebrated in the wilderness, once at the least, Numb.
9. Will you conclude of this: therefore they which were uncircumcised did eat
the Passover? If you do, I deny your argument: My reason is: If they had
admitted any uncircumcised to the Passover, they had profaned the holy
Sacrament. The words in the text are manifest: If a stranger dwell with thee,
and will observe the Passover of the Lord, let him circumcise all the males,
that belong unto him, and then let him come and observe it, and he shall be as
one that is borne in the land: for, no uncircumcised person shall eat
thereof. One law shall be to him that is borne in the land, and to the
stranger that dwells among you. Exodus 12. An other reason of yours is: the
cause why the Israelites were uncircumcised, was not in them: therefore the
godly uncircumcised of the family might not be barred from the Passover. I
answer: your argument is naught, and very saucy: for, you comptroll
Almighty God by whom they were barred. This is no pride, M. Penry. I might
say to you as the Apostle in another case: O man, who art thou that pleadest
against God? has not the potter power of the Clay, etc. Romans 9. I confess
that the Israelites ceased from circumcision in the wilderness: and yet were not
faulty in omitting and deferring circumcision: for, they had Gods special
dispensation to do so, because they were in continual travail: and people
being newly circumcised, could abide no labor. For the surer proof of this
point: vidz. that none which are known to be unbaptized, may either present
themselves, or be admitted to the holy Supper, I offer these reasons to the
godly Reader. First, Baptism is an entrance into the visible church: the holy
Supper is a confirmation of this entrance. Secondly, they which were of years
in the primitive Church were first baptized, and afterward received the holy
Supper. This is manifest in these words of S. Luke: Then they that gladly
received his word, were baptized: and the same day, there were added to the
Church about three thousand souls. And they continued in the Apostles doctrine
and fellowship, and breaking of bread and prayers, etc. Act. 2. By breaking of
bread, is understood the partaking of the Lords Supper. Thirdly, None may
present themselves to the holy table, before due examination of themselves, 1.
Cor. 11. This examination consists of faith and repentance: which faith and
repentance are not in them, which either wittingly omit, or wilfully contemn
the holy Sacrament of baptism: which baptism is the Sacrament of repentance.
Matthew. 3. Calu. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 19. sect. 17. Lastly, all famous men and
Churches are of my side. If master Penry dissent, it is no great matter. His
writings are not as the laws of the Medes and Persians, etc.


R. Some. If such as were baptized by popish Priests in the popish Church, and
by unpreaching ministers in the Church of England, received no Sacrament, many
excellent men have usurped the preachers office. My reason is: It is unlawful
for any man to be a public teacher in the visible Church, which is not by
baptism graft into, and so become a member of the visible Church. Our Savior
Christ was baptized of John in Iordane before he preached. Mat. 3. and 4. Chap.
The Apostle Paul was baptized of Ananias in Damascus, before he preached. Act.
9.


I. Penry. None uncircumcised might minister before the altar. True: but did
none of the Levites that were borne in the wilderness, teach Jacob the law, or
offer the incense of his God in all those forty years?


R. Some. The truth I perceive, is mighty. It makes the enemy many times to
confess it: so does it you in this place. Your words are clear for me, and
flat against your self. You grant that none uncircumcised might minister
before the altar. I thank you for it. Of this I conclude: therefore none
unbaptized may be a public teacher in the visible church. Thus, you see by
the way, which may not be forgotten, that an argument may be drawn from the
Leuiticall priesthood to the ministry of the new testament: which priesthood
and ministry are not twins, are vnmatcheable and cannot stand together. I
confess my self greatly bound unto you: you deal very liberally with me: for
you reach me arguments (as weapons) to smite your self withal. M. Penry a
little after in steed of answering my reason, asks a question after his
usual manner. Did (says he) none of the uncircumcised Levites teach Jacob the
law, or offer incense, etc. I answer: First, that no such thing appears in
the text: Secondly, that it is against the practice of the Leuiticall priefts
in the old Testament. Did ever any student deal so childishly, as M. Penry
does? is not he a very fit man to censure famous men and Churches? Calvin,
Martyr, Beza, Augustine, etc. are no body with him. I did never see him that I
know of: but, ex vnguibus leonem: I see by his answers what a deep clarke he
is.


I. Penry. Thus many things, you see, might be objected against your reasons,
and I take the objections to be of some weight. It had been well, you had
considered of them, before you had published your book. And the Baptism by
unpreaching ministers, must have better proofs, then any you have brought as
yet, or else I fear me, our posterities will not be satisfied therewith.


R. Some. Your wayghtie objections are invincible in your eye. Suum cuique
pulchrum. But they have neither Suczum nor Sanguinem: they have no pith in
them: they are lighter then any feather, and bewray your ignorance. You wish I
had considered before hand of your objections: Satis pro imperio. You are by
your leave a little too lordly: had I nothing to think of but of your absurd
fancies? you imagine very basely of me. My arguments for baptism by
unpreaching ministers are such, as you are unable to stir: for proof of
this, I refer the reader to your vnscholerlike answers. Your fear that the
posterity will not rest in my reasons, is a vain fear, etc.


R. Some. The unpreaching ministers do add the word unto the Element in the
administration of Baptism: therefore it is the Sacrament of Baptism which is
delivered by them. Accedit verbum ad Elementum, and fit Sacramentum. August.
Tract. 80. in Johan. that is, The word is added to the Element, and it becomes
a Sacrament. By (word) in Baptism is understood the word of Institution,
which is, to baptize in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
etc. Of this judgment are Beza confess. Cap. 4. Art. 47. and Musculus de sig.
Sacram. Art. 4.


I. Penry. Your next reason, page 23. is slender. Readers pronounce the words
of Institution with the delivery of the Element, therefore (say you) they
deliver a Sacrament. You have once already alleged this to prove popish
baptism, page 20. I have answered it page 29. 30. 31. And the place of Matthew.
28.19. brought in by you page 23. proves your consequent to be false. For it
shows, that he, who is to baptize, must be also able to teach, which
ability is wanting in our Readers. Go, says our Savior, and teach all
nations, baptizing etc. Therefore if he, that delivers the Element, be not
able to teach, we cannot be assured, that it is a Sacrament: Because the
commandment is not generally to all that could pronounce the words of
Institution, being thereunto permitted by the corruption of the time, but
particularly limited unto them that can teach, unless you will say that the
Lord bids them go teach, who cannot teach: which were not once to be
conceived of his Majesty.


R. Some. Whatsoever passes from me is slender in your opinion. All that you
deliver, is ex tripode, an oracle at the least. You answered before wisely and
like your self. So you do in this place: semper idem: you are no changeling.
You deny my consequent, and do add for your reason an objection set down by
me a little after. My answer to that objection is extant and very direct. I
rest in it: I did never say or think that Almighty God did either command or
allow any to be a priest in the old, or a minister in the new Testament, which
had not gifts in some measure. It pleases you to write in your treatise, that
unfitness to teach made not a nullitie of the Leuiticall priests office. If you
mean, that it made not a nullitie before God, you conceive very basely of
Almighty God: for, you make him to allow ignorant men to be his priests in
the old Testament: which absurd course would have brought great dishonor to
his Majesty, and great hurt to the Church of the Israelites. I do now but
touch this gross and blasphemous paradoxe of yours: and (with the dog of
Egypt) do, as it were, sippe and away: but I will examine it more surely
hereafter, that the reader may see clearly, as in a Crystal glass, what
base ware you commend unto us for excellent divinity.


I. Penry. The corruption in the Church of England, that the delivery of the
Element should be severed from the preaching of the word, is a breach of Gods
ordinance, you cannot deny, Matthew. 28.19. Acts 20.7. and therefore ungodly and
intolerable. Whether it make the action frustrate or no, that is not the
question.


R. Some. You mean, as I take it, by the word added to the Element, the word
preached: but you do not say flatly here (though you have a little before)
that the want of a Sermon makes the action frustrate, that is, the sacrament
to be no sacrament. I confess that Paul preached at Troas in the
administration of the holy Supper, Act. 20.7. and that the Apostles did teach
the Gentiles before they baptized them, Mat. 28.19. But no learned man will
conclude of this, that a Sermon is simply necessary to the Essence of a
Sacrament. If you will know, what I think of sound preaching before the
administration of the holy sacrament, my answer is, that I do greatly both like
and commend it. Yea, I do wish with all my heart, that all the Churches in
England had able teachers to perform that duty. This mind was I ever of,
since I knew what Gods religion and good divinity meant. Of this mind are
all godly and learned men in the Church of England.

An objection of the fantastical sort.

Christ said to his Apostles, Go and teach all nations, baptizing etc. Matt.
28.19. Therefore, if the word preached, be not added to the Element, it is no
sacrament of Baptism.

Answer.

The Argument is very weak. I confess, that Christ commanded his Apostles,
first to teach such as were of years and alients from his religion, and then to
baptize them. If the Gentiles had not been first taught, they would not have
offered themselves, nor the Apostles admitted them to the holy sacrament of
Baptism. If any will conclude of this place in saint Matthewe, that none
whatsoever may be admitted to baptism, before they be taught: they shut our
infants from the holy sacrament, and therefore are Catabaptists.

Master Penry answers nothing to this. So am I eased of some labor.


R. Some. The unpreaching Ministers do add (verbum aedificans) that is, an
edifying word, to the Elements, in the administration of the holy Supper:
therefore, etc.


I. Penry. Unpreaching Ministers do add an edifying word unto the Element,
therefore it is a Sacrament. This reason is the same with the former. Which
shows the great nakedness and poverty of the cause, that one reason must be
thrice perjured to prove the goodness of it, which notwithstanding it can not
show. I deny the antecedent, and consequent.


R. Some. Your eyes are not matches. If they were, you might have seen very
easily, that no reason of mine is perjured once, much less, thrice. I am
persuaded that if you be not well coniured by the Magistrate, you will prove a
strange body. You are far gone already. Strange fancies have almost consumed
you. The Magistrates discipline is the fittest medicine for you. If that will
not recover you, your disease is desperate. You deny both my antecedent, and
consequent. My antecede^t was that unpreaching Ministers do add an edifying
word to the Element. That there is verbum aedificans, I prove it thus. The
sum of Christ's Sermon in the Institution and administration of the holy
Supper by himself is the word of Institution in the administration of the
holy Supper in the Church of England: therefore, unless we will deny the sum
of Christ's Sermon, to be an edifying word, (which no learned man will deny)
we must confess, that we have verbum aedificans, that is, an edifying word,
in the administration of the holy Supper with us.


I. Penry. Your reason of the antecedent, that the recital of the sum of
Christ's Sermon, that is, the words of Institution, is an edifying word, is
falfe, and maintains charming. For do you think, that the word of
institution, being, as you say, the sum of Christ's Sermon, is then an
edifying word, whenever it is recited by a profane person, even in the
profanation of Gods ordinance? Look 2. Tim. 4.3. and you shall find that the
word barely read, and to no other purpose, then to edify by reading, is not
wholesome doctrine. The popish priest either without or within the book,
pronounces in his dark Latin, the sum of Christ's sermon: Is that an
edifying word, which he profanely breaths? The word of God uttered, is not
an edifying word, unless it be vtered according to the ordinance, both in
regard of the persons that utter the same, and the end wherefore it is
uttered. No learned man will deny the Lords prayer rightly said, to be an
edifying word. And yet, by your leave, no learned man, unless he favors
charming or popery, will say that the Lords prayer pronounced by an ignorant
man in a strange tongue, or profaned by a witch, is an edifying word.


R. Some. M. Penry is now in his Ruff. His pride and ignorance appear in
their colors. They are proclaimed even by himself. He denies that the
recital of the sum of Christ's Sermon, by an unpreaching minister, is an
edifying word: he says, it maintains charming. Can we think, that this man
is guided by Gods spirit, whose heart conceived, and pen brought forth such
blasphemy? That the reader may be assured, that the sum of Christ's Sermon,
is an edifying word, I will first set down the word of Institution, which is
the sum of Christ's Sermon, and then prove the point. The word of institution
in the holy Supper, is: The Lord Jesus the same night that he was betrayed,
took bread: and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat:
this is my body, which is broken for you: this do ye in remembrance of me.
After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, this
cup is the new Testament in my blood: this do as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me. 1. Cor. 11. That this word of Institution does edify, it is
manifest: for it teaches us, first, who did institute the holy Supper: The
Lord Jesus. Secondly, at what time: The same night that he was betrayed.
Thirdly, what the Elements are in the holy Supper: Bread and wine. Fourthly,
what our Savior Christ did: He gave thanks, he brake the bread, etc.
Fifthly, what the Lord Jesus said when he delivered the Elements: Take,
eat, etc. Does this maintain charming? Is there not edifying in this? If you
be not void of grace, be ashamed and sorry for your blasphemous levvdnes. An
other particular which you reach unto us, is a bird of the same feather: viz.
that the word barely read, and to no other purpose then to edify by reading,
is not wholesome doctrine. For proof of this gross and blasphemous error, you
use three reasons. The first is out of S. Paul to Timothee: The time will come,
when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine: but having their ears itching,
shall after their own lusts get them an heap of teachers, 2. Tim. 4.3.
Therefore the word barely read, and to no other purpose then to edify by
reading, is no wholesome doctrine. This reason cleaues together like a broken
potsheard. I deny your argument: The Apostle in that Chapter commands
Timothee to attend carefully upon preaching, etc. His reason is: Many will
loath and hate wholesome doctrine: they will choose such teachers as will tickle
their ears and feed their humors. 2. Tim. 4.3. Such graceless people were
in the time of Esaias and Micheas. Esa. 30. Mich. 2. Such were they of Anathoth
in Ieremies time Ier. 11. Such a one was Amaziah of Ieroboams Court in Amos
time. Am. 7. Such were in the Churches of Corinth and Galatia in S. Paul's time.
Such are they of the fantastical crewe in our time, which pike out teachers
as rot out of an apple. etc. Do you not perceive M. Penry, how fitly saint
Paul to Timothee does serve your turn? you have been very bold with him. You
have used the holy Apostle as Cacus did Hercules oxen: therefore I may not
think much that my writings are depraved by you. Your second reason is this:
the sum of Christ's sermon, pronounced by a Popish priest, either without or
within the book in his dark Latin, is not an edifying word: therefore the
word barely read, and to no other purpose then to edify by reading, is not
wholesome doctrine. Your Antecedent might have been kept in: No man denies it.
It is confessed by all of the religion, that the scriptures delivered in an
unknown tongue do not edify. The Apostle proves this notably. 1. Cor. 14.
In linguis quas non intelligimus surdi sumus, Cic. in Tusc. that is, when we
hear a strange language we are as deaf men. But I deny your Argument: it is
as strange as the Popish priests latin is dark. Every child may see the
weakness of it. But I must be content and put it up. It is such ware as you
have. He that wa^teth wood, must burn turfe. Your third reason is: No learned
man unless he favors charming or Popery, will say that the Lords prayer
pronounced by an ignorant man in a strange tongue, or profaned by a witch, is
an edifying word: therefore the word barely read and to no other purpose then
to edify by reading, is not wholesome doctrine. My answer is, I deny your
Argument. It is as weak as a staff of reed. This last reason is in deed the
same with the former. I might tell you if I listed, that your cause is poor
and naked, when one reason must be twice perjured, etc. verbum sapienti. You
know the rest: It came out of your wardroabe. Did any student ever broche such
stuff as this? You need not study for these arguments. You may deliver them
ex tempore, and power them out by the dosens. Many Carre-men in London can make
better arguments then these. I may say to you as Archidamus said to his son,
which was more aduenturous then became him: Either add more strength or be
less confident. You have heard M. Penryes invincible reasons. Consider now
these words of his: No learned man (says he) will deny the Lords prayer
rightly said, to be an edifying word. I thank you for this, and do conclude
thus against you: Therefore the Scripture barely read, and to no other purpose
then to edify by reading, is wholesome doctrine: for, the Lords prayer is a part
of the holy Scripture. Thus at unawares, he has overthrown his former fancy.
I see now of what force the truth is. It cannot be hidden long. It will break
out at the last, as the Sun through a black cloud. It has pleased M. Penry
to deliver an other strange point of divinity in these words: viz. The word
of God uttered, is not an edifying word, unless it be uttered according to the
ordinance, both in regard of the persons that utter the same, and the end
wherefore it is uttered. Is not this (M Penry) to make the person to give
credit to the holy word of God? which positio^ is very gross and blasphemous.
It is a certain truth in divinity: Scriptura est, (...), that is, the
Scripture is of credit in it self: it needs not to borowe credit of any man
whatsoever. The reason is: the Scripture is, (...), that is, inspired, not of
man, but of God. 2. Tim. 3.16. 2. pet. 1.21. For the clear proof of this
point, viz. that the reading of the holy Scriptures does edify, I have set
down sound reasons in the former part of this Treatise. Thither I refer the
godly Reader. M. Penry besides my Antecedent, denied my consequent: viz. that
it is not therefore a Sacrament, because unpreaching Ministers do add an
edifying word unto the Element. His reason, such as it is, is contained in his
own words which follow.


I. Penry. Concerning your consequent, do you think, that every one, that can
add an edifying word unto the Element, may minister a Sacrament? it is not so:
for Paul requires the words of every Christian (women and all) to be edifying
words, Ephesians. 4.29. even in common talk. Shall therefore the Element
administered by every Christian, be a Sacrament? God forbid. And yet every
Christian can add the sum of Christ's Sermon unto the Element, in the
administration of the Supper, which if it were sufficient, as by your reason it
is, then women, children, etc. Idiots that could not read might deliver a
Sacrament.


R. Some. You want matter to work on. That is the cause, why you shoot so
much at rouers in your Treatise. If the common speech of every Christian must
bring edification and grace, that is, godly profit to the hearers, Ephe. 4:
What shall we think of you, whose writings have neither grace nor salt, that
is, are neither profitable nor sauory, as the Apostle requires, Colos. 4. You
would bear the world in hand, that, in my judgment, every one which can
add an edifying word to the Eleme^t, may deliver a Sacrament: and so
consequently, women, children, idiots. I am very far, I thank God, from
this fancy. If you had any spark of good nature or common sense in you, you
would not father that on me continually, whereof, not so much as the least
print appears in my writings. I perceive the black More cannot change his
skin, nor the Leopard his spots. Your absurd collections are evidences of
your spirit. They shall never trouble me: I will not do you that pleasure.
Fructus laedentis in dolor laesi. Tertul. de pat. that is, the pleasure which
an enemy takes, is in the grief of him that is hurt.


R. Some. If any will conclude of this, that I mislike preaching before the
administration of the Sacrament, he does me great wrong.

M. Penry says nothing to this.

An objection of the fantastical sort.

Unpreaching Ministers are not apt to teach: therefore they are no Sacraments
which are delivered by them.


R. Some. The Argument folowes not. My reason is, Many Jewish priests were
both ignorant and dissolute in Esaias and Christ's time. Esaias 28.7. Matt. 9.36.
But the sacrifices offered, and the Sacraments reached by them, were both
Sacrifices and Sacraments. Otherwise, the Prophets which were at Jerusalem,
when the Jewish Church was full of corruption, would not have been present
at, and partakers of the Sacrifices in Salomons Temple. Calu. Instit. lib. 4.
cap. 1. sect. 18, 19.

An objection of the fantastical sort.

Ignorant Ministers are not apt to teach: therefore no Ministers, and
consequently, they are no Sacraments which are delivered by them.


R. Some. The Argument folovves not. I grant that it is of the substance of a
lavvful and good Minister of God to be apt to teach: but it is not of the
essence of a Minister simply: for which it is sufficient to have the Churches
calling. This appears clearly in the Magistrate. The holy Ghost requires
that none should be chosen a Magistrate, unless he were a man of courage,
fearing God, dealing truly, and hating covetousness. Exodus 18.21. When such are
advanced as defile their hands, either with filthy bribes, as Felix did, or
with barbarous cruelty, as Abimelech and Herod did, shall we say that they
are no Magistrates? I confess, they are not singled out by the electors
according to Almighty Gods direction in his holy Bible: but they are
Magistrates notwithstanding, and we are commanded by the Lord to perform all
duty unto them, saluo officio, that is, our duty being reserved to the
highest Magistrate, which is God himself.


I. Penry. The reason concluding unpreaching ministers to be none, because
they are not apt to teach, you have twice repeated within one twelve lives, and
made two several objections thereof. That was an oversight: the sufficiency
of the argument, I have showed to be such, as Caiphas ministry and Herod's
magistracy brought in by you, will never answer the same. Both of them, with
the reason from the outward calling of readers, I refer to your next chapter,
where they are repeated: thither now I am come, where the contradictory of the
question shall be set down and proved briefly: because the nullitie of the
unpreaching ministry may be in stead of a thousand reasons to prove the same.


R. Some. My objections are several, whatsoever you say. Any one that has but
half an eye, may easily see it by my several answers. I have set down the
objections as they were delivered to me. The confutation of my answers, if it
be any, is forth coming, you say, in an other place. I have sought for it,
but I cannot find it, It is shrunk, I fear, in the wetting.


R. Some. If any shall gather of this I have set down, that I undertake the
defense of ignorant ministers: my answer is, that my writings and Sermons, are
not Ajax shield to cover them, but the Lords sword to cut them. I confess
freely, that I am very far from opening either the Church door to ignorant
ministers, or the pulpit door to unskillful preachers: which unskillful
preachers give Gods religion a greater blow then the ignorant ministers: for
in stead of dividing the word of truth aright, they speak at all adventures,
yet very boldly: and as unskillful Apothecaries, deliver quid pro quo, chafe
for wheat, and strange fancies for Gods holy truth. By such absurd fellows,
many Churches and excellent men in this land, have been greatly disquieted, and
the good course of religion has been greatly hindered. The cause of this sore,
is intolerable pride, and gross ignorance in these bad companions, and want
of care in the Magistrates.


I. Penry. I am as far from accounting the unskillful preachers which speak
hand over head they care not what, (against whom your complaint is very just)
to be ministers: as I am from acknowledging many of our absucde doctors to be
apt to teach, who can bring nothing into ye Pulpit, but that which other men
have written: and that very often so fit to the purpose of edification, as the
reason from the corner to the staff is soundly concluded. In these three
sorts of supposed ministers (and there could be a fourth added unto them)
confisteth the woe of our Church.


R. Some. Is my complaint just against unskillful preachers? Do you, M. Penry,
wipe them out of the roll of ministers? Will you shut the pulpit door against
them? Take heed what you do. You bid your self loss. Your kingdom will
then fall to the ground: for unskillful preachers are your Bulwarks and
Blockhouses to support your fancies. The absurd Doctors you mention, shall
have no defense of me. If they preach as you write, for that duty and love I
owe and bear to the Church and Universities, I would both they and you were
disgraded: and they kept out of the Pulpit, and your writings out of the
Press. I hope some good will grow by your writings. First, that the
Universities will take better heed, upon whom they bestow their degrees:
Secondly, that the Magistrates will look better to the Printing houses. By
the fourth sort of supposed Ministers which you write of, I know not whom
you mean. I could guess shrevvdly, but I vvil not, because I will not
misconstrue you. If they or any other be the murraine of our Church, I vvoulde
they were either reformed or removed.


R. Some. If any shall ask me what the true causes are, why so many unfit men
are the Churches ministers: I answer, either great want of judgment, or great
corruption in such, which do ordeine and prefer them. The sin of these men
is very great: for they dishonor Almighty God, and do grossly abuse the
people of the land. This disease will be healed, when the Churches maintenance
is not disposed of by them which have the golden dropsy, but is freely given
to worthy and painful students, which will neither fish with the silver
hook, nor open the Church door with a silver key.


M. Penry says nothing to this.

CHAP. 9. THE GODLY ARE NOT polluted which receive the Sacrament at the hands
of an unpreaching Minister.
I. Penry. BY pollution I doubt not you mean sin.


R. Some. I do so.


R. Some. The Sacraments are Gods ordinance: the ministers ignorance can not
pervert the nature of Gods ordinance.


I. Penry. The Ministers ignorance, say you, page 28. cannot pervert Gods
ordinance: and again page 29. the Sacraments are not the worse for the
ignorance of the minister, etc. All this I grant, but bare readers are not
ministers, and the doubt is, whether the action performed by them be the
ordinance of God, whether it be a Sacrament. These be the questions which you
ought to have proved, and not have taken them as principles, though you do
this the third and fourth time.


R. Some. Your writings are like the wind, not long in one corner. Before you
denied it not to be a Sacrament, which was delivered by unpreaching ministers:
here you doubt of it. You erred either then, or now. Were he not a wise man,
that would follow your humor? The rock he should build on, should be
nothing but sand: his building should be as the wall in Ezechiel, dawbed with
untempered mortar. If unpreaching ministers have administered a Sacrament in
your judgment, I am sure you cannot deny them to have a calling: for you will
not account it a Sacrament, which is delivered by private men. But let us see
what you write in an other place of this argument.


I. Penry. If unpreaching ministers be no ministers, and if I cannot be assured
to receive a Sacrament, but only at the hands of a minister: then cannot I
assure my self, that an unpreaching minister can deliver a Sacrament unto me:
and therefore it is unlawful for me, or any Christian, to go unto an
unpreaching minister for the Sacraments: if unlawful, then a sin: if a
sin, then the godly are polluted, which go unto them for the Sacraments.


R. Some. If unpreaching ministers were no ministers (as you affirm and I
deny) then I would confess that a Sacrament might as easily be had of them,
as water of a dry ditch. But, what if some did minister the Sacrament in the
Apostles times, which were not preachers? very famous men are of that
judgment. Calvin upon these words of the Apostle, Christ sent me not to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel, 1. Cor. 1.17. writes thus: There were few
to whom the office of preaching was committed: but the administration of
Baptism was committed to many. Martyr writes thus upon the same place of the
Apostle: Munus tingendi, etc. that is, the administration of Baptism may be
committed to every one in the Church, but not the office of preaching.
Chrysostom upon that place of S. Paul has these words: Euangelizare
perpaucorum est, etc. that is, few are able to preach, but every one may
baptize, that has a calling. Of this judgment are Ambrose, Hemingius, etc.
Augustine has these words: Perfect baptizare minus docti possunt: perfect
euangelizare, multo difficilioris and rarioris est operis. Ideo doctor gentium,
plurimis excellentior, Euangelizare missus est, non baptizare: quoniam, hoc per
multos fieri poterat, illud per paucos, inter quos eminebat. August. contra
lit. Petil. Don. lib. 3. cap. 56. I have not set down this as either sword or
shield for ignorant Ministers. My judgment is, that none ought to enter into,
or continue in the holy Ministry, unless they have gifts in some measure.
The Plough man may return to his share: the Artificer to his shop: Other to
their several trades. Almighty God will not be offended if they do thus:
Yea, his Majesty will be highly pleased. Zach. 13. Ruff. lib. 1. cap. 6. Melius
de media via recurrere, quam semper currere male. It is not safe to continue in
a wicked course.


R. Some. A Sacrament can never be without promise of salvation: therefore, the
worthy partaker of the Sacrament receives a blessing: if a blessing, then no
pollution. That he receives a blessing, the Apostle teaches us: We are buried
with Christ (says. S. Paul) by baptism into his death, etc. Romans 6.4. The
cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? 1. Cor. 11.16.


I. Penry. M. Some says: the worthy partaker receives a blessing: if a
blessing, no pollution, etc. First, it is doubted whether we may be assured
that it is a Sacrament. Secondly, he is no worthy receiver that receives of an
idol Minister. Thirdly, there may be a blessing received, and yet pollution in
the receiver. Look 2. Chro. 30.17.18, 19. Nom. 9.7.


R. Some. Nodum in scirpo quaeris. You stumble in the plain way. My answer
is: First, if the unpreaching Minister have a calling, (which no learned man in
this land doubts of) it cannot be denied to be a Sacrament. It pleases you,
inter sacrum and saxum haerere, to doubt of it. Secondly, whosoever brings
faith and repentance with him to the holy Table, is a worthy receiver, though
the Minister be an idol. The unworthiness worthiness of the Minister hurtes
himself, but not the godly communicant. Otherwise the holy Prophets were
unworthy receivers, which communicated with idol priests. Thirdly, you add
that a blessing may be received, and yet pollution in the receiver, 2. Chr. 30.
Nomb. 9. This is, (...), just from the corner to the staff, that I may use
your own phrase. Do you confute on this fashion? You should have proved that
the worthy partaker of the Sacrament receiving a blessing, received pollution,
(that is sin,) by partaking the Sacrament. Because this passes your skill,
you fight with your shadow, and tell me, that a blessing may be received, and
yet pollution in the receiver: That is to say, that pollution is brought of the
Communicant to the holy table, not received from or by the holy Sacrament. This
makes nothing against that which I have written. Only it bewrays your
ignorance. All godly men confess, that pollution, that is sin, is in the
holiest Communicants: I mean, peccatum habitans non regnans, That is, sin
dwells in Gods servants, but has not dominion over them. The Patriarks,
Nazarites, Prophets, Apostles, had this pollution. They could not shake it off
in this life: the best of them had their wants. Only our Savior Christ was
clear of sin. You and I agree, I am sure, in this particular. If I should
ask you, how you prove pollution, that is, sin, to be in the receiver of
the holy Sacrament, you would refer me to your quotations in the book of
Chronicles and Numbers. Give me leave to examine your quotations a little. Your
first place is in the Chronicles. The words of the text are these: Because
there were many in the Congregation that were not sanctified, therefore the
Levites had the charge of the killing of the Passover, for all that were not
clean, to sanctify it to the Lord. For a multitude of the people, even a
multitude of Ephraim, and Manasseh, Issachar and Zebulun, had not cleansed
themselves, yet did cate the Passover, but not as it was written: Wherefore
Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, The good Lord be merciful toward him, that
prepares his whole heart to seek the Lord God, the God of his fathers, though
he be not cleansed, according to the purification of the Sanctuary. 2. Chr.
30.17, 18, 19. All that you can prove by this place, is, that they of Ephraim,
Manasseh, Issachar, etc. were unclean according to the purification of the
Sanctuary, that is, touching some ceremony of Moses law: for which uncleanness
they were dispensed with. Your second place is in the book of Numbers. The
words of the text are these: And certain men were defiled by a dead man that
they might not keep the Passover the same day: and they came before Moses and
before Aaron the same day. And those men said unto him, we are defiled by a
dead man: wherefore are we kept back that we may not offer an offering unto
the Lord, in the time thereunto appointed, among the children of Israel? Then
Moses said unto them, stand still, and I will hear what the Lord will co^mande
concerning you. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children
of Israel, and say, if any among you, or of your posterity, shall he unclean
by the reason of a corpse, or be in a long journey, he shall keep the
Passover unto the Lord. Nu. 9. ver. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. All that you can gather of
this place, is, that these me^ which were defiled by reason of a dead man, did
not celebrate the passover before the Lords pleasure was known. You cannot
conclude either of this place in the book of Numbers, or of the former place
in the Chronicles, that sin was in these, which offered themselves to the
Passover. I doubt not but that these men had pollution, that is, sin, in
them: But I am sure these places neither do nor can prove it: for you may not
reason thus: They of Ephraim etc. were unclean touching some ceremony of
Moses law, therefore they were sinners. If you do, I deny your argument. It is
a certain truth in divinity, that not every legal pollution was joined with
sin: My reason is, the touching of a dead body, was a legal uncleanness. If
it were a sin, then the burial of the dead, which is a Christian duty, and
a work of mercy, should be sin. Thus, you have taken pains, but to little
purpose. You have shot, I confess: but, nec coelum nec terram attingis, you
are many scores wide.


R. Some. The parents of Christ went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of
the passover, Luke 2.41. Their going to Jerusalem, was to testify their
religion, and to be partakers of the Sacrifices. There were at that time in
Solomon's Temple manifold corruptions: the high priesthood was sold for money,
many of the Jewish priests were ignorant, yet Joseph and the virgin Mary were
not polluted. Calu. Luc. 2.41.


I. Penry. The blindness of the ignorant Levites cannot make such a nullitie
of their priesthood, as they should be no priests unto the people. And
therefore great reason why the parents of our Savior, and the rest of the
godly should not leave the service of God, for the pollution of the priests.


R. Some. The ignorant Levites are deep in your books. They find grace with
you. You allow them to be priests unto the Israelites, whom Almighty God
never approved: yea, whom his majesty has disclaymed. Hos. 6. You must of
force be as beneficial to ignorant ministers, unless you do simply condemn
the external calling of the ministers in the Church of England, to be none at
all. If you do so, then in your judgment, we have no ministry, no
sacraments, no visible Church in England.


R. Some. The godly which receive the holy Supper of an unpreaching Minister,
are not partakers of the Ministers unworthiness, but of the holy Sacrament,
which is a pillar of our faith: therefore the unworthiness of the minister
does not defile the Communicant. Alterius, sieve Pastoris, sieve priuati
indignitate, non laediturpia conscientia. etc. Calu. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 1.
sect. 19. that is, A godly conscience is not hurt by the unworthiness of
another, either Pastor or private man: neither are the mysteries less pure
and healthful to a holy man, because they are then handled of such as be
impure. Ille qui accipit, si homo bonus ab homine malo, si fidelis a perfido,
si pius ab impio: perniciosum erit danti, non accipienti. Illud quippe sanctum
male vtentem iudicat, been accipientem sanctificat. Aug. contra Cres. gram.
lib. 2. cap. 28. that is, He which receives, if a good of an evil man, if a
faithful of a faithless man, if a godly of a wicked man, it will be hurtful
to the giver, not to the receiver: for that holy thing (he means the
Sacrament) does judge him which uses it ill, but does sanctify him which
receives it well.

M. Penry answers nothing to this.


R. Some. Circumcision was one of the Lords Sacraments in the Jewish Church.
The Jews which were circumcised of impure priests, and apostates, received no
hurt: therefore no pollution. Calu. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 15. sect. 16. The
Sacraments neither are, nor can be the worse for the ignorance or
unworthiness, or better for the learning or worthiness of any man whatsoever.
Whosoever thinks otherwise, is a Donatist.


I. Penry. The Sacraments are not the worse for the ignorance of the minister:
All this I grant etc.


R. Some. The first part of my reason is passed over with silence: A brief
kind of answering. In this M. Penry resembles young children. Where they cannot
read they skippe over.


R. Some. Touching this point of the Sacrament, I rest wholly in Augustines
judgment: his words are these. Ego dico, melius per bonu^ ministrum quam per
malum dispensari Sacramenta diuina: verum hoc propter ipsum ministrum melius
est, vt eis rebus quas ministrat, vita and moribus co^gruat, non propter illum,
qui etiam si incurrerit in ministrum malum dispensantem veritatem, securitatem
accipit a domino suo monente ac dicente: Quae dicunt facite, quae autem
faciunt, nolite facere: dicunt enim, and non faciunt. Addo etiam ad hoc esse
melius, vt ille cui ministratur, ministri boni probitatem ac sanctitatem
diligendo facilius imitetur: Sed non ideo veriora and sanctiora sunt quae
ministrantur, quia per meliorem ministrantur. Illa namque per seipsa vera and
sancta sunt, propter Deum verum and sanctum cuius sunt, and ideo fieri potest
vt accedens adsoctetatem populi Dei, alium inueniat a quo facile baptizetut,
alium eligat quem salubriter imitetur. Certus est enim sanctume esse
sacramentum Christi, etiamsiper minus sanctum, vel non sanctum hominem
ministratum est, se autem eiusdem ipsius sacramenti sanctitate puniri, si
indigne acciperit; si male vsus fuerit, si ei non conuenienter and congrue
vixerit. August. contra Cres. Gram. lib: 4. Chap. 20. The sum of Augustines
words is, that the Sacrament is administered better by a good, then by a bad
minister: yet that the Sacraments of themselves are true and holy, etc. by
what minister soever they be delivered, etc. If any shall ask me, whether it
be lavvfull to omit the partaking of the holy Sacrament in such Churches,
over which ignorant ministers are set, and to present our selves and our
infantes to the holy Sacrament in other Churches: my answer is, that I refer
them to the Magistrate and governors of our Churches, etc.

Nothing is answered to this.

An objection of a fantastical body.

By whom a thing ought not to be delivered, by another it ought not to be
received: but ignorant ministers ought nor to deliver the Sacraments, therefore
etc.


R. Some. The mayor is false. My reason is. An evil man ought not to deliver
the word of God, but we ought to receive it. An evil man ought not to give
alms, but a poor man may receive it. An absurd minister ought not to deliver
the Sacrament, but they are not polluted which receive it.


I. Penry. The objection concerning the giver and the receiver, was never mine:
I could turn it against you, but I must be brief.


R. Some. It was not yours, I confess. I do not charge you with it. It was an
other man's. You must give some other men leave to make fond arguments as well
as your self. You could turn it, you say, against me. You are one of the
strangest turners that ever I knew. You have turned out such a deal of gross
divinity upon me and other, that we are weary, and you may be ashamed of it.


CHAP. 10. I. Penry. THE GODLY DO SIN, which do communicate with
unpreaching ministers.
Reasons.

Because they communicate with those, who are no Ministers.

R. Some. YOu have been liberal in charging me to beg the question. It is
your fault in this place. You affirm that unpreaching Ministers are no
Ministers: I deny it. It is very strange to me that you will account ignorant
Leuitical priests lawful priests, and deny unpreaching Ministers to have any
calling. If you were indifferent, you would serve them both alike.


I. Penry. They cannot be assured to receive a sacrament at their hands.


R. Some. Your self denies not that they are the Sacraments which are
delivered by unpreaching Ministers. If they be the Sacraments which are
administered, I am sure, first, that they are the Sacraments which are received:
secondly, that they have a calling which do administer them. Besides, the
ignorance of the Minister cannot pollute the godly receiver.


I. Penry. They do not examine themselves aright, and so are not worthy
receivers, 1. Cor. 11.28. in as much as they do not acknowledge it a sin to
communicate where there is no Minister.


R. Some. This reason is all one with your first: therefore it is already
answered. They which offer themselves to the holy Table, without due
examination of themselves, are unworthy receivers. This examination consists of
faith and repentance.


I. Penry. Because they either make the element to be a Sacrament naturally in
it self, and not by the ordinance of God, or else think the ordinance of God
in the institution of the Sacrament, only to consist in the recital of the
words: I baptize thee, etc. or take, eat, etc. whereas a Minister is a most
principal part of the ordinance.


R. Some. You are an unpleasant Musician: You harp still on one string: viz.
that unpreaching Ministe^rs have no calling. Unless that be granted, you are
at a full point. No godly man that I know makes the element to be a Sacrament
naturally in it self: or once thinks that it is a Sacrament, when the words
of institution I baptize thee, etc. or take, eat, etc. are added to the
elements, by one that has no calling. Only M. Penry is of that judgment,
which denies not that they are Sacraments, which are administered by
unpreaching Ministers: and yet these Sacraments are but bare elements, if
unpreaching Ministers have no calling, as M. Pen. affirms. You make the
Minister a most principal part of the Sacrament. I grant the Minister is an
instrument to deliver it, but the most principal part and life of the
Sacraments, depends upon Gods promises expressed in his holy word


I. Penry. Because they make the Sacraments to be marks no more essential unto
the Church, then to other idolatrous Synagogues: for, the element may be
delivered out of the Church, by a public person, even as substa^tially, as by
our mere readers.


R. Some. This reason must needs by a sure one, it is so handsomely trussed
together. The godly communicants confess the Sacraments to be essential marks
of the Church, and that idolatrous Synagogues are unworthy of such precious
jewels. I grant that water, which is the outward element in Baptism, may be
delivered by any either woman or private man without the Church: but, it shall
not be a Sacrament, as that is, which is delivered by unpreaching Ministers. If
I should tell you, that a Sacrament has been delivered out of the Church, you
would account it a strange paradoxe. What I think of it, does appear in an
other place of this treatise. But, what if M. Penry denies not, that baptism
has been and is delivered out of the Church? That he does not, deny it, it
is manifest: His own words are these: Will you hold that there is a Church in
Popery? the assertion is dangerous, etc. page 25. And a little after he has
these words: In Popery there is no Church, page 27. M. Penry in other places of
his book, denies not that such as were baptized in Popery received true
baptism: therefore he denies not, that a Sacrament is delivered out of the
Church, etc. even by Popish priests which (as he says) have no calling at
all in the Church.


I. Penry. They approve the finne of the unpreaching Ministry.


R. Some. The Apostles received the Lords Supper with Judas: but they did not
approve the theft and treason of Judas. The godly which desire execution of
justice at the hands of a heathen or corrupt Magistrate, can not be said to
approve either Paganism or corruption in the Magistrate: for then the Apostle
sinned grossly in appealing unto Caesar, Acts. 25. The godly communicants do not
approve any sin of the ignorant Ministry: for they condemn it and pray
against it.


I. Penry. Because they are persuaded, that Christ does deliver unto them the
seals of their salvation, by the hands of those that are not Ministers: to
wit, by unpreaching readers. In all which points, the godly sin, and
therefore are polluted in communicating with unpreaching Ministers.


R. Some. Not one learned man in this land that I can hear of, is so
persuaded. They al do confess that unpreaching Ministers have a calling: and
that the godly receiving the Sacrament at their hands, are parakers of the
seals of their salvation. If you and your crewe be otherwise affected, God
send you other minds.

John Penry. In his addition Page 65.

And I dare arrest and attaint of high treason, against the Majesty of the
highest, all those both men and Angels, who either defend the communicating
with them lawful, communicate with them, or tolerate them as ministers under
their government.


R. Some. You lay on load: but it is fulmen sine tonitru: black clouds, but
no rain. When your single arguments will not serve the turn, you play the
officer, and do arrest for traitors against God, all the Magistrates and
learned men of this land. The best is, Almighty God has not put his mace into
your hands. It is a note of a false prophet to kill the souls of them that die
not. Ezech. 13. That they are not polluted which receive the Sacraments at the
hands of unpreaching Ministers, is sufficiently proved. Such Bishops and
Patrons, as have either ordained or presented unfit men to the holly ministry
and clergy livings, have much to answer for. I do not defend or excuse such
Bishops, Patrons, or ministers. I know they have highly offended the majesty
of God: and I pray God with all my heart, that this sore may be healed.


I. Penry. They of whose ministry there is a Nullitie before God, although
they have an outward calling, ought not to be accoumpted ministers: therefore
not to be communicated with.


R. Some. I deny your Antecedent: My reasons are: first, there was a nullitie
before God of Caiphas priesthood: for he entered by money, and the priesthood
was divided between him and Annas, against the Lords order. Calu. Luc. 3. yet
Caiphas is called the high Priest by the Evangelists. Matthew. 26. John 18.
Secondly, there was a nullitie before God, of the ministry of some in
Philippi, which preached Christ of contention, and to add more affliction to
Paul's bands. Philip. Chap. 1.15, 16. But these are accounted ministers by the
Apostle verse 15.18. If any shall deny, that there was a nullitie before God of
their ministry, I prove it thus: they had not an inward calling. M. Penry
says, that an inward calling is contained in the sufficiency of gifts and
willingness to practice them. Page 45. If M. Penry mean the practice of gifts
to Gods glory, I say, Amen, unto it. I confess that they of Philippi had gifts
in some measure, but they had not willingness to practice those gifts to Gods
glory: which willingness etc. is one of the necessary branches of an inward
calling. That they of Philippi had not this willingness etc. it is manifest: for
they sought themselves, and practiced their gifts wholly to increase the
Apostles afflictions.


I. Penry. Concerning the Nullitie of our readers ministry, we are to know,
that there is a nullitie of a ministry before God, either because the action
proceeds from a corrupt minister, as Psalm. 50.16. whom God would not have
to deal with his ordinances, or from a corrupt and evil ministry, which is
none of Gods ordinance. The action of the former is substantial in regard of
us: of the latter we know no substance it can have. Of the former there is a
nullitie only in the sight of God: of the latter, both in respect of the Lord
and also of us. The nullitie of our readers ministry is of this latter sort,
namely such as we ought in no wise to account a ministry. Whereas therefore
you grant that there is a nullitie of our readers ministry before God, and yet
affirm them to be ministers, you swerve from the point, and so your answer is
nothing to the purpose, but a desiring of the question, after your usual
manner. As Caiphas then, and the rest of the sleepy dogs, against whom the
prophet cries out, were wicked men, God would not have such to be his
ministers: hither refer Esaias 1.13. But as they had the ministry which God
allowed of, they were ministers unto the people. This ministry, our readers
want, therefore they can be no ministers, neither in respect of the Lord, nor
of the Church. Shemaiah was a wicked man, and a false prophet, so were the rest
of his stamp. The Lord detested both them and their ministry. Zephaniah and
Caiphas high priests with their company, were as wicked as any of the false
prophets, the Lord abhorred the men, but their ministry was his ordinance.
Hence. M Some, it follows, that neither the briberie of your Caiphas, nor the
blindness of your ignorant Levites, can make such a nullitie of their
prietshood, as they should be no priests unto the people. And therefore great
reason why the parents of our savior, and the rest of the godly whereof you
speak, Page 28. 29. should not leave the service of God for the pollution of
the priests. Esaias speaks against blind watchmen, Chap. 56.10. but chap.
42.19, 20. it shall appear, that they saw many things, but kept them not. I
pray you confer the places, and it can never be proved, that any of them
were so blind, as they could not declare by preaching the general use of the
sacrifices and ceremonies. Their wants might be many, but not like the
insufficiency of our readers. Be it they were as insufficient, yet their
ministry might be allowable.

Your answer consists of several branches. I will handle the chiefest of
them so briefly as I can. Your first branch is, that the ministry of the
ignorant Leuiticall priests is allowed of God: but that the outward calling of
our unpreaching ministers, is not allowed of God. Of this you conclude, that
the Leuitical priests were ministers unto the people (and consequently that
Joseph and the virgin Mary were not polluted by their Sacrifices) but that our
unpreaching ministers are not so to us. If the action of ignorant ministers be,
as you write, not substantial in regard of us: then you must deny (which
before you did not) that any Sacrament either was or is delivered by them. I
would feign know why the ministry of the ignorant Levites should be allowed,
and not the ministry of ignorant ministers. I confess freely, that I take
their cases to be like, howsoever you mince and shift the matter. But Ismel
your meaning: Latet anguis in herba, there is a padde in the straw. To
proceed, you stand very much upon the outward calling of the ministers in our
Church. If you repel the unpreaching minister for his ignorance, you can not
allow the ignorant Leuiticall priests. If you repel the unpreaching minister,
because of his outward calling, you may by the like reason discharge the
worthiest ministers in this land of the holy ministry: for all have one and
the same external calling in the Church of England. If you be so affected, the
next news we shall hear of you, will be that you shake hands with our
Anabaptisticall recusants, Vno absurdo dato, multa consequuntur. that is, Every
absurdity has many attendantes. The second branch of your answer, is, a
comparing, or rather preferring the ignorant Leuiticall priests before our
ignorant ministers. Nobile par: neither barrel better herring. I must a little
while examine this second branch of yours. You tell us that the wants of the
Leuiticall priests might be many, but not like the insufficiency of our
readers. For proof of this, you quote two textes in the Prophet Esaias. The
first is contained in these words: Their watchmen are all blind: they have no
knowledge: they are all dumb dogs: they cannot bark: they lie and sleep,
and delight in sleeping. Esa. 56. Will you gather of these words, that the
ignorant Leuiticall priests were more learned and better furnished then the
ignorant ministers? The prophet Esaias says that these Leuitical priests had
neither rem nor spem, that is, that they were woe begone. If you would study
seven years, you could not devise to speak worse of the most ignorant
ministers in our Church. The second place of the Prophet has these words: Who
is blind but my servant? or deaf as my messenger that I sent? who is blind
as the perfect, and blind as the Lords servants? Seeing many things but thou
keep them not? opening the ears, but he hears not? Esaias 42. Esaias in
these verses calls the Leuiticall priests blind and deaf, not in body, but
in heart, because they did see and hear Gods judgments with their bodily
eyes and ears, and did not observe them with the eyes and ears of their
hearts. You can not conclude of this place, that the ignorant Leuiticall
priests were deeper clerks then the ignorant ministers in the Church of
England. The third branch of your answer is, that the ministry of Caiphas
was the Lords ordinance. I deny it, and do dissent from you in this. My reason
is: Caiphas had not the high prieshood alone, therefore his high priesthood was
not the Lords ordinance. The Antecedent is manifest, for Annas and Caiphas were
high priests together, Luke 3. The argument follows: for the Lords ordinance
was that only one should be the high priest. Calu: Luke 3.2. You say nothing
here of the contentious ministers of Philippi. You take and leave at your
pleasure. It pleases you to call Caiphas, my Caiphas, and the blind Levites,
my ignorant Levites. I should be spedde, I perceive, if I would receive all that you cast upon me. Before, you did lade me with reverence: now, you throw
Caiphas and the ignorant Levites, as cobble stones, at me. You are very
liberal: but I refuse your ghests: I disclaim them, and return them to your
self. You are much fitter to entertain them, then I: for, you have magnified
Caiphas ministry, and are a hot pleader for the ignorant Leuiticall priests.
That appears in your words which follow.


CHAP. 11. I. Penry. UNFITNESS TO TEACH, made not a nullitie of the Leuiticall
Priests office.
Reasons.

Because it was sufficient, to make him a lawful, though not a good Priest,
for him to be of the line of Aaron.

R. Some. YOu have examined and censured my reasons at your pleasure. I hope, I
may with your good leave look a little upon yours. My answer is: first, If
your first reason be good, then they which received the Sacraments at their
hands, were not polluted. If they were not polluted, what say you to these
arguments? viz. The Sacrament may not be received at his hands, which wants
outward calling: therefore not at his hands which is destitute of the inward
graces. I. Pen. Again, we have no warrant to receive an extraordinary
Sacrament: But that which is administered by ignorant Ministers is an
extraordinary Sacrament, if it be any: therefore we have no warrant to receive
it. You know, I am sure, the father of these two arguments. They came out of
your own Mint. Secondly, if your first reason be good, then a corrupt
external approbation made them lawful Priests, which had not an inward
calling, that is, sufficiency of gifts, etc. If you deny the external
approbation of the ignorant Levites, to be a corrupt approbation, I prove it
thus. It was a breach of Gods own order, therefore it was a corrupt
approbation. The antecede^t is manifest in these words: The Priests lips shall
keep knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at his mouth, etc. Mal. 2.
Therefore the external approbation of ignorant Levites was a corrupt
approbation.


I. Penry. There was no commandment concerning the trial of his fitness to
teach: therefore unfitness to teach made not a nullitie of the Leuiticall
Priests office.


R. Some. You prove your antecedent thus: Almighty God said to Moses: Thou
shall appoint Aaron and his sons to execute the Priests office, etc. Number.
3.10. My answer is: No trial of gifts in Aaron and his sons was needful at
the first: for Almighty God did furnish the^ accordingly. My reason is
contained in these words of God himself: My covenant was with him of life and
peace and I gave him fear, and he feared me, and was afraid before my Name.
The Law of truth was in his mouth and there was no iniquity found in his
lips: he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from
iniquity. Mal. 2.5, 6. God did never call any to the holy Ministry, but he
gave them gifts fit for that function. I have proved this point in the
beginning of this treatise. To think otherwise of his Majesty, is great
wickedness. I hope, you will not reason thus: There was no commandment
concerning the trial of gifts in Aaron and his sons at the first: therefore
there was never any trial afterward of gifts in Aarons posterity. If you
reason thus, I deny your Argument. My reason is, If every one of Aarons
posterity, how unfit so ever, might enter into the Priests office by the
Lords warrant, Almighty God might be justly charged to have had very little
care, either of his own honor, or of the Church of the Israelites. Yea, his
Majesty had flatly broken one of his own positive Laws contained in these
words: The Priests lips shall keep knowledge: they shall seek the Law at
his mouth. Mal. 2.


I. Penry. It is not mentioned that any were put from the Priesthood for want
of this ability, whereas the doubt whether they were the sons of Aaron,
Esra. 2. and their idolatry, 2. Chro. bereaved them thereof: therefore
unfitness to teach made not a nullitie of the Leuiticall Priests office.


R. Some. Your reason is very weak: It is not mentioned etc. therefore none
were. I deny your argument: for it is, a non scripto ad no^ factum, which is
not sure in this case. If no ignorant Leuiticall Priests were removed from the
priesthood, for their unfitness to teach: Gods Church had, and the governors
did, greater wrong. I am sure, they should have been removed: for Almighty
Gods resolution is flat in these words: Because thou have refused knowledge, I
will also refuse thee, that thou shall be no priest to me, etc. Hos. 4. The
wise Prince will displace an absurd Ambassador. The valiant captain will
remove a cowardly soldier. The husband man will not suffer that drudge to
attend on his trough, which cannot feed his hogs. If such as were not found
within the compass of Aarons genealogy, were removed from the Priesthood,
they had no wrong: for, this was a Law of God himself: Thou shall appoint
Aaron and his sons to execute the priests office: and, the stranger that
comes near, shall be slain. Numb. 3.10. If such as committed idolatry,
were discharged of the Priesthood, they were justly dealt with. Ezech. 44.


I. Penry. The example of Paul, Acts. 21.26. confirms this, who communicated
since his conversion with those priests that were as unlearned as ever any:
which he would not have done, if inabilitie to teach, had made them no
priests. Now therefore M. Some, to make your Argument from the Leuitical
priesthood to be forcible for your unpreaching Ministers, you must prove, that
either our Readers Ministry is a Leuiticall Ministry, that the continuance
thereof is under the new Covenant, or show that the corrupt approbation, (for
so I name the best outward calling they can have of the Church) is as forcible
to make them Ministers, as was the ordinance of God to make the sons of Aaron
sacrificing at Jerusalem, to be priests.


R. Some. How learned or unlearned the priests at that time were in Jerusalem,
appears not in that place of the Acts. The meaning of S. Luke is this: The
Apostle Paul was accounted by the Jews an enemy of Moses Law. To clear
himself of this, he entered into Salomons Temple by the advice of the Apostle
James, and of the brethren in Jerusalem, and was purified. Acts. 21.26. Your
last reason serves very fitly for my purpose: therefore I will use it as a
sword to cut in pieces some of your fancies. Paul, you say, communicated after
his conversion with those priests, that were as unlearned as ever any, and was
not polluted. Of this I conclude: therefore they which receive the Sacraments
at the hands of unpreaching Ministers, are not polluted. My reason is: The
ignorant Levites and ignorant Ministers agree in eodem tertio, that is, in
ignorance. But M. Penry replies that an argument from the Leuiticall
priesthood, is not forcible for unpreaching Ministers. To prove this, he uses
two reasons. The first is: our readers Ministry is not a Leuiticall
Ministry, therefore an Argument from the Leuitical Priesthood, is not
forcible for unpreaching Ministers. My answer is: I grant that no ministry
in these days is a Leuiticall ministry: for, the date of that ministry is
out long ago. But I deny your Argument. My reason is: An argument is and may
be forcibly drawn from one thing to another, which are unmatchable. All
Logicians confess that similitudes are of things which differ. Every mean
Sophister in the University knows it. It is very like that you have
forgotten it. Such trifles are too base for your great spirits. Your second
reason is: The corrupt approbation of unpreaching Ministers (so you name the
best outward calling they can have of the Church) is not so forcible to make
them Ministers, as was the ordinance of God to make the sons of Aaron
sacrificing at Jerusalem, to be priests: therefore an Argument from the
Leuiticall priesthood is not forcible for unpreaching Ministers. My answer is:
I deny your antecedent, and do add this: first, that it is as lawful (that is
to say, utterly unlawful) to make unfit Ministers now, as it was before to
make unfit priests. Secondly, that it was not Gods pleasure, that all the
posterity of Aaron without exception, that is, tagge and ragge, should be
admitted to the holy priesthood. For neither you, nor any man alive, may reason
thus: The Leuiticall priesthood must rest in the tribe of Leui: therefore
every one of that tribe (though unfit for that holy function) was to be
admitted to the priesthood. You might very soundly have disputed thus: The
Leuiticall priesthood must be kept within the compass of the tribe of Leui, by
Gods express commandment, Number. 3. therefore no stranger might come near the
Lords altar. You call the best outward calling in the Church of England, a
corrupt approbation. If you mean it is corrupt in admitting ignorant men to
the holy Ministry, so was the ordeyning of ignorant Levites at Jerusalem. If
you mean that the best outward calling in the Church of England, is simply
corrupt, that is, none at al, though sufficient men be admitted, I detest your
Anabaptistical fancy: for then the worthiest Divines in this land, are no
Ministers. Besides, it is confessed of all famous and learned men, that Gods
Church is not necessarily tied in all places and times, to one form in the
external calling of the ministers.


CHAP. 12. I. Penry. THE CORRVPT ALLOWance of the Church cannot make our
readers to be substantial Ministers.
FOr so all men and women without or within the Church, might be capable of the
Ministry, because all may be capable of this outward allowance. Secondly and
particularly, a man not furnished with natural capacity: thirdly, a man that
could not read, though he wanted also the gift of interpretation: for, such a
one might recite the liturgy without the book: fourthly ye Church might make
a man Minister against his will, though he should never consent thereunto. And
this is the willingness that I mean, when I say, that the inward calling is
contained in the sufficiency of gifts, and willingness to practice: which
willingness, I gather upon the words, (...), and (...), used of the Apostle, 1.
Tim. 3.1. Your reason therefore from the malicious Philippian Ministers,
touches not the question. Thus Caiphas with his crew of unworthy and monstrous
priests (who within a few pages, in your book have impudently so often
troubled the Reader) is answered. And I think it a great judgment of God,
that the ornaments of our English and Welsh Ministry, for the most part,
consists in the deformity of such loathsome spots.

R. Some. If by substantial Ministers, you mean such as are furnished with
gifts in good measure, it is the peculiar office of God to make such, either
miraculously, as he did the Prophets and many in the Primitive Church: or by
blessing men's godly studies, as in later and our times. It passes the Churches
reach, by any external calling to make men furnished ministers, which before
the external allowance, were not furnished by God himself: therefore to be of
the line of Aaron, did make the ignorant Levites no more to be substantial
priests, then the external calling now, does make ignorant men to be
substantial Ministers. The sum of your reasons may be shut up briefly in
this argument: All may be capable, as you say, of the outward allowance:
therefore the outward calling of the Church makes not a Minister to us, unless
he have the inward. Your antecedent is a special one. If you were not
strangely carried, some branches of it might have been kept in. I trust you do
not condemn a prescript liturgy in the Church of God. If you do, all the
reformed Churches dissent from you, and their practice does apparently confute
you. But I leave that, and deny your argument. My reasons are: first, the
ignorant Levites had an outward calling, but not an inward: yet they were
lawful priests by your own confession. Secondly, Judas was called outwardly,
but not inwardly: yet he was an Apostle. Lastly, the Apostle charge Timothee
not to lay hands rashly on any, 1. Tim. 5. therefore the outward allowance is
more then you account of. My reason from the co^tentious Ministers of Philippi,
etc. was a very sure one, and did overthrow your fancy. Because you cannot
answer it, you tell me, it touches not the question. A brief kind of
answering. Caiphas and the Leuiticall priests have been alleged no otherwise
by me, then by those worthy men Calvin, Beza, etc. before me. The mention of
them has not troubled the godly Reader at al, therefore not impudently, as you
give out very sawcily. I perceive they have distempered you: for in stead of
answering my argument, you exclaim upon them. Your gift in answering, is very
rare. You make washway of the weightiest arguments. Unto the loathsome spots in
the English and Welsh Ministry, God grant either sovereign medicine to cure
them, or sound expulsion to remove them.


R. Some. Lastly, if your antecedent be true, viz. that they of whose
ministry there is a nullitie before God, although they have an outward
calling, ought not to be accounted ministers: what say you to this proposition?
They of whose magistracy there is a nullitie before God, though they have an
outward calling, ought not to be accounted magistrates. Do you not think this
proposition to be very dangerous? I could press and follow this very far,
but I abstain of purpose.


I. Penry. You demand what I think of this proposition. Surely my judgment
is, that it is altogether without sense, and overthrows it self: for, it is
as if you said, he of whose faith there is a nullitie before God, though he be
assured of his salvation, is not to be accounted a faithful man. Why? to be
assured of salvation, and to have a nullitie of faith before God, can not stand
together. No more can the outward calling of the magistracy, stand with the
nullitie thereof. For the outward calling makes a substantial magistrate.
But, M. Some, where is that reason which you could press so far? is this it?
they of whose magistracy there is a nullity before God, ought not to be
accounted magistrates. I say, your proposition is true: assume what you will,
you know what manner of nullitie I mean.


R. Some. My proposition in your judgment is without sense. You are very
peremptory. A word, I perceive, and a blow. I may say truly that your answer
is without sense. I grant, that the outward calling makes a wicked man a
substantial magistrate in that town or City, over which he is set: But I am
very sure, that because he wa^teth the inward calling, etc. that almighty God
does not allow that magistrate. My proof is contained in these words of God
himself: They have set up a king, but not by me: they have made Princes, and
I knew it not. Hos. 8. that is, I did not consent unto it and allow it. The
reason is: Almighty God had appointed the posterity of David, to sit in the
seat of that kingdom, until the coming of christ. The Israelites did set up
Ieroboa^ etc. It pleased you to write, that they of whose ministry there is a
nullitie before God, that is, that they who^ God has not furnished with gifts,
are not to be accounted ministers of us. I do see no reason, why in your
judgment, (I say yours, not mine) there should not be the like sense of this
proposition, viz. they of whose magistracy there is a nullitie before God, that
is, that they whom the Lord has not furnished with gifts etc. are not to be
accounted magistrates of us. I grant, that both ministry and magistracy are
Gods ordinance: but every minister and magistrate is not so. If they were, we
could not distinguish as we may between rem and personam, that is, between
the man and the function.


CHAP. 13. I. Penry. THERE BE THREE Essential differences between an evil
magistrate and a reading minister.
1.

THe outward calling of an evil Magistrate, makes him a substantial
Magistrate: so cannot the outward alowance of Readers, make them to be
Ministers.

R. Some. I grant, that there are and may be many more essential differences
between Magistrates and Ministers, then you set down. Yet this simile shall be
good for matter and manner in this sort: viz. Unfit Magistrates outwardly called
are Magistrates to us, therefore unfit Ministers outwardly called are Ministers
to us. My reason is: the above named Magistrates and Ministers agree in
unfitness and outward allowance. I confess, that unfit men ought not to be
advanced, either to Magistracy or Ministry: yet the actions of unfit both
Ministers and Magistrates, are substantial to us, until they be removed. That
an argument may very fitly be drawn from the magistracy to the ministry,
appears by this little which I have delivered. To proceed, I do not see, why
the outward allowance of the Church, does not distinguish unpreaching
Ministers from private men, as well as outward baptism does distinguish such
as are baptized, from Paganes.


I. Penry. 2 The Magistracy of an evil Magistrate, may be allowable before
God: so cannot the Ministry of Readers.


R. Some. In your second difference, the Magistracy and Ministry are
strangely sorted. You should have set it down thus: the Magistracy of an evil
Magistrate may be allowable before God, so cannot the ministry of evil
Ministers. If you had matched them so, I would have answered, that both
Magistracy and Ministry is of God, whatsoever the Magistrate or Minister is.
If you will not deliver your second difference otherwise then you have, I
answer first, that the Magistracy of Pilate, Licinius, etc. was of God,
though his Majesty detested such Magistrates: Secondly, that though ignorant
men are not allowed by Almighty God for good and sufficient ministers, yet the
outvvarde calling does distinguish them to us, from private men: otherwise it
were vvide with your ignorant Levites.


I. Penry. 3. Men may be assured, to receive that according to the ordinance of
God substantially, at the hands of an evil Magistrate, which concerns them
to have from him: so can they not of a bare Reader: for there is no man that
can assure himself to be partaker of a substantial Sacrament, at the hands
of such: and preach they cannot. I have handled this point of the Magistracy
in my former book, from page 47. to 51.


R. Some. There is some good thing, I confess, in the vvorst government:
therefore the Philosophers resolution is, that it is better to live under a
tyrant, then under no governor. In this last difference of yours, you give me
some advantage: for the corrupt Magistrate has and may pervert justice, that
is, sell the righteous for silver and the poor for shoes: but the ignorant
minister cannot pervert the Sacrament which is Gods ordinance: and you have
given out often in your Treatise, that you deny them not to be the Sacraments
of Baptism and the holy Supper, which are delivered by unpreaching Ministers.
You confess in this place, that Magistracy is the ordinance of God. You say
very truly: but, in your Addition whither you refer me, you have handled
that point with very foul and bepitched hands. In your Addition you use
these words, viz. Magistracy is an human ordinance, that is, as you
expound it, not an Ecclesiastical constitution prescribed in the word. This
is a very gross and Anabaptisticall error. Almighty God says thus: By me
Kings reign. Prou. 8. Our Savior Christ a little before his condemnation,
answers Pilate which was governor of Judea under the Romans, in this sort:
Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from
above. John. 19. The Apostle Paul writes thus: There is no power but of God:
and the powers that be, are ordained of God: whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God Romans 13. The Greek Poet can teach you
this Lesson: (...). Every learned man knows, first, that the civil
government before, in, and after the time of Nimrod, and after the departure
of the Israelites out of Egypt, until their entrance into the land of Chanaan,
and in Chanaan until and after the captivity in Babylon, was the Lords
ordinance, and appears in Gods book. Secondly, that the disposing of the
four famous Monarchies, viz. the first of the Chaldeans, the second of the
Medes and Persians, the third of the Macedonians, the fourth of the Romans,
was Gods ordinance, and set down in his holy book. Lastly, the reverence of
the Magistrates which is printed by almighty God in the hearts of subjects and
inferiors, does cry aloude against you, that magistracy is not a devise of
man, but an Ecclesiastical constitution and ordinance of almighty God,
prescribed in his holy word. If you tell me, that the Apostle Peter calls
magistracy an human ordinance, 1. Pet. 2: I grant he does so: but his
meaning is not, that magistracy was ordained and devised by man, but by
almighty God, for the benefit of man. No man, unless he be an Anabaptist,
expounds the Apostle Peter's words as you do: so that, not the Apostles words,
but the sense which you give them, is Anabaptisticall. Non scriptura, sed
sensus scripturae, est haeresis. that is, Not the scripture, but the sense of
the scripture, is heresy.


CHAP. 14. I. Penry. WHETHER THE GODLY do sin, which receive the holy
Sacrament at the hands of an unpreaching Minister.
THe Sacrament may not be received at his hands, which wants outward
calling: therefore not at his hands, who is destitute of the inward graces.

R. Some. Your Antecedent is true, and makes against the Anabaptists. I deny
your argument. My reason is: Omnia Sacramenta cum obsint indigne tractantibus,
prosunt tamen per eos digne sumentibus. Aug. contra epist. Parmen. lib. 2. ca
10. that is, all Sacraments, though they hurt such as do handle them
unworthily, yet they profit such, as do worthily receive them at their hands.


I. Penry. My reason concluding the unlawfulness of communicating with
readers, having but an outward calling, because it is a sin to communicate
with them, which only want the same having fitness to teach, is such, as I
cannot but marvel, that you would think it could be answered by a desiting
of the question, which is a fault in reasoning, wherein belike you seem to
take delight. You say again, that readers deliver a Sacrament. How can we be
sure thereof? and why may not I say as well, that a man endued with gifts to
teach, does deliver a Sacrament, though he have no outward calling? which
assertion would be false.


R. Some. You are the strangest answerer that ever I met with. I must be
content and answer you. If they sin which receive the Sacraments of him
which has an outward calling and wants the inward: then many godly Israelites
were polluted which received the Sacraments of the ignorant Leuiticall
priests, which had an outward but not the inward calling. You deny the
latter, therefore you cannot affirm the former, unless you be void of common
sense. Petitio principij, begging of the question is a special pearl in your
book. You charge me to delight in it. I use it not: there is neither pleasure
nor profit in it. You are a privileged man: you may say what you list. The
best is, I can receive no disgrace by any speeches of such as you are.


I. Penry. We have no warrant to reeiue an extraordinary Sacrament: But that,
which is administered by ignorant ministers, is an extraordinary Sacrament if it
be any: Therefore, we have no warrant to receive it.


R. Some. I deny your Minor, and do add this: first, that it is a Sacrament
by your own confession, page 50.51. which is administered by ignorant ministers.
Secondly, that it is no extraordinary Sacrament, which is delivered by them,
unless you will call Baptism and the holy Supper, extraordinary Sacraments.


I. Penry. By an extraordinary Sacrament, I mean Baptism or the Lords Supper,
administered either privately by a minister, or any way by one that is no
minister. I never affirmed, the Elements delivered by readers to be
Sacraments. It is one thing not to deny them, an other thing to affirm them to
be Sacraments: The former I have written, the latter I never did: and they do
my writings great injury, that report the contrary.


R. Some. In the shutting up of your Treatise, you have broched two errors,
the one is, that it is an extraordinary Sacr^^ent, which is delivered any way
by one that is no minister. Of this I gather, that you hold, that one which is
no minister, may deliver a Sacrament: for, an extraordinary Sacrament is a
Sacrament. If I would enter into your vain, I might set down these
consequents: viz. that bargemen, children, women, Idiots etc. in your
judgment, may administer an extraordinary Sacrament. Your other error is,
that the holy Supper etc. is an extraordinary Sacrament, when it is delivered
privately by a minister. I am not of your judgment in this: I am of M.
Caluines: therefore I set down this proposition: viz. that it is lawful to
administer the holy Supper in a particular house, if some cautions and
circumstances be observed. The reasons do appear a little after. It pleases
you to say, that as you never denied, so you never affirmed it to be a
Sacrament which is delivered by an unpreaching minister. A worthy resolution.
If you deny not that it is a Sacrament, etc. you do affirm it. For, not to
deny is to affirm. Every child can teach you that lesson. I do less marvel
that you are so short and wide in excellent points of divinity, when you
fail in a common point of Grammar. Thus, I see how complete a man you are.


R. Some. If any will conclude of these my answers, that I mislike M. Penries
desire of a learned ministry in Wales, he takes up that, which I never let
fall: for I desire with all my heart, and the Lord for his Christ's sake grant
it, that not only Wales may be furnished with worthy governors and pastors,
but all other parts of her Majesty's Dominions, that Gods graces may be more
and more multiplied upon us and our posterity, and his holy hand watch over us.


M. Penry says nothing to this.

CHAP. 15. R. Some. IT IS LAWFVL TO ADMInister the holy Supper in a private
house, if some cautions be observed.
The cautions which must be observed, are:

Calu. Epist. 363. 1. That there be a convenient number to communicate with the
sick party.

2. That the holy Supper be delivered according to Christ's Institution.

3. That the explication of the mystery be joined with the action.

M. Caluines reasons. Epist. 363.

IT is forcible for the confirmation of faith, to receive a pledge, as it were,
of Christ's hand, whereby we may be more assured, that we are of his body,
and that we are fed with Christ's flesh and blood, unto hope of eternal life.

The receiving of the holy Supper, does arm us in our spiritual batraile:
therefore the godly sick man, is not to be barred of that singular comfort. An
eripiendum est singular adiume^tum, quo fretus ad luctam alacrius descendat,
and victoriam obtineat?

The holy Supper is a sign of holy unity amongst Gods children: therefore the
godly sick man, whether he have a languishing sickness, or be at deaths
door, is not to be barred from professing his unity and consent with Gods
Church.

Coena, sanctaeinter filios Dei vnitatis est Symbolum. If any shall reply that
the holy Supper, is not a private action of any household, but mere
Ecclesiastical: 1. Cor. 11. M. Caluines answer is, that the holy Supper
delivered to a godly sick man, is part of the public action. Partem vel
appendicem esse constat publicae actionis. M. Calvin adds these words: Neque
vero Paulus, dum Corinthios admonet, domum cuique suam esse in qua comedat and
bibat, Coenam excludit a priuatis aedibus. Tunc neque fidelibus patebant
templa, neque vnquam permissum esset noua extruere. Sed tantum a communibus
epulis discernit spirituale mysterium, ne cum illis misceatur. That is, Paul
when he does admonish the Corinthians that they have private houses to eat
and drink in, does not shut the holy Supper from private houses: For then,
the faithful neither had use of any Churches, nor were suffered to build new.
Only he distinguishes the spiritual mystery from common banquets, lest it
should be mingled with them.

The same M. Calvin a little after, has these words: Coeterum diligenter
cauendum esse fateor, ne qua obrepat superstitio, ne spes salutis externo
Symbolo affigatur, etc. That is, diligent care must be had, that no
superstition creep in, and that no hope of salvation be tied to the external
sign, etc. Epist. 363.

Of this judgment is Peter Martyr in his Commentary upon the 10. chap. ad
Cor. Fol. 143.

Chemnicius writes that it is an absurd thing to tie the holy Supper to
peculiar places: Ad substantiam Sacramenti, sicut non pertinet circumstantia
temporis, ita nec circumstantia loci, tanqua^ necessaria requiritur. Chemn. in
2. part exam. con. Trid. That is, as the circumstance of the time, is not
necessarily required to the substance of a Sacrament, so neither the
circumstance of place.

I rest in the judgment of these excellent men. If you dissent from me, I
pray you condemn these learned writers: but, not before you have confuted
their reasons.

CHAP. 16.
I. Penry. THus M. Some, I have run therowe those points in your book that
concerned me. I have been driven to deal brieflyer therein, then I had
determined. But I am enforced to end, and to omit that, which page 9. I
promised to handle in the latter end, with diverse other things. I have not the
like liberty for Printing that you, M. Some, do enjoy. Procure me but the
favor to be iudicially heard according to the word, and I will personally upon
the peril of my life, by the Lords assistance, defend these two points against
all gainesayers. I am sorry, that you whom I reverence, should be the instrument
to oppugn a truth. The Lord respect the cause of his own glory, and pardon
our sin. Amen.


R. Some. You have run your self out of breath. You had dealt more wisely,
if you had gone with less haste and better speed. Sat cito, si sat been. The
brevity which you give out you are driven to, is, dignum patella operculum, a
fit garment to cover your absurd writings. You have not, you say, such
liberty of printing, as I. No reason you should. You broche and print gross
errors and Anabaptistical fancies: so do not I. You refuse to offer and submit
your writings to the view and allowance of the Magistrates: so do not I. You
would have me procure you Judicial hearing, etc. Your request is not equal.
Nec te noui, nec vbi sis. Speak for your self in Gods Name: so will I, if you
will revoke your errors and heresies. Otherwise, I will not open my lip for
you, or any such as you are. After leave obtained, you will appear (you say)
though it cost you your life, and deal in Argument, etc. Oh noble Goliath! Do
you challenge all gainesayers? so did the Donatists in Augustines time. Aug.
contra Don. post Coll. so did Photinus a gross heretic in Basils time. Sozom.
lib. 4. cap. 6. so did Popish Campian in our time. Alas, good M. Penry, you are
utterly unfit for such a match. This heat of yours, is like a blaze of
thorns. It will last but a while. Your cause is naught: your armor is not of
proof. Your Divinity is at a low ebb. Your Arguments are pitiful: your
answers are silly. There is no hope of prevailing. The Donatists, Photinus and
Campian presumed of a glorious victory: but they were learnedly confuted. The
Donatists by Augustine: Photinus by Basil of Ancyra: Campian by some of our
learned men. Besides, their garland was poena perfidiae, non corona fidei. I
would be sorry, your garland should be of such flowers. The best conquest that
you can have, is, to overcome your pride by humility, and your ignorance by
godly study. (...). Eurip. in Hippol. Excellent men have their second
thoughts, wiser then their first. Non vincimur, quum meliora nobis offeru^tur,
sed instruimur. Cipr. ad Qu. fratrem. It is no disgrace to yield to better
things. You are sorry, that I, whom you reverence, should be an instrument to
oppugn a truth. Be sorry for your self. Detest your fancies. Your reverence I
make very mean account of. You are the first that ever charged me in writing
to oppugn Gods truth. I am very far, I thank God, from that great sin.
Gods truth, I trust, is as dear to me as to you. I hope it has had, and
shall have more defense by me, then by you: there is some reason it should. You
misliked my last Treatise: if this book find the like grace at your hands, I
must and will bear it. To your prayer, that the Lord would respect the cause
of his own glory, and pardon our sins, I say withal my heart, Amen. I have
now, thanks be to God, passed through your book. I have not run, but walked a
foot pace through it. Your absurdities, I confess, are brambles, but they
have not pricked me. I would some others took no more hurt by them. If my
Treatise shall do either you, or any of your followers good, I will be glad:
If not, I say with the holy Apostle, If any man be ignorant, let him be
ignorant. 1. Cor. 14.38.

Non habet Dei charitatem, qui Ecclesiae non diligit vnitatem. Aug. de baptis.
contra Don.

lib. 3. cap. 16.
CHAP. 17.
IT has pleased M. Penry to take some pains in proving that Popish Priests
are no lawful and good ministers of God, that is, that they have no lawful
calling. In this he fights with his shadow: for he has not any of the
religion his adversary. I mislike the Popish priesthood and sacrifice, as
much as he: and if occasion require, will set down sure reasons to shake
them both in pieces. That which I hold in this controversy, is, that Popish
priests have a calling though a faulty one. If M. Penry will improve that, he
must take pen in hand and begin a fresh: for, as yet he has not encountered
with that particular. If he can prevail in that, the famous writings of
Calvin, Beza, etc. and the resolution of all the reformed Churches, in which I
rest for this point, shall be condemned, and M. Penry shall have the garland.
Because I purpose to pass, so briefly as I can, through his Treatise of the
Popish priests, I will handle first certain propositions which are incident to
that discourse.

The Popish Church is a Church though not a sound Church.

1. The Pope is Antichrist, therefore the Church of Rome is a Church.

No Protestant doubts of the antecedent, etc. I prove my argument thus:
Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Per Templum Dei,
Ecclesia: per sessionem, regnum intelligitur. Musc. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. that is, by
the Temple of God, the Church: by sitting, a kingdom is understood.

Viretus a man of excellent learning, writes thus of the popish Church: Non
dum eo vsque degenerauit, and prolapsa est, vt eadem prorsus a nobis iudicari
debeat, and eo haberi in loco, quo aut Mahumetana, aut Iudaica, quae Christum
penitus repudiant, and ab eius legibus and institutis abhorrent. Nam, sinulla
omnino extarent in ea, veteris Ecclesiae vestigia, Daniel non praedixisset,
futuram abominationem in loco sancto, neque Paulus, perditum illum filium, in
Templo Dei sessurum. Quomodo enim sederet Antichristus in Templo Dei, si nullae
amplius superessent illius Templi saltem reliquiae, and aliqua ruinarum
vestigia? aut, quomodo occupare abominatio lucu^ sanctum, si totus adeo esset
profanatus, vt ne vllus quidem vel exiguus angulus pristinae sanctitati
relictus esset? Nam, etsi praeualet, ac latius dominari videtur, hominum
iudicio, impietatis regnum: Et Christi Ecclesia vsque eo oppressa, ac pene
suffocata, vt vix spiritum amplius trahere possit, nondu^ tamen penitus animam
exhalait. Viret. Tract. de Commun. fid. cum Pap. cer. page 66. 67. The sum of
his words is, first, that the popish Church may not be accounted of as the
Mahomet and Jewish Churches, which refuse Christ altogether: Secondly, that if
no prints of Gods Church remained in the popish Church, Daniel and Paul would
not have foretold: the one, that abomination should be in the Holy place: the
other, that Antichrist should sit in the temple of God: Lastly, that the Church
of God amongst the Papists, though it be almost smothered, has not as yet
given up the ghost.

Daneus writes, that the Popish Church is the Church and Temple of God, not
simply, but secundum quid, that is, after a sort: His reason is, because the
popish Church retains some printe of the marks and badges of Gods Church.
Tract. de Ant. cap. 17.

M. Fox has these words: Neque enim Romam ita totam etc. In Apoc. cap. 13.
page 235. that is, we do not so sever Rome from al fellowship of the church,
that it shall have no conjunction at all, with the body of Christ.

If M. Penry mislike my first reason, let him confute it, etc.

2 Jeroboam did set up Calves at Bethel and Dan. In his time, the service of
God was strangely corrupted: yet, certain prerogatives belonging to the
Church, remained then amongst the Jews. Circumcision, which was the Lords
Sacrament, could not be so defiled by the unclean hands of the Jews, but that
it was always a sign and Sacrament of Gods covenant: therefore God called the
infants of that people, his children, etc. In the Popish Church, God has
preserved Baptism, etc. Besides, there remain amongst them other remnants,
vidz, the Lords prayer, the Articles of the faith, the Commandments, etc.
least the Church should utterly perish, etc. Lastly, Almighty God has
miraculously preserved amongst them the remnants of his people, though poorly
and thinly scattered, etc. Of this M. Calvin concludes, that the popish
Churches, are Churches. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 2. sect. 11.12.

If my second reason, taken out of M. Calvin please you not, confute that part
of M. Caluines Institutions.

3 If there be no Church at all in Popery, the infants of Papists, are not to
be baptized in any reformed Church, though some of the religion, do answer
for, and undertake the good educatio^ of them. Which I take to be a great
error.

Master Calvin, and the rest of the learned men in Geneua, being required of
M. Knoxe to set down their judgment, touching this question, vidz. whether
the infants of Idolaters and excommunicate persons might be admitted to
baptism, etc. deliver this answer: Promissio, non sobolem tantum cuiusque
fidelium in primo gradu comprehendit, sed in mill generationes exte^ditur.
Vnde etiam factum est, vt pietatis interruptio, quae grassata est in papatu,
etc. Calu. Epist. 285. The sum of their words is, that Gods promise, does not
only comprehend the posterity of the faithful in the first degree, but
reaches unto a thousand generations: and that those children which descended
of such ancestors as were godly many years ago, do belong to the body of the
Church, though their parents and grandfathers were Apostates, etc. M. Beza
writes thus of this argument: Iniquu^ esset Papistas, etc. Epist. 10. The
sum of his words is, that Papists are otherwise to be accounted of then
Turks: because Popery is an aberratio^ of the Christian Church. Besides,
because Gods goodness extends it self to a thousand generations, that it
were a hard case, to judge by the profession of the later parents, whether the
infants pertain to Gods covenant, etc. Thus far M. Beza.

If any shall reply, that Gods covenant has no place at all amongst the
Papists, and therefore that their infants are at no hand to be baptized in
our Churches, howsoever some of the religion offer them in the assembly to the
holy Sacrament: M. Caluines answer is: Certum est, adhuc illic manner residuum
faedus Dei exparte: quia quamuis, etc. Call. Ezec. 16.20. That is, It is
certain that the covenant is there on Gods behalf, and therefore that Popish
baptism needs not to be renewed: besides, that Satan, albeit he reigned of
late in the Popish Church, could not altogether extinguish the grace of God:
imo, illic est ecclesia. Alioqui, falsum esset Pauli vaticinium, vbi dicit,
antichristum sedere in Dei templo. 2. These. 2.4. That is, A Church is there:
otherwise Paul's prophecy, that Antichrist should sit in the temple of God,
were false, etc. If it shall please the learned reader to read M. Caluines
Commentary upon chap. 16. and verse. 20. of Ezech. It will be worth his labor.

A Popish objection of the absurd Papists, and of Master Penry.

If the Church of Rome be a Church, those Magistrates which have separated
themselves and their subjects from the Popish Church, are Schismatikes, etc.

Answer.

Our Magistrates, people, etc. have severed themselves, not from the Church,
but from Idolatry: not from the common wealth, but from tyranny oppressing the
common wealth: not from the City, but from the plague which pestereth the
City, etc. that is, separation is not from any truth remaining in the Popish
Church, nor from the poor Church, that is there holden under captivity, but
from the corruptions of the Popish Church, and from the tyranny of Antichrist,
which is more grievous then the yoke either of Egypt or Chaldaea: therefore
godly princes, and people, cannot justly be called Schismatikes. Thrasibulus
withdrewe himself to Phile, during the time that thirty tyrants did tear in
pieces the common wealth in Athens. Camillus withdrew himself to Veies, during
the time that the Gauls wasted the City of Rome. If any shall conclude of
this, that Thrasibulus and Camillus, separated themselves from the common
wealths of Rome and Athens, and not from the tyranny under which the Atheniens
and Romans then were, he reasons most absurdly, etc. The sum of my
answer is contained in the writings of that French Gentleman, Philip of
Mornay. Tract. de eccle. cap. 10. The name of Schismatike, is much fitter for
proud Penry and his fantastical disciples, then for godly Magistrates and
people, who are most sawcily dealt with, by the Anabaptisticall crew.

Question.

Whether all our ancestors, which lived and died in the Popish Church, are
damned?

Answer.

Philip of Morney, does answer thus: As our adversaries make a difference
between the Church and the people, snatching the name of the Church only to
the Prelates, which should be common to all Christians: so, we likewise do
well put a difference, between the people cleaving to the Church of Rome, and
the faction of Antichrist: between them who live under the Popedom, and the
vpholders and mainteiners of the Pope: between the inchaunters, and those that
are inchaunted: between the Pharisees, whom Christ calls a generation of
vipers, and the poor sick woman, whom he called the very daughter of Abraham.
We say, that among the poor people, which was so long time deceived under the
darkness of Antichrist, there was a part of the body of the visible Church:
But that the Pope and his mainteiners, are the botch of the plague in it, which
stifleth and choketh it as much as it can, etc. And a little after, etc. We
know that the most part of the people, were ignorant of those pestilent
doctrines which the Schoolmen left in writing, that is to say, of the
principal blasphemies of the Papacy: also, that the more part did never
believe, that they could merit everlasting life by their own works,
whatsoever men preached thereof. Again, albeit that through custom and
ignorance they went to Saints and Images, and frequented Masses and
Pilgrimages: yet notwithstanding in their conflicts of death, they always
principally claue to the cross of Jesus Christ. We have an example of S.
Barnard himself, and we have seen many more in our time. Saint Barnard in
certain places sauoureth of the contagion of his time, as it was hard he
should do otherwise. But see his refuge when he was tempted of the devil, in
his last days: I confess (says he) that I am not worthy of it. I know that
I can not by mine own works obtain the kingdom of heaven. But my Lord has
obtained it by a double right: by inheritance from the father, and by the
merit of his passion. Now he is contented with the one, and gives me the
other. And when I attribute it to my self, by the gift which he has made unto
me thereof, I cannot be confounded. And in another place: My merit is the
mercy of the Lord. And I am not poor in merits, because he is rich in his
mercies: I have greatly sinned, but I will comfort my self in the stripes of
my Lord. Even so likewise, we assure our selves in the mercy of God, that a
great number held the foundation in Jesus Christ, whereof the Apostle
speaks, albeit Antichrist shook it, and as it were, endeavored to ouerturne
it in them, all that he might. Phil. Mor. Tract. de Eccle. cap. 9. Of this
judgment, is that famous man, Peter Martyr, in his Commentary upon the
Epistle to the Corinthians, cap. 15. verse. 18. I rest in their judgment.

CHAP. 18. THAT POPISH PRIESTS have a calling, though a faulty one.
IF popish priests have no calling at all, Baptism was delivered in the Popish
Church by private men, which is a gross absurdity.

2 Many Popish Priests after detestation of their popish errors, were allowed
ministers in the reformed Churches, without imposition of hands etc. therefore
in the judgment of the best Churches, they had before a calling though a
faulty one.

Those execellent fathers and Martyrs, Cranmer, Rydley, Hooper, Latymer etc.
which were sometimes Popish priests, were allowed Ministers of the Gospel
without imposition of hands etc. Calvin writing of Popish priests has these
words: Si vero quis istiusmodi etc. and a little after: Si obijcitur Pauli
Canon ille, quo, traditur eligendum Episcopum irreprehensibilem esse oportere
respondeo, non hic agi, meo quidem iudicio, de simplici vel absoluta electione,
sed de approbatione vel restitutione ad certum munus, propter interuenientem
corruptionem. And a little after: Duo sunt in illo statu summa vitia. Vnum, quod
non recta ratione instituti sunt ad munus Eeclesiasticum etc. The sum of M.
Caluines words is, that such Popish priests as detested popery, and were fit to
be employed in the ministry, might be allowed, or rather restored to the
Ecclesiastical function: first, because they were not before rightly
instituted. Secondly, ad corrigendum praecedentem defectum, that is, to correct
the former defect etc. Calu. Epist. 373. By which words it is manifest that
Popish priests even in the popish Church, had, and have in M. Caluines
judgment a calling, though a faulty one. The same M. Calvin in an other
place, has these words: Cogimur fateri penes illos esse ordinarium
ministerium. that is, We are compelled to confess that papists have an
ordinary ministry. Calu. Ezech: cap. 13. v. 9. If M. Penry will take
exception against M. Caluines writings and the judgment of all Gods Churches,
let him confute them very soundly. If he can do that, he shall be accounted the
rarest man alive. If he can not (which I am very sure of) he shall not be
Magnus Apollo, that is, go for a Patriarch, (as his ignorant followers do
account him) but he shall be dubbed (as he is in deed) an other Neuius, that is,
a loud and clamorous companion. If either M. Penry or any of his fantastical
crewe shall think much of my speech, I do not pass. I confess freely that
sharp words are not sufficient plasters for such proud sores. I hope, the
Magistrates will consider further of him and such as he is. Duro nodo, durus
cuneus, etc. that is, A wedge of iron, is fittest for knottie vvood.

CHAP. 19.20. THEY WHICH ARE ONCE baptized, must not be baptized again.
THe covenant of grace and peace, which is made and sealed up in baptism, is
perpetual: for, Almighty God remains ever faithful in his covenant:
therefore, etc.

2 If Baptism should be iterated, Gods fidelity (which cannot be made void by
our infidelity) should be called into question: which were a heinous sin.

3 Circumcision was never iterated, therefore Baptism may not. Baptism is to
us, as circumcision was to the Israelites.

4 As the carnal generation is one, so the spiritual generation is one. Semel
nascimur, semel renascimur.

5 It appears not in Gods book, that any which received baptismum fluminis,
were rebaptized baptizmo fluminis.

6 Agrippinus the Bishop of Carthage, was author of iterating baptism etc.
Vinc. Lir. Cap. 9.

CHAP. 20. THERE IS TRVE Baptism in the Popish Church.
SVch as were and are baptized in the popish Church, were and are engraffed by
baptism into a true Christ: therefore they received true Baptism.

The argument follows: for baptism is an engraffing into the true Christ.
Romans chap. 6.3. The Antecedent is manifest in M. Penries judgment: for he will
not have them to offer themselves again to baptism: therefore he is either a
Catabaptist, or else there was and is (even in his judgment) true baptism in
the popish Church.

2 They which were circumcised in the time of Jeroboam and Caiphas, were
accounted true circumcised persons, although at that time the state of the
Church was almost altogether perverted and corrupted: therefore such as were
and are baptized in the popish Church etc. This argument is used of the
greatest learned men of the religion, and is allowed of all the reformed
Churches.

3 Calvin and Beza are resolute for this. Calu. Ion: chap: 1. v. 16. Ezech:
16. v. 20. Epist: 103. and 104. Beza Confess. chap. 4. Art: 49. and chap: 7.
Art: 11. Epist. 10. and 81.

Viretus has these words: Baptismum qui a sacerdotibus Papisticis collatus
est, etc. that is, we do allow popish Baptism, albeit we condemn the vain
and superstitious ceremonies, which are used in it. Tract de co^mun. fid. cum
Papist. cer. page 64.

Of this judgment are all learned men, and all reformed Churches. None
dissent, but Catabaptists, Anabaptists, M. Penry, and the rest of the
fantastical order.

CHAP. 21 THERE HAS BEEN AND may be true Baptism out of the Church.
THe Donatists thought otherwise in Augustines time: but they are notably
confuted by Augustine in his books, de baptis. contra Don.

2 True Circumcision was amongst the Edomites.

3 They which were baptized out of the Church by heretics, neither were nor
might be rebaptized: therefore they received true baptism.

The Antecedent is manifest, for it is a rule in Divinity, and received of all
learned men: Baptizati ab haereticis, non sunt rebaptizandi, that is, they
which are baptized of heretics, are not to be rebaptized.

The reasons are.

Where the essential form of baptism is observed, non haereticus, sed
haeretici manu Christus baptizat. that is, not the heretic but Christ does
baptize by the hand of the heretic. Aug. passim. de bapt. co^t. Don.

It is not the baptism of heretics or schismatics, but of God and the
Church, wheresoever it be found, and whithersoeuer translated. Aug. de bapt.
contra Don. lib. 1. cap. 14.

The heresy is theirs: the error is theirs, etc. but baptism which is
Christ's, must not be accounted theirs. Aug. de baptis. contra Don. lib. 3.
cap. 11.

Ciprian was of an other judgment in the Church of Carthage: but he was
condemned for that error by the best Churches in that age.

4. The Arc of the testament which was taken of the Philistims, lost not the
virtue of Sanctification, 1. Sam. 4. Dagon can teach us that.

5 Si foris nemo potest, etc. that is, if no man can have any thing which is
Christ's out of the Church, neither can any man have any thing which is the
devils within the Church. Aug. de bapt. contr. Don. lib. 4. cap. 7.

6 Non itaque ideo, non sunt sacramenta Christi and Ecclesiae, etc. that is,
they are not therefore, not the Sacraments of Christ and the Church, because
heretics and wicked men do unlawfully use them. They, that is, the heretics,
etc. are to be amended or punished: but the Sacraments are to be acknowledged
and reverently esteemed of, etc.

Question.

How do heretics possess baptism?

Answer.

Baptismum legitimum habent: sed non legitime habent: that is, heretics have
lawful baptism, but they have it not lawfully. Aug. de Bapt. cont. Don. lib.
5. cap. 7. Neque licite foris habetur, and tame^ habetur: sic, illicite for is
datur, sed tamen datur: that is, Baptism is not had lawfully out of the
Church: notwithstanding, it is had: In like sort, it is given out of the church
unlawfully: notwithstanding, it is given. Aug. de Bap. contra Don. lib. 6. ca.
15. If any shall ask whether it be lawful to offer our infants to baptism
out of the Church, etc. because all learned men (except the Donatists, etc. in
Augustines time, and M. Penry and his worthy disciples in our time) have and
do affirm, that true baptism has been and may be out of the Church: My
answer is negative, as Augustines was. I refer the learned reader to his
writings contra Cresc. gram. lib. 1. cap. 23. and de Bapt. contra. Don. lib. 1.
cap. 4.

CHAP. 22. I. Penry. THAT NO POPISH Priest is a Minister.
Every Minister must be at the least by profession, a member of the true
Church. No Popish Priest is by profession a member of the true Church.
Therefore no Popish Priest is a minister.

Every minister has an office within the body of the Church. No popish priest
has an office within the body of ye Church. Therefore no popish priest is a
minister.

The propositions or first part of both these reasons are set down evidently
and plainly by the wisdom of God, in these words. For as we have many members
in one body, and all members have not one office: so we being many, are one
body in Christ, and every one another members, seeing then that we have gifts
that are diverse. etc.

The place shows clearly, that whosoever is not a member, is not of the
body, if not of the body, then no minister. Again, whosoever is no member,
he has no office in the body: if no office, no minister. He that should
object that in this place is meant a member of the body, by election in the
secret counsel of God, and not in the acknowledgement of the Church by
profession, would not deserve the answering. Because it is vocation and not
election, that makes such a member in the Church as may have an office
therein: of which sort the Apostle speaks in this place. By vocation, I mean
that whereof the holy Ghost speaks, where it is said, Many are called, but
few are chosen: neither can any man deny him to be a member of the Church,
which by outward profession submits himself unto true religion, and such
are the members, whereof the Apostle speaks: namely such as are members in
the judgment of the Church. Judas was a member in the judgment of the Church,
though not belonging to election. A further proof of the propositions you
shall find 1. Cor. 12.26.28. He was no priest in the old Testament, that was
not a Jew by profession: yea, and of the line of Aaron too: and shall he be
accounted a minister among us, that is a stranger from the profession of the
truth, and a professed Idolater? Ishmael and Esau were circumcised, and the
sons of those fathers unto whom the covenant was made: Even I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed. They and their posterities fell from true
religion: well, admit that the profanation of circumcision had still continued
in their houses: yet a man supplying the place of a priest among them, was no
priest in deed, though he ten thousand times profaned circumcision, and would
brag never so often, that he worshipped after his Idolatrous manner, no other
God, but the God of his father Abraham, and swear only by the fear of his
father Isaac. The reason hereof is, because that every priest under the law,
must be an Israelite by profession, that is, a member of the true Church,
neither could any of the godly assure themselves, that an Edomitish priest
admistred true circumcision according to the substance. Now I reckon of a
popish priest no otherwise the^ I would have done of an Ismaelitish or
Edomitish circumciser: the profanation of that seal of the covenant, still
continuing in mount Seir.

R. Some. Your Mayor propositions in your two first arguments are. viz. Every
Minister must be at the least by profession a member of the true Church. And,
every Minister has an office within the body of the Church. My answer is,
that your Mayor propositions, and the proof of them out of the 12. to the Romans
are true, if you give them this sense, viz. that every lawful and good
Minister of God is by prosession a member and has an office within the body of
the sound Church. If you understand your Mayor propositions otherwise, I deny
them: my reason is: Excommunicated heretics which administer true baptism
out of the Church, had a calling though a faulty one: and yet these
heretics, neither were members, nor had any office in the true Church. That
Judas was a vessel of wrath, and yet an Apostle and a member of the Church in
the judgment of the Church, I make no question. The case of many hypocrites,
has and may be such for reprobation and ministry, though not for
Apostleship. That which I like of in this Treatise of yours, I will either allow
by some short speech, or else pass over with silence. Cauiling and wrangling,
become not such as profess and love the Religion. If none may be a Minister in
Gods Church by Gods order, but such as are members, that is, engraffed into
Gods Church: it is a good consequent that none in the time of the Law, might be
a Leuiticall Priest which was uncircumcised. Which point you dealt very
stra^gly in before. It is true that none might be a Leuiticall priest, which
was not a Jew by profession, and of the line of Aaron: but yet not every one
of Aarons line (if he were unfit for that holy function) might be admitted to
the Leuiticall priesthood, as you gave out before very absurdly. No popish
Priest (as he is a popish Priest) is accounted a Minister in our Church. If
you think otherwise, you think amiss: for I can assure you, that none which
have been popish Priests, either did or do administer in our Church without
the allowance of our Church. I confess, they receive not imposition of hands
again either in our Church or in other reformed Churches. If Circumcision was
amongst the Ismaelites and Edomites (as you write and I affirm) then a
Sacrament was amongst them. I pray you remember this. The Priests of Idumea, I
grant, were not Priests in deed, that is, they were not lawful and good
Ministers of God: for they had no lawful calling: yet they had a calling
though a faulty one: Otherwise Circumcision administered by them had been no
Sacrament. That which decemeth you, is, that you do not distinguish between a
lawful and good Minister of God, and a Minister: between a lawful calling,
and a calling, etc.


I. Penry. Whereas in the assumption or second part of both the reasons, I deny
popish Priests to be members of the Church: my meaning is not that there are
none of the elect, within the body of Popery, whom the Lord may call in his good
time: For I would not deny this unto Mahometisme, or that there are not left
in Popery certain rubishes and steps of true Religion, for this difference I
make between them and other Infidels, though the Jews also may claim this
unto themselves. But I mean that the Popish religion is such a religion as
whosoever lives and dies in the profession thereof: he lives and dies out
of the Church, where salvation is not possibly to be had, for any thing that is
made known unto man. Whence it necessarily follows, that in Popery there is
no Church. If it be objected that the Papists are within the Covenant, inasmuch
as long since they professed the truth: Mine answer will be, that Popery was
never the truth as yet, that no Papist in that he was a Papist, ever
professed the truth, and that God made no Covenant with professed Idolaters,
as all Papists are.


R. Some. Your Minor propositions in your two first arguments are, viz. No
popish priest is by profession a member of the church: And, No popish priest
has an office within the body of the Church. My answer is: If by (church) in
your Minor propositio^s you mean a sound Church: I grant that no popish priest
(as he is a popish priest and a professed papist) is either a member by
profession, or has an office within the body of the Church. If by (Church)
you mean an unsound Church: My answer is, that a popish priest is a member and
has an office within the body of the church. My reason is: the popish church
is a church, though an unsound church. For proof of this I have used diverse
reasons in this Treatise. I refer you to them. If they will not down with
you, you must confute the several writings of Calvin in his Institutions,
Commentaries and Epistles, and of other famous men, and condemn the judgment
of all the reformed churches. If your stomach serve you, you have matter
enough to work on, and more the^ you were well aware of. That steps of true
Religion remain in the Popish Church, it is manifest: for God preserved in
that Church verbum suum and baptismum, That is, his Word and Baptism: Beza in
Annot. Matt. 23.2. Yea, we of the Religion have received many good things from
the papists, as the Israelites did the Arc from the Philistines. I grant that
the Jews have many good things amongst them: yet there is great difference
between Jews and papists. The papist receives the new Testament: so does not
the Jew. The papist does not use circumcision, because the date of it is out,
but baptism which is an engraffing into Christ. The Jew retains
circumcision and does not admit baptism. That the papists are not altogether
aliens from Gods covenant, I have showed before, and do rest in M. Caluines
judgment, for that point. You write that popery was never the truth as yet.
If you mean that all popery was never the truth as yet, I agree with you. If
you mean that no part in popery was ever the truth as yet, you err
grossly, and are refuted by your own words, which are, that there are
certain steps of true religion in popery. You give out that no papist (in
that he was a papist) ever professed the truth. My answer is, that they did
and do err in very many things, but yet they did and do profess some
truth: and I doubt not, but that many which lived and died in the time of
popish darkness, died Gods servants. If you think that a man being wide in
many things, is wide in all things: then because you, M. Penry, have delivered
many blasphemous, Anabaptisticall, and other errors, I might justly conclude
that you hold nothing soundly: but I will not offer you such measure. If I did,
I should deal absurdly with you. How professed papists are Idolaters,
appears in my second proposition, which is newly added to my former treatise.
Thither I refer you.


I. Penry. Antichrist I grant should sit as God in the temple of God, but it
was never the temple of God, since he planted his pestilent chair therein.
Popery in deed has invaded the seats and possessions of true religion, and
began first where the truth was professed. For the mystery of iniquity first
appeared within the Church, and not elsewhere, where true religion flourished,
and not among the heathen: neither could he be that adversary, whose
beginning should be in Paganism. But although Popery took root in the
soil where the true Church was planted: yet it so grew there, that it still
continued to be the synagogue of Satan, and could never as yet be the Church of
God: howsoever it has ouergrowen the possession thereof. And what though their
fathers, who now are Papists, were within the covenant, as professing true
religion: shall it therefore follow that their Idolatrous sons should be so
too? If they return the Lord has mercy in store for them I deny not. But
what is there in this point said for the Papists, which the Jews cannot with
far more show of reason pretend for themselves? The profaning of Baptism
among the Papists can make them no more be within the Church, then the
continuance of the profanation of Circumcision among the Ishmaelites and
Edomites could keep them under the covenant. And why should popish Baptism
any more tie the Lords covenant to an Idolatrous race, then an Ishmaelitish or
Edomitish cutting off of the foreskinne, link him to be the God of those
adulterous generations? Oh but the Lord himself has said, in Isaak shall thy
seed be called, and Iaacob have I loved, and hated Esau. Why the same Lord in
respect of his revealed will, for with his secret election men must not
meddle, has said, the professors of true religion do I love, but the
Idolatrous papists my soul abhors: It will be here demanded whether I make
no more account of popish baptism, then of an Edomitish circumcision, I see no
reason why I should. For a circumcised Edomite being received, to be a true
worshipper at Jerusalem, should as well content himself with that circumcision
(circumcision being not a thing invented by man, or done in respect of man, but
ordained by the Lord, and done in regard of the covenant made unto Abraham) as
we do with popish baptism, which is not called in question.

And yet that which is spoken concerning the profession of the truth, by the
forefathers, is not altogether true in popery: for there be many large regions
now professing popery, where not so much as the name of Christ was heard,
until they were become grossly popish. So that their first step was out of
paganism unto popery. And this is the estate of all those poor oppressed
vassals the west Indians, who now in great numbers profess Romish Idolatry.
For at such time as the Spanyard inuading their land brought upon them the most
miserable slavery of the body and soul, that are upon any people under
heaven, they had not so much as heard whether there was any Christ, but were
most heathnish, and senseless Idolaters, as may appear by the popish
hystoriographers themselves, who wrote the stories of those times: And
therefore (to omit, whose posterities many of the nations within Europe are,
that have refused the light of the Gospel) though it were granted, that the
rest of the popish rabble were within in the covenant: yet these miserable
heathen papists, can be said to be under no covenant, but that which is made
unto popery and paganism. I hope M. Some, howsoever you may be persuaded, that
other popish shauelings can deliver a sacrament, yet that you will doubt,
whether any man could be assured to receive those holy seals at the hands of
the heathen massemongers remaining in Cuba, Hyspaniola, Mexico, or any other
the Eastern parts.

And thus much concerning the assumption. I am not ignorant that famous and
worthy men, have otherwise written concerning the popish Church, and therefore
I am not to be pressed with their authority.


R. Some. If your writings were as sound as they are absurd, they would give
many times great advantage to the Papist, Anabaptist, etc. If the popish church
was never the temple of God, since Antichrist planted his pestilent chair
there, then in your judgment, the Pope is not Antichrist: for Antichrist does
and must sit in the Temple of God, that is, in the Church of God. I have
handled this argument before. I rest in that I have written there. You say that
a circumcised Edomite being received into the Church of Jerusalem, should
content himself with his circumcision in Idumea, because circumcision was the
Lords ordinance etc. I agree with you in this. If the Edomitish circumcision
was the Lords ordinance, then it was a seal of Gods covenant to the Idumeans,
and consequently the Edomites in your judgment were not Aliens from Gods
covenant: for, the seal of the covenant, does import and presuppose a
covenant. Besides, if the Edomitish circumcision was true circumcision, and the
Edomitish Church no Church: then a Sacrament was out of the Church etc. How
like you this, M. Penry? You know my meaning. You add, that you call not
popish baptism in question. Here, I grant, you do not: but a little after,
you use these words: viz. where there is no true Christ whereunto men can be
engraffed by baptism, there true baptism as touching the substance cannot be
gotten etc. But in popery there is no true Christ etc. mendacem oportet esse
memore^. Your memory is very short. You would never, I think, have ve^ted such
motley stuff as this, if you had thought it would have bin looked on. I can
assure you, that besides me, whom you have put to a little pains, your treatise
has been viewed and reuiewed by very many learned men, who condemn it for a
foolish and fantastical babble. If the west Indians after profession of their
belief in the holy trinity, were baptized, as you say, by popish shauelings,
I assure my self that they received true baptism, and were therefore engraffed
into Christ. We in the Church of England need not sail (thanks be to God) to
the massemo^gers in Cuba, Hispaniola, Mexico, or any other part of the Indians,
we have Gods holy seals amongst us. If you call such of the Indians as are
baptized, heathen, you do them great wrong: for baptism is the external badge
of a Christian. I do not marvel though you be bold with the Indians, which
are so far off, when you are so saucy with the principal of the religion in
this noble land: I mean our Magistrates and learned men, which are singular
ornaments of our Church and commonwealth. The question you move, shall receive
my answer, when I understand that either you or some other of your
fantastical disciples, are on shippeboarde, and under sail for Mexico in
India. You confess that famous men have written otherwise of the popish Church
then you think. To that end you quote M. Caluines 103. Epistle. I rest in his
judgment: because you do not so, I pray you confute him. I must needs tell
you plainly that I make more account of one Calvin then of a thousand
Penries. Calvin was a man of singular learning, an enemy to papists,
Anabaptists, Catabaptists, etc. a notable light and ornament in Gods Church.
What you are, I will not say. I would be loath to do you wrong: therefore, I
will not match you with so famous a man as M. Calvin was.


I. Penry. I might in the third place use against you M. Some, a reason of your
own thus concluded. No ministry is sacrilege, because every ministry is
an ordinance of God, which cannot be turned unto sacrilege. The popish
priesthood is sacrilege, as you have set down 21. Therefore the popish
priesthood is no ministry, and consequently popish priests are no ministers.
You may see that you have overthrown your own cause. But this manner of
reasoning, although it should be of force against your self, inasmuch as your
own words are brought to express your own meaning, yet I account
insufficient.


R. Some. I have written, I confess, that the Popish priesthood is sacrilege.
Of this you conclude, that the popish Priesthood is no Ministry, that is, no
calling at all: and that I have overthrown mine own cause. Stay your self a
while good Sir. This victory deserves not so much as an oaten straw for the
trumpet. I deny your argument: for it is a fallace a secundum quid ad
simpliciter. I grant that that part of the Popish priesthood which is occupied
in sacrificing, is sacrilege: But that part of the Popish priesthood which is
occupied in the administration of baptism is not sacrilege. For this point I
allow Chemnicius judgment. His words are these: Verum quidem est, quia
principalis pars ministerij est doctrina: quod ideo quando vera doctrina
deprauatur, and prauae opiniones stabiliuntur, ipsum ministerium mutatur, and
quod illoru^ ministerium, qui doctrinam corrumpunt, ideo reliquendum sit, quia
scriptum est: Cauete a pseudoprophetis: Item, vocem alienorum non audiunt, sed
fugiunt ab ea. Simul tamen and hoc verum est, partem ministerij, vt sacramenti
alicuius administrationem, aliquando possideri etiam ab his, qui in alijs
materijs graves errores amplectu^tur: imo saepe habent, administrant, and dant
vera sacramenta illi etiam, qui ipsis sacramentis assuunt falsas aliquas
opiniones, modo substantialia, quae ad materiam and formam iuxta institutionem
pertinent, seruent: sicut exemplum de circumcisione Caiphae, Scribarum and
Pharisaeorum manifest testatur. Nullo modo autem sequitur, quia vera fuit
circumcisio, quae a Pharisaeis dabatur, ideo etiam veras fuisse omnes
opiniones, quas praeter and contra verbum Dei, non ta^tum alijs articulis
doctrinae, verum ipsi etia^ circumcisioni, traditionibus suis assuebant. Chemn.
in 2. par. exam. decret. Conc. Trident: Canon. 5. The sum of his words is,
that though true doctrine which is the principal part of the Ministry be
depraved, yet that a part of the ministry, viz. the administration of a
Sacrament, is possessed sometimes of them which in other matters hold gross
errors. Yea, they have and do often administer a Sacrament (though they do
annexe to the Sacrament some false opinions) if they retain such things
according to the Institution, which be essential for matter and form.
Circumcision used in the time of Caiphas and the Pharisees, is witnesses enough
of this, etc. Thus you see how trimly my words do serve your turn. Thrasilaus
was a fra^ticke man amongst the Athenians. He counted all the ships which
sailed toward. Athens, to be his: but he was foully deceived: so are you in
accompting my speeches your arguments.


I. Penry. They are no ministers whose very ministry overthrows directly
the Priesthood of our savor Christ: But the very ministry of popish priests,
directly overthrows the Priesthood of Christ: therefore they are no
ministers.

I know not what can be pretended against the proposition, unless men would
dream of a ministry, with whom the Priesthood of the Lord Jesus cannot
stand. The latter part of the reason is true, if it be true that Christ is the
only sacrifice for sin, that he is no more to be offered, that by once
offering himself, he has made full satisfaction for the sins of the whole
world, and that the popish priests daily sacrifice to appease Gods wrath, for
the sins of the quick and the dead.


R. Some. Before that I answer this Argument, I must tell you first, that
every one of the Religion is persuaded (as well as you) that Christ is the
only sacrifice for sin. Secondly, I must tell you, that this argument of
yours is very near of kin to that which you will needs borow of me: for it
is al one with the last. But I must bear with you: you have a special gift in
varying a phrase. For that, you shall bear the Bell, and carry the clapper too,
if you will. Is any part, I beseech you, of the Popish priesthood, called
sacrilege by any learned Protestant, but because it is occupied (as the
Papists say most absurdly) in sacrificing Christ? Now I come to your worthy
reason. I deny your Minor. My reason is as before. I rest in my answer to your
former argument, which is the same with this. Now Sir, if I were disposed as
you are, I could give out, that you are near driven, when one Argument
appears (I will not say as you did, is perjured) twice: and that you are like
to them which would make men believe, there are several meats, because one
kind of meat is served in several dishes.


I. Penry. Lastly, they are no Ministers who are made, that is, called, elected
and ordained by Idolaters. Popish priests are called, chosen and ordained by
Idolaters: Therefore they are no ministers.

The proposition appears, in that a minister can be made by none, but by such
as unto whom the Lord has given leave to deal in that action, otherwise the
action is frustrate. As if a company of women, though religious and godly,
should go about to make a minister, the action is nothing. Of the assumption
that popish priests are made by Idolaters, I make no question. And when did
God give Idolaters leave to make ministers?

Seeing therefore that popish priests are no ministers, I see no show of
probability whereupon my faith, or the faith of any can be assured to receive
true baptism at their hands: unless it can be showed by you, M. Some, that
either there may be faith where there is no promise, or that there is a
promise to receive a sacrament where there is no minister, which no man of any
christian modesty will affirm. Hence also it follows, that neither the
obstinate crew of recusants in this land, who offer their children to be
profaned by traiterous and runnagate Jesuits, nor any else within the body of
the Romish Babylon, can assure themselves that their children receive the
substance of baptism.


R. Some. If by ministers in your Mayor proposition, you mean lawful and good
ministers of God, I agree with you. If you mean otherwise, I dissent. If by
idolaters in your Mayor proposition, you understand not Pagane but popish
idolaters: my answer is, that such as were called, elected and ordained by
them, had a calling though a faulty one. Otherwise Luether, Ridley, Cranmer,
Hooper, etc. had no calling at all. For this point, I refer you to that I
have set down before, chap. 18. of this Treatise. You ask this question, viz.
When did God give idolaters leave to make ministers? I answer: even then when
he gave the Israelites leave to make your ignorant Levites priests: and when
he gave foolish electours of Magistrates leave to choose such Magistrates as
your foele Candaules was that is, Almighty God gave no leave at all. And yet
you are resolute, that the ignorant Leuitical priests, which might be well
begged for idiots were lawful priests, though not good priests: and that
such as are chosen Magistrates even against the wool, have both the life and
birth of Magistrates. It pleases you to say, that because Popish priests are
no ministers in your judgment, that you cannot be assured to receive baptism
at their hands. Then belike, if you were persuaded (as all learned men are)
that Popish priests have a calling, you would be content that infants should be
presented to baptism in the Popish Church: which Popish Church in your
judgment, is no church at all. What I think of that particular, I will not
presently write: but this I tell you, that this Argument does not necessarily
follow: viz. True circumcision was given in Idumea, and true baptism has been
and may be given of excommunicated heretics: therefore, they of Jerusalem in
the former times, might require circumcision amongst the Edomites, or they of
Hippo or Carthage in latter times, might require baptism amongst the Donatists.


I. Penry. My reasons besides that they are no ministers, are these. And I
desire that they may be examined by you, good M. Some, where you must remember
that I speak not of that which has been done yesterday, but of the^ assurance
that may be had of that which to morrow is to be done.


R. Some. Sir, you desire me to examine your reasons. You shall have an easy
suite of this: for I am very forwards to do you that pleasure. You grant it
to be baptism which was administered yesterday in the Popish church: but, you
doubt of that which is delivered to morrow. Then yesterday a Sacrament, and to
morovv none. You dare not for your ears, say in flat terms, that it was no
baptism which was delivered heretofore in the Popish church: for then, many
thousands whose Christendom you call in question, would condemn you for a
Catabaptist. But it has pleased you to set down this marginal note in an
other place, viz. As I do not deny that which has been done to be a
Sacrament: so, if any can prove it to be none, I will not withstand him. In
your Exhort. to the governors etc. of Wales, page 31. If I were not well
acquainted with your absurd vvritings, I should vvonder at you more then I
do. Your reasons, such as they are, do follovv.


I. Penry. Where there is no true Christ whereunto men can be engraffed by
baptism, there true baptism as touching the substance cannot be gotten: for
what baptism is that, which is not an ingraffing into the true Christ?

But in popery there is no true Christ, whereunto men may be ingraffed, because
he is not the true Christ, who either will not, or cannot satisfy the wrath of
God for the sins of the elect, without their merits, and such is the Christ
professed in popery, and no other.

Therefore men cannot be assured to have the substance of baptism in the
popish Church.


R. Some. I deny your Minor proposition: for such as were baptized in the
Popish church, were engraffed by baptism into a true Christ. The essential
form of baptism was and is retained by the Popish priests: viz. To baptize
in the Name of the holy Trinity. If your Minor proposition were true as it is
very false: then very many in this and other lands which were baptized by
Popish priests in the Popish church, are unbaptized: for baptism is an
engraffing into the true Christ: and you write that no such engraffing is in
the Popish church, because no true Christ is professed in popery. If you tell
me that you speak not of that which was done yesterday, but of that which is
to morrow, it is a blind and beggarly shift: for the Christ professed in
popery, was a divided Christ, when her Majesty was baptized, as even now he
is in the Popish church. That case and profession is all one. To proceed,
because I will answer your reason thoroughly, I will set it down in this sort:
The Christ professed in Popery is a divided Christ, and consequently not a
true Christ: therefore none in the Popish church are engraffed by baptism into
the true Christ. This is your reason M. Penry. My answer is, your Antecede^t
is true: I deny your argument. My reason is: the false profession of any man
whatsoever, cannot separat Christ from his own institution, Romans 3: therefore,
seeing Christ's institution is in Popish baptism, the true Christ is there,
that is, in that baptism. I do set down my words more warily then I needed:
because I find you to be a mere wrangler, and to take up that which I never
let fall. Besides, circumcision in Idumea, as you write, was true circumcision
and a seal of Gods covenant: yet, the Edomites, which you cannot deny, failed
in the true worship of Almighty God. I hope you see by this time that your
Arguments are scopae dissolutae, very loose ware and slenderly trussed
together. I am sure you esteemed them mountains: but they are not worthy the
name of mollhils. I deal plainly with you. If my answers please you not,
confute them directly, and not with ifs, ands, and whies: in which kind of
answering (if I may call it answering) you have a special grace.


I. Penry. No man can assure himself to have the substance of baptism out of
the Church, and that by those that are without the Church: for then a sacrament
might be had out of the Church, which were very impious and absurd to be
affirmed.

But popery is out of the Church, and so are all popish priests.

Therefore no man can assure himself to have the substance of baptism in
popery by any popish priest.


R. Some. Before that I deny any part of your reason, I must tell you that I
have proved already that true baptism has been and may be out of the Church.
Ciprian thought otherwise, and therefore would have such as were baptized by
excommunicated heretics, to be rebaptized. But he was and is condemned for
that error by ancient and later writers. You give out very peremptorily, that
it is very impious and absurd to affirm that baptism either has been or may
be out of the Church. So did the Donatists in Augustines time. It is no great
matter what you say. Your bolt is soon shot. Your water is very shallow. Many
points which you condemn in your Consistory for gross absurdities, are
manifest trueths in the sound judgment of all reformed Churches. So is this
present particular. Touching your argument, I deny your Minor. My reason is:
the Popish church is a church though an unsound Church: and Popish priests
have a calling though a faulty one. For proof of this I refer you to that
which I have written before in this Treatise. If you like not my reasons,
confute them.


I. Penry. That there is no Church at all in popery, and that all popish
priests are out of the Church, besides the former reasons, this one does
further show. If there be a Church in popery, or if all popish priests be not
out of the Church, then those magistrates that have separated themselves and
their subjects (and all others that made this separation) from the Romish
religion, as from that synagogue where salvation is not to be had, and
consequently, where there is no Church, are schismatikes, to speak the least.
Because it is a schism to make this separation from the Church, detest the
corruptions thereof we may, but make such a separation from the Church, we
ought not unless we would be accounted schismatiks. But those Magistrates and
their people, that made this separation, are not schismatickes, because in
Popery the foundation is overthrown. You say in your book (M. Some) page 33.
that you could press the Argument of the Magistracy against me very far.
Whether you may or no, that shall be considered when I deal with the point: but
this I am assured of, that in this point, you shall be driven either to defend
the absurdity, that baptism is to be had out of the Church in a company
estranged from Christ, which I think you will not do, or urged so far, as to
the plain breach of a Statute (which far be it from me) even in the cause of
treason. Will ye say that baptism may be had out of the Church? the assertion
is absurd: Or will you hold that there is a Church in Popery? the assertion is
dangerous, and I have proved it false. It is dangerous, because it affirms
our Magistrates to be schismatiks, inasmuch as they have separated themselves
from the Church: I hope rather then you will fall into either of these points,
that you will grant me the cause.


R. Some. I will answer your several points very briefly. The reason which
you use to prove there is no Church at all in popery, is this, viz. If there
be a Church at al in popery, the Magistrates and people which are of the
religion are schismatics at the least. My answer is, that this is a popish
argument. I have answered it before, and do rest in that answer. If either
you or any of the popish sort mislike my answer, you may confute it. Besides,
if there be no Church at all in popery, as you affirm, why should the Churches
of England, Germany, De^marke, (which were sometimes popish) be called reformed
Churches? The very name of reformed Churches does manifestly import, that the
Churches of England, Germany, Denmark, etc. (though popish and unsound) were
Churches in some sort, before the reformation. If you think that all the
popish sort which died in the popish Church ore damned, you think absurdly:
for you dissent from the judgment of all the learned protestants, and do
presume to sit in Gods chair, which is intolerable sauciness. To say, or
write, that true baptism has been, and may be out of the Church, is a true
proposition in divinity. Augustine did maintain it against the Donatists. The
most famous me^ and Churches in our time, are of that judgment. I rest in that
with all my heart. You account it an absurd proposition. The best is, you are
not master of the sentences, as Peter Lumbard was. If you were (which God
defend) the sound divinity which is taught in Cambridge and Oxford, should be
cried down, and your strange fancies should be ruled cases. The argument of
the magistracy is touched before. I perceive it has moved you a little: for
you draw out a statute of Treason, etc. What, I beseech you good Sir? No less
then Treason? you are a charitable man. I have, do, and will perform all
duty, by Gods grace, to the religion and my gracious Prince, so long as I
live: therefore treason statutes can take no hold of me. Yea, the refutation
of your blasphemous, Anabaptisticall, popish, and proud errors by me, is, I
am sure, a performance of a special duty to Almighty God, my Prince, and
this Church. And, I doubt not, but that blessing which God has given already
to my last treatise, and which his Majesty will give to this, will mar your
market. Great words shall not fray me, etc. If your ignorant disciples will still
magnify you, it shall not be strange to me: they do but their kind. Such as be
learned and wise, have, and do find you out. Cognoscitur quis sit, vt vt
laudetur Coruus. The most famous orators that ever were in Rome and Athens,
could not make the raven to be no raven. Tertullus commended Felix, Act. 24.
but Felix was an absurd body, and stripped of his office by Claudius Caesar.
The Samaritans commended Simon Magus. Act. 8: Libanius the Sophister commended
Julian the Apostate. Socr. lib. 3. cap. 22. Eunomius commended Aetius, which
was a pestilent heretic. Theodor. lib. 2. cap. 29. You have protested many
times in your treatise that you reverence me: but here you offer me this
choice, either to defend that which is in your judgment an absurdity (but in
deed is none) or to incur the danger of treason etc. Do you think that I
have any the least cause to believe your glorious protestations? Ioab pretended
extraordinary good will to Abner, and Amasa: but he killed them. 2. Sam. 3.
and 20. chap. Ismael pretended extraordinary good will to them of Sichem, Silo,
Samaria: the beast shed tears, but they were Crocodiles tears: for of 80.
godly men he killed 70. of them. Ier. cap. 41. Judas kissed Christ, but he
betrayed him. Matthew. 26. You use goodly words sometimes, but proud malice will
appear: it cannot be hidden. Marcus Cicero in his time had many hollow
friends. After his return from banishment, he was revenged of them Nihil
credendo, omnia cauendo, that is, in crediting them in nothing, and bewaring of
them in every thing. If I serve you so, I can not be justly blamed. You
pretend great sincerity and innocence: but your heretical absurdities in
your treatise, and your shameless dealing with our Magistrates and learned
men, do cry aloude that you are in deed very little acquainted with sincerity
and innocence. I tell you plainly, that I like better Humile peccatum quam
superba^ innocentiam, that is, humble sin then proud innoce^cie. The humble
Publican was more accounted of then the proud Pharisee. Luke 18. I pray God
with all my heart to keep me and all such as love the religion and detest your
Anabaptisticall fancies, from such as you and the fantastical sort are. You
and they are strange cattle. Your hope that I will grant you the cause you
defend, is a vain hope: for I think great scorn to be one of ignorant
Penries disciples, that is, a proud and ignorant Anabaptist. If you will have
any thing at my hands in divinity matters, you must gain it by force of
argument. If you think that I will come off otherwise, you are in a wrong
box: for I intend not to be at your whistle. Yea, I require and charge you in
the name of God (if you be not void of grace) to confess your ignorance, to
detest your errors, to yield unto Gods truth, that Gods blessing may rest upon
you. If you refuse to do this, take heed that Gods vengeance seize not upon
you.


I. Penry. Lastly, if men might be assured that they could have the true
substance of baptism in Popery, then they ought not to keep their children
from Popish baptism, if there were no other baptism in the world to be had.
For men might come to their baptism and detest their corruptions, if it be
Gods baptism, as you M. Some affirmed it to be, page 20. And they can add an
edifying word unto the Sacrament: if the recital of the words of institution
be an edifying word, and that be sufficient to make a Sacrament, both which you
have written, page 23. 24. But men ought rather to keep their children
unbaptized, then to offer them to be profaned by Popish baptism, both for
the former reasons, and because we ought to have no more fellowship with
Papists in the service of God, then with Pagane idolaters. M. Calvin has
written otherwise in this point, therefore again I appeal to the word.


R. Some. I will answer this section of yours both briefly and roundly by
the grace of God. That baptism delivered in the Popish church, was and is Gods
baptism, I make no question. For proof of this point, I have set down
weighty reasons in my former treatise: One of M. Caluines, an other ab
Absurdo. Your answers to them are very foolish, and are so accounted of by the
learned sort. I have examined them a little in this Treatise. It is the
judgment of all the reformed Churches, that there was and is true baptism in
the Popish church. Before, you denied it not: but now, the case is altered: you
account it an error to affirm it. What mutabilitie is this? He that would
sail after your compass for Divinity matters, should prove as giddie as a
goose. I pray God with all my heart to bless his people in England and Wales,
and to keep them from such blind guides as the ignorant sort are, and from
such blind guides as the ignorant sort are, and from such shameless and
fantastical guides as you, M. Penry, are. Concerning this question, viz.
whether men ought to offer their children to Popish baptism, if there were no
other baptism in the world to be had: M. Penry says one while that they
ought, if Popish baptism be Gods Baptism: which before he denied not. An
other while, he is peremptory that me^ ought rather to keep their children
unbaptized. His reason is: because we ought to have no more fellowship with
papists in Gods scruice, then with pagane Idolaters. The issue therefore now
is: first, whether infants ought rather to be kept unbaptized, then to be
presented to popish baptism. Secondly, whether no more fellowship is to be had
with papists in Gods service, then with heathen Idolaters. Concerning the first
question, M. Caluines resolution is affirmative, if the parents (which they
cannot do without peril of life) do publicly detest the popish corruptions. M.
Caluines reason is: the omitting of baptism is contempt of Christianity. Call.
Epist. 104. Of this judgment are Melanchthon and Peter Martyr. Call. Epist.
103. and Viretus Tract: de commun: fid. cum papist. Cer. page 61, 62, 70. I
confess freely, that this is a very weighty question (but in this our time a
needelesse question) and that men of great excellency for learning, have their
several judgments. I would be loath to stir coals in this argument.
Touching the other question, M. Penry says that no more fellowship is to be
had in religion matters with papists then with pagane Idolaters. I dissent from
him in this. My reasons are: first, the papists profess the holy Trinity: so
do not the pagane Idolaters. Secondly, the papists are not altogether aliens
from Gods external covenant: but the heathen Idolaters as yet are. Lastly, M.
Calvin is very flat against you in this point. Epist. 104. In steed of
answering his reasons in that Epistle, you appeal to the word. A strange kind
of appealing, when M. Caluines arguments are drawn out of the holy word. If
you will deal plainly as you ought, never piddle any longer: go through stitch
withal: seeing you are over shoes, adventure over boots too: confute Caluines
104. Epistle, and that which he has written very excellently upon the 20.
verse of the 16. chap. of Ezechiel. If you give the unset, and fail (whereof I
make no question) you shall lose no credit of learning: for you never had any
as yet. Qui semel verecundiae limits etc. you know the rest.


I. Penry. Seeing therefore in Popery there is no Church, no Ministry, no
Christ: Seeing we ought in no case to be joined with Papists in their
religion, but to be separated from them, as from those that are out of the
Church, and such as are become a very filthy cage and nest of unclean and
sacrilegious idolaters: therefore also it necessarily follows, that neither
our Popish recusants, nor any else, offering their children to be baptized in
the Popish synagogue, by those polluted and unclean Priests, may assure
themselves that they can be there partakers of true baptism, as touching the
substance of baptism.


R. Some. Seeing therefore in the judgment of all learned men and all reformed
Churches, there is in popery, a Church, a Ministry, a true Christ into whom
very many have been and are engraffed by Baptism: it is a sure consequent,
first that you have keptstra^ge coyles in comptrolling all the Churches of God,
and in setting down arguments as clear as midnight: Secondly, that your
conclusion (viz. that there is in popery, no Church, no ministry, no Christ)
is nothing else but an Anabaptisticall flourish, which will melt as wax before
the fire, and vanish as smoke before the wind.


CHAP. 24.
R. Some. BEfore that I set down M. Penries proposition and reasons touching
unpreaching Ministers, I must tell the godly reader, first, that my judgment
is, that Almighty God never called any to the holy ministry, either in the
old or new Testament, but he gave them gifts fit for that holy function:
Secondly, that by unpreaching Ministers, I understand such as have gifts in no
measure, for the discharge of that holy function. Such are M. Penries ignorant
Leuiticall priests, whom he warranteth (notwithstanding their extreme
ignorance) to be lawful priests, though not good priests. Such are some in our
days, which are fitter for the belfray, then for the body of the Church. That
such as these are, and they which admitted them, sinned grossly, I make no
question. That such ignorant men ought to be thrust out of the holy
ministry, and sent to some occupation, is a clear and ruled case in Gods
book. I have handled this argument before: I rest in that which I have written
there.


I. Penry. That unpreaching ministers are no ministers.

They are affirmed to be no Ministers, not because they are evil ministers,
but because their Ministry is an evil and profane ministry: So that in this
point the fault is not found with the evil minister, but with the evil
ministry. Their ministry is profane and evil, because there is no mention
made of it in the word. And a ministry not mentioned in the word is no
ministry, but a profane constitution. For the Lord has expressly set down
every ministry of the new Testament, that should be in the Church unto the
worlds end: Whereas he has not once mentioned the Ministry of our Readers,
because it is not a preaching Ministry. The sum of this whole controversy
is contained in these three axioms.

1 Every ministry is expressly set down in the word.

2 Every ministry of the new Testament is a preaching ministry.

3 The ministry of our unpreaching ministers, is not a preaching Ministry.

If you can show either of these 3. points to be false, I am overthrown: if
neither, you must yield. The truth of all three, I have showed out of the
Word, in the last edition of my book. The two former are confirmed by the
places quoted on the margent.


R. Some. My answer shall be so brief as may be. Wherein I dissent, I will
give my reasons. If the ministry (as you say) of unpreaching ministers be an
evil and profane ministry, it is a good consequent, that unpreaching
ministers, are evil and profane ministers. The argument follows a coniugatis.
To proceed: you write, that the ministry of ignorant ministers, is not
mentioned in the word* therefore it is no ministry (in your judgment) but a
profane constitution. I am sure you think this argument to be a sure one, but
you are fowly deceived. I deny your antecedent. My reason is: By Ministry in
your antecedent, I understand the reading of the holy Scriptures, the
delivering of the publikee prayers, the administration of the Sacraments: all
which are the co^stitution of Almighty God, therefore no profane constitution,
as you very profanely do imagine. He that misliketh the reading of the holy
Scriptures, is a Zwing fildian heretic. He that misliketh the administration
of the Sacraments, is a Messalian heretic. He that mislyketh the invocation of
our gracious God, is a filthy Atheist, that is, of no religion. If you tell
me, that you think excellently of the administration of the Sacraments,
public prayers, etc. But that your meaning is, that it is not Gods pleasure,
that ignorant men should administer such precious jewels, I assent unto you:
but, I must add this, that as you and I do mislike the entrance of unfit men
into, and the continuance of them in the holy ministry, so neither of us can
justly mislike their ministry, that is, the reading of the holy Scriptures,
etc. Now I come to your propositions, which you call Axioms. The first is
this: viz. Every ministry is expressly set down in the word. I grant that
the substance of every ministry is expressly set down in the holy word. By
Ministry, I understand not only the ministry of the word and Sacraments
(as you do in this place) but that ministry which concerns the relief of
the poor, and the civil government. For the Magistrate is the minister of
God. Romans 13. If Magistracy is Gods ministry, and the substance of it
expressly set down in Gods book, it is a good consequent that Magistracy is
not a device of man, but an ecclesiastical constitution, prescribed in the
word. Your second Axiom is this: viz. Every ministry of the new Testament
is a preaching ministry. If you mean (as I think you do) every ministry
of the word in the new Testament, I dissent not from you. Now sir, to come a
little nearer you, I must tell you that which either you know not, or
dissemble, viz. that the laws of this land do bar ignorant men from
entering into the holy ministry: they are flat against it. I offer you a
branch of an Act of Parliament to be considered of. The words of the Act are
these: viz. That none shall be made minister or admitted to preach or minister
the Sacraments, being under the age of 24. years, nor unless he first bring
to the Bishop of that Diocese from men known to the Bishop to be of sound
religion, a testimonial both of his honest life, and of his professing the
doctrine expressed in the said Articles: nor, unless he be able to answer
and render to the Ordinary an account of his faith in Latin, according to the
said Articles: or, have special gift and ability to be a preacher: nor
shall be admitted to the order of Deacon or ministry, unless he shall first
subscribe to the said Articles. Anno. 13. Reg. Elizab. cap. 12. You see by
this, that the law of the land requires in him which is to be admitted to
the holy ministry, soundness in religion, gifts in some measure, and
honesty of life. They must to together. Learning without godliness, is as a
gold ring upon a swines snoute. Godliness in a minister, without learning, is,
as a fair color without light to show it by, and as a goodly bell without a
clapper. Your third Axoime is this: viz. The ministry of our unpreaching
ministers, is not a preaching ministry. No man doubts of this, unless he
be void of common sense. Thus you have my resolution briefly for these
points: and yet you are no conqueror, as Caesar was, nor I overthrown, as
Pompey was. If your arguments were as tidie, as your speeches are confident,
there were no dealing with you. I perceive the greatest barkers are not the
sorest biters. Answer me I pray you directly to these questions. Do you
think, because our unpreaching ministers are not preaching ministers, that no
sacraments either were or are administered by them? Before, you deny it not. If
you should, neither sacrifices nor sacraments were offered or administered by
your ignorant Leuitical priests: for they were unpreaching ministers. Do you
think that al such are polluted, which receive a Sacrament at the hands of
unpreaching ministers? If you do, then was Saint Paul polluted which
communicated with your ignorant Levites: for they were unpreaching ministers.
Thus you see, to what streights you are driven.


CHAP. 25. I. Penry. THE MINISTRY OF OUR unpreaching ministers, is not a
preaching ministry.
IF the ministry of unpreaching ministers be a preaching ministry, or if
their function be a pastoral or doctoral function, then there had been a
preaching ministry, a pastoral and doctorall function known in the Church,
though there never had been any preacher therein. Otherwise, how can their
ministry be a preaching ministry, or their function be a pastoral function,
whereas the same may be in the Church, no preaching ministry or pastoral
function being known there? But no Church, much less a ministry had there
been known, if there never had been any that could have preached: Because God
ordained the Saints and so a Church, only to be gathered together by preaching
ordinarily, but not by the ministry of readers, because it might have been in
the world, and yet no saint gathered thereby: which thing experience in our
Church proves to be too true.

R. Some. You would think him strangely occupied, that should set down
arguments to prove that midnight is not high noone. Your labor is such in this
particular: and you sweat and moyle in it very busily. The gain you are like
to reap, is your labor for your travail. You write, that if no preaching had
been, no Church had been. If you mean that no Church had ordinarily been
without preaching, that is, that preaching is the ordinary means for the
beginning and growth of the Church, I assent unto you: but I add this, that it
has and does please God, by the reading of the holy Scriptures and the
working of his Spirit, to renew the hearts of many. If you shall answer that
this course is not so ordinary as the other, I will accept your answer, and
withal confess that in this point, no difference is between us.


I. Penry. My 2. and 3. reasons are drawn out of these words of Paul, Romans
12.6 7.8. Seeing then that we have gifts that are diverse, according to the
grace that is given unto us: whether we have prophecy, let us prophecy,
according to the proportion of faith: or an office, let us wait on the office:
or he that teaches on teaching, or he that exhorts on exhorting, etc. The 2.
reason is thus concluded.

Whosoever has received a ministry, and so a pastoral or doctorall function,
he has received prophecy spoken of in this place, verse 6. Because every
pastoral or doctorall function, mentioned in the 7. and 8. verse, under these
words, he that teaches, he that exhorts: are contained under the word
prophecy, verse. 6. Insomuch as he that has not received that prophecy there
set down, whereby is meant the interpretation of the word: he has not received
the pastoral or doctoral function set down verse. 7.8 But unpreaching
ministers have not received the prophecy spoken of in this place, which is
expressly set down, verse 6. to be one of the diverse gifts bestowed for the
government of the body, which is the Church. Therefore also, they have received
neither a pastoral nor a doctorall function, and so no preaching ministry.


R. Some. Your drifte is as before, to prove that our ignorant ministers are
unfurnished, therefore no preachers. You say true. Will you conclude of this,
that they have no ministry at all, and that the actions of their ministry,
viz. the administration of the sacraments, the reading of the holy scriptures,
etc. are not profitable in any sort to the godly asse^bly? If you dispute thus,
I deny your argument, and do give this reason. An absurd Magistrate is not
furnished by almighty God, and therefore utterly unfit to be Gods lieutenant:
but we may not infer of this, that the acts done by him in his magistracy
are not the acts of a Magistrate. If you tell me that the arguments for unfit
magistrates and ministers are of several stamps, I grant you say so. So did,
when time was, an other gross Anabaptist: but all learned men agree with me,
and dissent from you.


I. Penry. 3 No ministry is separated from a gift, because prophecy spoken of
in this 6. verse, under which as we see, every pastoral and doctorall
ministry is contained, cannot be severed from a gift: but the ministry of
our readers is severed in them from a gift: therefore in them it is no
ministry.

It is no ministry in them I say, although that ministry, the general name
whereof they have, is not severed from a gift in preaching ministers: But what
is that to them? what is the ministry of other men unto them? they are not
ministers, by the ministry wherewith other men are endued, but by their own,
which being severed from a gift, is no ministry. Paul had bin no Apostle, and
had received no Apostleship, unless he could have said, I am a minister
according unto the grace given unto me, Ephe. 3.7. and not according to the
grace given unto other Apostles, the general name of whose Apostleship I am
entitled with. A ridiculous speech it were to say, mine apostleship has
received grace, but I that am the apostle have received none.

How then may our readers claim a preaching ministry unto themselves, seeing
the ministry which they challenge, is altogether in them without a gift,
though it be not so in others?


R. Some. I grant that no lawful and good Minister of God wants furniture of
gifts. If you will conclude of this, that the approbation of the Church is
nothing if sufficient parts be wanting in them which are admitted to the
ministry, I deny your argument, and do offer you for my reason a flower of
your own garden: even that which you have written before in these words, viz.
that unfitness to teach made not a nullitie of the Leuitical priests office.
If you answer that extreme ignorance in the Leuiticall priests, did neither
bar them from, nor strippe them of the Leuiticall priesthood: I reply that
this is a positive and perpetual law of almighty God for the priests then,
and for the Ministers now, viz. The priests lips shall keep knowledge. Mal. 2.
yea, M. Calvin a famous learned man writes upon that place of Malachie, that
Sacerdos and doctor sunt termini conuertibiles, that is, that Gods priest and a
teacher are so near of kin, that they are like to Hippocrates twins, which
laughed together and wept together, which lived together and died together. You
add that the ministry in preaching ministers is not severed from a gift: but
that the unpreaching minister is not enriched by the furniture of another man's
gifts. A deep matter forsooth. It is as clear as the Sun, that learned
ministers have furniture of gifts, and that ignorant men are not learned
because the other are so. Blind Bartimeus could have espied this. Do you think
that any man of any account for learning will reason thus? Diverse learned men
have written excellently, therefore M. Penry has so, which has broched many
palpable errors. If any should dispute thus, he should reason absurdly: and
yet it is a wise a speech as that which was delivered even now by your self.
You write that it were a ridiculous speech to say, Mine Apostleship has
received grace, but I that am the Apostle, have received none. I confess that
Gods graces are not tied to any chair. To think otherwise, is a popish
fancy. But I dare tell you this, which I am sure is good divinity, that some
actions of ignorant and evil ministers may have good grace at Gods hands, when
the parties themselves find none. I prove it thus. First, the sacrifices of
ignorant Leuiticall priests were profitable to many godly men in that time,
but not to those priests. Secondly, public prayers delivered by absurd
ministers in the name of the godly assembly, are profitable to the assembly,
but not to them: for the prayers are accepted by almighty God, Non
properuersitate praepositorum, sed pro deuotione populorum, that is, Not for
the perverseness of the ministers, but for the devotion of the people. Augu.
contra epist. Parm. libr. 2. cap. 8.


I. Penry. Every unpreaching minister sins in executing the works of a
pastoral function, as the Sacraments, etc. therefore he has no ministry, and
so neither a pastoral nor doctorall function. He has no ministry, because
his calling is not the calling of the ministry. His calling is not the calling
of the ministry, because he sins in intermedling with the works thereof.
And this is an infallible truth, that no man sins because he deals with
the works of his calling. For this is the duty that God requires at the
hands of every man. Many sin in deed because they walk corruptly in their
callings, and have no care to glorify God therein, Col. 3.17. But leave thy
corruption and thou sinnest not, in keeping thee to the works of thy calling.
The hypocrites in the days of Isaiah 1.13. sinned not because they offered
sacrifice, but because they did the same through hypocrisy. Their hypocrisy
they ought to have left, but not his service in sacrificing according to his
commandment: but our readers though they should with as little corruption, and
as great zeal to Gods glory and the good of his Church as any men, deal in
the works of a pastoral ministry, yet they should still do that which the
Lord had forbidden them to do, whence it appears, that the works of the
ministry are not the works of their calling. For God forbids no man to
deal therewith, and not being the works of their calling, they are no
ministers, and have neither pastoral nor doctorall function.


R. Some. You would feign prove that unpreaching ministers have no ministry
at all: but it will not be. You have evil luck. you cannot hitte that mark.
Your reason is this: Every unpreaching minister sins in executing the
works of a pastoral function, as the Sacraments etc. therefore he has no
ministry etc. Mine answer is, that I deny your argument. My reason is: The
sons of Heli sinned in the execution of their ministry, 1. Sam. 2. yet they
were ministers. The contentious ministers of Philippi sinned in the execution
of their ministry, Philippi. 1. yet they were ministers. You go on M. Penry
in this sort: The Lord, you say, has forbidden ignorant men to deal with the
works of the ministry, therefore ignorant ministers have no ministry at
all. Your Antecedent is true: for the holy ministry is too high a calling for
such base companions. Your argument is very false. My reason is: your ignorant
Levites were forbidden by almighty God to enter into the priesthood: yet they
were lawful priests in your judgment, because they were of the line of Aaron
etc.


I. Penry. This is further showed, forasmuch as the Lord does not commit unto
bare readers the charge of those souls, over whom they are, which he does
unto every one that has a pastoral function, Acts. 20.26.28. 1. these. 5.12.
Heb. 13.17. For to what end else, should he commit a ministry unto any, who
have souls under their charge? The Church in deed may commit the souls of
men unto readers, but certainly the Lord commits none unto them. And he is
no minister, unto whom the Lord does not commit this charge, as the places
before quoted do show. For the Lord has in his word, ordained not only
offices, the executours whereof should have the oversight of souls, but also
the persons who were to execute those functions, 1. Cor. 12.28. 1. Pet. 4.10.
Romans 12.6.7.8. Ephesians. 4.7.11. Now unpreaching ministers are none of those
persons, because the Lord knows them not to be able to feed souls. And let
not men be so injurious unto the Lord, as to affirm, that he according unto
his revealed ordinance (for thereof I speak as of a ministry, and not of his
secret judgments) bequeathed the souls of men to be starued and kept from
salvation. As he must needs be convinced, to do if he bequeathed the^ unto
those men, the dispensatio^ of whose ministry is able to beget none, feed
none, save none. You must understand again, that I speak of the ministry
whereby readers are ministers, that is, of their own, and not of the
ministry whereby preaching ministers are ministers, wherewith readers have
nothing to do.


R. Some. That almighty God never committed charge of souls to ignorant men
(unless it were to punish them, as he did the rebellious Israelites by
ignorant Leuiticall priests) is a clear truth in divinity: I agree with you
in that. You say that the dispensation of our readers ministry does feed
none. In that you err grossly. My reason is: The Sacraments administered by
them do comfort and feed the souls of the godly communicants: for the virtue
of the Sacrament depends not of any minister whatsoever etc. The scriptures
read by unpreaching ministers do edify the assembly which is reuere^tly
atte^tiue. If you answer that the word soundly preached does edify more, I
assent. If you deny that the scriptures read by unpreaching ministers do edify
in any sort, you speak blasphemously, and I have refuted that absurdity,
Chap. 4. of this treatise. There is great difference between the Minister and
ministry: but either you cannot or will not see it.


I. Penry. Moreover, how can the Lord be said to commit the charge of souls,
according to his own revealed ordinance, unto those who may truly object unto
him, that he deals injuriously with them, by exacting those things to be
performed at their hands and in their own persons, as necessary duties of
their callings, unto the performance whereof, they have received no ability
from him? Is man to be answerable unto the Lord of that which he never
received? does the Lord require the use of that talent which he never
bestowed? does he lay that upon any, whereof he may have just cause to
complain? When did he impose a charge upon any, unto whom he gave not gifts to
discharge the same? now the charge of souls which he commits unto any, he
requires at their hands unto whom he has committed it, which he could not
do, if he had not given ability to the discharge thereof.


R. Some. I have proved before, Chap. 2. that almighty God furnished such as
he called to the holy ministry in the old and new Testament. I rest in that.
If his Majesty (which is far from him) either had or did commit the charge
of souls to such as have no metal in them, he might be justly convinced of,
and chale^ged for iniuirious dealing with them. No good Captain will send his
soldier naked into the field against an armed enemy. You write that God
deals injuriously with men, by exacting those things to be performed at
their hands and in their own persons as necessary duties of their callings,
unto the performance whereof, they have received no ability from him, etc. You
refer this speech, I am sure, to the Ministers. To take you otherwise, were
to wring your words, and to misconstrue you. I will not offer you such measure:
therefore I leave you a little while, and to tell the godly Reader that the
Pelagians in Augustines time, and the Papists in our time, reason in this sort:
Almighty God requires nothing at our hands, unto the performance whereof he
has not given ability: therefore the regenerate are able to fulfill the Law
of God in this life. This argument was and is accounted of the Pelagians and
Papists an invincible reason: but it is a very simple one. I deny the
Antecedent, etc. The reason is: God requires of us the fulfilling of the Law:
but, the regenerate are not able to fulfill it. That this point may be better
understood, I will set down my proposition and reasons, in the end of this
book.


I. Penry. What then? shall ignorant ministers be free from the blood of
souls, in as much as the Lord never committed any soul unto their charge? It
were well with them poor men, if the case so stood. But alas it is not so. And
yet the cause of their destruction proceeds not from their unfaithfulness in
the discharge of that vocation which he has allotted unto the^, but it comes
justly upon them, in that they have desperately thrust them selves contrary unto
Gods revealed will, upon those men, with the oversight of whose souls God
never trusted such as they are. The Lord says unto them, intrude your selves
and you will, unto the places of pastors, and so enforce me to bring heavy and
swift damnation upon you: but surely I will bequeath no soul unto your
custody. They on the other side in their practice say, Lord whether thou
committest unto us any charge of any soul or no, we care not, but rather then
we should not have ye means to live in this life, (for this is their only
scope in continuing in the ministry) require the blood of souls, and what
thou will at our hands. And so senseles men, they sell themselves, body and
soul unto everlasting woe and destruction.


R. Some. I am so far from being a defense to ignorant, either Leuits before,
or Ministers now, that I confess freely that their entrance into the
priesthood and ministry, and continuance in it most absurdly, was and is a
grievous sin. If the Lord has or shall punish them severely for their
instrusion into so high a calling, they cannot plead not guilty. If they do,
it is in vain: for, at Gods bar they shall not be acquitted. You write that
the ignorant ministers, whom you call senseless men, do sell themselves
body and soul to everlasting destruction. Your speech is true: Illi viderint:
Let them, if they be not graceless and shameless, look unto it. All that I
say unto it, is: the Lord for his Christ's sake heal that sore. It is not so
grievous, thanks be to God, as it was: I assure my self, it will be less: I
would to God it were none.


I. Penry. The pretense that the Lord commits the charge of souls unto
their ministry, and not unto them, is first a desiring of that in question:
(for they are denied to have any ministry) and otherwise many ways
insufficient. 1 Because the Lord commits not the charge of souls there,
where the punishment of their destruction cannot take hold, as it can not upon
the ministry: 2 the ministry is but a dead thing of it self, most
beautiful in deed, as being an ordinance of the Lord, but able to save none,
unless it be committed unto a person, who in the execution thereof, is able to
show himself to be appointed of God for that glorious work. This is taught
Ephesians. 4. where the Apostle verses 6. and 7. having spoken of the gifts
bestowed upon men for this ministerial work, ascribes verse. 11.12. the
gathering together of the Saints, not unto the gifts or functions, but unto
men endued with the said gifts. For he does not say that the Lord has
appointed for the gathering together of the Saints, an apostleship, a pastoral
or doctorall function, etc. but that he ordained apostles, pastors, etc. for
that end and purpose: whereunto because our readers were not appointed, it
forcibly ensues, that they have no ministry, no pastoral or doctorall
function, and so are no ministers: which conclusion also in the last edition of
mine exhortation unto my countrymen, I have enforced by many strong, and as I
am assured invincible reasons, drawn out of the infallible truth of Gods
word.


R. Some. What other men do or will pretend, I cannot tell. I am fully
persuaded, that Almighty God did never commit his sheep, soldiers, city, to
foolish shepherds, unskillful captains, blind watchmen. Such shepherds,
captains, watchmen, were your ignorant Leuiticall Priests, whose entrance and
continuance in the priesthood, are condemned by the written word. The line of
Aaron was not strong enough to break the cords of Almighty God. Such
shepherds, captains, watchmen, are our ignorant ministers. Let the ignorant
Levites and ministers be matched together, good M. Penry. They must needs
sail in one ship, fight under one banner, and be condemned at one bar:
and yet I grant, that your ignorant Levites which were never called of God,
but of the Jewish Church, did offer and deliver the Legal Sacrifices and
Sacraments: and that the godly Communicants were not polluted by their
ignorance. You must of force grant me thus much for unpreaching ministers: for
you have not before denied it. So shall some questions between you and me be
decided, and you shall agree with all the learned Protestants and reformed
Churches. You write that the Apostle does not say that the Lord has appointed
for the gathering together of the Saints, an Apostleship, a pastoral or
doctorall function, but that he ordained apostles, pastors, etc. You write
strangely in my judgment. If God appointed Apostles, he appointed the
Apostleship: if pastors, he appointed a pastoral function: for they cannot be
singled. Every mean Logician, yea every sensible man conceiueth this.


I. Penry. I would entreat you, M Some, when you have answered the reasons I
have now set down, to answer also the 1.2.3. and 25. reason that I have
there used. For you shall but strive in vain against the conclusion, as long
as the premises, whereby it is inferred, remain firm. If the Reader would be
further satisfied in this point concerning the dumb Ministry, he is to be
referred unto that which in the aforesaid Treatise I have set down.


R. Some. I have now answered your whole book. I have and do submit my labor
to the judgment of the learned, therefore not of you or your ignorant
disciples. Because you will have me have a little more work, you in treat
me to answer four reasons in your Addition. If you had not been very lordly,
you would have set down the reasons you self: but, whatsoever you do,
becomes you. You may command, comptroll, and deal with others, as Strato
did, which was a king over beasts. At the least, you think so, whatsoever
other men do. Well, I am content to satisfy your desire: for, as good hap
is, I have your book by me: and it is a fault in extremo actu deficere, that
is, to resemble the slouthful poet in the winding up of the clewe. Your first
reason is contained in these words: viz. Every one that has the life of a
minister good or bad (or that is a minister in deed) is ordained of God for
the gathering together of the Saints: For, there is no other minister spoken of
in the word. No bare reader is ordained of God for this end: Therefore no
bare reader is a minister in deed, or has the life of a minister, good or
bad. In Add. page 52. I answer briefly, that some parts of your Mayor
proposition are without sense. You write that every one which has the life of
a bad minister is ordained of God for the gathering together of the Saints. In
this short speech of yours, there are gross errors. The first error is, that
bad ministers are ordained of God for the gathering together of the Saints. It
is a certain truth in Gods book, that such as are called by the Lord to this
excellent work, are not bad ministers, as you very basely do imagine, but
choice men for gifts and life, etc. 1. Tim. 3. Your second error, is this:
viz. That furniture of gifts is one part of the life of a bad minister. This is
strange divinity. My reason is: furniture of gifts is one part of the life of
a good minister: therefore want of gifts is one branch of the life of a bad
minister. The Antecedent is manifest: the argument is strong: secundum legem
oppositionis, as the Logicians term it. I have told you often, that furniture
of gifts is of the essence of a lawful and good minister of God, but not of
the essence of a minister simply. This I rest in: so must you whether you will
or no, unless you will cry down your ignorant Levites, and hold this for a
principle, that no Sacrament, either was or is administered by unpreaching
ministers. Your three other reasons, are all one, and may be shut up in this
short argument: viz. Unpreaching ministers are not able to feed the elect with
the food of knowledge and understanding: therefore they have no calling at all,
howsoever they have the Churches approbation, etc. In Add. page 55.57. I deny
your argument, and have set down reasons for it before, in this Treatise. It
is time now to take manum de tabula, that is, to cease this course. My comfort
is, that I have the consent of all the learned, and that Almighty God will
bless this labor.


CHAP. 26. The regenerate are not able to fulfill the Law of God.
My reasons are.

THe Law is a yoke, which neither the holy Fathers, nor the Apostles, etc. were
able to bear. So says the Apostle Peter in that famous Council holden at
Jerusalem: his words are these, Why tempt ye God, to lay a yoke on the
disciples necks, which neither our Fathers, nor we were able to bear, etc.
Acts. chap. 15. verse 10.11. S. Peter speaks expressly of such as were
regenerate.

2 It was impossible to the Law (to take away sin and death) in as much as
it was weak because of the flesh. So writes S. Paul Romans 8. therefore the
weakness of flesh is such even in the regenerate, that they are not able to
fulfill the Law. Iex iubet, non iuuat: ostendit peccatum, non tollit: that is,
the Law does command, but not help: the Law does show sin, but it does
not take away sin.

3 The regenerate are guilty of the breach of some one commandment:
therefore they do not fulfill the Law.

The antecedent is manifest, for the regenerate do sin, 1. John 1.8. Matthew.
6.12. Non peccare, Dei iustitia: that is, not to sin is Gods righteousness
etc. and sin is a transgression of the Law, 1. John 3 I prove my argument
thus: He that fails in one (commandment) is guilty of all. James 2.10. The
reason of that is, First, because he has violated the majesty of the Lawgiuer
which is one and the same: Secondly, because the body of Gods Law is
indiuiduum, that is, cannot be parted.

4 The works of the regenerate, are imperfect. Aaron which was the high
Priest, in the time of the Law, and a figure of Christ, was appointed by
Almighty God, to bear the iniquity of the holy offerings, Exodus Chap. 28.
verse 38. S. Paul after his conversion, was far from perfection, Phil. Chap.
3. The same Apostle writes thus of himself: I know nothing by my self, yet
am I not thereby justified. 1. Cor. Chap. 4. verse 4. Ad eius examen vita
nostra ducitur, sub quo and virtutes nostrae trepidant: that is, our life is
examined by him (that is, Almighty God) before whom our virtues tremble: So
writes Anselmus, which was sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury, in his
Commentary upon 1. Corinthians. Chap. 4.

5 The regenerate cannot love God and their neighbor perfectly, as the Law of
God requires: for they offend God and their neighbor, either in word, deed,
or concupiscence, therefore, etc. The Law is spiritual, Romans Chap. 7. that is,
binds our hearts as well as our bodies to obedience. Who can say (truly) my
heart is clean? Pro. Chap. 20. Who can tell how often he offends? Psalm. 19. In
quibusdam iustos suos quoniam ad huc extolli possunt, non adiuuat ad
perficiendamiustit iam, vt dum non iustificatur in conspectu eius omnis viuens,
actionem gratiarum semper indulgentiae ipsius debeamus: and sic ab illa prima
causa omniu^ vitioru^, id est a tumore superoiae, sancta humilitate sanemur.
August de peccas. mer. and remiss. contra. Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 13. The sum of
Augustines words is, that because just men may grow proud, Almighty God
does not assist them in some particulers to perfect righteousness, that they may
be thankful for his mercy, and decline pride, etc.

6 The Scripture does conclude all under sin, that the promise, that is,
everlasting inheritance, by the faith of Jesus Christ, should be given to them
that believe, Galath. Chap. 3. verse 22.

Question.

If we cannot fulfill the law of God, what use have we of the law?

Answer.

By the law we understand Gods pleasure more certainly. Psalm. 19. by the
law, we understand our nakedness, as we do our debts by an obligation, and
our spots by the looking glass. The law is a schoolmaster to bring us to
Christ. Galath. chap. 3. verse 24. which Christ is a surgeon and phisician to
the wounded and diseased.

Question.

How are we just in Gods sight?

Answer.

By Christ's righteousness: which is ours by imputation, as our sins were
Christ's by imputation. The Apostle writes that Christ is our righteousness.
1. Corinthians. chap. 1.

It is confessed both by protestants and papists, that we are justified by
Grace. The difference between us is in this. The protestants by this word
(Grace) understand Gods favor, whereby our sins are pardoned: by which mere
and only Grace and mercy of God in Christ, we are justified in Gods sight. The
papists by this word (Grace) understand a quality powered into our hearts by
Almighty God: by reason of which quality we live holily and are justified (as
they say) in Gods sight. This is the Inherent righteousness which the papists
do write and speak so much of. We which are the protestants, do confess,
that that righteousness, which is an effect of Gods sanctifying spirit, and
the fruit of our justification before God, is inherent in us: likewise the
first fruits of our glorification, that is, peace of conscience and joy in the
holy Ghost. That righteousness whereby we are accounted just, or are justified,
or are made just before God, is not inherent in us, my reason is: we are made
righteous by Christ's obedience. Romans chap. 5. verse. 19. which obedience of
Christ, is not within, but without us: and yet this obedience of Christ, is
apprehended by a justifying faith, as alms is by the hand of a poor man.
Perfect righteousness should be inherent in us, if we could keep all Gods
commandments as exactly, as Almighty God requires. The best men were and
are short in that. Only our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, which was free from
sin, did fulfill the law as God requires.

Iustitia nostra potius constat remissione peccatorum, quam perfectione
virtutum: that is, our righteousness does consist rather in forgiveness of
sins, then in perfection of virtues. August. de ciuit: dei. lib. 19. cap. 27.

FINIS.

