CHRIST'S LAST Supper OR The Doctrine of the Sacrament of Christ's Supper, set
forth in five Sermons.

Wherein is taught the great necessity of a godly preparation, before men come
to the Sacrament. Wherein it does consist: with the condemnation threatened
against the unworthy receiver of the same.

BY SAMVEL SMITH, Minister of Gods word at Prittlewell, in Essex.

JOHN 6.27. Labor not for the Meat that perishes, but for the Meat that
indureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you.

LONDON Printed by T. D. for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at the South
Entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1620.

TO THE HONORABLE Sir FERDINANDO DVDLEY, Knight of the Noble order of the Bath,
and Son and Hei^e unto the Right Honorable Edward L. Dudley. And to the
Honorable and virtuous Lady, the Lady Honor Dudley his wife. S. S. wishes the
increase of all true Honor in this life, and eternal Glory in the life to come.
HONORABLE
IF the Lord did not like, that men should sorake and gather their fields, as
nothing might remain for the poor to glean after: Assuredly, himself
suffers not the great and glorious Field of his Word, to be so reaped down
by any (being a Fountain of living waters, never to be drawn dry: and
containing in it the very hid wisdom of God). But something remains, which
the poor may come after, and gather up. I confess, that many of Gods worthy
Servants have taken pains in this kind, and that upon this subject, The
Doctrine of the Sacrament, to the great benefit of those who desire to be
acquainted with the same, how to come prepared unto the Lords Table: yet as a
poor man, and one that has a great charge, I have come after, and gathered a
gleane or two out of the Lords field, for me and mine, from the which none are
forbidden, but rather, invited to come, and take freely. And albeit, it be but
a little that I have gathered, yet with the Widows Oil and Meal, which
also was but little, may notwithstanding (by Gods blessing) be good relief
unto the poorer sort, that want better provision: Whatsoever it be, to your
Honors it comes for shelter and protection* And why should I any whit doubt of
your Honorable acceptance, having known you (Sir) from your youth, to be both
religiously educated, and for your sober, studious, and most religious
Conversation, worthily held your Countries Honor. And for your Honorable
LADY, above many of her rank, especially in those parts, God has seasoned
her affection with love to the Truth, and tender respect unto the despised
Ministry amongst you: who rejoice in you both, and expect that as God has
honored you above others, so you should still countenance his servants, and
shine as lights, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation. And when
the Lord shall call you (Sir) into greater employment in the Commonwealth,
the Church will expect, you should promote her causes, and stand still in the
maintenance of pure religion. Go on therefore I beseech you still, in that
good way you have begun: What though ye find little encouragement from the
World, your reward is with the Lord. It was the great praise of Righteous Lot,
that he lived Righteously in that age, and in that place: I leave the
application. These being the days fore-tolde by our blessed Savior, wherein
men, as in the days of Noah, Luke 17.26.27.
and Lot, do Eat and Drink, Buy, Build, and Plant, etc. Altogether
unmindful of him who is ready to come as a Thief in the Night: At what time
they only shall be blessed that watch.

I have endeavored in the Sermons following, to show men the way how to
perform aright, one of the most excellent parts of Gods worship, the
receiving of the Sacrament of Christ's Supper: wherein I have labored to prove
the great necessi-of a godly preparation that must be made thereunto, wherein
it does consist, the m^anes to be used to Communicate worthily As also, the
great hurt and danger that is like to follow the unworthy receiving of the same.

These are the things that are here offered unto you. I confess, you deserve a
better oblation, then the tender of this small Book: But may I add, but one
grain to your godly care of a Christian life, with which I offer my most
inward affections, I have my expectation I know your sufficiency in this kind,
above many of my profession, yet I rest assured, you will not refuse the help
of those whose function and calling it is to attend thereon: and in an humble
manner offers the same unto you.

And so I commend you both to that God, Jude 24
who is able to keep you, that you fall not: and to that Word of his grace,
Act. 20.32. Luke 10.42.
which as it has taught you, to choose the good part, that shall not be taken
from you so is able, to build you up further, and to give you an inheritance
amongst those that are sanctified. And rest

Prittlewell this 18. of November 1620. Your HONORS in the Lord Jesus to be
commanded SAMVEL SMITH.

A Table of the principal matters contained in these Sermons following.
The first Sermon. page 1
The Text. 1. Cor. 11.28.29. Let a man therefore examine himself, ver. 28.
and so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup.

Verse. 29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, ver. 29.
eats and drinks his own damnation, because he discerns not the Lords
body.

THe order of the Apostle in this Chapter. Page 2 Christ's order in the
Institution of this Sacrament. Page 3 ibid page 4 ibid page 5 to show forth
the Lords death. ibid
The occasion of this Scripture. page 7 The Text divided. page 8 Reasons
showing the necessity of Examination. page 10 ibid page 11 page 12 The Lords
Table represents the kingdom of Heaven. page 13 The practice of the primitive
Church. page 15
page 16 The benefit that comes by due receiving. page 17 ibid page 18 page 19

will ensue, does show the necessity of the same. page 20
The uses of the Doctrine. page 23 page 24 As first, Children. page 25 Secondly
Madmen, Idiots. ibid
page 26
page 30 First, every man is best acquainted with his own estate. page 31
Ministers not exempted from taking notice of us. page 32
page 33
page 35 page 38


The second Sermon.
1. Cor. 11.28. Let a man therefore examine himself. MOst men fail in the
manner of performing most duties page 44 What Examination is. ibid Reasons
moving to perform the duty. page 47 page 49 page 50 page 51
Knowledge necessary to the due receiving of this Sacrament page 54 What things
are absolutely necessary to be known to salvation page 55 ibid page 56 page 57
The danger of ignorance page 58 It is necessary to increase in Knowledge
daily. page 59 The Uses of the Doctrine. page 61 page 62 To teach us to labor
for the getting of Knowledge. page 63 Secondly, Faith is necessary for the due
receiving of this Sacrament. page 64 What Faith is. page 65 The excellent use
of Faith in this Sacrament. page 67 It must not be a general, but a particular
Faith. page 68 It is a hard thing to believe. page 70 The weak must not be
discouraged. page 72 There is a weak Faith. ibid Comfort to the weak. page 73
Faith is a most excellent grace. page 75 page 76 ibid ibid ibid ibid

The Uses. For examination for this grace of faith. page 77 How Faith is
wrought. page 78 To show, that many men's Faith is but a fancy ibid
Thirdly, Repentance is necessary to the due receiving of this Sacrament. page
79 What Repentance is. page 80 How to come to Repentance. page 82 page 83 page
85
Two sorts of sorrow: First, a worldly, Secondly, a godly Sorrow. page 86 What
godly Sorrow is. page 87 The means to attain to Godly Sorrow. page 88 ibid
page 89 page 90 ibid
Comforts for the weak. page 92 ibid page 93
Without Repentance, there is no way but death. page 95 The Uses. page 100 page
101 Fourthly Love is necessary for the due receiving of this Sacrament. page
104 Reasons to prove the necessity of love. page 109 ibid ibid ibid ibid

The uses. page 110 page 111

The third Sermon.
1. Cor. 11.28. And so let him eat, etc.

page 117 page 119 page 120 page 121
The Uses. page 122 What sins they are guilty of, which willingly abstain
from the Lords Supper. page 124 ibid ibid page 125 page 126 page 127
Objections of such as refuse to come answered. page 128 page 130 page 131
Objections of weak Christians that dare not come, answered. Their wants so
many, and faith so weak, they dare not come. page 134 Comforts against their
doubt. page 135 page 136

The Uses. page 137 page 138

And so let him eat.

page 141 page 144 ibid. page 145
The uses of the Doctrine. ibid page 146 page 147 The least degrees of grace
are page 149 ibid page 150 page 151

page 152 commands the circumstances about it. page 155 ibid page 156
The Uses. page 157 page 157


The Text And so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup. There is a
twofold eating. page 160 ibid
What it is to feed on Christ. ibid To feed on Christ, and to believe in
Christ, all one. page 161
page 164 The Uses. page 166 page 167 page 171 The Godly have communion with
Christ in this Sacrament. page 172

page 173 Comforts arising from our union with Christ. page 181 page 182 page
183 page 184
The Use. Shows the happy estate of those which be united to Christ. page 185

page 187 page 190 ibid page 191 page 192
The Uses. page 193 page 194

page 195 the Law. page 197
The Use. To show the Sacrilege of the Church of Rome.

page 201 Reasons against Transubstantiation. page 204

The fourth Sermon.
1. Cor. 11.29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
his own damnation, because he discerns not the Lords body. page 212 page 216
The Uses. page 218 page 219

page 225 page 227 page 228
The Uses. page 229 page 231

page 233 page 234 To reprove those who care not how they come to the Lords
Table. page 236 page 237 page 238 page 240

Who they be that receive worthily. page 244 Seven things to be known of every
worthy receiver. page 245 page 248
ibid page 249 page 251 page 252

Who receive unworthily. page 255 page 257 page 258 page 260
Reasons. page 261 page 263
Uses. page 264 page 266

page 268 page 272 page 273
ibid page 175

The Text. Not discerning the Lords body. What it is to discern the Lords
body. page 279
page 280 page 283 page 284


The fifth Sermon.
1. Cor. 11.30, etc. For this cause many are sick and weak among you, and
many sleep.

For if we would judge our selves we should not be judged.

But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we should not
be condemned with the world.

page 291 page 293 ibid
page 294 page 295 page 296

page 301 ibid
page 302 page 303

page 304 ibid
page 308 page 309 ibid
page 310

page 311 1. Examination. 2 Accusation. 3. Condemnation. 4. Execution. The
only way to turn away the Lords wrath, is to judge our selves. page 327 page
328
page 332 page 335 page 336 page 339 page 340
page 342 page 345 ibid ibid
page 346 page 347

page 350 page 353 ibid
page 354 page 355


FINIS.
1. Cor. 11.28.29. 28 Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat
of this bread, and drink of this cup.

29 For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own
damnation, because he discerns not the Lords body.


UPON occasion of some abuse committed by the Corinthians, about the receiving
of the Sacrament, the Apostle delivers unto them the first institution of this
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. For as one says well; Where things are reduced
to the first institution, Tertul. Vbi ad primum veritatem diuertuntur, etc.
all humane error then cease.

Concerning the institution of the Lords Supper, Paul sets down sundry points.

The order of the Apostle in this Chapter.
First, the Author of it, namely Jesus Christ himself, the eternal Son of
God, and blessed Savior of the world, for none else has authority to set on
the seal but he that makes the covenant.

V. 23.
Secondly, the Apostle notes the time when it was ordained, even the very night
before he was betrayed; whereby our Savior Christ would teach his Church and
people, that now there was an end to be put unto the Passover, and that this
Sacrament of his blessed body and blood was to come in stead thereof: as also to
testify that his wonderful care of his poor Church and chosen people; that
immediately before his death and bitter passion, he was so mindful and
careful of their comfort, as that notwithstanding his time was but short, and
that his apprehension drew near, he seems to neglect himself; and the
preparation he was to make for his own suffering, and prouides for the comfort
and welfare of his Church.

Concerning the institution, Christ's order in the first institution of the
Sacrament.
it is said; First, that he took the bread into his blessed hands; to show
unto us, that the bread is now set apart from a common use, to a holy and
religious use, 1 He takes the bread and wine.
to be the Sacrament of Christ's body, and so the wine of his blood, v. 23.

2. He blesses them.
Secondly, he blessed them; as Christ did open the institution of this Sacrament
amongst his disciples, v. 24.
with the nature and quality of the same, to what end and purpose it was
ordained, he teaches them likewise the right and holy use of it, by blessing
it by prayer and thanksgiving to his Father. For these are essential parts of
the Sacrament; the opening of the institution by the ministry of the word,
prayer to the blessing of the elements, direction in the use of this holy
ordinance, and thanksgiving unto God.

3. He breaks the bread, and pours out the wine
Thirdly, after he had thus consecrated the elements, and blessed them, and set
them apart for this holy use, he breaks the bread, and poures out the wine,
which accordingly must be imitated of the ministers of the word, that so by the
breaking of the bread and pouring out the wine, the people may be put in mind
of the breaking of the body, and pouring out of the blood of Christ.

Fourthly, Christ delivers it unto the Disciples saying, 4 He gives them
Take eat etc. Showing that as the communicant does take the bread and wine
with his bodyly hand, so he must reach out faith the hand of the soul, and
lay hold on Christ. And so spiritually eat his flesh and drink his blood,
applying the merits of his death and passion unto his own soul in particular.

Fifthly and lastly, 5 He shows the end of all, viz. to show forth his death.
Christ lays down the end likewise why this blessed Sacrament of his was
ordained, namely to Show forth his death, and to keep in remembrance that his
bitter passion unto the end of the world: that so often as we come to this
Sacrament, we should freshly call to mind the bitter death and passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ. What and how cruel tortures and torments he suffered for
our sakes, that so we might be brought to the true sight of our sin, which in
no one thing more can appear then in the sufferings of Christ, which were
indeed the very Nails and Spear that put him to death: and might be brought
to be more thankful for so great a work of mercy showed unto poor Sinners.
These things touching the institution it self of this holy Sacrament, the
Apostle has handled in the former part of this chapter.

Now the Apostle having set down the true institution of the Lords Supper, The
occasion of this Scripture.
and also the end of it. He does here labor to prepare the Corinthians and in
them all Christians, to the right use of this holy Sacrament. And teaches that
as the benefits is wonderful great, if they come to this holy ordinance in a
holy manner, prepared as they ought to be, as meet guests for so holy a
banquet. So is the danger great if we come to the same unworthily, and
unprepared; such shall be so far from receiving a blessing, as that rather
they shall provoke the Lord to plague them with some heavy judgment, or
punishment, temporal here, to bring them to the sight of their sins, and to
true repentance for the same, if not then with eternal condemnation in the
life to come. And therefore our blessed Apostle here is the more earnest in
this point to persuade al Christians to take heed how they come to so holy an
ordinance.

This text consists of two parts.

The text divided.
First a precept or commandment. Let every man therefore Examine himself, v.
28.

Secondly a reason to enforce the duty. v. 29.

For he that eats and drinks unworthily etc.

In the first of these we have 2. things 1. A preparation. 2. A participation.


In the preparation we are to observe 1. The Necessity of the preparation. 2.
The Subject of it, a Man's own self. 3. The duty it self. Examination.


And first for the Necessity of this preparation and examination of our
selves, 1 A Preparation.
before we partake of this holy Sacrament, it appears in the words of the
precept, Let a man examine himself.

The word Let, may seem in our English phrase to be a thing leaft as
indifferent, to be done or not to be done. Let a man if he will examine
himself. But it is not indeed so indifferent a thing neither is it least as a
thing arbritrary, but propounded as a precept, and implies the necessity of
obedience thereto, and so not a matter of indifferency, (...)
the word it self in the original, it seems to import so much, for it is
used in the imperative mood and implies a duty as if the holy Ghost should
have said do thou examine thy self. And so the phrase runs as in the
Princes Laws and act of Parliament Be it enacted, so that it is a flat precept
or commandment implying a necessity of obedience: that if any look to reap
any good or benefit by the use of this Sacrament, he must Examine himself.

Reasons showing the necessity of examination.
And that the necessity of this duty may the more clearly appear, we are to
consider the reason which may move us to this examination and godly
preparation, and the reasons are these.

First of all Gods Commandment, then the which what may be more effectual to
persuade us to this duty, the Lord has commanded it, 1 It is Gods Commandment.
and must be obeyed in this as in all other his Commandments: it is not leaft
as a thing indifferent for a man to examine himself, or not to examine
himself, to come, or not to come. But it is a duty imposed upon all to
examine themselves, now then seeing it is the Lords commandment, and he has
power over his Church to command, it is our duty to obey. And as he that
swears, or kills, or breaks any of the commandments of almighty God,
is in danger of Gods wrath. So is he that does willingly and wilfully break
this commandment of God.

Secondly, the Lord has promised to bless it, 2 The Lord has promised to
bless it.
as a special means of good unto our souls, so as if we come fitted and
prepared in a holy manner in faith, repentance, love, reverence, and and
obedience, and seek to sanctify the Lord in his ordinance, we shall then
find and feel to our endelesse comfort; the sweetness and comfort of this
Sacrament. The Lord has promised to bless his own ordinance, and will be
found of them that seek him, in the conscionable use of the means he has
appointed.

3 The reverence we owe to these holy things, does require it.
Thirdly the reverence we owe unto these holy things, may move us to this duty
to examine our hearts, and to prepare our selves, for if when we come to the
table of an earthly Prince or ruler, Pro. 23.1.
we will consider diligently what is set before us, and be so careful unto
our selves that we do nothing unbeseeming so great a presence, Oh how much
more careful ought we to be, to prepare our selves when we come to the Lords
Table, who is Lord of heaven and earth, with whom we are there present and and
with whom we sit.

And indeed this table represents the kingdom of heaven, The Lords Table,
represents the kingdom of heaven.
and as we sit here with our bodies, so ought we to set our hearts there in
the company of God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, with the most blessed
Saints and Angels: we are therefore to come prepared.

Did Joseph shave himself and chang his raiment, Genesis 41.14
when he was to come before Pharaoh an earthly king and sinful man, and shall
not we when we come before the king of glory and Prince of power, much more
out of our sinful lusts, chang our former conditions, and be clothed with the
robes of Christ our righteousness? Did the people of the Jews in a solemn
manner prepare themselves unto the Passover, Exodus 12. 2. Chro. 35.
as that the Priests were to sanctify themselves, and to prepare the people
before they came thereunto, which Passover was but a sign of this Sacrament,
and shall we dare to come carelessely, irreverently, in our old sins, without
faith, repentance, and love, unto this Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which is
the substance?

We use great care about our common meat, we will have our dishes, cups, and
platters clean and scoured, and our hands and face washed before we eat; and
shall we not much more cleanse our hearts, James 4.
and prepare our selves to the receiving of these holy Mysteries, that we
receive them not into unclean hearts, and polluted souls: Oh the danger is
great to such an unworthy receiver!

Sancta Sanctis says a Father, holy things belong to holy men. And the very
heathen themselves in their Sacrifices, when they went about them, and the
duties of their false religion to their gods, they ever proclaimed and cried
out before, procul hic este prophani: Depart away from hence ye profane. And
in the Primitive Church it was the practice of the faithful at this time, when
they were about to administer this holy Sacrament, to say Who are here? The
practice of the Primitive Church.
and the answer was made, None but good and honest men and women. As if none
but good and honest men and women should partake of such a holy thing.

And this was the charge that Almighty God gave unto Moses and Aaron, Exo.
12.48. Leuit. 7.20.
that no uncircumcised person should be admitted to partake of the Passover;
and the very Levites were to prepare themselves before they came unto it, yet
all this was but for the figure and type of this Sacrament, how much more ought
we to prepare our selves when we come to the substance; for no unclean person
must dare to touch or come near these holy things.

Paul would not suffer an unclean person in the Church: much less may such be
admitted to partake of the most excellent privilege of the Church. 4. The
benefit and profit by so doing does bind us to this duty.


Fourthly, we must examine our selves, and prepare our hearts, in regard of the
great benefit and profit that by so doing we shall receive: Mat. 9.20.
For if the woman in the Gospel, that did but touch the hem of Christ's
garment, was healed of her infirmity, and brought such a benefit unto her that
had faith; what benefit shall the true believer receive, who in this Sacrament
does feed on Christ? Surely the benefit and profit that we, shall reap
heere-hence will be wondrous great: for

The benefit that comes by due receiving.
This Sacrament will be a special prop to stay our weak faith, even as a weak
and impotent man leans upon his staff and is supported and stayed up by the
same; It is a prop to the weak
even so a weak faith is underpropped and relieved by the reverent use of this
Sacrament.

Because Christ Jesus is now offered more effectually and perticulerly to his
heart and soul, Gal. 3.1.
now is Christ crucyfied a fresh, and more lively represented and set forth
before his eyes, yea as the Church cries out, Cant. 2.5.
Oh stay me with the flagons of wine, and comfort me with apples. It is that
which ministers singular comfort to a poor distressed soul.

It seals up unto us Christ and his righteousness. Ioh. 6.35.
yea it does assure the true believer of the sweet promises of life and of
mercy, that Christ with all the merits of his death and obedience, belongs unto
us in particular* yt even as verily as we eat the bread and drink the wine
which turn to the nourishment of our bodies, to comfort and refresh the same.
So are our souls by faith much more nourished and refreshed by the merits and
obedi^nce of Jesus Christ, Ioh. 6.35.
which is the ^pirituall food of our souls.

It quickens to all good duties.
^o all good duties of thankefullnesse and obedience to God and man. For when a
man comes ^nce to consider Gods infinite mercy in giving his Son to ^eath, and
Christ's wonderful ^oue in suffering of death. It will make a heart if there be
any love ^f God at all shed into it, fearful ^o offend God, who has been ^o
good and gracious a father unto him, seeking him up, Luke. 15.4
when ^e was lost and gone astray, and ^uickning him that was Dead in
Trespasses and Sins. Ephe. 2.1.
And lay ^^ darkness and in the shadow of death. And so likewise will it
make a man most careful and willing to please God, to be loving and merciful
unto men* because now in this sacramen^ we come to renew our couenan^ with God,
to seal to it afresh that so ever after we might be^ the more careful to
keep it, these and many more are the sweet^ benefits that we shall receive, b^
coming prepared to this holy ordinance.

5 The hurt and danger which otherwise will ensue, does show the necessity of
the same.
The fifth and last reason to persuade us to this duty of preparation, may be
taken from the great hurt and danger which for want thereof will follow. For
besides the loss of the benefit, there is a fearful judgment threatened to
the unworthy receiver, namely such a one becomes guilty of the body and blood
of Christ* It is not the loss of a man's labor that is all, but the fearful
punishment which will fall upon such, should terrify all, such eat and drink
their own judgment, such do no better then mock God to his face, because
they will seem to make a covenant with God, that God shall be their God, and
that they will be his people, but when they should seal this covenant, as
every Christian does in this Sacrament that coms prepared thereunto, they will
not be brought to that. This is nothing else but to dally with God, for a man
to provoke his maker. Let not such be deceived, God will not be mocked, if we
do not sanctify our selves, and sanctify the Lord in our hearts in a holy
and godly preparation, when we come to this his ordinance that so we may reap
some benefit and comfort by it to our own salvation: let us assure our selves
the Lord will be sanctified of us, and we shall serve his justice for abusing
so holy and excellent an ordinance to our own condemnation.

In all which respects let us learn to make more conscience of this duty, to
prepare our hearts, and to examine our selves before we come, that so we may
be fit ghests and meet partakers of this holy banquet.

We will now make some further use of this Doctrine to our selves.

The use of the Doctrine.
First, then seeing that examination, and preparation, is so necessary a thing,
as that without it, none may dare to come to the Lords Table. This may serve to
Teaches Ministers their duty, to prepare men for the Lords Table.
in a necessary duty that belongs unto their places, namely that they labor to
help the poor people of God, in furthering them, instructing them, and that
in private as public, and in using all other holy helps and means, as
preaching, Note.
private conference, catichising etc. that so they may fit them for the Lords
Table, and bring them to some competent measure of knowledge fit for this holy
duty.

This was the charge the Lord gives to the Levites, 2. Cor. 35.6
that they should sanctify themselves and prepare the people, The Lord lays
this duty upon them, they are called to that place, that they might instruct
the simple. Their lips must preserve knowledge, and the people must hear the
law at their mouth. Mal. 2.7.
They must be wary and careful that they admit none of those, whom the Lord
does not admit, such as cannot examine themselves, whether they be old or
young, rich or poor, Mat. 7.6.
for if they do, what were it but to give holy things to Dogs, and pearls to
Swine. Which we are straightly commanded of our Savior not to do.

Shows what manner of persons may not be admitted thereunto.
This serves to show what manner of persons may not be admitted thereunto,
namely, such as for want of skill and knowledge in the word, cannot examine
themselves, and prepare themselves in some good measure, yt so they may be meet
partakers of this holy mystery. Children.
And such are Children, who in regard of the tenderness of their years, cannot
examine and prepare themselves, they know not what it is to eat Christ
spiritually, and the like may be said of Mad men, Mad men. Idiots.
Idiots, etc. yea and such who though they be of ripe years, and have the use
of reason, and do understand the doctrine of man's redemption, yet if their
lives declare that they are vain and profane, such as are contemners of God
and godliness, Note
such as are prophaners of the Lords Saboth, drunkards, swearers, unclean
persons, or such in whom appears not the work of mortification and
sanctification, such cannot be interessed into this Sacrament. None must dare
to partake of this holy ordinance of God, but only such as for knowledge can,
and for conscience do Examine and prepare themselves thereunto.

Is for trial of our estates.
that none come to this Sacrament, but only such as can and do examine and
prepare themselves thereunto. Let this serve then to admonish us all in the
fear of God, to enter into our selves, to try our own hearts and Souls,
Whether we be in the faith, 2. Cor. 13.5
or not: how we are fitted and prepared to come to so holy a banqvet: let us
descend into our own hearts; ask thy heart this question, whether it be
purged of sin, of ignorance, malice, uncleanness, etc?

And let this examination be done in a serious manner: Ier. 17.9.
For the heart of man is deceiptfull above all things. Call to mind thy life
that is past, examine it by Gods law, and by his word, whether it has becommed
the gospel of Christ, whether it be truly humbled, wounded, and bruised for
sin, since by thy sins thou have grieved the good spirit of God, and whether
thou hungerest and thirstest after Christ and his righteousness, desire to
be eased of that burden of sin and corruption, that hangs on so fast, and
that presses down. Heb. 12.1.
And if upon examination, thou find this to be thy case, be not any whit
discouraged for thy wants, or too much cast down for thy sins. I will say
unto thee, as sometime the Disciples said unto blind Bartimeus; Luke 19. Mat.
11.28.
Behold, Christ calls thee: For so says Christ: Come unto me, all ye that
travail and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Here is the Physician
that is able to heal thee, and here is a medicine for thy sick heart, this
Sacrament will minister comfort unto thy sorrowful soul.

But if on the contrary part, upon this examination, thou find thy heart to
be fraught with sin, with blindness, ignorance, contempt of God and
godliness, pride, drunkenness, malice, etc. oh deceive not thy own soul any
longer, but know, that thou can not receive this Sacrament to thy good and to
thy comfort, but with great hazard to provoke the Lord to wrath, to punish
thee with both temporal and eternal judgments, with utter confusion, and
eternal condemnation.

And thus much for the necessity of this preparation: we are now to speak of
the subject of this preparation, and that is a Man's self.

Let a man therefore examine himself. The Apostle here gives a special
command, The subject of Examination.
that every one should narrowly try and examine Himself; that is, that every
man enter into his own heart and conscience, and examine himself, how it
fares betwixt God and his soul, whether or no he find his conscience to be
at peace with God. q. d. mark and behold in what estate you stand, what is the
condition of your own consciences, whether they excuse or accuse, for if our
own hearts condemn us, God is greater then our hearts, and will much more
condemn us.

Every man must be most diligent to know his own estate.
Now in that our Apostle bids us not to try one another, or our neighbors to
try us, but every man to try Himself, we are taught this point of holy
instruction; That our principal and special care and diligence must be in
knowing our selves, and laboring to discern of our own estates, how it fares
betwixt God and our souls. Lam. 3.40
He bids not our neighbor to try us, or we to try our neighbor, but every man
to try himself. Examine your own hearts upon your bed, Psalm. 4.4.
says David. This is that holy direction that Paul gives unto the godly
Corinths. 2. Cor. 13.15.
Prove your selves whether ye be in the faith, know ye not that Christ Jesus is
in you except ye be reprobates. And to this agrees that exhortation of the
same Apostle to the Galathians: Let every man ^roue his own work, Gal. 6.4.
that he may have ^oy in himself. And this duty be^ongs unto all, from the
highest unto the lowest, be a man never ^o holy, wise, learned, mighty, etc ^et
before he must dare to come ^o this Sacrament, this is the du^y that is to be
performed by him ^e must Examine himself. And ^reat reason:

Every man is best acquainted with his own estate.
as a man's own self. It is true, the Apostle here ^oeth not exclude others
from ^e trial of us; It is lawful for the Pastor to try us, and we must be
ready to give an account of our faith, Ministers not exempted from taking
trial of us. 1. Pet. 3.15.
and that hope that is in us, whenever we shall be required. But other men
can never so search our hearts as we our selves may; No man knows so much by
me as I know by my self. No man can be so certain of the estate of the heart,
and condition of the conscience of an other man, as he himself may. Thou
may obtain a good report amongst men, Note well.
thy Minister may approve of thee, think thee a meet Communicant, love thee
and delight in thy fellowship and society, yet may thou be^ a secret
hypocrite, and perish for all thy glorious profession in the end. When men's
outward behavior seems to be sober and godly, we are bound in conscience to
judge charitably of such, and to think well of them; but this is not all, it
stands every Christian soul in hand to approve himself to God, as to men, for
it is he that searches the heart, and tries the reins: Psalm. 7.9 1. Chro.
28.9.
He sees where man cannot discern, and before him al things are naked. In
which respect, we conclude, that there is none so meet to try the spirit of
man, to search the heart, and to prove the conscience of man, as is man
himself.

Every man shall answer for his own sins. Eze. 18.
may be this: Because every man must answer for his own sin; and The Soul
that sins shall die the death. And here unto agrees that of the Apostle;
2. Cor. 5 10
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, Romans 14.
that every man may receive the things which are done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or evil. A man stands and falls to his
own Conscience. It all the world should condemn me, and account me wicked,
if I have peace in my Soul, and my own Conscience does acquit me, I may have
peace. The world can judge but by ye outward appearance, it is the Lord that
knows the heart. 1. Sam. 1.13
Eli was deceived in Hannah, who in the bitterness of her soul mourned before
the Lord, and he judged her no better then drunk; even so, if all the world
should justify me, if my own conscience did not bear me witness, and acquit
me before Gods tribunal, it would auail me nothing at all. So then whether we
consider that every man's estate is best known unto himself, or that every man
shall answer for his own sins unto God, we conclude the necessity of this
duty, that if a man would have comfort in coming to this sacrament, and come
prepared as he ought, this duty is to be performed by him, he must examine
himself.

For reprofe
that are very forward and busy in prying into other men, pursuing them with
their examinations, and that through a glassie spectacle, wherein every mole
seems a mountain, and every more a beam; herein they are Eagle eyed, and
quick sighted, but in the mean time, do utterly neglect themselves and those
great corruptions and maine deformities that are in themselves, and break out
in their lives, they cannot behold. But what are they that for the most part
are so forward to prye into the faults of their brethren, but such as seldom
or never behold their own deformities. But who art thou that iudgest another
man's servant, Romans 14.4.
seeing he stands or falls to his master. The Lord has commanded thee to
Examine thy self, he does not require that thou should so strictly examine
the ways of thy brother* the Lord has reserved that to himself. Let such
remember our Savior his check to Peter for his busy inquisition concerning
John: Ioh. 21.22.
What is that to thee? follow thou me. We are carefully to heed our own
ways, and our own walking: It is no wisdom to neglect our selves, and to
be ignorant of our own estates, and to be so curious in prying into other
men's ways.





Public persons may and ought to examine others; and thus Ministers in a
special manner are bound to take trial of the estate of the flock that is
committed unto them; the Lord himself does will it so, when he says: The
Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, Mal. 2.7.
and the people shall seek the law at his mouth. And so are Parents, and Masters
of families bound unto the same duty, to examine the children and families; for
their relation to their congregations and families, makes them public persons,
and binds them to this duty.

But now for a private person, he ought not so to do, unless by way of
conference, so to help to confirm and strengthen their brethren, Luke 22.32
unto which duty al are bound: And so to give testimony of our obedience, we
are likewise bound to give an answer to all that shall ask us, not being
ashamed of Christ or his word, according to that of the Apostle Be ready
always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope
that is in you, 1. Pet. 3.15
and that with meekness and reverence.

For instruction.
it shall be our wisdom to put the same in execution, that every one do search
and examine his own ways, who will be so faithful to thee in this duty as
thy self? How can he be faithful to another, that is careless of himself?
Love ever begins with a man's self. Simile.
If a man's house be on fire with his neighbors, will a man be so careful of
his neighbors, as to neglect his own? I trow not. Oh my brethren, our souls
are set on fire with sin, why then should any man so neglect himself, and
the welfare of his own soul, and seem to be so mindful of another man's?
of such a one it may be truly said, that he does little mind the eternal
good of either. It is no point of good husbandry for a man to acquaint himself
with the nature of other men's grounds, goods or chattels, and in the mean
time, to be altogether ignorant of his own. Be diligent to know the state of
thy own flock, says Solomon* he gives not the like charge in any place
concerning our neighbors.

So then, would thou have any comfort in the use of this Sacrament, would
thou not have thy hearing, reading, praying, receiving, and the like holy
duties, holy I say in themselves, laid unto thy charge, and put in the score
amongst the bedrole of thy sins, against the day of reckoning? learn then
betimes to make more conscience of this duty of examining thy self, see what
leads thee to the performance of them, whether thou do them in faith,
repentance, and obedience, or for custom ^ake, and betimes learn to judge thy
self, that thou be ^ot judged of the Lord.

And thus much conserning ^he subject of this examination and that is a man's
self, the duty follows, which we refer to another time.

Let us pray.
The Second Sermon.
1. Cor. 11.28. Let a man therefore examine himself.


HITHERTO we have spoken of the necessity of Examination, and godly
preparation, that ought to be made of every christian before he come to the
Lords Table, as also of the Subject of it Himself. We are now in order to
treat of the third circumstance, and that is the duty it self laid ^owne in
this word Examine. Let ^ man therefore examine himself.

Here is the duty that every ^hristian must perform, that ^omes to partake of
this Sacrament, and desires to be a fit guest ^or the Lords Table, he must
first Examine himself.

There is no man that will vn^ertake a business of any im^ortance: but he
makes some ^ind of preparation thereunto. ^f it be but to go to the market, ^
a Fair, or to his Meals, how ^uch more in a matter of this nature, that so
highly concerns ^ods glory, and the salvation of ^ur own Souls, we are not to
go about this lightly and vnadui^dly, but with great care and due ^xamination
of our selves, least ^ seeking Comfort in coming unto this so holy an
ordinance we bring upon our own head^ swift damnation.

Most men fail in the manner of performing most duties.
It is an usual and common practice of the most, to fail cheefely in the
manner of performing of any duty unto God by reason of that ignorance that is
in them; their vnderstanding^ being not enlightened, and their judgments
informed in the truth. And as in all other duties o^ Gods worship and service,
so especially in this. Examination of themselves, either in being ignorant
wherein it consists, of in performing the same according to the truth. What
examination is
We are therefore to know, that to examine our selves, is to make a narrow and
strict search into our own hart^ not in a formal manner but substantially, as a
matter of ye greate^ consequence and importance, yt s^ ^ow we may uncover and
make ^aked things that are secret and ^idden, and find out how the ^ause
stands betwixt God and us: what sins we are guilty of, how we stand affected
toward them, whether we have labored to subdue them, or have let loose ^he
rain unto them, commit^ing sin with greediness, as it were with deliberation,
plod^ing and devising how we night accomplish wickedness, and whether we have
still a pur^ose to continue in our former ^uill ways.

Such a diligent Examination ^oth the Apostle call for else ^here, 2. Cor. 13.5.
when he says Prove your ^elues whether ye be in the faith ex^mine your
selves. Psalm. 4.4.
And that of ^auid, Lam. 3.40.
Examine your selves upon ^ur bed. But especialy that of the Prophet Jeremy Let
us search and try our ways etc. The word signifies such a searching: as if a
man were to search for gold or silver in a mine in the earth, where there is
much earth, but little oar. Thereby giving us to understand that sin creepes
into corners, and lies close, so that if a man would find it out, he must
search and that narrowly, o^ else he may miss of it. This made David to cry
out, Psalm. 19.12.
who can understand his faults? Oh cleanse me from my secret sins. Eccle. 7.31.
And Salomo^ says that God made man righteous, but they have found ou^ many
inventions. In all which respects we see, that it must not be ^ triuiall or
ordinary examination that will serve turn, but the mo^ diligent scrutiny and
searc^ that may be, And that,

First, 1 Reasons moving to perform the duty.
because man's heart is a ^ine of deceit, and is as a sea of ^ubtilty, and
therefore unless a ^an dig deep and diue low, ^t will not be sounded. The
heart ^ deceiptfull above measure, Ier. 17.9.
who ^an find it out? many men's hearts ^re like unto a quagmire, rotten within
and yet seeming solid without, like unto Iezabel, paint^ng the outside, and
making the ^oule to seem comely. As let a ^an demand any question of his
^eart, how deceitful shall the ^nswer be, if he bring the same ^o trial, as
in particular, if a man ^ske his heart whether he may ^ot safely go to the
Sacrament, ^t will say with Elizeus, 2. Reg. 5.29
go in ^eace, whereas indeed there is no ^eace to the wicked. Esaias. 57. vlt
And as the A^ostle shows in the verse fol^owing. v. 29.
He that eats and drinks unworthily eats and drinks Judgment to
himself. Yet al^ who is there in a whole congregation, of so lewd and loose a
life that thinks not himself fit for the Sacrament, and all this com^ to
pass through the deceitfullnesse of the heart.

Besides how many are deceived in their estates, when the^ compare themselves
with others, and when they see tha^ they break not out into ye sam^ excess of
riot with other me^ (though God knows they a^ but kept by a restraining grace
and are besides fraught with al^ manner of hypocrycie) they ca^ think that all
is well, Luke 18.11
yea an^ glory in that estate too: with Go^ I thank thee that I am not as
other men. When they are but meer^ Pharisees, painted Sepulcher^ and within are
full of all manner of corruption.

Secondly, we had need very seriously to perform this duty, because of the
straight commandment of almighty God to that purpose: Keep thy heart with all
diligence. Pro. 4.23.
Now this can never be done unless we view them thoroughly, and search into them
with exceeding care. The Governor of a Castle can never defend it from the
enemy, unless he have ^n eye to every passage that the enemy may make his
entry. And ^ure it is that we shall never de^end the Castles of our souls,
^nles we have a special care unto the in-roads of our senses, and ^he
out-roads of our affections, ^y the which as so many doors and Casements, sin
and Satan ^oth wind himself into us.

And again, this is not the least motive to stir us up unto this duty, because
of the danger; for the curse of God is liable unto every one yt does the work
of the Lord negligently. Ier. 48.10.
There is in no one part of Gods worship and service that requires more
circumspection, care, and conscience to the right performance of it, then this
of the due receiving of this Sacrament of the Lords Supper. And therefore, as
that great Gommaundement of Almighty God, of sanctifying his Saboth, has a
special memento prefixed before it, because by the careful keeping of it, we
shall observe the rest the better. So of all other, the ordinances of God given
unto his Church, this being the neare^ and dearest pledge of his love he does
in a special manner require that men should come prepared thereunto.

v. 31.
That if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged, and by our
negligent and careless neglect of this duty, we expose our selves unto the
most strict and dreadful examination of the Almighty. Now were it not better
that we should judge our selves, then that God should judge us, which the Lord
will never do, if we will truly judge our selves. Thus did the Prodigal
Son judge himself, when he confessed he was not worthy to be called a
Son, Luke 15.19.
and in so doing found mercy at Gods hands. But when men come short of their
duty herein, the Lord falls to his examination, and men that cannot endure to
set sin before their eyes for their conversion, the Lord at the last will set
them before his, to their confusion.

Now having considered the reasons to move us to this narrow search and trial
of our selves, we now come to speak of the duty it self, which consists of
four particulars, without which we can never celebrate the Lords Supper to
the glory of God, the comfortable discharge of our own duties, and with peace
unto our souls.

The first is Knowledge, the second Faith, the third Repentance, the fourth
Love.

If we find not these things in us in some measure, we cannot be meet
partakers of these holy mysteries. Here then is our duty, Examination

And the things that are to be enquired after, are first, whether we have in
us the sanctified knowledge of God and of Christ. Secondly, whether we have
faith in him. Thirdly, whether we have repentance for our sins, and last of
al, love and charity to our brethren. If these things be in us, though but in
a weak measure, we may come to this Supper of the Lord, here to have them
strengthened and confirmed, the Lord does invite such poor souls to come unto
him, and has promised to refresh them, Mat 11.28. Mar. 12.26.
and not to break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax.

But if on the contrary part, we find upon Examination, that our hearts are
ignorant of God and of Christ, and of our redemption through him, that we want
faith in his promises, that our hearts are not broken and wounded within us
for our sins, that we are not in charity with men yt have wronged and injured
us; Then our estate is most woeful and miserable; thou may eat panis
Domini, but not panem Dominum, as one says: Thou may get part of the bread
of the Lord, but not that Bread the Lord. Thou may get it into thy mouth,
but not into thy heart: And which shall be so far from turning to thy good
and comfort, as that it shall rather add unto thy sins, and bring upon thy
own head the greater damnation.

1. Knowledge.
The first Interrogatory in this our examination is, whether we have that true
and saving knowledge of God and of Christ, without which there can be no true
faith, and so consequently no salvation.

It is knowledge that is the ground of all grace and obedience unto which
eternal life is promised, or which is the means to bring us to eternal life,
as our Savior witnesses, saying; This is life eternal, to know thee to be
the true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. What things are absolute
necessary to be known to salvation.
We must be careful at the least to attain to the principles of Religion, as
they are laid down in the word: That is, to know that there is but only one
God, Creator of heaven and earth, distinguished into three persons, Father,
Son, and holy Ghost. We must know, that as God created man after his own
Image at the first, Genesis 1.26. Gen 2.17. Esaias 53.5.
in holiness and righteousness; so by his wilful rebellion and transgression,
he plunged himself into all misery, and made himself guilty of eternal
death. And that there was no creature in heaven or earth that could reconcile
God and man, but only Christ Jesus, and that he must take our nature upon him,
satisfy Gods justice for our sins, by bearing the punishment, and fulfilling
of the law.

Christ partaked only by faith.
We must know again, that there is no way to partake of Christ, but only by
Faith. By Faith we apply unto our selves all the merits of his death and
passion. It is the Hand of the Soul, by the which we come to lay hold on
Christ, to our own salvation.

And as we must be furnished in some good measure with the knowledge of ye
word in general, What is to be known touching this Sacrament.
touching God and man, so in particular conserning this doctrine of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we must be in^t ^cted in the true use of it.
Who did institute and appoint it, namely the Lord Jesus, where^ore? For to be
the spiritual ^oode and comfort of our Souls, that it might be a special
means to support and strengthen our faith, and to keep in our minds a perfect
memory of the death and passion of Christ: and ^n what a holy and reverent man
^er we ought to come unto it. The knowledge af these things, ^s absolute
necessary to salvation, and without the which we cannot believe, pray a right,
worship God sincerely, hear the word profitably, or receive the Sacrament
worthyly Nay, which is more, The danger of ignorance.
such Ignorance is the forerunner of destruction, and an evident sign yt the
Lord has passed by such a Soul and has reserved it as a vessel of wrath to
destruction. And this is plainly proved out of sundry places of ye Scripture
as, Hos. 4.6.
my people perish for want of knowledge. So again Paul says. That if the
Gospe^ be hid, 2. Cor. 4.3.4.
it is hid to those that perish, whom the God of this world has blinded their
minds. Oh fearful Judgment of God able to make a stony heart to rend in
sunder, Note.
if men did duly consider it, what is the woeful estate and condition of men
that live in ignorance! it is a manifest sign that such shall pe^ish. For if
the Gospel (...) hid, it is hid to such as perish. So gain the same Apostle
says in another place, 2. These. 1.8
that the Lord Jesus all show himself from heaven ^ith his mighty Angels,
inflaming ^e, rendering vengeance to them that ^ow not God, and obey not the
^ospel of Christ. And again, Heb. 3.10.
The lord was grieved with that genera^on, and said, it is a people that do
^re in their hearts, for they have not ^owne my ways. Psa. 59.10.
By all which ^aces of Scripture it is most ^eare and plain, that he that
^ueth in the estate of ignorance, and dies without knowledge, cannot be saved.

Secondly, It is necessary to increase in knowledge daily.
as we must try and ^xamine our selves whether we ^aue this true saving
knowledge ^f God and of Christ in some ^easure in us. So must we try and
examine our hearts, how we grow and increase in the same knowledge. For the
child of God is like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that does ever
bring forth fruit and grow. And it is imposible, that such a one should stand
at a stay in religion, if we grow not forward we shall draw backward. And
indeed, it is a dangrous sign of the want of grace, when men stand at a stay
in religion, to be as ignorant and blind in heavenly matters, this year as
they were the last year, yea many years ago. This is a mark of Gods curse,
that unless at the last such a one be called home and plucked as a brand out
of the fire. He must needs perish eternally. 1. Pet. 2.2.


The Apostle Peter, bids us grow by the milk of the word. We must then be
careful to see that by all holy helps and means, such as are the word,
Sa^rament, prayer, meditation, ^eading, etc: we may find our ^nowledg to
increase, and yt we grow daily in grace and in the ^nowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

^ome: who teach that ignorance is ^he Mother of Devotion. And the ^ore
ignorant, the more de^ote, and Religious. But our Sa^iour Christ which is the
chief Doctor of his Church, he teach^th that ignorance is the Mother of sin,
rebellion, and damnation: and in every place the word of God, shows the danger
of this ^^nne. But no marvel though they plead for ignorance as a maine
pillar of Popish Religion, for so are men kept from discovering their fithy
abomination, for if men were not extreme ignorant in ye matters of God, and
his word, how could they be abused a^ they are this day amongst them*

Romans 14.23.
For whatsoever is no^ of faith, is sin. And no knowledge, no faith, for how
can a man believe that he is ignoran^ of. So that even their best duties they
shall be excercised in ^s hearing the word, receiving ^f the Sacrament,
prayer, etc* ^hese are abomination unto the Lord, and these add unto the
measure of their sins, being not performed in a holy manner, in ^aith,
repentance and obedience, which is altogether impossible ^or any that are
ignorant to do. And yet alas, though the estate of such as live in ignorance,
be so ^amentable and fearful as we ^eare it is: how many be there that
seem to have past a state of their Souls to ignorance for a ^earme of life,
as if they had who^y devoted themselves to sin and Satan, and that there
were ^ot a reckoning day to come!

that has the stamp of grace upon it, and is proper to the people of God. And
that we send to heaven for it by prayer unto the Lord. And attend diligently
upon the word preached and taught, reading, conference, etc: least it comes
to pass that we perish for want of knowledge, and for our neglect and
contempt of the same be damned for ever.

And thus much touching the first Quere, Knowledge.

2. Faith.
The second, interrogatory i^ this our examination, is for ou^ faith, which is
indeed the hand of the Soul, by the which we lay hold on Christ in this
Sacrament and therefore is called Sacramentum Fidelium. That Sacrament that
belongs only to the faithful. This faith is the Queen of all other virtues,
with out which our Knowledge shall profit us nothing at all: It is of that
nature, that it purifies the heart, and makes it a fit receptacle for Christ,
Act. 15.9 Ephesians. 3.17 What Faith is.
who is said to Dwell in our hearts by faith.

Now this Faith is a gift of God, whereby the elect do apply Christ and the
saving promises of the Gospel to themselves ^n particular. And according as ^
man believes, so shall he receive, as our Savior speaks to the woman of
Canaan, O woman, Mat. 15.28. Luke 7.50 Luke 8.48.
great is thy Faith, be it unto thee as thou desire. And unto the woman that
anointed Christ's ^eete, Christ says, Thy Faith has saved thee, go in peace.
This Faith was the hand, by which the poor woman in the Gospel that had the
bloody issue, touched Christ, and was healed, according to that speech of our
Savior unto her: Daughter be of good comfort, thy Faith has made thee whole.
This is it that seasons all our Sacrifices and Services that we offer unto God,
whether it be to hear the word, receive the Sacrament, prayer, singing of
Psalms, thanksgiving etc. It is faith that makes them find acceptance with
God, and without Faith it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11.6.
This made Abels Sacrifice, and Noah's Obedience accepted: this made that cup of
water, given to a Disciple in the name of a Disciple, to be regarded of God.
And the poor Widows Mite so acceptable. And without this Faith, there is
nothing that we can do, can be pleasing in his sight.

That the holy Ghost speaks of the word preached, Heb. 4.2.
That it profited not, because it was not mixed with faith in those that heard
it, may be said of this Sacrament, Mat. 22.
That it profits not, because it is not mixed with faith in those that
receive it; for it is faith that makes it acceptable, it is faith that bids us
welcome to this feast of the great King. Heb. 11.1
It is the evidence of things not seen. It gives us a comfortable assurance of
Christ's presence in the Sacrament. Yea, ^t is so necessary in the receiving of
this Sacrament, that without ^t we can never receive aright, or ^ruely partake
of the body and blood of Christ.

Christ says, Ioh. 6.55. The excellent use of faith in this Sacrament.
that his flesh is Meat indeed, and his blood is Drink indeed, but we must
eat ^he same by faith. For faith is the hand of the soul, by the which we
apprehend Christ and all the merits and benefits of his death and passion, and
are made partakers of the same. Yea faith is the mouth of the soul, by the
which we receive Christ within us, the stomach to digest Christ, and that most
special part of the wedding garment, without which no man may approach near
the Lords presence.

It must not be a general but a particular Faith.
Now concerning this Faith, we must know, that it is not enough to have a
general Faith, as the Papists teach to believe as the Church believes; but
we must labor for a special and particular Faith, to apprehend Christ Jesus
and all the benefits of his passion unto our own selves in particular.

The Devils have in them a general faith, whereby they are brought to believe
that there is a God, and that Christ dyed for sinners: But that they shall have
any benefit by Christ's death, they want faith to believe: whereas the true
child of God must labor for a particular faith, to say with Paul; Gal. 2.20.
I know that Christ loved me, and gave himself for me. And again, I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, 2. Tim. 4.7
I have kept the Faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day.
The promises of life and salvation, forgiveness of sins, etc. we must believe
that they be^ong unto our selves in particu^ar. The Scripture calls Christ ^
Redeemer indefinitely, the ^rue believer calls Christ a Redeemer particularly. I
know that my Redeemer lives (says Job): Job. 19.25.
And Thomas out of a special apprehension of Gods love to him, Ioh. 20.28.
says: Thou art my Lord and my God. And indeed, this particular application
of Gods favor in Christ, laying hold on him by faith, is the very sum of
Christian Religion, it will put life into all our services, and make them
acceptable with the most highest.

A hard thing to believe.
And thus to believe is the hardest thing in the world, by reason of the
strength of corruption within, and the force of Satan his temptations, who
seeks by all means possible to hinder the faith of the elect. Indeed it is an
easy matter for a natural man yt finds no opposition, to say he has faith,
and he would be sorry to doubt of Gods mercy, which is indeed mere
presumption, and no faith. But when Satan shall win now a poor soul, when his
own heart shall accuse him, when sin shall lie heavy upon the soul of a
man, and when his conscience shall be upon the rack, and the Lord shall seem to
write bitter things against him, Job. 13.15.
as Job complains, then for a man to stand upright, and to rest himself upon
the rock Christ, and to comfort himself in his God, and to say, Mat. 16.16.
Though the Lord would kill me, yet will I trust in him. This, ^his is the
property of a sound faith indeed, against which the gates of Hell shall never
pre^aile.

And thus having the godly evidence and assurance of a liue^y faith, we may
boldly come to the Lords Table, to this heavenly banquet and feast of our
souls.

The weak must not be discouraged
Neither are we to abstain and to hang back from coming to this Sacrament,
because we feel and find sundry wants and defects in our faith, for wherefore
has Christ least this Sacrament to his Church, but as a stay and prop for a
weak faith? There is a weak faith.
An earnest and unfeigned desire to be reconciled unto God in Christ, God
accepts, and embraces, and accounts the very desire of faith as faith it
self. And the very desire of a Christian soul, hungering and thirsting after
reconciliation and forgiveness of Sins, shall be available to work out
our atonement and redemption.

It is not the case of all the godly ^o come to the fullness in Christ, ^o say:
I am persuaded, Romans 8.38
that neither ^ife nor death, nor things present, ^or things to come, neither
Angels, ^or principalities, nor powers, nor ^eight, nor depth, nor any other
^reature, shall separate us from the ^oue of God which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. Only to this assurance, ^hey labor to come, and seek after, and so go
on from faith ^o faith, and strength to strength: ^ntill at the last (through
Gods mercy) they begin to take foot^ng upon the battlements of ^eauen, and can
bid defiance unto the devil, the world, and all ^he enemies of their Salvation.

No doubt there were some, Comfort to the weak.
that with a weak eye beheld the ^rasen Serpent in the wilder^esse, Number. 21.8.
yet were cured as well as ^hey that saw more clearly, even so he that has
but a little faith in the Son of God, shall never have his Salvation denied
him, endeavoring after more faith and more Sanctity of life. Luke 17.5.6.
When the Disciples prayed that the Lord would increase their faith, our
Savior declared presently unto them, Mar. 2.23.
that if faith be but as a grain of Mustard-seede in quantity: it should be
effectual unto salvation, promising withal that he would not break the
bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax. But would rather cherish and
nourish the least spark of grace in his children. The Disciples themselves,
were ignorant of many things conserning Christ's death and Resurrection, and
therefore are called by Christ, Men of little faith. Luke 2.4.25
And such likewise was the faith of him, whose child was possessed with ^
dumb and deaf Spirit, when Christ said unto him. If thou ^anst believe all
things are possible ^o him that believes. Straightway ^e cried out with
tears, I believe, Lord help my unbelief. Christ ^oth not reject him, Mat.
7.7.8.
nor cast him ^ff, because his faith was weak, ^ut answers him in the
desires ^f his Soul, teaching us thereby ^or to be dismayed, though we and
many wants and imperfectio^s ^o be in us, inasmuch as he has ^romised to
cover them all, if we ^e humbled for our wants, and ^eeke to improve those
gifts and ^races we have already received.

And to that end we may be ^irred up the more to labor for ^o excellent a
grace, consider du^^ these reasons. Faith most excellent.


Romans 14.23
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

Heb. 11.6.
Secondly we cannot please God in any particular action without it. For:
Without faith it is impossible to please God.

Heb. 4.2.
For: The word which they heard, being not mixed with faith, did not profit
them.

Iam. 1.6.
for the Apostle wills us to pray in faith and waver not.

Mar. 16.16.
for thus runs the promise, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved,
but he that believes not shall be damned.

cannot hear ye word with profit, ^ray aright, have any assurance ^f our own
salvation, nor receive ^is holy Sacrament with any ^uit or comfort to our own
^oore Souls. Oh how does this ^and every one in hand to try and ^xamine his
own heart, 2. Cor. 13.5
whether ^e has this excellent grace or ^oe. Prove your selves whether ye be ^
the faith: Know ye not that Christ in you except ye be Reprobates. and to wait
upon God in the ^onscionable use of al holy helps and means appointed of God,
^oth for the begetting as also for ^e increasing of so excellent a ^race. Least
by making light ^count of it, we should show ^ur selves rebellious against God
and injurious to our own Souls.

And because the ministry of ^e word is the principal means ordained of God,
both for the begetting of faith, How faith is wrought.
and also for the daily increase of the same, As says the Apostle, Romans 10.14
How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard. And how shall
they hear without a Preacher. And the inference upon that, is this verse, 17.
That faith comes by hearing and hearing by the word of God Therefore every one
must with all care and conscience attend upon that his ordinance: making
conscience of the duties of the Sabbath in public and private, as hearing,
reading, praying, conference, meditation etc. Which are the means the Lord
ordinarily does use, both for the begetting as also the daily increase of this
grace in us.

many amongst us, is but a mere ^magination and fond presump^ion, for why? do
not many ^oast of their strong faith, and ^et live in the continual neglect
and contempt of the public ^inistry of the word, either they ^re careless in
coming unto it, or ^se care not to profit by it. Poor ^oules, how do such
deceive the^^elues: whose faith one day will ^ppeare but a fancy, and in time
^f need will then deceive them.

And thus much touching the ^^cond Quere, Faith.

Repentance. For those that ^e united unto Christ by Faith, Repentance.
and made his members, they ^ust needs repent and become ^^w creatures, and
be holy as christ is holy. Such must be truly humbled for their sins, hate and
abhor every evil way, and endeavor in heart and life to obey God in all his
Commandments.

What repentance is.
Now this gift or grace of Repentance, is nothing else but a conversion or
change of the whole man from sin unto God. When a man comes to consider, and to
examine his own ways, and upon his examination finds his estate to be miserable
and cursed, (...) he is in extreme danger of God wrath, and eternal
condemnation for his sins. This will mak^ a man deny himself, and t^ seek
for help of God.

And this is that pass, the every one of us must labor t^ bring our hearts
unto, if we des^^ to come prepared unto the Lords Table, and to reap an^
benefit and comfort unto o^^ Souls by the use of this so holy ^n ordinance.

Now if we will duly examine our selves, and search into our own hearts, we
shall find, that we have run far into Gods score, and that our sins are
infinite of all sorts, sins of omission, and sins of commission, sins of
^nfirmitie, and presumptuous sins, in the time of our igno^ance, and in the
days of our knowledge, against God, and against man, yea and against our own
souls: for all which, if our hearts be not hardened in sin, and we our selves
come to that height of impiety, to be past fee^ing, our hearts cannot choose but
smite us, and we our selves be brought to cry out of our selves, and to say:
Ier. 8.6.
Alas! what have I done? Which if the Lord do show us that mercy, that we can
once thoroughly come to the sight of it, it must needs work in us sorrow for
sin, and to seek to make our reconciliation with GOD, whom we have offended.

And because our hearets can never smite us for sin, before our judgment be
truly enlightened and informed, that we have sinned, and sin must be seen
before it can be sorrowed for.

How to come to repent.
We must therefore first of all* make a narrow search after sin, according to
that of the Prophet: Lam. 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord. And this search ought
to be strict and narrow, in regard of the deceitfulness of our our own hearts
which are deceitful above al^ things, Ier. 17.9.
and there are in them many secret lurking-holes for sin* which will be
unespied, unless a ^rict search be used. And therefor the Prophet exhorting
unto his duty, says; Gather your selves, Hag* 2.1.
^^at is, gather your wits toge^er, and fix them upon the con^^deration of
your estate.

And this is to be observed as ^^e only way to true repentance, 1 To see sin.
(...) get a sight of sin, for he that ^es his sins thoroughly, will be^aile
them heartily. David consi^ered his ways, and what fol^^wed upon the sight of
his error ^^d wandering: Psa. 119.59
I turned my self in^ the ways of thy testimonies. It is (...) possible that
a straying trauel^r should ever return into the ^^ght way, yt does not
understand ^^s error: When God will bring ^ome a poor wandering sinner in^ ye
way of life, he gives him e^^r a heart to question his estate, after this
manner, God has made me a man, endued me with a reasonable soul, affording
unto me the means of grace and salvation; what now does my walking answer
this mercy of his? is my life a walking in, or rather, not a wandering from the
paths of his commandments? This makes a Sinner with Ephraim to smite upon his
Thigh, and to be ashamed, which before was as an untamed calfe, and then
conclude^ he thus after, when I was instructed, Ier. 31.18.19.
I Repented.

And this may be assigned a^^ the only cause of that great hardness of heart,
and sencelesnesse that so reigns this day i^ the world, even that brutish in
consideration, that men go o^ still in sin, adding sin unto sin, not
considering what they do, but flattering themselves ^n their evil ways, and
abandon^ng the very thoughts that should make their estates questionable; Oh
this is the case of many thou^ands in the world, which does manifestly declare
how far they ^re from the practice of true Re^entance.

This is a matter (I confess) that would ask here a large ^iscourse, if I
should speak of all ^he parts of Repentance, I desire ^ut briefly to observe
some ^ew passages of the same.

As there must be in the first ^lace a sight of sin (as we have ^eard), 2.
To be humbled for sin.
so in true repentance ^here must be a sorrow of heart ^or the same sins:
Neither will ^uery sorrow for sin serve the ^urne, or has Repentance
ac^ompanying it, but only Godly Sorrow.

Two sorts of sorrow. 2. Cor. 7.10
There is a worldly sorrow that brings death, as there is a godly sorrow, the
end whereof is life and peace.

The first sort of Sorrow is to be found amongst hypocrites and wicked men,
which are many times full of sorrow, but it is not for sin because it is
sin, and offends the majesty of God, but because of the punishment which by
their sins they have drawn upon themselves, even a guilty conscience, a
trembling heart, and wounded soul, and withal, a fearful expectation of
judgment. These are the effects of sin, and these wound the heart of the
sinner, and maks him to fall out with his sins, or rather indeed with the
punishment* like unto Caine, Genesis 4.14. Exodus 9.28.
Pharaoh, Saul, and Judas, etc. which only were affected with the punishment,
Mat 27.5.
and could have wished with all their hearts, that the same had been no sin,
that so they might have lived in the same without controlment.

But besides this, What godly Sorrow is. 2. Cor. 7.10
there is also a godly Sorrow, which is only to be found amongst the godly:
which has the promise annexed unto it* And that is, when the Child of God is
grieved for sin, because by sin he has grieved God, a good and gracious
Father in Jesus Christ; and if there were neither hell, nor Satan, nor
punishment for sin after this life, yet inasmuch as the Lord is offended, and
his righteous laws are violated, this is it that makes the heart of ye godly to
smite them and they to be humbled for their Sins. And this Sorrow, these
sighs and throbs of the godly for sin, are those sower herbs wherewith we
must ea^e our new Passover; Exo. 12.
and such troubled spirits shall be acceptable Sacrifices unto God, and such
broken and contrite hearts the Lord will not despise. Psalm. 51.17.


The means of godly Sorrow.
Now the means by which this godly Sorrow may be attained unto, are these:

Nathan deal with David, 2. Sam. 12*7.8.
putting him i^ mind of Gods mercies in advancing him to be King over Israel,
^^d delivering him out of the ^nds of Saul, adding moreover, (...) that had bin
too little, he would ^aue given thee more. That was it yt ^rought remorse and
sorrow in ^^e heart of David. And this was (...) that prevailed so with Joseph,
and kept him from sin, even ^^e consideration of Gods good^esse, formerly
extended toward ^im. How can I do this great ^ickednesse, and ^in^e against
God. Genesis 39.


selves, the very earth we tread upon, besides the full fruition of Gods wrath
and eternal vengeance in the life to come.

Jews brought to compunction of heart for their sin of crucifying ye Lord of
glory. Act. 2.37.
And this word is called the Hammer of the Lord, for by it the Lord does break
the hard and stony hearts of men.

special manner, that the Lord would keep him from Sins of this nature,
saying, Keep thy Servant from presumptuous sins. Psalm. 19.13.
Knowing that they would at the ^ast, lie heavy upon the Soul and conscience
of that man that ^ommitted them, when he should come to a true sight of them.

But here the weak Christi^n is bewayling his want, that he cannot bring his
heart to any ^easonable pass to be sorrowful ^or sin, but howsoever, that
^^ine he would, and withal his ^eart he desires that his heart ^ould dissolve
into tears, yet he ^ndes that his heart is fat, and ^ill not stoop, and this
makes ^im grieve because he cannot ^ieue, yea and mourn because ^e cannot
mourn.

Let such for their comfort observe.

Comfort for the weak.
First, that the constitution of every man's body is not alike, and there may be
true compunction and contrition of heart for Sin, though at all times it do
not manifest it self in the eye by tears,



^he Lord looks after the manner, ^hen the measure of any duty, or grace. And,
2. Cor. 8.12
Accepts us according to that which we have, not according to that which we
have not. And has promised that he will not Quench the smoking flax, Mt. 12.20.
nor ^reake the bruised reed. And so ^ong as we please not our selves ^n these
poor beginnings, but ^ndeuour after more grace, and ^ouet after the best
gifts, 1. Cor. 12.3
the lord does except both of us and them.

To leave and forsake sin.
For he that has ^oue his penance once truly before God, I mean, has had
this hearty sorrow for his sin, it will abandon sin in his Soul, for when
this Godly sorrow comes in, sin goes out. A man that has surfeited of such
meat once, will afterward loath it. This point is very clear by the examples
of all the godly, of whom we never read, they fell into the same sins
again after their repentance. They made not a trade of sin, as of David, of
whom it is said, That David did that which was right in the sight of the Lord
all the days of his life, 1. Reg. 15.5
save only in the matter of Vriah. And Zacheus, no sooner called by Christ,
but leaft his former course. And great reason: for every true penitent is
partaker of Christ's death, and the power of the same, which causes him that
he is now become dead unto sin: Romans 6.6.
and withal has ye spirit of God dwelling in him, whose proper work is to
purify the heart, and not to suffer any ^ilthinesse to remain where it ^oth
lodge. Act. 15.9.


And thus we have seen the ^arts of true repentance, and wherein it does
consist: We ^re now to speak of the necessi^ie of the same.

The necessity of this duty ^ppeares by that speech of our ^auiour, The
necessity of Repentance.
Except ye repent ye shall (...) perish. Luke 13.5.
And the words are there ^ice repeated, to show the cer^^intie of it. And
again, If ye will ^^t return but continue still in your ^s, I will visit you
says the Lord, Ier. 5.3.9.
^^d be avenged on you. Many are pathetical exhortations, in the ^^ripture to
this purpose, to ex^rt men to repentance. O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from
wickedness that thou may be saved. Ier. 4.14.
And Cast away from you all your transgressions whereby ye have transgressed,
Ier. 18.31.
and make you a new heart and a new Spirit. And again, Let us search and try
our ways, Lam. 3.40.
and turn unto the Lord. This is that loving admonition, Hag. 1.5.7.
Christ gives unto the Church of Eph^sus who had lost their first love, Reu.
2.5.
she should Remember from whence she: Ephe. 4.23.
was fallen, and repent. The^ and infinite places more do suf^^ciently declare
the necessity ^ Repentance, Romans 12.2.
Seeing without we cannot be saved.

Yea all our Sacrifices and Se^uices that we offer up unto Go^ whether it be to
hear the wor^ to receive this Sacrament, ^ pray etc. Without repentan^ are
nothing worth. Faith an^ Repentance, makes all our service ^o God to be
accepted: and that ^his may the more evidently ap^eare, consider what the Lord
^ayth by his Prophet Esaias: When you come to appear before me, who has
required this at your ^ands, to tread in my courts? Esa. 1.12.13.14.15.
Bring ^o more oblations in vain; Incense (...) abomination unto me, I cannot
^uffer your new Moons, nor Sab^oths, nor Solemn days, nor Assem^lies: And
when ye stretch out your ^ands, I will hide my eyes from you; and though you
make many prayers, will not hear. These are fearful ^hreatnings that the Lord
de^ounceth against the Jews his ^wne people: But would we ^now the cause of
all? the Lord ^eclares the same in the very next ^ords following: Because your
^ands are full of blood. They came in their old sins, without Repentance, and
thought that so long as they offered up their sacrifices, all was well, God
could not choose but accept of them. But the Lord regarded not the sacrifices of
his own worship and service, when men did not perform them in an holy manner,
in Faith and Repentance. And therefore the Lord exhorts them thus: Esa. 1.16.
Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your works from before mine
eyes: Cease to do evil, learn to do well. etc. This were the way to have
their Sacrifices accepted, to break off their sins by repentance, without
which the Lord accepts of nothing that we do. The truth is further manifested
by the same prophet, where he says, that H^ that kills a Bullock, Esa. 66.3.
is as if he slew ^ man: He that sacrifices a sheep, ^ as if he cut off a
dogs neck: He that offers an oblation, as if he of^ered swines flesh. Now
what is the ^eason of this? did not the Lord ^equire these things at the
peo^les hand? did not his worship and service consist in them? I ^nswer yes.
Yet for all that, these things were abomination unto ^he Lord: For in every
duty ^ere is the Matter, and the Man^er; the Lord never regards the ^atter of
his service, if men fail (...) the Manner, if they do not ^erforme the same
in Faith, Re^entance and Obedience. And therefore the Lord lays down ^e
reason why their Sacrifices ^ere rejected, viz. Because their ^ule delighted in
their abhominati^. They came unto them in ^eir sins, which caused the Lord to
hate both them and their Sacrifice.



And surely, in our days and times, there is more need of the Sons of
Thunder then of Consolation, inasmuch as sin does abound in every place and
congregation, and that here be so few that come truly to the sigh^ of the same.

^eriously in this one point espe^ially, whether we find our hearts ^o be broken
and wounded in us ^or sin, for the evils of our life ^ast, desiring to walk
more holi^y for the time to come. For this (...) the end wherefore we come to
^his Supper of the Lord, that we ^ight be strengthened against ^^nne, and be
knit unto Christ, and so receive the power of his ^eath to kill sin in us,
and ^ight have more power to ^ease God.

So that we must try our Re^entance, how we find and feel ^ur hearts humbled
for our ma^ifold sins and offenses com^itted; whether we be grieved (...)
our souls, for offending so ^ood and gracious a God; whe^^er we come to this
Sacrament ^ith a hatred and detestation of all our former evil ways, and with
a constant purpose, to walk in new Obedience, in all things purposing to
please him.

And when we have partaked of this Sacrament, we must then examine our hearts,
and see how we prevail against our corruptions. So that though we have
repentance before, yet now we must renew our Repentance, and labor to find
more power and strength against sin the^ before.

But if we come in our old^ sins, in our ignorance, blindness, hardness of
heart, profaneness, lying, swearing, uncleanness, etc. it were better tha^
we never came at all, we cannon look ever to reap any benefi^ by this holy
ordinance of God but in stead of a blessing, shall be sure to draw down from
GOD some heavy judgment. Let us not then come in our old sins, as Judas in
his hypocrisy, least we reap the reward of Judas.

The Jews had four days to ^o prepare themselves, and they must eat the
Passover with vn^eauened bread and sower herbs, Exo. 12.
^y which Ceremony they were ^aught to come in Repentance, ^ith hearts grieved
for sin, and ^o prepare themselves for so ^reat a mystery. And the Apostle
^xhorteth unto this duty, when ^e says: Purge out the old leaven, 1. Cor. 5.7.
^at ye may be a new lump: for Christ ^ur Passover is sacrificed for us.

And thus much for the third ^art of our examination, viz. Re^entance.

Love.
The fourth Interrogatory in this our examination is for our love to man, or
reconciliation to our brethren. This virtue, as it is necessary at al times, so
especially at this time, when we come to partake of this Sacrament, which is a
Supper of love. This is as needful and necessary to the due receiving of this
sacrament as the former: For wha^ were our knowledge, if we ha^ the same in
never so great a measure, what were our faith, or repentance, if love to our
brethren be wanting, we may well call the truth of them all into question, i^
we find not our selves ready an^ willing to remit and forgive o^ brethren their
injuries and trespasses committed against us.

This Sacrament is called the Communion, to teach us this duty how we ought to
come unto the same in love, we have one God, one Mediator, and redeemer, one
Spirit, one mother the church of God, we be all members of one, and the same
mystical body, and therefore when we come to this Supper we should come in
love.

That which our Savior says of Sacrifices, may very well be said of this
Sacrament. When ^hou come to the Alter, Mat. 5.23.24.
and ^here remembrest that thy brother ^ath ought against thee. First be
^econciled to thy brother, and then ^ome and offer thy gift. There must be
first reconciliatio^ to our brethren, before the Lord will ^ccept of our
Sacrifice or Ser^ice. Nay more, the Lord will ^aue his own service and wor^hip
to cease for a time, till ^his reconciliation be performed. I will have mercy,
and not Sacrifice, Hos. 6.6.
says the Lord: meaning indeed, that men can never perform aright the
duties of the first Table, where they make no conscience of the duties of
the second, Love, and services to man.

And hence it is that our Savior does most diligently exhort his Disciples and
in them all christians unto this duty, saying: By this shall all men know that
you are my Disciples, Ioh. 13.35
if ye love one another. 1. Ioh. 3.14
And again, This is my commandment that ye love one another. 1. Ioh. 4.12
1. Ioh. 4 7.
Our Savior makes this love a badg or cognizance by the which we are known
to be his Disciples, this assures us ^^^t we are Gods children, and that we
are translated from death to life. And, Hereby we know that God dwells in
us, and his love is perfect in us. And Paul most earnestly exhorts unto this
duty, when he says, as the elect of God, Col. 3.12.
holy and beloved, put on tender mercy, kindness humbleness of mind, meekenes,
long-suffering, forbearing one another, forgiving one another, If any man have
a Quarrel to another: Even as Christ forgave you, even so do eye, And above
all things put on love, which is the bond of perfection. Where the holy Ghost
does require us, that we would make it manifest to our selves and others, that
we are the elect of God, and that the love of God is shed into our hearts, that
we have tasted of the Lords mercy toward our own Souls in particular, for
the pardon of our sins. Which we shall do by showing our selves ^eady and
willing to forgive others, as we have found the Lord both ready and willing
to forgive us.

And to this end has the Lord ordained this Sacrament of his Supper, that it
might be a feast of love, and a band or chain to knit us fast one unto
another. Wherefore not unfitly is this Sacrament called the Communion, to show
that there would be a holy and blessed agreement amongst those that come
thereunto yt they come in love, with one heart and mind, even as one man, as the
Apostle teaches. We that are many are one bread and one body, because we are
all partakers of one bread.

Reasons to prove the necessity of love.
And to provoke us unto this duty, consider.

This is his commandment, that we should love one another. 2. Ioh. 5,


Ioh. 13.35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.



1. Ioh. 3.10.
from death unto ^ife, even our love to the brethren.

Joseph's brethren were welcome for Beniamins sake, even so are all duties
accepted for Loves sake, otherwise what will it profit a man to hear, to
read, to pray, receive the Sacrament, etc: yea though he should give his body
to the fire, 1. Cor. 13 14.
that it burned, and had not love, it should profit him nothing.

Col. 3.12.
that we Put on tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long Suffering etc, and above all things Love, the bond of perfection,
otherwise we ^ot exspect any fruit or comfort ^n the use of this Sacrament, or
any other the ordinance of God.



this is the flesh and the Devil, and as yet thou have taken counsel of none
but them, If thou remember that thy brother has ought against thee etc. Mat.
5.23.
stand not upon such terms but go thou to him, look not for him to come to
thee first, and seek reconciliation with him, hereby thou shall heap coals
of fire upon his head.

Otherwise with what heart cans^ thou pray, forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass^ against us. Do thou not pray the Lord to hasten
thy destruction, and no way to forgive thee in as much as thy heart is shut up
against thy brother? whereas in deed we are taught to love ou^ very enemies,
after the Exampl^ of Christ, who prayed for h^^ Enemies, thus unto his Father.
Father forgive them they wot not what they do. Luke 23.35. Act. 7. vlt.
And that of Stephen, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. Oh this, this is
the truth, let us then acknowledge it. And this is the way, let us then walk
in it, otherwise let us not look ^o reap peace unto our Souls, ^or comfort
by any of Gods ordinances.

And thus (Beloved) you have ^cene the necessity of a Christi^n man's
preparation, The Conclusion.
before he ^omes to this holy Sacrament. You have seen again ^he Subject of
it, not another, ^ut a man's self. And last of all, ^ou have seen wherein this
du^y does consist.

Now if we find our selves ^urnished with some competent ^easure of
Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, and Love, as you have heard, all which are
required to the due receiving of this Sacrament, we may then with comfort come
unto it. And howsoever these graces be in us but in part, and in much
weakness, yet if we be humbled for our wants, and desire to increase in our
Knowledge, to be strengthened in our Faith, to be bettered in our Repentance,
etc. Here we are called to the living Fountain, from whence we may look to
have supply made unto all our wants. But if on the contrary part, upon
examination, we find our selves altogether ignorant of God, and his Son Christ,
and the means of our redemption, that we have not our hearts truly touched
with our sins and that we are not at peace with men, better not come; for
this were but to abuse so holy an ordinance, to mock God to his face, and to
stir him up to wrath against us. And by this that has been said, it may
appear that few come worthily, and prepared as they ought, but ignorantly, and
for custom sake, to the great dishonor of God, and abuse of so holy an
ordinance.

And thus much concerning the preparation that is to be made by every faithful
communicant: the participation follows, which we refer to another time.

Let us pray.
The Third Sermon.
1. Cor. 11.28. Let a man therefore examine himself: And so let him eat of
that Bread, and drink of that Cup.


WHen we have Examined our souls, and prepared our hearts, and bring the true
Wedding garment of Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, and Love: then we are to
come to this holy banquet and feast of our souls.

And so let him eat of that bread, and drink, etc.

Here we have the act of Receiving to be performed by the true Communicant,
his taking and receiving of the Bread, and the Wine.

In which action we note 1. The Duty it self, Eat, Drink. 2. The
Qualification of the person, employed in this word, So. 3. What he must Eat
and Drink; This Bread, Of this Cup.


And first, for the duty it self: As before he was enjoined to examine
himself: So here by no ^esse straight an iniunction to Eat, and to Drink.
The Doctrine is,

To receive th^s Sacrament is not a thing indifferent.
whether we will come to ^his Sacrament, or not, to receive ^t, or not to
receive it; but it is the will of God, and his commandment, that we should
come unto it as often as conveniently we may. And so let him Eat, etc. This
is not a bare permission, but rather a precept, and binds all unto obedience
thereunto: And therefore as it is our duty to hear the Word, to pray, to
sanctify the Lords Sabboths, etc. because the Lord has so commanded; even so
has the Lord commanded us this duty likewise, to come and partake of this
holy Sacrament. And the necessity of this will appear, if we do but consider,
how straightly the Lord enjoined the people of the Jews the observation of the
types of both the Sacraments. Such as was Circumcision under the Law, when the
Lord commanded the uncircumcised Man-child (that was not circumcised according
to the ordinance of the Lord) to be cut off from his people, Genesis 17.1 Exo.
3.24.5 Number. 9.13
as one that had broken the Covenant. And so for the Passover, he that did not
keep it solemnly, according to the law was to be cut off from Gods people: now
then, if it hold so in the ceremony, then how much more in the Substance? But
the Reasons that follow, will show the necessity of the same more clear^y.

taught by him. For in vain do they worship me, Esa. 29.13, 14
teaching for Doctrine, men precepts. Mat. 7.7.


Now one principal part of his worship consists in the due receiving of this
sacrament, and therefore in obedience to so holy an ordinance of God, men must
com thereunto.

savor of death unto death. 2. Cor. 2.16
Yet notwithstanding, this Sacrament may truly be said to be a Conduit, to
convey the grace of regeneration and remission of sins unto the true believer:
Simile.
Even as the Princes Letters are said to save the life of a malefactor,
whereas indeed, they do but signify the Princes pleasure that he shall be
saved. And ^he Lord working grace in the hearts of his servants, has ^n his
wisdom appointed the lord, Sacraments, prayer etc. to ^e the means for the
effecting of ^he same.

covenant, and serves to be a seal of the ^ame, between God and us, Genesis
17.1.
that ^e will be our God, Esaias. 43.25
and we will ^ecome his people, by the which ^s by a most sure and certain
^ledge given on Gods part, Ier. 31.31.
and ^eceiued on ours, Zach. 8.8.
God of his ^reat mercy, does as it were ^^nd himself to us by an euerlast^g
decree to be our God, and ^ee again bind our selves vn^^ him to remain his
people, and to keep a constant course of obedience before him.

For reprofe.
As many do offend in coming unworthily and unprepared, so many offend in
coming not at all, when occasion and opportunity is offered unto them to
come. Does not the practice of such men beray that they do lightly esteem of
Gods ordinance. Simile.
If the King or some other great parsonage, should have granted unto a man
the lease of some goodly Manor upon very reasonable conditions, and appoint a
day to seal the writings, who would not give attendance, or rather what
great ingratitude, were it for a man not to come at the time appointed, but
^ilfully to refuse and contemn (...) friendly an offer. Oh beloved, ^he Lord
of heaven and earth, he ^ath promised to give unto us Christ and with him al
things* Romans 8.32.
Heaven, eternal life, and the saluati^n of our Souls. The very day and time
of the Administration ^f this Sacrament of the Lords ^upper, what is it but the
sea^ng day wherein the Lord offers ^o confirm his grant unto us, and to
stablish that his covenant, that ingratitude then shall we ^e guilty off, if
we neglect so ^reat salvation.

And surely this Sin of wil^ll refusing or abstaining from ^e Lords Table is
not all one, ^ut it has many other sins at^nding upon it, and accompa^ying
it.

First such men as do wilfully abstain and absent themselves, do contemn
and despise the commandment of Christ himself, What sins they are guilty of,
that neglect to tome to the Lords Supper.
who has commanded al to do this. To examine, to take, and t^ Now to rebel
against God and Christ, is noe small sin, Since herein they cannot but
declare what a light esteem they hau^ of the covenant, God has mad^ with
them, and the seal of ye same

Jesus Christ, which he s^ straightly commanded us to keep in memory, as
wherei^ we shall show forth his death v^till his coming again. For so often
as ye shall eat this bread, and drink^ this cup, ye show the Lords death t^ he
come.

in any, does manifestly ^eclare the great vnthankefull^esse of such unto God.
Vnthankefullnesse in a great measure.
Who ^ great measure and deep com^assion toward our poor souls ^oth afforde
us such props and ^ayes, to support our weak ^ith, as this Sacrament is. For
^ch is our weakness while we ^e here, even when we have ^ained unto the
greatest mea^re of grace, and assurance of ^r Salvation, that we stand in ^ede
daily of the word and Sa^^^ments, as to beget, so to con^me and strengthen us
in the ^ce received: And therefore (...) neglect the same, when the ^rd does
offer it unto us, does ^^nifestly declare great ingrati^e against God.

their redemption even the most precious body and blood of Christ, which is
offered in this sacrament unto every true believer. Mat. 26.2 28* 6.
This is my body, which is given for you etc: And the very food of their
souls, Ioh. 6.55.
men so loath, and so lightly regard.

Ahaz did, which refused ye sign, the Lord offered vnt^ him, and said, I will
not ask a sig^ nor tempt the Lord. But because he asked not a sign, therefore
h^ did tempt the Lord, and what is i^ else, but a tempting of God, for ^ man to
neglect the means appointed of God, and make trya^ whether he will save him
with out ye means or not. We kno^ yt the word, and Sacraments, a^ ye means
appointed of God, n^ only to beget faith and other graces, in ye hearts of his
children, but are means likewise ordained of God, to help ye weakness of our
faith, and to neglect or lightly to esteem of these, does manifestly declare
yt such men have either no faith, or that they ^egard not the increase or
con^irmation of the same.

Communion of the ^ody and blood of Christ, from ^e which they cut and sever
^^emselues, us unworthy.

And thus you have seen how ^any sins such men are guilty of, as neglect the
due receiving of this holy Sacrament, which must be duly considered of us,
least by the heaping up of these sins now, one upon the neck of another, we
bring upon our own heads swift damnation.

Now because there is none that either refuses or neglects duly to come to
this holy ordinance of God: But have some excuses for themselves, I desir^
therefore breefely to remou^ some of the cheifest of them, an^ so come to the
further uses to b^ made of this point.

Objections answered.

This first and most common excuse, men have for themselue^ is they are not
prepared, Object. 1.
and the know that it is a dangero^^ thing to come unprepared, succate and
drink their own damnation.

to be watchful, that so we may be always ready, Mat. 24.44.
ever expsecting the coming of the bridegroom. And therefore away with such
excuses, which are but demonstrations of a graceles heart, and no better then
Fig leaves, that shall never hide thy nakedness from the eyes of the almighty:
But the Lord one day will make it an argument against the^ that thy
condemnation is mos^ just, and out of thy own mout^ will condemn thee.

Mat. 22.
like unto those in the go^pel; one that must be excused because he had bought
a farm, another five yoke of Oxen, a thi^ that had married a wife, a^
therefore could not come, these have some journey to ride, or one triuiall
business or other, that is matter sufficient to keep them from the Lords
Table.

What shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and to lose his own
Soul? Is not thy Soul more precious unto thee then thy body? and ye welfare
of the one to be preferred before the welfare of ye other, since the loss of
thy Soul, a whole world cannot recompense: make not light account then of ye
Lords gracious call, neither belike those profane Gadarens, to prefer thy Swine
before Christ I mean, the world before thy salvation.

in charity, and therefore they dare not come: Do you not know, and have you
not taught us that we must come in love, otherwise we cannot receive the
sacrament worthily; Now such a one and my self, we are not friends, and he
has so wronged me, that I can never put it up.

Mat. 6.12. Mat. 5.
and to go and be reconciled to thy brother? yea though he has trespassed
against thee, and injured thee. Religion and Christianity does teach the
professors thereof to seek reconciliation with their brethren. But of this
before in the duty.

Many more are the objections of wicked men, which when they come to be weighed
in the weightes of the Sanctuary, will prove to light, and manifestly declare
the want of grace in the soul: For where there is true Sanctification in the
heart of any, such a one is ever conscionable ^n the use of such means as are
^ppoynted of GOD, for the increase of grace: Amongst which ^he reverent use of
this Sacrament is not the least.

There are other objections, that are of another nature, made ^y weak
Christians, who are ^uch discoraged in themselves: and object against
themselves as follows.



Disciple to blind Bartimeus, Behold, Christ calls thee. Mar. 10.49
Such are fit patients for Christ the spiritual Physician to work on. If this
complaint or the like, proceed from an inward feeling of their wants, and from
a heart truly humbled for them, having in them a hungring and thirsty desire
after Christ and his righteousness, Surely such a one is not far from the
kingdom of Heaven. And therefore, for the endless comfort and consolation of
such that are thus humbled and dejected through the conscience of their own
wants: Consider

Comfort to the weak Christian.
that the feeling of the want of grace, with grief for the same, is grace it
self, for the graceless and faithless do seldom or never find any such
defects in them.

Mat. 11.38
Come unto me etc.

Mat. 12.20.
that he ^il not break the bruised reed, nor ^uench the smoking flax.

our Savior in the poor widow.



Now then, what an absurdity were it for a man to refuse to eat, because he
were hungry, and to refuse to drink, because he were thirsty. Do not then
discourage thy self more then there is cause, but come, O come unto this
heavenly banquet and feast of thy soul, where thou have a promise, that by the
conscionable and holy use of this ordinance, thou shall have thy faith
strengthened, thy repentance increased, and all other graces of God confirmed
in thee, to thy endless comfort.

In the fourth^eenth day of the first month at even, is the Lords Passover.
Exo. 12.18. Leuit. 22.5.
And ye passover we know was but a ^ype of this Sacrament.

I answer, we now compare the ^haddowe and the substance together in that
particular where^^ they are not to be com^ared. For touching this Sacrament of
the Lords Supper it is ^is will, that it should be admi^istred and received
often, for so ^ith our Savior, So often as ye shall ^te of this bread etc, And
as for ^is Annual communicating, is ^ow hatched in time of popery in ^e infancy
of the Church, and ^y no means to be immitated ^f us, that live now in the
Sunshine of the Gospel.

But to leave these objections we come now to make some further use of the
point.

For instruction.
that it is not left as a thing arbitrary, to come or not to come, but it is
rather a flat precept imposed upon all, To come and eat of this bread, and
drink of this cup. Let this serve for our instruction yt we learn to make
more conscience of this duty of coming to this Sacrament. If the Lord should
require as our hands a thing that were hard and heavy, we ought with all
cheerfulness to undergo it, and willingly to submit out selves unto it, in
regard of his commandment. How be it, this the Lord requires at our hands,
is not hard, but easy, not an intolerable burden, but tha^ which may delight
the Soul of christian. And therefore were shame not to do it. It was well said
of Naamans Servant to his Master. Master if the prophet had ^id thee do some
great thing, 2. Reg. 5.12
ought ^ou not to have done it? how much ^ore when he says wash and be
clean. ^f Christ should have imposed ^ppon us greater things then ^hese, ought
we not to do them, ^ow much more, when he says, ^ake and eat. How will we
drink cup of Martyrdom for Christ: ^at will not drink the cup of ^luation
with Christ.

For consolation.
that hunger ^d thirst after this spiritual ^nquet, more then their ap^ointed
food: such may surely exspect a blessing. Whatsoever thy wants are, ye Lord
will cover them all. Do thou take the Lords offer when he calls thee to his
Table, and come with a certain exspectation of good success, and see if the
Lord do not open the windows of heaven upon thee, and rain upon thee
abundantly the showers of his grace, and refresh thy hungry Soul, with good
things.

And therefore in Gods name le^ this be an encouragement unto us, Iam. 4.
to Draw near unto God, seeing he will draw near unto us. And although we
cannot prepare ou^ selves as we would, Yet when we labor after holiness, and
Sanctification of life, let us come and not be discouraged, the Lord will be
merciful unto us, ^. Cro. 30.19.
though we are not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctu^ry.

And thus much for the first ^enerall circumstance of the Text, the duty Eat,
Drink, we ^ome now to the qualification ^f the person ^^.

And so let him Eat etc. 2. Cir. The qualification of the person that must
communicate.


The qualification of the ^erson, is employed in this word (...). Which has
reference to the ^^rmer part of the verse, exami^^tion it self. The doctrine
is ^eare.

It is not sufficient to come but to come prepared.
and finds ^^mselfe in some measure fitted (...) Knowledge, faith, Repentance,
^d Love, then he may come, yea ^s he alone, that has warrant ^ come and none
other, and is ^e required to participate of ^s holy ordinance. It is not
sufficient that a man come to the Lords Table, but that he S^ come, that is in
an holy manner unto such an holy ordinance.

Mat. 22.11.
At the Marriage banquet i^ the Gospel, man were bidde^ to the feast, and many
came, bu^ that was not all. If there be bu^ one in the company, that come
without the wedding garment, b^ is discovered, and it was not h^ being present
at the feast, the would serve his turn, but in a much as he was not perpar^
and fitted thereunto, he is the sentenced, Mat. 26
to be bound hand, (...) foot, and to be cast into utter dar^nesse. Judas
received this Sacr^ment as well as Peter, from (...) blessed hand of Christ:
yet because he was not prepared the unto, it proved his bane, (...) gave Satan
the more aduan^age, even for the abuse of so ho^y an ordinance, to enter into
Judas. Mat 25.
The foolish Virgins seemed ^o exspect the Brid-gromes coming, but in as much
as their Oil was spent and their Lamps gone ^ut, they were taken vnprepa^ed,
and so for ever shut out of ^he Marriage chamber, and the Bride-gromes
presence. These and the like examples, whereof ^he Scriptures are full, they
all ^erue as a cloud of witnesses, to ^onfirme unto us the undoubted truth of
this doctrine, that it is ^ot sufficient yt a man come unto ^his Sacrament of
Christ's Sup^er, and so join with the rest of Gods people in receiving of the
^^me, but he must So come, yt is ^^ted and prepared by a godly ^xamination as
before.

The reasons follow.

Which is abomination unto the Lord. Ecle. 4.
And a^ our hearing, praying, receiving* etc: When we come unto them for custom
sake and fashion sake not in a holy manner, in faith* repentance, and
obedience, ar^ so far from pleasing God, a^ that they rather provoke hi^
Majesty and stir him up to wrath against us.

will be found of al them that seek him, in the conscionable use of those means
he has appointed.



Note.
many a time have we received this Sacrament, when we made little or no
preparation unto it: and this was our case before our calling, in the time of
our vn^egeneracy, howsoever it has fa^ed with us since. And surely it was Gods
wonderful mercy unto us then, that we were not destroyed for abusing so holy
an ordinance, and his gracious and glorious presence therein. And now (my
brethren) albeit we have escaped our deserved judgment, which the Lord might
then have most justly inflicted upon us, yet now should we judge our selves
worthy, then to have been destroyed, and labor to be humbled for our old
sins, least they bring upon us new judgments.

the Lord in this Sacrament do offer unto them his own Son, and the benefits
of his passion, remission of sins, redemption, his Spirit, and Kingdom. They
prefer their sins before these, and by no means will be brought to part
with them, but have their appetites so taken up with earthly things, that they
have no mind at all, or appetite to spiritual things. Oh, the case of such
men is most miserable and fearful. How just shall their condemnation one day
be, when the Lord shall enter into judgment with them for neglecting so
great Salvation.

For consolation.
that labor to prepare themselves, and seek to put away their sins by godly
sorrow. Though this man cannot be so fitted and prepared as he desires, he
may not be discouraged, but draw near unto God in his ordinance, who will
accept of the poor desires of his servants, and has invited such hungry and
thirsty souls to come unto him, and has promised to satisfy them: but of
this before.

Now because the heart of man is deceitful above all things, Ier. 18.17.
and we are ready to deceive our selves herein, I shall very shortly propound
such degrees of grace, as are in some measure found in those whose hearts are
at all seasoned with grace: and without which no man, The least degrees of
grace are
can come unto this Sacrament with comfort, or exspect any blessing from God.

First, they must see their wants, 1 To see sin.
this is required in every one, to have their understandings enlightened, by
the which they come ^o see what God requires, and how far short they come of
that obedience the Lord requires at their hands; and this is indeed (...)
first step to true repentance and ^ound conversion, to attain to ^he sight of
our own wandering, and is one of the smallest degrees ^f grace that can be in
any. And because that wicked men and hy^ocrites may attain unto this, that
shall never be saved, unto ^his more must be added.

And in the second place, 2 To be humbled for sin.
this ^an must be humbled for his ^ants, and not please himself in ^^em. And
this is it, as I take it, yt ^^ts the difference between the ^odly Christian
and the Hypocrite, though both see and discern sin in them, yet both does not
dislike sin, because it is sin, and offends the Majesty of God. There is ever
in the heart of an hypocrit some secret sin or other ye which howsoever in his
judgment he knows to be a sin, Note.
yet in his affection he could wish it were no sin, that so he might live in
the same without controlment, for this appears by his often relaps into the
same sin, when as ye child of God is content tha^ the sacrificing knife of the
Law, should be applied to the throat o^ every sin, even to his darling and
beloved sin, that so he might no^ offend so good and loving a father

3 To pray for the pardon of sin.
Thirdly, he is earnest with Go^ to pray for pardon, not resting in the former
degrees of grace, to see sin, and to be grieved for it but making conscience of
al holy means by the which he may obtain deliverance. And because it is God
alone that is offended, and his most righteous laws violated, unto God goes
he, and desires as earnestly that God would cure his corrupt nature for the
time to come, as to pardon his sins that are past in his life: And O Lord
thinks he, that I could be more holy, and less sinful; and it is the on^y
grief of his heart, that he cannot master his corruptions as he should, and as
he would.

Fourthly, 4 To resolve for the time to come of new obedience.
he resolves heereaf^er to come more prepared; as to ^ee and acknowledge his
want of due preparation, with grief of heart for the same: So there is a
^esolute purpose in his soul, in all things to please God, and for the time to
come, to walk in new obedience. These are the least degrees of grace, and in
some measure are to be found in the weakest Christian, and in him whose heart
is truly seasoned with grace: as for others, they are able to practice more
excellent degrees of Mortification and Sanctification.

And So let him Eat, etc: That is, being fitted and prepared as before. We may
yet observe one note of instruction further. That Circumstances in Gods service
are to be observed, Circumstances in Gods service must be observed.
and good things must be done in a good Manner. This is in effect the same
that was handled in the former doctrine; I shall handle the same so much the
more briefly.

The Manner as the Matter of Gods service is to be looked after, and hence is
it, that many men ^auing performed the outward work of some commendable duty,
and failing in the circum^tance of the manner of performing of it, have mard
all.

The people of the Jews per^ormed many things in them^elues commendable, Esa.
1.14.15.
yet haue^ng their faylings in some perti^ulars, the Lord did abhor both them
and their services, and hence ^s it that David giving direction unto Solomon
his son, touching Gods worship. Does prescribe ^s ye matter, so the
circumstances that belong unto it, how and after what manner he should ^erue
the Lord. And thou Solomon ^y son, 1. Cro. 28.9
know thou the God of thy ^ather, and serve him with a perfect ^eart, and with
a willing mind etc And the same does Solomon again in his time give touching
Gods worship, Eccle. 5.1.
When thou go into the house of God, take heed to thy feet. How is this
thing urged in all the Epistles of the Apostles, that men should regard
circumstance in the Act of Gods worship, and the manner how they perform it,
as the matter, as: The Lord loves a cheerful giver. Iam. 2.12.
So run ye that ye may obtain, and So speak ye, 1. Cor. 9.26
and so do ye, as they that shall be judged by the perfect law of liberty.
These present texts of Scripture, and the like, whereof the Scriptures are
full, they all serve to confirm unto us the undoubted truth of this doctrine,
that circumstances are to be regarded in Gods service, and men must regard
the manner, as the matter in the true performance of the same.

well performed, as performed.

Give me children (says Rachell) or else I die. A speech proceeding from a
Spirit very impatient of delay. That notwithstanding, the desire it self was
not unlawful, yet her manner spoiled the matter; and so in the ^andling of the
word of God, when men shall leave the foun^aine, the pure word of life, and
^tuffe their Sermons with philo^ophy, and the vain fantacies of man's brain,
and so in prayer, when men will seem, to Draw near unto God with their
lips, when their hearts are far from him. And to give Alms pharisayical-like
to be seen of men, circumstances make or mar all.

hearts, all is nothing worth. So then, whether we consider, that God has
commanded the manner, as the matter, that circumstance of an action, may
overthrow an action, or that God being a Spirit must be worshipped
spiritually, we conclud ye circumstancs in Gods service, must be regarded of
us, that so holy duties may be performed holily.

Forreprofe.
not regarding any circumstance, or the manner of doing it. How many have we in
every congregation, who think they can say enough for themselves, that they
they have been at the Church upon ye Sabbath, and if they have offered their,
there presence once or twice upon that day, God ^s much beholden unto them, and
^hey have done enough, yea, as much as any, or as the Lord does require. And so
if once or twice ^t the most in the whole year, ^hey partake of this
Sacrament, what would we more? although (poor Souls) in the mean ^ime they
have but offered the Sacrifice of Fools, and the Lord one day will say unto
such, Who has required these things at your hands? yet herein they think
they highly honor God, never regarding how or after what manner they come
thereunto.

For instruction.
and how and after what manner we should perform the same, both in public
and private, the hearing of the word, receiving of this Sacrament, Prayer,
Singing o^ Psalms, etc, that so performing them aright both for matter and
manner, or at the least so indeuoring, we may bring some glory unto God, and
peace and comfort unto our own Souls, the which we shall never do, so long ^s
we rest contented with the outward matter of Gods service: and look not after
the right ^anner of our performing of ^he same, but of this before.

And thus much for the Qua^^fication, of the person that ^ust communicate. We
come ^ow to the third and last cir^^mstance, what he must Eat, ^^d Drink: Of
this Bread: of this ^up.

And so let him eat of this Bread, ^d drink of this Cup.

the handling of ^is point we are to serve two things. 1. What it is to Eat
and Drink. 3. Circumstance What he must eat and Drink.
2. What we Eat and Drink.


For the first, A twofold eating.
we must know ^t there is a twofold Eating ^nally, and Spiritually

The first is an outward partaking of the outward sign of Bread and Wine
carnally, 1 Carnally.
which indeed a wicked man may do which does reap no benef^^ nor comfort
thereby, as Iuda^ did, and as all wicked and impenitent persons that live in
their sins, and want Faith, the han^ of the Soul (whereby the tru^ believer
does lay hold upon Christ) do at this day.

The second, is spiritual an^ mystical, 2 Spiritually.
and that is by faith i^wardly to feed upon the bod^ and blood of Christ. And
(...) much imports those words (...) our Savior. I am the bread of li^ he
that comes to me shall ne^ hunger. Ioh. 6.36.
And he that believe on me shall never thirst. And the to feed on Christ,
What it is to feed on Christ.
is to belee^ in Christ. And it is an action the Soul, when as we do by
faith apply Jesus Christ his death and passion unto our own souls in
particular, believing that he dyed for our sins, Romans 4. vlt.
and rose again for our justification: According to that of John: As many as
received him, to them he gave prerogative to ^e the Sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name. So then, ^o feed on Christ is to believe in Christ.

And indeed, To feed on Christ, and to believe in Christ all one.
Christ attribueth the same fruit and effect to them that believe in him, that
^e does to them that eat his bo^y and drink his blood, to teach ^s, that by
eating and drinking, ^e means nothing but belee^ng. And to this end, to
con^me us herein, compare these ^criptures together* He that earth my flesh,
and drinks my blood, Ioh. 6.54.
has eternal life. verse 40.
And This is the will of my Father, that every one that believes in the Son,
should have eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Whereby it
appears, how Christ does attribute that to believing, he does to eating and
drinking.

And hence it is that under the Law, before Christ came in the flesh, it is
said, that the Fathers did Eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same
spiritual drink the Corinthians did, 1. Co.. 10.1.2.
and other Christians that lived under the Gospel. And how could this be, but
only by faith, resting upon the promises of Christ's coming, that it was he
alone tha^ should take away the sins o^ the World. Luke 23.40
And thus did the believing thief upon the cross though he did never receive
this ^acrament, eat the body, and ^rinke the blood of Christ to e^^rnall life.





Now who has that grace of ^od so firm and perfect in him ^ut stands in need
of help dai^, and of the further confirma^on of the same. Lo this is one
(...) ye most excellentest ordinance of God, that he has sanctified to the
same end, which in all holy obedience we are bound to use, as a thing most
necessary while we live here. So then, the point of Instruction is: That

The faithful only feed on Christ in this Sacrament.
As a man coming to a feast being hungry, is assured there to be refreshed and
strengthened, so the true believer, that hungers and thirsts after
righteousness, is sur^ here to be satisfied. And indeed^ inasmuch as the
fruit and benefit thereof does appertain unto a spiritual and eternal life,
wicked men cannot thus partake o^ Christ in this Sacrament. The^ want a hand
to lay hold o^ Christ, a mouth to receive Christ a stomach to digest Christ,
a^^ can only ta^^ of the outward el^ments of Bread and Wine, to the
preservation of a temporal life: but can in no wise so partake of them, as
they may serve for the strengthening of their souls unto eternal life. For
herein indeed, is that true which the holy Ghost speaks of the word prea^hed:
That it profited not, Heb. 4.2.
because ^t was not mixed with faith in them that heard it. So, even so may it
be ^ayd of this Sacrament, that it ^rofiteth not, because it is not ^ixed with
faith in them that ^eceiue it. But this point was suf^ciently declared in that
part of ^he communicants examination which showed the great necessity ^f faith
to the due receiving of his Sacrament. The uses follow.

that all men do not receive alike: Some catch only the Shaddowe, some lay
hold upon the Substance: Some feed on Christ, others feed only on the
elements of Bread and Wine. Some are strengthened in the inward Man, and Christ
does dwell in their hearts by faith* Others again have but the body only
refreshed, and their souls in the mean time, hunger-star^ued and ready to
perish. Unto some this Sacrament is a sauou^ of Life unto Life, unto others the
woeful savor of Death unto Death: and eating the same unworthily, eat and
drink Judgment unto themselves. And thi^ is the condition of all such a^ want
faith.

use of this sacrament, to feed on Christ, and to be nourished unto eternal
life. Whereas wicked men that want faith, reap no fruit or benefit by it But
on the contrary, this Sacrament is as poison unto them, and proves the very
bane of their Souls, so as they eat and drink their own damnation.

This shows what ought to be the care of every godly Pastor and faithful
Minister, even to ^arre from so sacred an Ordi^ance, all such as show
themselves unfaithful, and impeni^ent, and in whose lives there ap^eares not
the work of Sancti^ication, all are not indifferent^ alike to be admitted for
that ^ere to make ye Church of Christ (...) Stye of Swine: No, Holy things ^^e
not to be given to Dogs. Mat. 7.
A naked sword in the hand of a child or madman that cannot use it. Let
discipline have her place, and wicked men as rotten members cut off, that so
they may be brought to the sight of their sins, and repentance for the same,
that the rest may fear, and so be preserved in sound doctrine, and holiness
of life and conversation.

Note.
Oh, if Ministers would but consider of this, that in giving of these Seals to
any, they do thu^ much, as if they should say unto every one whom they do
admit; I as the Minister of Christ, and in hi^ stead, do by these Seals assure
thee that thou art the child of God, ^^member of Christ, who is wholly thine,
for thy eternal Salvation which to do to a lymb of Satan how horrible a sin
were it.

And for this cause it is well pro^ided in our Church in this and, that the
Minister must not only examine such as he admits unto the Lords Table, ^ut
also refuse such as he finds ^o be ignorant, and can give no ^estimony of
their faith, be out of charity, or any other ways ^e notoriously wicked, and
show ^o token of repentance. These and such like, even by the order ^f our
Church ought to be de^arred and not suffered to partake ^f the Lords Supper.
So yt, what Minister can admit such, but ^ust incur Gods heavy displea^ure,
abuse his Sacred ordinance, ^reeue Gods faithful people, ^ncourage others in
sin, and make himself guilty of other men's ini^uities, then the which, what
can ^e more fearful.

Furthermore Ministers must know that this Sacrament is the Lords broad seal
of eternal life. The keepers whereof are the Ministers of God. Now therefore as
the Lord Keeper of the Kings broad seal is guilty of of great offense, if not
of treason it self, that should give it without authority from his Majesty:
How much more heinous is that Ministers sin, who shall give the seal of Gods
kingdom to such, as he is not able to justify it before God, that is fit for
the same.

This I speak not as though I meant that any man can judge of the heart, for
that is proper to the Lord. Only this I say, that God who has made his
Ministers keepers of his seal, has plainly showed to whom they must deliver
it, and has put as it were a rule and measure into their hands to measure
every one by, that so they may know whom to allow, and whom to disallow.

faithful, yet they have still a secret and sweet fellowship and society with
Christ their head, who will accept of the will for the deed, and answer the
desires of their Souls when they cannot come unto his ordinance, with a
gracious supply of his own spirit.

Now as we have heard what it is to eat Christ, viz. to believe in Christ, and
that it is a priuiledg that belongs only unto the faithful so to do.

So now we are to observe our spiritual union, which by this means we shall
have with Christ.

The Godly have communion with Christ in this Sacrament.
For this word Eat and Drink serves to set out unto us our Spiritual union
and communion that we have with Christ, being made now bone of his bone, and
flesh of his flesh. That as verily as we see and feel our bodies to be
nourished and fed by the outward elements. So, even so undoubtedly are our
souls likewise nourished and strengthened, by the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, applied by Faith. So as ye true believer becomes now assured that
Christ Jesus with all the merits of his death and passion, becomes to be his
righteousness and obedience, and does ^ruly belong unto him, seeing Christ is
his. Even as truly as Bread and Wine is turned into his substance, and becomes
his, so Christ and his benefits becomes ^is likewise. Christ in this Sacrament
does give the true believer a sure possession of himself.
So that the Instruction

That Christ Jesus in this Sa^rament of his Supper does give unto the true
believer, a sure possession of himself. And hereby we come to be ingrafted
into Christ, and to have a spiritual being in him.

So that as the spiritual eateing of Christ, consists in faith, by the which
the true believer does truly partake of Christ, so does it in a consequent and
effect of faith, which is our spiritual union and conjunction we have with
Christ. And this the Apostle calls a Great mystery. Speaking of Christ and
his Church: Ephe. 5.32.
for what union can be greater or stronger then that which is between the
thing nourshing, and the thing nourished. The cup of blessing (says Paul)
which we bless* is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? 1 Cor. 10.16.
And the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?
And the Bread and wine, are not only pleadges of what shall be bestowed upon
^s, but effectual means to con^erre and exhibit the things promised unto us.
Yet what can be ^earer unto us then our Meat and Drink. We can have no
^reater interest into any thing ^hen in our food, for that is part ^f our
selves, and turns into our ^ery substance, and there is no ^^e member of the
body, but ^ceiues life and strength from ^ what then can more lively ex^resse
this union and coniuncti^n, yt we have with Christ, then ^read and Wine, in
this Sacra^ent does.

^ am not ignorant, how the spi^ of God in the Scripture, does ^der diverse
similitudes, labor ^ set out this our union and conjunction with Christ, as by
the Similitude of a Marriage, the strongest conjunction tha^ can be betwixt
any. By a building, whereof Christ is the foundation. By a tree, whereof Chri^
is the Root, we the branches: Nay more, which is strange, the^ is scarce two
things in nature come to be made one: But the spirit of God in some one plac^
or other does borrowe a comparison from the same, to expres^ our union and
communion tha^ we have with Christ. But amongst al other things none ca^ more
lively set out the same vnt^ us, then this Sacrament does where Christ does in
a most lively manner communicate himself unto the true believer. (...) the
which, he comes to be tran^formed, and trans-changed into into the Godly
Nature, 2. Pet. 1.4.
making us one with himself.



Ioh. 14.
spiri^ally. We may see this to be ^eare, by the members of Christ's ^ysticall
body, howsoever they ^e scattered and dispersed tho^wout the whole earth, and
have ^uer seen each other, yet are ^otwithstanding knit together ^ the bond of
one spirit into an ^ly Communion, Note.
and have in ^em a fellow feeling of the miseries one of another.

Then why should we doubt but that the head and members of this mystical
body, are also one by the same spirit, though Christ be in heaven, and we
upon earth. There needs not any corporal presence for the effecting of this
union, his spirit is sufficient while we abide here, which is given to all
that truly believe.

Now from this ground of a Christian man's union with Christ there proceeds
many comforts.

Comforts arising from our union with Christ
First then, seeing we are vnite^ unto Christ, and made one wit^ him,
heere-hence arises a not^ble comfort; That the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Comfort.
who sanctified o^ Nature, that he might assum^ it, he will also sanctify
us, i^ as much as he has united us unto himself. It is not so leaft unto us
to do, as that the Lord Jesus Christ will be a mere patient, but he has
taken it into his own hand to perform. Moses may marry an Ethiopian, but
he cannot change her color: but the Lord Jesus Christ shall make to himself
a glorious Church, Ephesians. 5.27.
not having spot nor wrinkle. And from him shall we have such a garment as shall
cover all our nakedness from Gods sight, Even Christ our righteousness, who
being united unto us, and we unto him, shall cover us therewith. For, shall the
woman in the Gospel but touch Christ's garment, and be cured, and ^hal we be
incorporated into his body, Mat. 9.20.
and made one with him, and not have the running sores of our corruptions
stayed, and more and more solued in us, by the work of Gods Spirit that is in
us.

2 Comfort.
Secondly, we have by our union with Christ, a communion of estates; for being
united unto him, he must needs be touched with compassion of our infirmities.
This is clearly to be seen in a natural body, as the Apostle witnesses: 1.
Cor. 12.16.
If one member suffer, all suffer with it. The foot cannot be payned, but the
head is affected with it; one finger cannot ache, but all the body suffers pain.
Even so it fares in this mystical body: He that touches you, touch the apple
of mine eye. Zach. 2.8.
There being a most sweet and secret sympathy betwixt Christ and his members,
so as to persecute them, is to persecute him, Act. 9.4. Mat. 25.40.
he still partaking with them in their weal or woe; a sweet comfort.

Thirdly, we have by virtue of this union and conjunction with Christ, 3
Comfort.
a most certain assurance of the resurrection of these our bodies to life
eternal, for so says the Apostle; Romans 8.11.
If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that
raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his
Spirit that dwells in you. And this is likewise confirmed by that of our
Savior, where he says; Ioh. 6.33.54.58.
Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my ^loud, has eternal life, and I
will ^ayse him up at the last day. What though these bodies of ours, for ^ time
do taste corruption, they shall not perish in corruption. Trees, and plants of
the earth in ^he winter season, appear like dead trees, without leaves or
fruit, but in the Spring time they budde, blossom, and bring forth. And the
reason is, because of that union and conjunction which they have with the
root, where lies the Sap all the Winter season. Even so, by virtue of our
union and conjunction we have with Christ, these decayed bodies of ours shall
one day rise again, and that to life eternal, where we shall ever enjoy the
Lord.

And last of all, this our union with Christ, 4 Comfort.
what does it but assure us of the grace of perseverance, that we shall hold
out firm and constant unto the end, so as the gates of hell shall never
prevail against us. And the reason is clear: Mat 16.16. Romans 11.18
We bear not the Root, the Root bears us. We are fast knit unto him
that is the Lord of Life. We are built upon a sure foundation, Ephesians. 2.20
Christ himself being the chief Corner stone. And Because I am not changed,
therefore ye are not consumed, Oh ye Sons of Jacob. And surely in time of
temptation, this is a sure stay unto Gods people, to consider the manifold
privileges that follow such as are united unto Christ. Now the use in a word.

wild Olives, not plucked up, and planted into the stock Christ: Their nature
is not change, Christ partakes not with them in their sufferings, but the same
is inflicted as a judgment of God upon them. Little comfort can such have in
their life, whose hope and glory is but vain, and dies with them, if not
before them: Less comfort in death, inasmuch as Judgment does follow, Heb.
9.27.
and they are then to give up their account unto God. Poor souls, if such
only be happy and blessed, who have the Lord for their God, and are thus knit
unto him, oh, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear, that are solyable unto
al miseries, crosses, and curses in this life, and hereafter to be separated
for ever from his glorious presence: But of this before.

And thus much for ye first circumstance, what it is to Eat, and what to
Drink. The second, fol^oweth, and that is what we eat, and what we drink.

Of this Bread: Of this Cup.

It is Bread then that we eat, 2 Circumstance what it is that we Eat and
Drink.
and it is Wine that we drink, ^wo of ye most excellent creatures that God
ordained for the use (...) comfort of man's life, the one, ^ strengthen man's
heart. The over, to glad man's heart. For use and comfort, what would we ^aue
more, and therefore of all ^her creatures the fittest for ^ch an holy use.
Teaching us ^us much.

Christ every way a sufficient Savior unto the elect.
as every true ^^leeuer does in this Sacrament, shall find him every way a
sufficient Savior, whatsoever our wants are, we shall here find a Supply
made unto them all; for the weak; here is Bread to strengthen them. For the
sorrowful here is Wine to comfort them, And thus does the Lord by his prophet
Esaias make a free and a large profer of his heavenly graces unto his Church, yea
such good things as shall make a Supply unto all our wants. H^e every one that
thirsts, Esaias. 55.1.
come ye unto the waters: And ye that have no silver come buy and eat, come I
say, buy Wine and Milk without money etc. Whereby Wine and Milk etc. are to
be understood the graces of Gods spirit, yea such good things as will fit every
man^ turn, according to their several necessities. Some have Sorrowful
hearts, for such he has wine to comfort them. Some are Babes, for such he
has Milk to nourish them. Others are feeble and weak, for such he has
Bread to strengthen them, others are grown Christians and ^espect their
pleasure, and unto them he has Let your Soul de^ght in fatness. So yt
Christ is all ^ all unto all, Col. 1.19.
for so says the A^ostle, It pleased the Father, that in ^m should all
fullness dwell. And ^his fullness we all receive grace ^r grace. Mat. 1.21.
He is Jesus a Savior ^^d shall save his people from their ^nes. He is the
way, the truth, 1. Cor. 10.3.4.
^^d the life, and there is salvation ^ none other. Say we then ^th the
Apostle, Lord whether ^ll we go? thou have the words of ^rnall life. It shall
little avail to go to Saints or Angels, or the Virgin Mary, to procure a
pardon from the Pope, indulgence etc. in as much as for all our wants, of what
nature soever, here we may have supply.

The reasons follows.

If when we were enemies we were reconciled unto God by the death o^ his
Son: Romans 5.10.
how much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life The reason is
clear.

^^flicteth the punishment, now ^ath not he appointed his own ^onne to be our
peacemaker? ^^ worke-mans reconciliation? and to make Attonment for us? ^ow
then can he but be pleased ^ith his own sacrifice, and ac^ept of the obedience
of Christ: ^nasmuch as he appointed him (...) suffer for the same end.

As by ones man's disobedi^ce many became sinners, even so, Romans 5.19.
(...) the obedience of one, many be made righteous. The means that Christ
has used, being more forceable to repair our breaches, and to set us at
liberty, then Adams si^ could be to procure our misery, and to keep us in
bondage.

Eat, and to Refre^^ themselves with good things. An^ who can doubt of this,
that he^ that was so willing to lay down^ his life a ransom for us, when w^
were his enemies, can deny us any good thing, inasmuch as we are now reconciled
unto him. Oh no, the Lord is very bountiful and needs not to be sparing as
man in his gifts, in as much as in him lie hid all the treasures of life and of
happiness.

alone, a Doctrine; then the which, what can be more derogatory to the blood
of Christ, when men shall mingle heaven and earth together, the merits of
frail men, with the all-sufficient sufferings of Jesus Christ.



Of this Bread: Of this Cup. Eat, but to Eat and Drink* Christ delivered
both these signs, not only the Bread, but the Wine also unto the Disciples.
So that the instruction is, That both kinds by the Minister are to be
delivered, Communicants are to partake of both kinds.
and both kinds by the Communicant are to be received: not Bread only, nor
Wine only, but Bread and Wine.

And great Reason.

To Eat ^f this Bread, and Drink of this Cup. Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24. Luke
22.20. Ioh. 6.54.
And often are these words used ^y Christ; Take, eat, this is my bo^y, which
is given for you, and which is broken for you. And so for the Wine, Drink ye
all of this: and This is my blood which is shed for you. This then being
Christ's commandment, and his own ordinance, does bind all to this duty.

Christ's blood was indifferently shed for all the faithful; for the Layetie
as well as the Clergy, and All are commanded to show forth Christ's death
until he come, and how shall this be done, but by eating of the Bread, and
drinking of the Wine: for so says the Apostle; 1. Cor 11.26.
As often a^ ye shall eat o^ this Bread, and drink of this Cup ye show the
Lords death till he come* And again, of the Wine, Christ says thus; This is
my body, which is shed for you, and for many, for the remission of sins. Mat.
26.28.
Why then should the blood of Christ, or the Cup, which does represent the same
unto us, be denied them unto whom Christ has given it. If ^hey have part in
Christ's death, which is the thing signified, why ^hen not in the Sign and
Seal ^hereof?

1. Cor. 10.4
They did all drink of that ^iritual Rock that followed them, ^^d that Rock
was Christ. But ^^at were absurd, to make the ^^ndition of such that lived
under the shadow, to excel the con^^tion of such as live under, and enjoy the
substance, no, no, the Lord does more highly honor his Church under the
Gospel, then so to keep them back from any privilege they enjoyed under the
Law.



Now if any should ask, Why Bread and Wine.
why Christ should make choice of Bread and Wine, rather then any other
creature, to represent his death and passion in this Sacrament.

I answer, because it is his will: and if there were no other reason to be
assigned, this were sufficient, and with this we ought ^o rest contented, it is
his pleasure, it is his will. As it is said ^oncerning the preaching of the
Gospel: 1. Cor. 1.21
It pleased God by the foo^^shnesse of preaching, to save them that believe.

Yet there may be other rea^ons given, wherefore Christ in ^ special manner
might make ^hoyce of these signs in this Sa^rament.

Because Bread is the most ordi^ary food of the body, and therefore called the
Staff of man's life, So is Christ the food of the soul, by the which we are
nourished unto eternal life: Howbeit these elements do but in part shadow out
the same, the one being earthly, the other heavenly, the one serving but to
preserve a temporal life, and that but for a time: the other tending to the
preservation of a spiritual life, and that for ever.

And herein indeed do these signs make wonderfully for Gods glory, in that
he should make choice of such weak means, that so his glory might appear.
If we had bin to receiue^ any other signs, or things of a^ higher nature, we
should have been ready to have pored so upon the shadow, as that we should have
lost the substance, and ou^ senses would have been more wrought upon then our
hearts, which the Lord in his wisdom has prevented, in giving us these
signs of Bread and Wine.

Of this Bread: Of this Cup.

Bread and Wine retain still their natures.
and delivered Bread and Wine, then they must needs retain their former
natures, and their former proper substance, and still remain the same
elements, even after the words of consecration. Against the doctrine of the
Church of Rome, which hold, that after the words of consecration, there
remains no Bread at all, but that it is transubstantiated into the very body
and blood of Christ, a mere fable and fantasy, against all divinity,
philosophy, reason, sense, and experience.

Reasons against transubstantiation.
First, it does overthrow the very nature of a Sacrament, which consists of
two parts: an outward sign, and an invisible grace. Now then, if after the
words of consecration, the Bread and Wine were transubstantiated into the very
body and blood of Christ, then the sign must needs be taken away, and the
element overthrown.

Ioh. 6.33.
does nourish and strengthen the soul. Now then, to take away the natural
use of this sacrament, wherein can our faith be confirmed and strengthened,
which ever relies upon this in the use of this Sacrament that as the bread and
wine serves to nourish and feed our bodies, so does Christ Jesus and the
merits of his death and passion feed our souls, so that while they take away
the substance of bread and wine in this Sacrament, the very nature and
spiritual use of the Sacrament is taken away with it.

Manna they eat off, and ^he Spiritual Rock they drank ^f, 1. Cor. 10.1
was not Christ's body and ^loud corporally, because he ^as not then come in
the flesh, neither had he taken our nature upon him. Therefore it was by ^ith
that they fed on Christ under the law. Neither is there any other feeding on
Christ under the Gospel.

Bread and Wine. The eye sees it, the taste deserneth it, to be Bread and not
flesh, to be Win^ and not blood. And therefore that doctrine of
transubstantiation is most false and absurd.

I might hereunto add diue^ reasons of this nature: As namely if that should
be granted the^ mayntaine, what absurditie^ would follow it. As Hypocrite^
should then eat the flesh o^ Christ, and so be saved, inasmuc^ as Christ has
said. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, Ioh. 6.15.54.
has eternal life.

Besides, what canibals would they make of christians, to feed upon man's
flesh, which nature it self does abhor.

And to make a natural body ^n diverse places at one time, which cannot be.

bread at all in the Lord Supper. So it makes no less against such as
conceive there is nothing ^ut bread to be expected there, and this is, the
condition of many thousands, that come ^hereunto. They are not able to ^o
discern of the Lords body: ^oore Souls, they want the eye ^f faith, and this
must be spiritually discerned. Whereas the true believer, beholds the Lord
truly although not corporally to offer unto him Jesus Christ, with all the
precious merits of his death and obedience* unto his endelesse comfort, though
natural men neither see nor feel it, inasmuch as they being not able to
discern of the Lords body, come unto this Supper as to their appointed and
ordinary food.

And thus much for the Apostles precept or commandment* Let a man therefore
exam, etc.

Let us pray.
The Fourth Sermon.
1. Cor. 11.29. For he that eats and drinks ^nworthily, eats and
drinks his ^wne damnation, because he discer^eth not the Lords body.


IN the former verse we have heard the Apostles precept, that every one ought
^ Examine himself before he ^ome to the Lords Table: and partake of these
holy Mysteries. We have heard the necessity of that duty. The subject of it,
a man's self. And the duty it self, examination. And wherein the same does
consist.

We are now to speak of the second general part of the text, and that is the
reason the holy Ghost does here lay down to enforce the duty: and the
Reason, is taken from the great hurt and danger which for want of this
Examination is like to ensue: laid down in these words, For he that eats
and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own Damnation.

That is by eateing and drinking these holy mysteries unworthily, that is
unprepared and irreverently, they do thereby provoke the Lord to plague and
^unish them with some iudge^ent or other in this life, to ^^ring them to the
sight of their ^innes, and to repentance for the ^ame: if not, then with
condem^ation in the life to come.

and in handling of ^is reason, we will ^bserue this order (...) speak 1. Of
the persons. 2. Of the punishment 3. Of the cause of their punishment.


Of unworthy receivers, Two sorts of unworthy receivers.
there ^e two sorts, one pertaining to ^ods covenant, the other not: ^e one,
the godly who through ^egligence and carelessness, may ^^me to to this Sacrament
vn^ted and unprepared, without ^at reverence and due respect ^ey ought to show
unto such ^cellent mysteries. The other, ^icked and profane, that want ^ith,
and so come in their sins, ignorance, blindness, malice etc. unto whom this
ordinance of God is a savor of death unto death.

And Two sorts of punishment.
And as the persons do differ so do their punishments, the godly if they come
unprepared unto this ordinance, without that godly examination and preparation
they ought to mak^ thereunto, the Lord will not pass^ by that sin of theirs,
but he will be sure to chastise them so the same, they eat and drink
judgment unto themselves bu^ what judgment (...) ^fflictioni^ judgment of
affliction, that is such stir up the Lord to wrath, as this Church of Corin^
did. For whose vnreuerent pa^ taking of this holy ordinanc^ the Apostle says
in the ver^ following, that many were wea^ sick and some of them taken away by
death.

But as for the punishment of wicked and ungodly men, it is certain that such
unworthy receivers, eat and drink (...) condemnation, judgment of eternal
condemnation unto themselves, that is by that their vnreuerent and unworthy
receiving of this so holy an ordinance, they sin highly against God, which
sin of theirs, shall be punished with no less punishment then with eternal
condemnation.

Before I enter into these par^iculers, I will propound one in^truction from
the scope of the holy Ghost in this text, and that ^. Seeing the Apostle has
before exhorted unto that christian ^uty of godly examination and preparation,
that every christian ought to make before he come to partake of this holy
ordinance, and now uses such a reason to enforce the duty, as is taken from
Gods Justice and Judgments, which for want thereof, he will execute and
inflict upon them.

The consideration of Gods judgments should make men perform holy duties
holily.
And hence it is, that it is very usual with the Lord by his servants, when
he has exhorted unto any one holy duty, to annexe unto the same some
forcible reason to persuade thereunto. This is clear by the practice of
Almighty God himself with our first parents, Adam and Euah, Genesis 2.18.
who having given them but one Commandment to observe, he uses a reason to
bind unto obedience, and that is taken from Gods Justice: The day thou eatest
thereof, thou shall die the death. And thus does Almighty God deal with Cain,
Genesis 4.
one of the Sons of Adam, persuading him first to well-doing, to break off
his sin by repentance, even that malice he had conceived against his
innocent Brother: But if that would not serve, the Lord adds one reason more,
and that is taken from Gods justice and vengeance, which otherwise will be
sure to follow: If thou do ill, sin lies at ^hy door. And this is that one
^y Reason that Moses does ^se unto the people of Israel; That they should
hearken unto ^he voice of the Lord their God, which if they would, it should
then go well with them, and with their children after them: If not, what then?
It shall come to pass, Deu. 28.15 16.17. etc.
if thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and to
do all his commandments, and his statutes which I command thee this day;
that all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee: Cursed shall thou
be in the City, and cursed shall thou be in the field: Cursed shall be thy
basket and thy store, etc.

And this is the order that David uses in his exhortation unto Solomon: And
thou Solomon my Son, 2. Cro. 28.9
know thou the God of thy fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with
a willing mind. And he adds a reason to enforce his exhortation, and that is
taken from Gods Justice: If thou forsake him, he will forsake thee, and cast
thee off for ever. And what thing else did our Savior intend, when he bade
Remember Lots wife: Luke 17.32.
but to move all men to consider her sin, and her punishment, that so
fearing the one, we might learn to take heed of the other. And why does the
Spirit of God in the Scriptures, lay down so many examples before us of Gods
justice and vengeance upon the Angels which ^ept not their first estate: 1.
Cor. 10.6 11. 2. Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. Pro. 14.16.
Upon ^he world of ungodly men, In ^he days of Noah: Upon the Cit^ies of
Sodom and Gomorrah, tur^ing them into ashes: but to this and, that all men
might fear. And this is the reason why the ^postle here does propounde ^he
judgments of God upon the ^orinths, for that their vnreue^^nt receiving of
this sacrament, to this end, that all men that hear of the same might learn
to fear, and to come more reverently and prepared thereunto. And great
reason, that the consideration of Gods judgments should work this effect in
us: For

we lay to heart and be warned by them

Heb. 12. vlt.
Our God is a consuming fire. If man will not turn, he will whet his sword, and
make ready his bow, and the sinner shall not escape. This is cleared by the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, where he says, Heb. 10.28 29.
that If he that despised Moses Law, dyed without mercy, under two or three
witnesses, Of how much sorer punishment shall he be worthy, which treads
under foot the Son of God: counts the Blood of the New Testament as an
unholy thing: and so despites the spirit of grace.

Where he shows, that Gods judgments must needs be heavy upon such as
abuse this holy ordinance, by comparing their sin with those that despised
Moses Law.

For reprofe.
that are no whit moved with Gods judgments upon others, nor those fearful
threatenings that are daily denounced against themselves, nothing can terrify
them from sinning. It fares with such, as with the Sons in law of Lot, when
Lot spoke unto them, he seemed unto them as if he had mocked. They are ready
still to skin over the deadly wounds of their Souls with peace, peace, and
secure themselves against the judgment to come. Poor souls, their damnation
does not sleep, the Lord will one day visit for these things, and pay, and
repay tribu^ation, anguish, and sorrow upon them, when he shall come to make
good his threatenings, and ^ccomplish his judgments upon them, which will
prove so much the more intolerable, by ^ow much the less they ever ^eared
them.

For instruction.
that we do not lightly e^^eeme of Gods judgments, either executed upon
others, or ^hreatened against our selves: ^ut make this use of them, that ^hey
may enforce us unto good ^ueties, and bind us unto obe^ence.

I confess that this ought ^ot to be the principal motive ^to us therein: in
as much as the love of God should constrain us, and our obedience should be
free and willing, and not wroung out from us even as the service of a loving
and dutiful child the Love of whose Father unto him, makes him most careful
to obey, and most fearful to offend. Yet let the thoughts o^ his judgments
have place in us likewise, that so we may learn to fear him with David. My
flesh trembles for fear of thee: and I am afraid of thy judgments, and to
obey him and to walk humbly before him in all holy obedience, in as much as he
is a God so fearful and terrible, just in hi^ judgments, and true in his
word.

Men naturally are afraid o^ water, Fire, Ravenous beasts, etc oh let us
learn to fear our God who is a consuming fire. And will be sure to punish
sin, Heb. 12.
and take vengeance upon the impenitent.

And what though the Lord do not presently punish us haueing offended, shall we
say with the wicked, Tush God cares not for it. Or is their any knowledge with
the most high? oh no, let that be far, from us, but know that it is his mercy
to bring us to repentance. Which effect, if the Lords patience and
long-suffering toward us, work not in us, his judgments when they come will
be so much the more fearful.

Having now handled the doctrine in general, from the scope of the holy Ghost
in the whole verse, we come now to the parts of it. And first for the persons.

He that eats and drinks unworthily, etc. 1 The godly themselves may
sometimes be said to eat and Drink unworthily.
There are of the godly themselves, as well as wicked men that may be said to
eat and drink unworthily. When they shall come and partake of this holy
ordinance of almighty God, without that godly examination and christian
preparation they ought to make thereunto. Neither may this seem strange, that
even the godly themselves, may eat and drink unworthily, in as much as they
are not at all times alike, careful to fit themselves and to prepare
themselves unto this duty; But either the world and the businesses of the same,
has so taken up their affections, and their most precious time, when this
preparation ought to be made: or else some secret sloth and drowsinesse, has
crept into them, that they have omitted the same. It was the case of this
Church of Corinth, albeit Gods people, that many amongst them had their
failings herein, Verse. 30.
for which sin of theirs, the Lord did not spare to punish them, with diverse
and sundry temporal judgments.

Now as the child of God may eat and drink unworthily, so it follows, that
such must needs eat and drink judgment unto ^hemselues. Howbeit as I said
before, judgment of affliction. Not judgment of condemnation, for ^here is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.1.
And so ^ndeede the word (...) does ^ignifie not properly condemna^ion, but
judgment of afflicti^n, and so is the same word used (...) diverse places of
Scripture, as ^at of Peter, Judgment must begin at the house of God. 1. Pet.
4.17.
That is, punishment and correction must begin with his own children, and so
our Apostle expounds the same in the verses following. For this cause, many are
sick amongst you: and many weak, and some are fallen a sleep. And he adds
further, that we are Judged of the Lord. That is punished and corrected, That
we should not be condemned with the world. So yt it is not properly to be
understood, as our common translation reads it of eternal condemnation, that
Gods children might eat and drink, so unworthily, but rather of temporal
punishment and correction.

Now then, seeing that the godly themselves may thus eat and drink
unworthily, and for that sin of theirs may provoke the ^he Lord to correct
them with ^emporall chaistsements and cor^ections as we have heard. We ^earne
heere-hence, this instruction.

Many are punished temporally that are not condemned eternally.
The Lord would not ^uffer this sin in these beleeue^ng Corinthians to escape
vnpu^ished, but laid sundry sharp ^orrections upon them, Verse 31.
yet in ^e midst of judgment, the Lord ^ough upon mercy, they were ^dged, (that
is corrected) of the lord. Number. 27.12.13.14.
That they might not be con^mned with the world. And thus ^d the Lord deal
with Moses ^d Aaron; inasmch as they had ^ouoked the Lord to wrath, the lord
would not suffer them to ^ter into ye land of Canaan. The ^e may be said of
Vzza: that staid up the Arc, 2. Sam. 6.7.
who having no calling of the Lord thereunto was stricken of the Lord. And
Josiah who albeit he was a good King, and served the Lord from his youth, yet
the Lord gave him into the hands of Pharaoh Necho, 2. Reg. 23.29.
King of Egypt, who pu^ him unto a violent death.

Number. 11.33.
The history of the Israelits in their iournying toward Canaan For whose sin
of murmuring the Lord did smite them wit^ exceeding great plagues, Psalm. 90.
eue^ judgment upon judgment, until he had almost consumed the greatest part
of them: does mak^ this clear. The like may be^ said of Manasses Iehosophat,
H^zechiah and the like. All which testimonies as a cloud of wi^nesses, they
all serve to confirm^ our judgments in the vndoub^ted truth of this doctrine:
That many have been punished temporally, that have not perished everlastingly.
And that God will not spare, no not the godly them selves, be they never so
near or dear unto him; but if they will sin against him, he will visit
their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquity with scourges. And this
did the Corinthians ^ind by woeful experience, who ^or want of their
preparation, and godly Examination before ^hey came to the Lords Table, ^he
Lord did punish them with ^ore afflictions, although they ^erished not
eternally.

Sin whenever, wheresoever, or in whomsoever he finds it. He accepts
not the person of Princes (says Elihu), Job. 34.19.
nor regards the rich, more then the poor, they being all the work of his
hands. And thus does the LORD declare himself to be most righteous, and
just in his judgments and corrections for sin, that all men to the end of
the world, might learn to quak^ and tremble at the committing thereof.

least the^ should be condemned with the wi^ked, 1. Cor. 11.32.
in the world to come. Sinn^ must be judged, and sinn^ must be condemned. An^
surely it is Gods mercy unto h^ servants, that the Lord vv^ not let them so
thrive and go on in their sins, for so would they multiply their iniquities
against him, but does correct them betimes, and labors to prevent more heavy
judgments, which by their sinning they would otherwise draw upon themselves.

All things happen alike to all, Eccle. 9.10.
meaning all outward things, such as is prosperity and ^duersity: yet many
will take vp^n them to judge and censure men ^o be out of the favor of God,
because of some outward afflicti^n yt lies heavy upon them. But ^hus might
these believing Corinthians bin condemned as wicked, who notwithstanding their
temporal chastisements, were not condemned with the world. Who ever had such a
load of afflictions, as Christ himself had laid upon him? Why should we
conclude then, that such are out of Gods favor? No, no. Judgment begins at
Gods house. And if the Lord do not correct men in this life, Note.
it is a sign that the Lord reserues such a one to the condemnation of the rest
of the world, and such indeed have just cause to suspect themselves, that
they are Bastards, and not Sons, for the Lord does chastise them whom he
loves, and no heavier judgment can there be upon any, then to thrive in
sin, and grow up in iniquity, and yet to be free from correction.

When the waters seem to have gone over our souls, as David complains: And
the Lord shall seem to vex us with all his storms, as Job confesses. Even
this, that ^his is the portion of all the ^aints. It has ever been the
con^ition of the Church. God many ^imes feeds them with the bread ^f tears,
Psalm. 80.5.
and gives plenty of tears ^o drink. Romans 8.38.
Yet there shall be nothing able to separate us from God, nor divide us from
his pre^ence. Let us then confess the ^and of God in all our troubles, and
withal confess our sins, (...) the procuring cause of al Gods ^dgements:
Lam. 3.40.
and amongst the ^st of our sins, acknowledge that our want of preparation to
this Sacrament has provoked the Lord to punish us. Little do men think, that
this negligence of theirs in coming unto this holy ordinance, and want of
Preparation thereunto, has been the cause of their sickness, troubles,
afflictions, etc. but what says the Apostle? For this cause some are sick,
etc. The Lord does surely chastise for thi^ sin of unworthy receiving this
sacrament.

Again, inasmuch as the Lord i^ thus stirred up to wrath against his own
children, for this sin o^ vnpreparednes, to chastise them so severely with
sickness, weakness, yea and with death it self albeit they be not condemne^
for ever.

We learn by the greatness o^ the punishment, to conceive of the greatness of
sin. And here hence we may learn; That is is It is a great sin to receive
unworthily.
but it is a very great and grievous sin, such a sin as highly prouokes the
Majesty of God to anger, and draws Gods judgments upon his own Children,
that howsoever he will not for ever condemn them, yet he will punish them, and
correct them for coming unworthily and eating and drinking these holy
mysteries, not with that reverence as they ought to do. These Corinthians were
the Church of God, embraced the Gospel, believed in Christ, yet because they
came vnworthi^y to the Lords Table, not so fitted and prepared with that
reverence as they ought to have done, Paul tells them, that for this very cause,
and for this very sin of unworthy receiving of this Sacrament, the Lord sent
those judgments amongst them.



should punish so severely and sharply.

He that receives you, receives me, Luke 10.16
and he that refuses you, refuses me. He that offers any wrong, to any
Messenger, Legate, or Embasador of a Prince, offers wrong unto the King that
sent him, or he that abuses the kings picture or coin by clipping it, or
treading it in the mire, it is ^eason against the King himself. Even so,
howsoever Christ ^e in heaven, and the bread be not transubstantiated into the
^ody, and the wine into the blood ^f Christ, as the papists teach. ^et because
these eliments are ^y Gods ordinance, set a part, or^ained, and sanctified by
the lord, and prayers to be signs and seals of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ; the abuse of them therefore redounds unto Christ himself.

to bring them to see and acknowledge this sin of theirs, and so to
Repentance for the same, if not, the Lord will be sure to punish the same
eternally.

unworthily, even the very servants of God themselves, who come in some
weakness and infirmity, without that due examination and godly preparation
they ought to make thereunto, oh then, how shall such escape Gods wrath and
vengeance that contemn this Sacrament, make light account of it, and will not
come at all unto it, that think it is at their own choice ^o come or not to
come, to receive or not to receive. Heb. 2.4.
If every ^in and transgression receive a recompense of reward. How shall such
escape as neglect so great salvation. Exo. 4.24.
When Moses did but omit the Sacrament of circumcition, either of some
negligence or carelessness, or else as it is thought, for fear of his wife and
Father in law, it was like to have cost him his life, the Lord made as though
he would have slain him. What punishment then do such deserve, and shall one
day draw down upon their own heads, that despise the substance, and make
light account of the blood of the covenant, Christ and his righteousness, who
is here crucified afresh and offered in this Sacrament unto every true
believer.

for gross and grievous sins, such as the world cries out of, but we must be
humbled for our secret sins, infirmities, and wants. Our carelessness in
prayer, hearing of the word, receiving of the Sacrament; yea we must be
humbled for our unworthy coming to the Lords Table, for re^eiuing this
Sacrament careless^y, irreverently, and vnworthi^y;

And hence it is that David ^rayes that the Lord would par^on his secret
sins, Psalm. 19.12.
and Peter ^ils Simon Magus to repent, Act. 8.22.
and ^ pray that the thoughts of his ^eart might be pardoned. The lord has
threatened a curse to ^^em that do his work negli^^ntly, saying, Ier. 47.10.
Cursed be he that ^th the work of the Lord negligent (...) And yet
notwithstanding that we have all of us had our failings there in, where is the
man that is humbled aright, and says, Alas what have I done? and seeks to to
stay Gods wrath and to appease his anger before the decree come forth, Ier. 8.6.
and the Lord begins to punish for this sin.

this common sin of ours; the unworthy receiving of this Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. But alas, though ye Lord send abroad his judgments, sickness, diseases,
weakness in men's bodies, etc, Who thinks of sin as the cause of all,
especially of this sin of unworthy receiving of this Sacrament: little do men
think, yt that is, is cause of all, well the Apostle concludes thus: For this
^ause many are weak amongst you and sick etc: Note.
And experience ^eacheth, yt the Lord usual does ^ot send more sickness at any
one ^ime all the year after, then at ^his time of the year, when most ^houlde
or do receive this Sa^rament of the body and blood ^f Christ.

Thus much concerning the first ^^rt of men yt may communicate unworthily, even
the godly man himself, for want of this godly examination and preparation
thereunto: as also for his punishment.

But now, howsoever ye Lord in mercy does thus deal with his servants, and for
this sin of theirs corrects them here, that they may not perish hereafter. It
is not so with the wicked, their unworthy receiving is punished after another
manner, They eat and drink their own damnation. Tha^ is amongst all other
their sins this their unworthy receiving is not the least, but the Lord does
and will impute the same unto them, 2 Sorts of unworthy receivers are the
wicked, properly so called.
and this does help to fil^ up the measure of their iniquities, and hasteneth
their condemnation.

And now being to speak o^ the wicked and their punishment: we will labor to
discover the person of the unworthy receiver, and then to speak of his
punishment,

Now for the more certain discovery of the person of the unworthy Communicant,
Unworthy receivers discovered by being compared with the worthy.
and who it is that may most properly be so called, and who it is that does
thus abuse Gods holy ordinance, and eat and drink unto his own eternal
condemnation; ^ take it to be needful, first, to show who they be that
receive Worthily: So shall we come the ^etter to discern who they be that
receive unworthily. For reason it self does teach us, that it ^ the readiest
manner of teach^ng one, to know which is the ^rong way, by instructing him ^^st
which is the right way, for that is but one, whereas other by-ways are many.
For whosoever is not a worthy receiver, must needs be an unworthy one, whether
he come too short, or go too far.

Who receive worthily.
Now such only receive this Sacrament worthily, who both see and acknowledge
their own unworthiness.

Wherein there is first of all, Knowledge required, 1 Such as have a competent
measure of knowledge.
which is the ground of all other grace: And that is to be considered two ways.

First, more generally, in the knowledge of the principal points of Christian
religion.

Seven things to be known of every worthy receiver.
Secondly, more particularly, in the Knowledge of this Sacrament.

Touching the first of these seven particulars must be known of every worthy
receiver.



Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and that these three are but one God.





estate, but that God the Father of his mere love and tender compassion,
without any desert of man, did send his own Son to take our nature upon him,
and in the same, to work our redemption, and to reconcile us unto God.

Christ, we must have some means to make that ours which is Christ's, and that
is only Faith, for it is Faith that apprehends and applies Christ and his
obedience, and makes the same ours, as we had wrought it our selves.

of the word, and that God has appointed means, as for the begetting of
faith, so for the strengthening, and daily increase of the same in us, such as
are the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, etc.

Secondly, Besides the knowledge of Christian religion in general, Romans 10.2
Particularly in this Sacrament.
there is further required in all worthy receivers a particular knowledge of
this sacrament, the nature of it, as namely, what he does receive, how he does
receive, and why he does receive, al which we have spoke of in the former
Sermons,

own damnation; for alas, how few do truly know these things, but are
altogether ignorant of these maine and fundamental points of Christian
Religion, without the knowledge whereof none can be saved, much less receive
this Sacrament vvorthily.

This being so, we see what great need there is for every one that will
approach to the Lords Table, to labor for Knowledge, and to use all holy
helps and means whereby they may attain unto it. Least for their ignorance
they be judged unworthy receivers, and so be guilty of this fearful
judgment, to Eat and Drink their own damnation.

The next thing required to a worthy receiving of this Sacrament 2 Faith.
is Faith, which cannot be without Knowledge, but must follow it: For here by
Faith is meant, not only a giving credit to all those things we spoke of
before in Knowledge, but a certain assurance of the heart in every Child of
God, and worthy receiver of this Sacrament, that all those promises which God
has made unto his Children, pertain unto him.

Now this Faith stands in two things, as Knowledge did.

For, the Faith that is required of the worthy receiver, must take hold upon
Christ, as he is offered in the Preaching of the Gospel, and so of his death,
obedience, and resurrection, whereby he comes to have assurance that his
sins be forgiven him, and he received into favor.

But besides this, there is another degree of Faith required in this Sacrament,
and that is, as Christ Jesus has and does most truly offer himself unto the
true believer in this Sacrament. So the worthy receiver must be assured
thereof: and accordingly takes these outward signs as seals and pleadges,
whereby his faith becomes more and more confirmed, then by the bare promise
made in the Gospel.

Unworthy receivers there be. Seeing that as the greatest part wants
know^edge. So of those that have Knowledge, the greatest part of them want
Faith, as their lives do sufficiently declare.

3 Repentance.
The last property that I will stand upon, is Repentance, which proceeds from
a true faith, and is most necessarily required of al those that worthily
receive this Sacrament. For mark I pray you, whereas in this Sacrament we be
cuppled with Christ, and are made one with him, of necessity now we must
become New creatures, and be changed, inasmuch as we are now knit unto Christ.
And we must now part with the practice of sin for the practice of
Godliness else how can we have any fellowship with Christ, for to sa^ we have
fellowship with Chri^ and to walk in darkness, we ly^ for there can be no
agreemen^ between light and darkeness^ Be thou in Christ, declare, d^clare
it, by thy walking, For the that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts.

And surely this true repentance, extends it self very far even to the
obedience of the whole law of God. First, to the hating and forsaking of al
things that be evil and forbidden in the Law, as also in the love and
practicing of all that which God requires. And here-hence do flow all those
graces of God, which do so adorn his Servants, as love to God and his
children, humility, meekness, patience, etc. which such, as are not knit
unto Christ, are strangers unto, and altogether unacquainted with.

Whereby, as by the former, we may see how many more are cut off from the
number of wor^hy receivers, even all ungodly persons, who though they have
never so much knowledge, and boast never so much of their faith, yet inasmuch
as there appears not in their lives, true repentance for sin. Which will
show it self ever by the effects of it. Certain it is that their knowledge is
but braine-knowledge, not experimental and sanctified knowledge, and their
faith they boast of, presumption and not faith.

And thus as shortly as I could, I have showed what is required to worthy
receiving. Whereby it may most evidently appear what it is to receive
unworthily. For whatsoever is not agreeable unto this, must needs be unworthy
receiving, and such do eat and drink unto their own damnation.

Of which sort be all those that be ignorant of these necessary points of
christian religion, Who receive unworthily.
who come in their old sins, ignorance, 1 Such as are ignorant.
blindness, unbelief, etc, Who, as they are ignorant of Gods word and will,
so they know nothing of the doctrine of this Sacrament, but are ex^reame
ignorant and blind in ^hese holy mysteries: not know^ng the institution of
this Sa^rament, the matter of it, nor in that manner they should come unto it.
Such ignorant souls ^ust needs come without the ^edding garment, and so eat
and ^rinke their own Damnation, vn^sse they repent.

rush upon their own destruction, and eat and drink unto their own
damnation, but labor to be instructed, and learn to know how they should come
worthily, and prepared thereunto.

Secondly, this may be noted further as a good direction unto the ministers of
God, how to be have themselves toward suc^ as are ignorant, want faith, an^
yet abide in their sins. Such mu^ not be admitted unto the Lord Table though
they would thru^ in themselves thereto. An^ to allow and admit of such one,
for ought I can see, is to be made partaker of his sin. A^ it were to put a
sword into a man man's hand, is to make himself guilty of what hurt he shall
do^ even so that Minister that sha^ know one to be unworthy, and yet admit him,
who can account him innocent.

unworthy, he is to have charity toward all.

State of his sheep. And every faithful Minister must labor to know the
state of his flock, who may be admitted unto the Lords Table, and who ^ot. And
therefore the Lord ^equireth this at the hands of ^uery good shepherd, that
he ^trengthen the weak, Heal the ^cke, Bind up the broken, Eze. 34.
and ^ing into the way all such as wan^er. None of which can he do ^nlesse he
know the estate of is flock. 2 Such as come in unbelief.


Secondly, such eat and drink unworthily, which come in their unbelief
without faith in Christ, Romans 14.23.
which is all in all. For faith is the hand of the soul to lay hold on Christ,
Heb. 11.6.
the mouth of the soul to feed on Christ, and without which, whatsoever we
do, is sin.

Prove themselves whether they be in the faith. 2. Cor. 13.5
In as much as it is that grace that must bid us welcome, and make both us and
our Sacrifice accepted.

3 Such as come without repentance.
Thirdly, such do eat and drink unworthily as come without Repentance, that
is, which do not find their hearts humbled and broken for sin, in whom
there appears not the work of Sanctification and sound Conversion, that are
not yet made New Creatures, but live in all Sin. A manifest declaration, that
such are not in Christ.

And thus having discovered the person of the unworthy Receiver, compared with
the worthy; we will now come to propound a Doctrine or two, from the
consideration of the person and the punishment, and so hasten toward an end.

He that eats and drinks unworthily. Note here, that wicked men will be
eating and drinking of these holy mysteries of the body and blood of Christ,
as well as others, howbeit not with the same fruit and effect as others. The
Doctrine is clear, that

A man may Communicate, and yet unworthily.
else what means the Apostle here to say, that He that eats and drinks,
etc. were it not that there are some that eat and drink unworthily, and so
draw down judgment upon their own heads.

And as in this, so in all other the duties of Gods worship and service, as
the hearing of the Word, Prayer, etc. a man may perform them, and yet not in
a holy manner, as God commands, and therein the same become sins unto them.
This appears by the example of Cain, who offered Sacrifice as well as Abell, yet
it was so far from being pleasing unto God, Genesis 4.
and acceptable with the most highest, as that it added unto the number of
Caines sins. And thus did the people of the Jews offer their Sacrifices in a
great abundance, Esa. 1.
but the Lord tells them, that he had no pleasure in them. This was the case of
these Corinthians: Paul tells them, They came together for the worse. And
notwithstanding they had met together at the Lords Table and partaked of this
Sacrament, they had been so far from pleasing the Lord therein, as that
rather, they had stirred him up to wrath against them. Witness those heavy
judgments that were inflicted upon them, for their unworthy receiving. But
the Reasons that follow, will further clear this truth unto us.

First, because there are in the Church, that are not of the Church; Secret
and close hypocrites have ever shrouded themselves under the profession of the
truth, yet inasmuch as they join with the rest of the Church in Gods service,
we are not only to embrace their fellowship, but to hope the best of their
service, till the Lord shall at the last discover them. Now what is that duty
that a wicked man will not join with Gods servants in? Especially in public,
such as is the hearing of the Word, receiving of the Sacrament, public Prayer
etc. And yet for all that, highly provoke the Lord in the doing of ye same. But
of this before.

Heb. 11.6.
All men have not Faith. And therefore cannot receive this Sacrament worthily.
For without Faith it is impossible to please GOD in any particular action that
we do. It is Faith that seasons all our actions that we do in Gods service,
and makes them to have a gracious acceptance with the Almighty. This made the
widows mite accepted, and that cup of water, that was given unto a Disciple,
not to lose it reward. But now, wicked men, and hypocrites that live in the
Church, albeit they hear the Word, pray, receive the Sacrament. etc, it
profits not them, because their persons are not accepted with God, they are out
of Gods favor, and unto them the Word is but the favor of death unto death.

Communicate, and Communicate unworthily, how does this discover the folly of
them that stand upon the work done, and never look after the manner of doing
the same. Oh, it is the case of many thousands in the world, that think they
have highly honored God, if upon the Sabbath day they have presented their
bodies before the Lord in his house, and there have heard the word, and
perhaps, for company sake, have received the Sacrament with the rest. But as
for the manner of performing this duty, they never look after, but hand over
head, rush upon them, and rest satisfied with the doing of them. Poor souls,
how do such deceive themselves. At the last day, I doubt not, there shall be as
many condemned for the ill doing of good actions, as for the doing of those
things as are simply evil. As many condemned for ill hearing, Note.
as not hearing, for bad praying, as for not praying, and for unworthy
communicating, as not communicating, for unconscionable preaching, as for
seldom preaching. It shall not avail any to say, these and these things have
I done, when men have not regarded how they have done them.

Neither would I be so understood, as if there were no hope that God will
accept of our service, unless it be absolute in the manner of perfourming, God
forbid we should so think; for then, what would become of the best duties,
even of the best? No, better to hear in weakness, then not to hear; better
to pray with infirmity, then not to pray, and to Communicate with some defect,
then utterly to forbear. Better it is to limp, and creep in the way, then not
to come at al. Yet we must learn to make conscience of the manner of our
performing of good duties, and be humbled for our wants therein, least the
Lord reject both us and them, and say unto us one day, when we look to have
comfort in them; Who has required these things at your hands?

out of a godly ielously make question, Master is it I?

So my brethren do we hear, that some may communicate and that unworthily.
Eateing and drinking judgment unto themselves. Let us do as the Disciples did
say, good Lord is it ^l? I have now partaked of this Sacrament, as I have often
done hereto-fore: Is not that all; may wicked men, and Hypocrites do the same?
and such as shall euer^astingly perish in the end? It be^oues me to look unto
it, that I go beyond such in the performance of this duty, least I ^eape their
reward one day: oh his godly fear and care ought ^o be in all the children of
God, ^hen they come to be exercised about this duty, that so they may ^ot
perform the same formally, as wicked men do, but in a holy and sanctified
manner, in Faith repentance, and obedience, that so the same may be accepable
unto God.

Eats and Drinks his own Damnation. There is no ordinance of God so holy,
but wicked men abuse it to their own condemnation.
yet herein fill up the measure of their sinne^ and hasten their final
condemnation. The Doctrine is

There is noe ordinance o^ God so holy, but wicked me^ may abuse it to their
own condemnation.

As this Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a heavenly banquet unto the hungry
and thirsty soul, that groans under the burden of sin, and desires to be
eased and refreshed. So wicked men instead of receiving any spiriturall food:
they receive (except the special mercy of God prevent them,) that which will
be the bane and poison of their Souls. Genesis 4.
Cain sinned not only ^n slaying his innocent brother, ^ut in offering his
sacrifice. This ^ clear by ye indictment which Christ brings against the old
^orld. They Eat and Drank, Mat. 24.38.
Mar^ed, and were given in Marriage. ^ll which were things lawful in
^emselues. yet became sins unto them that lived in that ^me, and tended to
hasten their ^estruction; for they only minded their pleasure therein, their
hearts being set upon carna^ lusts, they gave themselves wholly to satisfy
their sinful desires and so fell upon those things good in themselves without
fear, without prayer or thank^ giving unto God, as if they were no way
beholden unto the Lord for them. And this is furthe^ cleared by yt of Solomon,
He tha^ turns away his ears from hear ring the Law, Pro. 28.9.
even his prayers sha^ be abomination. The meaning i^ that the very best duty
that wicked man can perform, tha^ lives in sin and wants faith, tha^ should
season all his actions i^ Gods worship and service, a^ not better then
abominatio^ unto the Lord. And the like i^ alleged by our blessed Sauiou^
against those filthy Sodomits tha^ They bought, they sold, Luke 17.28.
they plan^ed, they builded: Things in themselves lawful, but now they become
so many sins unto them, inasmuch as they abused them, they bought and sold with
co^etuous desires. They builded ^ot for necessity sake, but to ^hewe their
pride and vanity. And thus it fares with wicked men in ^his sacrament. They
cannot but ^buse it to their own perdition. And the Bread and Wine which ^hey
receive, shall be so far from being unto them the body and blood of Christ
unto their salua^ion. As it shall rather be as the ^op unto Judas, a means in
and ^y ye which satan shall enter into ^uch, unto their condemnation.

The reasons are clear.

First, because wicked men are ^gnorant how to use the ordinances of God
aright, and stand upon the matter of them, not regarding the manner, I shall not
need to press this reason farther, in regard of the affinity i^ has with
the former doctrine.

Jews, which said w^ will not hear, nor obey. Nay the walk on stubbornely
again^ the Lord, and against his word and notwithstanding their judgments be
often convicted, and the themselves therein constrain to consent unto this
truth: Y^ their rebellious wills, not being sanctified: lead them away from all
obedience. Whose condemnation does not sleep.

Titus, where he does manifest this truth more clearly, when he says, Tit.
1.15.
that To the pure ^^e all things pure. But unto the wicked is nothing pure, but
even their minds and consciences are defiled. They are like unto a cold
stomach, that turns the best food into putrefaction, and corruption, the
most holy things of God are defiled by such, and ^urne in the end unto their
vt^er ruin and destruction.

of God. But even in the performance of Good duties their hearing of the word,
their praying, receiving of the Sacrament etc. The Lord make these things
turn to the vtte^ ruin and Destruction of wicked men. Oh then how do wicked
men increase their sins daily and multiply their iniquities, i^ as much as their
best duties ar^ sinful and call down judgment upon them. And if to do goo^
things in an evil manner be s^ farefull a sin, what will one da^ become of
those, that have done evil things in a worse manne^ to be laid to their charge
lik^wise* Let such consider this thin^ well betimes, before they be p^ into the
real possession of the judgment, which waytes and a^tends upon them.

godly preparation, it would be our last Bread that ever we should eat, and
would turn to the bane of our bodies. Oh (my brethren) the Lord has threatened
the unworthy receiver, not with a bodily death for this sin of his: but with
a spiritual and eternal death, even with the death both of body and Soul for
ever; and shall not this move us?

If our bowels and intrals should be in danger to rot within us, Note.
for receiving this Sacrament unworthily, would it no^ make us look about us?
And what? shall we no way regard^ what the Lord has heer^ threatened, that
He that eatet^ and drinks unworthily, eats an^ drinks his own
damnation. The were a pitiful folly. The Lord open our eyes at the last, to
see our misery herein, and give us hearts truly to be humbled for our sin.

Hitherto of the persons, and their punishment, we come now to the last
circumstance, and that is the ground and cause of the punishment.

Not discerning the Lords body. In these words, the Apostle comes to lay down
the cause of the aforesaid punishment, why men do by their unworthy
receiving, eat and drink judgment unto themselves: That is, hale down some
judgment or other upon themselves, temporal here, or eternal hereafter: the
reason is, Because they discern not the Lords body.

The meaning is, they put no difference between these Sacramental elements,
and other common Bread and Wine. They do not consider that the Bread and Wine,
now sanctified and set apart for such an holy use, differs from common Bread
and Wine, as signifying and representing unto us the body and blood of Christ,
and are as signs and seals to confirm unto us, all those precious promises
that God has made unto us in his Son.

Discern the Lords body?

more highly and honorably then we do of other things, and accordingly to use
it. And so the same word is used elsewhere: Have compassion on some sinners,
Jude. 22.
and put a difference: That is, put a difference between such as truly repent,
and such as be impenitent. So again; 1. Cor. 4.7.
Who makes thee (...) to differ.

So then, What it is to discern the Lords body
to discern of the Lords body in this place, is to distinguish that bread
that is used in this Sacrament, as a most precious and blessed sign and seal
of the body of Christ, from all other Creatures, and therefore to use it with
all reverence and due respect, as a thing set apart of God, by his own
appointment and institution to be a sign and seal of the body and blood of
Jesus Christ, and of all those benefits which we have and receive by him, and
therefore that we come not unto it, as we come unto our common meat and
drink, but as to a holy mystery and sign of a blessed benefit.

They discern not the Lords body: It is the property of an unworthy receiver,
to put no difference between bread and wine in this Sacrament, and common
bread and wine.
that is, put no difference between those elements thus sanctified, and set a
part for such an holy use, from their ordinary food: We learn, That

It is the property of an unworthy receiver, and of such a one as does eat
and drink unto his own Damnation, to put no difference between Bread and Wine
in this Sacrament, and common bread and common wine, but eat and devour the
Bread and Wine, never looking after, or regarding to feed on Christ, who is
therein exhibited to every true believer.

Now what is this else, but to contemn Christ and his merits, and the
undeserved love of God the father himself, who has prepared such a bountiful
feast for us, when we will not see nor regard that food by the which we should
live for ever.

So that, again here comes to be considered the grieuousnes of that sin of
unworthy receiving, the Apostle calls it, a not discerning of the Lords body:
and here by does not lessen the fault, but rather teaches us, yt this light
esteem, and slight regard that most men have of this so holy and sacred an
ordinance, howsoever men make light account of it, and the grace that is
therein offered. Yet it is such a Sin, as grievously offendes the Majesty of
God, and pulls down upon men his fearful wrath.

If the King should pass by us, and we know him not, how could we do him
that reverence we ought, inasmuch as we could nor discern him, nor know his
person. Even thus fares it with men in this Sacrament, albeeit the Lord be
nigh unto his servants that come in a holy manner thereunto, in Faith,
Repentance, and true Obedience; And that such feed upon Christ to their endless
comfort. Yet it is not so with the wicked, the reason is, they Discern not the
Lords body. They cannot see nor perceive any difference at all betwixt this
bread, and their ordinary food, they want the eye of faith to discern Christ,
who is spiritually discerned. And hence is it that they in stead of reaping
comfort and benefit by this his ordinance, do rather dishonor God, contemn
Christ and his merits, and draw down upon their own heads swifte damnation.

Discern of the Lords body. Receive unworthily, and eat and drink their own
damnation, this shows in what a lamentable and fearful estate many thousands
in the world be at this day; For ask them what they receive in this Sacrament,
they make you a marvelous silly and ignorant answer. They receive their Maker.
A bit of bread and a little wine, and the like. By which ignorant and profane
speeches of theirs, they show that they discern not the Lords body. But eat
and drink unto their own perdition.

Discern the Lords body. And to apprehend what rich treasures are offered unto
every true beleeue^ herein, even Christ with all his merits, and not a piece of
Bread as many fondly imagine. And that these elements being set a part by God
himself, and sanctified unto us by the word and prayer, are now become unto
us, signs and seals of the body and blood of Christ, and of those benefits
that come unto us by his passion, and so be able to put a difference between
them and common bread, and common wine.

First, because they are set apart by God to a special use, not so much to
feed the body, as to Nourish and refresh the soul.

Secondly, because being now sanctified, they serve to be Sacraments, signs
and seals of heavenly things, and spiritual mysteries: even of the body and
blood of Jesus Christ, and all those singular benefits that come unto us by the
same.

And thus much for the Apostles Reason in this 29. verse. To enforce his former
duty of preparation.

Let us pray.
The Fifth Sermon.
1. Cor. 11.30.31.32. For this cause many are weak, and sick among you, and
many sleep.

For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged.

But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we should not
be condemned with the world.


Our holy and blessed Apostle Saint Paul, having in the former part of this
chapter, The Coherence.
^et down the true and holy manner of ministering and receiving the Supper of
the Lord, as ^ direction for all good Minister and people to follow. Does i^
the seventh and twentieth verse threaten the unworthy receivers that they are
guilty of no less^ then high treason against the blood of Christ, for
profaning and unworthy receiving of the same.

And verse 28. He lays dow^ a general rule to be observed o^ all, that will
come worthily an^ prepared as they ought. Let euer^ one therefore examine
himself, an^ so let him eat, verse. 28.
etc. First his knowledge, whether it be sound an^ sanctified. 2. His faith,
whether i^ be firm or not. 3. His Repentance, whether he have a dislik^ of
sin past, a resolute purpo^^ and endeavor to avoid sin for the time to
come, resolving to obey God in all things. 4. whether he come in love and
charity to man. All which are absolute necessary in every true communicant, yt
desires to receive this Sacrament worthily.

Verse 29. The better to awake al careless and vnreuerent receivers of this
holy Sacrament. The Apostle comes to show them the danger of the want of this
preparation: viz. That such do not only loose their labor, or the benefit
which otherwise they might receive by the use of this Sacrament, but such do
indeed provoke Gods heavy wrath and displeasure against them, and hereby
hasten and procure their own judgment. Because they discern not the Lords
body. That is, they put no difference between the Bread and Wine thus
consecrated and set apart for such a holy use, and ordinary Bread, and ordinary
Wine.

Now in this 30. verse the words of this text, the Apostle come o^ prove that
which he had se^ down before: viz. that the unworthy receiver of the Lord
Supper, draws down God^ heavy wrath and vengeance by this means upon him,
and this he does by bringing in the Church and people of God in Corinth, to
witness this truth who for this very sin of unworthy receiving of this
Sacrament, were many of them stricken, some with one disease, and some with
another: saying For this cause many are sick and weak etc.

q.d. You your selves oh Corinthians find this to be true, that the unworthy
receiver of this Sacrament eats and drinks his own judgment. Seeing that
for this sin of yours, the judgment of God is upon you, in punishing many of
you with faintness, sickness, yea and with death also. All which judgments
of God now resting upon you, are so many witnesses of Gods displeasure against
you for this sin. This is the some of this verse.

It is the ministers duty to make particular application of their Doctrines.
Teaching

That it is the duty of every faithful minister of Jesus Christ, to make
particular applications of those Doctrines the which they deliver: not to sooth
the people in their sins, but plainly to set them before them, and to show
them the judgments of God that are upon them for the same. And thus does Nathan
make a particular application of the parable of the sheep, saying to David, 2.
Sam 12.7 I. Reg. 21. Exo. 9.13 Act. 14.25. Mar. 6.18. Ioh. 4.9
Thou art the man. Thus does Elias reprove Ahab: Moses, Pharao Paul, Felix:
and John Baptist, Herod, etc. yea, thus does Christ him self deal with the
woman of Samaria, who did but dally with Christ, until he came to lay to her
charge her particular sin, that she was a wicked woman, no better then a whore
or harlot; and then she was tamed, and began to listen unto Christ's doctrine.
And there is great reason that the Ministers of God should deal thus truly
and faithfully with men's souls: For

Eze. 33.
and faithfully with the souls of men, to lay open their sins, and to acquaint
them with the judgment to com. And heere-hence it is, that the Lord does give
unto his servants in the Ministry, such names and titles, which serve to put
them in mind of their duty herein: Eze. 3.1. Eze. 34.1. 1. Sam. 9.9. 2. Pet.
1.^3.
as Watchmen, Shepherds, Seers, Remembrancers, etc.



Now then, inasmuch as this is it whereunto all the labors of Gods servants
in the Ministry, does tend to bring men to see their sins, and to repent
for the same; this can they not more better effect, then by the particular
application of their Doctrins, bringing down the same, and applying it unto
the consciences of the hearers.

for reprofe.
And surely this does serve to show, why so many that labor in the Lords
vineyard amongst us are so unprofitable, and do so little good in their
Ministry; the reason is plain, they deliver general Doctrines, without
their Uses; they make not a true and particular application of the same unto
the Consciences o^ their hearers, and so it wants the life of all Application,
and falls to the ground. Men having no^ their portion out of the same divided
amongst them.

for instruction to Ministers.
this may serve to admonish all Ministers of the Word, that as they desire to
see some fruit of their labor, the conversion of their hearers, and those the
Lord has committed unto their charge: So to behold Paul's practice here, to
deal faithfully with men's souls, to rip up men's consciences to smite home, to
press them with their sins, and to say with Nathan, Thou art the man. For
indeed, such is the deceiptfulnesse of man's nature, that unless men be
plainly and faithfully dealt withal, we may see, that self-love will make
men put off the most wholesome instructions unto others, as if they did no whit
concern themselves. This is a good lesson for such, and such a man, I would
they had heard it: Whereas indeed, it concerns none more then themselves.
Paul preuents this amongst this people of Corinth, and tells them, That many
amongst them were weak, etc. Oh that this duty were duly regarded of all in the
ministry, it could not be but we should then find the fruit of the same: much
peace in our own souls, in the conscionable discharge of our duty therein, and
the good of many a poor soul that is under us.

For instruction to hearers.
Thirdly, and lastly, if this be the duty of Gods Ministers, to make particular
application of his doctrines, and to press the same up on ye consciences of
his hearers: You that are our hearers, must be thus content to be dealt
withal, and not to storm against the Minister, nor to kick against the word.
For this know, that if the word of God be not as an edged sword, to cut ye
throat of thy sins, it is a sign the Lord has cast thee off from his care, and
intends to glorify himself in thy destruction. And therefore, as you tender
the salvation of your own souls, suffer the Lords Chyrurgians to make
incision into your souls, by the sharp razour of the Law, who best know what
will be the danger of a festred soul with Sin, and must lance the same
before it can be cured: rather say with David: Let the righteous smite me
friendly: Psa. 141.4.
a good sign of an humbled soul, and broken heart.

Many are weak, sick, etc. Here we have three kinds of corrections and
visitations, that almighty mighty God lays upon this people.

1. Many were weak: That is, had upon them some lingering and fainte
diseases, as the Consumption, etc.

2. Some were Sick, and so were vexed with more painful griefs: as Agues,
Fluxes, Fevers, etc.

3. Some were fallen asleep: that is, the Lord had by his own hand taken them
out of the world by death.



boldly say it. But besides, Paul knew that God had threatened thus to plague
his people for this sin, as he threatened by Moses his servant. Deu.
28.21.22.27.28.
And had further in all ages, executed sundry judgments upon his Church and
Children, for such open and common transgressions. And therefore Paul seeing
these judgments upon these Corinthians, and knowing this to be a common sin
amongst them, as Gods Minister, concludes thus: For this cause, etc.

And heerin I see not the contrary, but the servants of God have warrant to
say the like, namely, that when we see a judgment of God upon a place, and
withal, do see some great and common sin to reign amongst them; we may
safely put them in mind of their sins, and tell them that this judgment of
God is upon them for such sins, as are so rife and notorious amongst them.
There was good cause then why Paul should thus charge them.



That sickness, Sickness and diseases are the fruit of sin.
diseases etc. are the fruit of sin, according to that of the Prophet Jeremy:
Man suffers for his sin. Lam. 3.39.
And this does Moses most clearly set down, when he denounces so many
several punishments against the people of Israel, as the Pestilence, Deu.
28.22
Fever, burning Ague, Consumption etc: if they should disobey the the voice of
the Lord their God.

But of this we have spoken more fully in the former Sermon. The reasons are



moreover, Lam. 3.22.
That it is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed. Our sins ever deserving
heavier plagues, and more greuious judgments.

Daniel gave to Nabucadnezzer, Dan. 4.24.
Namely to break of his sins by repentance. And his transgressions, by
having compassion on the poor. And surely this is the best counsel that one
Christian can give to another in affliction, viz. To break of their sins by
unfeigned repentance and turning unto the Lord. This is the way to stop the
breach of Gods wrath, and to move the Lord to revoke his judgments, and
without which we shall but weary our selves in vain, for we must first remove
the cause of Gods judgments, our sins, or else the hand of God cannot be
removed.

Job acknowlegeth all these things to come from God, though it was, the devil
and wicked men that spoiled him. Oh let us in Gods name, Job. 1.21.
learn to be wise herein, to acknowledge that all sickness, and every kind
of disease, is Gods visitation, sent of God to humble us, to make us to know,
and to acknowledge our sin, and to seek unto him for mercy. And surely when
we know that sickness comes from GOD, it will make us not only to seek unto
him for help and deliverance from trouble, but be a good means likewise to
work in us patience, to wait his leisure, when we can persuade our selves
that they come from a loving Father, and sent for the good of our Souls.

And many sleep. Hence I might observe diverse things.

Gods judgments are seasoned with mercy.
who rather then they should come to eat of this Sacrament unworthily, Esaias.
57.2.
and so to provoke him to wrath against them, does first humble them by
sickness, Esa. 54.7.8.
and after takes them away by death. And thus indeed the Lord takes away his
children, when they are at the best, and by death he does prevent many euilles
in them to come. And thus the faithful are taken away from the Evil to come.
Psalm. 103.13.14.15.
And howsoever he may seem for a time to hide his face, yet with an
everlasting mercy he has compassion on his; But I will not stand long on this
point.

must then receive the Sacrament at home in their houses, in their chambers,
and on their beds. I do not speak this as that I hold it in all cases
unlawful so to do, but that the sick desiring it, may have the same
administered unto him, that does hunger and thirst after the same, and is in
some good measure prepared thereunto. But I speak as ye same is commonly so
used, o^ rather indeed abused. For wha^ do such else but cross God to his
face. For whereas ye Lord does by sickness tie up a man or woman, and does as
it were, round them in the ear, and say, thou may not receive at this time
thou art unfit, they say oh, but we will receive, and that at home though the
Lord say nay. And whereas the Lord has shut them out of his house, and keep
them back from his Table, least they should abuse so holy an ordinance, they
notwithstanding are so far from being humbled for their sins, and for their
particular failings therein in this duty, as that if the Lord do not strik with
the stroke of death it self, they will not be kept from abusing the same still.

I speak not this I say, to dishearten any from receiving of this Sacrament,
either at home, or in time of sickness, but to warn men of their superstitious
custom therein, who receive the same superstitiously, and consider not that
the Lords hand is even then upon them, for abusing the same before.

And some are fallen a sleeepe. The death of the godly is but a sleep.
how the Apostle calls here the death of ye godly a Sleep. A point indeed of
singular comfort to the godly, in that the death of their bodies is nothing
else, but a sweet sleep. They die not, but sleep. And so it is said of
David, Solomon, Hezechias. etc. That they Slept with their Fathers. And so in
the New Testament, death is usually termed a Sleep. As when CHRIST came to
Lazarus, Ioh. 11.
he says, Lazarus is not dead, but Sleeps. And of Stephen it is said, Act.
7.
that He fell asleep. And so are the graves of the Saints departed called
Beds, according to that of the Prophet: Esaias 57.2
And they shall rest in their Beds, every one that walks before the Lord in
righteousness.

Now the Reasons of this resemblance are thus conceived:

God, and the bodies of his saints, howsoever they taste of corruption, do not
perish in corruption, but are laid in their graves, as in a bed of Down, Reu.
14.13
that so resting from their labors, and from all pain and grief, they may
rise again at the last day, to eternal life.



Sadduces, that conclude against the Article of our resurrection: But not to
stand on this.

1. These. 4.13.
Brethren, says Paul, I would not have you ignorant, concerning them that
sleep in the Lord, that ye should mourn, as men without hope. Showing, that
this immoderate fear of death, and this excessive mourning of many for the
dead, it springs from ignorance and want of Faith: For, if we believed this,
that they are laid a sleep, and their Souls being in heaven, their bodies
lie in the earth, as in a bed of Down, until the judging day, and then that
they shall rise to glory, why should we mourn so much for them?

For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord. In
this verse, the Apostle shows a reason why the Lord deals so sharply with
his people, and corrects them so sorely for this sin of theirs, their
unworthy receiving of this Sacrament, namely, because they would not see their
sin, be humbled for the same, and condemn themselves as guilty before God, of
unworthy receiving of this Sacrament: And therefore the Lord was constrained to
take the matter into his own hand, and to correct them for the same.

For if we would judge our selves. That is, enter into our own hearts, examine
our own ways, and call our own sins unto account, and condemn our selves
for the same, then should we not in this manner, be judged, and condemned of
the Lord.

Concerning this remedy here prescribed by the holy Ghost, to avoid Gods
judgment, and eternal condemnation. It stands we see, in the practice of this
most needful and Christian duty of men's entering into their hearts and
Souls, to examine and find out their sins, and to judge and condemn themselves
for ye same.

Now that we may perform this duty aright, we must know, Four things necessary
to the judging of a man's self.
there is a fourfold duty to be performed by us: for in judgment there must be
examination, accusation, condemnation, and execution. And these four are
likewise necessary to the judging of a man's self.

First, Examination.
there must be a serious examination of our selves, and of our own estates, how
it fares betwixt God and our souls, which is wrought by the law of God, by
the which as in a glass, we may behold the sundry sins we have committed, as
so many spots and blemishes in our souls, and this examination and trial of
our own hearts and estates is so needful, as that without it, it is impossible
to judge himself, or to repent truly of his sins: For by the conscionable
perfourmance of this duty, coms the knowledge of sin, and of our misery, which
is the first step unto true repentance.

And to this end, in the word of God, the Lord does often call up on men to
consider their ways, and to call their lives to acount, and that so they may
attain unto the sight of their sin, and come to repentance for the same. The
Prophet Jeremy does often call upon this saying: Ier. 3.13
Know thy sins, O Jerusalem. Lam. 3.39.
And again, Wherefore is the living man sorrowful, man suffers for his sin.
Let us search and try our ways and turn unto the Lord. Where he shows that
for want of this judging of our selves, men are punished, and because they will
not enter into a narrow search of their own souls, they do not return unto
the Lord. So David, I considered my own ways, and turned my feet to thy
Testimonies. Ps. 119.5^
And the like speece is used by the Prophet Zephany: Zeph. 2.1.2
Fan your selves, oh my people. Yea common reason does require the same, before
a man can frame himself to enter into a right course, he must thoroughly be
resolved and persuaded within himself, that he has been mistaken in his
former course of life. I might multiply testimonies in this kind, but these
shall suffice, to direct us in this duty, how necessary this strict trial and
examination of our own estates, is to the iudgeing of our selves.

Joel. 2.13.
Only let me add this, that in this our examination we must not only search
after our gross sins, Act. 8.22.
but even after our most secret corruptions. For true repentance extends it
self not only to the gross euiles of men's lives, but even the most secret
corruption of the heart, and of the Soul.

And we must withal consider the Circumstances of our sins, as when, where,
and how, we have committed the same, that so accordingly we may labor for
humiliation for the same. And herein it shall be safe for us to pass thorough
the whole law of God, and take a view of our lives by every particular
commandment, that so we may the better come to see and acknowledge our misery,
and want.

it over, but esteem it as the blessed truth of God, that the sight and
understanding of our own wandering, is the first step unto eternal life and
salvation, and to judge our selves, that so we may in the end escape the
condemnatorie sentence of the Almighty.

case, past hope, Psalm. 50.
and God himself must be faint to take him into his own hand, for sin must be
judged.

And thus much for the first degree of judging of our selves: our examination
of our own estates.

The second particular, 2 Accusation.
wherein this judging of our selves does consist, is Accusation. Or the
preferring of bills of indictment against our selves: and to accuse our selves
before God for our sins. And indeed, if we would not be judged and
condemned of the Lord, we must bring our selves as poor prisoners to ye bar
of Gods judgment seat. And this we do when we set our selves, in the
presence of God, and enter into a narrow reconing with our own Souls, and
consciences, as if now were the day of judgment. To see what our conscience
(which is as a little God and judge in our bosom) would say against us. And
surely the often performance of this duty, Note.
to bring our selves thus into Gods presence, to see what an acnount we can
make unto GOD of our lives past, will be a good means to bring us to this
duty, to judge our selves, that we be not judged of the Lord: and where men do
truly come to the sight of their sins, and unto true repentance for the same,
there will ever follow this Accusation for sin. In true repentance there is
evermore a disposition to lay to a man's own charge as much as is possible. A
penitent sinner needs none other adversary then his own conscience, he
himself is his own foe. And this appears clearly by that of David, I have
sinned exceedingly (says he) and done very foolishly. 2. Sam. 24.10.
And it is the practice of Ezra in that confession of his, he makes in the
behalf of the whole Church: Our iniquities are increased over our heads, Esaias.
9.6.
and our trespasses are grown up to heaven. And that of the Prophet Daniel is
most excellent to this purpose when he says, We have sinned and committed
iniquity and have done wickedly, Dan. 9.5.
and have rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts, and from thy
iudgemens. How does the Prophet there accuse for sin, by the acknowledgment
of the peoples degrees of sins: 1. Tim. 1.13
And if we require some examples, we may behold Paul's practice herein,
confessing himself to be a Blasphemer, an Oppressor etc. Yea the Chief of
sinners. And that of the Prodigal, who confessed that he had sinned against
heaven and against God etc. All which as a cloud of witnesses, Serve to inform
our Judgment, and to settle the same in the truth of this point, that unto
this judging of our selves there must be selfe-accusing* and indeed where
there is true repentance, there is in some

The uses follow.

If this accusing of a man's self be so necessary unto the iudgeing of our
selves, that so we may escape the condemnation of the Lord: what shall we say
to those that study the Art of mincing and extenuating of sin? poor souls,
such never came where repentance gr^we. And yet the world affords thousands of
these, who notwithstanding, think themselves to be in good cause* that can
put upon covetousness, the cloak of frugality and good husbandry: upon
drunkenness, good-fellowship etc, so far are many from accusing themselves for
sin, as that they rather justify themselves in their evil ways.

our sin covered before God, to confess and uncover the same unto him. For he
will justify us if we condemn our selves. He forgets our sins, if we
remember them: and when we are vile in our own eyes, we are most precious in
the Lords, and when we are lost in our selves, we are found of him.

3 Condemnation.
The third degree of this judging of our selves, is Condemnation. And that is a
passing of Sentence against a man's self, acknowledging that if the Lord did
bring upon him swift damnation, he were most just and righteous in his
judgments: Like ye penitent thief upon the Cross: Psalm. 51.4. Psalm. 32.5.
We are justly punished. And this was David's case in diverse places of his
Psalms, saying I said (or determined with my self) I will confess my sin
against my self. And so Job: Job. 4^.6.
I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. And indeed, herein lies a
principal part of this judging of a man's self, when a man comes so to see his
sins, and Gods heavy displeasure for the same, as that he can subscribe unto
Gods justice, even in his own condemnation: acknowledging that God is just,
and that he himself deserves far more greater judgment: And never comes a man
to be truly humbled for sin in himself, till he be brought to this pass,
to judge and condemn himself.

And unto the three former degrees of judging a man's self, 4 Execution
there may be added a fourth, and that is Execution, 2. Cor. 7 11.
and holy Revenge. And this is when we beat down our bodies, and mortify our
members, denying them that sway and swinge in the ways of vanity: And the
undertaking of good duties, that the like occasions may be prevented for the
time to come.

By all which we see that this judging of our selves is no small matter, nor
easy thing, which should make us so much the more careful to perform the same
aright. And thus we have seen what the judging of our selves is, a duty how
necessary, appears in the last clause of this verse.

We should not be judged. In which words, the Apostle means that we should
not be condemned and punished of the Lord, and heerin giving us to understand:

The only way to turn away the Lords wrath is to judge our selves. Pro. 28.
to judge our selves, as has been declared, and might further be manifested by
many testimonies, as that of Solomon: He that hides his sins shall not
prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes them, shall find mercy. And how
often does the Lord by his Prophets tell the people, that if they would turn
from evil ways, that he would Repent him, Ier. 26, 3.13. Psalm. 78.34.
etc. and turn from his fierce wrath he had conceived against them: evident
testimonies to clear this truth.

And for this cause, did the Lord call upon his Prophets, to meet the Lord
before the Decree came forth, and the Lords wrath was kindled against his
people. To kiss the Son, least he were angry: Jonah 3.9 Psalm. 2.1. Esaias 55.6
And to seek the Lord, whilst he may be found, etc. And indeed, the
Scriptures afford us diverse examples, of such as by judging themselves, have
turned away the Lords judgment, not only the godly, but even among the wicked
themselves, Exo. 9.
as Pharao Ahab, etc. And not only of men, but the same has been proved true
of whole Cities, and Countries: as Nineveh, and of the people of Israel, and
the like.

and have themselves felt his heavy hand.

And therefore in Gods name, as we desire to escape the judgment of God, let
us make conscience of this remedy, to enter into our own hearts, call our
own ways to account, that so iudgeing our selves, we may not be judged of
the Lord.

ver. 32. But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we
should not be condemned with the world.

In this verse, the Apostle makes plain his meaning, and sets down the
principal end why God corrects his children, viz. That they should not be
condemned with the world.

Which the Apostle does to this end, to answer a doubt that might arise and
trouble the conscience of Gods Children, to whom this comfort does appertain.
And that is this:



or like a rigorous Judge, in fury take vengeance upon them: But rather, as a
Father, did chastise them, and that to this end, that hereby, they might be
brought to repentance, and so delivered from condemnation with the world.

We are chastened of the Lord, that we might not be condemned with the World.
Out of these words we may gather three conclusions.

First, that the wicked world, Three conclusions from the text.
or the world of wicked men, shall assuredly be condemned.

Secondly, that the godly shall not be condemned, but certainly saved: and

Thirdly, that one principal means that God does use to free his children from
condemnation is correction.

world, that is the wicked men of the world, who are so called because of their
multitud, The wicked shall certainly be condemned
shall more assuredly be condemned. And the Lord will take vengeance upon them at
last. There is nothing of more certainty then the severity of Gods justice
upon ^ose, who are no way provoked by the abundance and riches of his mercy to
repent. Genesis 18.
And hence is it that the Lord in the Scriptures is called a Judge, Psalm. 50.6.
and a righteous Judge, to show that the Lord in time will take vengeance upon
the wicked. 2. Tim. 4.8.
Job. 21.20.
And Job speaking of the wicked says, His eyes shall see destruction. Pro.
17.15.
And Solomon says that He that justifies the wicked: and he which condemns
the just, are both an abomination to the Lord. And by the Prophet Esaias, Esaias.
5.23.
the Lord denounces a heavy woe against those which justify the wicked. Now
if the Lord do hate it in others, to acquit the inocent and to condemn the
just; we may be well assured, it will be far from the judge of all the world
to do unjustly. For he is not respecter of men's persons. Act. 10.
But will in the end most certainly execute judgment and vengeance upon the
wicked.

And if we would look upon some particular examples, the Scriptures afford us
diverse, as evident testimonies of the severity of Gods judgment upon the
wicked. He spared not the Angels (says Peter) which kept not their first
estate. 2. Pet. 2.4.
Jude. 6.


He suffered the old world long, but at the last he cleared his justice, and
brought a Flood of destruction upon the wicked; and so at last he remembered
the sins of the Sodomites. And answered the cry of them with fire and Brimstone
from heaven. What though Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, and Iesabel, flourish for a time,
it will be but for a time, their Damnation does not sleep, nay more to show
the certainty of the condemnation of all wicked and ungodly men, John. 3.18.
our Savior says, that the wicked are condemned already.

First, in the justice of God who will punish the transgressors of the law:
Gal. 3.10
Cursed is every one that abides not in all things, etc.

Secondly, in the court of a wicked man's conscience, wherein God does begin to
execute the sentence of condemnation upon them, giving them either a guilty
and an accusing conscience, as it were ye flashes of hell in this life; or else
hardness of heart, and blindness of mind, which judgment of God is no way
inferior to the former.

And thirdly, in Gods decree and Gods accoumpt, they are condemned already:
that is, are as sure and certain of condemnation. As if they were already
plunged into it.

every man shall receive according to his works. 1. Cor. 5.10
Against all those blasphemies of the wicked, who say, where is the promise of
his coming, for since the beginning, all things continue alike. And thus the
wicked that contemn religion, scoff at al piety and godliness, make but a
scoff of the judgment day, either that it shall not come at all, or that the
Lord will justify the wicked and the sinner in that day. Oh how has Satan
blinded the minds of such. I ask such why that day is called the day of the
Lord. 2. Pet. 3.10.
And the terrible day of the Lord shall come as a thief etc. Luke 19.42.
Romans 2.5.
And yt it is called the day of the Declaration of the just judgment of God.
1. These. 1.5.8.
But that the Lord will be exalted in judgment in that day. When he will
revenge himself upon his enemies, and upon all impenitent sinners.

sure and certain to be condemned (without repentance) as if they were plunged
in hell already. What though a traitor that is condemned, have the liberty of
the Tower or Castle wherein he lies, and may follow his sports and pleasures
there? poor soul, what joy can he have, to think that even in the midst of
them all, the King may ^all him to the block. Even so what though the wicked
abound ^n pleasure? Job. 21.9.
what though their ^^uses are peaceable and without ^eare, and the rod of God
be not vp^n them. Shall we say their estate ^ happy? Eccle. 8.11.
when their sin lies ^t the door. As God told Cain. And their condemnation
does ^ttend upon them? Oh but ye day ^f judgment is not come yet; Genesis 4.7.
^t is true because judgment; deferred, therefore the wicked wax bold. But
know, Oh know; thou that live in thy sin, and put in this manner from
thee the evil day, that the sentence then to be ratified is already
pronounced, and that which is then to be executed is already begun, thou art
now as it were upon ye hurdle, draging along to the place of execution, the
rop^ is as it were about thy neck, and nothing is wanting but the turning off
the ladder. Oh conside^ this ye that forget God, Psalm. 50.
least I ta^^ you in pieces, and there be none to d^liuer.

peace with him, and that a Lord have mercy upon me, will serve the turn,
though it be but at the very hour of death. But know, O thou vain man, that
strengthenest thy self in thy sinful course, under this hope, that the LORD
will show thee mercy at the last: That thou may so far abuse his mercy,
goodness, and grace, which should have led thee to repentance, as there will
be no place of repentance left for thee, though with Esau, thou seek the
same at Gods hands with tears. Else, Heb. 12.17
what means that, Prou. 1.24 25.26.
where the Lord says: Because I have called, and ye refused: I have stretched
out my hand, and none would regard: But ye have despised my council, and
would none of my correction. I will also laugh at your destruction, and mock
when your fear comes. But to show that the Lord will not regard the cries,
and moanes that the wicked shall make at the last, that have hardened their
own hearts against his gracious call, and turned away their ears, when he
spoke unto them in his word.

Note.
and in the midst of all their pleasures, and height of all their pomp and
glory, they are but cursed and condemned creatures. And now for a short time,
and a little season, what though the World admire them, and they have many to
stoop unto them with cap and knee: God has already condemned them, Psalm.
15.4.6
and they are despised in the eyes of all good men.

And thus much for the first conclusion.

That we should not be condemned with the world. Observe hence in the second
place, what is Gods immutable counsel and decree touching the godly, he will
that they shall not be condemned, and to this end, does many times correct
them in this world, that so they may not be condemned with the World. So
that, our second Conclusion will be

The godly shall not be condemned but most certainly saved.
but certainly saved. For, Who has resisted his will? If the Lord will have
the Elect to be saved: And amongst other the means he has ordained and
sanctified to the same purpose, he has appointed correction to be one in
this world, to make his servants escape the condemnation of the wicked in the
World to come. The Lord ever effects what is the purpose of his own will.
The gifts and calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11.29 Ioh. 13.1.
whom he loves, he loves to the end. His love is perpetual, and therefore
says: Esaias 44.8
With an everlasting love had I compassion on thee says the Lord thy redeemer.
And indeed, this is a most certain rule, that where God begins the good
work of grace, there is no opposition whatsoever, that can be made by the
Devil, the World, or our own Corruptions, shall ever be able to hinder the
same. And therefore says Paul: I am persuaded, Phil. 1.6
that he that has begun this good work in you, will finish the same, until
the day of Jesus Christ. And it is made the very final cause, why God sent his
Son into the World, even this: That all that believe in him, should not
perish, Ioh. 3.16
but have life everlasting. And unto all that I have said, add these
Testimonies: I know my Sheep, Ioh. 10.27 28.
I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish: Neither shall any
pluck them out of my hand. Romans 8.1.
And there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. 2. Tim. 2.19.
And that the foundation of the Lord remains for ever sure. Surely there is
no point of Doctrine more often urged, or clearly proved in the Scripture, then
this, to show the certainety of the salvation of all the elect, that their life
is hid with Christ in God. Col. 3.3
And that such shall never perish: And hence it is, that Christ is called the
Author, Heb. 12.2
and finisher of our faith to comfort and stay the poor sheep of Christ with
this, that if the Lord have in any measure begun in them the true work of
grace, as he is the author of it; For every good gift, and every perfect gift
coms from him that is the Father of light, James 1.6
and God of all consolation. So he will never cease, until he have brought the
same unto perfection

And the reasons hereof are

His gifts are without repentance, Romans 11.29
his foundation stands sure. And we are kept by his power unto salvation. 2.
Tim. 2.19


1. Ioh. 1.
And that being given as a ransom for many, what a fearful imputation
should we cast upon it, if the same should not be available unto the elect
to Salvation.

of the Son of God, for the sins of all the elect, and to make the same of no
validity, if the elect redeemed by Christ, should finally fall away, and
perish everlastingly. But not to stand upon these Reasons.

The uses are,

bondage, and servile fear, that the Wicked live under; We might learn to
serve the LORD in Righteousness and Holiness yea with much joy, and comfort,
Luke. 2.
all the days of our life.

Herein we are like unto little children, yt look after babies in a book,
and regard not the matter. Oh why should we be so foolish, to seek those
things which cannot continue, and let go those things as are both perpetual
and eternal. Do we affect perpetuities, do we desire a glorious, a
comfortable, an honorable and withal an unchangeable estate. Behold here is
an excellent estate indeed. Eternal Salvation, an Eternal inheritance. An
Eternal wait of glory. A Lease not of one and twenty years, but for term
of such a life as shall never see death. Why then seek we not after it, and
get good evidences of the same, that so at last, Salvation may be our portion.

And thus much breefely for the second conclusion.

We are chastised of the Lord: that we might not be condemned with the world.
The Apostle herein labors to prove, that these judgments of Almighty God
(unto them yt can make a right use of them) are but Fatherly chastisements and
instructions, to keep his children from the condemnation of the world. We are
chastised of the Lord etc. q. d. You are even in the midst of your trials,
troubles and afflictions, to behold Gods mercy toward you, who does thus
correct you, not out of any hatred he bears to any of you: but even as a
loving and dear Father corrects his own child, to prevent more dangerous
courses, which might bring him to shame in the end. So God does exercise you
with these temporal chastisements, that thereby he might keep and restrain
you from falling into such sins, as might bring you to Damnation with the
rest of the world: the Doctrine then is,

One principal means that God does use to free his children from condemnation
is correction.
That one principal means that God does use to free his Children from
condemnation, is correction. For whereas by nature they are corrupt as well as
the wicked: God uses this correction as a sovereign Medicine to Purge out
their corruption, and so to cleanse them from their sin, to bring them to
repentance, and to Salvation. This is intended by Christ when he says, Every
branch that bears not fruit in me, he takes away, John. 15.2
and every one that bears fruit, he purges: That it may bring forth more
fruit. And most agreeable unto this, is that of the Prophet David, Psa. 94.12.
Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest O Lord, and teach him in thy Law.
That thou may give him rest from the days of evil, whilst the pit is
dug for the wicked. Whereby we learn what an excellent fruit comes to
Gods children by correction, even no less then such as accompany eternal
life and Salvation. Which comes to pass, not simply thorough afflictions:
For then should the wicked have the same fruit of them, inasmuch as All things
happen alike to all. Eccle. 9.
But only thorough the great mercy of GOD, who Sanctifies the same unto his
children, and unto the wicked. The Scriptures are full of proofs for the
confirmation of this Doctrine. Excellent to this purpose is that of the Prophet
Hoseah, I will be to Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion to the house of
Judah. Hos. 5.14.15.
I, even I will tear and go away etc. Till they acknowledge their offense and
seek my face. And this is acknowledged by the prophet David, who could speak
herein by experience Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I
learned thy commandments. Psa. 119.71
And Paul concludes thus, 2. Cor. 4.17
For our light affliction, which is but for a moment: causes unto us a far
more excellent and eternal wait of Glory. And great reason, that the
afflictions of Gods Servants should work this work, in them.



For no affliction is for the time present, joyous but grievous, yet they are
by Gods blessing upon them, excellent means to work in us contrition, and
true humiliation for our sins. The ready way to conversion. And this appears
by the incestuous person upon whom Paul required to be laid that fearful
penalty of Excommunication, that he should be delivered over to Satan: 2.
Cor. 5.5.
And excluded out of the Church until he repented. It appears that he was
awakened thereby, and so brought to Godly sorrow for his sin.

The uses follow.

of affliction: But rather with all meekness submit our selves unto our most
wise GOD, who ever corrects for our good. And chasteneth us for our profit,
Heb. 12.10
that we might be partakers of his holiness. How many notwithstanding are
there that make many hard conclusions against themselves in time of affliction.
As if God had forsaken them, and they clean cast out of his favor. But Oh
consider wherefore does the Lord lay thee upon thy sick bed, afflict thee in
thy Wife, Children, Goods etc: Surely for no other end, then to bring thee
unto himself. What cause then has any to murmur or complain in time of
affliction.

of God, that can and does so overrule the nature of all things, that they
shall serve for much good unto his children, according to that of the Apostle
All things work for the best to them that love God, Romans 8.
As the skillfull Apothecary, of poison, makes Triakle to expel poison, so can
God make the poison of afflictions, (which in themselves are the curse of the
Law) to drive out the poison of sin, as we may clearly see in the examples
of Manasses, 2. Cro. 33.11. Ier. 31.18. Act. 16. Luke. 15.
Ephraim, the Iaylor, Prodigal etc: The afflictions of whose outward man: were
by Gods blessings upon them, good means to save both the outward and inward
man.

Yet even herein we must observe a difference betwixt the godly, and the
wicked, to the one, they are helps to heaven, to the other forerunners of
greater torments, as in the deluge the waters that bore up the Arc for the
saving of Noah, drowned the wicked of those times. And this we may often see
under the Cross, the godly to pray, the wicked to blaspheme, the dross
consumes, while the gold is purified, So much mattereth it not, what is
suffered, but what the persons be that suffer.

And thus much for our helps and direction, how to receive the Sacrament, and
that worthily.

To God only wise, be praise for ever, Amen. FINIS.

