THE BOOK OF THE HOLY SOCIETYE COMMONLY CALLED OF TWELVE Containing the
Lytanies, and Prayers, which are to be said by those who are of that
Societye. To obtain of God the grace to dye well. Lately translated out of the
French language for the benefit of English Catholics by N. N. a Catholic
gentleman.

Orate pro (...)

Printed at Douay BY LAURENCE KELL^^^ (...).

Saluos nos fac Domine Deus noster,

Et congrega nos ^^nationibus:

Vt confite amur nomini sancto tuo,

Et gloriemur in lau^de tua.

Psalm. 105. THE TRANSLATOR TO THE DEVOVT READERS.
AS it is most certain, that we shall all of us die once; so is it no ^esse
certain that after our death we shall receive a doom of an irreuocable
sentence of at^ernall life, or aeternall death, accordingly a^ we shall be
found worthy or unworthy at tha^ hour: And therefore i^ concerns us very near^
so to provide our selves whilst time permits that at the last hour we may
be found in such case, as is most befitting for that end, which w^ all aim
at^, which is happy life without end. This considerati^^ has from my very
childhood taken such deep impression in my heart, that although to satisfye my
curiositye, I have travailed over the greatest part of Europe, yet in my
travails I had always this end set before mine eyes, to observe where ever I
might ^earne, what course was best to be undertaken for a man to secure
himself (as far as the instabilitie of this mutable world will permit) of a
good and happy end. I saw from the beginning there was no better securitye could
be had in this world of dying well, then to live well: And for this reason
considering that saying of S. Bernard. In Religione homo viuit purius etc. In
Religion a man lives more purely, falls more rarely, rises more speedily,
walks more warily, receyveth the dew of gods grace more frequently, repofeth
more securely, dies more confidently, is purged from his sins more quickly,
and rewarded with glory more abundantly; For this reason, I say, I could have
been well content to have embraced a religious course of life; but I either
found indeed the constitution of my body too weak, or at least the
cowardelinesse of my mind made me flatter my self with that co^ceipt, which
diuerted my thoughts from so high an entreprise. At the length coming
homeward thorough France, by the providence of God, and the care of my good
Angel, as I presume, I met with a friend who bestowed on me one of these
little books, set forth in the French language; which, after I had well
perused, and pondered, gave me such content, and joy by cause it suited so well
with my wishes, and presented me so plain, and easy a way to what I
principally aimed at, that I procured my self to be admitted into the holy
Association or Confraternitye, which is herein discribed. Afterward coming
into England and there discovering my treasure gotten in France, I was
follicited by some of my friends, whose requests were commands unto me, to
translate the said book into owre language. I did so: and it began by little
and little to grow into that general liking of so many, that it seemed too to
laborious to transscribe so many copyes. For which reason I gave my consent it
should be printed, that so satisfaction might be given to all. And lo here the
book: which if it redound to the spiritual benefitt of your sowles, I beseech
you let me have some part of your prayers; and that is all the recompense I
desire of you, either for my labor, or good will.

Your fellow partener in your afflictions for gods cause. N. N. a Catholic
gentleman.

The authors instruction to the Reader that is, or desires to be of this
societye.
NOE truth is more approved the^ that which does both teach and assure us that
every living man must once die, to live again there in heaven with the S^^ and
blessed Souls, or in hell with the damned and wretched ghosts, since this is
the last sentence from which there is noe appeal; never to be reuewed again,
pronounced by the mouth of god our souueraigne judge. And truth it self by the
apostle in these terms; It is decreed that all me^ must once dye and after
that comes judgment. For which cause the most important and serious buisines
that a Christian man can have in this world is to learn to dye well: For this
is the Science of Sciences. And thereto ought we to apply that sayeing in the
ghos^ell so much praised by our savior to S. Mary Magdalene. But one thing
only is necessary. Whereupon S. John does esteem, and call those only
blessed amongst mortal men who dye in our lord: that is to say in his grace;
Blessed are the dead who, dye in our Lord.

Now since it is so that either from a good, or evil death, the eternal and
chief felicity is derived, or else everlasting and dreadful misery, if there be
any thing, dear reader, which thou oughst to have in singular reco^mendation
whilst thou do reside in this valley of tears, it is to search and know the
means which thou must use and practice to render the passage out of this
mortal life, as much as in thee lies, most easy and assured. And to this end
I have been willing to lay down for thee, at the end of these prayers, some
wholesome lessons for thy instruction, how thou oughst to behave thy self both
in sickness and in health, to the end thou may more happily finish thy days
and life. Of which lessons the principal, and most assured (next to a good
life) is to have recourse as you shall hear hereafter in fit place to the
perfectio^s, and merits of the Saints, and above all of the most holy, and ever
glorious mother of god. In which I shall declare unto thee (beloved reader)
certain devout and religious persons being well instructed, cast themselves one
day, being inspired from god, upon that consideration that our good mother the
church does call the blessed virgin, mother of God; the Gate of heaven, and
door of paradise: and that she does daily sing unto her; Marye mother of
grace, mother of mercy, defend ^s from our adversary and receive us at the
hour of death. But this was performed with so serious attentio^, and so much
feruor of devotion; that from that time they resolved to address themselves
always with reverence to her, and to implore her aid and special assistance
that they might more duly dispose themselves for that difficult, and dangerous
passage of death.

For these considerations they did agree together to say every day the
Lytanyes of our Lady of Loretto to the honor and glory of her name, one for
another; as also the prayers of the most glorious Patriarchs S. Joseph, S.
Augustin^, S. Barbara, to whom they particarly devoted themselves that by they
intercession they might be assisted in these their endeavors.

And forasmuch as noe man can fully possess that high vetrue of Charity
without having a particular care of the welfare and safty of his neighbor; to
provide also that their small number in times to come might increase in this
devotion, and to augment the effectual merit of their prayers by a laudable
and holy multiplication, they did advise amongst themselves and determine, that
each one of them should associate to their company twelve devout persons, and
that those twelve if they would, when the occasion should be offered might
likewise each one of them associate other twelve, and they also every one of
them twelve others, and so consequently from one to another all those, who
should from time to time be added by any one, that had been formerly admitted,
should have the same power, which those had who did admit the^. And hence it
does proceed, devout reader, that this Company is very fitly named at this
time the holy society of twelve, Whereunto since that time so many are united
in France, Italy, Germany Spain; yea even as far as the Indyes, that they
are accounted at this present of either sex, men and women, more then three,
or four hundred thousand of the societye, But whereas almost infinite persons
men and women cannot (not being able to read) say the foresaid litanies it
has been thought by some of the principal most zealous, and affectionate to
the said holy association, that in stead of them those that are admitted, which
cannot read, say their ^eads; and for the psalm De profundis, which those
who are more learned ought to say for such sou^es as are departed of the said
holy Company, shall say 3. Pater Noster, and 3. Aue Maria.

Now to the end that those, who are admitted, may not err in the number of
those, who they are to admit into the said holy association; (...) were good,
as soon as they shall be receive to register and write the down in some sma^^
book; or else, which we^^ better, and wherein ther^ is more merit, every on^ of
them shall prouid twelve of these little books to give them gratis to each one
of thos^ whom they shall admitt^ so shall he know by the finishing and
distribution of his books that the number of those whom he may admit is
complete and ended.

Another means more certain and suitable to the condition of secular persons,
especially woeme^, is, to entreat him that shall admit them, if he be a
priest, or religious man, to accept and take the charge upon him to associate
for them such persons as he shall judge in points of religion to be most capable
giving him the twelve books, which they have prepared for that purpose; nor
ought those priests or religious men refuse this commission, and act of
charity; but rather ought to seek and dema^d it. Yea they ought not to admit
but very few, or scarce any secular men at all, especially women; without this
condition, to wit that they shall not receive any one without the knowledge of
their Co^fessor; considering that great profit will redound from thence to the
holy associatio^, which otherwise by degrees might be filled with a great
number of libertins, and debaushed persons without devotion, which in the end
would bring dishoner to the societye. By which means the sayeing of the
prophet Esaias should be verifyed; Thou have multiplied the nation, but have not
increased their joy.

Moreover this holy and flourishing Company, with those prayers which are
exercised therein has been received, and allowed by many grave and renowned
persons, afwell of the chief of the clergy as of the seculars. By famous and
learned preachers and by good, and holy religious men, who have been admitted
from diverse orders both austere and reformed. By whom all Christendom,
perceiving the fruit and proffit which must needs arise to the church of god
from this laudable and holy society, does labor to have it approved,
authorized, and enriched by the holy apostolic seat with the treasures of the
said church obtaining for it plenary indulgences in form of a Jubilee, which
those of the company shall gain twice in their life, that is to say, then
when they shall enter into the said holy Society, and at the article of death,
and other plenary indulge^ces likewise, with the delivery of a soul from
purgatory, to be applied by manner of suffrage to such souls, as are departed
in the said holy societye, which they may gain as well upon all the feasts of
our blessed Lady, as of the foresaid blessed S. Joseph, S. Francis, S.
Augustine, and S. Barbara, with this condition, that those who are of the
society do confess themselves to allowed Co^fessors, and communicate upon the
said feasts.

And that they may be made pertakers of so many good prayers, which are
continually offered up by so devout souls, and in so many parts of the
Christian world, it is requisite before they enter into this holy societye to
have afirmed to live and die therein and withal to observe as they shall be
able, all that which shall be here. after set down although there be noe
obligation or tie of conscience, other then that which every Christian has to
live well, and serve god, and to love their neighbor.

WHAT IS TO BE DONE BY THOSE WHO DESIRE TO BE ADMITTED INTO THIS SOCIETYE?
FIrst of all he that will enter into the said holy Company must cause himself
to be received and admitted by one who has been formerly received, who shall
make his reception so much more grateful and meritorious before god, as he
himself shall be more recommendable in devotion, holiness of life, and
profession; which point is so important, and of that consideration, that those
who demand to be admitted, ought to use all means possible, that it may be
done by some religious, or secular churchman, who has the reputation to be a
man of good life, or by some such other who as much as humayne frailty will
admit, is irreprehensible in his life and conversation.

Secondly he must every day without fail say the letanyes, which are set
down in their place: the Antheme; Sub tuum praesidium: the prayers and other
usual devotions that do follow, and the psalm De profundis: and such as
cannot read, their beads with 3. Pater noster, and 3. Aue Maria; as has been
formerly mentioned.

Thirdly; He must say the said letanyes with the prayers for all those of the
society, as every one of them do say them for him; and he must bear them in
memory as much as he ca^, and cheefely him, by who^ he was admitted, in all the
rest of his prayers and orasons; if he be a priest, in all his masses; if a
religious man, or woeman, in all their meditations, disciplines, fastings,
watchings, and such like exercises of mortification; and that he love them,
honor, and assist them as well corporally, as spiritually, according to his
power, and the need that they shall have.

Fourthly; He must say the foresaid prayers to obtain of god, by the
intercession and favor of our blessed Lady, and of the foresaid Saints, the
grace to dye well, and that with as much devotion and attention as possibly he
can, indeuoring with all his power, by his good life, to make himself
meritorious of that grace: For as saynct Augustine says he can hardly dye ill,
who has lived well, and he ca^ scarcly dye well, who has lived ill. And it
is, as a secret judgment of god, noted by the same S. Augustine in his sermon of
innoce^ts: It is just o Lord that he who whilst he lived was forget full of
thee, at his death should forget himself: that is, his own salvation, the
sacraments, restitution etc? and dye like a beast.

To conclude those of the company are exhorted, and entreated in our lord Jesus
Christ to bear in memory and carefully to practice these five points which
follow.

The first that as soon as they can they should free themselves from mortal
finnes, if either they do believe, or doubt that they are touched with any;
flying by all means possible those occasions which they know do cause so
great a miserye; and that where they are able to hinder it, they do not suffer
that any offend god in their presence, or in any other place where they have
power to hinder.

The second point that they both confesle and communicate if they can, beside
those days which are appointed therefore, as we have showed, every month.

The 3. that they hear every day mass, if they can do it without prejudice
to that whereunto they are obliged; and that they pray for the catholic
church, and for our holy father the pope, for the king and state, and for the
kings assue; for the peace and unity of Christian princes, for the extirpation
of heresies, for those that are in mortal sin, for such as are afflicted and
in temptation, for those that are in the agonye of death, and for their enimyes.

The 4. that they endeavor to discharg themselves faithfullye, and with
conscience of such duties, and obligations as belong to their charge, and
vocation whereto they are called.

The 5. that every night they make, as they are able, an examination of their
conscience, and either say before or after it, the prayer which is used to
obtain a true contrition for their sins, which does begin: My lord Jesus;
with the next following prayer to our blessed lady; which examination may be
reduced for such as either know not how, or cannot imploye themselves longer
therein to two points. The one to give god thanks for all the graces, and
benefits, which we have recieued at his hands, chiefly that he has that day
preserved us from mortal sin, and sudden death, and infinite dangers as well
spiritual as corporal, which have that very day fallen upon so many others
better, and more conformable to the divine goodness then we. The other is to
fifth and search out into what, and how many offenses we have fallen, or
pexmitted or caused others to fall; then to demand pardon for them, and to
propose unto our selves to confess, and amend them.

OF THE GREAT BLESSINGS WHICH THOSE WHO ARE OF THIS HOLY SOC^ETYE DO RECIEVE.
IF thou be in sinful estate of life, those who are of the company through out
the whole world by their prayers and merits dispose thee, to leave such manner
of life, to acknowledge thy sin, and that thou may not dye in it.

2. If thou be in state of grace, they pray to god to conserve thee therein,
and to augment and confirm it unto thee.

3. Thou do participate of the infinite good works of so many good
Christians as are admitted to this societye.

4. They help thee by their prayers to obtain the excellent gift of final
perseverance, and other virtues, which are necessary, as charity, patience,
chastitye, devotion etc.

5. They aid thee also to obtain of god that he would vouchsafe to keep thee
from suddayne, or at least from unprovided death: And from falling into mortal
sin: and in case thou do committ any, that he would so powerfully in spire
thee with his grace that thou may presently rise from it again. And also
that he would assist thee against thy enimyes at the hour of thy death.

6. The sacred virgin mother of this holy company, and the glorious patrons
thereof, Saint Joseph; S. Francis; S. Augustine; and S. Barbara, whom thou have
so often called upon for these ends, and so many thousands as are of this
societye which daily pray for thee, will assist thee particularly in this
dangerous passage.

7. By these means thou shall receive great consolation, and shall be freed
from great apprehensions, which perplex many.

8. After thy death if thou have any guilt to be purged, they will assist thee
that thou may be speedily delivered from that clensing and correcting fire,
as S. Augustine calls it upon the sixth psalm.

9. In a word thou shall recieue a thousand other blessings, which are all
comprised and far more in the communion of Saints; and in that which S. James
says: The daily prayer of the just man is of great force. Then consider, dear
brother, if the prayer of one just man be of so great value, how much more
meritorious and auayleable will the continual prayers of five or six hundred
thousand servants of god be; who do daily increase, and apply themselves to
this exercise of prayer through the whole world, according to the rule and
order of this holy company, to solicit thy requests and affairs with god; and
that especially which is the most principal of them all, to make a happy end,
and to dye in the faith of the church, with the benefit of the sacraments, and
in the grace of god. Yea even then when thou do walk, sleep, eat, and
peradventure offend god, a great number of people fall down upon their knees,
and lift up their hands to heaven, beseeching god to preserve thee from
mortal sin, and from a sinful death, and his anger, and fearful judgment.
Therefore, devout reader, procure this blessing for thy soul whilst thou have
time, and despise not this fair occasion which is so easy for thee, and
without any obligation at all. Think with thy self seriously what thou will
wish that thou had done for thy self, when thou shall be laid upon thy bed
waiting for the last stroke of death; and pray to god that he will give thee
grace to find that in thy self at that hour, and then let him dispose of
thee according to his holy will for the rest.

THE LETANYES OF OUR LADY OF LORETTO WHICH THOSE OF THE COMPANY DO DAILYE
SAY.
KYrie eleison, Christ eleison, Kyrie eleison, Christ audi nos, Christ
exaudi nos. Pater de coelis Deus, miserere nobis. Fili redemptor mundi Deus,
miserere nobis. Spiritus sancte Deus, miserere nobis. Sancta Trinitas vnus
Deus, miserere nobis. Sancta Maria, ora pro nobis. Sancta Dei genitrix, ora. S.
Virgo Virginum, ora. Matter Christi, ora. Matter diuinc gratiae, ora. Matter
purissima, ora. Matter castissima, ora. Matter inuiolata, ora. Matter intemerata,
ora. Matter amabilis, ora. Matter admirabilis, ora. Matter Creatoris, ora. Matter
Saluatoris, ora. Virgo prude^tissima, ora. Virgo veneranda, ora. Virgo
praedicanda, ora. Virgo potens, ora. Virgo clemens, ora. Virgo fidelis, ora.
Speculum iustitiae, ora. Seeds sapientiae, ora. Causa nostrae laetitiae, ora.
Vas spirituale, ora. Vas honorabile, ora. Vas insigne deuotionis, ora. Rosa
mystica, ora. Turris Dauidica, ora. Turris eburnea, ora. Domus aurea, ora.
Foederis arca, ora. Ianua Coeli, ora. Stella matutina, ora. Salus infirmorum,
ora. Refugium peccatoru^, ora. Consolatio afflictoru^, ora. Regina angelorum,
ora. Regina patriarcharu^, ora. Regina prophetaru^, ora. Regina apostolorum,
ora. Regina martyrum, ora. Regina confessorum, ora. Regina virginum, ora.
Regina Sanctorum omnium, ora. Matter Dei, ora. Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata
mundi, parce nobis Domine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, exaudi nos
Domine. Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccara mu^di, miserere nobis.
Sub tuum praesidium confugimus sancta Dei genitrix nostras deprecationes ne
despicias in necessiratibus, sed a periculis cunctis libera nos semper Virgo
gloriosa and benedicta Domina nostra, mediatrix nostra, tuo filio nos
reconcilia, tuo filio nos commenda, tuo filio nos in hora mortis praesenta:
sancta Maria succurre miseris, iuua pusillanimes, re. foue flebiles, ora pro
populo, interueni pro clero, intercede pro deuoto foemineo senu; sentiant omnes
tuum juuamen, quicumque celebrant tuam sanctam commemoraetionem.

Verse: Ora pro nobis peccatoribus sancta Mariae matter Dei.

Resp: Nunc and in hora mortis nostrae.

Verse. Ora pro nobis sancte Joseph.

Resp. Nunc and in hora mortis nostrae.

Verse. Ora pro nobis sancte Augustine.

Resp. Nunc and in hora mortis nostrae.

Verse: Ora pro nobis beat Francisce.

Resp. Nunc and in hora mortis nostrae.

Verse. Ora pro nobis sancta Barbara.

Resp. Nunc and in hora mortis nostrae.

Verse. Memento Domine Congregationis tu.

Resp. Quam possedisti ab initio.

Verse. A subitanea and improuisa morte.

Resp. Libera nos Domine.

Verse. Ab insidijs Diaboli.

Resp. Libera nos Domine.

Verse. A poenis inferni.

Resp. Libera nos Domine.

Verse. Saluos fac seruos tuos.

Resp. Deus meus sperantes in te.

Verse. Domine exaudi orationem meam.

Resp. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.

Oremus.
GRatiam tuam quaesumus Domine. mentibus nostris infunde, vt qui angelo
nunciante Christ^ filij tui incarnationem cognouimus, per passionem eius and
crucem, ad resurrectionis gloriam perducamur.

Defend quaesumus Domine beata Maria semper Virgin intercedente, istam ab
omni adner, sitate familiam, and toto cord titi prostraram ab hostium
propi^ius tuere clementer insidijs.

Sanctissimae genitricis tuae sponsi quaesumus Domine meritis adiuuemur, vt
quod possibilitas nostra non obtinet eius nobis intercessione donetur.

Adesto supplicationibus nost^is omnipotens Deus, and quibus fiduciam sperandae
pietatis indulges intercedente beato Augustino confessore ^uo, atque pontifice
consuetae misericordiae tribue benignus effectum.

Deus qui Ecclesiam tuam beati Francisci meritis foetu nou prolis amphficas:
tribue nobis ex eius imitatione terrena despicere, and coelestium donor^um
seniper participatione gaudere.

Intercessio quaesumus Domine beatae Barbarae Virginis, and Martyris tuae ab
omni aduersitate nos protegat, vt per eius inte ruen tum gloriosum,
sacrosanctum coiporis Domini nostri sacramentum, ante diem exitus nostri per
veram poenitentiam, and puram confessionem percipere mereamur.

Da nobis quaesumus Domine perseuetantem in voluntate tua famulatum, vi in
diebus nostris. and merito, and numero populus tibi seruiens augeatur.

Praetende Domine famulis, and famulabus tuis dextera^ coelestis auxilij, vt te
toto cord perquirant and quae digne postulant consequi mereantur.

Actiones nostras quaesumus Domine aspirando praeueni, and adiuuando
prosequere, vt cu^cta nostra oration, and operatio, atque been viuendi
insticutio, a te semper incipiat, and per te coepta finiatur: Qui in trinitate
perfecta viuis and regnas Deus, in secula seculorum. Amen.

PRAYERS FOR THE SOVLES OF THOSE WHO ARE DEPARTED OF THE HOLY COMPANY.
DE profundis clamaui ad te Domine: Domine exaudi vocem meam.

Fiant aures tuae intendentes: in vocem deprecationis meae.

Si iniquitates obseruaueris Domine: Domine quis sustinebit?

Quia apud te propitiatio est: and propter lege^ tuam sustinui te Domine.

Sustinuit anima mea in verbo eius: sperauit anima mea in Domino.

A custodia matutina vsque ad noctem: speret Israel in Domino.

Quia apud Dominum misericordia: and copiosa apud eum redemptio.

Et ipse redimet Israel: ex omnibus iniquitatibus eius.

Verse: Requiem aeternam dona eis Domine.

Resp. Et lux perpetua luceat eis.

Verse. A porta inferi.

Resp: Erue Domine animas eorum.

Verse: Requiescant in pace.

Resp: Amen.

Verse: Domine exaudi orationem meam.

Resp. Et. clamor meus ad te veniat.

Oremus.
DEus veniae largitor, and humanae salutis amator, quaesumus cleme^tia^ man vt
nostrae associationis fideles, qui ex hocseculo transierunt, beata Ma^ia semper
virgin intercedente, cum omnibus sanctis tuis ad perpetuae beatitudinis
consortium peruenire concedas: Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

ANTHEME OF THE HOLY VIRGIN AND MARTYR S. BARBARA.
Gaude beata Barbara,
Summa pollens doctrina,
Angeli mysterio.
Gaude virgo Deo grata,
Quae Baptistam es imitata,
In vitae stadio.
Gaude cum te visitauit,
Christus vita, and curauit
Plagas actu proptio.
Gaude quia meruisti,
Impetrare quod petisti,
Da^te Dei filio.
Gaude, namque es eleuata,
Et in coelum es delata,
Nobili mattyrio.
Te laudantem familiam,
Trahe post te ad gloriam,
Finito exilio.
Verse. Ora pro nobis sanctissima Virgo Barbara.

Resp. Vt digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.

Oremus.
INtercessio quaesumus Domine beatae Barbar Virginis, and martyris tuae ab omni
aduersitate nos protegat, vt per eius interuentu^ gloriosum sacro-sanctum
corporis Domini nostri Jesus Christi sacramentum ante diem exitus nostri per
veram pnitentiam and puram confessionem; atque etia^ extremam vnctionem
percipere mereamur: per eundem Christum Dominum nostrum Amen.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TOUCHING THE FORESAID ANTHEME AND PRAYER.
YOu shall know that amongst the holy patrons of this blessed f^aternitye S.
Barbara is rightly placed, forasmuch as she has that gift and grace from god
to preserve from soddayne, and unprovided death all such as do demand it of
god in her name. As it does appear in the acts of her noble martyrdom which
you shall sind in the lines of Saints vvitten by the reverend father
Rybadeneyra: with a notable example of one, who falling dovv^^ from the topp
of a house that was on fire, and being buried, or rather overwhelmed with
the ruynes of the house, and flaming brands, was in due time succored by the
said Saint, who appeared unto him and promised him that he should not dye
before he had received the Sacraments; and for that end thee had obtained of
god a respit for him till the ne^t day: which s^e fell out, and he made a most
happy end; because for a great space of time he had be^^ deuou^ to the foresaid
Saint.

A PRAYER TO JESUS CHRIST CRVCIFIED.
O Lord Jesus Christ, my most merciful savior, I beseech thee by that great
bitterness, which thou did suffer on the cross for me wretched sinner;
especially at that hour when thy most sanctified soul did depart from thy
blessed body, that it would please thee to have pity on my soul, and to use
mercy thereto when it shall depart out of this life, and that thou would by
the merits of thy most precious blood take it with thee into aeternall life.
Amen.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Caesarius a religious man does report, that a great servant of god being
accoustomed to say the foresaid prayer as often as he passed by the holy
Crucifix, did merit after his death to go out of this world directly into
paradise, without suffering the pains of purgatory.

AN ACT OF CONTRITION, WITH ALL THE PARTS THEREOF IN FORM OF A PRAYER.
MY lord Jesus Christ, true god, and true man, for as much as thou art
accomplished with all perfection, and because I do acknowledge thee for my
souueraigne bilsse, I do love thee with all my heart and above all things I am
infinitely sorry that I have so ungratefully offended thee. Wherefore I do
first of all resolve never to offend thee more. Secondly to fly from all the
occasions of sin. Thirdly to make a sincere confession, and to perform such
penance, as shall be enjoined to me: and for a more full, and worthy
satisfaction, I do offer unto thee thy own merits, with those of the blessed
virgin thy mother, and of all those whom thou have elected, joining therewith
both my body and foul, my temptations, sorrows, and afflictions, and my whole
life. Beseeching thee also that thou would pardonne, and give me thy grace,
whereby I may amend my life; and that I may continue therein eue^ till my death.
Amen.

A PRAYER TO OUR BLESSED LADY TO COMMEND OUR SELVES TO HER SPECIAL PROTECTION
AND SAFEGUARD.
O Domina mea sancta Maria ego infaelix peccator me in tuam benedictam fidem ac
singularem custodiam, and in sinum misericordiae tuae hodie and quotidie, and
in hora exitus mei, animam mea^ and corpus meum tibi co^mendo; omnem spem meam,
and consolationem meam, omnes angustias, and miserias meas, vitam, and finem
vitae meae tibi comitto; te hodie matre^, and apud Deum aduocata^ mea^ prae
omnibus eligo, and propto; tu qu pijssima es matter misericordiae, noli me
propter nimia peccata mea reijcere: sed pertuam sanctissimam intercessionem,
and per tua gloriosa merita, omnia mea dirigantur and disponantur opera,
secundum tuam, tuique filij voluntatem. Amen.

AN OTHER PRAYER TO IMPLORE THE AID OF OUR BLESSED LADY IN TIME OF
TRIBVLATION, AND IN HORROR OF DEATH.
O Most chaste, and merciful virgin, and mother holy Mary, stretch forth I
beseech thee, the hand of thy help and succor to me a miserable and wretched
sinner in all those trauayles, and necessityes which may happen unto me at any
time or place; but principally in this tribulation and affliction which does
oppress me at this present, so that I may not only bear it patiently, and
for the love of god, but also with courage, and cheerfully and that by his
grace and special assistance I may gain force and constancy in all my other
crosses and aduersityes, which may fall upon me, as well from the hand of my
god, as of me^. O mother of mercy and advocate of sinners be pleased also to
be my gracious defendresse at that time when my soul shall part from my body;
for at that time more the^ any other shall I have need of thy succor and aid.
For alas if I consider the weight of my sins, and the number of offenses
which I have committed and do daily committ in the presence of the divine
goodness, I fear to be confounded and overcome by the devil, who will never
cease to present the^ before my eyes indeuoring to deceive me by his false
illusions. I therefore most humbly beseech thee, the true distributor of gods
holy graces) that thou would obtain of my lord, thy dear and only son,
true god, and true man, that as he has vouchsafed to come and take humayne
flesh in thy chaste womb, not by any humayne but Divine power, that so he might
save mankind from eternal damnation; so likewise it would please him to give
me the force and understanding at that last hour truly to repent myself of my
sins, and to have nothing in my thoughts but him alone. Which I ask by thy
intercession not for my self alone, but also for all those who are of this
holy societye whereof thou art the principal lady and mistress so that by
thy merits and intercession we may all so well serve thy most sweet son in
our life, that acknowledging him at our death by recieuing all the sacraments
and his holy grace, we may merit one day in heaven to enjoy and possess
without end, the clear vision of the blessed. Amen.

AN OTHER PRAYER TO OUR LADY.
O Most merciful virgin Marye, most worthy mother of god, assured refuge of
sinners, conforter of the afflicted, I unworthy sinner have recourse to thee
with great confidence, beseeching thee for that great joy, which thou did
feel in thy heart, when thou did see thy only dear son rise from death to
life, that it would please thee to comfort my soul: and more expressly I
beseech the for a special grace, by the bowels of thy infinite pittye, that
in the last passage of my life when I shall appear trembling defore the
awefull tribunal of thy dear beloved son my savior Jesus Christ, to give a
strict account of my whole life, that thou would vouchsafe to assist and
prorect me, to the end that by thy favorable intercession (most gracious
mother) I may escape that terrible sentence of eternal death, and be found, or
made worthy to enjoy with thee that life which never shall have end. Amen.

PROTESTATIONS FOR THOSE WHO ARE SICK AND DESIRE TO DYE IN THE GRACE OF GOD.
I. N. miferable sinner do protest here in the presence of the holy Trinity,
the Father, Son, and Holy ghost, of Jesus Christ crucified for my sins, of
the glorious virgin Marye our advocate, of S. Michael the archangell, and of
all the angels, and saints in paradise, especially my angel gardien and of my
patron S. N. and other Saints my aduocats and intercessors, and of all ye my
parents and friends that are here present, whom I desire to be witnesses of
what I shall speak. I do then first of all protest that I do take in good
part my death, and with all willingness of mind; and that I do willingly suffer
the griefs and afflictions of this disease for the love, and glory of the
divine majesty; yea even the pains of purgatory for such time as it shall
please our lord for the remission of my sins and the punishment due unto them.

2. I protest that I will dye as I have lived in the true faith of the holy
Catholic, Apostolic, and Romayne church; and, I do believe and hold
inuiolably whatsoever it does believe, and propose unto me to be believed, with
all the articles of the Creed which I will now repeat; Credo in Deum etc: and
therewithal I do reprove condemn, and detest all the ancient and modern
heresies, principally that of the Caluinists and Protestants of our times.

3. I do protest that I do entirely trust in the infinite bounty and mercy of
my god and savior, the which does infinitely exceed all my sins, how great
or grievous soever they be. And therefore I do hope to be saved, not by my
merits, but by the merits of the precious blood, of the passion, and death of
Jesus Christ, the only true savior of my soul.

4. I protest that I do pardon with all my heart all those, who have at any
time offended me wishing them all happynes and prosperitye in our Lord
beseeching their pardon for every occasion or subject that I may have given
them to offend me.

5. I do protest that from the bottom of my heart, and with all profound
humility I do ask pardon of all those whom I may at any time have scandalized
by my ill example, or in any other sort whatsoever offended in word, or deed
either in body, goods, or fame; offering my self with all readynes to give them
all manner of satisfaction, as far, as I shall be able.

6. I do protest, being humbly prostrated before the diume majesty, that from
the bottom of my heart I do ask pardon and for giuenes for all my sins and
offenses which I have committed against him, against my neighbor, and my self:
being chiefly grieved, and troubled in my soul that I have transgressed his
will, considering his infinite goodness and merit, and in regard of the
exceeding and notorious favors, which it has pleased him to bestow upon me;
much offended with myself, that I have not had that grief, sorrow and
co^trition, which I ought, and should desire to have, and that I have not
peradventure confessed myself as I ought, and am obliged to do; for which I am
hartyly sorye, and do propose to my self for the time to come in better manner
then I have hitherto done, to serve god faithfully, for ever remitting my self
to his divine providence, and perpetual goodness.

7. I do protest that I give thanks with the utmost power and forces of my
heart to my lord my god, for all the benefits already recieued, and which I do
hope to recieue from his divine majesty, which are infinite. I do also thank
all those who in any manner whatsoever have either done, or desired any
benefit, service, or good office, either for my soul or body; and more
expressly and particularly those who have either given or offered me any
occasion to merit.

8. I protest that I do offer to my lord and god all the satisfactions,
merits, sorrows, with the blood which has been shed by my savior Jesus
Christ his son, the merits of the blessed virgin Mary, of all the Saints, and
servants of god, who shall live here till the end of the world, for the
remission and satisfaction of all my sins, and for a perpetual
tha^kesgiuing, and fit acknowledgment of the infinite benefits, and graces
recieued of his divine majesty.

9. I protest that I do most humbly beseech the sacred virgin Marye, my angel
gardie^, my patron, and the saints to whom I have special devotion, with all
the angels, and Saints of paradise that they would aid and assist me at my
last point of life and obtain for me by their intercessions, and merits
everlasting repose in their blessed company. Marye mother of grace mother of
mercy protect us from our enemy, and recieue us at the hour of death. All
the saints of heaven make intercession for me.

10. I protest that if so be that our Lord permit that I should be tempted by
the devil with any temptation whatsoever either against faith, hope, or
charity toward god, or neighbor, or against ought that I have now said, that
I will not harken, answer, or consent thereto, or believe his false
persuasions, and if so be that by his craft and deceipts, or by the violence
of my malady and pain I should happen to consent to any sin, I do now
beseech my good god that such consent of mine may be void and of none effect;
and this I ask for the valewe and merit of the precious blood of my Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

Finally I protest that I do recommend at this present my poor soul to the
sacred wounds of the feet, hands, and side of my sweet and merciful savior
Jesus Christ, the which I do kiss and embrace with all my heart, in the which
I will live and dye. Betwixt the arms of my redeemer I will live, and I desire
to dye: Into thy hands o lord I commend my spirit: Thou have redeemed me my
lord god of truth, god of my heart, and my portion for ever. I beseech all those
who are present at my hour of death, and when I shall not be able to speak any
more that they would aid, and succor me with their prayers offering up to the
eternal father my agonye, sweat, and sufferings in the union of the agonye,
sweates, and sufferings, of the blood, pains, and passions of my well beloved
Jesus Christ for the remission of my sins.

When thou shall have ended these protestations, the which thou may recite
many times, if thou think good, thou shall say with great reverence, devotion,
and attention the two prayers; the one to Jesus Christ Crucified, the other to
the B. Virgin; by which is demanded grace to make a happy passage from this
life to the next: which prayers are placed above page 65 and page 78.

OTHER DIRECTIONS VERY PIOUS AND PROFITABLE.
1. After the foresaid protestations and prayers it is requisite that the
assistants with an intelligible voice should say the letanyes of our lady, or
those of the saints, and that the sick party should endeavor to answer at
least by heart, if he cannot by mouth, to the end that he may more surely
obtain the grace which is desired. Then shall he kiss the sacred wounds of
the holy Crucifix, sayeing each time, Jesus the son of David have mercy upon
me.

2. The sick person shall cause a Crucifix, or some other devout image of our
Lord Jesus Christ, or our blessed Lady to be hung up in some place where he may
easily behold hold, and contemplate it many times, as well by night as by day,
and pray sometimes to Jesus Christ, sometimes to our blessed lady, and
recomme^ding himself cordially unto them to speak these words, or such like. O
Jesus my sauuiour save my soul. O merciful virgin Marye defend my soul. O
Jesus and Marye grant patience and strength to my soul. O Jesus and Marie
recieue my soul near unto ye. He shall likewise reco^mend himself to the
blessed patriarchs S. Joseph, Saint Francis, Saint Augustine, and Saint Barbara,
special protectors and intercessors for the holy Association of twelve, and to
other his particular friends, and devout persons, and above all to his good
Angel guardien.

3. Theye who have charge of the sick parties shall be careful that their
children, or such like persons, do not come near them, or but very seldom by
reason of the particular and natural affection that they bear to them,
because the presence of such persons does usually trouble sick people, for the
te^dernesse of affection which is stirred up in them, which is very hurtful as
well to the body as to the soul.

4. All lascivious paintings, and profane pictures, are to be removed from the
chamber of the sick body, or at least to be kept out of his sight, because they
might without doubt cause in him, by the craft of the devil evil thoughts,
and effects.

5. Those who shall visit the sick, must be careful that they do not
entertayne them with vain discourse, or unprofitable and worldly buisinesses:
but shall speak unto the^ such things as may spiritually recreate them, and
edify the assistants in our Lord.

6. The sick party shall be diligent to discover unto his spiritual father
all the temptations, doubts, scruples, and sins, orderly as they come to his
memory, to the end, that conseruing by this mean the peace and tranquillity
of his conscience, the devil be not able to deceive him in any thing.

^. Besides the sick, or those who attend about ^im, must endeavor to get
^eligious men to come ^ften unto him, particu^arly his confessor or spi^ituall
father, that he may ^e aided by them, com^orted, and solaced, especi^lly
toward the end of ^is life. For it is certain ^that the presence only of
^ood religious men, espeially if they be priests, ^oth bring, and cause great
^are and terror to the infernal devils, which never forsake the sick person
till he be dead.

8. To conclude, I will say^ one thing very profitable for sick persons, who
desire to make a good, and quiet end; and which perchance is not much practiced
by worldly men which is; not to put of the sayeing of masses for the after
their death, or t^ give alms for the goo^ of their souls; but they ought to
do it whill they live, for as much as such like good works, are then without
comparison far more profitable to the soul then after their death. First
for that they obtain of god diversity of proffit, and spiritual helps, with,
or by which the soul is excited to do supernatural works, and which deserve
eternal salvation, as acts of forrowe, and contrition for sin, of the love
of god, hope, and such like, by which a habit of divine grace does increase in
the soul, and consequently the glory which is due thereto in paradise. 2.
Because the soul does receive of these spiritual helps, great force, and is
meruailously strengthened and encouraged in time of death against the assaults
of his ennemy. In a word these means are of great force and vale we to obtain
of god a true and hearty repentance at the hour of death, and a most perfect
conversion to him; wherein a happy end does consist, and in his grace, and
consequently our eternal salvation in the life to come, whereunto may it
please our redeemer to conduct us all by the merits of his most holy passion.

THE COMPLAINT OF A SOVLE APPREHENDING THE AETERNITYE OF HELL.
FOr EVER, never ending, my good god,
S'an infinite that knovvs no period:
Restless, hovvlinge, burninge, dyinge EVER,
So endless each a part, and all together.
If after many thousand years were past,
These ills should end, there would be hope at last.
But this for EVER termelesse all consumes,
And old past Age, its infancy resumes.
The fullest mirth hard EVER does control,
And sad, and silent strikes the afflicted soul.
By Attoms could a vvrenne over the main,
Transfer the headless Alps, with easlesse pain;
And every thousand years but once could fly:
Or when an Ant had sucked the Ocean dry,
Should be the term; this tardy hope might please,
The Damned souls; that once there would be ease.
But Horred EVER, time, and all over past:
Exists alone, with him that, ^ first, and last.
FINIS.
OFFICIVM PARVVM in honorem S. JOSEPH Sponsi B. Mariae.
AD MATVTINVM.
Verse. Jesus, Maria, Joseph.

DOmine labia mea aperies.

Resp. Et os meum annunciabit laudem ruam.

Verse. Deus in adiutorium meum intend.

Resp. Domine ad adiuuandum me festina.

Verse. Gloria Patri, and Filio: and Spiritui sancto.

Resp. Sicut erat in principio, and nunc, and semper: and in secula seculorum,
Amen. Alleluia.

A septuagesima vsque ad Pascha, loco Alleluia, dicitur, Laus tibi Domine, Rex
aeternae gloriae. Hymnus.

Joseph David filius clara stirpe natus,

Virgini desponsus, mente copulatus,

Vtriusque custos, caelo de (stinatus.

Antiphona. Salve Patriar charum decus, and Ecclesiae sanct Dei oeconomus, cui
panem vitae, and frumentum electorum conseruasti.

Verse. Ora pro nobis sancte Joseph.

Resp. Vrdigni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.

Oremus.
SAnctissimae Genitricis tuae sponsi, qusumus Domine, meritis adiuuemur: vt
quod possibilitas nostra non obtinet, eius nobis intercessione donetur. Qui
viuis, and regnas cum Deo Patre in vnitate Spiritus sancti Deus, per omnia
secula seculorum. Amen.

AD PRIMAN.
Verse. Jesus, Maria, Joseph.

Versus. DEus in adiutorium meum intend. Resp. Domine ad adiuuandum me
festina. Verse. Gloria Patri, and Filio: and Spiritui sancto. Resp. Sicut erat
in principio, and nunc and semper: and in secula seculorum. Amen. Alleluia.

Hymnus.
TV, qui sponsam grauidam dolens cum videres,

Cogitabas anxius an ^am retineres,

Sed coelestis nuntius, ne amplius tim^res,

In somnis admonuit, sed potius gauderes. Antiphona. Salve Patriarcharum decus,
and Ecclesi sanct Dei oeconomus, cui panem vitae, and frumentu^ electorum
conseruasti. Verse. Ora pro nobis sancte Joseph. Resp. Vt digni efficiamur
promissionibus Christi.

Oremus.
SAnctissimae Genitricis tuae sponsi, quaesumus Domine, meritis adiuuemur: vt
quod possibilitas nostra non obtinet, eius nobis intercessione donetur. Qui
viuis, and regnas cum Deo Patre in vnitate Spiritus sancti Deus: per omnia
secula seculorum. Amen.

AD TERTIAM.
Verse. Jesus, Maria, Joseph.

Versus. DEus in adiutorium meum intend. Resp. Domine ad adiuuandum me
festina. Verse. Gloria Patri and Filio: and Spiritui sancto. Resp. Sicut erat in
principio, and nunc, and semper: and in secula seculorum. Amen. Alleluia.

Hymnus.
BEthleem profectus censum soluturus,

Cum praegnante Virgin, vbi nasciturus

Erat mundi Dominus, quippe mox facturus,

Vtipsum infantulum esset ample xurus.

Antiph. Salve Patriarcharum decus, and Ecclesiae sanctae Dei oeconomus, cui
panem vitae, and frumentum electorum conseruasti.

Verse. Ora pro nobis sancte Joseph.

Resp. Vt digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.

Oremus.
SAnctissimae Genitricis tuae sponsi, quaesumus Domine, meritis adiuuemur; Vt
quod possibilitas, nostra non obtinet, eius nobis intercessione donetur. Qui
viuis, and regnas cum Deo Patre, in vnitate Spiritus sancti Deus: per omnia
secula seculorum. Amen.

AD SEXTAM.
Verse. Jesus, Maria, Joseph.

Versus. DEus in adiutorium meum intend.

Resp. Domine ad adiuuandum me festina.

Verse. Gloria Patri, and Filio, etc.

Hymnus.
CVm Herodes impius in pueros saeuiret,

Gabrielis monitu ne amplius dormiret,

Retulisti sponsae, sed tecum veniret,

Et accepto paruulo in AEgyptum iret.

Antiph. Salve Patriarcharum decus, and Ecclesiae sanctae Dei oeconomus, cui
panem vitae, and frumentum electorum conseruasti.

Verse. Ora pro nobis sancte Joseph.

Resp. Vt digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.

Oremus.
SAnctissimae Genitricis tuae sponsi, quaesumus Domine, meritis adiuuemur: vt
quod possibilitas nostra non obtinet, eius nobis intercessione donetur. Qui
viuis, and regnas cum Deo Patre in vnitate Spiritus sancti Deus, per omnia
secula seculorum, Amen.

AD NONAM.
Verse. Jesus Maria, Joseph.

Versus. DEus in adiutorium meum intend.

Resp. Domine ad adiuuandum me festina.

Verse. Gloria Patri and Filio: and Spiritui sancto.

Resp. Sicut erat in principio, and nunc, and semper: and in secula seculorum.
Amen. Alleluia.

Hymnus.
HOstibus defunctis inde recessisti,

Et in Galilaeam tecum reduxisti,

Puerum, and sponsam, sicut didicisti

Clitus, and Nazareth humilis vixisti. Antiph. Salve Patriarcharum decus, and
Ecclesiae sanctae Dei oeconomus, cui pane^ vit and frumentum electorum
conseruasti.

Verse. Ora pro nobis sancte Joseph. Resp. Vt digni efficiamur promissionibus
Christi.

Oremus.
SAnctissimae Genitricis tuae sponsi, quaesumus Domine, meritis adiuuemur: vt
quod possibilitas nostra non obtinet, eius nobis intercessione donetur. Qui
viuis, and regnas cum Deo patre in vnitate Spiritus sancti Deus, per omnia
secula seculorum. Amen.

AD VESPERAS.
Verse. Jesus, Maria, Joseph..

DEus in adiutorium meum intend. Resp. Domine ad adiuuandum me festina.

Verse. Gloria Patri, etc.

Resp. Sicut erat etc.

Hymnus.
O Qui Iesum factum duo decim annorum Perdidisti tuum lumen oculorum!

Sed inuentum postea in medio doctorum,

Custodisti sedulus, Regem Angelorum.

Antiph. Salve patriarcharu^ decus, and Ecclesiae sanctae Dei oeconomus, cui
pane^ vitae, and frumentum electorum conseruasti. Verse. Ora pro nobis etc.

Oremus.
SAnctissimae Genitricis tuae sponsi quaesumus Domine, meritis adiuuemur: vt
quod possibilitas nostra non obtinet eius nobis intercessione donetur. Qui
viuis, etc.

AD COMPLETORIVM.
Verse. Jesus, Maria, Joseph..

Convert nos Deus salutaris noster. Resp. Et auerre iram tuam a nobis.

Verse. Deus in adiutorium meum intend.

Resp. Domine ad adiuuandum me festina.

Verse. Gloria Patri, etc.

Hymnus.
Faelix, quem in vlnis Jesus cum Maria

Tenuit cubantem, dum in agonia

Spiritum efflares, vt directa via,

Tenderes ad Patres functus vita pia,

Antiph. Salve Patriarcharum decus, etc.

Oremus.
SAnctissimae Genitricis tuae sponsi, etc.

Commendatio.
HAs horas Canonicas cum attentione.

Dixi sancte Joseph tui ratione.

Vt sis memor mei in oratione,

Vt viuamus simul in coeli regione. Amen.

FINIS.
Hic libellus, eui titulus ASSOCIATIONIS, sieve SOCIETATIS; VNA CVM OFFICIO S.
JOSEPH, translatus ex Gallico in Sermonem Anglicum, vriliter excudetur. Actum
Duaci 20. Maij. 1626.

GEORGIUS COLVENERIVS, S. Th. Doctor, and Regius ordinariusque Professor, and
i^ Academia Duacena Libroru^ Censor


