(...) ^nstruc^^^^^ (...) and orders Military requisite for all Chieftaines,
Captains (...) higher and lower men of char^^ (...) to understand, (...)
Composed by sir (...) ^mythe: knight, 1591. And now first imprinted. 1594.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Iohnes: dwelling at the sign of (...) and
Crown, near to Sai^^ ^^drewes church in Holborne, 1594.

To the Knights, Esquiers, and Gentlemen of the English Nation, that are
honorably delighted in the Art and Science Military.
THE chief cause and principal end of the first association of men dispersed,
from a solitary savage life, into Cities, Common wealths, or other civil
societies, was, that by means thereof they might enjoy a certain common good,
tranquillity, and happiness, whereunto al humane kind (how barbarous soever) is
naturally inclined; and the special ways or means to preserve and continue
those civil societies thus assembled and united, Li. 4. de legib.
in their desired quiet prosperous estate, and to defend them from the
unnatural rapines, Li. 1. de Repub*
violence and oppressions, of their domestical wicked neighbors, and from the
incursions and invasions of foreign Enemies, is Religion, policy, and
discipline military.

Religion says Plato, is the foundation of al Common wealths, and of humane
society; execution of good laws, and administration of Justice, (which is
rightly to be called policy) is the fountain of felicity: And the exercise
of Arms and of the Art and discipline military, is the maintainer of peace,
and ground of security; without these and every one of these, no kingdom can
continue, and the Common wealth where they are with good order established,
does prosper and flourish: For ouerpassing the commodity and necessity of
Religion and policy, to be dilated of by Divines and statesmen, as more
agreeable to their profession, and impertinent to my present purpose:
Concerning the Art and science Military, this may I boldly and truly write
and affirm: that by the exercise thereof all Empires, kingdoms, and Common
wealths have come to their height and soueraintie, and have maintained their
happy state and prosperity; And by neglecting the same, they have declined,
decayed, and finally been made prays to their Enemies.

The Art Military it was, that established the Empires of the Egyptians,
Assirians, Medes, Persians, and Grecians; and that enlarged the dominions of
the Romans to so wonderful greatness: This Art it was, by the which great
Alexander with a handful of soldiers (as they may be termed) did vanquish
infinite Armies, and did conquer a great part of the world* and beyond the hope
and expectation of almen, did march unto the v^most parts of the Earth then
known, And the neglecting thereof again, has been the decay and ruin both
of those and many other most noble Empires and Kingdoms, and has caused the
loss of all Greece, and a great part of the Roman Empire; and without the
great grace and especial goodness of Almighty God, will be the ruin of the
rest. Li. 7. polit. Cap. ^
By men of War (says Aristotle) Common wealths are conserved, and that the
Art Military should be always practiced in any well ordered kingdom, it is
both profitable and necessary: which Gelon king of Scicilie well knowing and
considering, and that people unpracticed in Arms through idleness and want of
experience incur danger to be subdued: He caused often in his kingdom rumors
of wars, and invasions of Enemies to be raised, and thereupon made present
preparation of resistance, levied soldiers, trained and exercised them in all
points of military discipline, and led them forth in warlike order some
certain days march, toward the sea coast, as though he intended presently to
give battle to his enemies inuauding; but his soldiers expecting the enemies,
and when they should fight, he employed them in certain labors and travails,
such as he thought convenient, saying, that in performing the same, they should
both overcome sloth and Idleness, two mortal Enemies of the common wealth; and
that their enemies besides, understanding how they were void of Idleness, and
exercised in Arms, would never have the boldness to invade them.

The like provident care have diverse other noble kings, Emperors and governors
of Common wealths had, for the continual exercise of their people in matters
military, both for the continuance of their own estates, and to the terror of
their enemies upon just occasions of injuries offered. But seeing at this
present day the contrary, and that the a^ncient and true knowledge of
discipline military is in most parts of Christendom by civil Wars corrupted
and greatly decayed, I, for the benefit of my Country and Nation, whereunto I
wish a^prosperitie and happiness, and for the commodity of you Gentlemen,
unto whom matiers and affairs of Arms, and also of Justice, do most properly
appertain, have with some labor and pains, collected and set down in this
treatise, Certain orders, instructions, and observations Military, the most of
which in services of diverse wars under notable Captains, of diverse Nations I
have seen practiced, and the rest by reading of diverse histories, I have other
wise observed: giving you therewithal to understand, that my intent and purpose
is not to treat in this book generally of all matters military by land which
are in^inite; for I handle not therein the approaching and and besieging of
Cities, and places for^ified, nor the forming and fortifieng of Camps, nor
the lodging and disl^dging of armies, nor the making of Bridges over rivers to
pass over Armies, nor in^inite other ma^ters and stratagems military: Al
which (some at one time, and some at another) have been very well written off
by many principal Captains and gentlemen of diverse Nations, and some of them
also handled by me in some other Books of mine that I have composed, which I
have not as yet put in print.

But in this book I have begun and chiefly handled (as the Reader may see)
the reducing of footmen and horsemen into their simple and single order of
ranks from point to point, and after how to reduce them into many forms of
troops, squadro^s, and battles in the field, and that (chiefly) to the intent
to enter into skirmish and to give battle with the most advantage, which of al
other matters military are of greatest importance, to work the highest effects
in the field, by reason that thereby great victories are achieved, and
sometimes Empires, Kingdoms and dominions conquered: And for most of al those
matters that I have written of, I have alledg^d many reasons to fortify and
prove the same: All which not withstanding, I doubt not, but that in reading
and perusing of this my treatise, in this malicious time, there ^ill be some
found cast in the mould of that good fellow, who going to another man's house,
used to carry both his eyes in his head, and returning home to his own, put
them up in his pocket; Many I mean that will find fault, for one that will
commend: and some (as saint Jerome writes upon the like occasion) that will
curiously search and sift every sentence, clause, word and syllable, yea and
the very letters of my writing, and then censure both my work and my self
according to their Mydaslie judgment; But as Pindarus answered a king of
Sparta, it is one of the easiest things in the world to find fault. Sed ecquid
habent melius? let them beware least in passing above the slipper, and in
correcting the shadows of Apelles picture, the boys that grind colors
laugh them not to scorn, who so long as they hold their peace think them by
their gaie and golden garments to be goodly fellows.

But leaving envy to work upon her own intrailes, and setting light of the
malice of detractors, to you the honorable gentlemen of my Country, for whose
good I composed and imprinted these discourses, and to whom with a sincere
affection and devotion I commend and present it; I say and protest that if it
may find at your hands that favorable acceptance and friendly allowance that
I expect it shall, and work withal that desired effect that I hope it will; I
shall eesteeme my labors and travels well employed, and my self for the same
every ways abundantly satisfied.

From my house at Badewe in Essex this first of May. 1594. Your loving friend
Io. Smithe.

The Table of the chief matters that are contained in this Book.
HOw Captains and their officers as well of horsemen as of fo^^eme^ should
reduce their bands into their simple and single order of ranks, with diverse
aduertisements concerning the same. page 3. How the Captains and officers are
to teach their piquers to shoulder their piques. page 5 How piquers should be
taught by their captains and officers to advance their piques and make a
stand. page 9 How all the piquers of a single band or squadron should carry all
their piques upon their right shoulder and not upon their left. page 10. How to
form a single band of 5. different sorts of weapons to march in the fields.
page 11 How Captains marching in their single order of ranks should double or
triple all their ranks by right line, or increase them by fla^kes, with diverse
other particularities. page 13. Where the ensignebearer, dro^mers, and phifers
of a single band marching in their single order of ranks, are to be placed.
pa. 18 How Ensignebearers ought to carry their ensigns marching through a
great City or Town. pa. 19. How Ensignebearers should be armed. pa. 19.
Certain particularities concerning a deputy Ensignebearer. pa. 20 How
Sergeants of bands should be armed and weaponed. pa. 20 Upon what license a
private band or squadron of horsemen and footmen being reduced into any form,
are to disorder and break^ their ranks to go into their quarters to lodge. pa.
22 How soldiors are to be taught by their Captains and officers to upright
their piques. pa. 22 How piquers are to be instructed by their Captains and
officers to charge or receive a charge of an other squadron of piquers. pa. 23
How piquers should resist a charge of lances. pa. 28 How piquers should
receive a charge of lances incase the Sergeant Mayor or Captains should
think good to place any weapones of vol^e before them. pa. 29 In what sort
harquebuziers or mosqu^tiers are to discharge their pieces from under a
squadron of piques. page 29 A contrary opinion to Mounseur de le Noue. page 32
How Captains should cause their soldiers to make of flank, or of back
frunt, page 35 The different ways and orders that are to be used by Coronel^
or Seargeant Majors to form squadrons al of piquers double as broad, or a
third part brother in frunt than by flanks. page* 36 How a Sergeant Mayor having
reduced his squadron into form should upon any occasion, make it broader in
frunt, and shorter by flanks, page 42 Diverse ways and means for a Sergeant
mayor to place any overplus of broken ranks in. page 42 How a Lord Marshal or
Sergeant Mayor their squadron being in fight should draw up a sleeue of
piquers to assa^le their enemies in flank. page 43 The squadron being formed,
how a Sergeant Mayor should make of either of the flanks frunt, observing the
same proportion in frunt and number of ranks by flanks, that they were before
he made of flank frunt. page 44 The order that is to be taken by a Coronel, if
his squadron accompanied with sleeves, wings, and troops of weapons of volee,
should happen in their march to come to a straight, how they should march, and
pass through the same. page 47 Where the Drommers and phifers are to be
placed, the squadron marching forwards in the enemies Country, the enemy
being not in sight, as also upon the doubt of battle. page 50 Whereupon the
squadron formed and marching forward, the field pieces are to be placed and
drawn. page 54 Where the field pieces with their munitions are to be placed in
marching thorough a straight. page 55 Concerning the most convenient and sure
placing of the ca^iages and baggages in passing through a straight. page 56 How
to form a squadron of piquers just square in number of men both by frunt and
flanks, with diverse particularities concerning the same. page 57 How a
sergeant mayor having formed a just square may upon any occasion shor^en the
same by flank, and enlarge them in frunt. page 59 How a squadron of halbardes
environed about with 5. ranks of piquers should be reduced into fo^me. page 63
How to reduce an English army of 28000. or 30000. horsemen and ^ootmen into
form of battle, ready in all points to fight with the enemy. page 65 The
placing of the several battles of the Ar^ie. page 67 Upon what parts of the
squadrons, the men at Arms, Dimilaunces, Stra^iots, Archers and Crosbowers on
horsbacke are to be placed. page 71 How and where to arm the battles with
field pieces. page 74 How all the Cariages and baggages of the Army should be
placed in form of a semicircle, to guard the back and Rereward of the whole
Army. pa. 79 Where to reduce, appoint, and place the pioners of the whole
Arm^e. page 81 Certain reasons alleged to prove that a pu^ssiant Army that
does consist of many thousands of armed footmen, is of greater force being
reduced into 5. 6. 7. or 8. battles, then only into 3. great battles of
vaunguard, battle and Reregard, according to the common use. page 86 The great
aduauntages of a squadron of battleaxes, environed about with 5. ranks of
piquers, against a squadron consisting altogether of piquers. pa. 91 How to
reduce and form a battle of necessity or extremity, betwixt 4. or 8* piques
placed in square. page 99 Diue^s causes and reasons to prove that great bands
of 500. under an ensign, are more convenient for all services in the field,
then small bands of 150. page 100 An Example to prove that great bands of
footmen, are more requisite then small. page 104 Concerning Ensigns and
Ensignebearers of private bands and squadrons, of footmen, as also concerning
the Standard, and Standardbearer of an Emperor, or of a king. page 128 Certain
orders, directions, and brief speeches to be used unto harquebuziers, p^quers,
and battleaxes, when they are in skirmish with their enemies in the field. page
133 Brief speeches to be used by Captains or leaders of harquebuziers when
they would reduce them into abroad square with distaunces oblique. page 145
Speeches to be used to a broad squa^e, or to any ordered troop of
harquebuziers being in a straight or ground of advantage where horsemen cannot
charge them. page 146 Brief speeches to be used to mosquetiers being in a
broad square. page 147 Certain orders, directions and brief speeches to be
observed by a Sergeant mayor, and Captains, and leaders of archers in the
field. page 150 A comparison betwixt Archers and mosquetiers, and archers and
harquebuziers. page 154 A comparison betwixt harquebuziers and mosquetiers.
page 155 Instructions to be given by captains and officers to their bands for
the passing of any brief speeches or word, page 157 The duty of trompettors
and drom^ers. page 158 Certain instructions and observations concerning the
ordering and exe^c^sing of men at Arms, of dimilaunces, and also of light
horsemen Stradiots, incorporated with archers and Crosbowers on horseback, for
diverse purpo^es and services. page 159 Why lances are rather to be reduced
into squadron then into troop. page 165 How and in what distaunces men at
Arms or dimilaunces, are to charge or receive a charge of their enemies. page
167 Diverse exercises for horsemen to be instructed and taught. page 168 Into
what forms light horsemen borderers or Stradiots, are to reduce themselves,
with the ways how they should be reduced into the form of a semicicle. page
171 How stradiots, archers on horseback, and Crosbowers on horseback
incorporated in bands, are to behave themselves in the field. page 174 Certain
proceedings and observations that I would wish to be observed in the first
election, enrolling, arming and weaponing of soldiers for the defense of the
Realm. page 179 Three principal things to be observed in all right and true
elections of soldiers. page 180 Concerning the election, apparelling, arming,
and weaponing of (...) of footmen. page 1^7 How all fortes of horsemen should be
apparelled, armed, horsed, and weaponed. page 1^8 Of what calling the
mustermaisters of eu^ry shiere should be. page 205 The curious order that al
mustermaisters are to use in mustering of their ban is of horsemen. page 206 The
order that is to be used for the supplying of soldiers ma^med or (...), or
otherways decayed, or departing from their ^^bitation into (...) other Town
or hundred or out of their masters se^uice. page 210 The different placing of
the soldiers armors and w^^^ons in all the shires of England, with the Authors
opinion where he would have them ^laced, and certain other necessary
aduertisements. page 211 Where and how soldiers that are enrolled to any kind
of weapon ought to ^xercise themselves. page 217 The cause wherefore the Author
has compose^ (...) Book. page 220
Faults happened in the printing of this Book, by reason, that for John Smythe
was absent from London at the time of the imprinting thereof, And they are tobe
corrected and read, as follows.
Page. line. 5 23 Put out And march. 7 18 for Armor, read, Armours. 9 32 for,
the left feet, read, their left feet. 21 16 for, Captain Lieutenant, read,
Captain or Lieutenant. 31 26 for opinions, read, opinion. 36 31 for, in a^ank,
read, in ranks, 39 18 for, therein make, read, there make. 43 3 for, which
like number, read, which little number. 48 9 for, forpart corner, read, forpart
and corner. 48 16 for, sort and weapon, read, sort of weapon. 56 26 for,
substance of the powder, read, substance and body of y^ powder 62 11 for, 145.
Read, 143. 63 18 for 5. in frunt, read, 50. in frunt. 63 33 for, the flank,
read, the left flank. 74 1 for, but one kind, read, but of one kind. 87 33
for, that their in encountering, read, that in their encountering. 88 In the
margent, for 3000. read, 5000. 93 30 for piquers, read, piques. 94 4 for rank,
read, ranks. 106 27 for flanks, read, flank. 111 14 for 18000. read, 1800.
126 35 for like, read, little. 134 3 for double, read, doubt. 143 2 for sorts,
read, sort. 148 33 for, and without, read, and not without. 150 35 for, narrow
or short, read, narrow and short. 156 17 for motions, read, motion. 189 25 for
stocks, read, cocks. 194 10 for, the piques of such sagging, read, the points
of such sagging 197 29 for septrionall, Read, septentrionall. 203 16 for, into
their bands, read, into bands: 218 3 for, at a great But discharge, read, at a
great white in the midst of a great But.

Certain Instructions, observations and orders military, requisite for all
Chieftains, Captains, and higher and lower men of charge, and officers to
understand, know and observe. Composed by sir John Smythe, knight, 1591.
THE first thing belonging to the Art and Science Military, practiced by all
Warlike Nations in all ages has bin, that al Captains after they have received
the charge of bands or companies of horsemen or footmen armed and weaponed,
according to the discipline and use of the Nation that they are of; have first
instructed and taught their soldiers to reduce themselves into their simple
and single order of ranks, and to wear, carry, and use all their weapons in
soldior-like manner, according to the nature and effect of every different sort
of them, without which readily and orderly performed and duly observed, with
all obedience, neither Captains, officers, nor their soldiors, can in right
understanding be accounted worthy to bear the name of men of war; and
therefore I will first begin with the orderly reducing of a band into form to
march in their ranks as follows.

All Captains, Lieutenants, and Sergeants of bands, are first to consider
before they do reduce their bands of soldiers into their simple and single
order of ranks, Certain matters to be considered of and observed by all
Captains before y^ reducement of their bands into their simple and single
order of ranks.
how many different sorts of weapons they have in their bands with the number
of every different sort of weapon; which done, then are they to consider what
sort and kind of weapon shall march in the first compertiment or division, and
what other sort of weapon in the second compertiment, and so subsequentlie in
all the rest; so as always the compertiment of armed men piquers do march in
the midst of all the rest of the compertiments.

All which being by them and their officers considered, A compertiment of a
band of Soldiors, is to be understood the number of soldiors of any one sort
of weapon, as of Harquebuziers, of archers, of musketeers, of piquers or of
halbardiers, reduced into their simple or single order of ranks, as of 3. 4.
5. 6. or 7. and so up to 10. or 11. in a rank at the most, ready to be
reduced into squadron, or to be any other ways employed
then they are to resolve how many soldiers of every sort of weapon they will
command to march in a rank; as of 5. of 6. or of 7. or more or fewer: so as
they be not fewer then 3. nor more then 10. or 11: at the most in their simple
and single order of ranks, although their bands be very great. And these
numbers of 10. or 11. in a rank at the most, and 3. soldiors in a rank at the
fewest for single bands to march in, has been observed by all men of war of
judgment amongst all Warlike Nations in all ages; and that in respect that the
ranks of soldiers that do not exceed the number of 10. or 11. may in an
instant be numbered by the Captains or officers, sudden casting their eyes
upon such ranks, as also by the soldiers that are to reduce themselves into
their ranks: whereas if they were of greater numbers, the captain, lieutenant,
or sergeants, may quickly mistake the number of soldiors in rank, and so to
their reproach fail in their intended reducements. Besides that squadrons how
great, and of what form soever they are formed, the compertiments of diverse or
many bands, are more conveniently and certeinlie brought into their proportions
and forms, Single bands are not to march above 10. or 11. in a rank at the
most for diverse causes and reasons.
with the compertiments of bands that do not exceed the number of 10. or 11.
in a rank at the uttermost, or rather fewer, then if they were of greater
numbers; with other causes and reasons also which for breuities sake in this
place I omit. And now all this being as aforesaid by a Captain considered,
and he having with himself concluded that all the compertiments of different
weapons throughout his band shall march 5. in a rank, or any other number (as
aforesaid:) he is presently to give order to his officers to reduce them into
that number in every rank; which to perform, some one of them is first to
say unto the harquebuziers who are to be the first compertiment, Certain orders
and brief speeches to be observed and used by Captains and their officers,
when they would reduce their bands into their simple and single order of
ra^kes.
Rank your selves harquebuziers five in a rank, appointing them the ground
where the soldiors of the first rank shall reduce themselves; and so likewise
the like brief words and orders are to be pronounced to the Archers, to the
Musketeers, and to the armed men: which being by them heard, every different
sort of those weapons ought with all celeritie to reduce themselves throughout
their compertiments into the foresaid number of 5. in a rank, In all
reducementes either of horsemen or footmen all the backer ranks must observe
the proportionate distances in frunt and by flanks, of the two foremost ranks.
all the backer ranks of every compertiment, observing the proportionate
distances of the two first ranks of their own compertiment in frunt and by
flanks.

But because when soldiors do begin to reduce themselves into ranks after the
number pronounced by their Captains or Sergeants, that in the first, second, or
third rank, or else in some of the rest of the ranks, there happen sometimes
more soldiors to fa^l into some of those ranks, then there should be by the
number pronounced, (as aforesaid) and that those soldiors that came last into
that rank or those ranks, Two special and general rules to be observed by
all soldiors when they are to reduce them selves into ranks.
are upon pride or wilfulness loathe to put themselves out of that rank or
ranks, and to retire themselves to find out some rank or ranks that do lack
the number pronounced: the Captains therefore and the officers of bands ought
to instruct their soldiors, at such times as they are to reduce themselves into
their simple or single order of ranks, according unto the number by their
Captains or officers pronounced, that if in the first, second, or third rank;
or in any of the rest of the former ranks, that disorder do happen; that then
the overplus of the number of the soldiors by the Captain or officers
pronounced that do find themselves on the left flank, or side of that rank,
or ranks, shall presently put themselves out of the same rank, or ranks, and
retire until they find a rank or ranks, that do lack the number of
soldiors by their Captain or officers pronounced. And to the intent that this
order may be the better performed, the Captains, Lieutenants, and sergeants,
ought to instruct their soldiors that in the reducing of themselves into ranks,
the first soldior that is to begin in the first rank, being placed by the
Sergeant in the place where the first rank should begin, the rest of the
soldiors of the same armor and weapon that are next unto that first soldior by
the seargeant placed, shall presently fall into rank by the left side or
flank the one of the other, until that rank be complete according to the
number by the Captain, Lieutenant, or Sergeant pronounced. And so likewise the
second, This kind of reducement of a single band of horsemen or footmen into
ranks, every soldior by the left flank of the other has not been according
to true discipline used by our English nation of a long time.
third, fourth, and consequently all the rest of the ranks are to reduce
themselves into their ranks by the left flanks, or sides the one of the other,
and not to enter into rank disorderly the one betwixt the other. So that by
the performance of this prescribed order, any overplus of soldiors that shall
happen to fall into any of those ranks shall find themselves to be on the left
flank or side of those ranks, and therefore shall know that it is their duties
presently to retire out of those ranks, until they find some other rank or
ranks that do lack the number by their Captains or Sergeants pronounced. Al
which different weapons being reduced into their compertiments by the orders
aforesaid, then the Captain may command his lieutenant and Sergeants of the
band to draw the one half of every different sort of weapon of volee, behind
the compertiment of armed men, and there to place them in the same and like
order as the other half of those weapons of volee are before the armed men; so
as the armed piquers shall hold the middle place of the band according to all
discipline.

And the like brief speeches and prescribed orders of reducements by the left
flank the one of the other may serve for horsemen, be they men at Arms,
Lances, borderers or Stradiots, or of any other kind of armor and weapon on
horseback. As for example, If a Captain or Lieutenant of men at Arms, or
Dimilances would reduce his company into their simple or single order of
ranks, Brief speeches to be used by Captains of horsemen when they are to
reduce their companies into their simple and single order of ranks.
he is to say unto those that are to begin the first rank: Rank your selves
Lances three in a rank, or 4 or 5 in a rank, or as it shall please him: Upon
which speeches pronounced, all his whole band or company is to perform his
commandment and words pronounced with the like observations as are before
prescribed unto the bands of footmen, having always special regard to their
proportionate distances in frunt and by flanks. And these prescribed orders
before set down, al soldiors be they horsemen or footmen ought to know and
perform with all celerity, quietness, and silence, upon very severe punishment.

Now the Captain or Captains having reduced their soldiors into their simple,
or single order of ranks or into any form of square, and that the soldiors
piquers do stand at their piques, the butends on the ground, and the points
upright, and that the Captain, Lieutenant, or Sergeants would have them to
march, they are then to say to the first rank: Shoulder your piques and march;
which is as much to say: Brief speeches to be used by the Captain and his
officers to piquers standing at their piques.
Lay your piques upon your right shoulders and march, which shouldering of
piques must be done with a comely and soldiorlike grace, all the piquers of
the first rank falling back with their right feet almost a foot behind their
left, that their piques may the more leisurely and comely fall to their
shoulders, and then raising up their left feet about a handful from the
ground, How piquers should shoulder their piques and march.
and letting them fall again, they must all in an instant advance forward, and
so fall into their march, first with their right feet. And so in like manner the
second, third, and fourth ranks, and so subsequentlie all the rest of the ranks
must in all points perform the like, and shoulder their pikes one after another
and carry the butends of their piques 3. foot or more from the ground, straight
in descent toward the right hams of the soldiers piquers marching before
them, every rank being so even in frunt, that the butend of no piquers pique
may preceed the one the other in the same rank; and so even and straight by
flanks that the butend of every piquers pique may be just point and blanke
toward the right hamme of the piquer preceding in the rank before him: And so
they must al with great silence and with a grave and soldiorlike grace, march.

But whereas in this place I do instruct that all the soldiors of the first
rank, and so subsequentlie of all the rest of the ranks one after another
should first fall back with their right feet, almost a foot behind their left,
to the intent that their piques should fall the more leisurely to their
shoulders, and that then all the soldiors of the first rank at one instant
should raise and lift up their left feet about a handful from the ground, and
letting them fall again to the ground should march forward, first with their
right feet; that instruction I do give partly in respect that the same being
orderly performed as aforsaid, it does give a very comely grace unto the
soldiors in their first beginning to march, but chiefelie because that the
leisurely falling back of all the soldiors of the first rank with their right
feet, to shoulder their piques, and so subsequentlie of all the rest of the
ranks one after another, with the lifting up also of their left feet about a
hand full from the ground, is a warning to every hinder rank presently to
prepare themselves to march, whereas by not performing the same or the like
leisurely and soldiorlike warning upon the stroke of the drum or brief
speeches pronounced as aforesaid, it often comes to pass that the soldiors
of the second rank, are suddenly, and disorderly cast too great a distance
behind the first rank, and so consequently all the rest of the ranks, by the
sudden shouldering of their piques, and stepping forward of the first rank.

And I do further advertise that the soldiors piquers of any private band
marching in their single order of ranks do in any wise observe the distances
of 16. or else 18. feet betwixt every rank and rank by flanks, and 6. or
else 7. Distances to be observed by piquers marching in their single order of
ranks.
feet betwixt every soldior, and soldior in frunt; that is betwixt soldior and
soldior in every rank: And this in case the ground will permit them or
otherwise that they do march in convenient distances in frunt and by flanks,
according to the ground and occasion.

And in this place because I have mentioned and touched the distances that
ought to be observed by a single band of piquers, and other weapons marching in
their simple and single order of ranks, I thought it were a convenient place
also to handle and write at large of the many and different distances that
ought to be observed as well in frunt; that is in every rank from frunt to
back, as by flanks, that is betwixt every rank and rank, not only by single
bands, but also by squadrons and battles for many purposes, and that not only
by footmen, but also by horsemen of diverse different sorts of armor and
weapons. Howbeit considering that the same has been briefly touched although
to no great purpose by some other writers of foreign Nations; And that if I
should enter to write and discourse of those matters effectually, it would
require many sheets of paper, and therefore would be very long and tedious to
the Reader, I thought good to ouerpasse those particularities as things very
well known to all skillful men of war of all warlike nations, and to proceed
to other matters that do require more particular instruction. That it is a
thing of very great difficulty to set down by writing all the just and
proportionate distances that Horsemen and footmen are to observe in frunt and
by flanks upon diverse occasions.
And that the rather, because the many and different distances that are upon
diverse different causes and occasions to be observed by horsemen as also by
footmen, are such and so many as they cannot be expressed by writing but with
very great difficulty; for that the same cannot be particularlye set down
but by the measures of paces and half paces, and by the measures of more and
fewer feet, of half feet and quarters of feet, and other such measures; which
I think no man of any experience can possibly by writing rightly express
without failing or erring more or less: And that by reason that sometimes
single bands are to march in open places where they have room enough to
enlarge their ranks both in frunt and by flanks, thereby to beautify and give
grace unto such companies; And at other times they are to march through Cities
and Towns, where the narrowness of the streats do not give them room to
enlarge themselves in their distances, thereby to make the greater show: at
other times also bands are to march in the field ready to be reduced and
incorporated with other bands, at which time they are to march more close, and
in nearer distances both in frunt and by flanks. And so likewise being
incorporated into squadrons, they are for diverse different purposes, as
sometimes for their greater ease to march, and to give the greater show, and to
bewtifie the squadron, they are to march in the ranks enlarged; and at other
times upon the expecting of the enemy being not yet in sight, or being in
sight, they are to straighten their ranks more or less; or that upon the
near approach of the Enemies squadrons of both horsemen and footmen, they expect
and doubt a charge of horsemen in frunt, or flanks, or both; or that they
themselves are with their piques to charge a contrary squadron of footmen. For all which, and diverse other occasions and purposes, they are to reform
themselves into diverse different distances.

And as piquers and short weapons either in single bands, or reduced into
squadrons, are for diverse purposes to reform themselves into such variety of
distances: Even so weapons of volee reduced into sleeves, wings, and other
forms, are to use some of the like, and other sorts of distances. And as
footmen are for such different causes and occasions to observe such variety of
distances as aforesaid: Even so horsemen of diverse armors and weapons, as men at
Arms, Dimilaunces, Stradiots, Reistres, and other sorts of light horsemen, are
to reduce themselves into diverse different distances according to the effects
and nature of their armors and weapons; and are again to reform themselves
into other distances according to new occasions and directions, sometimes for
one purpose and sometimes for others. All which variety and different sorts of
distances and many others are of very great difficulty, to be by writing
rightly expressed in their just and proportionate measures; and yet y^
notwithstanding it is a thing of so great facility for all good and diligent
Captains and officers as well of horsemen as of footmen, only by sight of eye
and ordinary practice to instruct and reduce their soldiers upon any
different occasions into all sorts of distances either in Town, Camp, or
field, according to the Art and science Military; as that there is not any
Captain, Lieutenant, nor Sergeants of band, that are any ways worthy to have
the charge or mannaging of a band of footmen; nor any Captain, Lieutenant,
Conductor, nor Decurion of horsemen, that are any ways worthy to have the
ordering and managing of any sorts of horsemen under their charges, if they do
not very well know all different sorts of distances according to discipline,
that they are to reduce their soldiors into.

And if the Captain or officers aforesaid, would have their soldiers to stay
their march and make a stand; then the Captain, Lieutenant, or Sergeant is to
say to the first rank of piquers Auance your piques: which words being
pronounced, all the soldiors piquers, Brief speeches to be used to piquers when
they should make a stand or pause.
of the first rank must in an instant lay their left hands upon the forpart of
their piques, about a foot or more before their right hands, auancing
themselves forward two steps, the first with their left feet, How piquers
should advance their piques and make a stand.
and the last step with their right feet, and therewithal raising their
piques upright with both their hands, they must set the butends of them upon
the ground with the points toward the Element, which being by the first rank
performed with a comely and soldiorlik grace; then the second rank, the third,
fourth and so subsequently all the rest of the ranks one after another, must
after the same sort auance their piques.

And whereas it has been of long time used, and still is by many Italian,
Walloun, and French Captains, and so likewise by some other Captains of other
Nations, that they do instruct their soldiors marching in their simple or
single order of ranks of 5. or 6. or 7. or other such numbers, as also when
they are reduced into squadron, that all the piquers that do march of the left
flank or side of the band or squadron, should carry all their piques upon
their left shoulders, as ^y piquers marching upon the right flank do carry
theirs upon their right shoulders; and this to the intent (as they say) that
the piquers of the left flank or side of the band or squadron carrying their
piques upon their left shoulders, do in the same carrying of their piques,
greatly beautify the band or squadron in the eyes of the beholders: whereas,
if otherwise all the piquers of the left flank should carry their piques upon
their right shoulders, as those of the right flank do, that it would not make
so good a show, as by carrying their piques upon their left shoulders: Thereunto
I say, that I have known diverse Italians, and namely Marco Antonio Colo^na,
Ascanio de la Corna, and Chapin Vitelli: all which three were very notable
gentlemen and great Captains, that did greatly mislike that the piquers of the
left flank of a band or squadron, No piquers of a single band or squadron
ought to carry their piques upon their left shoulders.
should carry their piques upon their left shoulders, utterly condemning the
cause before alleged: saying, that the left flank or side of piquers marching
in their simple, or single order of ranks, or in squadron, could not be more
bewtified, then by the wearing of their swords upon their left sides, and their
piques upon their right shoulders in soldiorlike manner: besides that for right
handed soldiors to carry their piques upon their left shoulders when they are
to advance, or upright, or shoulder their piques, it does give a greater
disequalitie and disgrace in the performance of those and diverse other effects;
and therewithal is a great deal more unready for right handed soldiers, for
diverse other purposes to perform and use; then if they carried al their piques
after one sor^ upon their right shoulders. And as the opinions of diverse
Captains are as aforesaid, that the carrying of their piques upon their left
shoulders does bewtifie the left flank, because it does resemble the right:
So contrariwise, I say that such as do behold either the frunt or the back of
such a band or squadron, shall see a disproportion and disequalitie in the
partition where the piquers of the left flank do carry their piques in a
different sort from all the rest of the piquers of the right flank. For all
which causes before alleged, with others, which for breuities sake I omit; I
would wish that all piquers should as well in squadrons as in their single order
of ranks, carry all their piques upon their right shoulders, and not upon
their left; except some times when they are in march in the field to ease
themselves, they may change their piques to their left shoulders.

Also if there were any piquers that were left handed from their youth, I would
wish them to carry their piques upon their right shoulders, and to practice
and use their piques with their right hands, in couching and making head with
them against either horsemen or footmen, and in all other military exercises
and actions. And because such left handed soldiors do wear their swords upon
their right sides, I would wish that they should not be placed neither in
single bands, nor in squadrons, upon the uttermost flanks or sides of them,
but in some other of the inner ranks.

And here it is to be noted that in reducing of a single band or company of
soldiors into their simple, How a single band consisting of 5 different sorts
of weapons should be formed to march in the plain and open fields.
or single order, the Captain, Lieutenant, or Sergeants of the band, must have
great consideration in forming of their bands; and chiefly consisting as our
English bands do of 5. different weapons; that is, of piques, batleaxes,
musketeers, harquebuziers, and archers; and that they ought to perform in
this sort following: First that they should place the one half of the
harquebuziers in frunt; and immediately after them, should march the one half
of the archers, and after the archers, the one half of the musketeers, and
after the musketeers, all the ranks of the piquers with the Ensign in the
midst or center of them, guarded with halbarders, or battleaxers; and after the
piquers the other half of the musketeers, and after the musketeers the other
half of the archers, and after them last of all the other half of the
harquebuziers; which band marching in this sort, the one half of the different
sorts of weapons of volee marching before the piques, A great advantage and
readiness for bands marching in this sort, to be reduced into other for^es.
and the other half behind, both in like numbers of ranks and in one order,
they are by that means always ready upon all occasions to be reduced into any
form, or different forms to arm as well the back of the piquers by some called
Rereward, as also the frunt, flanks, and al four corners of the said piques: as
for example, If the Captain of the band be disposed to arm, and draw two
sleeves of any one sort of those weapons of volee by the flanks of the armed
men, he may then with great celerity perform the same, either by commanding by
the stroke of the drum, or by some brief speech, that all the piquers and short
wepons shall advance their piques and make a stand, and having reduced those
armed men into some kind of square, then one of the Sergeants of the band is to
draw down all the ranks of that weapon of volee, that he would make his sleeue
of, upon the right flank of the piques in as many ranks as he lists, and as
many soldiors in every rank as pleases him, or as he is commanded; and so
likewise at the same time and instant another sergeant, or the Lieutenant of the
band (which Lieutenant ought ever to march behind the hindermost rank of the
band incase the Captain do march before) may draw up by the left flank of the
piques the like number of ranks, and of soldiors in every rank of the same
weapon of volee; and so likewise with the like celerity upon the different
strokes of the drum, or different brief speeches of the Captain, all the rest
of the different sorts of weapons of volee by drawing down as many ranks of
them that do march before as he thinks requisite, and drawing up as many
ranks of those that do march behind or in rereward as he thinks meet; and
employing the rest for skirmishes, or ambushes, or other services as he
thinks most convenient; they may with great dexterity reduce them into
diverse different and variety of forms, as well for the guard of the frunt and
back of the piques, as for the flanks and corners, and all other occasions and
purposes.

Also it is further to be noted that if a Captain, marching with hi^ band in his
simple or single order of 3. How Captains marching with their bands in their
simple and single order of ranks should double all their ranks by right line.
of 4. or 5. or more in a rank; and that upon any occasion he thinks requisite
to double all the ranks of the compertiments of his band by right line: that is
by every second rank entering into the rank that is before them; then he is to
say to the sergeant or sergeants of his band, Double your ranks by right line:
upon which brief words and directions, the sergeant presently ought to command
the drummer or dru^mers to strike the doubling of the ranks; or else himself is
to command the second rank of piquers to enter into ^y first rank of piquers,
and at the same instant the fourth rank to enter into ^y third rank, and the
sixth into the fifth rank, and so subsequently in the like order, all the rest of
the ranks to enter one into another; so as if they were before but 5. in a rank
in their single order, they are now by this doubling of ranks by right line
become 10. in a rank. How Captains should double the ir ranks by flanks.
And as a captain may double the ranks of ^y compertiments of his band, by
right line as aforsaid, so may he likewise double them by any of both ^y flanks
by commanding every second rank to march up to the left flank of the rank
before them, that is, that the second rank of 5. soldiors do march up to the
left flank of the first rank of 5. and that the fourth rank do at the same
time march up to the left flank of the third rank, and the sixth rank to
the left flank of the first rank, and so subsequentlie all the rest of the
second ranks throughout the band to march up to the left flanks of the
ranks before them, until they be of equal frunt and in equal distances with
the said ranks before them. And further, if the captain of the same band his
company marching in their simple and single order of 5. in a rank as they did
at ^y first be disposed to have two ra^ks to enter into one, that is whereas
they marched before 5. in a rank to make them 15. then he is to say to the
Sergeants of his band: Triple your ranks by right line, How Captains should
triple their ranks by right line.
which brief words by the Captain being pronounced, then the Sergeants
presently are to command the drommers to strike the tripling of the ranks, or
else themselves with the like brief speeches as aforesaid, to cause the second
and third ranks of any weapon to enter into the first rank of the same weapon,
and the fifth and the sixth, to enter into the fourth, and the eigth and the
ninth to enter into the seventh, and so subsequentlie all the rest of the
ranks orderly to perform the like, which being by them performed, they must
presently in every rank enlarge themselves in their distances. And to the
same effect, If a Captain be disposed to triple the ranks of the armed men of
his band by flanks; How Captains should triple their ranks by flanks.
that is, whereas they marched before but 5. in every rank in their single
order, that he would reduce them into 15. in every rank, then he or his
Lieutenant, or the Sergeants of his band may command the tripling of the ranks
by saying to the first ranks. It is to be noted that in all reducements of
squadrons into form with the compertiments of bands, that the middle most part
of the frunte is the highest place in estimation, and that the right hand of
the same frunt is the second in degree, and that the left hand same frunt (...)
the lowest place in degree. And that the first, second and third ranks, but
chiefly the first, are the places of greatest estimation for the gentlemen of
the bands if there be any to be placed in the presence of their Captains to
show their valors.
Triple your ranks soldiors by both the flanks throughout. Upon which brief
speeches pronounced either by the Captain, Lieutenant, or Sergeants, the second
and third ranks are presently to march up to the flanks of the first rank,
that is to be understood, that the second rank shall march to the right flank
of the fifth rank, and the third rank to the left flank of the said first
rank, until they be al of one equal frunt, and in like and equal distances;
at which time likewise the fifth and sixth ranks shall in the very same order and
sort march up to both the flanks of the fourth rank, and the eighth and the
ninth ranks shall march up to both the flanks of the seventh rank, and so
subsequentlie all the rest of the ranks that are of any one sort of weapon
shall march up to both the flanks of the ranks of the like sort of weapon
before them: so as of 5. that every rank did at the first consist in their
simple and single order they are now by this trypling of ranks by both the
flanks as aforesaid reduced, to be. 15. in every rank throughout. But because
by this kind of trypling of ranks, as also in trypling of them by right line,
the fourth rank is now become to be the second rank, and the seventh the
third rank, and so subsequently in the rest, and that therefore every one of
those ranks are too great a distance by flank the one from the other, they
must every rank presently upon their first trypling performed, march up
until they find themselves in such convenient distances and nearenes by
flanks one rank to another, as the Captain, Lieutenant or Seargeants shall
think requisite.

But here it is to be noted that in case the last rank or the two last ranks
shall by this kind of trypling and reducing by flanks as before said, How and
where any overplus of broken ranks of piquers should place themselves.
lack a third rank before them to reduce themselves unto, by flanks, then the
foremost of the two last ranks shall march up by the rightflanke of the
piquers, until they come to the middle place whereas the Ensignebearer with
his Ensign does stand, and there shall rank and place themselves on the right
hand of the Ensignebearer. At which present time likewise, the last rank of
the other. 5. piquers shall march up by the left flank of the armed men
until they come to the foresaid middle place where the Ensignebearer with his
Ensign does stand, and there shall rank and place themselves on the left
flank of the Ensignebearer. It is contrary to discipline that any rank of
disequall number to the rest of the ranks should march either in frunt o^
back.
And this is to be performed, by reason that it is not sufferable according to
discipline that any broken rank of a squadron of piquers, or of any other
weapon of disequall number to the rest of the ranks should so march either in
frunt or back. How beit the Captain before he commands the trypling of the
ranks as aforesaid, ought well to consider of the number of the ranks that he
has or means to triple, to the intent to bring them into a convenient and
proportionate form, as well by flanks as frunte, which proportionate form is
not only intended in respect of the distances by frunt and flanks as
aforesaid, but that there be not more ranks by flanks then there be soldiors
in every rank, which would cause being piquers, the square or squadron to be
a great deal longer by flank, considering their different distances, then
broad in frunt, which in all discipline in forming of squares, or squadrons is
a great disproportion; unless that the Captain upon some occasion or accident
were disposed to make of flank, frunt, that is to make all the soldiors to
turn their faces and weapons that ways. How Captains hauing^by tripling their
ranks brought their bands into disproportion, may and ought to remedy the
same.
Howbeit if the Captain by the tripling of his ranks as aforesaid, should
find that he had not brought them into that proportion and form that he ought
according to discipline to do; that is to make the frunt full as broad as the
flanks are long, or broader to any convenient proportion then the flanks are
long; then he may easily remedy the same by increasing all the ranks by
flanks saving the hindermost rank, (which by such encraesment of ranks
comes to lack number), to as convenient breadth and length by frunt and
flanks, as he thinks meet; which order of increasing of ranks by flanks,
I have already before set down. And as the Captain may double or triple
the ranks as aforesaid; so he may likewise upon good consideration and cause
quadruple them; that is to make every. 3. ranks to enter into the fourth
rank, observing and proceeding in performance thereof in the like sort and
order as is before declared. Another special point to be looked unto by
Captains in doubling o^ tripling their ranks by right line or increasing them
by flanks


But in the performance of this before set down, the Captain and his
officers, are further to consider that in that doubling of ranks by right line,
or encresing them by flanks, they must take heed that they do not confuse or
confound their ranks, by making two sorts of weapons to enter into any one
rank; as to make any piquer to enter into any rank of halbarders, or any
harquebuzier into any rank of archers, or any archers to enter into any rank
of musketeers, nor yet any harquebuziers at any time to enter into any rank of
musketeers, although they be both weapons of fire, because that to mingle two
sorts of weapons of different force and quality in one rank, it is a great
scorn and contrary to al true discipline. But now if any man will ask the
causes wherefore in reducing this band of 5. sorts of weapons into their simple
and single order of 4. 5. or 6. in a rank, I placed the harquebuziers foremost,
and the archers betwixt them and the mosquetiers, and the musketeers next unto
the piquers. Thereunto I answer, The causes and reasons why in reducing this
band into their simple and single order of ranks, every sort of weapon is
placed in the order aforesaid.
and say that the causes and reasons that have moved me so to do, are, that
harquebuziers in respect of the lightness of their weapon and furniture, are
of al other weapons of volee most ready and apt to be employed in skirmish,
or upon any advantage of ground to be placed upon the sudden in ambush, where
they may lie close and ready upon diverse opportunities to give a sudden volee,
or diverse volees divided either at horsemen or footmen. But I would always
upon the employing of them in such actions, Harquebuziers empl^ied in skirmish
or for ambushes or some other like causes ought to be backed with hal^ards.
that they should be bac^t with some number of halbarders lightly armed, as
also upon some occasions with some piques for diverse causes and reasons that
heerafshal appear. And as for the archers I have placed them betwixt the
harquebuziers and musketeers, partly to make a separation and distinction of
those weapons of fire, the one of greater length and heueth, Archers and
musketeers are not to depart from the body of the squadron.
and in effect of greater violence in further distance; and the other, I mean
harquebuzes, shorter and lighter, and to be emploid most commonly in the first
services; but chie^^e, in consideration that neither the archers nor the
musketeers are to depart from the body of the piques, but are to be reduced
into hearses, or into greater or smaller formed troops; as also for such other
effects, and purposes as in certain places of this book hereafter shall
appear: and so likewise the reasons wherefore I have placed the harquebuziers,
archers, and musketeers in the same number and order as well behind the body of
the piques, as before in frunt, are as well in respect of the ready drawing of
them up into sleeves, and other forms, by the flanks of the piques as
aforesaid; as also that upon some accidents or coming of the enemy, it
sometime happens that the body of the piques reduced into square may happen to
be forced to make of back frunt: upon which and diverse other occasions and
accidents the body of the piquers have always in a readiness as many of all
sorts of weapons of volee behind them to be any ways employed with all
celeritie as in frunt before.

And here it is further to be noted, Where the Drommers and Phifers of a sin
gle band marching in their single order of ^ankes ought to be placed.
that a single band marching in their simple and single order, ought to place
their drummers and phifers: one drum and phifer betwixt the second and third
rank in frunt, and the other drummer and phifer (incase they have two phifers
which few bands have) in the midst of the band directly before the Ensign
bearer; and in case that the band be so great that there are three drummers,
(which is but seldom seen) then the third drummer is to be placed betwixt
the second and third of the hindermost ranks. But because most great bands
have but two drummers and one phifer, those two drummers are to be placed, the
one betwixt the second and third rank in frunt as aforesaid, and the other
drummer with the phifer in the midst of the band before the Ensignebearer: But
in case there be but one drummer and one phifer, then they are to be placed in
the midst of the band before the Ensignebearer, as aforesaid, and not betwixt
the fore ranks of the band; although I have seen when there has been but one
drum and one phifer, that they have not marched before the Ensignebearer, Where
the En signebearer is always placed.
but in the frunt as aforesaid. And this I have seen used by some Italians
after the one sort, and by other Italians of other parts and dominions of
Italy, after the other sort. The pique the most honorable weapon for soldiors
on foot.
But because the Ensignebearer does always march in the midst of the piques
accompanied with halbarders; and that the piques being the most honorable
weapon in respect that they are for the body of the square, do march in the
midst betwixt the weapons of volee; I would in consideration thereof, as also
to the intent that the different directions of the strokes of the drum may be
the more easily heard throughout the whole band, place the drummer and phifer
(if there were no more but one in the band) in the midst before the Ensign
bearer, and not amongst the shot in frunt.

Also it is further to be noted that the Ensignebearer marching in the midst of
his band or company through any City or great Town, How Ensignebearers
ought to cari^ their Ensigns marching through a great City or Town.
ought to carry his Ensign open and upright, and not wound up about his
Ensign staff, nor yet the lowest part of the Taffata of his ensign gathered
into his hand, and leaned upon his shoulder, but upright as aforesaid. Howbeit
having marched thorough the City or Town into the fields, and being out of the
fight of the multitude of the people, he may then either wind up his Ensign,
or gather the lower part of the taffe^a into his hand, and lean the same to
his shoulder if it pleases him.

Also I would wish that all Ensignebearers should be armed in this sort
following (viz) How Ensignebearers should be armed.
a light upright and sharp crowned Spanish burgonet, a Collar, a Cuyrasse with
short tasses, or without tasses, and a back with a pair of sleeves and gloves
of fine maile, or without gloves of maile, to the intent that they may carry
their Ensigns with the more ease; and his said armor I would wish to be of a
good and a hard temper to resist the point of a pique, or halbard, and no ways
at the proof of harquebuze nor pistol shot, because that such armors at the
proof are too heavy for Ensignebearers to march withal, and to carry and
manage their Ensigns: Besides that Ensignebearers being most commonly in the
mid parts or Centers of squadrons are very seldom hurt by the bullets of any
pieces of fire maniable but rather with piques swords, or halbards, upon a
battle well ^ought.

Also I would wish that the Ensignebearer should have a Deputy Ensignebearer,
Every Ensignbearer is to have a deputy Ensignebearer.
who should be of his own society or Camerada, What manner of men I would
wish the Ensignebearers and their deputies to be.
and this deputy Ensignebearer, as also the Ensignebearer himself I would wish
should be men of good force and strength, and therewithal that they should be
men very valiant, and very sober and of good discretion, and able to speak
well and deliver their minds to the encouraging of all soldiers about them;
The deputy Ensignebearer how he should be armed and what weapon he should ca^y.
and this deputy Ensignebearer being in all points armed like unto the
Ensignebearer, should carry a fair, and a good halbard, which halbard should
be in common betwixt him and the Ensignebearer, to the intent that when the
Ensignebearer is disposed to deliver his Ensign to his Deputy, to ease
himself, that then delivering his Ensign, he should take his halbard of his
Deputy.

Also I would that the same Deputy Ensignebearer should take the like oath for
the guard and defense of the Ensign that the Ensignebearer himself has
taken, The deputy Ensignebearer is to take the like oathe for the guard of the
Ensign that the Ensignebearer has taken.
I mean he as a deputy, and the other as Ensignebearer himself: And
therefore I would wish that the Deputy Ensignebearer either upon the
advancement to higher place or death of the Ensignebearer should succeed him in
his place of Ensignebearer, Preh^minences of right, due to the deputy
Ensignebearer.
and that during the time of his being deputy, he should have an advantage of
pay according to his place.

Also I would wish the Seargeants of the band, and of all bands to be armed in
all points like to the Ensignebearer as is before set down, How Sergeants of
ba^ds should be armed.
as also weaponed like him with his halbard, sword and dagger: Howbeit I would
not that the sergeants should wear any long or short tasses because that their
office in marching with their band is to perform the Captains directions with
celeritie, The office of Sergeants in marching with their bands.
as also to march and sometimes to trot by the flanks of the band to see that
the soldiers do march straight in their ranks both by frunt and flanks, and
that they do with great silence observe their proportionate and equal
distances as well betwixt every soldior and soldior in rank; as also betwixt
every rank and rank, with all other orders and obseruat^ions military.

Also a Captain leading his band through any City or great Town ought to
march in his Corslet complete, How a Captain leading his band through any City
or great Town ought to march.
and to march before his band with his pique upon his shoulder: Howbeit his
page may wear his burgonet, and carry his target either before him or by him.
And so likewise the Lieutenant of the band being armed and weaponed in the same
sort ought to march at the back or Rereward (as they call it) of the band;
howbeit this is always intended by such Captains, as have disposition of body
to perform the same. But incase that the Captain be very old, or have any
other corporal impediment, whereby he is not well able to perform the same,
then he is to march before his band more lightly armed as he thinks most
convenient, with his sword and dagger and his leading staff in his hand.

Also it is a great shame for any Captain, ^or Lieutenant of a band of footmen
to ride in the field before or with his band upon any lively or swift running
horse or Gelding, A great shame for any Captain or Lieutennant to lead his
band in the field upon a swift running horse.
but upon a simple hackney being sure of foot that will gallop a Caunterburie
pace by the frunt, flanks, and back of his band, to see order observed and to
ease himself upon; by reason that when Captains do in the field upon swift
running horses or geldings lead their bands, it does give the soldiors
occasion to doubt whether the Captains will tarry with them or not, No private
band neither of horsemen nor footmen being reduced into their single order of
ranks or into any square ought to disorder and break their ranks until the
Captain has given command meant or license to the Ensignebearer to lodge. etc.
upon any accident or occasion of extremity.

And here it is further to be noted, that after all these aforesaid reducements
of a single band into diverse orders and forms as aforesaid, that neither in
Camp, field, nor town, they must break their ranks to go into their quarter to
lodge, until their Captain, Lieutenant, or sergeant do come and give license
to the Ensignebearer to depart out of his place and lodge; which Ensignebearer
departing with his Ensign in his hand, out of his place whereas he before
marched, and himself pronouncing to ^y soldiors next about him that they may
lodge, they all then may, some convenient number acompanying and guarding the
Ensignebearer with his Ensign orderly, and with silence break their ranks
and lodge, and go into their quarter, or may in the Camp or Town make
provision of victual, and other things as they think most requisite: And the
like is to be performed as well by squadrons composed of diverse Ensigns as by
one private band; that is, that a squadron being reduced into form within ^y
market place of a Town, No squadron consisting of diverse bands ought to
disorder and break their ranks until the Coronell or Coronells or Sergeants
Majors do come to the rank of Ensigns, and license them to depart and lodge.
or in the place of assembly within their Camp, they must never break their
ranks to go to lodge, until by the commandment of the Coronell or Sergeant
Mayor to the Ensignbearers given, they understand or see that the
Ensignebearers with their Ensigns in their hands pronouncing license to lodge,
are departed, or departing out of the Center of the squadron; And therewithal
it is further to be noted that all the Ensignebearers of every regiment, must
fix their Ensigns upright in the ground all in one rank, a convenient
distance from and before their quarters, every Ensign directly before the
band that it does belong unto, The Ensignebearers of every Regiment must at the
time of their lodging fix their Ensigns upright in the ground in the place of
assembly in the frunt of their quarters.
I mean in the frunt of every one of their quarters and bands toward the
place of arms and assembly. And thus far concerning the aforesaid different
particularities; And now again I reuert to other brief speeches, and words,
and other orders, proceedinges, and particularities military to be performed
by Captains and officers in the field.

And if a Captain or diverse Captains, or their officers would have their
piquers standing at their piques auanced as is before written to take their
piques into the boultes of their arms, Brief speeches to be used by Captains
to their soldiors, when they would have them to upright their piques
as soldiors do use when they approach very near the place of their watch, or
as piquers ought to do when they are to charge another square of piques, or to
make head and resist a charge of horsemen, then are they to say to the first
rank Upright your piques, which is as much to say, take the butends of your
piques into the palms of your right hands, and carry them in the boultes of
your arms with the points upright toward the heavens: which being performed
by the first rank, then the second, third, fourth and fifth ranks, and so
consequently all the rest of the ranks one after another ought to upright
their piques as aforesaid. And if all the piquers of a band, or diverse bands
being reduced into any form of squadron in the field, and having vprighted
their piques in the boultes of their arms as aforesaid, and that the Sergeant
Mayor or Captains. would have their piquers to charge or to receive a charge
of another square of piquers their Enemies, Brief speeches to be used by
Sergeant Majors or Captai^es to their soldiors when they would have them to
charge or receive a charge of another squadron of piquers.
then are they to say to the first ranks of piquers. Straighten and close your
ranks, couch your piques and charge: which being pronounced, all the piquers
of the first rank must join, and close themselves close in frunt, letting
fall the points of their piques and carrying them close breasthigh with both
their hands steadilie and firmly, the points full in the faces of their
Enemies: And the second rank likewise straightning and closing themselves by
flank and frunt, and joining themselves to the back of the first rank, and
following them step with step carrying their piques abouehand over the
shoulders of the first rank, How piquers should charge or receive a charge of
an other squadron of piquers.
the points of their piques likewise toward the faces of their Enemies, And
the third rank closing and straightning themselves in flank and frunt, and
joining themselves to the back of the second rank; And the fourth rank
likewise straightning and closing themselves to the backs and shoulders of the
third ran^e, and carrying their piques firmly with both their hands over ^y
shoulders of all the ranks before them, the points of their piques likewise
toward the faces of their enemies approaching. And all the rest of the ranks of
piquers following step with step each one at the heels of the other, must
carry their piques still upright in the palms of their hands, and in the
boults of their arms as abouesaid, but yet bending the poin^es of them
somewhat toward their enemies, that they may be seen ready in an instant to
let fall the points of their piques toward their enemies, and to succor the
rank before them upon any necessity, Piquers when they approach their enemies,
are not to shake and clatter their piques, but are to carry them firm and
steady.
or heard encounter of their Enemies. Aduising therwithall that no Captains
nor officers of bands do in any wise teach nor suffer their piquers, when they
shall approach their Enemies to charge them, to shake and clatter their piques,
as some new fantastical Captains and officers of this time do teach their
soldiors to do; as though they would make their enemies afraid before they come
at them: which is more like unto such as do play the Soldans and Sarazins upon
a Stage, then like soldiors piquers in the field, who should at an approach and
charge, carry their piques as steadie and firm as they can possibly, the
points full in the faces of their enemies as is aforesaid.

But in this place I think good further to notefie unto the Readers of these
mine instructions that in the year. 1588. The opinion of such as do vain ly
hold that piquers in squadron should lie at the push of ^y pique, thereby with
thrusts and foines to annoy their enemies, answered.
I did hear some two or three of our Nation of principal offices and charge
Military hold an opinion, that when two squadrons of Enemies all piquers
should come to encounter and confrunt the one with the other, that then the
^ormost ranks of them should lie at the push of the pique and so should annoie
the one the other, with thrusts and foines (as they term it) at all the length
of their Arms and piques, according to the use of single Combattes either in
sport or earnest betwixt piquer and piquer. By which kind of fighting of
squadrons at the push of the pique, I say, that none of the ranks can fight
but only the first rank, because that if they observe their proportionate
distances according to order and discipline, the piques of the second rank are
too short to reach with their points the first rank of their enemies squadron
likewise standing still foining at all the length of their Arms and piques; as
they vainelie imagine: Yea although to the trouble and disorder of the first
rank before them they do thrust and foine over their shoulders; During which
time of the pushing and foyning of the two first ranks of the two squadrons of
enemies, all the rest of the ranks of both the squadrons must by such an
unskillful kind of fighting stand still and looke^ on and cr^ aim, until the
first rank of each squadron has fought their bellies full, or until they can
fight no longer: which is a very scorn and mockery mylitarie to be either
spoken or thought of by any men of war that do pretend to have ^eene any
action effectually performed betwixt any great numbers of piquers reduced into
form of squadrons in the field. For in troth according to all reason and true
experience, such a squadron as should think it their greatest advantage to
fight in that sort, must (contrary to discipline) enlarge themselves in their
ranks and distaunces both in frunt and by flanks, to the intent that they may
have elbow room enough without any impediment by the nearness of the ranks
behind them, to pull back their arms, and to thrust at their enemies
approaching them at all the length they can of their arms and piques, and
again with dexterity to pull back, and retire them to give new thrusts:
which opening and enlargment of ranks being perceived by the contrary squadron
(who if they be skilful men of war) do come closed in their ranks both in
frunt and by flanks, as close as they can possibly march pace with pace and
step with step, as if they were one entire body, carrying their piques with
both their hands breasthigh, all the points of the piques of the first rank of
one evenness and equality not any one preceding the other: And so likewise
the points of all the piques of the second, third and fourth ranks, carrying the
like equality and evenness, but yet the points of every rank of piques,
shorter and further distant almost by a yard from their enemies faces, then the
points of the rank that do preceed them; And all those four ranks marching
or moving forward together pace with pace and step with step, carrying their
piques firmly with both their hands breast high as aforsaid their points full in
their enemies faces, they do altogether give a puissant thrush, the points of
the first rank of piques, first lighting upon the faces of the first rank or
ranks of their enemies; and the points of the second, third, and fourth
ranks, subsequently in a manner all in an instant, do all one after another
in such terrible sort light upon the faces, breasts and bodies of the foremost
ranks of the enemies that do stand still pushing and foining with their piques
in their ranks opened and enlarged, that they never give them any leisure any
ways to pull back and recover the use of their piques to give any new
thrustes, nor yet to close their ranks enlarged, but do overthrow, disorder
and break them with as great facility, as if they were but a flock of geese;
as all men of right consideration and judgment may easily consider and see.

But after all this it may be, that some very curious and not skillful in
actions of Arms, may demand what the foremost ranks of this well ordered and
practiced squadron before mentioned shall do after they have given their
aforesaid puissant blows and thrusts with their piques incase that they do not
at the first incountry overthrow and break the contrary squadron of their
enemies: thereunto I say, that the foremost ranks of the squadron having with
the points of their piques lighted upon the bare faces of the foremost ranks of
their enemies, or upon their Collers, pouldrons, quirasses, tasses, or disarmed
parts of their thighs; by which blows given they have either slain,
ouerthrown, or wounded those that they have lighted upon, or that the points of
their piques lighting upon their armours have glanced off, and beyond them; in
such sort as by the nearnes of the foremost ranks of their enemies before them,
they have not spaceenough again to thrust; nor that by the nearnes of their
fellows ranks next behind them, they have any convenient elbowe room to pull
back their piques to give a new thrust; by means whereof they have utterly
lost the use of their piques, they therefore must either presently let them
fall to the ground as unprofitable; or else may with both their hands dart, and
throw them as far forward into and amongst the ranks of their enemies as they
can, to the intent by the length of them to trouble their ranks, and presently
in the twinkling of an eye or instant, must draw their short arming swords and
daggers, and give a blow and thrust (termed a half reuerse, and thrust) all
at, and in one time at their faces: And therewithal must presently in an
instant, with their daggers in their left hands, thrust at the bottom of their
enemies bellies under the lammes of their Cuyrasses, or at any other disarmed
parts: In such sort as then all the ranks of the whole squadron one at the heels
of the other pressing in order forward, do with short weapons, and with the
force of their ranks closed, seek to wound, open, or bear over the ranks of
their enemies to their utter ruin: At which time and action all the inner
ranks of piques saving the first, 4. or 5. ranks, can with their piques work
no effect, by reason that the said 4. or 5. ranks before them being next to
their enemies, are so near and close together, that they cannot with any
thrust use the points of their piques against their said enemies, without
endangering or disordering their fellows before them; For which causes by all
reason and experience military, short staued, long edged, and short and strong
pointed battleaxes or halbards, of the length of 5. foot or 5. foot and a half
in all their lengths, at the uttermost, in the hands of lusty and well armed
soldiors that do follow the first 5. ranks of piquers at the heels, do both
with blow at the head, and thrust at the face, work wonderful effects, and
do carry all to the ground. By all which particularities before alleged and
declared, I think it may be apparent to all such as are not obstinately
ignorant, that Battles and squadrons of piquers in the field when they do
encounter and charge one another, are not by any reason or experience mylitarie
to stand al day thrusting, pushing, and foining one at another, as some do
most vainelie imagine, but ought according to all experience with one puissant
charge and thrush to enter and disorder, wound, open, and break the one the
other, as is before at large declared.

And if all the piquers of a band or of diverse bands being reduced into any
form of squadron, should be charged with a square or troop of horsemen,
having their piques vprighted in the pal^^s of their hands, and boults of their
arms (as abouesaid) and the sergeant Majors and Captains seeing the Lances
ready to charge them, Brief speeches to be used by a Sergeant Mayor, or a
Captain to their soldiers piquers, when they are ready to be charged by a
squadron of Lances.
they should then say unto their piquers, Straighten and close your ranks close,
couch your piques and make head: which being by them pronounced, all the
soldiors in the first rank should close themselves in an instant in frunt, and
setting the butends of their piques under their right feet firmly to stay the
ends of them from sliding, they should hold their piques with their left
hands, about a yard and a quarter from the butends, leaning their right knees
strongly upon their piques to keep them the more firm, and should direct the
points very low toward the breasts of their enemies horses, How piquers
should resist a charge of Lances.
having all their short arming swords ready drawn in their right hands, the
points forward, ready to kill or hogh any barbed horse or horses that by
chance may break the piques and enter: And then the second rank of piquers
straightning and closing themselves in frunt, should let fall the points of
their piques toward their enemies, and should join themselves close to the
back of the first rank, bearing their piques firmly with both their hands,
almost close to the upper part of their breasts over the shoulders of the first
rank, at all the convenient length they may, with the points toward the
faces of the enemies horses: And the third, fourth, and fifth ranks of piquers
in the same sort should close and join themselves close, each one to the back
and shoulders of the ranks before them: And each one of those ranks should
carry their piques firmly with both their hands over the shoulders of the
ranks before them, with the points of their piques full in the eyes and faces
of the horses, and bodies of the horsemen: And the sixth, seventh, and all the
rest of the backer ranks straightning and closing themselves as aforesaid
should carry their piques upright in the boultes of their arms, but yet the
points somewhat bending forward toward the enemy ready always to favor
and succor the ranks before them: And thus all the ranks of the whole
squadron being united, closed and in corporated as it were into one entire
body, should with mighty hand resist and repulse any furious charge of
horsemen. How piquers should receive a charge of Lances in case the Sergeant
Mayor or Captains should think good to place any weapons of volee before them.


But it is to be noted that in case the Sergeant Mayor be disposed to reduce
three ranks of Harqueb^ziers, or else two ranks of mosquetiers, and those not
too thick before the frunt of the squadron of piques, to the intent to give a
volee of short at the Lances approaching; then the piquers of the first rank
must not set their piques under their right feet with their swords drawn (as
aforesaid) but the said two ranks of mosquetiers, The foremost ranks of a
squadro^ of piquers cannot con^eniently and aptly encouer and guard above 3
ranks of Harquebuziers nor above 2 ranks of musque^^^rs, against the charge
of Lances.
or the three ranks of harquebuziers, seeing the Lances ready to charge them,
must very orderly retire themselves almost close to the forefeete of the
first rank of piquers; and there falling upon their right knees, they must
set their left elbowes upon their left knees, the more firmly and steadilie
to bear and discharge their mosquets or harguebuzes, as from very steadie
restes at the horses or horsemen coming in their Carrire within 10. or. 12. or
15. Every Geometrical pace does consist of 5 foot, and every foot does
consist of 12 Geometrical inches, or inches (as we term them) by the Rule, and
so it is to be understood by the Reader in all my writings, where I speak of
paces.
paces.

And then the first rank of piquers, as also the second, third, and fourth,
How and in what distances harqu^buziers or mosquetiers are to discharg their
pieces from under a squadron of piques.
must bear all their piques firmly abouehand close to the upper parts of their
breasts, the points of their piques full in the breasts and faces of the
horses; and so must encouer and guard the shot under their piques, and bravely
repulse and disorder the Lances. The order that mosquetiers should observe in
charging their pieces in the foresaid action.
Aduising all Conductors and leaders of mosquet shot that in this or the like
action of arms before declared they do instruct and give order to al their
mosquetiers to charge their mosquets with 5. or 6. round hailshot of war of the
height of Reistres pistol bullets which are called by the Spaniards Perdigones
de guerra: and that they do thrust between the powder and the hailshot some
convenient quantity of brown or soft paper, or something else to restrain
and keep the powder close together, and then to put in the round haileshot of
war, and again to thrust after the same a convenient quantity of brown
paper or something else to keep the haileshot close together, and to restrain
both powder and shot; in such sort as thereby the powder may carry the haileshot
the further, and give the greater blow, which within 10. 15. or 20. paces is of
great effect.

But in this case the mosquetiers must take great heed, that they do not
ouercharge their pieces with powder, nor with above the number of.5. or.6.
haileshott of war at the most, as aforesaid; least that their pieces should
break or recoile, and so overthrow them to the trouble of the piquers, from
under whose piques they are to discharge their pieces: And this manner of
discharging of haileshot of war by mosquetiers is for diverse times and places
of service, of great effect, so as they give no volee at the enemy above.20.
paces at the furthest. And I do further advertise that no musketeers, nor
harquebuziers, reduced under the guarde of a sqadron of piquers, should give
any volee, or volees of shot neither with full bullets nor with any haileshot
of war at anysquadron or troop of Lances charging, or approaching to charge
neither.300.200. nor yet.100. paces, with intent to recharge again, and to
give a new volee: Because that both by reason and experience the first volee
either of mosquets, or harquebuezes, being charged as they ought to be either
with haileshott of war, or full bullets, and being given within.10. 15. or.
20. paces at the Lances coming in their Carrire to charge, does terrefie,
wound and kill more horses and men, then. 10. volees of muskets or harquebuzes
given. 300. 200. or. 100 paces distant can do. And this encouering of shot with
piques (abouesayd) at my trayning of Master Barringtons, Master Westons, and
Master Maxeies bands at Chelmesford this last summer. 1588. I did show unto
them and to their officers both by actual demonstrations and reasons with
diverse other perticularities appertaining both to horsemen and footmen.

But now whereas there be diverse that have conceived an opinion from the
discourse of Mounser de la Noue, The oppinion of Mounsieur de la Noue.
that incase there be any great overplus of harquebuze or mosquet shot more
then a squadron of piquers that is without horsemen can encouer and guarde under
their piques from the charge of a squadron or diverse squadro^s of Lances, that
upon that occasion they should be reduced into square, and environed or empa^ed
in frunt, flanks and back, with 6. or 7. ranks of piquers; and that y^ Lances
coming in their squadrons to charge them in frunt, in flanks, or back; y^
piquers closing themselves close in frunt, flanks, and back, and bending
themselves forward with their piques to encouer and guarde certain musketeers
and harquebuziers placed before them, as also to resist and repulse a charge of
horsemen; that then the ranks of the aforsaid harquebuziers placed within the
ranks of piques, may give a volee of shot over the piquers heads before them,
at so much of the bodies of the horsemen as do appear above the heads of the
piquers, greatly to the danger and mischief of the Lances charging. Certenlie
I do think that the opinion^ of so sufficient a man of war and old soldior is
no ways to be contemned, but greatly to be regarded* Howbeit when I come to
consider that the same was never yet put in practice in any service of the
field: and therefore does rest but only in imagination, I will (with the help
of almighty God) to the intent that the true effect and effects of the same
may be y^ more apparent, al^edge diverse reasons wherefore (in mine opinion) the
same can be no ways profitable, but very dangerous to the whole squadron, and
of very small or no annoiance to the Lances; and my reasons are these: First,
when a squadron of piques are to make head and resist a squadron of Lances
coming in their Carrire to charge them, The opinion of the author fortified
with reasons contrary to the opinion of Mounsieur de la Noue.
they are to straighten and close themselves by frunt and flanks as close as
they can, making themselves as it were, one entire body, to y^ intent that they
may the more fi^mely and strongly stand together with their piques bent to the
encouering and guarding of the mosquetiers before them, and to the resisting
and repulsing of the horsemen, which when the foremost. 7. ranks have performed;
then if the harquebuziers that are within the piques in the center of the
battle, as also the piquers of the flanks and back, to the intent that the
squadron may keep proportion and form, do likewise straighten and close
themselves in their ranks by frunt and flanks, as the piquers before them
have done; it comes to pass that they are so close together, that having no
elbowe rome to discharge their pieces at some kind of point and blanke: the
discharging of their shot upon diverse accidents does become more dangerous to
their fellows piquers in the ranks before them, then any ways to the
Lances; because that being so near together, every each one do so trouble
the arms, pieces, and hands of their companions; that when they think to
shoot over their fellows piquers heads at the Lances, they are more likely
to shoot too low, and to kill some of their fellow piquers in the ranks
before them, to the danger of the disordering of the whole squadron: Besides
that it is wonderful dangerous if any flaske, or tuchboxe by any accident
should fall on fire by so many matches light, being so near together, which if
it should happen by one flaske or touchboxe taking fire; there is no doubt but
that the same would set on fire a great sort of other flaskes and touchboxes,
burning and scorching many soldiors; in such sort, as that one accident alone,
would cause so great disorder and fear, that it were enough to discorder and
overthrow a whole squadron if it were of ten thous^^^ men; although they were
the most practiced soldiors (...) are in Christendom.

But peradventure some body not experienced in yt straight ning and closing of a
squadron of armed footmen by frunt and flanks, will say; y^ although all the
ranks of piquers both by frunt, flanks, and back, do straighten and close
themselves to make head against ye lances (as aforsaid) yet that ye
harquebuziers that are within the squadro^ may remain so enlarged in their
ranks, as yt they shall have so much elbowe room without any ways troubling or
touching one another, that they may with great facility discharg their pieces
over ye heads of the piquers before them without any ways troubling them, or
endangering the firing of their flasks and touchboxes to the great mischief of
the Lances. Whereunto it is to be answered, An objection answered.
that if every rank of the whole squadron be of one number of soldiors, as al
well formed squadrons are; and that by flanks ye number of ranks be of the like
number to the frunt and back; whereby it comes to pass that the squadron is a
just square in frunt, in flanks, and back; or that the squadron be double as
broad; that is, as broad again in frunt and back, as it is by flanks, or else
that the squadron be triple as many, that is three times as many in frunt as by
flanks, or more or fewer according to the nature and advantage of the ground,
or of other occasions and advantages, that may seem best to the Sergeant
Mayor, or to the Sergeant Mayor general that has the ordering of ye said
squadron: then in which of those forms soever, or any other that the squadron
of footmen should be reduced into; the foremost 7. ranks of piquers in frunt,
straightning, and closing themselves in their ranks to make head against y^
horsemen charging (as aforesaid) and likewise the 7. ranks of piquers at the
back of y^ squadron straightning, and closing themselves, and turning their
faces and piques backward, to the intent to make frunt and head against a
charge of Lances that would charge them in back: and the harquebuziers yt do
remain within the squadron empaled on every side with 7. ranks of piquers (as
aforesaid) still remaining enlarged in their ranks to have the more commodity
to discharge their pieces over the piquers heads; of diverse disproportions and
disorders that must by the forming of this foresaid squadron of necessity
succeed by the harquebuziers remaining still enlarged in their ranks, and the
piquers straightned and closed in their ranks: This one chief and most
notorious deformed disorder, that does include all the rest, must needs ensue
to the present ruin and overthrow of the whole squadron; that is, by 2. or 3.
charges of the Lances given at one time upon the open and unguarded places of
the squadron; and that by reason that ye harquebuziers remaining still enlarged
in their ranks in frunt and by flanks, the more orderly to discharge their
pieces, do occupy so great a quantity of ground, that all the ranks of the
piquers that do empale the harquebuziers of the right and left flanks
straightning and closing themselves by frunt and flanks as the ranks of the
piquers of the frunt and back have done, cannot possibly perform the same
in any such sort, but that the said piquers of both the flanks must remain a
great deal too short to close themselves, and join with the 7, ranks of
piquers in frunt, and the 7. ranks of piquers in back: whereby of necessititie
it would come to pass, that there would be 4. open places betwixt the 4. or
rather 8. corners of the squadron unguarded with piques; where the Lances
without receiving any resistance, nor so much as one blow of the point of a
pique, might charge and give in amongst the harquebuziers within the body of
the squadron, to the disordering and utter overthrow of the whole squadron with
great facility, Weapons of fire are no ways to be placed nor yer to be
suffered to enter within the body of a squadron of piques.
as any man well practiced and of good experience and judgment in matters
military, may easily consider and conceive. For which causes, dangerous
accidents, and reasons before alleged mine opinion is, that I would never
place nor yet suffer any weapons of fire, to enter within the body of my
squadron of piques.

But now furthermore, if any number of soldiers of what weapon soever they
be, being reduced into any form of square, and that the Sergeant Mayor or
Captains would make of flank frunt; then are they to go to that flank and
side, that they would make frunt, and being right against the midst, somewhat
distant from the flank, Brief speeches to be used by Captains to their
soldiors when they should make of flank (...).
they should say to their soldiors aloud. Frunt to me soldiers: which being by
them pronounced; the first rank next unto them is to turn their faces toward
them, and so subsequentlie all the rest of the ranks one after another: But
because that by making the flank frunt, the squadron comes to be in
disproportion, by reason that the distances of the ranks of a squadron, being
reduced into any form of square to march or to fight, are greater by flanks;
that is betwixt rank and rank, then they are by frunt; How a Sarg^ant Mayor
or Captain in making of flank^ frunt is to reduce their piquers into their due
proportion are distances.
that is betwixt soldior and soldior in frunt: The Sergeant Mayor and Captains
in making the flank frunt, must straighten all the ranks in frunt and enlarge
them by flanks; and so reduce them into their due and proportionate distances.

And incase the sergeant Mayor or Captains will make of the back frunt, then
they are to go to the back and pronounce with a loud voice the like words,
and then all the ranks are to turn their faces and to make their frunt that
ways: How to make of back frunt.
And as these brief words pronounced for the purpose aforesaid are to be used
unto soldiers footmen; so the like words for the same effect and purpose to
make flank frunt, may serve for men at arms, dimilaunces, or light horsemen;
as for example, If a Coronell or Captain of men at arms, or dimilaunces having
reduced their Lances into any form or squadron, be disposed to make of
flank frunt; then they placing them selves upon the side or flank as
aforesaid, and saying to their horsemen with a high voice, How Captains or
Coronells of horsemen a^ to make of flank frunt.
Frunt to me Lances, or if they be light horsemen, Frunt to me spears, all the
horsemen of what armor and weapon soever they be, must turn the faces of
their horses, and make frunt that way, having regard to reform and reduce
themselves into their proportionate distances by frunt and flank as aforsaid.

And now having written concerning the ordering and forming of private bands
and companies of soldiors, ^ does behoue the General and the lord Marshal of
an Army as also the ^ergeante Mayor general always to ^aue about them a
^erfite roll of all the Coronells and Cap^ains names with the ^umber of every
^ne of their Regi^ents, and what ^umber of soldiors also do appertain ^o
every ^nsigne and ^and as well of horse men as of footmen ^hroughout the whole
army, that ^hereby upon all occasions they may give present orders and
directions.
with diverse and sundry particularities concerning as well squadrons composed
of diverse bands, as of single bands: I will with the help of Almighty God,
proceed to show how a squadron should be redu^ed into form in the open
fields, to march or fight, that by the curious forming of that first one
squadron with diverse particularties concerning the same; all such as do
profess arms, and are of consideration may with great facility see and
observe all such particularaties as they shall think therein worth the nothing
and observing: And therefore I say for examples sake: If a Coronell or his
Sergeant Mayor of a Regiment of 4000. footmen of diverse weapons be disposed to
reduce 2100. piquers of the same Regiment into squadron, and that he would
form his squadron double as broad, or a third part broader, or more, or less
in frunt then by flank; then he first is to consider of how many piquers he
will make his frunt, that is, how many soldiors every rank from frunt to back
shall contain, The way and order ^ow a squadron should bear duced unto form
in the o^en fields, either to march or fight.
as also of how many ranks the same squadron by flank, or flanks shall
consist; and therewithal of how many divisions or compertiments of bands he
will form the said squadron; and according to the same, the Sergeant Mayor
must command all the Captains or their Lieutenants, All Coronells and
Sergeants Majors of Regiments as well of ^or^emen as of foot^en ought to have
^ontinually about them a Roll of all ^he Captains and their Lieutenants names
that are in their Regimentes ^ith the number of soldiors and diffe^ent armors
and ^eapons that do be^ong to every band ^r company thereby ^o give present
di^ections.
the piquers of whose bands are to enter into squadron, to feparate them from
all other sorts of weapons, and to reduce them into so many or so many in every
rank, and so many ranks by flank as he before has propounded and resolved
with himself. As for example, having 2100. piquers to reduce into one battle,
and that he thinks 55. soldiers in ^ rank, and 38. ranks by flanks to be a
convenient form of squadron according to the nature of the ground to march and
fight; he then may make his compertiments of the piquers of every private
band, of odd numbers; or of different odd numbers, as of 5. and 7. or else of
even and odd numbers, as of 4. of 5. of 6. and of 7. according to the
greatness or smalnesse of the number of piquers of every private band, incase
there be none of the numbers too small; which if any of them be, then they are
to be united and incorporated with the compertiments of the piquers of other
bands; always observing that the different numbers of al those compertiments
being united in frunt do make just 55. soldiers, and by flanks 38. ranks.
Three different formings of squadrons.
And therefore I will begin with three different formings of squadrons, which
of all others are most ready and best; The first.
of the which the first is, That a Coronell or his Sergeant Mayor having
considered and cast how many compertimentes or divisions of piquers he will
make the frunt of his squadron of; and that the same compertiments be they even
or od, or of compertiments both of even and odd numbers, so as they all united
into one body of squadron do make in frunt but the just number of 55.
soldiors: then the Coronel or his sergeant Mayor determining to form his
squadron, and seeing all those compertiments of piquers by their Captians,
divided and separated from all the weapons of volee and other weapons, and
therefore ready to be reduced into squadron; he then is to say to the captain
that does lead that compertiment, or company that is next him, if he thinks
good to begin his squadro^ with that compertiment: March up to yonder ground,
pointing to the same with his warder; and there you and your company auance
your piques and make a pause: which being by that company or compertiment
performed; then he is to say to the Captains of two other compertiments or
companies: March up with your company upon the right flank, and you with
your company by the left flank of yonder compertiment, and incorporate your
compertiments in frunt, flanks, and back, with that company or compertiment;
Then the Coronelles drummer Mayor, or rather his trompetter according to the
use of the Suissers in respect that the soundes and commandementes of the same
may be the better and further heard and understood for the forming of
battles and squadrons, then the strokes of Drums can be; is presently to
sound the forming of the squadron by doubling by both the sides or flanks at
one time, according unto the order of the doubling of the 3. first
compertimentes; which being by all the rest of the compertiments performed; I
mean by marching up and doubling themselves upon both the flanks or sides
of the 3. first compertiments formed; all marching and succeeding one another
both upon the right and left flanks in a manner at one time; and so the
squadron being reduced into form; the first compertiment by this kind of
forming and doubling upon both flanks of the same, is now come to be the
middlemost compertiment of the whole squadron: and this manner of forming of a
squadron by doubling the compertiments upon both flanks at one time, is one
of the readiest, and best of all others, if the ground do permit the
performance thereof.

Then there is another order in forming of squadron; The second way to form
squadrones.
and that may be termed to form and double a squadron with companies, or
compertiments by back, and that is to be performed in this sort; First, that a
Sergeant Mayor having considered which ways he will make the frunt of his
squadron, he is then to command that every company or compertiment that are
to enter into squadron shall be reduced into so many soldiers by flank, as he
does mean to make his frunt of, having regard also to the number of the
ranks that he will make his whole squadron of by flanks: which being by his
direction, as also by the sound of the Coronels trompetter thrughout all the
companies or compertiments performed; then he may say to the Captain of the
first compertiment that he will make his frunt of, pointing or directing with
his warder: March to yonder ground, and there auaunce your piques and make a
pause, and make of your right flank frunt, and reform your distances
according to discipline both by frunt and flanks, or if he has determined to
make his frunt of the left flank, he may then say, Make of your left flank
frunte, and reform your distances both by frunte and flanks according as he
has before determined either the one ways or the other to make his frunt:
which making of frunt either of the right, or of the left flank is to be
understood that they should turn their faces and weapons one of those ways:
which being by them performed, then if they were. 55. ranks, and. 5. in every
rank in their marching, they are now by making of their flank frunt become.
55. in frunt, that is so many in every rank, and by flank only. 5. ranks:
which advancing of their piques, and pause, and making of flank frunt by the
first company, or compertiment performed; then he is to say to another
compertiment of the like number of ranks by flank, be they of even or od
numbers it is imports not so as he fail not in his great and general
account of the number of the ranks of the whole squadron by flank, or
flanks. March and double your selves by the back of yonder conpertiment, or
company, and there (...) make of flank frunt, as that company has done.
Which being by them preformed, then persentlie, but rather at the first, the
Coronelles Trompetter is to sound the doubling of their Companies into squadro^
by back, which being by all the companies or compertiments performed and
reduced into their convenient distances both by frunt and flanks according to
discipline either to march or to fight, then the Sergeant Mayor may give order
and reduce upon the flanks and corners of the squadron all the different sorts
of weapons of volee into as many forms as he lists, of sleeves, wings,
hearses, troops etc, and may back as many of them with light armed piquers,
and halbarders, or battleaxes, as the number or remnante of those weapons will
give them leave.

And yet there is another order of forming of a Squadron by doubling and
redoubling of the compertiments upon the back of the first compertiment, which
with diverse others, because I do not allow them for so good as these before
set down, I omit; and therefore proceeding to the third order of forming of
a squadron by doubling the compertiments only by one flank, that is only
either upon the right, The third order of forming of squadron:
or upon the left flank, with diverse and sundry particularities concerning
the same; I say that incase I had a regiment of. 4000. footmen of diverse sorts
of weapons, as abouesayd, and that I were disposed to reduce. 2100. piquers
into squadron of. 55. in frunt, and 38. by flanks, and that I thought good to
make my compertiments altogether of like od numbers, as of. 5. soldiors in
every rank from frunt to back, and the same of. 38. ranks by flanks, I
would then divide them into. 11. compertiments of. 5. in every rank throughout
every compertiment, which united are. 55. piquers in every rank: and in number
of ranks by flanks. 38. every which compertiment of. 5. from frunt to back
co^teining. 190. soldiors, the whole squadron consisting of. 11. compertiments
as aforesaid, does come to consist of. 2090. soldiors; the overplus which
lacks number to make a rank and therefore to be termed a broken rank. 10.
soldiors; who are either to march and place themselves with the rank of
Ensigns, or otherwise ready to be employed as the Sergeant Mayor shall think
most convenient. Now having all these. 11. compertiments in the field separated
from all the rest of the weapons; and being disposed to reduce them presently
into form, the Coronell, or Sergeant Mayor either leading them himself, or
pointing with his warder in his hand to the ground to y^ which they shall march
unto, is to use these brief speeches, or the like to the Captain that does
lead the first band, or compertime^t March up to that ground and there advance
your piques and make a pause; then presently after he is to say to the second
band or compertiment, March up and double your selves by the left flank of the
first compertiment, and so subsequently he is to commau^d his trumpettor to
sound, as also otherwise to give direction to the rest of the compertiments
that they shall double themselves every one upon the left flank of the other:
but after that he has used the brief speeches aforesaid to the two first
compertiments, then besides the sounds of the trompettor for the forming of the
squadro^, if he be not disposed to gallop with his horse by ye flank of the
rest of ye compertiments yt are further off behind, and to use the like speeches
of doubling by flanks as aforesaid, he may by certain signs that he may use to
accustom his Captains and officers unto, either with his hand, or with his
warder, direct them to the doubling of their ranks by flanks as aforesaid,
which squadron, with all the Ensigns guarded with their halbardes, or
battleaxes placed in the Center, or betwixt the 2. middle ranks of the same
being by the Coronell, or Sergeant Mayor with so great facility performed,
and by him and his officers straightly looked into, that all their ranks as
well in frunt as by flank, do observe their most convenient and proportionate
distaunces either to march or to fight, he then may form his sleeves, wings,
squares, hearsses and troops of harquebuziers, Archers, and mosquetiers, and
back as many of them with the rest of the piques and battleaxes, as the ground
and the said remnant of those weapons will give them leave, or as the
approaching and coming of the enemies shall give them occasion. Squadrons may
be formed of compe^timents of like odd numbers, or of diffe^ent odd numbers, or
o^ di^^e^ent even and odd numbers, as also of like even numbers.
Now as this squadron is formed altogether of compertiments of like od numbers,
so may the Sergeant Mayor form the very same squadron with compertiments of
different odd numbers, as with compertiments of ^. and 7. or with
compertiments of different even and odd numbers, as of 4. 5. and 6. so as they
all united in frunt do come to make 55. soldiers, and by flan^e 38. ranks, as
is before declared: which different particularities with many others concerning
as well the ordering of horsemen as footmen, I have set down by demonstration in
a book which I mean shortly to put in print, entitled. Certain military
discourses, and Arithmetical tables, with diverse forms and demonstrations for
a Lord Martial or for a sergeant Mayor to form squadrons and to reduce both
horsemen and footmen into diverse and many forms of battles, by me Composed 1585.
or rather 1580.

But now this foresaid squadron being reduced into the form of 55. by frunt
and 38. by flanks, overplus a broken rank of 10. soldiers as aforesaid, if
the Sergeant Mayor upon the coming of the enemy, or upon any other occasion
shall think requisite to make the said squadron broader in frunt, that is of
more soldiers in every rank, and shorter by flank, that is to be
understood of fewer ranks; then he may draw up by flank, from the back, or
rereward (as some terms it) as many ranks as he thinks convenient. As for
example, If he be disposed to draw up 4. ranks of piquers by flank to frunt,
he is then to say unto his deputy Sergeant Mayor, or to any other such
Captain or officer that does accompany him; How a Sergea^t Mayor having
reduced his squadron into form should upon any occasion make it brother in
frunt and shorter by flank.
Draw up 4. ranks from the back of the squadron by flank: which brief
speech or the like being by him pronounced, his said Lieutenant, Sergeant
Mayor, or other Captain or officer by him appointed, is presently to go to
the left flank of the last 4. ranks in back, and to say unto them: Frunt
unto me ye 4. last ranks, and let this word, frunt, from the left flank
pass throughout to the right flank; and that incase he do pronounce those
words upon the left flank. Upon which words pronounced, and the words
passed from the one flank to the other, and their faces and weapons turned
toward him; then he is to lead them up by the left flank until they come
to make even frunt with the foremost rank of the squadron; which being
performed, then of 55. that the squadron was before in every rank from frunt to
back, it is now come to be 59. throughout all the ranks from frunt to back.

But here it is to be noted, Diverse ways and means for a Sergeant Mayor to
place any overplus of broken ranks.
that this addition of 4. piquers in every rank being drawn up by the flank
of the squadron as aforesaid, there do remain overplus 21. ranks, of 4. in
every rank, which do in all make 84. piquers; of the which number the
sergeant mayor may if he does so think it requisite, draw up 34. ranks
more of 2 in every rank, by the flank of the squadron; which performed, then
the squadron does consist in frunt of 61. soldiers, and by flank of 34.
ranks; but then there does remain an overplus of 16. soldiers, which li^^e
number he may reserve to employ in any place of service where he shall think
most requisite; but if the Sergeant Mayor shall not think it convenient to
enlarge his whole squadron from frunt to back with 2. soldiers in every rank
as aforesaid: then he may with 59. soldiers taken out of the number of 84.
that did before remain, (in which number of 84. soldiers, the 16. soldiers
overplus before remaining are contained) increase his squadron in number of one
rank by back, as by drawing those 59. piquers in one rank by the back of
the squadron, then the squadron from 34. that it was before, is now come to be
of 35. ranks, overplus 25. soldiers, with which 25. soldiers and with the
10. soldiers that did first remain of the 2100. that were reduced into the
squadron, who were to be placed in the rank of Ensigns as aforesaid; those
10. soldiers being drawn again from thence, and annexed unto the 25. do in
all make 35. which 35. soldiers being drawn up in length by the flank of the
squadron, do increase every one of the 35. ranks 1. souldior in every rank;
so as of 59. soldiers that every rank did consist before; they are now by this
increase come to be just 60. soldiers in every rank, and in ranks by flanks
35. ranks, besides the rank of Ensigns with their guard of Halbarders, that
are p^aced in the midst or Center of the squadron: by which kind of reducement
the whole squadron comes to contein just 2100. soldiors, overplus, 0. that is
to be understood, not so much as one soldier. How a Lo^ Marshall or a
Sergeant Mayor their squadron being in fight, should draw up a sleeue of
Piquers to assail their enemies in flank.


And it is further to be noted that if another squadron of like number in frunt
should come to confrunt and ioin in battle with this squadron, and being entered
into fight; and that the Coronell or Sergeant Mayor, or the Lord Marshall of
the field should think it their advantage to charge and assail the contrary
squadron with a sleeue of piquers in flank, then the Sergeant Mayor may draw
5. or 6. ranks or more as he thinks good from the back of the squadron
up by any of both the flanks of the same squadron, but distant the length of
2. piques or more, to the intent that by that little distance of the length of
2. piques as aforesaid, when they have marched up, and do find themselves
right against the flank of their enemies squadron, they may have space to
turn themselves and make frunt toward their enemies flank, and to close their
ranks by frunt and flanks, and with y^ points of their piques to charge their
enemies in flank: And thus far concerning the ordering and forming of
squadrons in diverse sorts, as is before set down.

But now further, The squadron being formed how a Sergeant Mayor should make of
either of the flanks frunt, observing the same proportion in frunt and number
of ranks by flanks, that they were before he made of flank frunt.
this squadron being thus formed into 60. soldiers in frunt, and of 35.
soldiers by flank, which is by flank 35. ranks, then if upon any occasion
of the coming of the enemy, or upon any other cause, the Coronell and
Sergeant Mayor shall think requisite to make of one of the flanks frunt: As
for example of the left flank frunt, and that he would reduce them into the
very same form of squadron both in number of ranks by flank, as also of
number of soldiers in every rank that they were before; then the sergeant
Mayor ought himself on horseback if he think it requisite, or else to
command his Lieutenant Sergeant on foot presently to go athwart 25. ranks: It
is not lawful for any other officers of the field to pass on horseback
athwart the ranks of a squadron reduced into any form but only the Lieutenant
General, the Lord Marshall or the sergeant Mayor mayor of an Army, but yet it
is lawful ^or a Cor^nel, or Sergeant Mayor to pass on horseback a thwart y^
ranks of any band, or squadr^n that is of their own Regiment and not any
other Captain nor officer.
not from flank to flank, but from frunt to back, that is to go down by
right line betwixt the five and thirtith soldior of his right hand, and the
five and twentieth souldior of his left hand, from frunt straight to back; and
passing through them he is to say to the soldiers that are upon his left hand:
Keep your selves in frunt as you are, notwithstanding that the soldiers of my
right hand, do make flank frunt: the effect of which his words being
throughout signified to the soldiers that are next unto him of his left hand,
presently the Captains and their drummers that did march in frunt before the
7. compertiments of 5. in every compertiment as above is set down; are to
march and go to the left flank, which now shall be made frunt: but the other
Captains and drummers that are in frunt before the other 5. compertiments are
still to keep their places until they receive further direction.

And now the Captains and their drummers of the compertimentes aforesaid being
come before the left flank; the Coronels drummer is first to begin to strike,
and the rest immediately to do the like, that all the soldiers of that left
flank are to make frunt toward the Captains and drummers; that is, to turn
their faces and weapons toward them: Or else the Sergeant Mayor may command
the Captains, or in galloping or passing on horseback by the flank, may
himself say with a loud voice, Frunt to me soldiers: upon which words
pronounced, or upon the sound of the drums for that purpose, all the soldiers
of flank, are presently, to make frunt; and are therewithal presently to
reform their distances as well in frunt, as by flanks; which by this making
of flank frunt is grown into great disproportion: which reforming of their
distances as well by frunt as flank, is to be performed by straightning their
ranks in frunt and enlarging them by flanks into their convenient and
proportionate distances, either to march or fight.

Which being performed; then the Sergeant Mayor to the intent to give the more
ground and room to the other part of the squadron of 5. compertiments to
reduce themselves by flank, is to command the Coronelles Drummer and so the
rest to strike a march; which done, then the Captains and all that part of
the squadron that have made flank frunt, are orderly one rank after another
to shoulder their piques and march after their Captains but 50. or 60. paces
where the Drummers again striking and sounding a pause; all that foresaid part
of the squadron, are presently one rank after another to advance their piques
and make a stand; which being performed, then the sergeant Majors Lieutenant is
presently to command the drummers that do remain upon the frunt of the 5.
compertiments that have not altered their frunt nor flanks, to strike a march;
which being performed, he and all their captains must with that part of ye
squadron march certain paces straight forward, thereby to take the more compass
of ground: and then turning upon the left hand, must draw them up almost close
by the left flank, to the frunt of that part of the squadron that have
already made of flank frunt: Al which being performed according to the orders
before set down, the whole squadron is now come again to be in the same
proportion both in number of soldiers in every rank, as also of number of
ranks by flanks that they were at the first; that is of 60. in every rank, and
35. ranks.

But here it is to be noted, How the Ensign bearers of the first part of the
squadro^ that made of flank frunt are to bring themselves again into order.
that the rank of Ensignebearers of the first part of the squadron that made
flank frunt with their guardes of halbarders by this making of flank frunt,
being brought into disorder, by reason that now they are not in rank as they
were before, must presently upon the stroke of the drummer commanded by the
Coronels Ensignebearer march up, not betwixt the ranks but through the ranks
of the soldiers, till they al come betwixt the seventeenth rank before them,
and the eighteenth rank behind them; and there betwixt those two ranks they
must reduce themselves into order and rank; which being by them done, then
both they and the rest of the other Ensignebearers of that part of the squadron
that marched up and reduced themselves by flank as aforesaid, being in one
rank, have before them just 17. ranks, and behind them 18. which in all are
35. ranks.

All which performed, then the sleeves, wings, and troops of the different
weapons of volee that did before arm the right and left flanks, and all 4.
corners of the squadron, are again by their officers to be lead and reduced
into the same forms upon the right and left flanks, that they were before that
the squadron did make of flank frunt; or else may be reduced into any other
variety of forms that the Coronell or Sergeant Mayor shall think most
convenient; And so march forward if the plainness of the Country, and other
requisite causes, do cause and permit them so to do.

But now it is further to be noted that if the same squadron accompanied with
sleeves, wings, and troops of diverse sorts of weapons of volee as aforesaid,
not having the enemy in sight nor near, should happen in their march to come
to a straight passage; where betwixt rocks mountains and hills or any such
like there could not pass above.5. soldiors in a rank; and that there were no
other open way near by many miles for the Regiment to pass, but only the
same; then the Coronell if he be alone with his Regiment of.4000. men, The
order that is to be taken by a Coronell if his squadron accompanied with
sleeves, wings, and troops of diverse sorts of weapons of volee should happen
in their march to come to a straight how they should march and pass through
the same.
as aforesaid, is presently to take order that the highest parts and sides of
the mountains, rocks, and hills be possessed of both sides of the passage,
with certain numbers of harquebuziers, and some mosquetiers, as also of some
light armed halbarders to back them; that thereby the rest of the shot and
squadron of armed men may the more safely pass through the straight; which
being perfomed, then he is to send the one half of the shot of all the diverse
sorts of volee yt did arm the right and left flanks of the squadron to march
before through the straight, I mean all such weapons of volee as did arm the
foreparts of both the flanks and frunt of the squadron, and not the other
half of shot that did arm the hinder parts of the flanks, and back of the
squadron, who are for the guard of the back or Rereward of the squadron, and
for diverse other causes, and accidental employments to remain hindermost and
to march.5. in a rank, and to follow the last compertiment of piquers into the
straight, and that I would wish to be performed in this order and sort
following: First I would send the compertiments of mosquetiers of the right
flank marching according to the narrownes of the straight.5: in a rank, and
the harquebuziers of the same flank after them, backed with some light armed
piquers and halbarders; then I would send the compertiments of archers likewise
of the right flank marching.5. in a rank, then I would that the compertiments
of mosquetiers and harquebuziers that were for the guard of the left flank
marching. 5. in a rank, backed likewise with some number of light armed piquers
and halbardars, should follow the archers of the right flank, and that after
them should follow the archers of the forepart corner of the left flank, which
different compertiments of weapons of volee of the forepart of the right flank
being marched through ye straight into the plain, should march so far on the
right hand, as there should be space and room enough for the compertiments of
the piquers of the right flank to reduce themselves into form upon their
left flank, and that then every sort and weapon of volee should reduce
themselves into the same forms, of sleeves, wings, and troops and other such
like, as they were upon the right corner and flank of the squadron before that
they marched into the straight: Where the compertiments of the weapons of
weapons of volee of the forepart of the right and left flanks of the Squadron
being marched through the straight, should reduce themselves into form.
Then would I that the different Compertiments of the like weapons of volee of
the foreparte of the left flank of the squadron that have followed the first
compertiments and are now likewise come through the straight, should march so
much on the left hand of the plain as they may leave ground and space enough
for the squadron of piquers to reduce themselves into their form betwixt them
and the weapons of volee of the right flank, and that they there should again
reduce themselves into the like forms of sleeves, wings, and troops that
they were upon the forepart of the left flank before they marched through the
straight. But it is to be noted, that presently upon the entering of the last
compertiments of the forepart of the weapons of volee of the left flank into
the straight, that the Sergeant Mayor is to come to the frunt of the right
flank of the squadron if the same flank be next unto the passage, and he is
in brief words to say. Single. 5. in a rank throughout from frunt to back
and march after the last compertiment of shot through the straight, Brief
speeches to be used by the Sergeant Mayor to the piquers, before they enter
into the passage.
and being marched thorough into the plain, Auaunce your piques and make a
pause. Upon which his direction the Captain with his whole compertiment of 5.
in a rank from frunt to back is to single the same from the rest of the
squadron and to follow the shot and march into the straight; upon the
separation and marching of which compertiment, then the Sergeant Mayor is to
say to the Captain of the next compertiment. Single your compertiments of 5.
throughout, and follow, and march straight after the first compertiment through
the straight, and being marched thorough into the plain, double your
compertiment by the left flank of the foremost compertiment of piquers, which
compertiment being something separated and marching into the straight; then
upon the same direction received by all the Captains that are before the
frunt of the rest of the compertiments, as well by such brief speeches as
aforesaid, as by the sound of the trompettor and drums, they are all
subsequentlie and orderly with their compertimentes to separate them and to
follow one another by right line; and as every one of those Captains with
their compertimentes have marched one after another thorough the straight into
the plain; so they are with all celeritie to reduce themselves by the left
flank the one of the other into the same form of squadron that they were
before they entered into the straight; How ye piquers being marched through the
straight are to reduce themselves again into their former squadron.
and that is, that the Captain of the third compertiment of 5. in a rank
throughout, as aforesaid, seeing the second compertiment reduced and doubled
by the left flank of the first Compertiment; he likewise is to reduce his
compertiment by the left flank of the second; and so consequently the
fourth, fifth, and all the rest of the compertiments, are by their Captains
to be lead and reduced by the left flanks the one of the other; which being by
them performed, and the squadron reduced into the same form of number of
ranks, and of soldiors in every rank that it was before they entered into the
straight; then all the shot of the different weapons of volee that did march
through the straight before the first compertiment of piquers; I mean, the one
half of those that before they came to the straight did arm the forepartes of
the right and left flanks of the squadron, and now again already before the
squadron is altogether again formed by their Captains and officers, reduced
into the same forms upon the foreparts of the right and left flanks of the
squadron that they were before that they first separated themselves from the
squadron, and entered into the straight: And even as those different
compertiments of shot did one after another orderly march through the straight
and are now again reduced and come into their first order as aforesaid; So the
different compertimentes of sleeves, wings, troops, and other such like of
different sorts of weapons of volee that did arm the right and left hinder
flanks, and corners of the squadron, in the like order immediately following the
last compertiments of piquers through the straight, are presently again by
their officers to be reduced into the like compertimentes and forms for the
guard of both the hinder flanks and back of the squadron, that they were
before the squadron did enter into the passage.

All which being performed, and all the harquebuziers, mosquetiers, and
halbarders that were sent to possess the tops of both the sides of the passage
being come down into the plain, Where the drommers and phifers are to be
placed, the squadron marching forward in the Enemies Country, the Enemy being
not in sight as also upon doubt of battle.
and reduced into such forms, or otherwise employed as the Coronell and
Sergeant Mayor shall think most meet, they may then begin again to march
forward. Howbeit in this place it is further to be noted that the squadron
marching forward in the enemies country the one half of the drummers are to
be placed upon the frunt, and the other half upon the back of the squadron;
and that, during the time they march the enemy being not in sight; but upon
the sight and approach of the enemy and doubt of battle; then upon that occasion
all the drummers and phifers y^ did march in the frunt and back of the squadro^
must presently reduce themselves, the one half upon the forpart and hinder
part of the right flank of y^ squadron, and the other half upon the forpart
and hinder part of y^ left flank of the squadron; I mean more toward all the
4. corners of the squadro^ upon both flanks, then toward the midst of those
flanks; because that all their different strokes of direction, may be the
better heard and understood as well in frunt and back as flanks: The cause
wherefore no Drummers should be placed in the frunt of the squadro^ upon the
occasion of a battle.
And the cause wherefore I would have no drummers placed in the frunt of a
squadron upon the occasion of battle is; that they should be no impediment to
the piquers through the greatness of those instruments, to use their piques,
nor unto mosquetiers, nor harguebuziers, in case that any, upon any occasion
should be reduced under the guard of the frunt of the piques to use their
mosquets or harquebuzes. Not above one Dro^me and a Phifer are to march in the
midst of a squadron with the rank of ensign
Besides that I would never permit upon any occasion, that any drums, or at
the most above one drummer, and a phifer, should march in the midst of the
squadron with the rank of Ensigns, because that the greatness of them would
be an impediment to the ranks to close themselves by frunt and flanks, as
upon some occasions they ought to do.

But here it is further to be noted that the squadron being again reduced into
form, and marching forward in the enemies Country, and finding the ground in
diverse parts as they march of that nature, yt they cannot march in squadron
formed, and having great intelligence by discouerers, and espialles, that the
enemy is not so near hand as that by reason and discipline military they
ought to keep themselves in squadron; then they ought according to the breadth
or frunt of their squadron, to divide the whole squadron into as few and as
great compertiments of number of soldiors in every rank from frunt to back as
the grounds or passages will give them leave; that by the greatness of their
compertiments they may a great deal the sooner reduce and form their squadron
again upon any sudden or great Alarm: As for example, If the squadron were
double as broad in frunt as by flanks, as of 60. in frunt and 30. by flanks,
then the Coronell or Sergeant Mayor may presently command the whole squadron
to be divided into 6. compertiments of 10. soldiers in every rank from frunt
to back throughout every compertiment; or if the ground be of that nature, that
in some places there cannot pass above 7. or 8. soldiers in frunt, then he
may divide his whole squadron into ^. compertiments, that is of 4.
compertiments of 7. in every rank, and the other 4. compertiments of 8.
soldiers in every rank throughout every compertiment, and by flanks, that is
in length from frunt to back every compertiment of 30. ranks, the Ensigns
always placed betwixt two of the middlemost ranks of every compertiment, or
of so many of the compertiments as shall be requisite. All which compertiments
upon intelligence or discovery of the enemies approaching may in any convenient
ground be presently incorporated and reduced by flank or flanks into the same
form of squadron that it was at the first forming of the same; or into any
other form that the Coronell or Sergeant Mayor shall think most requisite by
any one of the same orders of reducementes that I have before very particularly
set down.

And it is further to be observed that the said squadron marching in the open
fields with sleeves, wings, and troops of weapons of volee belonging to the
same, should ever at certain times make certain pauses, as well to the intent to
ease themselves and take breath, because that armed men or mosquetiers with
their heavy furniture, or the soldiors of any other weapon cannot possibly
continue any long march without such pauses and stays, as also that if any
dismarch or disorder has happened in their ranks, forms, or orders, the same may
be presently again reformed and redressed: And the like pauses and stays are
to be made by bands of horsemen, for the same consideration and causes.

But now peradventure some that may read this place of my book may say that I
forgot in this place to write of horsemen, as well where they should be placed in
the field either upon the flanks or corners of the compertiments of diverse
sorts of weapons of volee reduced into their orders, as also in marching
through the straight, whether they should march half before and half behind,
or otherwise. Whereunto I answer that it were impertinent to this place, An
objection answered.
considering that here I do but only show, how a Regiment of 4000. footmen
under their coronels, Captains, and officers, without any bands of horsemen
should be reduced into diverse forms as well to march as to fight; as also to
pass through a passage or straight, and being passed through the same; how
again to reduce themselves into form; that by the ordering, forming, and
marching of this squadron and regiment as aforsaid, all such as do profess
arms, and that do not know how squadrons of footmen should be formed, may
by that which I have before set down, see, consider, and observe, Bands and
squadrons of horsemen are to be reduced into form after the very same order
and sort that footmen are.
how any squadron of a great deal greater or smaller numbers may diverse ways
be reduced into form, although in troth, bands and squadrons of horsemen are to
be reduced into form or diverse forms even after the very same order and
sort that bands and squadrons of footmen are. But yet something to satisfy
such as shall read this my book, I will by the help of Almighty God, in
some places more convenient, of these discourses make mention, and set down
diverse very important particularities concerning the ordering, fourming, and
employing of bands, squadrons, and diverse other forms of horsemen of sundry
sorts of armous and weapons.

But now peradventure some will with more reason further demand where the
baggages and carriages of the Regiment that I have not hitherunto mentioned,
should be placed in marching through the straight: and how the same should be
guarded; as also where the field pieces of the same regiment, if there be any
should be placed upon the squadron formed; and in what convenient place or
places they should be with their hor^es, Whereupon ye squadron formed and
marching forward y^ field pieces are to be placed and drawn.
or oxen drawn, and go through the said straights. Whereunto I say that incase
there were 8. field pieces belonging to the Regiment, that is, 4. fawcons of
the Caliuer of 5. pound the bullet, and 4. fawconets of the Caliuer of 3. pound
the bullet; I would then upon the squadron, formed and marching forward, that
2. pieces (viz) one fawcon, and one fawconet should with their horses be drawn
upon the flank, or side of the squadron, betwixt the sleeves of the weapons
of volee and the squadron, I mean upon the forepart of the right flank; and so
likewise another fawcon, and fawconet to be drawn by the hinder part of the
same flank likewise betwixt the weapons of volee and the squadron, and even in
the same manner, in the like places, order and sort I would have the other 4.
fawcons, and fawconets to be drawn upon the left flanks of the squadron ready
upon all occasions to be drawn forward and placed, the 4. foremost that were
upon the foremost right and left flank of the squadron somewhat distant or
wide from the 2. forecorners of the squadron, or upon some occasions upon the
very frunt of the same squadron ready to be discharged at the enemy
approaching, and so likewise the 4. pieces that are drawn by the hinder flanks
of the squadron are ready likewise to be placed upon the frunt or both the
corners of the back or rereward of the same square, incase that the squadron
upon any accident or coming of the Enemy should make of back frunt: And here
it is to be noted that all these 8. field pieces must be accompanied with
their gonners, Officers and other necessary provision belonging to the field
pieces.
officers, and all other their assistants, with some numbers of pioners, and
with all kind of things and Instruments belonging to them, as bullets ladles,
rammers, and other such like, as also with a large and sufficient quantity of
good powder well guarded by some number of halbarders, and archers from the
danger of fire.

Howbeit upon the occasion of marching through a straight as aforesaid; then I
would that. 4. of these field pieces with their powder, Where the, field pieces
with their munitions and other things belonging unto them are to be placed in
marching through the straight.
bullets, and all other things requisite should upon their carriages be drawn
with their horses, conducted by their Carters, gonners, and pioners and guarded
and accompanied as aforesaid, just betwixt the last troops, and compertiments
of weapons of volee, and the first compertiment of piques; and so likewise that
the other. 4. field pieces that did before march upon both the hinder flanks
of the squadron, should under the conduction of their gonners and assistants as
aforesaid with their powder, bullets and al other things necessary, march
through the straight in Rereward just betwixt the hindermost compertiment of
piquers, and before the foremost troop or compertiment of the weapons of volee,
that did and are again to arm the hinder parts of both the flanks of the
said squadron; and those. 8. pieces marching in the order and sort as aforesaid
are most ready again upon the whole Regiment being past through the
straightes, and the reducing again of the same into the form of squadron
first above set down, to be placed and drawn as they were at the first before
the regiment entered into the straights: But incase that the Coronell being
entered into the straights should doubt to be assailed by the enemy either in
vauntguard or in Rereward; then he ought to place a couple of fawcons, How the
Coronell is to place the field pieces incase he doubt to be assailed either in
vaunt guard or R^^eward*
or of fawconets either in frunt or in back as he doubts to be assailed,
with some convenient quantity of powder, and bullets, and other things
necessary strongly guarded and accompanied with some numbers of archers, light
armed piquers, and halbarders, as also some mosequtiers, so that those soldiors
of weapons of fire do not come too near the powder belonging to those field
pieces; and in y^ sort, those. 2. field pieces are to be drawn by their horses
and accompanied with their gonners pioners and guardes of diverse sorts of
weapons as aforesaid, in frunt and back according to the occasion.

And now concerning the most convenient and sure placing of the cariages and
baggages of the Regiment, Concerning the most convenient and sure placing of
the carriages and baggages in passing through the straight.
I mean for the passing through the straight; for the placing and marching
whereof, it is first to be considered, whether they expect, or doubt the enemy
more in frunt and vauntgard when they shall be passing, or passed through the
straight, or in back and Rereward when they are entering and entered into the
straight; or that they doubt to be assailed both in vauntgard and Rereward: Now
if in case they doubt to be assailed by the enemy in Rereward, Diverse things
to be considered of, for the sure placing of the cariages and baggages.
then the Coronell is to command all the carriages and baggages to be placed
in the midst of the weapons of volee y^ are in vauntgard with some convenient
numbers of light armed piquers and halbarders for ye better guard of the same;
but in case that they doubt to be assailed in vauntgard and not in Rereward,
Where the Coronell is to place the carriages and baggages incase he doubt to be
assailed by the enemy in Rereward or in Vauntgard or in both.
then they are to place the cariages in the midst of the short of the Rereward
accompanied with some light armed piquers and halbarders as aforesaid; But if
they doubt to be assailed both in vauntguard and Rereward, then the Coronell is
to command all the cariages and baggages to be placed in the midst betwixt all the compertiments of piquers, I mean the one half of the piquers before, and
y^ other half behind the carriages; every Carre, or wagon having two
harquebuziers or archers for y^ guard of them. Howbeit here it is to be noted
that the carriages of the chief substance of the powder that does belong to
the Regiment be they wagons or Carres that do carry the same, Where the
carriages of the chief substance of powder are to march.
do with their officers, Carters, and pyoners march either foremost of all the
rest of the Carriages, or else hindermost of them all; or else upon some
occasions half before and half behind as the Coronell upon any occasion shall
think most convenient, but in any wise a convenient way distant from all the
rest of the carriages, and that the same carriages of powder be well
accompanied with some good numbers of archers and halbarders, but with no
harquebuziers nor mosquetiers, thereby to avoid all accidents of fire. Also
every Wago^ or Carre ought to have a cover of the hides or skins of buffes
made of such largeness that the same may cover all the barrels of powder from
wet, Every wagon or Carre ought to be covered with Buff hides
as also that such couers of buffe will resist the force and fury of all kind
of bals and other inventions of artificial fires and wild fire, A peculiar
property of the skins of Buffes.
which peculiar property the skins of those beasts have above all others.

And now as I have very particularly showed how a squadron of 2100. should be
reduced into form in diverse different sorts, and that the same squadron
consisting of 2100. armed men piquers is now last of all reduced into 60.
soldiers in frunt, Squadrons by more then a third part broader in frunt then
long by flanks, are of a far greater advantage to fight, then just Squadrons.
which is intended in every rank from frunt to back, and 35. soldiors by flank,
which is to be understood 35. ranks; which proportion of squadron is brother in
number of piquers in frunt, then long by flanks, by more then a third part,
which by most Sergeants Majors is esteemed to be of a great deal greater
advantage to fight, for diverse causes and reasons (which here I omit) then
any just squadrons of armed men are; by reason that squadrons that are just
square in number of men; Why squadro^s that are just square in number of men
are thought to be out of proportion.
that is, as many piquers by flank as in frunt, are accounted to be out of
proportion; and that in respect that such squadrons are a great deal longer by
flanks then broad in frunt, because that the distaunces betwixt rank and
rank be it either to march or fight, are a great deal more then they are
betwixt every soldior and soldior in frunt, which is to be understood in
every rank; How to form a squadron of piquers just square in number of men
both by frunt and flanks
So to satisfy such as would understand of the forming of a just squadron of
piquers: I mean a just square of like numbers of men in frunt, flanks and
back as aforesaid; and not a just square in ground, I would take 6600.
piquers, which number I would command y^ sergeant Mayor, Mayor, to draw out of
4. of 5. regiments, and to reduce them into 12. compertiments, every
co^pertiment of 5. in frunt and 60. by flanks, which makes just 300. piquers
in every compertiment; al which 12. co^pertiments of 300. piquers in every
compertiment, being reduced into squadron either by doubling those
compertiments by back, or by flank or flanks, or any other ways, as I have
before very particularly set down; do come to be a just squadron of 60.
piquers by frunt, flanks, and back, overplus not any one souldior.

And this kind of just square of armed men by frunt, flanks, and back, has
been holden by some men of war, The reasons that diverse me^ of war do
allege to prove a just squadron to be of greatest advantage to fight.
and yet is, to be the most strong and puissant kind of squadron of all others,
in respect that the number of ranks by flanks are equal with the number of
soldiers in frunt and back; whereof ensues (say they) upon the joining of
two squadrons, and a battle well fought, that commonly many of the soldiers
of the first ranks are either overthrown and wounded, or slain in the place:
upon which accidents, the soldiers that are in the next ranks directly
behind them, are presently to bestride them; I mean to stand over and defend
them if they be but wounded, and if they be slain, then to take their places;
and so subsequentlie every hinder rank to fill up the rank before them; so as
only the hinder ranks shall come to diminish and lack number, by the supplying
and filling up of the former ranks: By means of which entering of soldiers out
of the hinder ranks still to fill up the foremost ranks for the causes
aforesaid, the opinion of some men of war has been and is, that a just
squadron of armed men, is of more resistance and annoyance against the enemy,
then a broad squadron in frunt and shorter by flanks is, I mean both the one
squadron and the other being near about one number of soldiers; Besides all
which it may be alleged, that such just squadrons in frunt, flanks, and
back, are more ready upon any sudden unlooked for occasion, and coming of
the Enemy to make of any of both the flanks frunt, with a convenient breadth;
then a squadron that is broad in frunt, and narrow by flanks is able to
perform, by reason that the just squadron has no more to do, but to make of
one of the flanks frunt by turning their faces and weapons that ways, and to
reform their distaunces by frunt and flanks: whereas the broad squadron to
make of flank frunt, must not only do the like, but also must draw out a
great sort of ranks from the contrary flank, and draw them up to the head of
that flank, that is now made frunt, and also reform themselves in their
distances by frunt and flank, with diverse other particularities by me at large
before set down.

But incase that the sergeant Mayor when he has fourmed this just square of
men, How a Sergeant Mayor having formed a just square may upon any occasion
shorten the same by flanks and enlarge them in frunt.
and not of ground as aforesaid, shall upon any occasion think it requisite to
enlarge the same squadron in frunt, that is to increase every rank from frunt
to back with some convenient number of soldiors, and to shorten the same
squadron by flank, that is to make fewer ranks; then he may with great
celeritie and dexterity draw out as many ranks from the back or rereward, as
he shall see requisite to enlarge the frunt withal, and draw them up by one
of the flanks: But because the squadron comes to be shortened by flanks, by
so many ranks as the Sergeant Mayor has drawn out from the back or
Rereward, and therefore that there shall remain an overplus of broken ranks
more then at one time can be drawn up by flanks as aforesaid: the sergeant
Mayor then must consider whether the numbers of the piquers of those broken
ranks, be sufficient to increase one rank more by back: And incase there do
lack number to perform the same; then he is to consider whether the numbers
of the piquers of those broken ranks, will serve to increase every rank one
souldior or more by flank; which is to be understood from frunt to back; and
as he may with those broken ranks best perform either the one or the other,
he is to do the same. But incase that the Sergeant Mayor shall see that the
armed men of those broken ranks do lack number to perform as well that by
flank, as the other by back (as aforesaid,) he then is to place them in the
rank of Ensigns, or otherwise to employ them in other services as he shall
think most requisite: The particularities of all which with many more I have
before set down at large, and therefore it were superfluous to particular the
same again. And now as I have formed this foresaid battle and just square of
60. piquers in frunt, flanks, and back, which in all do amount to 6600. men,
with diverse other requisite matters: Even so by the like orders of reducement,
If a Lord Marshall or a Sergeant Mayor Mayor, have 4000. or 5000. yea or 10000.
or more or fewer piquers to reduce into one body of squadron, he may reduce
them into a battle of a third part broader in frunt then by flanks; or double
as broad or more in frunt then by flanks; or otherwise as he thinks most
convenient: As for example; If he have 5355. piquers, and that he would
reduce them all into one squadron, double as broad or more by frunt then by
flanks, as of 105. piquers in frunt, and but of 51. ranks by flanks; and
that he would reduce his squadron into form, by compertiments throughout of 5.
in a rank; he shall then find that 21. compertimentes reduced into squadron
by flank or flanks as aforesaid, will form that squadron, of 105. piquers in
every rank from frunt to back, and of 51. ranks by flanks.

Or if the Sergeant Mayor, be disposed to form the same squadron of the like
number of 5355. piquers with greater compertiments as of 7. in every
compertiment throughout from frunt to back, that thereby he may form his
squadron with the fewer compertimentes; he may then command all the Captains
or leaders of the piquers to reduce every one of their compertimentes into 7.
in a rank throughout from frunt to back; and then he shall find that 15. such
compertiments or divisions of 7. in a rank throughout every compertiment
reduced into squadron either by the flanks the one of the other, or by both
flanks subsequently al at one time, (as I have in the beginning of this project
of squadrons very particularly declared) do make just 105. piquers in frunt,
and 51. ranks by flank, which is more then double as broad in frunt, then
long by flanks.

But because peradventure there are some professing arms not knowing how
squadrons should be fourmed that will imagine, The orders and ways of reducing
of 3000. or 4000. or of. 10000. or of any greater number of piquers into one
body of squadron, are all one saving that the compertiments are to be made
longer by flanks.
that it is a matter of far greater difficulty to form a squadron of 10000.
or 12000. piquers, or of greater numbers, then of 3000. or 4000. Thereunto I
say, that the orders and ways of reducing of 3000. or 4000. or of 10000. or
any greater numbers into one body of squadron is all one, saving that the
compertimentes or divisions of piquers, or of piquers and short weapons to
form great squadrons must be longer by flanks, then the compertimentes of
small squadrons are: and therefore whereas the number of piquers of one band,
or company are sufficient to make a complete compertiment of number of piquers
by frunt, as of 5. 6. 7. or any such even or odd numbers, not exceeding 10. or
11. as also of numbers of ranks convenient by flanks to begin the squadron
withal; and that so likewise the piquers of other such single bands are able
to perform the like, being reduced by the flanks the one of the other as
aforesaid, whereof it should come to pass that such small squadrons should
be composed of the compertiments of single bands by themselves; yet great
squadrons or battles double as broad in frunt, as long by flanks, or just
squares, or any other forms, must be composed of compertimentes although of
like numbers in frunt as aforesaid: yet much longer by flanks, which to
perform, because no one band have piquers enough to ma^e a compertiment of so
great a number as is requisite with celeritie to form so great a squadron; the
Sergeant Mayor in that case is to command the piquers of 2. bands presently
to be reduced into one compertiment, and so likewise of other bands, to the
intent that by such great compertiments he may with the more celeritie form
his squadron; in such sort, as if a Lord Marshall or a Sergeant Mayor Mayor,
were disposed to form and reduce his squadron of 10000. or 12000. piquers, or
any greater, or smaller numbers into one squadron or battle; and that he would
form the same double as broad by frunt as long by flanks; he may by the like
order of reducing of compertimentes of greater numbers by flanks, perform the
same with as great facility, as he did in the reducing of the other squadrons
of smaller numbers with the compertiments of single bands into form.

And therefore if a Sergeant Mayor Mayor would form one battle of above 10000.
piquers, and that he would make them double as broad or more in frunt then
long by flanks: As for example, of 143. in frunt, and of 71. ranks by
flanks; he is first to consider how many compertiments of even and od numbers
will make that frunt, and he shall find that 17. compertiments of 8. soldiers
in every rank from frunt to back, and of 71. ranks by flanks in every
compertiment reduced into squadron by flank or flanks (as I have very
particularly in my first forming of squadrons before declared) do make y^
squadron in frunt 136. soldiers, and then drawing up another compertiment of
odd number, as of 7. soldiers in every rank throughout the whole
compertimente from frunt to back, in all are 17. compertiments of even numbers
of 8. and one of 7. which are odd, which in all are 18. compertiments. All
which divisions reduced into squadron by flanks as aforesaid, the whole
squadron so formed, does come to be of 143. soldiers in frunt, and 71. ranks
by flanks, which in all do make 10153. soldiers.

But now whereas all these squadrons before reduced and described do consist
only of piquers with a few halbardiers for the guard of the Ensigns, The
chief causes why the Italians and Spaniards, have of late used squadrons
altogether of piques.
which has been altogether used of late years by the Italians and Spaniards
in respect (as I have heard them say) that such squadrons all of one weapon are
mor readily reduced into squadron, then of two different weapons, and
therewithal more beawtifull and terrible in the sight of the Enemy in show,
through the equality of the length of the piques, then if there were many
ranks of short weapons within the piques, which through the shortness of the
weapons would make the squadron to show unto the Enemy as though there were a
void place without any soldiors in the midst of the piques: Yet because many
years past I have in France seen the Sergeants Majors of the Suissers reduce
certain ranks of halbardiers within their piques, thereby according to
discipline to strengthen their battles as well against the charges of horsemen as
against squadrons of footmen piquers: I will here (with the help of Almighty
God) set down and show how a squadron of halbardiers or battleaxes, environed
or impaled about with 5. ranks of piquiers in frunt, flanks and back, should
be reduced into a squadron broader by a third part in frunt and back, How a
squadro^ of halbardiers environed about, with 5. ranks of piquers, should be
reduced into form.
then long by flanks: which is to be performed in this sort following, that
is, Incase that I have.1500. armed battleaxes, or halbardiers, and that I were
disposed to reduce them into.50 in frunt, and.30. by flanks, and that I would
divide that whole number into.10. compertiments of.5. battleaxes in every rank
throughout every compertiment: so as every compertiment from frunt to back
should contain 150. battleaxes; Or that I were disposed to command the.1500.
battleaxes to be reduced into.5. compertiments of 10. soldiers in every rank
throughout every compertiment from frunt to back, that is of 300. soldiers
in every compertiment, the same being by the captains and officers performed,
I then appointing the ground where I would make the frunt of the squadron,
would command the Captains or leaders of every compertiment either of.5. if
the compertiments be all of.5. or of.10. if they be of.10. soldiors throughout
every compertiment to march up, the one by the flank of the other, until
they come all to make one equal frunt in their just and proportionate
distances from frunt to back: which being performed then I would command two
compertiments all of piquers, each one of them of.150. marching.5. in a rank
to be drawn up, the one compertiment of.150. close by the right flank of the
battleaxes: and the other compertiment of the like number in like sort close by
the left flank of the battleaxes until the foremost ranks of both those
compertiments of piquers upon both flanks be of equal frunt with the frunt of
the battleaxes, and their last rank equal with the last rank of the
battleaxes, which being performed, then of 50. battleaxes that they were in
frunt before, now by the conioining and reducing of those 2. compertiments of
piquers upon the two flanks as aforesaid, the squadron is come to be of 60.
soldiors in every rank from frunt to back; which performed, then would I
command 300. piquers reduced into 60. ranks of 5. in every rank to be drawn
close by the frunt of the squadron of battleaxes and piquers before reduced,
even from the one flank and corner to the other: And at the very same instant,
I would command 60* ranks of piquers more of 5. in every rank to be drawn
close by the back, and Rereward of the same squadron: which being performed,
then as well the 60. ranks of piquers 5. in a rank in frunt, as the 60. ranks
of piquers 5. in a rank in back, are either upon the sound of the trumpet, or
the stroke of drums to turn their faces and weapons, and to make of flank
frunt: I mean that ways that the squadron of battleaxes, and the piquers on
the flanks do make frunt, and therewithal presently to reform themselves in
their distances: so as of 60. ranks of 5. in every rank that the same
compertiment of piquers that was reduced in frunt was before, it is now by
making of flank frunt as aforsaid, become to be of 5. ranks of 60. soldiors
in every rank: And so likewise the aforesaid compertiments of the like number
of 300. piquers of 5. in every rank reduced upon the back of the squadron, by
making of flank frunt, toward the squadron of battleaxes and piquers, are now
likewise become to be 5. ranks by flank, and 60. in every rank. All which
being performed the squadron of battleaxes does come to be environed or
empaled with 5. ranks of piquers in frunt, flanks, and back, the whole
squadron containing in frunt 60. soldiors, and by flanks 40. ranks.

And now this squadron being thus formed; then would I reduce all the different
sorts of weapons of volee into their most convenient forms of forlorn hopes,
of sleeves, of wings, of hearses, of troops, and other forms, according to
the nature and effect of every different sort of weapon, and as the coming of
the enemy should require, or as the ground or grounds would permit, having
therewithal regard as well to arm the back or rereward of the squadron with
weapons of volee, as to arm the frunt and flanks. And as I have very
particularly showed how a squadron of Halbardiers or battleaxes, environed
about with 5. ranks of piquers should be reduced into the form above
described, and therewithal said that the same should be armed in frunt,
flanks and back, with weapons of volee of diverse sorts, so would I if I had
convenient numbers of horsemen of diverse armors and weapons, arm the same
squadron, and sleeves, and wings of weapons of volee, with horsemen in their
due and most convenient places and forms.

But because I do think that it shall be a far greater instruction for such
Gentlemen of our Nation, as do not know and yet are willing and desirous to
learn how diverse squadrons or battles of footmen with their weapons of volee
and field pieces ought to be armed with many hearses, squares, and troops of
horsemen of diverse sorts of armors and weapons, and those conveniently placed
in the large and open fields to give battle and fight with the Enemy, How to
reduce an English Army of 28000. or.3000. horsemen and footmen into form of
batle, ready in all points to fight with the Enemy.
with their most advantage, then to place only one squadron of footmen
with their Weapons of volee, and to arm the same with horsemen of diverse
sorts, I do for example say, that if there were in the enemies Country
28000. or 30000. horsemen and footmen of our English Nation, well sorted, armed,
weaponed, and exercised, according to the nature and effect of every different
sort of weapon: And that the same Army of 28000. did consist of the different
weapons and numbers under written, that is of 4500 piquers, 8500. battleaxes,
or halbardiers, of 10000. weapons of volee, of the which I would have 7000.
good archers, 1500. mosquetiers, and 1500. harquebuziers; Of horsemen also I
would have 5000. of the which there should be 240. men at Arms, 480.
Dimilaunces, 1680. Stradiots, 1300. archers on horseback, and 1300. crosbowers
on horseback; and all those as well horsemen as footmen sorted and divided into
their different proportions and numbers under their standards, En^ignes,
pennons and Guydons, as also under their Coronels, Captains, Conductors, and
other higher and lower men of charge and officers; and that I were by the
commandment and appointment of the Lord Lieutenant General to give order and
reduce the said Army into a form of battle, as if it were presently to fight
with the enemy, I would then take of those 8500. battleaxes or halbardiers,
6000. and out of the 4500. piquers I would take 3600. and would divide and
reduce all those numbers of piquers and battleaxes into 3. battles, How many
battles ye whole Army, should be divided and reduced into.
that is, into a vauntguard, a battle, and a Reregard, or rather into four
battles, that is into a vauntgard, a battle, and a Reregard, and into a fourth
which I would term and call by the name of an a Rereregardrereward: every one
of which four battles should consist of 1500. armed halbardiers or battleaxes,
and of 900. armed piquers, which are just 2400. piquers and battleaxes in each
battle: And as for the overplus of the whole number of the halbardiers or
battleaxes, which in all do amount to 2500. as also the overplus of the
piquers which are 900. (none of both which numbers are to enter into the
squadrons before mentioned) I would reserve to be employed in such other
services as hereafter shall be mentioned: And I would that each one of the
said 4. battles should contain 60. soldiers in every rank from frunt to
back and 40. ranks by flanks: And that all the battleaxes should be
environed and empaled in frunt, flanks and back, with 5. ranks of piquers,
even in the very same form and sort that I have before particulerlie reduced
and formed the last squadron before described.

But because diverse squadrons being reduced into form in the open fields where
battles most conveniently are to be fought, are to be placed in diverse sorts,
as sometimes all in a manner of one equal frunt with their sleeves and wings
and other forms of weapons of volee, and sometimes also the vauntgard,
advanced a good distance before and nearer to the enemy then the battle and
Reregard, who are in wings more retired, ready upon all needful occasions to
succor and aid the foremost battle: And at other times the vauntgard, and
Reregard advanced beyond and nearer to the enemy then the principal battle,
which remains either in wing retired, or otherwise placed according to the
nature of the ground and coming of the enemy, or according to some other order
and commandment of the General, ready upon all occasions to succor the
other two battles, that are ready to enter into fight: So would I place those
foresaid 4. battles in this sort following.

First, The placing of the several battles of the Army.
I would place the vauntgard and Reregard both of one equal frunt, but yet so
far distant the one from the other, as that there might be ground and place
enough betwixt them to reduce so many troops, sleeves, wings, and other forms
of all the different sorts of weapons of volee footmen, belonging to those two
battles, as ought to be (according to the disposition of the ground and
coming of the Enemy) reduced and placed upon the outer flanks and corners of
those 2. battles: And I would that of the 2500. halbardiers before reserved and
not placed, one thousand divided into 2. parts of 500. halbardiers in each
part should be placed in many little societies and troops of ten halbardiers
in every society, some in guard of the field pieces belonging to those two
battles, and all the rest behind in Rereward at the backs of the troops and
wings of the weapons of volee, ready upon any occasion to succor them and to
annoy the enemy: I mean that the said 1000. halbarders divided into 2. parts
of 500. in each part, that the one 500. divided and placed in their little
troops as aforesaid, should be for the succor and guard of the weapons of
volee of the vaungard, and the other 500. should be for the succor and guard of
the weapons of volee of the Rereguard, which performed, then would I place the
other two squadrons of battle and a Rereregardrereward in two wings, but not so
far forward as the hindermost ranks of the two foremost battles by 150. paces
or more, with all their different sorts of weapons of volee, reduced into
their most convenient forms, with one thousand Halbardiers also taken out of
the 1500. yet remaining vnplaced, equally divided 500. to each battle for the
guard of the field pieces and succor of the weapons of volee as is before more
at large set down: And those twoe hindermost battles I would also place of one
equal frunt, that is, the one as far forward as the other, but so far
separated and distant the one from the other, and so far without and in
winge, the one on the right hand, and the other on the left hand of the two
foremost battles, as that all the different sorts of weapons of volee
belonging to the two inner flanks of those two hindermost squadrons, might not
only have room enough to be reduced into their most convenient forms,
according to the nature and different dispositions and effects of every sort of
them, but also in such sort, as that both those two hindermost battles with all
their weapons of volee might (without any impediment of the two foremost battles
and their wepons of volee, or of any their hearses, troops, or squares of
horsemen) have the coming of the enemies battles, and squares, and troops of
horsemen, so apparent and clear in their sightes, as that they might succor
and aid the said two foremost battles upon all needful and requisite occasions
and causes.

All which reducements of those foresaid 4. battles, being by the Coronels,
Sergeant Majors, Captains and other officers with great order and celeritie
performed: then I having such convenient numbers of men at arms, of
dimilaunces, of Stradiots, of Archers and Crosbowers on horseback (as are
before particularly set down) to arm the flanks of the aforesaid four
battles: I would first give order that the 240. men at Arms should be
divided into 4. wings, that is into 60. men at Arms in each wing, every which
number of 60. men at Arms, I would reduce either into 3. ranks of 20. in
every rank, How and where the men at Arms should be ordered and placed.
or else into 4. ranks of 15. in every rank, and would place two of those
hearses or broad squares of men at Arms, the one even by flank and right
over against the midst of the right flank of the vauntguarde, and the other
broad square or hearse of men at Arms in like sort, even by flank and right
over against the midst of the left flank of the Reregard; And so likewise
in the very same order I would place the other two broad squares of men at
Arms, the one by flank right over against the midst of the right flank of
the principal battle, and the other broad square by flank, right over against
the midst of the left flank of the a Rereregardrereward.

But yet it is to be understood by this before written that I would place all
those 4. hearses or broad squares of men at Arms, so far distaunt in winge
from all the flanks of those foresaid 4. Battles, and so far wide and clear
from all the Sleeves, Wings, and Troops of the Weapons of Volee footmen, as
that those hearses of men at Arms might upon all good occasions offered, give
a charge upon the Enemy, be they horsemen or footmen without any ways
troubling the Weapons of volee, or receiving any trouble or let by the Weapons
of Volee to give their charges with great order: And therewithal that upon
their charges given, they may retire to give new charges without disordering
their own weapons of volee, or any ways troubling the ranks of their own
squadrons of armed footmen.

The dimilaunces also belonging to those men at Arms (which according to
discipline ought to be in number double as many as the men at Arms) The
ordering and placing of the Dimilaunces.
which is that the men at Arms being 240. the dimilaunces ought to be 480.
which number 480. Lances, I would divide into 4. broad squares or hearses, of
120. in every hearse, every which number of 120. dimilaunces, I would reduce
either unto 4. ranks of 30. in every rank, or else into 5. ranks of 24.
Lances in every rank, and would place two of those wings, the one by flank
in a manner even with the right flank of the hearse or wing of the men at Arms
reduced upon the right flank of the vauntgard, and the other wing of
dimilaunces in a manner even by flank, with the left flank of the wing of the
men at arms that are reduced upon the left flank of the reregard: But yet
both those two wings of dimilaunces I would place a little advanced more
forward then the wings of the men at Arms, and so far distant by flank
from both the foresaid wings of the men at Arms, as that there might be
ground and room enough betwixt them, for six little troops or societies, I
mean two troops or societies of archers on horseback, and 4. troops of
Crosbowers on horseback of 10. in every society, to place themselves in
their troops in convenient distances separated and oblique each one troop from
the other, ready upon any charge by the Lances or men at Arms given or unto
them by the Enemy offered, to galloppe by the flanks of the Lances or of the
men at Arms, but something more back and in Rereward of them, and to give
their volees of quarrels and arrows at the enemy, before the Lances or men
at Arms should come to join and shocke with the enemies horsemen, or charge
their footmen, or otherwise to give their volees at any squadrons or troops of
horsemen or footmen, according to any other order and commandment unto them by
their superiors given.

And in like sort as I have placed those 2. wings of dimilaunces with their
troops of Crosbowers and archers on horsbacke betwixt them and the flanks of
the 2. formoste wings of men at Arms as aforesaid; Even so would I in the
very same sort place the other two wings of dimilaunces of 120. in each winge
reduced, either into 4 ranks of 30. in every rank, or else into 5. ranks of
24* in every rank, almost even and right over against, saving a little more
advanced forward, then the flanks of the two hindermost wings of the men at
Arms, that are reduced the one upon the right flank of the principal battle,
and the other upon the left flank of the a Rereregard-Rereward, with the like
numbers of troops or societies of Crosbowers and archers on horsbacke betwixt
them, (every little troop of those weapons of volee separated and oblique in
distances the one from the other,) as are reduced and placed betwixt the
flanks of the. 4. ^ormost wings of men at arms and dimilaunces. All which
with great order being performed, then of al y^ rest of the numbers of
Stradiots, The ordering and placing of the Stradiots, and Archers, and
Crosbowers on horseback.
of archers on horsbake, and Crosbowers on horsbacke, which in all do amount to
4040. I would take out 60. stradiots 40. Crosbowers, and 40. archers on
horseback, which are in all 140. horsemen, which numbers I would reserve for
such other employments as hereafter shall be mentioned, and would divide the rest
which in all are 3900. stradiots, Crosbowers and archers on horseback into 3.
divisions or parts that is into. 1300. in each division, in every which. 1300.
I would there should be like numbers of every one of those 3. foresaid
different sorts of weapons, or as near thereabouts as they could be divided:
which done, then would I appoint one of those. 3. parts of different sorts of
light horsemen, which are in number 1300. to arm the right flank of the winge
of dimilaunces that are upon the right flank of the men at Arms which do arm
the right flank of the vauntgard. And I would give order to all the Captains
and Conductors of all the aforesaid light horsemen men of the first 1300. that
they should divide and reduce all the numbers of their stradiots, of Crosbowers
and archers on horseback into little troops and societies of tennes and
fifteens in every troop, and that every society and troop should be of
distinct and like weapons by themselves, and that every one of those
societies should be lead by the heads and chief of their societies, and that
all the troops of stradiots Crosbowers and archers on horseback, should be
placed and advanced in winge more further forward toward the Enemy, then the
hearse or winge of dimilaunces: And I would also that all the societies of the
weapons of volee, I mean the archers and Crosbowers on horseback, should be
placed and advanced before and nearer to the Enemy by some 10. 15. or 20.
paces, then the troops and societies of stradiots, and that the troops of
archers should not march altogether by themselves, without any troops of
Crosbowers amongst or betwixt them, in respect that they are different kinds
of weapons, but I would that the troops of archers and Crosbowers should march
in their troops separated, but yet in their troops intermingled about 15. or.
20. paces distant one troops from another, which is to be understood a troop
of archers and a troop of Crosbowers, and a troop of archers and a troop of
Crosbowers and so the rest, some troops fifteen, some twenty paces one from
another and those not all of one equal frunt, but oblique the one to the other,
I mean some advanced further forward toward the Enemy, and others more
backward in winge and Reregard Retired; And that I would to the intent that
when the foremost societies and troops of weapons of volee, had given their
volees of quarrels and arrows either at horsemen, or footmen their Enemies,
and that they were casting about again and retiring to give place to other
troops of weapons of volee to second and succeed them: that then some other
troops of weapons of volee that are in winge Reregard of them, should in their
troops put spurs to their horses and advance themselves forward and second
and supply their fellows places retired, with new volees. And I would also
that every three societies of Crosbowers and Archers on horseback, should
have one troop of 10. of 15. of 20. or 25. stradiots with their double headed
Lances continually upon all charges and other services to attend upon them
in Reregard, some 15. or 20. paces distaunt, ready upon any occasion to
advance themselves forward and succor them, as also upon the disordering or
overthrow of the Enemy to follow the Chase, and do execution upon their
Enemies disordered or broken, be they horsemen or footmen.

And I would that no society nor troop of Archers nor Crosbowers on horseback
should be under the number of 10. nor above the number of 15. nor that any
troop of Stradiots should exceed the number of 25. nor be under the number of
10. And to the intent that every troop of Stradiots should know upon which
3. troops of Crosbowers and Archers they should attend, as al^o that every 3.
troops of Archers, and Crosbowers should give their charges and volees and
make their Retraites, and work all other effects in the field together, it
were convenient that every 4. troops of stradiots, archers, and Crosbowers on
horseback, and their Conductors, should always lodge in their quarters in
Camp together, but I mean not that the soeieties of archers, of Crosbowers,
and stradiots should lodge all in one hale or tent together, but that the hales
and tents of every different sort of weapon of every such 4. troops should be
placed one next unto another, and that al their Cariages upon any remove of
camp should march together, and that all the Conductors and the chiefs of the
societies of tennes, as also all their soldiors of every different sort of
weapon, should know, frequent and keep company one with another in Camp, and
should vow to live and die together, as if they were but one ^ind (...),
society and Camerada.

And as I have placed this first 1300. light ^^^smen of different weapons in
the order before described, so would I in the very same sort and form reduce
the second number of 1300. stradiots, archers, and Crosbowers on horsbacke
upon the left side and flank of the dimilaunces, that are upon the left
flank of the men at arms, which are in wing of the left side of the Reregard,
which performed, I would then give order that the third division and number of
1300. stradiots, archers, and Crosbowers on horseback, should be divided into
2. divisions or parts, that is into 650. in each division, and that the first
650. stradiots, archers and Crosbowers on horseback should in the like order as
abouesaid be reduced in their societies and troops upon the right flank of
the dimilaunces, that are reduced on the right flank of the men at arms, that
are in wing on the right side of the principal battle: And that the other
division and number of 650. stradiots, archers, and Crosbowers on horseback
should be likewise reduced in their societies and troops upon the left flank
and side of the broad square of dimilaunces, that are on the left flank of the
men at arms, that do arm the left side of the a Rereregardrereward.

And I would that all those 4. wings of light horsemen, stradiots, archers and
Crosbowers on horseback should upon any occasion of battle, great incountrie,
or skirmish, behave themselves in fight according to the instructions that are
hereafter described and set down, where amongst other matters I make special
mention of those 3. different sorts of light horsemen.

And now as I have reduced and placed these 4. battles of footmen, How and
where to arm the foresaid 4 squadrons, with field pieces.
and armed them and their weapons of volee with many squares and troops of
horsemen of diverse different sorts of armors and weapons, so would I in this
sort following, arm those 4. squadrons with certain field pieces, according to
the ordinary use of this time for the greater annoiance of the Enemy, and for
the more sure guard of the battles. First, incase there were any little hill or
high ground of advantage of any convenient neerenesse unto the two foremost
battles, that might command the open fields and plains where the Enemies
battles should march and approach, then I would there place so many field pieces
as should be requisite for that ground of advantage, with some trench or
trenches by good numbers of laborers and pioners upon the sudden cast, and
those pieces well and strongly guarded with convenient numbers of piquers,
halbardiers, and archers, and would place the rest of the field pieces, upon
the flanks of the battles in their most convenient places, with their powder,
bullets, and all other things that do appertain to the use of them for the
annoiance of the Enemy. But incase there were no such grounds nor ground of
advantage as aforesaid where to plant such pieces of artillery, then would I
place 3. fawcons ranforced of 6: pounds the bullet, and one fawconet ranforced
of 3. pounds the bullet, some 8. or 10. paces wide from the right corner of the
vaungard, and advanced further forward then y^ frunt and Corner of that battle
by the like number of paces with their gunners and all their aides and things
appertaining unto those pieces well guarded with convenient numbers of
halbardiers; And so likewise would place the like numbers of 3. fawcons and one
fawconet in the like distances wide and advanced further forward, then the left
corner of the same battle, by the like number of paces, with their gonners and
all their aides and other things appertaining unto those pieces, well guarded
also with convenient numbers of halbardiers.

And as I have now armed the frunt of the said vaungard with the number of
field pieces before planted, so would I arm the fruntes of the other 3.
battles of Reregard, of maine battle, and of a Rereregardrereward before placed
and described, each battle with the like numbers of field pieces planted in
like distaunces from the frunt and corners of them, well guarded also with
Halbardiers as aforesaid. And although the backs and Reregards of all those 4
battles should not need to be armed with any field pieces, as it shall be
within few lines hereafter apparent by the rest which I will set down
concerning those matters: yet to arm those 4. battles in the greatest
perfection that I can, I would place upon every corner of the backs and
Reregards of all the aforesaid 4. battles, two fawcons and one fawconet in like
distaunces of paces that I have before placed the field pieces from the corners
of the frunt of the aforesaid 4. battles.

But here it is to be noted that although diverse great Captains that have
bin commanders and leaders of armies, have always accounted Sakers of 10. or
12. pounds their bullets and other pieces from 10. pounds downwards to
Robinets of one pound to be in the number of field pieces, Of what height the
field pieces ought to be.
yet I to arm any battle with field pieces in the open fields, would use no
pieces above the height of fawcons of 6. pounds the bullets, and no smaller
pieces then fawconets of 3. pounds the bullets, unless it were some Robinets
of one pound the bullet, and those mounted upon carriages after the manner of
Germany light and easy to be drawn, and ready upon the sudden by the
Gonners to be turned every ways. And the causes wherefore I would use no
pieces of any greater height for the field, are, that to use Sakers of 10. or
12. pounds the bullets in the field, such pieces I say do require more
Horses, or Oxen to draw them, and men to manage them, then Fawconets of 3.
pounds, or Fawcons of 6. pounds do, which overplus and greater numbers of
Horses or Oxen of draught, do upon the remoouing of those horses or oxen, and
drawing them back when the pieces are planted, give a great deal more
impediment and trouble not only to the Gonners and their aids, but also to
^he sleeves, wings, and troops of the weapons of Volee, that are reduced on
the flanks and Corners of squadrons, then the small number of horses belonging
to fawconets of three pounds or Fawcons of 6. pounds do.

Also Armies sometimes in marching in the open and plain fields, do light
upon sandy and such other softish and yielding grounds, where either upon
the drawing or discharging of Sakers of 10. or 12. pounds the bullets, their
Wheels do sink so deep into the ground, that oftentimes they give great
impediment and let to the Gonners and their aides to manage and use them, upon
diverse needful occasions; besides that, upon their discharginges the^ work
no greater effect against the Enemy, then such Fawcons and fawconets as
aforesaid do.

Also it is further to be noted that I would never place above the number of 8.
field pieces by the flanks or corners of any battle, nor under the number of 4.
I mean that I would never place above 3. Fawcons and one Fawconet, and those
in convenient distances wide from the right Corner of the Battle, and 3.
Fawcons and one Fawconet, wide and in like distaunces from the left frunt and
corner of the same Battle, or at the fewest 2. Fawcons and one Fawconet, some
8. or 10. paces wide from the one Corner, and 2. Fawcons and one Fawconet wide
in the like distaunce from the other Corner of the fame Battle, and that in
respect that too many field pieces being drawn and marching upon the
flanks of squadrons to the intent to be planted as abouesaid upon the day of
battle, are for diverse causes and upon diverse accidents of far greater
impedimentes and trouble, then any ways profitable to their own Squadrons.

Also it is further to be noted that I would never place any Field pieces
directly before the frunt of any Squadrons or Battles, unless I thought
our forces in the field to be much inferior in strength to the Enemy, because
that pieces so planted would be a great impediment unto the battles marching
forward to encounter with the enemy, by reason that such squadrons should be
compelled by such pieces so planted to open and break their ranks, and to
disorder themselves, which is a matter of great danger the Enemy being in
sight or near at hand. And now having armed all the aforesaid 4. battles with
field pieces in their most fit and convenient places, there rests to show
what should become of the Cariages and baggages of the Camp, as also where the
overplus of the horsemen and footmen that are not yet placed, ought to be
employed.

The Carriages of all Armies and Camps do consist of two sorts, the one sort
that are public, as of treasure and pay for the Army, of great quantity of
powder both for great and small shot, of armor and weapon, of Artillery, as of
Cannons, Culuerings, demi Cannons, demi Culuerings, and Sakers and other
smaller pieces, with all things belonging unto them, of diverse sorts of
victual of provision, of pieces maniable also, as of Curriers of war, of
mosquets, harquebuzes and other such pieces, with all things belonging unto
them, of bows and sheafes of arrows, and Crosbowes, gaffles, and quarrels,
with piques, halbardes, targets, Lances, Launcezagaies and all other sorts of
armors and weapons both offensive and defensive, with boats also to make
bridges over rivers and all things appertaining unto them: And to be brief,
of many other munitions and provisions, al which being public for the use of
the whole Army or Camp, are under the charge of the Master of the
Ordinance. And as for the other Carriages and baggages that are private they
are such as do belong unto Cheistaines, Coronells, Captains, and other higher
and lower men of charge and officers, and to be short to all the soldiors of
the Army that have any thing to be carried: All which private Cariages also, are
under the Master of the Ordinance his commandment and Order. Now all the
aforesaid most important public Carriages that do belong to the Army and
Camp, How the Cari^ages and baggages of the Army, should be placed and
guarded.
I would that the Master of the Ordinance and his officers and substitutes
should reduce as near as he can possibly into a square with such convenient
distances betwixt every row of carriages and carriages as they might not be
any impediment nor let the one to the other, neither in marching nor in staing
and pawsing. And I would that the treasure should be carried either upon mulets
or horses, or rather upon close covered wagons after the manner of Germany,
and those carriages placed toward the midst of the square on the right hand,
and that the wagons or Carts that do carry the chief substance of the
powder, should be placed also toward the midst of the square on the left
hand, and that both those sorts of carriages should be very strongly guarded
with good numbers of halbardiers, and that all the great ordinance of battery
and artillery with powder and bullets, and all other things belonging unto them
should be placed and drawn with their horses or oxen as well upon the frunt and
back, as upon the outer flanks and sides of the same square: And I would that
all the rest of the carriages should be reduced into 2. 3. or 4. ranks in the
form of a Rainebow, a semicircle or half round at the back of the most
important public cariages which are before reduced into square, in such sort
as that the midst of the half round should be directly behind and very near
the foresaid square of Cariages, and that both the ends of the semicircle
should be so far extended and drawn into a great Compass circular, that the
right end thereof should have right over against the left flank and corner of
the same (but a good distance wide) the hinder part of the right flank of the
principal battle, and that the left end of the same half round, should also
have right over against the right flank and corner (but a good distance wide)
the hinder part of the left flank of the a Rereregardrereward, and that in such
sort as that semicircle or half round of Cariages might seem as it were to
half compass and embrace the backs and Rerewards of all the 4* battles and
their weapons of volee: which Reducement of Cariages being performed, I would
then take the 500. halbardiers, and the 900. piquers, which at the first
forming of the 4. battles were reserved and not any where placed, and would
also either from the beginning reserve vnplaced, or at least would draw. 400.
archers. 400. harquebuziers, and. 400. mosquetiers, out of the 7000. archers,
and the. 3000. harquebuziers and mosquetiers, which are reduced and placed in
many sleeves, wings, troops and other forms upon the flanks Corners and
Reregards of all the aforesaid 4. battles, and would divide all the aforesaid
900. piquers 500. halbadiers and 12000. wepons of volee of different sorts into
4. parts, 3. parts of the which being reduced into diverse squares and troops,
I would should be reduced upon the back and both the Corners of the
semicircle, with certain fawconetts and Robynets for the guard of the back and
ends of the semicircle of Cariages, and therewithal would also place many of
(...) the harquebuziers and mosquetiers aforesaid upon diverse of the Carriages
themselves, that from thence upon any approach of the Enemy, they might
discharge their pieces at them to their terror and mischief.

Now as for the fourth part and division of the weapons aforesaid I would they
should be placed in many hearses and troops upon the frunts and flanks of the
aforesaid square of carriages, as also upon the ynner parts and corners of the
half round. And as for the 140. stradiots, archers on horseback and
Crosbowers on horseback, I would that. 100. of them should be placed under
their Conductors in diverse little troops and societies upon the back and
Rereward of the half round, for the more sure guarde of the same, and the rest
which are 40. light hormen, I would that they being divided in their little
troops and societies, should be for the guarde of the inner part of the
semicircle, or else that the Enemies Army being in frunt of the aforesaid 4.
battles, that 20. of those light horsemen under a sufficient Conductor should
serve for discouerers on the right hand of the whole Army, and that the other
20. light horsemen under the like Conductor should discover on the left hand,
whether there were any unlooked for troops of the enemy approaching, and
thereof to give advertisement to the General of the Army, or to the Lord
Marshall.

And now all these reducements before set down being performed, It is to be
noted that for so puissant an Army as this of 28000. horsemen and footmen of
our English Nation is, there cannot be fewer then 4000. pioners and laborers,
besides the waggoners, Carters, and other baggagers of the Camp, as well for the
leuelling and plaining of grounds where the Army and artillery shall pass,
as also for the fortefying of Camps and approaching of places fortefied with
trenches, Cross trenches and gabions, and for the making of mounts and working
in mines, and infinite other things appertaining to the Army and Camp: which
4000. laborers and pioners I would upon the day of battle appoint and place in
this sort following. First, How to reduce appoint and place the Pioners of the
whole Army.
I would that besides their spades, shouelles, and mattocks, which they should
have always by them ready to perform any labor or work to them appointed
by their Captains and Conductors, that every one of them should have a good
halbard or black bill with a good dagger either hanging before them, or upon
their Girdles at their backs: And so I would likewise that all the Waggoners,
Carters and other baggagers of the Camp should be appointed with the like
weapons always upon their cariages ready upon any occasion for them to take
and use, or else that every sort of them should have such other weapons as they
have most skill to handle: And of the pioners and laborers I would appoint
some convenient numbers to be with the field pieces that were placed upon the
fruntes and corners of all the 4. battles to help to remove, turn and manage
them.

Also I would take 1600. more of those pioners and laborers, and would divide
them into 4. divisions or parts of 400. in every division, under their
Captains, and Leaders, and would appoint every one of those 4. parts divided
into their societies of tens to attend upon the aforesaid 4. battles, and that
they should be placed at the backs and in Rereward of the societies of
halbardiers that are in Rereward of the weapons of volee of the 4. battles,
ready to cut any trenches, or to perform any other commandment unto them
given, as also upon the overthrow of the Enemy with their black Bills or other
weapons to follow the Chase, and do execution upon the Enemy flying as the
soldiers halbardiers placed at the backs of the weapons of volee ought to
do, because that according to right discipline upon the overthrow of the
Enemy, Squadrons and battles, upon y^ overthrow of the enemy, are in no wise
to break their ranks and order to follow the chase: and that in respect of
the many and great inconveniences that upon diverse occasions and accidents, do
often happen.
it is not any ways lawful for battles and squadrons of footmen to break
their ranks and orders, to the intent to follow the Chase: And as for all the
rest of the 4000. laborers and pioners, I would place them divided under their
Captains and leaders as well for the guard of the aforesaid square and half
round of cariages, as for the keeping of the Cariages in order, and repairing
and mending of the wheels and other things of the Ordinance, or of Carts and
wagons broken.

And now having reduced and placed all the aforesaid 4. battles with their
forlorn hopes, sleeves, wings, troops and other forms of weapons of volee in
their most convenient places, and therewithal armed them with convenient
numbers of field pieces, and reduced and placed all the horsemen of diverse
different sorts of armors and weapons in their most convenient forms for the
annoiance of the Enemy and for the aiding and succouring the one of the other
upon all needful occasions and accidents, and therewithal placed all the
Cariages of the Army and Camp in the form of a half round and semicircle
with a square of cariages in the midst or bosom thereof for the guard of the
Rerewards and backs of all the 4. battles; and all those cariages in their
forms guarded with diverse different sorts of weapons both of horsemen and
footmen, accompanied with small field pieces to make head against and resist al
attempts either of horsemen or footmen: And all this to the intent presently
upon the approach of the Enemy that is now in sight to give battle: Then I
would wish according to the ancient use of many Warlike Nations, to the intent
that it might please Almighty God to prosper this Army with victory, that
upon the sound of the Lord Lieutenants trompet for the displaieng of the
standard Royal of the Army, to the intent to give battle, the Enemy being in
sight and approaching, all the soldiers should be instructed and taught long
before to say this short prayer following, or some other to the like effect.

O Almighty, A short prayer to be said by soldiors, upon the approaching and,
sight of the Enemies battle.
Eternal, and incomprehensible God, we most humbly beseech thy divine
Majesty, to give unto us all courage, force and victory to the glory of thy
holy Name.

And this said prayer, I would wish to be said upon the sight of the Enemies
battles by all the squadrons of armed footmen, and by all the sleeves and
wings of the soldiers of weapons of volee upon their knees in their Ranks as
they stand. And that all the horsemen of every sort of weapon should on
horseback use the same or the like short prayer.

And therewithal I thought good further to advertise, that those squadrons
being so formed or in any other sort, It is not lawful nor sufferable for any
soldior upon the near approach of the Enemy, to turn his face.
to the intent to give battle to the Enemy, all the soldiors piquers, and
halbardiers should be instructed and taught long before, that it is not lawful
nor sufferable for any of the soldiers of any rank reduced into form of
battle, when upon the very near approach of the enemies squadron they have
vprighted their piques, to the intent with the points of them to charge or
receive a charge of their Enemies be they either horsemen or footmen, so much
as once to turn their faces to look behind them: And to the intent that they
may be the more terrified from any ways turning their faces to look back
(which does argue fear) they are to be instructed according to discipline,
that it shall be lawful for the soldiers of every Rank to wound or kill
any souldior or soldiers of the rank before them upon the turning of their
faces and bodies to look back: and the same is to be performed even from the
very first to the last ranks: And this instruction is to be observed to ye
intent to make all the soldiors of a squadron formed to keep their weapons,
faces, eyes, and brave countinaunces toward their Enemies, without showing
any suspicion or so much as one tittle of fear.

But now after my describing very particularly and at large this said Army
reduced into the form and forms aforesaid, to the intent that thereby all
Gentlemen affected to matters of arms, and soldiers may with great facility
understand mine intention and meaning; it may be that some gentlemen not
experienced in matters of arms, will in reading this my project imagine that
the reducement and forming of an army into diverse battles and other forms,
does appertain only to the Lord Lieutenant General, or to the Lord high
Marshall of the army; and that the same should be performed onley by one of
them, one piece after another: And that they peradventure may imagine the
rather; because I in my foresaid reducing and forming of ye army by way of
discourse do write, and say, that first I would reduce and place the vaungard,
then the Reregard, and then the other two battles, and the Weapons of volee,
and after the horsemen of diverse sorts of armors and Weapons in this sort, and
in that sort, with many other particularities and circumstances: Unto which
their misimaginations I say, that it is not one man's work; although it were
Julius Caesar himself, to reduce a whole army into diverse forms of battle
with celeritie when they are to march in the enemies Country, or to fight with
the Enemy, but that the same must be of necessity performed by diverse
Chiefetains, and higher and lower officers of the army: And yet that
notwithstanding, it is not possible to perform the same with art, celeritie,
and Discipline, unless the direction and order thereof do proceed either
from the only mouth of the Chiefetaine of the army, or from the Lord high
Marshall, or some other chief Officer by them appointed; And therefore it
does behooue (which of them soever does give the order) to have the form and
forms, of all the battles, squares and troops, as well of horsemen as of
footmen with the situation and nature of the ground and grounds, and many
other particularities in his memory and head; and that in so great perfection,
as if he with his eyes did at that instant behold and see the whole army in
the field reduced into all his intended forms.

And therefore to perform the same, it is the ordinary use of all skillful
Chieftaines of armies and Lord Marshals when they have concluded and resolved
with themselves by the advice of their Council, The ordinary proceedinge of
al skilful Chieftainsof Armies in their reducements and forming of batles.
into what form and forms the whole army shall be reduced to march or to
fight, to call and assemble before them the Chiefetaines of all the horsemen
and footmen, the master of the Ordinance, the Sergeant Mayor general, the
master of the Camp, and such other men of office and charge as he thinks
requisite, and there gives order unto them from point to point, concerning y^
dislodging and ordering of al those most important affairs: which being by him
performed; they presently do resort every one to their own charges, and do
give order to their Lieutenants, to their Sergeant Majors, Captains, and all
other officers unto whom the execution of those affairs and actions do
appertain, for the performance of al those reducements and orders that they
have received of the Chiefetaine of the army, or from the Lord Marshall: which
done, then all the Captains both of horsemen and footmen, and all their
officers, do with all celeritie reduce their bands into order, and march into
the field, where the Lord Lieutenant General, with the Lord Marshall, and
Sergeant Mayor general, do ouersee and direct the Coronels, Sergeant Majors
and Captains, in the ordering and forming of their battles, troops and other
forms. And thus by this ordinary proceeding of all skillful Chieftaines of
Armies in their reducementes and formings of battles and Camps, those and all
other matters military of any great importance, are with great facility, and
in very short time performed.

And now having showed all the most convenient ways of reducing and forming of
all sorts of squadrons as well great as small, and where in the field to their
most advantage they may be placed, and therewithal how and where horsemen of
diverse different sorts of armors and weapons ought to be placed in their most
convenient places: with many other particularities, I think good before I go
any further to give an advertisement that although it has been the use of all
antiquity amongst many Nations according to good discipline to reduce the
chief force of their armed footmen into three squadrons or battles, Certain
reasons alleged to prove that it is more convenient and of greater force, for
the general of a puissant Army that does consist of many thousands of armed
footmen to reduce them into 5. 6. 7. or 8. batles, than only into 3. great
battles of vaungard, battle, and reregard, according to the common use.
terming the first, vaunguard, the second, battle, and the third, Reregard; and
that oftentimes they have used to form very great battles of 8000. or 10000.
or more into one body of squadron; yet I for diverse causes and reasons would
wish a Lieutenant general, or lord Marshall of a puissant Army, rather to
form 6. 7. or 8. smaller battles; incase the number of the Army be so great
that the same by reason military may be performed, then only into three
great battles as aforesaid.

As for example, if there were an Army of 30000. horsemen and footmen; and that
there were of those. 15000. armed men piquers and short weapons to be reduced
into diverse battles; that I would not only of those. 15000. according to the
ordinary use, form a vauntgard, battle and Rereward, but also 3. other smaller
battles, unto the which I would give 3. different names, and would call the
first by the name of a vauntregard Rereward; the second the batle of succor; It
is here to be noted that the whole frunt of 15000. men reduced into 3. great
battles of 5000. to each battle does consist of 3. times 125. armed me^, which
being nombred as if they were all in one frunt, do make just 375. piquers, and
by flank 40. ranks, ourplus of broken ranks, not any one soldior. And so
likewise the frunts of the 15000. men reduced into 6. smaller bat^les, 3. of
the. which being of 3000. to each battle do consist every one of them of 75.
piquers in frunt. And the frunt also of each one of the other 3. smallest
squadrons of 2000. to every batle consisting of 50. piquers in each frunt being
all 6. frunts nombred together as if they were all (...) one frunt, do
likewise make the just number of 375. piquers in frunt, as the 3. great
squadrons of ^000. to every batle do, and by flank 40. ranks, overplus not
any one sodior.
and the third by the name of a Rereregard Reregard; and the first 3. battles
of vaungard, battle, and Reregard I would should consist of 3000. piquers and
short weapons to every battle; and that each one of those battles being reduced
into squadron should consist of. 75. piquers in frunt, and. 40. by flanks,
overplus of broken ranks not so much as one soldior; and the last 3. mentioned
battles I would should consist of. 2000. to every battle, and that every one of
them being reduced in to squadrons should consist in frunt, that is in every
rank from frunt to back of 50. piquers, and by flanks of. 40. ranks,
overplus of broken ranks not any one soldior. And these 6. foresaid battles
reduced into the forms aforesaid, and flankt and winged with weapons of volee
of diverse sorts according to discipline and the coming of the enemy; in mine
opinion should be of great advantage to encounter with 15000. armed men their
enemies reduced but only into. 3. batles of 5000. to every battle; by reason
that whilst the 3. foremost battles each of them consisting of 3000. as
aforesaid, do confrunt with the. 3. great batles of 5000. in each battle, the
other 3. battles of a vauntregard Rereward and of the battle of succor, and of
a Rereregard Rereward, that do march in wings in Rereward retired, as
aforesaid, may with great celeritie and dexterity by marching and auauncing
themselves forward, charge the flanks of their enemies 3. battles, and put
them in great hazard of disordering and breaking: Howbeit here it may be
objected against mine opinion, that in case the 3. great battles of the enemy
of. 5000. to every battle were each one of them reduced into. 125. armed men in
frunt, and of 40. ranks by flanks; that their (...) encountting and ioining
with the foremost 3. small batles of vaungard, battle, and Reregard, they might
every one of them in joining frunt to frunt with them, in respect that every
one of the great battles of. 5000. to every batle does bear a greater breadth
by the number of. 28. soldiors in frunt, then any of the foremost 3. squadro^s
of 3000 in every squadron do, with great advantage draw up a sleeue of 28. in
every rank, and of 40. ranks by flanks; and finding themselves full against
the flank of their Enemies squadron, they may suddenly make of flank frunt by
tourning their faces and weapons toward the flank of the foresaid
littlesquadrons, and then reforming themselves in their distances, and closing
themselves in frunt and flanks, may bend their piques and charge the flanks of
the little squadrons to their most assured ruin. Or otherwise upon the
inconsiderate ioining of any one of the small squadrons of 3000. being in frunt
but. 75. with the very midst of the frunt of the great battles of. 5000. that
do consist of 125. piquers in frunt; the foresaid great squadrons upon such an
advantage offered, may draw up each of them two sleeves from each side or
flank of their squadron one of. 14. piquers in every rank, and finding
themselves even upon both the flanks of the little squadron; they may of their
flanks make frunt, and so of. 14. that they were before in every rank, they
are now by making of flank frunt become to be 40. in every rank, and in
length by flanks 14. soldiors, and so by reforming their distances and
straightning and closing themselves in frunt and by flanks as aforesaid, may
with their piques charge both the flanks of the little squadron to their utter
disorder and overthrow. To which objection I say, that those foresaid
aduauntages and others might be very well taken against the 3. little squadrons
of vaungard, battle, and Reregard, if it were not that the other 3. little
battles of succor of 2000. to every squadron, every of them of. 50. piquers in
frunt, marching in Rereward in distinct battles by them selves were not
always ready upon the drawing up of all such sleeves or wings from the bodies
of the great squadrons, suddenly with great dexterity to charge them either in
frunt flanks or back, to their most assured ruin and overthrow. But again it
may be further alleged in favor of the great battles, that al squadrons of
armed men piquers do always march, winged, and flankt with convenient numbers
of weapons of volee, in such sort as those weapons of volee should be a great
impediment to the forsaid little squadrons to charge the sleeves, and wings as
aforesaid.

Unto the which I say, that true it is, that all well ordered battles, are
winged and flankt with shot of diverse sorts and that it has been and is a
maxim amongst al men of war of great experience and Judgment, that
hearses, sleeves, wings and troops of shot being divided into many small
divisions, are a great deal more apt and ready to be employed at one time,
into more different and effectual services to work great effects then any
great divisions of shot can be: Which if it be so, as most certain it is by all
experience Military; then the 3. battles of 5000. to every battle having
10000. weapons of volee of diverse sorts to be reduced under their safeguard,
must divide those 10000. into so many compertimentes and divisions of sleeves,
wings and troops, as are requisite to guard 3. such battles; As also the
divisions of weapons of volee themselves to be protected and defended under
the safeguard of those 3. squadrons; and so likewise the 15000. armed men
being reduced into 6. little battles as aforesaid, having the like number of
weapons of volee of diverse sorts to aid them, and to be by them protected,
must by all order military divide those 10000. weapons of volee into double as
many or more divisions of sleeves, wings and troops then the 3. great battles
have divided theirs for their aid. From all which experienced reasons and
examples I come to conclude that as 15000. armed footmen reduced but only
into 3. great battles cannot by any reason military have so many sleeves,
winge, troops, and other divisions of diverse sorts of shot under their
safeguard, as 15000. armed men reduced into 6. smaller battles may have: Even so
that the 3. great squadrons of armed men with their few and great diuisio^s of
shot cannot possibly by any reason or experience work so great effects, as the
6. smaller battles their Enemies, with their many and more convenient divisions
of diverse sorts of weapons of volee may work.

And now whereas I have before fourmed a squadron and diverse squadrons all of
halbardiers or battleaxes environed or empaled about with 5. ranks of piquers
in frunt, flanks and back; and that the short weapons are in greater number
then ye piques; and therefore by some in these days (that do more regard the
new fashions, and fancies of the disordered and corrupted Militia, that of very
late years in diverse civil wars have crept into Christendom, then the true
discipline, art, and science military, which has been practiced and used
from age to age of all antiquity, in the wars betwixt Emperors, Kings, and
puissant Common wealths) it may peradventure be thought, that such a squadron
is no ways co^parable for all great effects and purposes to a squadron of the
like number al of piquers without any short weapons, saving only a very few
for the guard of the Ensigns: Thereunto I say, that I do think this squadron
of short weapons environed with 5. ranks of piques as aforesaid, to be of a
great deal more advantage, strength and effect as well against horsemen as
footmen, then any squadron of the like number all of piquers can be. And
because it shall be apparent that I am not carried with new fashions and
fancies, but with the observation of that which I have read, has been in use
and observed by diverse brave Nations in many ages, as also by mine own hearing
the opinions of diverse great Captains, Coronels, and Sergeants Majors of
diverse warrelike Nations, some of late years dead, and some yet alive; And
therwithall by that which I have seen and observed my self, in the squadrons
of diverse Nations, some of the which have used squadrons all of piquers as
aforesaid, and other Nations squadrons of piquers with some ranks of halbards
with in their piques: which different uses of Nations have given me occasion
not only to enter into imagination of the different or contrary causes of the
forming of such squadrons, but also the more curiously to ask and inquire of
diverse men of great sufficiency of those Nations, the different reasons and
causes of the forming of such squadrons, some all of piques and others of
piques and short weapons as aforesaid; I therefore will set down that which I
have gathered and observed by the diversity of their opinions concerning the
same, as also by mine own sight and consideration, and will here by the help
of Almighty God, give sufficient causes and reasons to prove that my foresaid
squadron formed with short weapons, environed about with 5. ranks of piquers
as aforesaid, is of far greater force and effect, then if the squadron were
all of piquers; And the reasons are these.

First, when a squadron of men at arms or dimilaunces, or diverse squadrons
seconding one another, should charge the squadron of footmen all of piquers
in frunt: Reasons to prove a Squadron of Battleaxes, environed about with 5.
ranks of Piques to be a far greater advantage, strength, and effect against*
horsemen (...) footmen the^ any squadron of the like number, all of Piques.
all men of consideration may consider and know that all the whole squadron
consisting only of piquers, according as I have before formed diverse squadrons
in this discourse; that not above 5. ranks of the foremost piques at the most
being closed in frunt, flanks and back, or rather but 4. ranks, can make
head with the points of their piques to hurt or reach the horses or men of the
foremost ranks of the Lances charging; and that because the longest piques that
are in these days used by any Nation are not above 18. foot long, of which
length of 18. foot, Not above 5. ranks of Piquers closed in frunt, flank and
back, are able to make head with their Piques, to reach or hitt the first
rank of Lances charginge, for diverse reasons.
the foremost rank of piquers either clapping the butendes of their piques
under their right feet, or carrying them breast high to resist, and repulse
the Lances (both which ways are in the beginning of this book, very
particularly declared) I say that from their right hands that they hold the
butendes of their piques withal to theirleft and forehands that do bear
their piques (incase they carry them abouehand breast high) do occupy and
therefore shorten 3. foot at least of the length of their piques toward the
foremost rank of their Enemies; then there do remain 15. foot beyond their
left and forehandes more for them to reach and annoy their enemies withal;
then the second rank closing themselves to y^ first rank and carrying their
piques breast high over the shoulders of the first rank do leese 3. foot more
of ^y length of their piques by that which they hold betwixt their hinder and
forehands, as aforsaid; so as there remains but 12. foot of the length of
their piques beyond the foremost ranks toward the annoiance of their
Enemies; then the third rank closing themselves to the shoulders of the second
rank do come likewise to loose three foot more by so much of their piques as
they hold betwixt both their hands as aforesaid, which with the thickness and
distance of the two ranks before them does come to make them to leese 9.
foot of the length of their piques, so as there remains only 9. foot of the
length of their piques at the most beyond the foremost rank toward the
annoiance of the Enemy; then the fourth rank by the like cause and reason
comes to leese 3. foot more of the length of their piques, so as there
remains only 6. foot of the length of their piques with the points of them
before the foremost rank to annoy the Enemy; then the fifth rank of the
squadron of piquers comes by the like causes and reasons as aforesaid to
leese 3. foot more at the least of the length of their piques, which with the
thickness of all the 4. ranks before them do come to make them to leese 15.
foot or more of the length of their piques so as there remains only 3. foot
of y^ length of their piques beyond y^ foremost and first rank, the which 3.
foot of their piques toward the Enemy reaching too short to annoy either
horses or men, do rather through the shortness of the same, reaching so
little a way beyond the first rank, trouble the foremost ranks of their
fellows, then work any other good effect; and therefore those piques of the
fifth rank are rather to be kept still vprighted with the points some thing
bent toward the Enemy, then any ways to be couched as the piques of the 4.
foremost ranks are, and so likewise the piquers of the sixth, seventh, and
eighth ranks, and subsequently of all the rest having no possibility at the
first charge either of horsemen, or footmen, to annoy them, they are to keep
their piques still vprighted, the points something bent forward toward the
enemy to show themselves in the sight of the enemy ready to succor the
foremost ranks, rather then any ways to bear the points of their piques any
lower. But if any man will say that all the backer ranks of piquers may
orderly and easily succor and supply the places of such piquers of the fore
ranks as come to be slain, wounded, or overthrown, and so resist or repulse
either horsemen or footmen entering, as I my self in the beginning of this
book have particularly set down.

Thereunto I answer, An Objection answered.
that the piques that are in the backer ranks upon the accidental breaking
in of any men at Arms into the foremost ranks of piquers; or upon the entering
of any of the foremost ranks of the contrary squadron of footmen; are through
the having of so many other ranks of piquers before them, with the great length
of those weapons in a press so vnmaniable, and therefore of so little effect
when battles come to join; that most of the piques of the inner ranks; I
mean of the sixth, seventh, and eighth, and so consequently of the rest of the
middle ranks, through the letting fall of the points of their piques forward
(how leisurely soever) to couch and bend the points of them to the annoiance of
the enemies, do through their great length so intermingle, and intricate with
the pique^^ of the former ranks, that every sudden touch of the piques that
are in the ranks before one another, do so disorder, beat, and turn aside the
points of the piques from their intended thrusts at their enemies, as that they
rather turn them through their great length to the trouble of the ranks before
them, then any ways to resist, repulse, or annoie the Enemy.

But now it may be demanded of me wherefore the sixth, seventh, Why the sixth,
seventh, and so consequently, the rest of the inner ranks can not as orderly
let fall and couch their Piques to the mis chief of the Enemies, as the 5
foremost ranks.
and so consequently the rest of the inner ranks should not as orderly one
after another let fall and couch their piques to the resistance and mischief of
their enemies, as the 5. foremost, and first rank^ of piquers may. Whereunto I
answer that the 4. or 5. first ranks having apparent and clear in their eyes
and sights the coming of their Enemies in squadron, be they horsemen or
footmen, may with greater order and leisure all one after another couch their
piques and charge a contrary squadron of footmen, or receive a charge of
horsemen, then the other inner ranks of piquers can, who upon the breaking in
and entering of some of the men at arms in one place or other, or y^ entering of
some part of the squadron of their enemies footmen more in one place then in
another, as sometimes it happens, cannot so well and clearly see the coming
and entering of their Enemies, by reason of so many ranks of their fellows
before them, as that they may so well in just and convenient times, moments and
distances, orderly and effectually let fall and couch their piques as the 4.
or 5. foremost ranks have done.

Upon which accidents it does ordinarily happen, that such inner ranks are
driven to let fall and couch their piques upon suddens, least y^ by their not
couching them, they should by their enemies approaching them too near leese the
use of the points of their piques. Which sudden letting fall and couching of
their piques, does cause the aforesaid intermingling and intricating, and
confused ouerthwarting of piques with piques, a great deal more in the inner
ranks, then any ways in the foremost 4. or 5. ranks as aforesaid. By all
which it is to be considered and noted, that neither horsemen, Lances, nor
footmen piquers can enter under the points of my squadron of battleaxes empaled
and environed in frunt, flanks and back, with 5. ranks of piques as aforesaid,
but that they must of necessity abide the first violence of the points of
them, (...) they find them already in great order and leisure couched to resist
and repulse them.

Whereas far otherwise it does behooue the inner ranks of a squadron
consisting all of piquers, to observe the entering of their Enemies be they
horsemen or footmen in such moments and just distances, as that they may be
sure to let fall and couch their piques, when their Enemies are entered, and do
come within 4. or 5. ranks of them; which if they should fail to perform;
then it were too late for such inner ranks to couch their piques either
against horsemen or footmen, now entered and comne within and under the length
of their piques. But unto this, some unskillful soldior may object and say,
that the inner ranks may still carry their piques couched, ready to resist,
or repulse their Enemies entering. Or otherwise, that they letting fall and
couching their piques, after that their Enemies be entered within less then 5.
or 4. ranks of them may so far retire, and pull them back, as that they may
recover the use of the points of them against their Enemies to their great
annoiance.

Unto which objections, I say that it is not in the force and strength of the
most puissant soldiors of any Nation that live, An objection answered.
still to carry their piques couched, no nor yet to bear them abouehand over
their fellows heads but a very little while, considering the great length
and heaueth of them: And therefore they must never let fall and couch them,
until such instant and needful times, as their Enemies do approach them in so
near distances, as they must presently (either with one entire thrush, if they
be the foremost, 4* or. 5. ranks, or with diverse thrusts in just instantes and
times if they be the inner ranks), upon the entering of the Enemy, be driven
to make head, and succor the ranks before them; for if the inner ranks should
through lack of skill thrust at their Euemies before they come within the
reach of their piques, then they should work no other effect, but thrust their
own fellows that are betwixt them and their Enemies, to their trouble, or
mischief in their heads, necks or backs. And for answer to the other
objection that the ynner ranks of piquers letting fall and couching their
piques, may pull and retire them so far back, as that they may again recover
the use of the points of them against their Enemies entered; I say, that if the
enemies be they either horsemen or footmen be entered but only.7. 6. 5. 4. or
3. feet within and under the length of any of the piques of the inner ranks
that it is not possible for such piquers, in respect of the rank and ranks
that are so near and close behind them, to pull their piques with their arms
so far back, as any ways to recover y^ use of the pyonts of them against
such Enemies as are comne within and under their piques as aforsaid: whereof
insueth that those inner ranks have utterly lost the use of their piques, and
therefore must let them fall to the great trouble of the legs and feet of the
ranks of their fellows aduauncing forward, and betake themselves to their
swords and daggars, The great effects that a squadron of Battleaxes, environed
about with 5. ranks of Piquers do work.
which are not weapons any ways able to repulse or resist armed men with
battleaxes, or halbards. By all which before alleged, I think it is most
apparent that the 5. ranks of piquers that do empale and enuiron my squadron
of battleaxes by frunt, flanks, and back, are ranks enough to restist any
Charge or Charges of Lances, as well, and a great deal better, then if the
same squadron were all of piques, because that the 4. or 5. first ranks only
are those that do work all the effects to the resisting and repulsing of
Lances charging, or that are with their thrush to resist and repulse any
charge of a squadron of footmen piquers their Enemies; and if any Lances by
chance should break through those 5. ranks, then the battleaxes, and short
staued, and long edged, and short and strong pointed halbards in the hands of
well armed men, are ready at the heels of the 5. ranks of their piquers, and
do wonderfully both with blow and thrust at the heads, and faces of horses or
men, kill wound, overthrow, or repulse either horsemen Lances, or footmen
piquers, whose first charges and furies have been before greatly stayed and
weakened by y^ resistance of the first 5. ranks of piquers (as aforsaid;) For
it is to all men of understanding in matters Military most evident, that short
staued battleaxes, or halbards, of not above 6. foot long in their whole
length, do no ways in their blows nor thrusts, either against horsemen or
footmen trouble, entermingle, nor intricate one with another, by reason of
their shortness, as the ranks of piques do, through their great lengthes:
which piques do no ways kill nor hurt but only with their points, as is
before at large declared. By all which I come to conclude, that 4. or 5. of the
first ranks, be it in frunt, flanks, or back; I mean which of them soever
upon the coming of the enemy be made frunt; do work far greater effects
then all the rest of the inner ranks of piquers can possibly do: for in troth,
all y^ inner ranks of piquers besides the 5. first ranks, do neither against
horsemen, and chiefly against footmen halbarders, or battleaxes well armed;
no nor yet against armed men with swords and targets, using their targets only
to defend their faces from the points of the piques, work any important
effect, as it is most manifest by the reasons, causes and accidents by me
before alleged.

And thus having at large showed by diverse reasons the imperfections of
squadrons that do consist only of piques, with the great perfections and
effects of squadrons of battleaxes environed only with 5. ranks of piquers;
as also how all sorts of squadrons that are commonly in use in the open
fields in these days, and also in all former ages ought to be reduced into
form, with many other different particularities; I will omit diverse other sorts
and forms of little battles that are contained in some printed books of diverse
languages; as of Crossebattles, of battles in triangle, and battles in form of
stars, with many other such battles of diverse shapes and fashio^s
extraordinary, y^ are rather set forth to fill up books and to please y^
curious; then for any great use of them; by reason y^ such fantastical battles
are no ways able in the open fields to march and encounter with such squadrons
as I have before described and set down: And yet sometimes armies may march upon
such strange and extraordinary grounds (as in marching over mountains or high
hills y^ have variety of forms of rising and descending grounds) y^ it is not
possible to form such great squadrons in such forms, as I have before declared
and described, but that upon the coming of the enemy they must be forced to
divide their three battles of vauntguard, battle and Rereward, that they
marched withal in the plain and open fields, into as many varieties of
little battles and forms, as the advantages and forms of the variety of
grounds where they presently find themselves do present unto them; and
therewithal to flank their armed men on every side with weapons of volee: All
which a Lord Marshall or sergeant Mayor may with a great deal more facility
perform, then to form such great squadrons as I have before described,
reduced, and formed.

But here I think it good to advertise the Reader, that I have heard very
credibly reported, that there is another kind of forming of a battle, amongst
some of the Sergeants Majors of our Nation in these days greatly in use, and
that is; That they place four piquers with their piques advanced in square,
according to the greatness of the squadron that they mean by guess to form
with the number of piquers that they have for that purpose: And sometimes they
place in the midst of the frunt betwixt the two foremost piquers, a third
piquer, and so likewise they place two other piquers, upon the midst of each
flank one, betwixt the said piquers that are in flank, with a fourth piquer
also in the midst betwixt the two hindermost piquers, which 8. piquers when
they have placed in as just square in their distaunces as they can: then they
command all the piquers that they mean by guess to reduce into squadron,
being all behind and in Rereward of the 8. piquers in square, presently to
run into the void place within the square of the 8. piquers, and there to fall
into their ranks with hubbledeshuf as well as they can, until they have
filled up all the distances and empty place within y^ square of the said 8:
piquers, which being performed; they hold this way not only for a very ready
forming of a squadron, but also for a most excellent way of reducement, Some
Sergeants Ma^ors of this time do through lack of understanding and skill,
think a battle of extremity and necessiti^ to be better then a battle
according to art and discipline formed.
because that there is not any Sergeant Mayor so unskillful, although he be
utterly ignorant in Arithmetique, nor that he do know so much as one letter
upon the book, but that he may by guess form such a squadron; which kind of
forming, or rather deforming of squadrons, in troth is called of all antiquity
to make a squadron or battle of extremity and necessity; when upon the sudden
and unlooked for approach and near coming of the enemy, through the fault and
negligence of the scouts and discouerers, they are forced in the place of
assembly in their Camp, to make of necessity virtue: that is, for lack of
time to reduce their squadrons into form of like numbers of soldiers in every
rank, and into their just and proportionate distances both by frunt and flanks
according to discipline, to form a confused squadron of different numbers of
soldiors into crooked ranks, and uncertain and confused distances, into the void
ground or place that is within 4. 8. or 12. or more piquers, placed in square
as abouesaid, in the place of assembly of their Camp: which kind of disordered
battles of extremity are no ways able by any reason Military, to encounter
and abide the charge of a squadron of the like number of piquers reduced into
form according to discipline; that is of like numbers of soldiors in every
rank from frunt to back, and in their even and proportionate distances in
frunt, and by flanks; and therefore being always ready with great order and
facility to incorporate and close themselves by frunt and flanks, may without
any ways troubling the one the other, nor intricating their piques nor ranks,
manage and use their piques with great dexterity* and charge, and overthrow,
such a confused multitude, or battle of extremity that are in uncertain numbers
in their ranks, and in as uncertain and confused distances: which causes
disequality and crookedness of ranks; and therefore cannot possibly close
themselves in frunt and by flanks, in any order, form, and strength, nor
manage and use their piques without confounding and intricating their piques
with their fellows piques, to the great advantage of their enemies well formed
squadron, and their own most certain ruin; Besides all which it is not possible
for such a disordered squadron to march in the fields, with any order, nor
according to discipline to perform diverse other effects belonging to well
ordered squadrons in the field, as all skilful and expert Sergeants Majors,
and men of war of experience and judgment do very well know. Wherefore I
come to conclude that such disordered battles of necessity and extremity are
never to be used, but upon a sudden and unlooked for coming of the enemy,
through the negligence of the scoutes, discouerers, or Centinelles as
aforesaid. And therefore now I proceed to diverse other very important and
requisite matters Military.

That great bands of 500. under an Ensign are more connenient for all services
in the field, then small bands of 150.
IN this place before I proceed any further, I thought good to notify unto
all such as shall read these my instructions, that my opinion is, y^ great
bands of footmen of 500. soldiers to every Ensign according to the ancient
and modern use of Germany (when they do invade, Great bands of footmen of
500 to every Ensign are a great deal better then bands of 150. or 200. for
diverse causes, and reasons.
or resist, and make head against y^ Turk) are more convenient, and a great
deal better as well for the princes saving of many paies of Captains, and
officers, as also for the more speedy forming of great battles or squadrons
with dexterity and celeritie, then small bands of 150. are; who in respect of
the many Captains and officers, are a far greater charge unto the prince as
aforesaid; as also through the smalnesse and great number of their
compertiments or divisions of diverse different sorts of weapons, a great deal
more slow and unfit to be reduced into great battles or squadrons, then great
ba^ds are: which mine opinion, because I have fortified and proved the same
with certain examples and many reasons in my book of discourses, which I set
forth and caused to be printed 1590. and yet that the same has been by
certain apassionate Gentlemen with many malicious and vain words void of all
reason military, denied in certain malicious libelling pamphlets by them in
written hand in many places dispersed contrary to all civility and profession
military; I will again in this place rehearse and set down a part of that
which is contained in my foresaid book of discourses, and will fortefie the
same with such reasons and examples, as any man that is of any discretion may
manifestly see the great ignorance and lack of skill of those that do
think, that many small compertiments of piquers and of weapons of volee may be
as soon brought into any form of battle, with sleeves, wings, forlorn hopes,
etc, as great bands of 500. that do consist of great compertiments of
different sorts of weapons may; And therefore the words of my book of
discourses to prove my foresaid project, are in a manner verbatim, these
following.

When the great Princes of Germany upon any occasion or injury offered, are
disposed to make War one against another, or upon an imperial army assembled
to invade or resist the Turk, being bound as they are by their Tenures
Military to the Empire, some to find Horsemen, The causes and reasons
wherefore y^ Princes of Germany do use great bands of 500, in their service
of the Empire.
and others to find footmen at their own charges, they then upon such
occasions have always used, and do still use to form their Regiments of
footmen into great bands of 500. to an Ensign, and that they use especially
for two causes; the one thereby in their regimentes and so consequently in
their whole Armies to save the pay of a great sort of Captains, Lieutenantes
of bands, Ensignbearers and other officers, which would be greatly increased
and so amount to a far greater charge, and pay, incase they should compose
smaller bands of 200. or 150. or under that number.

The other cause that does move them to form their bands so great, is, that
their Militia consisting of harquebuziers, mosquetiers, piquers, and some
halbarders, with a few slathe swords for the guard of their Ensigns, that
those sorts of weapons by reason of the greatness of the bands being in great
compertiments and divisions may be the more readily and easily drawn out,
and separated, and with a great deal more celeritie incorporated with the
other great compertimentes of like weapons of other great bands to form their
squadrons with sleeves, wings, troops, and forlorn hopes, according to the
order and direction of their Coronels, and Sergeantes Majors, then if their
bands were smaller either of 200. or 150. or under that number, whereby the
Compertiments of weapons should be also the smaller, and thereby in number the
greater, and so consequently, would require a much longer time not only to
draw out, but also to incorporate compertimentes with compertimentes for the
forming of battles with sleeves, wings, and forlorn hopes as aforesaid:
Besides that, such great bands both by reason and experience are as ready, and
a great deal more ready to be employed either in whole companies under their
Captains and Lieutenants, or divided into parts and corporalates under their
Corporals and Sergeants, for watches, bodies of watches, Sentinels, and all
other ordinary and extraordinary emploiments and actions military, in Camp,
Town, or field, then any small bands are: For it is most evident that small
bands of 150. to an Ensign, consisting of 5. different sorts of weapons,
(viz:) piques, battleaxes, mosquets, harquebuzes, and longbowes, and that
therefore every one sort of those weapons is to be reduced into diverse little
divisions by themselves, which besides the uncomely sight to see so many small
compertimentes in every such little band, it would require a much longer time
upon the daily and ordinary dislodging of an Army reduced into a vaungard,
battle and rereward, to draw so great numbers of compertiments out of such a
number of little bands; then out of a few bands of 500. to draw a few great
compertiments, and to incorporate and reduce them into any form or forms.

And this before written, I think, might suffice to persuade any that do
profess Arms, that are of any discretion, although but of mean judgment in
matters Military, that such great bands as aforesaid, are a great deal more
fit and convenient to form battles and squadrons withal, then such small
bands as aforesaid are. Howbeit because there be some 3. or 4. of our Nation yt
have written in certain lewd and false pamphlets and libells against me (as is
before mentioned) that have not been ashamed to name themselves the inuentors
and deuisers of a new discipline Military, (who how far wide they are from
the understanding of all true discipline, all men of right consideration may
evidently see by their writings, speakings, vain opinions and actions); that
they I say, in their malicious and frivolous libels do write (as aforesaid)
that small bands of 150. are as ready to be reduced into any squadron, as
great bands of.500. are. I therefore to make that, which I have before written
more apparent, and utterly to convince their obstinate ignorances, will by
comparing the best orders and ways of fourming of squadrons, both with great,
and with small bands, show with what great readiness and facility, squadrons
may be formed with a few great Compertiments out of great bands of. 500. to an
Ensign; and with what difficulty great squadrons are reduced into form, with
many little Compertiments out of small bands of.150. to an Ensign: that
thereby all men of consideration may evidently see the erroneous and unskillful
opinions Military that those our such men of war do hold: And therefore I do
for example allege: That admit that a general of an Army of.18000. An example
to prove that great bands of Soldiers are more requisite then small bands.
footmen reduced into.6. Regiments of.3000. to every Regiment and.8000. 10000.
or.12000. horsemen of diverse armors and weapons, with all other provision and
furniture belonging to such an Army, to invade some foreign dominions; and that
the whole 18000 footmen being divided into 5. parts he had concluded
(according to the commendable opinion of some notable men of war that I have
known in my time) that. 3. parts of the 5. should be all piquers and short
weapons, or all piquers without any short weapons, to form a vaungard, battle
and Rereward, according to the manner and use of the Italians and Spaniards of
this time; and that the other two parts should be all weapons of volee; wear I
say, determined to make a proof, whether little bands of 150. or great bands
of 500. were most apt and ready to form squadrons withal; and therefore
having reduced 3. of the 6. Regiments into little bands of 150. that is 20.
bands of 150. to every Regiment of 3000. and the other. 3. Regiments into
great bands of.500. that is.6. bands of 500. to every Regiment of 3000. he
then giving these or the like directio^s hereafter set down, should most
manifestly see the great aptnes, dexterity and readiness of great bands
of.500. to reduce squadrons into, with the wonderful unreadiness, great
disorders and imperfections in reducing of squadrons into form by little
bands of 150. consisting of.5. different weapons as aforesaid*

The Lieutennant general therefore first to make proof whether the piquers of
one of the regiments of the small bands, or the piquers of one of the Regiments
of the great bands were more ready to be reduced into squadron, is to command
that at a certain hour upon a sound and warning given by his trompettor, two
Coronells with their two Regiments the one consisting all of small bands
of.150. and the other all of great bands of.500. should with all celeritie
reduce themselves into their simple and single order of ranks: (which
reducement of bands into their simple, and single order, is ever to be
performed before squadrons can with order and reason Military be formed),
Soldiors are to be ruduced into their simple and single order of ranks, be fore
they are to be broug* to any form of squadron.
and that either in the place of Arms, if the General shall appoint that
place, or otherwise if it shall please him to command both the Coronells at one
time to march out of the Camp to two several places and grounds appointed both
of like distance from the fortifications of the Camp; there to reduce.3. parts
of their Regiments which do consist of piquers, (the other two parts consisting
weapons of volee as aforesaid) into two several squadrons, each of them 60.
piquers in frunt, and 30. by flanks which are in each Regiment.1800. piquers:
The great readiness and dexterity in forming of squad^ons with great
compertiments out of bands of 500.
Then I say that the 3. parts of piquers of every great band of.500.
being.300. and the other two parts of weapons of volee in number 200. marching
out of their quarters into the place of Arms, which is betwixt their quarter
and the fortifications of the Camp, and there reducing themselves into their
simple and single order of 100. ranks 5. in every rank; or rather into 50.
ranks of 10. in every rank: I mean the one half of the weapons of volee,
that doconsist of 100. marching before the ranks of y^ piquers, and the other
half of y^ like number of weapons of volee behind the hindermost rank of all
the piquers, with the Ensign according to all discipline in the midst of the
piquers: And so all those 6. bands of 500. under every Ensign marching 10.
in a rank one after another out of the Camp toward the ground where they
are to form their squadron; whither being comne, the weapons of volee that are
in frunt of the first band, marching a convenient distance to the right hand
from before the piquers, to the intent to give the piquers place, and to be
ready to arm the forepart of the right flank of the squadron: And the
compertiment of piquers of this foremost and first band being comne to the
ground whereas they are to advance their piques, and make a stand, and having
performed the same; the other half of the weapons of volee of the same band
that marched behind, who are to arm the forepart of the left flank of the
squadron being drawn up by their Conductors so large a distance on the left
hand from their compertiment of piquers, as they may leave ground enough
betwixt them and their piquers to form all the rest of the squadron: which
whilst the first band of 500. is a performing; then the one half of the
weapons of volee of the second band that does follow the first band, being by
their Conductors drawn from before their compertiment of piques, and marching
up by the right flank of the compertiment of the first band of piquers,
(that have already made their stand) until they come to the foremost
compertiment of the weapons of volee; and y^ second compertiment of 30. ranks
of piquers 10. in a rank of y^ said second band, marching up by y^ left flank
of the first co^pertiment of that weapon until they find their first and last
ranks equal in frunt and back, with the first and last ranks of the first
compertiment; and then the other half of the weapons of volee, that marched
behind the second compertiment of piquers being by their Conductors drawn so
far to the left hand, until they come to find the hindermost ranks of the
other compertiment of weapons of volee that was marched thither before; And so
subsequently the foremost compertiments of the weapons of volee of the third
band of 500. marching up by the right flank of the piquers that they find
already reduced; as the other two foremost compertimentes of the former bands
have done; And the third compertiment of piquers marching up by the left
flank of the other two Compertiments before reduced, until they find
themselves of equal frunt with them: And then the other that is, the last
compertiment of weapons of volee of the same band, being drawn from behind
their piquers to the other two compertiments that are already of the left hand:
And so subsequentlie the three foremost compertiments of weapons of volee of the
three last bands, marching up by the right flank of the piquers before them,
to the intent to arm as well the hinder part of the right flank, as the back,
or Rereward of the squadron: And the three compertimentes of piquers, of the
said three last bands, marching up by the left flank of the other 3.
compertiments already reduced, as also by the left flanks orderly the one of
the other, until they find themselves all of one equal frunt; the whole
squadron by this means, is now reduced in a very short time into form of
battle, having in frunt 60. piquers, and by flanks 30. ranks: which whole
squadron being reduced thus into form of 60. piquers in frunt, and 30. ranks
by flanks, does contain 1800. piquers as aforesaid; the hindermost and last
three compertiments of weapons of volee marching to the left flank of the
squadron, ready to arm the same according to the direction of the Coronell or
Sergeant Mayor.

Or otherwise, if the same said Regiment of 3000. being ready to dislodge and
march out of their quarter, will use a more short way of reducement into
squadron, and to arm the same with weapons of volee: Then the Sergeant Mayor
may give order that every one of the 6. bands of 500. to every Ensign be
reduced into their simple and single order of ranks in this sort following;
that is that the Captains and officers of the 3. first bands that he will
reduce into form, and begin his squadron withal, do reduce all their weapons
of volee that are to (...) the frunt and right flank of the squadron into
compertiments of 10. in a rank, or fewer as he shall think most meet: And that
the said several compertiments of every one of those three bands being led by
their Conductors shall march and follow one another: And that all the piquers of
the 6. whole bands be reduced into 6. compertiments of 10. in every rank from
frunt to back, ready upon the sound of the drums to follow the compertiments
of weapons of volee; As also being distinctlie led by their Captains to march
and follow one another: And then that the three compertiments of weapons of
volee, that do belong to the three last compertiments of piquers, y^ are to
arm the left flank and back of the squadron shall reduce themselves into 10.
in a rank throughout, or any smaller number, in like sort as he has before
given direction to the three first compertiments of weapons of volee.

Al which reducementes into their simple or single order being performed; then
upon the strokes and sounds of the drums, or of the Coronels trompettor,
they are presently to march out at that Sallie, turnpique, or barriers of the
camp, that it has before pleased y^ General, or L. Marshal to give direction:
And the three foremost compertiments of weapons of volee being comne near to
the place where the squadron is to be formed, they are presently to march to
the right flank and side of the same place, and there to reduce themselves
into as many different forms, as the sergeant Mayor has before given
direction: At which instant, the first compertiment of 30. ranks of piquers 10.
in a rank, do march up to the place of reducement, whither being comn, upon y^
sound of the drums for that purpose, they are presently to advance their piques
and make a pause. At which time and instant the second compertiment, and the
third compertiment both of like numbers of 10. piquers in every one rank from
frunt to back, do march up the second by the right flank of the first
compertiment that has already made a pause or stand, and the third by the
left flank of the said first compertiment: At which time and instant also the
fourth compertiment does march up by the right flank of the second
compertiment, and the fifth by the left flank of the third compertiment.

And the sixth or last compertiment by the right flank of the fourth
compertiment, until all those 5. compertiments do find their first ranks
equal in frunt, and their last ranks equal in back or rereward, with the
first and last ranks of the said first compertiment. During which time and
instant of the reducement of the said 6. compertiments of piquers into
squadron, the three last compertimentes of weapons of volee do march up by the
left flank of the squadron of piquers now already fourmed, and there are to
reduce themselves into the like forms that the foremost 3. compertiments of
weapons of volee have done, upon the right flank of the squadron: Or
otherwise as it shall please the Coronell or Sergeant Mayor to give direction,
for the arming of the said left flank and back of the aforesaid piquers.

And now this squadron being by this kind of reducement, reduced into form,
with sleeves, wings, troops, and other forms of weapons of volee, with great
readiness and celeritie; al men of consideration may evidently see, with what
great facility and dexterity a few great compertiments of piquers and
halbardiers for the guard of the Ensigns, out of great bands of 500. are
reduced into squadron of 60. soldiers in frunt and 30. ranks by flank, or
into any other far greater squadron, with weapons of volee reduced into
diverse forms to arm, the frunt, flanks and back, according to the
commandment of the General, or Coronell, or Sergeant Mayor.

But now let us see how the other aforsaid regiment of 3000. divided into small
bands of hundreds and fifties, (according to the contrary opinion) three
parts of them piquers, and the other two parts weapons of volee (as aforesaid)
may with most celeritie be reduced into y^ like squadron of 1800. piquers
before set down; that is, 60. in frunt, and 30 by flanks: I say that to form
that squadro^, each one of the 20. Captains must according to all order and
discipline, first reduce their bands under their Ensigns into their simple
and single order of ranks, as also into their different compertiments, as the
great ba^ds before have done.

And because that they may the more readily form the squadron, it will behooue
them to have special regard to the number of 60. soldiers that their squadron
must contain in every rank from frunt to back, as also that there must be
30. ranks by flanks: which being by them considered, they then must reduce
all the piquers of every one of their bands into such numbers of ranks, as
that they may be by flank, in equal numbers of ranks with the squadron that
they intend to form of 30. ranks: which to accomplish, they must reduce their
compertimentes of piquers of each one of their bands into 30. ranks of 3. in
a rank: which number being 3. parts of the 5. parts of each one of their
bands as aforesaid; does amount just to 90. piquers; the other two parts
consisting of weapons of volee being 60. So as they must form their squadron
with the compertiments of 90. piquers, 3. in every rank, as the great bands
did form their squadrons with compertiments of 300. piquers 10 in every rank,
which to perform, (considering that they are 20. compertiments of 90. piquers
to every compertiment, out of 20 little bands, as the compertiments of the
great bands were but only 6. compertiments of 300 piquers to every
compertiment, out of the 6. great bands of 500. to every band) will require 3.
or 4. times longer time, then to reduce them into squadron by the 6.
compertiments of the great bands as aforesaid.

Or incase that the Coronell would give order that those little bands being
reduced into their simple and single order of.3. Diverse disorders and
confusions that do ensue in forming of squadrons with little compertiments out
of bands of 150.
in every rank throughout every Compertiment as aforesaid, should come to
join 3. or 4. Co^pertiments of piquers out of 3. or 4: little bands, thinking
thereby to form the squadron with greater celeritie: They I say shall first
before they bring that to pass, find themselves greatly confused to form the
same, by their seeing so great a number of little bands dispersed over the
place of Arms, which do occupy a great deal more ground in the said place,
then 6. great bands do: Besides that it will require a double, or rather a
treble time more, first to reduce 20 little bands into their simple and single
order of ranks, and little Compertiments of so many different sorts of weapons
in so many places dispersed: and then to draw out and to incorporate such a
number of small Compertiments one with another, and after to reduce them into
one body of squadron as aforesaid, then only with 6. great Compertiments of
piquers to form the like squadron, and to arm the same with many forms of
different sorts of weapons of volee in frunt, flanks and back. By all which
alleged both Pro et contra, as also performed in the sight and presence of
such a general as aforesaid, I think it would be evident unto him, and to all
other men of consideration and Judgment in his Amie, that this little squadron
formed but of. 1800* piquers, is a great deal sooner and with more facility
performed with the Compertiments of a few great bands, then with a great
number of little Compertiments, out of many little bands as aforesaid: which
if it be so in so small a squadron where the little Compertiments of 90.
piquers marching 3. in a rank do bear length in number of ranks by flanks
to form such a little battle without patching and peecing so many little
compertiments to form the squadron withal: what then if the General should
command the Coronels and Sergeants Majors of 2. of the 3. Regiments of those
little bands to reduce all the piquers that according to the former division do
amount unto 3600. piquers, into a squadron on of 90. piquers in frunt, and 40.
ranks by flank? when that to perform the same, they must not only first of
all reduce every one of their little bands into their simple, and single order
of ranks of 3. or 4. or more in every rank; but because that their
compertime^ts of 30. ranks 3. in every rank are too short by 10. ranks to
make 40. ranks, they must not only incorporate themselves by flanks with the
like number of ranks; but also must with pieces of other bands, patch and
piece their incorporated Compertiments, and after the patching and pie^ing of
them, then reduce and form their squadron: which to perform does require a
very long time, and does greatly confuse and confound the Coronels and
Sergeants Majors, and all the rest of the officers of those Regiments to their
great disgrace and reproach: whereas contrariwise the 3600. piquers of the. 2
Regiments of 6000. that do consist but of 12. great bands being in the place of
Arms reduced into 10. Compertiments of 9. piquers in every rank, in each
Compertiment from frunt to back, are with great facility, and with out any
confusion to be reduced, by doubling themselves by flank, or flanks as
aforesaid into the aforesaid squadron of 90. piquers in frunt, and 40. ranks
by flanks: which being so, as by all reason and practice Military it is, then
if the General should give further order to the three Coronels or Sergeants
Majors of all the three Regiments of 9000. that do consist of little bands (as
aforesaid) to reduce al their piquers, which according to the proportion and
divisions aforesaid, do amount just unto. 5400. piquers; besides the other two
parts that are weapons of volee, into one body of squadron of 108. piquers in
frunt and of 50. ranks by flank: how wonderfully then would the Sergeants
Majors and officers of those Regiments find themselves confused to form so
great a squadron of the pieces and patches (as they may be well termed) of. 60.
little bands; when every one of those single Compertiments do not only lack
number in frunt to make convenient compertiments to form the frunt of the
bat^e with celeritie; but also are a great deal too short by flanks to form
the aforesaid squadro^ in number of ranks by flanks and therefore must of
necessity, not only incorporate a great number of little Compertiments, and
pieces of compertime^ts with other little compertiments by flanks thereby to
make them to come to the just number in frunt of 108. piquers; but also must
piece and patch every one of those Compertiments with the pieces of other
little Compertiments in back or Rereward, thereby after to reduce, form, and
being their squadron by flanks to have the just length of 50. ranks: which to
perform, does cause so great a disorder and confusion in the officers
executing of the directions of the Coronelles and Sergeants Majors, as it is
never to make an end: whereof insueth great noises and rumors, by calling, by
swearing, by commanding and countermaunding, and by this and by that.

Whereas contrariwise, the compertiments of piquers of the other three Regiments
of great bands of 500. as aforsaid, consisting of 300. piquers to every
compertiment, may with great dexterity, quietness and facility, without the
aforesaid peecing and patching of compertiments with compertiments form the
aforesaid squadron of 108. in frunt, and 50. by flanks, with their single
compertiments, without any one band, or compertiment borowing the one of the
other: As for example, to form the aforesaid squadron of 108. piquers in
frunt; and 50. ranks by flanks, (the three Regimentes of 3000. to every
Regiment consisting of 18 bands 500. to every ensign: which of piquers and
weapons of volee are in all 9000. Of the which there are 3. parts piquers, and
two parts weapons of volee, as aforesaid, that is 5400. piquers, and 3600.
soldiers of weapons of volee) the compertimentes of piquers of all those 18.
bands consisting every one of 300. piquers, and every one of those
compertimentes of 300. being reduced into their simple and single order of 6.
in every rank, from frunt to back, are just in number 50. ran^es of 6.
soldiers in every rank.

All which 18. compertimentes of 300. piquers to every compertiment marching
every one of them 6. in a rank, (as aforesaid) being led and drawn up by
their Captains by the flank, or flanks the one of the other, (according unto
any of the orders that I have before very particularly set down for ye forming
of squadrons and battles) are without any kind of trouble, disorder or rumor,
with great facility reduced into ye aforsaid battle and squadron of 108.
piquers in every rank from frunt to back, and of 50. ranks by flanks, which
squadron in all consists of 5400. piquers as aforesaid.

And this dexterity and facility of forming of great squadro^s without any
disorder or confusion does proceed of the great compertiments that are drawn
out of great bands: whereas far otherwise, to form the same said squadron
with 60. compertiments of 90 piquers, 3. in a rank in every compertiment,
drawn out of 60. little bands of 150. Diverse confusions that do ensue of
many little compertiments of piquers.
to every Ensign, to the intent to form the said squadron: the Captains and
officers after that they have reduced every one of their bands into their
simple and single order of ranks, (which is the first thing for all services in
the field that according to al discipline ought to be performed) must then
because their little compertiments of 90. piquers do consist but of 30. ranks,
3. in a rank, go and find another compertiment of the like number of another
band to join with them by flank, thereby to make their compertiment of 6. in
every rank. But because their two compertiments incorporated by flanks as
aforesaid, do lack 20. ranks of 6. in every rank to make the just length
of the squadron by flank that consists of 50. ranks: Another Captain must
bring his whole compertiment of 90. piquers, which do consist of 15. ranks 6.
in a rank, and join them at the back of the other two compertiments; and yet
those 3. Captains must borrowe out of another compertiment of a fourth band 5.
ranks more of 6. in a rank, which are 30. piquers to make out the full number
of 50. ranks, 6. in every rank; so as the fourth Captain that has lent 30.
piquers, does remain but with a piece of his compertiment of 60. piquers,
with the which he must after incorporate, and piece and patch other
compertiments either to make length by flank, or breadth in frunt. And in this
sort or in the like with small difference all the (...) compertiments of 90.
piquers in each compertiment as aforesaid must in corporate, piece and patch by
flanks and back all the rest of their compertiments, and pieces of
compertimentes until they have formed their squadron: which kind of reducing,
peecing and patching, to form a squadron, does breed such a wonderful
confusion in such a number of little compertiments dispersed in the fields, as
the Sergeants Majors and other chief commanders will find themselves
wonderfully confused and confounded in their directions for the forming of
their squadron, H^ere it is to be noted tha^ although the Author does praise
and allow great bands of 500 in the which diverse different sorts of weapons
are incorporated, to be more convenient for the forming of squadrons then small
bands of 150. or 200. of the like different ^or^es of weapons: yet he does not
disallow that in a puisant army there should be some small bands of 1^0. or 150.
amongst the great: but those only of weapons of volee, as of Archers or
harquebuziers, incorporated with some convenient nombers of halberdiers or
battle axes, for diverse purposes,
and the Captains and other inferior officers in the performing and executing
of the same.

And as these before alleged confusions and disorders do ensue in forming of
a squadron of piquers with such little compertiments: even so does there ensue
as great or greater confusions in reducing a far greater number of little
compertimentes of weapons of volee, that do consist of three different sorts of
weapons, as of Archers, mosquetiers and harquebuziers, into diverse forms and
emploiments; All which reducementes of squadrons into form with sleeves,
wings, troops, and forlorn hopes of weapons of volee, and other such like do
require four or five times longer time to perform, then with a few great
compertiments of piquers and weapons of volee out of bands of 500. to reduce
such great squadrons into form as aforesaid with sleeves, wings, forlorn
hopes, etc. of weapons of volee, as all men that are not obstinately ignorant
may by that which I have before declared most manifestly see.

The testimony and proof whereof was evidently seen at such time as there
were certain great squadrons formed, or rather with great disorder, trouble, and
confusion wonderfully deformed here in Essex the year 1588. Which proceeded
of nothing so much as of the lack of understanding of such as should have
reduced the whole Army into great bands of 500. to every Ensign, with
convenient and well sorted compertimentes, or of 400. or of 300. to every
Ensign at the fewest. Whereas far otherwise, the bands of the whole Army
did consist of diverse different numbers, as of 150. of 200 of 300. of 400. of
500. and of 600. to an ensign, and in all those bands, the compertimentes of
the different sorts of weapons were so ill sorted, and in so great
disproportion, as the same with the lack of skill of such as should have
reformed those imperfections, were the very causes that when they went about to
reduce and form any squadron with sleeves, wing^s, etc: they fell into many
errors and confusions, as all those that were there of any understanding in
matters military might evidently see. Upon all which reasons and examples of
reducing of great and small bands into squadrons with so many imperfections,
confusions, and failings as are incident and do ordinarily ensue in reducing
of little compertiments of small bands into diverse forms of squadrons with
sleeves, wings, forlorn hopes, etc, with the great perfections and easiness
of reducing the great compertimentes of great bands into all sorts of forms
with great facility as is before declared, considered; I come to conclude that
the aforesaid Lieutenant General, or any other Chiefetaine of right
understanding, observation and judgment, would form the footmen of his Army
into great bands, and not into such small bands as are before mentioned. And
thus far concerning the proouing that great bands of 500. are more
convenient for all purposes and emploiments, then small bands of 150. or 200.
are.

Concerning Ensigns and Ensignebearers of private bands of footmen, as also
concerning the Standard, and Standard bearer of an Emperor, or of a King.
Here it is to be noted, because Ensignebearers of footmen are to march in the
midst of the armed men, as well in squadrons as in private bands; and
therewithal to be ever ready to take their places upon the assembling,
reducing, or marching of such bands: that they with their Ensigns ought to be
lodged in their Captains tents or lodginges, Where Ensig^bearers footm^ are ^o
be lo^ged.
or very near unto their Captains; always accompanied with one of the
drummers, and the phi^er of the band; and the other to accompany the Captain.
And incase there be but only one drummer and a phiser, then they are always
to accompany and lodge where the Lieutenant and ensignebearer with his Ensign
in their soldiors quarter do lodge; and that, in respect, that they may with all celeritie by the stroke and sound of the drum assemble their band upon al
sudden Alarmes, or mutinies or other accidents.

Also it is to be noted that an Ensignebearer in the field, How an
Ensigneb^arer in service in the field ought to carry his Ensign.
carrieng his Ensign displayed ought (...) carry the same upright, and never,
neither in town nor field, nor in sport, nor earnest to fetch florishes about
his head with his Ensign staff, and taffata of his En^igne, as the
En^ignebearers of London do upon midsommer night; because that such florishes
in all true discipline are houlden for mockeries: Howbeit sometimes to
advance, lift up; and raise his Ensign higher upon certain occasions it it
very allowable.

Also an Ensignebearer carrying his Ensign woond up about the Ensign staff,
Ensigns of ^ convenient bredthe and length more better then Ensigns that are
very large.
or else he carrying the same open, and leaning it to his shoulder, ought
marching down a hill to gather together the lower part of the taffata of his
Ensign in such sort as it may not touch the ground: And therefore Ensigns of a
convenient size and not too large and great, With what respect the hal^ards
that are for the guard of the Ensigns are to march.
are far better and more convenient then Ensigns that are very large.

Also the halbarders that do march in the rank of the Ensigns, and are for
the guard of them ought to carry their halbards with such respect as they ought
not to tear nor touch any part of the Ensigns as near as they can possible.
How Ensignebearers upon the sight and nere approach of the enemy are to
manage their ^^signes.


Also all Ensignebearers marching in the field either amongst their single
companies, or being reduced into squadron upon the discovery of the Enemy are
presently to unwind, open and display their Ensigns: but yet if the wind be
great, they may gather together the lower part or taffata of their Ensigns,
and lean the Ensignestaffe and Ensign to their shoulders until they approach
nearer to the enemy; at which time all Ensignebearers ought to display and
advance their ensigns carrying them in their left hands, to the intent that
they may be the more ready upon the near approach and encountering with the
enemy, with their right hands to draw their swords and defend their
Ensigns, by reason that they ought not to fight nor thrust with the points of
their ensign staves, but only in assaults of Towns, or upon some other great
extremity, but to carry them upright, and sometimes advanced to the intent
that they may be still in the sight of their soldiers.

Also if any Ensignebearer or ensignebearers in their band or bands, How an
Ensignebearer marching by an Emperor or king, or their Lieutenant general is
to behave himself.
happen to march by an Emperor or King, or by the Lieutenant General, they
ought to carry them displaied and advanced, and when they come almost over
against such a Prince or his Lieutenant General, they ought to pull down
their ensigns lower, and bow down forward the point and taffeta of their
ensign or ensigns, not directly toward the prince, or Lieutenant General,
but directly toward the way that they are marching: and at the same instant,
they ought also to bow something forward their heads and bodies, in token of
respect and reverence, without any ways moving or touching their burgonets,
which ought to be always fast tied with a taffeta under their chinnes.

Also when a single band or company of soldiors or a squadron of diverse bands
marching in the fields shall come to advance their piques and make a stay,
How Ensignebearers are to use their ensigns when the squadron makes a paus^.
or pause, then the Ensignebearer of that single band if it be alone, or all
the Ensignebearers of a whole squadro^ must display and advance their Ensigns.

Also a squadron of diverse bands marching in the fields, it is lawful for all
the Ensignebearers in their rank or ranks of Ensigns to carry their
Ensigns woond up about their Ensignestaues, How all the ensignebearers of a
squadron marching in the field are (...) carry their Ensigns.
rested or leaned to their shoulders so as in the rank of Ensigns or in each
rank of Ensigns, if the squadron be so great that there be more then one
rank of Ensigns, that one Ensignebearer in each rank must carry his
Ensign open and displayed: and he during the time that he so carries his
Ensign ought to be in the midst of the rank of the Ensigns, until such time
as he to ease himself does wind up his Ensign, and retire again to his own
place, be it on the right or left hand, leaving the middle place to the
Ensignebearer that does succeed and supply his place with his banner or
Ensign displayed. But it is to be noted that in a squadron whereas there be
diverse Ensigns, for some of them to carry their ensigns woonde up and leaned
against their shoulders and others displaied, vprighted, and advanced, and
other ensignebearers also their ensigns opened and leaned to their shoulders,
it is very vnsoldiorlike and uncomely to see such variety of carrying of
ensigns in one squadron, and therefore either they ought all to carry their
ensigns woond up and leaned against their shoulders saving only one
ensignebearer with his ensign displayed, vprighted, or advanced as aforesaid;
or incase in calm weather or upon any other occasion, the ensignebearers like
not so to do, then they may carry them al opened and displaied, but in any
wise all after one sort, saving only he that is the chief ensignebearer for
the time, who ought to carry his ensign upright, opened and displaied, although
all ^y other ensignebearers do carry their ensigns woond up as aforesaid.

But all this before notwithstanding, All Ensignebearers are to receive their
directions from the Standard bearer of the Emporor or king (...) he be in the
field.
here it is to be noted that in case an Emperor or a Kings Standard be in any
battle or squadron of footmen in the field, that then all the ensignebearers of
private bands are to receive their orders and directions from the
Standerbearer of the same Emperor or King, whether they shall carry their
ensigns woonde up, or any ways open, with all other directions.

And also it is to be noted that the said standardbearer with his standard, or
his deputy standardbearer, when the standardbearer is disposed to ease
himself, Where the Standeardbearer of an Empep or king should be pla^e^.
is always to hold the middle and chief place of the rank of ensigns, and
therewithal that he should never display his Standard, as other
ensignebearers of private bands do, but only upon the assured doubt and
expectation of battle, the enemies Army being in sight in the field, When the
Standardbeaerr of an Emperor or of a king is to display his standdard.
or else upon some other great and principal occasion; and yet not then
neither without the special commandment of the prince or his Lieutenant
General: which said displaying of the Princes standard, ought to be performed
with certain notable respects, prayers, and ceremonies: which because I do not
certenlie know them all, I omit. And therwithal it is to be further noted that
the standardbearer of an Emperor or King being always either a Nobleman or a
Knight, does seldom himself carry the standard, but upon certain great
occasions, and therefore he has always. 2. or. 3. esquiers of great
reputation and valot to supply his place in carring the standard, the enemy
being not in sight in the field; but the enemy being in sight, he is
presently to leave his horse and to retire himself into the squadron and
rank of ensigns, ready to take his standard into his own hands upon any
important occasion: And besides when he comes near to the place where he
shall lodge, Cerren other par^icularities concerning the Standard and
Standdardbearer of an Emperor or of a King.
be it in Camp or Town which ough to be in the Lieutennante generals lodging
or at lea^t very near unto the same, he then being on foot, must himself with
great respect and reverence take and carry the standard be it imperial, or
royal, and place it in his lodging under a strong and very convenient guarde
of soldiors, and so likewise in the morning upon the occasion of dislodging he
himself being strongly accompanied ought to take the standard into his own
hands, and to march and take his place according to the direction of the Prince
or his Lieutennant general, which being by him performed, he may then deliver
the standard unto one of his deputies giving unto him a great charge therewith,
and so march out of the battle and then take his horse and ride a little either
before the squadron to ease himself, or else to accompany the Prince or the
Lieutenant General if any of them both be near unto the same battle or else
not. And these particularities concerning these matters aforesaid are such as I
do at this present remember, although there be others that I have in times
past observed which with length of time I have forgotten.

Certain orders, directions and brief speeches to be used unto Harqueb^ziers,
Piquers, and battleaxes, when they are in skirmish with their enemies in the
field.
SKirmishes both on horseback and on foot do begin upon such, and so many
diverse, and infinite occasions when two puissant Armies that are enemies one to
ye other are in the field, as no man is able to particular the number of them:
And therefore I will as not requisite ouerpasse them; But because hitherunto I
have handled the ordering, reducing and forming more particularly of footmen
then of horsemen, I will by the help of Almighty God in this place proceed to
certain orders, directions and brief speeches, that are to be used unto bands
of harquebuziers entering into skirmish, or being in s^irmish; as also how they
should be reduced into diverse orders and forms for diverse effects and
purposes: which when I have performed, I will then proceed to the reducing and
ordering of other weapons of volee, as of mosquetiers, and archers into their
convenient forms. And therefore it is first to be noted yt there be 4.
different and principal ways for bands of harquebuziers to enter into
skirmish 4 different and principal w^i^s for harquebuziers to enter into
skirmis^e.
and to maintain themselves being in skirmish, which although they seem not
much to differ, yet their differences are so great, as they are to be observed
by all skillful leaders and conductors of harquebuziers, and by the soldiors
themselves.

Of the which 4. the first is upon some occasions to skirmish only with loose
shot, The first way for harquebuzers to enter into skirmish.
backed some good and convenient distance behind them with light armed
halbardiers: yea and of piquers also incase they doubt ye charge of horsemen,
but then those loose shot must divide them selves into small societies either
of 3. or else of 4. harquebuziers to second and supply one another place: and
that is to be understood in this sort: Incase that they do divide themselves
into societies of threes, then have they but only three dischargings, and that
is when the foremost soldior has in trauessing his ground and with good
aduisement discharged at the enemy, and trauessing his ground does retire
behind his fellows to charge again; y^ then ye second harquebuzier should
advance forward to epsy some advantage to discharge his harquebuze, not in have
at the air, but with leisure at his enemy that he espieth standing still or
in slow motion; which when he has performed, and trauessing his ground, he
does retire: then the third harquebuzier aduauncing forward and trauessing his
ground should with good aduisement discharge his piece at the enemy that he
espieth standing still or in slow motion, whilst the other two harquebuziers
his companions, before retired do charge again: which by him performed, then
he is to trauesse his ground and to begin again to charge, retiring beehind,
and something wide of the hindermost of the three. And by this kind of loose
skirmishing of many societies of threes dispersed in the field, The commodities
that ensue to harquebuziers by this first way of skirmishing.
the foremost of every three next unto the enemy with his piece charged,
trauessing his ground, and espying when to discharge his piece effectually (as
aforesaid) does give time and leisure, to the other two of his society
retired behind, to charge their pieces again: But because that the chief
effect of harquebuziers in skirmish does consist principally in three
things; Three principal ways wherein the chief effects of harquebuziers in
skirmish do consist.
that is, in the well charging of their pieces, which cannot be well performed
without convenient time and leisure; the second, in leisurely discharging,
although not from steady and firm point at blank; which can be seldom
performed at men, or by men in motion; and therefore they are to take their
sights at the ends of their pieces, at such their enemies as are in slowest
motion, and so make the best point and blanke that they may by guess from the
ends of their pieces.

And the third which is of no less importance then the former two is; that
harquebuziers do not discharge their pieces at the enemy out of convenient
distances; for if they do, then how well soever they have charged their
pieces, and with what leisure and aduisement soever they do discharge the same
at men in motion, they do work very little or no effect, as well in respect
that no harquebuziers how good soever they be, can take their sightes so
certenlie from point at blanke in a great distance, as they may in a much
nearer distance; as also that they can a great deal less take their sights
from the ends of their pieces at their enemies in motion a great distance off,
although it be within the points and blankes of their pieces: besides many
other causes and particularities concerning the same in my book of discourses
by me set forth 1590. contained: Harquebuzie^^ in skimish are not to discharg
their pieces above 20. 30. or 40 paces in distance.
All which well considered, it does behoue all good and skillful harquebuziers
not to discharge their pieces above 20. 30. or 40. paces at the uttermost,
although their pieces will carry point and blanke a much greater distance.

But here it is to be noted that this kind of skirmishing of lose shot of
societies of threes is not so good by a great deal as to skirmish in societies
of 4. Societies of threes not so good by a great deal for harquebuziers to
skir^ish in as societies of foures.
in every society; and that by reason that every foremost harquebuzier of 4.
next to the enemy discharging his piece as effectually as he may and retiring
behind the hindermost of his society to charge again, whilst the second
aduauncing forward and traversing his ground does supply the place of the
first harquebuzier that did first discharge and is now retired as aforsaid, and
so consequently the third harquebuzier upon the discharging of his fellow
before him, (that at the first was the second) to advance and supply his place,
and then again the fourth that did first of all discharge, and has now again
very well charged hi^ piece, does (upon the dischargeing and retiring of his
fellow before him) advance forward, and trauessing his ground supply his
place: which orderly discharging and recharging again, and discharging, and
recharging again and again with good aduisement, does by the societies of 4.
give more time and leisure to every harquebuzier that has discharged his
piece to retire and charge very well again without heating of his piece, then
societies of threes aforesaid can do, considering that in those skirmishes of
loose shot, it is convenient that only one of every society of 4. should
be foremost, and should discharge alone to the intent as well to give leisure to
their fellows one after another to recharge again, as also to have 2. or 3.
harquebuziers continually ready with their pieces charged one after another
still to advance forward and supply the others place ready to discharge at the
enemy. For if they should discharge 2. or 3. or al at one time, then upon their
error espied by the enemies, and taking the advantage thereof by a sudden
approach, they should find themselves vnsupplied and vnsuccoured, the one of the
other to their great danger and mischief.

But here it may be demanded what I do call the well charging of pieces of
weapons of fire? Whereunto I answer, That I do allow neither harquebuze nor
mosquet for well charged in services of the field, Now harquebuzes and
mosquets ought to be charged.
unless they be charged with convenient charges of powder, and with soft
brown paper, or the refuge ends of matches, or something else, with their
skowring sticks thrust close to the powder to restrain the same, and likewise
upon the bullet the like or a more quan^^^^^ to keep close and restrain the
bullet: or when at the least, I would that some such thing should be thrust
upon the bullet with the skowring stick to keep the same close to the powder;
and therewithal to the intent that every souldior upon his lack of bullets
might use his fellows bullets, I would that all the harquebuzes throughout
the field should be of one Caliuer and height; All the harq^^ buzes through out
the field ought to be of one Caliuer ^ height.
and that all the ordinary bullettes for the field, I mean not the full
bullets that first with great leisure they charge their pieces withal before
they march out of the Camp, which are or ought to be of the just Caliuer and
height of their harquebuzes, All the ordinary bullets for the field ought not
to be above 2. bores lower then the height of their pecees.
but the ordinary bullets for skirmish: that those bullets I say should not be
above two bores lower then the height of their pieces, whereas far otherwise
the most bullettes for the field here in England as well of Mosquets as of
harquebuzes are 4. 5. and many 6. bores lower then the height of the pieces,
which with the soldiers not restraining the powder nor bullettes as aforesaid,
The discommodities of bullets that are 4. 5. or 6. bores lower then the height
of their pieces.
is the cause, that the powder how good soever does neither carry the bullets
so far point and blanke, nor yet do give so violent blows as being
otherwise well charged with more full bullets they would do, nor yet can
possibly shoot with any certentie, although it were from a steadie rest either
at horses or men standing still within point and blanke, by reason that such
bullets do naturally mount and fly wide, how true soever the pieces are,
besides that the powder for lack of restraining as aforesaid, does lie in the
Cannon of the piece loose, and the bullet through the too much smalnesse
thereof in comparison of the piece does upon every little accident fall out
and drop to the ground: where as ordinary bullets for the field, that are
not above two bores lower then the height of their pieces, do carry the
bullets (the pieces being otherwise true and well charged as aforesaid)
further point and blanke, and with a great deal more certentie: and besides
do give a more forcible blow as aforesaid then such over small bullets can do.

But now the second way of skirmishing is, The second way for harqu^buziers to
skirmish in.
that such little societies of threes and of fowers may skirmish by discharging
their pieces, almost, or near about one time: but that must be performed by
the discharging and retiring to charge again of such little troops, other such
little societies of like numbers that are a convenient way distant upon both
their flanks but something retired, and therefore have kept their shot,
advancing forward, as well to espy some advantage to give their volees at their
enemies effectually, as to give time and leisure to other little troops that
have discharged, and therefore retired to recharge and advance forward again.

The third way of skirmishing is of greater troops as of 6. of 9. of 12. of
15. of 18. or of 21. The third way of skirmish.
And this kind of skirmishing in so great troops does resemble the first
mentioned skirmishing of loose shot of 3. soldiers in every society, and
that in this sort; that even as the societies of 3. did divide themselves into
3. single discharginges as aforesaid, so must these greater troops divide
their dischargings into 3. volees: as for example, if the troop be of 6. then
the 2. foremost may discharge at or near about one time, and then trauessing
their grounds retire behind the hindermost two, to charge again, whilst the
two second being now foremost do advance forward to epsy their advantage to
discharge effectually: which when they have performed, then they likewise are
to retire again recharging until they be hindermost, giving place unto their
next two fellows to give their vol^e as aforesaid: which being by the second
two performed, then are the last two (who did first discharge and have now
recharged again) to advance forward again toward the enemy to give time to
their fellows retired to recharge again: but if the troops be of greater
numbers as of 9. then their divisions of volee are of 3. harquebuziers at a
time, as those of 6. were but of two; and so likewise their troops being of
12. then their divisions of discharging are likewise of 3. volees, yt is 4. to
discharge at or near about one time: And incase that the troops be of 15.
then they are to divide their discharginges into 3. volees of 5. at a time,
that is of 3. times 5. And incase that the troops be so great as of 18. then
they are likewise to divide their volees into 3. times 6. No tr^^ps of shot
are to give their volees in divisions above the numberof ^1.
harquebuziers: And if of 21. then of 3. times 7. harquebuziers, every 7. to
give their volees one after another in the order and sort before declared,
greater then the which for diverse causes I would have no troops of
harquebuziers in the field for to give their volees in three divisions as
aforesaid.

But now the fourth sort of giving of volees in troop, The fourth way of
skirmishing.
is of 4. divisions, which resembles the second discharging of loose shot of
societies of 4. harquebuziers, for as those societies of 4. soldiors did divide
themselves into 4. single discharginges for the causes aforesaid, so these
greater troops are to divide themselves into 4. dischargings or volees, and
that in this sort: the smallest troup that are to perform the same are. 8.
which number is to be divided into. 4. volees of two of the foremost
harquebuziers to discharge or give their volee at or near about one time, and
to retire to charg again and give place to their fellows as aforesaid, and so
subsequently, all the rest by two harquebuziers continually advanced to
discharge, and other 2. continually retiring to recharge to perform the like:
and incase that their troops be of 12. then they may divide their volees into
4. as of. 3. harquebuziers to give their volee at one time, and if they be of
16. then their divisions of volee may be of 4. harquebuziers all at one time,
and incase that their troops be of 20. then their. 4. divisions of volee may
be of 5. harquebuziers at a time, greater then the which number of 20. or 21.
as aforesaid I would not in mine opinon for diverse causes have any troops of
shot in skirmish to give their volees: which 4. divisions of volee, by
discharging, retiring, aduauncing, and discharging, retiring and advancing
again and again with continual volees, does give more time and leisure to
every foremost division of harquebuziers with good aduisement to discharge
their pieces, and to retire and rechgarge their pieces orderly and very well
again, then the divisions of three dischargings or volees aforesaid, for lack
of convenient time can do, as all men of any consideration may evidently see by
the particularities by me before set down. But here it is to be noted that
the 2. first little societies of 3. and of 4. soldiors divided into three
single discharginges, and the other of 4. harquebuziers into 4. single
discharginges are to be accounted skirmishing and discharging of loose shot,
whereas all the rest are to be accounted skirmishing in troops.

And further that all the aforesaid little societies and greater and smaller
troops of shot, are in their foresaid skirmishes to be ordered ouerseene and
conducted by their Corporalles, and all the Corporalls by their higher
officers; and all these different sorts o^ skirmishing in societies of loose
shot, as also in troops I have particulerly set down because I have known some
Conductors of harquebuze shot, Italians, Spaniards, and of other Nations that
have used to skirmish by their soldiors giving of their volees in three
divisions, and some other conductors of the same Nations that have caused their
harquebuziers to give their volees in 4. divisions in such sort as is before
declared.

But now besides all this, The skirmishing of loose shot in hubbledeshu^^e.
there is another kind of skirmishing of loose shot, and that is when
unskillful harquebuziers Nouices are lead out to skirmishe by as unskillful
conductors, that those harquebuziers do never divide themselves into chosen
societies of threes, of foures, or any such numbers, nor into little troops,
as aforesaid, the one to take care of the other, and to give time and leisure
to discharge and recharge with order as aforesaid, but that they are lead in
skirmishe by their officers in great troops of. 25. or 30. harquebuziers
together or more, wheeling about and following one another so thick and so n^re
as they resemble a sport that I have seen little boys play, hanging one upon
another long coat when there have been many of them together, called, Why
Puttocke away, or else that every one of his own head do go thick and
threefold or dispersed to discharge at the enemy with all fury,
Discommo^^^ies ensuing by this manner of skirmishing.
by which disorderly and furious skirmishing, it comes to pass that the
harquebuziers do discharge in have without aduisement, to small or no hurt to
the enemy, and therwithall by their discharging, charging, and recharging as
fast as they can, they suddenly heat their pieces and make the^ unprofitable,
and oftentimes do by such disorderly skirmishing, kill, or mischief one
another: And besides, if any of them happen to be wounded or hurt because they
have not divided themselves into chosen societies as aforsaid, none do take
care to succor and relieve such hurt and wo^nded soldiers, nor to draw away
and save their dead karkases according to the use of all warlike Nations, with
diverse other Inconveniences that I omit, which do ensue upon such disorderly
skirmishing: And this kind of skirmishing may be very well termed to skirmish
in hubbledeshuffe. But yet it is further to be noted that in most skirmishes
that are well performed in the open fields, although they do skirmish in such
troops of 3. or 4. divisions of volees as aforsaid, yet such skirmishes are
first begun by small societies of threes and of fowers, besides that it is
always convenient that such troops of shot should be backed with some numbers
of light armed halbarders and piquers for such causes as hereafter shall be
mentioned.

But because that in all matters military how well ordered at the first
soever, there happens upon diverse accidents disorder, either through the
fault or lack of skill of the conductors, or else through y^ negligence or
lack of skill of the soldiors conducted: I will now proceed to show how the
chief co^manders and directers of such skirmishes should by brief speeches
redress and reform al such disorders happened: as for example, If the chief
leaders and directers of the skirmish, shall see the loose shot in their
societies as aforsaid, or any of the troops of shot before mentioned to
skirmish too thick and near together whereby they may indaunger one another, or
receive the greater annoiance from the shot of their Enemies, being more thin
and dispersed in their dista^ces: then he is to say unto such societies or
troops, Enlarge soldiers enlarge, ^riefe spea^es to be used ^hot when ^^y are
too ^^cke in skir^ish, by their ^aders.
which being by the harquebuziers heard, they then should presently enlarge
themselves more thinner, and into greater, but yet convenient dis^^^ces, as well
the societies of the loose shot of threes, and foures, as also such troops of
shot as are before mentioned, thereby to discharge with great order and
dexterity, seconding and supplying the one the others place, as also each one
to succor the one the other incase of any wounds or hurts received according
to the directions by me before very particulerlie set down.

And if it happen as your soldiers are in skirmish or marching toward, or
entering into skirmish or retiring, that you do perceive and epsy any ground
or grounds of advantage for your harquebuze or mosquet shot to work any good
effect against your enemies, either by ambush or otherwise as of hills,
banks, trenches, caves, wooddes, shrubs, vines, or any other thing to encouer
your shot, then you are to say to so many societies or troops of your
soldiers as you shall think meet for that effect; ^riefe speeches (...) be
used to ^ot upon any round or rounds of adauntage e^^ied.
To your advantage soldiers to your advantage, and therewithal you must name
the advantage and strength that they should prevent the enemies of, be they
banks, hedges, trenches, hills, or any other strength, which being by them
heard, they must presently perform the same.

And incase that you being in skirmish do see any reason of advantage to
draw the loose shot of societies or troops, or both, more on the one side,
then on the other, that is more to the right hand then to the left; then you
are to say unto them, Wing, Wing soldiers to the right. And if to the left
hand then you may say, Wing, Wing soldiers to the left. ^erten other ^lefe
speeches ^ be used unto ot for diverse ^rposes.
And if you see that the enemies have spent their powder and heated their
pieces, and that your advantage is to approach them with more fury, then you
are to say Auaunce, Auaunce forward soldiers. And incase your soldiers being
in skirmish, you shall see your advantage to reduce some of your loose shot
into troops of 6. of 9. of 12 or of 15. or more, be the numbers even or odd
it imports not, so as the particularities by me before set down be always
observed, in such sort that the one troop may favor and flank the other;
then in passing amongst them you are to say to your Corporals and soldiers.
Troop, troop, and flank soldiers.

And if you find your soldiers ouerpressed with number of shot, or that your
soldiers with long skirmish have almost spent their powder or heated their
pieces, then you are to say. Retire, retire, and frunt soldiers, which being
by them heard they must retire still with their faces toward their Enemies,
discharging their pieces not too fast, least that they should find themselves
to their own mischief altogether without powder.

And incase that you have piquers or halbarders to back your shot (which you
should never be without,) and that you see that your Enemies as also your own
soldiors by long skirmish have spent much of their powder and heated their
pieces, and that your shot with the shot of your enemies are ready to enter
pellemelle, then you are to say to your piquers and halbarders: Charge charge
and execute soldiors: which being by you pronounced they are to enter with all
fury upon their enemies, and with puissant hand to do execution upon them. The
harquebuzes of a yard long the Cannon and ^anfor ced backward, of as great and
greater effect^ then the heavy Caliuers that are nowadaies in use.
And here it is to be noted that harquebuzes of a yard long the Cannons at the
most, well ranforced backward, and of a convenient thinness forward, and the
bullets of a convenient Caliuer or height not too great, are a great deal more
maniable, and therefore better for soldiors to use in the field, then such
heavy harquebuzes as we in these days do miscall Caliuers, that are of great
bullets, and the Cannons long and heavy with deformed stocks: which said
harquebuzes ranforced of convenient heueth and lightness will wound or kill as
well 50. or 60. paces off (which is distance enough) as any such heavy
mistearmed Caliuers* and therewithal they do not so soon weary the soldiors
in handling and using them in services of the field as such foresaid heavy
pieces do, besides that they have this commodity that when in skirmish
soldiors do grow very near together, and so sometimes pelle melle that they
have no more leisure to recharge their pieces but that they are forced to
betake themselves to their swords: they may then I say take their pieces being
of such convenient heueth and lightness, in the midst with their left hands
and drawing their swords may bear a blow either at the head or legs, or
beat by any thrust of sword, halbard, or pique, either with the upper or lower
part of their harquebuze, and may therewithal at that instant enter and run in
with the points of their swords to the mischief or endangering of their
enemies, which cannot be performed with our such heavy mistearmed Caliuers,
which most commonly upon such accidents through the too much heueth of them
are thrown away by the soldiers that use them. Aduertising further, that
whenever your soldiers be in skirmish with the enemy in the plain and
open fields, that your harquebuziers be alwais instructed never to discharge
their pieces nor give any volee of shot at their euemies above 20. 30. or 40.
But small effect ^rought by harquebuzes in skirmishe above 50. paces off
paces distant, or 50. at the uttermost: For it is to be noted that to
discharge or give any volee, or volees of shot at the enemy in skirmish any
greater distance then 50. paces, the same does work but very little effect;
by reason that such weapons of fire are in those actions so uncertain, as all
Captains and soldiers that are of experience in matters of Arms do very
well know; although I have diverse times heard some talk and tell how they
have seen skirmishes whereas the harquebuziers have discharged their pieces at
their enemies, A very skorne ^o give volees of harquebuze shot at the enemy 10.
12. or 14 ^kores of.
10. 12. or 14. skores of, which (considering the very small effect that such
discharginges and volees do work against the enemy) is to be holden for a
very great skorne and error military, for such harquebuzes as do use to
skirmish so far off, are more meet by all reason and true experience to skare
Crows in a corn field, then to work any good effect against their enemies in
the field.

Brief speeches to be used by Captains or leaders, of Harquebuziers when they
would reduce them into a broad square with distances oblique.
IF a Captain or leader of harquebuziers would upon any occasion or advantage
of ground reduce any number of harquebuziers into a broad square or hearse
oblique of 7. ranks, with intent that they may have the more convenient
distances for the discharging of their volees, then they are to say unto them:
Oblique your selves harquebuziers 21. and 20. in ranks, or any other numbers
greater or fewer, so as the first rank do exceed the second rank by the
number of one, and the third, the fourth likewise by the number of one, and so
consequently in the same sort to the last seventh rank which should be of
equal number to the first: Then the harquebuziers presently are to reduce
themselves into the form oblique, What distan^^ oblique do^ means.
all the harquebuziers of every second rank being fewer in number then the
greater rank preceding them by the number of one should place themselves
oblique to the rank before them, that is, they should place every one of
themselves with their faces directly toward the void places or distaunces of
the greater rank before them saving that the last rank as aforesaid, must be
of equal number to the first rank, to the intent that the same may be a
fourmed and proportioned hearse that is broad in frunt and narrow by flanks.

And all those harquebuziers being reduced into this form oblique with
convenient and proportionate distances, may through those distances oblique
give gallant volees to the great mischief of their enemies, without hurting or
endamaging the one the other: And because that these distances oblique may
seem strange to such as never saw horsemen or footmen reduced into that
form: So it is that I have many times seen in Hongarie in the Wars of
Emperor MAXI MILIAN against the Turks, the harquebuziers, (...) lique
altogether used by the harquebuzes and light horsemen Hongarians and other
ori^ntall nations.
Hongarians called by the name of Heydukes march and serve in those orders and
distances oblique: And so in like manner the horsemen Hongarians being all
light horsemen and called by the name of Vssarons although I have seen them in
the field in many and diverse orders and forms, yet their distances were most
commonly oblique; which order oblique is also used by the Turks, Tartars, and
other such oriental Nations: because that all their horsemen are light
horsemen and not men at Arms, The Persians only of all the oriental nations
do use men at Arms.
saving that the Persians only of all the rest of the oriental Nations do
use both men at arms with their horses barbed, as also light horsemen. And
this aforsaid order oblique is of great advantage for all light horsemen in the
field, and chiefelie for such as do use to charge their spears, Distances
oblique in the field of great advantage for all light horsemen.
as the Hongarians do, in sockets made fast to their Saddles, or as our light
horsemen borderers that do charge their spears upon their thighs, as also for
such light horsemen Stradiots as will after the manner of the Moors, use double
headed Lances, or zagayas by some called punching staves for diverse causes and
reasons, that I am able by the help of Almighty God to show by effectual
demonstrations in the field, Of the which some I did show this Iast Summer 1588
in exercises of the field, unto diverse Captains and Gentlemen of the shire of
Essex.

Speeches to be used to a broad square, or to any ordered troop of
harquebuziers being in a straight or ground of advantage, where horsemen cannot
charge them.
WHen a good number of harquebuziers are reduced into a square or troop formed
not in ranks oblique but by right line to flank a breach or to make head
against the enemy in some straight or passage, or that the place is such and
of that strength for the guard of the harquebuziers that it is more requisite
that they should make resistance against the enemy in some square or troop
formed then any ways disseuered or in troops confused, then the leaders upon
the approach of the enemy are to say unto them Discharge soldiors and to your
knees, and charge again volee after volee: How harquebuziers are to give their
volees being reduced into a square in some ground of advantage.
which being by them heard, the first and second rank being in ranks of
convenient distances, are at one instant to give a volee as near as they can,
taking their sightes at point and blank, which being done, they ought in an
instant to fall upon one of their knees and to charge again while the third
and fourth ranks do likewise give their volees, which being by them
performed, they ought in like manner to kneel down and charge their pieces,
giving place to the fist, and sixth ranks to discharge their pieces over all
their heads, which being performed throughout the whole hearse or troop,
saving that the two hinder ranks shall not need to kneel because there are
none behind them to shoot over their heads, then all the first ranks that have
charged their pieces again are to stand up and to give volee after volee, and
so to their knees again, and to give place to the hindermost ranks to
discharge their pieces over their heads according to the former prescribed
order: But to the intent that two ranks may the better give a volee both at one
instant without daungering the one the other as aforesaid, it were requisite
that every second rank should be reduced oblique as aforesaid to the rank
preceding, for otherwise there can but only one rank discharge at a time
unless their ranks be very thin.

Brief speeches to be used to Mosquetiers being in a broad square.
WHen a convenient company of mosquetiers well guarded with armed men are
reduced into a broad square of 15. or 20. in frunt, and 6. by flanks, more or
fewer, and that all their restes be fixed in the ground in convenient
distances, and that their conductors upon the approach of the enemy would have
them to give volee after volee from their rests, taking their certain sights
from point at blanke, and that every rank should orderly succeed the one
the other in discharging their pieces; then they are to say unto them,
Discharge, retire, and advance, which being by the mosquetiers heard, How
mosquetiers are to discharge their pieces being reduced into a ^^oade square
then the first whole rank taking their sights at point and blanke are all at
one time to discharge their pieces at the squadron or troop of horsemen or
footmen approaching, which being by them performed they are presently to retire
to the last rank of rests there to charge again, leaving their own rank of
rests still fixed in the ground. Then the second rank are to advance
themselves and to clappe their pieces upon the first rank of rests as they do
stand directly before them, and the third rank are to advance themselves to
the second rank of rests, and the fourth rank to the third rank of rests and
the fifth rank to the fourth rank of rests, and the sixte rank to the fifth
rank of rests, whilst the first that has discharged, and is now retired to
the sixte or last rank of rests do charge their pieces again and so giving
continual volees of bullets by discharging, retiring, and aduauncing as
aforesaid, they may annoie the enemy be they horsemen or footmen in terrible
sort without falling into any disorder or confusion. And the very like
speeches may be used to little squares or troops of harquebuziers in the field
when they are to retire having discharged, and other troops to advance and
supply their places giving them time to charge again, and so by retiring,
aduauncing, and succeeding every one the other, they may give continual volees
of shot at the enemies. Aduertising and aduising all leaders of mosquetiers
that will work good effect and win reputation with that kind of weapon in
the field, Mosquetiers are not to discharge their pieces at the enemy above
10. or 12. skores (...) the furthest.
that they do not permit their mosquetiers to discharge their pieces at their
enemies above 8. 9. 10. or 12. skores, at the furdest, and therewithal to take
their sightes at point and blanke from their rests and without their rests.
Also I would that some convenient numbers of mosquetiers should be commanded
to charge their pieces with convenient charges of powder and with 5. pistol
bullets of a mean Caliuer and height with some quantity of soft brown paper
or something else, both betwixt the powder and hail shot of war, Mosquets
charged with haileshot of war within 10. 15. or 20. paces do work great
effect.
as also after the haileshot to restrain both powder and bullets, to the
intent that the same may work the more forcible and terrible effects: And
that the same mosquetiers should be commanded not to discharge their pieces
when their companies do discharge theirs with single bullets, but that they
should reserve their shot until some squardron of footmen, or square, or
troop of horsemen should approach within 10. 15. or 20. paces to charge them.
At which time I would have them to give their volee of hailshot of war from
their rests at their Enemies approaching within the aforesaid distances, and not
any further, because they may be the more sure to hit either horsemen or footmen,
which in greater distances they cannot so certenlie perform.

And here it is to be further noted, It argues but small experience in those
that would have mosquetiers in the field to give their volees of shot 30 24. or
20. scores off.
that such as do talk of giving volees of mosquet shot 30. 24. or 20. skores
off, at squares or troops of horsemen or footmen that are in march or in any
motion of the field do greatly err, as men that never had any good experience
of that weapon in actions of the field, unless peradventure it has been to
their own mischief, incountring with old bands, Italians, Wallouns, or
Spaniards, who were never so ill advised as in vain to give their volees so
great distances off, and therefore do reserve their shot to discharge at the
enemy not above 8. 9. or 10. skores off at the uttermost, although it be at a
whole square or troop of horsemen or footmen, unless it were out of some
fortification, from whence they may discharge their pieces with full bullets,
and Demain puesto, as the Spaniards call it.

For although the mosquet ranforced and well charged with good powder would
carry a bullet point and blanke 24. or 30. scores: does it therefore follow
that they should give Volees of mosquet shot 24. or 20. skores off, Why
mosquetiers are not in the field to give their volees of shot 20 24. or 30.
scores off.
when that in failing to take their just point and blanke no more but the
length of a Corn, their bullettes do work as much effect at the stars, as
against the enemy that they shoot at; Besides that in so great a distance of
ground, how truly soever they take their sights at point and blanke, the air
does work very great effect, with their bullets that are lower by 4. or 5.
bores then the height of their pieces, to carry them by mounting, or otherwise
from the mark or marks that they are shot at.

Certain Orders, directions, and brief speeches to be observed by a Sergeant
Mayor, and Captains, and leaders of Archers in the field.
ALl the most notable and excellent kings and their great captains of our
English nation in times past, (who as it is most manifest by many notable
histories both ancient and modern) were not any ways inferior in knowledge
and skill in the Art and science military to the greatest kings and captains
of our age deceased; but did also far exceed and excel all the Princes and
Captains of this obscure time of Ignorance in christendom now living, in all
proceedings and actions military, (as it is most apparent by the many batt^les
and great victories by them in diverse ages, and against many warlike nations
obtained) did (contrary to the vain and frivolous opinions of our new
English men of war of this time) so greatly esteem of our archers, The
account made of archers in times past.
through the continual and great experience they had of their wonderful and
miraculous effects in all battles and great in countries; that upon the
composing and forming of any Army, the same being divided into five parts,
always three parts of the five did consist of archers: And because archers in
all actions military were so continually and greatly employed, they used to
reduce them into the most convenient orders and forms that they could devise
for them with their arrows to work their greatest effects, The ancient ^orme
of redu^ing of archers ^ere into hear^es.
against both horsemen and footmen their Enemies; which was into the form of
hearses, which hearses were broad in frunt, and narrow short by flanks, which
is to be understood, of many soldiors in every rank; and but of few ranks by
flanks; in such sort, as what nombers soever of archers they placed in
frunte, that is in every rank, the archers by flank did never exceed the
number of 7. or 8. ranks at the most; And the causes and reasons were these:
that the archers being reduced into their hearse or hearses, as also into their
convenient distaunces in frunt and by flanks, every one of them without any
trouble through the too much nearenes of their fellows in the same rank, or
by the overmuch nearenes of the rank and ranks before them, might, without any
impediment shoot and roue of any mean height at their enemies being either
horsemen or footmen, over the heads of the rank or ranks before them; and
therewithal that the hindersmost ranks, (being so few by flanks as aforesaid)
might the more easily see their Enemies that they shoot at: As also that by the
fewness of their ranks, the hindermost rank and ranks being the nearer to
their Enemies, should the more easily reach their Enemies with their volees of
arrows; whereas otherwise if the ranks were many, then by the ouerpluralitie
of ranks the hinder ranks should be deprived of the sight of their Enemies
that they should shoot at, and also should be driven to shoot their arrows at
their enemies too high a compass, and by such means work the less effect
against their enemies.

All which considered, How to reduce archers into Hearses.
I thought good in this place to show how any number of archers should be
reduced into the form of a hearse, or diverse hearses, which is a thing of
great facility to be performed, because that the Captain or Captains of
archers have no more to do but to say unto their archers. Rank your selves
archers. 7. in a rank or if they will make a hearse of 8. ranks, then rank
your selves 8 in a rank, (as in the first part of this my book concerning the
reducing of single bands into ranks, is very particulerly contained); which
being by the archers performed thrughout the whole band, or as many bands of
archers as they will bring into a hearse; then their Captains and conductors
are to lead them by the flank and corner of the squadron where those archers
shall be reduced into winge; and there drawing those archers as far out, and
large from the corner of the squadron as they shall think requisite; and finding
the hindermost rank of 7. soldiors, or of 8. if they be disposed to make their
flank of 8. archers, to be of such convenient distance from the corner of the
squadron as they shall think meet: then the chief Commander of those Archers is
presently to go to the midst of that flank where they are to make of flank
frunt, and then being a convenient distance from them, he ought to say unto
them: Frunt to me Archers, and let this word pass throughout from flank to
flank: Upon which his words pronounced, all the soldiers in flank
throughout next unto him are presently to turn their faces and weapons
toward him and make of flank frunt, and so subsequentlie all the rest of the
archers throughout all the ranks must perform the like. And this making of
flank frunt may be performed as well by the stroke of the drum as by the brief
speeches of the commander: which being by them performed, then they must
presently reform themselves into their convenient distances both by frunt and
flanks, that thereby they may without any impediment give their volees as
aforsaid: And thus of a great number of ranks that they were before when they
marched in their simple or single order of ranks, as of 7. or else of 8. in a
rank from frunt to back, they are now become a great number of Archers in
frunt; that is, in every rank, and but only of 7. or else 8 ranks by
flanks, which order and form is to be understood and termed a hearse of
Archers; and as this hearse is now reduced into a wing either from the right or
left corners of the squadron: so may the like wings be drawn from all 4.
corners, as also upon the frunt or flanks of the squadron, or any other place
or places where it shall please the General of the field, Archers reduced into
hearses, are never ^o give their volees but upon a sign given
or the Lord Marshall to direct or command.

But here it is to be further noted, that such hearses are not to give any
volees of arrows at their Enemies, but only upon a token or sign given unto
them by some chief Commander of the hearse, who by his officers is to make
all the soldiers of the hearse privy to the same sign and token; And
therefore the same Commander and sign giver is to be of good understanding in
archerie: as also of the distances of grounds, that thereby he may not fail
to give his sign when the hindermost archers are within the reach of the
former ranks of the enemies be they horsemen or footmen: for if he should
fail in the same, whereby the Archers through the too great distance of ground
should shoot short, he should then commit a very gross error.

Also it is to be noted that if the commander of the archers do think it
requisite, he may divide the delivery of his archers arrows into two volees,
that is, that he may if the hearse do consist of 8. ranks by flanks take
order that four of the foremost ranks shall give their first volees, and as the
enemies do approach nearer to give order that the other 4. hindermost ranks
shall likewise give their volees altogether with the ranks before them. And as
the reducing of Archers into these aforesaid forms of hearses are very
convenient and of great effect for battles: even so they may be brought into
diverse other forms according to the situation of the ground or grounds and
diverse other occasions, and likewise work very great effects.

But now, whereas there be diverse in this time professing Arms, that do
greatly disesteeme archers, thinking that a far greater number of Archers
were not able to encounter with a smaller number of mosquetiers: An answer to
such as do think archers inferior to mosquetiers in the plain field.
Thereunto I say that that their opinion does proceed of nothing else, but of
their lack of understanding and knowing the wonderful imperfections and
failinges that do belong to muskets and mosquetiers in the field, as also of
the strange and incredible effects of archers arrows, and therewithal that
they did never enter into the consideration that mosquetiers are not to work
any effect in the open fields but from their restes fixed in the ground, or
some other accidental or natural rests and themselves standing still to take
some sight from point at blanke, at their enemies when they discharge, which at
men in motion with any certentie it is not possible for them to perform, and
if they fail in taking their sightes at point and blanke, then their bullets
do fly straight at the Clouds without doing any other hurt; besides that when
they have once discharged their first charges of full bullets, or haileshot of
war from their rests incase they be forced upon the uncertain coming of the
Enemy to remove and new place their rests and charge again, their pieces are
so exceeding heavy, and they therewithal so troubled with their rests hanging
upon their fingers, that they are driven to a very long recharging of their
mosquets again, which recharging if it be not in such particular sort and
perfection, as I have before set down, the bullets of their second volee will
scarce go within the compass of the height of piques vprighted, or rather of
young trees, as all skillful soldiors that do know their wonderful uncertain
effects in services of the field will confess: so as I com to conclude, if the
trial were to be made in the open and plain fields betwixt 1500. archers, and
3000. 1500. archers able to break 3000 mosqueters
mosquetiers without any other weapon of succor either for the one side or for
ye other, ye mosquetiers being reduced into anyformes of greatest advantage
and conueniencie for mosquetiers yt can be devised, those. 1500. archers being
reduced into many and many troops of fifteenes, of twenties, of five and
twenties, of thirties and more or fewer, and they approaching and assailing the
mosquetiers both in frunt and by flanks, and giving their volees of arrows in
continual motions at the mosquetiers, who if they mean to work any effect of
necessity must stand still to discharge their pieces as aforesaid during which
time of their standing still they shall to their great error and mischief
receive the continual volees of the archers arrows, upon all parts of their
bodies, in such sort as the archers there is no doubt, being well instructed
and led in their troops by their Captains and other officers, The advantage
that archers have of mosquetiers.
would with great facility with a very few volees of arrows break all the
mosquetiers, although they were of a far greater number: For although
mosquets will carry their bullets point and blanke a great deal further
distance then archers are able to work any effect with their arrows; yet their
wonderful vncertenties (many of the particularities whereof I have in other my
books very particulerlie set down) are such and so many, as against archers
reduced into great numbers of troops as aforesaid, and assailing them in motion
with infinite volees of arrows, they would be found to be of a wonderful, and
incredible small resistance against the blows of such innumerable arrows as
aforesaid.

Howbeit peradventure some professing arms will say, that harquebuziers may
with a great deal more advantage encounter with Archers then mosquetiers,
Their oppinion that think harquebuziers of greater advantage to encounter
with archers then mosquetiers refuted.
because that harquebuziers may encounter with Archers divided into great
numbers of societies and troops, and therewithal may give their volees of
bullets in motion at the archers, as well as the archers their volees of arrows
in motion at them. Whereunto I answer, that if the volees of mosquetiers
bullets from their rests be so uncertain at men in motion as I have before
mentioned, then of necessity the volees of harquebuziers, themselves
discharging in motion, at the archers likewise in motion must needs be a great
deal more uncertain: besides that if harquebuziers do discharge 9. 10. 11. or
12. skores distant at the archers, as the archers may do at them, it will be
found that in 10000. of their shot they will not hit so many as 10. archers:
The aduauntages y^ archers have of harque buziers.
so wonderful uncertain by all true experience of all well practiced and skillful
soldiers are those weapons of fire. So as I come to conclude also that a far
greater number of harquebuziers are no ways able to abide the terror of a much
smaller number of archers, I mean if the archers be of a thousand or any
greater number, whereby they may reduce themselves into many forms and troops.

And now as I have alleged diverse reasons to show and prove that a smaller
number of archers reduced into many greater and smaller troops, have great
advantage to overthrow and break a great deal greater number of mosquetiers
in the plain and open fields: even so am I persuaded by the like causes and
reasons that. Reasons to prove that 500. harquebuziers are in skirmish able to
overthrow as many mosquetiers.
500. harquebuziers in the plain and open fields reducing themselves into many
societies of loose shot, as also into greater troops (as I have before in
other places, whereas I have showed in what sort harquebuziers should skirmish
declared) were able with great facility to overthrow and drive out of the
fields. 500 mosquetiers; I mean, if neither the harquebuziers nor the
mosquetiers had any other weapon to succor them but themselves, by reason that
the harquebuziers being dispersed into many societies of loose shot, and into
greater and lesser troops, may trauesse their grounds and enlarge themselves,
and give their volees in continual motion, Iauing only at the instant when
they take their sights and discharge their pieces at the frunt, flanks and
back of the mosquetiers standing still like buttes without motion at their
rests whereas mosquetiers reducing themselves into diverse broad squares, or
troops according unto their most convenient orders of advantage to discharge
their pieces from their rests, cannot discharge their pieces although with
haileshot of war at the harquebuziers to any effect, by reason that they are
dispersed, and in continual motion. Howbeit if any man will say that
mosquetiers might without their rests likewise reduce themselves into many
little societies, and greater and smaller troops, and so with great advantage
in respect that their pieces will carry point and blanke a great deal surder,
then harquebuzes, skirmish with the harquebuziers: Mosquetiers are not able in
skirmish to use their pieces without rests to any effect, and with restes they
cannot skirmishe.
Thereunto it is to be answered, that it is not possible that mosquitiers,
although they were al men of great force and strength, should be able with
their forehandes to support and bear their so heavy pieces to discharge, and
shoot with any steadines or certentie: Considering that for any man to
discharge any piece either harquebuze, Currier, or mosquet without a rest
effectual^lie it does behooue him to have his piece of such lightness, as he
may be Master of his piece, and not his piece through the great heueth thereof
master of him; For any man to discharge his piece effectual ly, it behooves
him to be master of his piece and not his piece master of him.
that is, that he may with dexterity discharge it steadily and with ease from
his forehand, taking his sight either from point at blanke, or at least from
the end of his piece with some kind of certentie: which if his piece be any
thing too heavy for him with facility and ease to manage, it is not possible
for him to perform, although it were at a firm and steadie mark, by reason
that he striving with all his force to bear the end of his piece, to discharge
the same with some steadiness and certentie, the same ouermaistring his forces
with extreme heueth, does make him to shoot just either at the center of the
earth, or else at the seven stars without doing any hurt to the enemy:
Besides that when he has once or twice discharged to recharge again, it does
not only through the great length and heueth of his piece require a much
longer time then for a harquebuzier to recharge his harquebuze, but also does
so weary the mosquetier, that it does bereave him of his forces, in such sort
as he is to work in a manner no effect, other then by his seldom discharging to
make a great noise. So as in this matter I come to conclude, that as
mosquetiers (as I have in certain other places before men tioned) through the
great distance that their pieces will carry, and the great blows that they will
give as well with hailshot of war as with single bullets, have in their
convenient and due times and places great advantage against harquebuziers: Even
so for skirmishes, harquebuziers for the causes and reasons before alleged, do
in their effects far exceed and excel mosquetiers. And thus far concerning
these matters before handled. Instructions to be given by Captains and officers
to their bands for the passing of any brief spe^ ches or word.
All Captains both of horsemen and footemenne and their officers should
instruct and teach their bands that when they are reduced into their simple or
single order, or into any form of squadron, or into any other form; that when
any brief speeches or words are spoken either by y^ coronel or sergeant Mayor,
or by their Captains, to y^ intent that the same should pass from the
hindermost rank to the foremost rank, or from the foremost to the hindermost, or
from flank to flank: y^ then they do in no wise fail with all celerity to
pass that speech or word without stop or stay upon severe punishment of
every rank that shall be found not to pass the same, even to the very first
or last rank, and so likewise from flank to flank. And the commandment of
the passing of those brief speeches or words in bands single do appertain
to the Captain, To whom the commandment of passing of brief spea ches does
appertain.
his Lieutenant or Sergeants; and if it be in diverse bands reduced into forms
either to march or fight, then those commandments of brief speeches or words
do apperteine chiefly to the coronell or Sergeant Mayor, or to his deputy
Lieutenant, and not to any Captain or Captains, or their officers, without the
special commandment of one of the three aforesaid officers.

All drummers should be very skillful and perfect in all The duty of
trompettors and drummers.
the different strokes that are to direct and command al captains and their
soldiers be they either in Camp, field or Town. All trompettors also, as well
such as do belong to bands of horsemen, as others that do belong to Coronels
of footmen should be very skillful and perfect to blow and sound all kind of
soundes, directions, and commandments. And the Lord Lieutenant generals
sergeant trompettor, or trompettor Mayor, as also his Sergeant drummer, or
drummer Mayor, should have a special care to see that all trompettors, and
drummers under them throughout the whole Camp should strike, and sound all
diversities and kinds of soundes and strokes with one conformity, in such
sort that all Captains and their officers and soldiers may at al times and
upon all occasions understand distinctlie by all those their diversities of
soundes and strokes what they should perform without any ways mistaking them.

Also all Captains and officers of bands as well of horsemen The care that all
Captains and officers of ^andes are to ^aue to instruct their bands.
as of footmen should be very careful to instruct their soldiers to learn
and know what every different sound of trompet or stroke of drum does
signify, and how to perform the directions of those trompets or drums: as
for example, when horsemen or footmen should reduce themselves into their
simple or single order of ranks, and when one or diverse bands should reduce
themselves into squadron, and how when they being reduced into squadron should
make of back, or of flanks, frunt, when also to march faster or more
leisurelie, and when to march a trot without disordering their ranks, when to
stay and make a stand, when to retire, and when to advance, when also to
straighten and close their ranks by frunt and flanks, with all other
diversities of soundes and strokes, that are in the skill and science of
trompettors and drommers to direct with their trompets and drums. And as they
are to learn and know when by the sound of the trompet, or stroke of the drum
to perform those and other actions military, so ought they to be instructed
and taught by their Captains and officers by often exercises how to perform
all those and other matters military with great order as well every souldior
in particular as all soldiers in general. And thus all bands both of horsemen
and footmen being instructed and taught by their Captains and officers to
understand the different significations of all strokes and soundes of trompets
and drums, as also all such brief speeches, as I have before set down in
this book, and how effectually to perform them, may in mine opinion be very
well accounted not only soldiors, but old soldiers, in most services of the
Camp or field.

Certain Instructions and observations concerning the ordering and exercising of
men at Arms, of dimilances, and al so of light horsemen, stradiots incorporated
with Archers and crosbowers on horseback, for diverse purposes and services.
FIrst, when any Coronell or Captain or Captains will reduce their bands be
they of men at Arms, or of dimilaunces, or Stradiots, or of any other sort of
light horsemen into their simple or single order of 4. 5. or 6. or more or
fewer in a rank, To reduce men at a^mes or dimilaunces into their simple or
single order of ranks.
I would wish that they should instruct their horsemen that upon the sound of
the trompet for that purpose, or upon hearing such words pronounced by their
Captains or officers, as I have very particularly set down as well for
horsemen as footmen in the beginning of this book, that they should presently
reduce themselves into ranks by the left flanks the one of the other, and
that there withal they should have regard to their distances, and to all other
such considerations as are there mentioned concerning these and diverse other
purposes.

Now to reduce men at Arms or dimilaunces into squadron, I think it is more
then needs again to particular ye same; considering that any numbers of such
horsemen are to be reduced into their squadron or squadrons in one of the same
sorts that piquers footmen are; Squadrons of men at arms how many soever they
be in frunt ought not to be above 10. or 12. by flanks.
and that with a greater facility; because that squadrons of men at arms, how
many soever they be in frunt ought not in mine opinion (although I have seen
otherwise) to be above 10. or 12. at the most by flanks; because all the
ranks that should be above that number might be holden for superfluous and
unprofitable; by reason that if another squadron of men at Arms that were but
of the like number by frunt; and were by flanks 24. or 30. ranks or more,
would upon that opinion of the plurality of the ranks conceived without
taking any other advantage, charge such a squadron as aforesaid, that were of
like number unto them in frunt, and by flanks only 10. ranks, they should
find that squadron but of 10. ranks as well able to encounter with them, and
to abide their charge, as they theirs; because they should not be able with
their charge to pass those 10. ranks, no more, then the squadron of 10. ranks
to pass through their multiplicitie of ranks; which is the cause that I would
make my squadron of men at Arms or Lances broad in frunt according to the
number, and by flanks not above 7. or 8. or 9. or 10. or 11. or 12. ranks at
the most.

Howbeit, true it is that such squadrons of Lances as do consist of 20. 25. or
30. ranks may draw forth from the back or rereward a sleeue of 5. or of 10.
ranks of Lances, and draw them up by one of the flanks of the same
squadron, and make the frunt of their squadron broader by frunt and shorter by
flanks; and may also upon some other advantage espied with those ranks drawn
out from behind, charge the contrary squadron in flank; or upon other
occasions otherwise employ them, which is the greatest advantage that such
squadrons of men at Arms or dimilaunces of many ranks have.

Also it is to be noted that it is a greater advantage for such as are
Coronels, Why 500. (...) are rather to be reduced into 3. 4. or 5. litl^
squadrons, then into on^ entier squadron.
commanders, or orderers of horsemen to reduce 500. Lances into 2. 3. 4. or
5. squadrons to charge either horsemen or footmen, then to reduce 500. Lances
all into one body of squadron; by reason that they being in so many squadrons
may at one time be employed in diverse services. Also if it were to charge a
squadron of 500. Lances; 3. of the 5. of those little squadrons may make
themselves all of one frunt: but I mean every squadron by himself separated
a good distance one from another, and in that form may receive or give a
charge all at one instant upon the broad frunt of the 500. Lances whilst that
the other two squadrons that are in wings of those three, espying their
advantages immediately upon ye charge given and received, may likewise almost
at the same instant give their charge upon the flanks, back, or hinder
corners of the great squadron to the disordering of them: even so likewise 500.
Lances reduced into 5. squadro^s of 100 to every squadron may with greater
advantage charge a squadron of piques, then if the whole 500. were reduced but
into one body of squadron, by reason that 3. of the 5. squadrons of 100. to
every squadron reduced into 5. ranks 20 in every rank, charging the frunt
and corners of ye squadron of piquers at one time, and the other 2. squadrons
of 100. a piece being each one of them reduced into 4. ranks of 25. in every
rank to the intent to bear the greater breadth, or into 5. ranks of 20. in
every rank as the other 3. were, may immediately upon the Retraite of those
3. Squadrons, give a new Charge upon the frunt and corner of the Squadron of
piquers, to the indaungering of the disordering and breaking of the said
Squadron: whereas, if the whole number of 500. Lances were reduced into. 100.
ranks. 5. in a rank, or into. 8 ranks that is 62. in a rank, overplus* 4:
or into. 10. ranks that is. 50. in every rank, or more or fewer, I say (that
in mine opinion) one charge of the squadron of 500. lances should not be able
to work so great an effect to the endaungering of the squadron of piquers as
those 5. little squadrons or hundreds should be able to do, seconding one
another and charging at different times, and thereby the two last squadrons
finding the squadron of piques in some disorder through the charge of the. 3.
first squadrons should with great facility give in amongst them and overthrow
them, or at least, put them in great hazard of breking and overthrowing. And so
likewise 500. lances or stradiots or any greater number have a great deal
greater advantage to charge, disorder and break in the open fields any number
or numbers of harquebuziers or mosquetiers, incase they be without any succor
of piques or advantage of ground in troops of hundreds and fifties, or many
other smaller troops, then if they were reduced into any. 2. or. 3. great
bodies of squadron or troops.

But yet because I have said before that a squadro^ of Lances of 10. or 12.
ranks are to be reduced into form with a great deal greater facility then a
squadron of footmen that does consist of many ranks and peradventure of
diversity of weapons, and that all Captains that do lead Lances do not well
know how to form such a squadron, although but of a few ranks as aforesaid; I
will therefore here briefly set down how they shall presently reduce such a
squadron of few, Two ways whereby to re^duce a squadron of lances of few or
many ranks into form.
or of many ranks into form with great facility; and that is by any one of
two ways, the first to reduce them by flank or flanks, and the other by
right line.

As for example, the Captain or Captains of such a band or bands of men at
Arms or dimilaunces, commanding their officers to reduce their band or bands
into their simple or single order of 6. Lances in a rank throughout, and then
considering the one half of the full number of the ranks, they are upon the
sound of the Trompette, or else by brief speeches pronounced, to command the
foremost one half of the lances to march some 20. or 30. paces, and the other
half of the lances to stay and keep their ground, which marching forward of
20. or 30. paces by the first half to give convenient ground and place to the
other half to reduce themselves into squadron by flank being performed, and
they there in their ranks making a stay and pause, then some captain or
captains or other leaders for that purpose appointed, placing themselves upon
the frunt of the hinder half of the lances that have not yet moved, they upon
the sound of the trompet are to march up either by the right or left flank of
the foremost half of the lances now making their pause and standing still,
until that the foremost rank of the hinder half of lances do make equal
frunte with the foremost rank of the foremost half of lances, and so likewise
that the hindermost rank of the same one half of lances, be equal with the
hindermost rank of the foremost one half of the lances, and so consequently
all the rest of the ranks be even and straight by flanks one with another:
which being performed then of 6. in a rank that the same band or bands of
lances were before throughout, they are now comne to be 12. in a rank
throughout; which being done, then to make them a broad square of many in
frunte, that is in every rank, and but only of 12. ranks, the captain, or
captains that do lead them, are to lead and draw the flank of their band or
bands to the ground whereas they will make of flank frunt: where being comne,
they are to make a stay and pause, and then either by the sound of the troumpet
upon that flank that shall be made frunt, or else upon some of the captains
galloping to the midst of the same flank, and being something distant from the
flank; and pronouncing with a loud voice. Frunt unto me men at Arms; or frunt
unto me Lances: then presently all the horsemen that are next unto them are
to turn their horses faces and make frunt that ways, and so subsequetnly all the rest of the ranks of the lances one after another, which being performed,
then of how many ranks soever they were before by flanks, now they are
becomne to be only of 12. ranks by flanks, and in frunt, of the like number
that they were by flank, or flanks: And as the first forming of this squadron
was performed by doubling of the hinder half of the Lances by the flank of
the foremost half of the Lances (as aforesaid:) Even so may the Captains
either by the sound of the trompette, or by brief speeches command their
Lances to double themselves by right line; that is, that the second rank of
6. should enter into ye foremost rank likewise of. 6. and that the fourth rank
should enter into the third rank; and so consequently every second rank
throughout to the very back or Rereward, to enter into the rank before him,
in such sort that of 6. that every rank was before, they are now by this
doubling by right line becomne. 12. in every rank from frunt to back: which
being performed and all the ranks reformed in their distances as well by frunt
as flanks, then the Captain or Captains may presently make of flank frunt
according as I have before very particulerlie declared; and then the standard
or Ensign, Where the standard of men at arms or the guydon of di^^il aunces is
to be placed.
or Ensigns if they be men at Arms, or the Guidons if they be dimilaunces
being placed in the midst of the same squadron, the whole broad square is
ready to straighten and close their ranks by frunt and flanks, and either to
charge their enemies or to receive a charge. And as this broad square of many
Lances in frunt, and but of 12. Lances by flanks has been reduced into
form by two different ways as aforsaid; so may any other squadro^ or
squadrons of lances be reduced by any of those two ways, of how many ranks
by flanks soever they are. But yet as the reducing of horsemen by right line
is very good and ready: so the reducing of them into squadron by flanks as
aforesaid, is better; because they do no ways alter nor disorder themselves in
their distances neither in frunt nor by flanks; whereas otherwise by entering
and doubling their ranks one into another by right line, they come to disorder
their proportionate distaunces, which they must again with all speed reform.
Aduertising further, that as this squadron has been formed by the aforesaid
two ways, so may the same or any other even at the first be as well reduced by
any of those 2. ways into form, in vaungard and frunt, without making of flank
frunt, so as the Coronell, Sergeant Mayor, or Captain, that has the forming of
the said squadron, have good regard as well to the ground and number that he will
make his frunt of, as to the number of ye ranks by flanks, and therwithal to
place and accomodat the broken rank, or ranks if there be any with the
standard, ensign, or Guidon.

Now because in these days new opinions and fancies in matters of arms
grounded upon very weak or rather no reasons at all, do bear a very great
swaie; and that amongst other errors military there be some that do hold and
allow that lances should be rather reduced into troup to charge or receive a
charge, Lances are always rather to be reduced into squadron, then into
troops.
then into squadron formed: I for diverse reasons, of the which some I will
after allege, would that when any Coronell or Captains of men at arms or
dimilaunces shall have occasion to reduce their bands into form, either to march
or fight; that then they do in any wise reduce them into form of squadron,
according to the ancient-vse, and not into troop according to the new
fancies, incase that time and leisure will serve: And therwithall that they do
form them with a triple frunt, Lances are always to be 3. times and sometimes
4. or 5. times or more in frunt the^ by flanks.
that is three times as many in frunt as by flanks, and sometimes more: As for
example, if the frunt be of 24. or 25. Lances, then the flank should be of 8.
lances: And sometimes also with a quatriple frunt, that is 4. times more in
frunt, then by flanks; as also at other times and upon other occasions into
far broader frunts then quadruple, although by flanks not above 10. or 12.
ranks at the most as aforesaid: and that the Standards or Ensigns, if they
be men at Arms; or the Guidons if they be dimilaunces be placed in the
midst of the squadron.

And ye those horsemen be instructed how to enlarge themselves in their ranks
when they march in squadron: and how presently upon the sight of the enemy
approaching to straighten themselves by frunt and flanks, with their just and
proportionate distances, in such sort as they may charge or receive a charge of
the enemy without disordering their horses or Lances, or confounding their
ranks. But incase that upon a sudden Alarm given upon the approach of the
Enemy the Lances being in Camp, Town, or Village be not reduced into their
single order under their Ensigns or Guidons, but that they are then assembling
themselves and the enemy near at hand; then they must make of necessity
virtue, that is to reduce themselves into troop, making as near as they can a
triple, or quatriple frunt, or more that they may somewhat resemble a squadron,
having regard to their distances, that they may use their Lances without
disordering the one the other as near as they may.

And whereas there be some professing arms in this time that do hold an
opinion that Lances have a greater advantage to charge or receive a charge in
troop, then in squadron as aforesaid; they therein do show that for lack of
understanding and consideration they do greatly err in the ordering of
horsemen Lances. For the Almaines, Italians, English, and diverse other Nations
have of great antiquity used, both squadron of men at Arms and dimilaunces,
and also troops: But it was never heard of before these disordered civil wars
of France, whereupon the ^educing of aunces into roupe does amongst men of war
proceed.
and the Lowcountries, that Lances in troops confused, should be preferred
and judged to be of greater advantage then lances in squadron formed,
considering that the reducing of Lances into troop does amongst men of war
proceed of nothing else but of lack of time to reduce them into squadron upon
some sudden Alarm and approach of the Enemy: So as such as do hold that
opinion might as well say that two, ^ batle of neces^ ^tie is a nom^er of
piquers (...) horsemen ^unces out of ^^nks in ^roup.
or three thousand piquers, and short weapons have more advantage to fight in a
battle of necessity, then in a Squadron formed: which battle of necessity or
extreamitie, term it as you list, is never used but upon some great and sudden
accident as when a puissant enemy does make a sudden approach upon your Camp
most commonly by night, or at the break of day with a Canuesada, killing both
scoutes, Sentinels and watches, through their negligent watching, or
discovering, and thereupon an alarm given, for lack of time to reduce your
piquers into squadron formed, you are feign in the place of assembly to make
them to run together into ranks confused, closing themselves as close as
they can to defend the Ring, or entry of the Camp. By the which comparisons,
reasons, and examples of footmen piquers before alleged, such new fancies and
lack of understanding in the ordering, or rather disordering of lances may be
easily discerned by men of reason and judgment.

And now to the intent that your men at Arms or dimilances may be the better
able to charge or receive a charge of their enemies, it is very meet, and
convenient that their Captains and officers should reduce them some time into
squadron with a triple, or quatriple frunt.

And being so reduced, that they should be taught, How and in what distances
men at Arms or dimilaunces are to charge or receive a charge of their enemies.
how to straighten and close themselves in frunt and flanks; and how presently
upon the sound of a charge they should almost all at one instant put spurs to
their horses galloping upon the hand about 8. or 10. paces, and then charge
their Lances from their tasses or long Cuisses and thighs presently into
their restes, and not to carry their Lances at the Arms end, as they do
commonly use at Tilt, to make the fairer show; and then imagining the squadron
of the enemies Lances to be within 15. or 20 paces directly before them, they
should altogether put their horses into their Carrires to the intent to give
the greater blow and shocke to the overthrowing or breaking of their enemies.
Then I would wish them to be taught how they should receive a charge if another
squadron of lances should charge them: and that they should do in this sort.

First when they shall see the squadron of their enemies coming to charge them
either galloping upon the hand, or in their full Carrire; then they being
straightned and closed in their ranks by frunt and flanks should stand firm,
all the Lances of the three foremost ranks ready charged in their restes, but
yet the points of their lances something high, until they do see the enemies
squadron within 15. or 20. paces of them: at which time they should with a
terrible shout altogether in an instant, as if they were one entire body, put
spurs to their horses, and fall into their Carrire, and so charge and shock
with their enemies, to the disordering or breaking of them.

All which being by them performed, they should then stop their horses and
discharge their lances, setting them again upon their thighs: And then they
should be instructed how with all celeritie to make of flank frunt, by turning
al their horses faces that way, and by enlarging themselves and doubling, and
redoubling their ranks to reduce their squadron again into a triple, or
quatriple frunt. Then I would wish that all the squadron of Lances should
disorder themselves pelle melle out of their ranks: and that they should be
instructed either upon the sound of the Trompet or upon the pronouncing of
these words, Diverse exercises for horsemen to be instructed and taught in.
Troup, troup Lances, presently to fall into troop, making their frunt,
triple, or quatriple, or more in respect of the flanks, as near as their
Captains or officers can guess; And being thus fallen into troup, they should
be taught how to charge or receive a charge of their Enemies, without
disordering themselves or their lances.

Then I would have them again reduced out of troop into squadron, and taught
how they should charge ye flank or corner of a squadron of piques, and how
incase they do not disorder* nor break the piquers, that they should retire
again; and then falling into troop they should with a terrible shout offer a
false charge by making a point and casting about when they come within 10. or
15. paces of the squadron of piques, incase that the piquers making head with
their piques do not disorder themselves: But if they should perceive the
squadron of piquers to wa^er or swaie (as commonly they do a little before they
break) that then they should give in upon the piquers with a full charge, to
the utter overthrowing of them. And thus with these and such like exercises
they should be made skillful and able with all advantages to charge any
squadron of horsemen or footmen with great art and de^teritie.

Now peradventure some not skilful in matters of arms may say that I have made
in a manner no difference betwixt the charging of a fquadron of men at Arms, or
Dimilaunces, and the receiving of a charge of another squadron of the like
Weapons, because I do allow to the squadron that should charge but 30. paces,
that is 20. galloping upon the hand, and 10. for their full Carrire to give the
greater blow and shocke: An objection answered.
Whereunto I answer that such as are leaders of any squadron of Lances that
will fall into their gallop 12. skores, or 15. skores distant or more, to the
intent to charge another squadron of Lances, shall find themselves in so
great a distance greatly disordered and confounded in their ranks, and their
horses out of breath, and thereby the force of their blow and shocke greatly
weakened when they shall come to encounter with the squadron of their enemies
fresh, and not disordered, ^ho have put forward their Horses into their
Carrire not above 10. paces.

Now if it should be said unto me that it were more meet that a squadron of
lances that is disposed to receive a charge, The opinion of such as hold it
best for launce^ to receive a charge standing still, answered*
should keep their ground and stand firm with their lances in their rests
rather then to fall into their carrire of. 10. paces as aforesaid: I say that
their receiving of a charge in standing still, should be greatly to their
disaduauntage, because that force and violence in this action must be repulsed
with the like or greater force and violence. For any man of judgment by reason
may consider that a squadron of lances straightned and closed in frunt and
flanks with their just and proportionate distances coming to charge their
enemies squadron but 30. paces, that is. 20. galloping upon the hand, and. 10.
with a terrible shoute in their full carrire will work a wonderful effect to
the breaking of the squadron of lances standing still, The disadvantage of a
Squ^dron that receueth a charge standing still.
without moving forward with any force. Besides that the disaduauntage of such
a squadron as receaueth a charge standing still without moving forward with
force, is greatly augmented by the terror and thundering of their enemies
horses feet upon the ground coming in their full cartire, as also by the
noise of the armors of the horsemen, and with the furious coming of the horses
in squadron with the points of so many lances in the eyes and sights of both
horses and men standing still in cold blood: whereas contrariwise the squadron
coming but. 30. or. 40. paces in hot blood to charge them, first galloping
upon the hand, and after in their full carrire as is aforesaid, do gather
heat, fury, and force, in such sort as their blow and shocke becomes so
violent, that it does amaze, disorder and break the contrary squadron with
great facility; But a squadron of Lances standing firm upon their ground
until they see their enemies within. 20. paces of them, and then putting
themselves into their full carrire and meeting with their Enemies. 10. paces
of, it is distance enough to receive and encounter them with as great force as
if they had begun their carrire when the squadron of their Enemies was a
greater distance of.

But now in this place it is to be noted and observed that the Ensignebearer if
he be of men at Arms, or the Guidon bearer, Where the En^ignebearer of men at
Arms or the Guydon beare^ of light horsemen are to ^e lodged.
if he be of light horsemen, be ever lodged both in Camp and Town in the
Captains Tent, or lodging, or very near unto the same, ever accompanied with
the trumpetor of the same band, to the intent that they may receive all orders
and sudden directions; and having received the same, may signify them by the
soundes of the trumpet.

Light horsemen borderers I will not take upon me to set down any thing for
their instructions how they should use their spears in the field, because that
they themselves by their continual exercise are so skilful with all such
weapons as they do use in the service of the borders. Into what forms, light
hors^ men borderers are to reduce themselves.
But yet I would wish them to learn to reduce themselves into semicircles or
half moons into two ranks either by right line or else oblique, after the
manner of the Turks and Hongarians; Because I think that the same would be of
great advantage for them, for diverse purposes, as I have showed by diverse
demonstrations and forms in a Book by me Composed 1585. and not yet printed,
entitled; Certain Military discourses, Arithmeticall Tables, forms and
demonstrations to reduce both horsemen and footmen into many forms of
squadrons. etc.

But because that in my forementioned Book I have but only set down the
forms and demonstrations of those semicircles by figures of little horsemen,
and not how nor in what sort they should be reduced into those forms; I will
here briefly set down concerning those reducements, as also of the
aduauntages that such light horsemen have in such semicircles against a
squadron of Lances. And therefore to reduce them into the aforesaid forms, I
say that if therebe (for examples sake) 200. light horsemen; they are to march
2. in a rank either by right line or oblique: And incase they march 2. in a
rank by right line, then every 2. horsemen are of equal frunt throughout from
frunt to back as all other sorts of horsemen in their ranks are: But if they
march in ranks oblique, How to reduc^ light horsemen or Stradiots in to the
form of a Semicircle.
then every second light horsman does march retired and a good distance wide
from the first, in such sort as he may march and have in flank the midst of
the void ground that is betwixt his fellow foremost horseman of his own rank,
and the foremost horseman of the second rank, that follows the first, and so
likewise the second souldior of the second ran^e is to follow him in the like
sort, but marching and having on his flank likewise the midst of the distance
or void ground that is betwixt his foremost fellow of his own rank, and the
foremost light horsman of the third rank; And so subsequentlie all the rest of
the light horsemen must march in ranks oblique the one to the other.

Now all this band of 200. light horsemen reduced into 100. ranks marching by
right line straight forward, are to be reduced into a semicircle in this sort
following, that is, that one Conductor ought to march before all the ranks;
And another last of all behind all the ranks; Then after two other Conductors
are to be placed in the very midst, the one to take care and to see order
observed by the one half of the semicircle, that is of his right hand; and the
other to see order observed by the other half of the semicircle that is of his
left hand: which conductors being so placed, and the Cornet either in the midst
of the ranks of the light horsemen, or else in one of the foremost ranks; then
to reduce these 100. ranks into a semicircle, either the Captain, or foremost
Conductor must march with his band and fetch a great and a large compass and
circuit of ground, either upon the right, or left hand, according as he
intends to make the frunt of his semicircle: And thus he must lead his band
in compass and half circle, until he sees the hindermost rank right over,
and against in semicircle to the foremost rank of all the band, which he
himself leads: which he perceiving, then he must command his trompettor to
sound a stay or pause, which done, the trumpettor must gallop toward the midst
of the semicircle; I mean of the inner or compass side, and there must again
sound to make of flank frunt: which being performed, then of 100. ranks of 2.
in a rank that they were before, they are now becomne to be only 2. ranks of.
100. in each rank, which being performed, then may they march in this form of
semicircle in their ranks, either by right line or oblique if the fields be
large and open (as they are most commonly in France, and many other Countries)
with great facility: And incase there were a squadron of. 150. The advantage
of a semicircle of light horsemen or Stradio^s, against a squadron of lances.
Lances that would think to break that semicircle by a charge given in the
midst of the same semicircle, then the advantage of the semicircle is, upon
the instant and very beginning of the charge of the lances to open themselves
in the midst; the foremost Conductor of the Corner of the right hand galloping
large and something in compass, and leading the one half of the semicircle of
light horsemen, upon the one flank of the squadron of Lances; and the other
Conductor of the other end, or corner of the semicircle to galloppe likewise
somewhat large in compass, and lead the other half of the semicircle to
charge upon the other flank of the squadron of Lances, and with terrible
noises and shoutes to charge both the flanks, as also the back of the
squadron with their spears al at one time. Or if the Semicircle be all of
stradiots, with their zagaias, which are double headed Lances, then that they
being lead by their Conductors and opening in the midste, as aforesaid, do
charge both the flanks and back of the squadron with their zagaias striking
both forward and backward, killing, and wounding, both horses and men.

By which new, extraordinary, and unexpected kind of charge, the squadron of
Lances that thought by right line to have charged and broken the semicircle in
the midst finding nothing there before them to charge but only the air, are
forced to make a stay or stand, and to defend them selves with great
disadvantage of Weapon; and are compelled to make frunt of both their flanks
and back, all at one time; which they can no ways perform without
disordering themselves out of all form: whereof, and by the neernesse of the
light horsemen be they spears or zagaias, that have charged them, as
aforesaid, it comes to pass, that they have not any ground nor room to put
their horses into any Carrire, nor to charge their lances into their restes,
thereby to give the greater blow and shocke, or any other ways to annoy the
light horsemen, that have charged and do with their zagaias, or spears used as
punching staves, wound and kill them and their horses both in flanks and
back, as aforesaid, by means whereof they have not only utterly lost the
use of their Lances, but are driven with many wounds already received to
disorder all their ranks and squadron and in tumultuarie and disordred sort, to
fight with their swords, and other such short weapons against the said light
horsemen with their punching staves, to the g(...) disadvantage and utter ruin
of the Lances.

And whereas I have showed this order of marching of a semicircle of two ranks
oblique according to the Hongarian and Turkey manner: I say that it has been
and is in respect, that if any other such light horsemen in ranks by right
line should charge them, that the hindermost light horsemen of the second
rank, that are oblique in rank to their fellows before them, may at the same
instant, have more open and conueniencie of ground to succor their fellows in
the foremost rank, and to charge their enemies, then they otherwise could have,
if they were by right line directly behind the first rank.

The great effects that Stradiots, Archers on horsbacke, and Crosbowers on
horsback, are to perform in the field, both against horsemen and footmen, with
also, the great ad^antage that they have against Carabins, and against
Reistres, and all other weapons of fire on horseback, in services of the field.
STradiots before mentioned are a kind of light horsemen that have been used
of many years both in Italy, France, Spain and Germany, although in their
weapons and manner of arming, every Nation has differd one from another more
or less. Stradiots much used in times past.
Amongst the Pagans, the Arabians and Persians, the Turks and the Tartars, in
such ages as they conquered the greatest part of Europe, Affricke and Asia,
used almost no other soldiers and weapons on horseback but light horsemen
Launciers with long lances, Stradiots with Launcezagaias headed with two
steeled heads, Archers with their bows; and Crosbowers, and al those with
their Cemeteries and straight or crooked daggers, and other weapons in use with
them. Stradiots of great execution and effect in the field.


Now these light horsemen stradiots that have been used by so many Nations are
of great execution and service in the field, both against horsemen and footmen
disordered, and very excellent to enter into and maintain skirmishe, chiefly
if they be incorporated with Archers on horsback, and Crosbowers on horseback:
The difference of which armors, weapons, horses, and other furniture belonging
to those three sorts of weapons I omit, because I have very particularly set
down mine opinion of those matters in my forementioned book, entitled; Certain
Military discourses, Arithmeticall Tables, forms and demonstrations, etc. by
me Composed 1585. not yet printed. Now therefore I will make mention of nothing
else but how they should behave themselves in the field against their enemies,
and that I would have them to perform in this sort.

Stradiots, How stradiots Archers on horseback, and Crosbowers on horseback,
incorporated in bands, are to behave themselves in the field.
archers on horseback, and Crosbowers on horseback, being incorporated into
bands, every band of 100. of the which I would have 40. stradiots, 30.
archers, and 30. Crosbowers all on horseback, and all those reduced into
Cameradas or societies of tennes, or fifteenes I would wish that they should
not fight in squadrons nor in great troops as men at arms and dimilaunces
should do; but that they should fight in many little troops of tennes, or
fifteens, or twenties, and not above; and that they should charge a squadron or
troop, or diverse squadrons or troops of Lances in frunt, flanks and back, in
many little troops some advanced, and some retired, in such sort, as all the
troops next unto the squadron of their enemies horse, might have other troops
in wing more retired to second and succor them; and that the troops of
archers and Crosbowers should give their volees of arrows and quarrels at the
squadrons or troops of their Enemies both in frunt, flanks and back, all at
one time, and that the little troops of Stradiots should remain in wings
somewhat retired, ready upon all occasions of any disorder of their enemies
to give in, by flanks, and back, and to kill, or wound the horses of their
enemies; and that incase the Lances being in great squadrons, or troops,
should charge them; that then they should presently cast about and fly in
their little troops, and that they should disperse their troops all over the
large fields, in such sort, that the squadrons of lances should not well know
which troops to follow; and that upon the Lances pursuing of those troops;
that other little troops and societies should charge them again both in back
and flanks, and that with terrible shoutes and volees of quarrels and arrows,
the Stradiots at the same time galloping in their troops by the hinder corners
of the squadron, should wound their horses with their Launcezagayas, and give
them occasion to stay their pursuit, and to make head against them; which if
the Lances do without disordering themselves; then I would wish those troops
that charged the back and flanks presently likewise to disperse and fly: and
that the other little troops that they had followed before, should upon some
extraordinary shoute or hubabub, (whereto they should be inured) return
again upon them with new charges and volees both in back and flanks with
terrible shoutes and cries as aforesaid: In such sort that although all the
little troops of Stradiots, and shot, do not exceed the number of the lances
in their great squadrons; yet that their false charges should be such, so many,
and so continual in giving their volees in frunt, flanks, and back, as that
by continual molesting of them, they should put them in hazard to disorder
themselves and disperse: which if it should happen; then that the Stradiots
should enter pelle melle amongst the Lances, and striking both forward and
backwarde with their Lances that have double heads, should kill or wound
their horses; and so by the advantage of their weapons, should do execution
upon their Enemies to their utter overthrow.

Now peradventure some will say that there are no squadrons of Lances that
wilbee without some companies of Carabins, and Argolettiers, or else of
Reistres to succor them, which should greatly trouble the archers and
Crosbowers to work the effect before declared. To the which I answer, that I
am persuaded that if the Stradiots, archers and Crosbowers, be as many in
number, as the Lances, Argolettiers Carabins, or Reistres are of small succor
to a squadron of lances against stradiots, archers and crosbowers.
and Argolettiers, or Reistres; that the Argolettiers or Reistres will be of
small succor to the Lances against those kinds of weapons, but that they
would upon three or four volees of quarrels and arrows turn their backs,
and leave the lances to defend themselves: For Argolettiers, or Reistres in
true experience, are not to discharge their pieces and work any effect above 6.
8. or 10. paces distant, The distances wherein Argolettiers or Reistres are to
discharge their pieces.
and yet that too far, considering the uncertainty of those weapons caused
through the motion of their horses: whereas Crosbowers and chiefelie archers,
may work very certain and great effect to the mischief both of men and horses
a great deal greater distance off; which with diverse other reasons that for
breuities sake I omit, do persuade me to think that 2000. Carabins or
Reistres, are not able in the field to abide the charge and volee of 1000.
stradiots, Archers and Crosbowers.

Now the effects that bands of stradiots, archers and Crosbowers on
horseback may work against footmen, Theeffects of bands of stradiots archers
and crosbowers on horsbacke against foot men in the field.
upon diverse opportunities are, that they may give their volees of quarrels,
and arrows at randon into the squadron of piquers or into the wings, or
sleeves of shot, to the disturbing and molesting of their orders; and upon the
overthrow of horsemen or footmen be they armed men or shot, the stradiots in
following the chase may do great execution and slaughter by striking both
forward and backewarde with their double headed lances. And these actions
before declared are in mine opinion the chief effects of those three sorts
of weapons in corporated in bands, as aforesaid.

And thus having now finished all such instructions, and aduertisements
military as have at this time fallen into my remembrance, that do concern the
ordering, forming and exercising of single bands and companies as well of
horsemen as of footmen, as also of reducing and sorming of squadrons into all the chief forms of battles ^y are requisite for armies to march or fight
withal in the open fields, with many other important particularities: I will
now (with the help of Almighty God) proceed to the setting down of mine
opinion how new bands and companies that should be elected and enrolled for
defense of the Realm, or for foreign invasion, are to be elected, enrolled,
armed and weaponed, with diverse other particularities. For as for the mustering
of old bands that have either served long in Armies, or in Garrisons, they
are matters so common in use, as it might be holden but for superfluous to set
down the orders and proceedings concerning the same; considering that the most
of all Warrelike Nations do observe almost all one sort of proceedings and
observations in viewing and mustering of armies and Garrisons that have of long
time served.

Certain proceedinges and observations that I would wish to be observed in the
first election, enrolling, arming, and weaponing of Soldiers, for any
employment; but chiefly for the ordinary bands and companies of horsemen and
footmen that are to be chosen in the Shieres of England, for the defense of the
Realm, or for foreign Invasion; as also for taking of reuewes of musters again
from time to time, with diverse other particularities.
THe first thing of all others that does belong to any perfect Militia, The
first and chief thing (...) all others tha^ does belong (...) any perfect
Militia is goo^ election and choice.
either of horsemen or of footmen, or of both, is good and orderly and
sufficient Election and choice of soldiors, which we commonly call taking of
Musters, without which well and sufficiently performed, all the rest of any
Militia and discipline Military can have no good form, nor work any great
effect: and therefore, according to orderly writing, I should first have begone
to have written of the same: Howbeit, because I mean to write but of some
parts thereof; I thought good in that respect to set it down in the end of
these my former instructions: And therefore I say that there are only two
principal causes of elections, Two principal causes of elections inrollements
and leuies of men of war.
enrollements, and leuies of men of war, of the which the first is for
employments, and services by Sea; into the which there do enter none but only
footmen and that of two sorts: the one Masters of Ships, officers, mariners,
and sailors that are to manage the Ships, The first.
and all other sorts of artificers that are to repair the Ships, and all
things belonging to the same: And the other of soldiors and their officers that
are chosen, elected and levied to use their weapons for the annoying of the
Enemy, and defense of the ships; in which number of soldiors are contained,
all sorts of gonners and officers belonging to great ordinance, as also all
others that do receive pay for and concerning those services; which because it
is a distinct and different thing from that part of the Militia, that I intend
to handle, The second.
I will omit. Now the second cause of musters and leuies, is, for emploiment
and services by land, either for a war offensive, or defensive or for both;
into the which does enter the first elections, choice, and enrollements as well
of horsemen, as of footmen, and as well the horsemen, as the footmen of
different sorts of armors and weapons.

Now because I have in diverse parts of Christendom seen soldiors both
horsemen, and footmen elected, enrolled, and levied, in some Countries with
greater order, and in others with less; and that also I have partly observed
the ancient manner of election, inrolling, arming and furnishing of soldiors
here in England when I was young, as also the proceedings in those affairs of
this time; I thought good in this place to set down my opinion how and in what
sort, I would have al horsemen and footmen of such armors and weapons as we at
this present in England do use, to be elected enrolled and every ways
furnished; and there withal in their first election and inrollement
instructed: And therefore I will first begin with footmen.

And because that in all right and true elections and first enrollements of men
of war, Three principal things to be observed in all right and ^rue elections
of soldiors, by coronells captains, and muster masters.
there be three principal things to be regarded and observed; of the which the
first is, conueniencie of age and years: The second Corporal disposition and
ability of body: and the third, honesty, which proceeds from honest
education, which in respect of obedience Military that insueth thereof, is no
less requisite then the other two: therefore I mean to include those as three
principal matters belonging to my whole election. Of the which three
concerning conueniencie of years, Concerning the conueni^ncy of years ^f such
as are to ^e elected and ^nrolled for ^oldiors.
I think none meet to be elected and enrolled under the age of. 18. years;
which is the lowest age that has been allowable amongst all warlike nations
of ancient and modern times; nor none above the age of. 35. or. 40. at the
most: And of the age of. 18. I would have none elected unless they were of so
great growth, and corporal disposition, as that they were able to perform the
duties and effects of soldiers, which very few at that age can. And such as
should be elected after the age of 18. I would have to continue soldiors until
they come to the age of 45. incase their health and corporal disposition of
body, do continue in them until that age.

And so likewise, I would that such as were elected through their good
disposition of bodies to be soldiers at 35. or 40. years old, should with
good account and credit in the shiers where they dwell, be dismissed from being
soldiers at the age of 45. and no ways further to be employed in matters
military, unless their wisdom and sufficiency were such, as they were to
serve as officers of bands. And the causes wherefore I would not have any to
be elected to be soldiers above the age of 40. or to continue soldiers
above the age of 5. years more, which is 45. are; that to elect and leauie
old men that never served before to be young soldiers, is contrary to all
discipline; and to serve as private soldiers above the age of 45. (unless
they be excellent archers in perfection of strong and clean shooting) it is
more then is convenient, considering that for the defense of a kingdom where
there is choice of young men enough, it were contrary to all reason and
discipline that they should continue their services as private soldiers any
longer, then until that age of 45. but in the countries where they dwell, at
that age with great credit to be dismissed, that they may the better intend and
follow their own private affairs and other yoonger men of sufficiency and
ability of body and mind to be chosen in their places: And thus far
concerning conueniencie of years. Concerning the good and convenient corporal
disposition of body of such as are to be elected and enrolled for soldiors.


And now to the second sufficiency that is to be required in such as are to
be elected and enrolled to be soldiers either horsemen or footmen; which is
good and convenient corporal disposition of body and mind, able and apt to
handle, or to learn to handle and use diverse sorts of weapons, without which
none are worthy nor meet to be elected and enrolled for private soldiors. First
therefore I would concerning the same, that the choice and election should be
such, as every souldior that should be chosen should be a man well formed and
dispost of body and mind, and therefore meet and fit either by former exercise
from his youth; or at least by aptness of mind and force, to learn the use of
such weapons as he should be chosen and enrolled unto: as for example: I would
have no man chosen to be an Archer that had not so practiced the use of his bow
from his youth, that he should be able to shoot strong, or at the least of a
convenient strength and long arrows, and therewithal used by continual
exercise to draw his arrow with three fingers, and not with two (according to
the new fashion) to the head: of which shooters with two fingers, I would have
none to be allowed for archers, Archers shoo^ing with two fingers are not to be
allowed for soldiors ar^hers.
how fair soever they shoot, unless they could very well reform themselves
from that fond new fashion: because that in their so shooting they loose a
great deal of the strength of their draught. And thus far in this place
concerning corporal disposition of body.

And now to the third sufficiency of such as are to be elected, chosen and
enrolled, Concerning the honesty of such as are to be elected, ^hosen and
in^olled.
which is honesty, I would that all such as should be elected and enrolled
should be of honest parentage, and that their education and course of life had
been such, as there were no notable vice to be noted in them, and chiefly of
drunkenness, theft, blaspheming, common swearing or brawling. Al which vices
are such, as they cause al such as are possessed of them to be disordered,
mutinous, and disobedient; which are things most contrary to all true
discipline. Also I would if it might be, that all such as should be elected and
chosen to be soldiors, should be of themselves of some ability and substance
either in lands, or goods, or both; or else that from their parents they
should be in possibility after their deceases to enjoy some lands, or goods,
or both: And I would that they should be of those two conditions before
mentioned; I mean of good parentage and present hauiour, or in possibility by
the death of their parents as aforsaid, because ye same should be a kind of
obligation to their captains, as also to ye common wealth, for their good and
obedient behauior, in their vocation and degrees of soldiorie. Besides all
which I would have all soldiors and officers of bands at their first election
All soldiors and officers of bands are at their first electi^on and enrolment,
to take their oaths of fidelity to the crown and Realm of England and
obedience to their captains and superior officers.
and, enrolment to take their oaths of fidelity and loyalty to the crown
and Realm of England; as also of obedience to their captains and officers, in
such matters as do concern the art, science, and discipline military, for
the defense of the Crown and Realm of England.

Now the election and inrollment of the archers, as also of all the rest of the
soldiors of other weapons being taken with such regard and respect as aforsaid;
I would then have them to be armed very fitly and conveniently according to
every different sort of weapon: And because that no man can be conveniently
and fitly armed, unless he be first fitly apparelled for his armor, and also
for the use of his weapon, No man can be conveniently, armed unless he be
first fitly apparelled.
and that in the camp and army at Tilburie 1588. whereas there were the
regiments of diverse shieres, with diverse bands both of dimilaunces and light
hormen, I did see and observe, so great disorder and deformity in their
apparel, to arm withal, as I saw but a very few of that Army that had any
conueniencie of apparel, and chiefly of doublets to arm upon; whereof it came
to pass that the most of them did wear their armors very uncomely, and
vneasilie; which foresaid doublets if they be not conveniently made, and of
purpose to arm upon according to the use of all antiquity, it is not possible
that armed men horsemen, nor footmen should find themselves in their armors
at ease: nor that they should use their weapons with such dexterity as they
may do if their garments be purposelie and fitly made to arm upon; nor yet
that there can be any comeliness in wearing their armors upon such deformed
doublets; I would first therefore, that there should be special regard had to
the fit and convenient apparelling of all sorts of soldiers; and therefore to
begin with soldiers doublets, Concerning the convenient apparelling of all
sorts of soldiors.
I would that their doublets should be made of Fustian according to the use of
all antiquity, or of chamoise skins, as well in respect of lasting, as that a
man may arm better upon any of both those things, then upon Canuas, or any
thing that is more smooth, and less woollie.

Then concerning the form and fashion of their doublets, I would that they
should be of a convenient height in the Collers, as well to defend their necks
from cold in winter, as from heat in Summer. Then* I would that they should
be narrow in the shoulders, and so small in the sleeves, and with so little
bumbast, that the vambrases of armed men might easily close together; and that
archers using no vambrases but certain stripes of serecloth or maile within
their sleeves to defend the cut of a sword, might through the smalnesse of
their sleeves easily draw and shoot, without the string hitting upon any part
of the sleeue, but only upon their bracers.

Then I would that their doublets should be made easy and wide upon the
stomachs and breasts, that the soldiers being not pent by the straightness
of their doublets upon their breasts, might the easlier fetch their breath
either in fighting, or in any hasty march: and therewithal, that their
doublets be cut flat upon the belly, and wasted of like length to the
Cuirasses of their armors, to the intent that armed men's armors might sit the
more just and flat to their bodies: But because the collars of armors do bear
the chief weight of all the rest of the armor, I would wish that the
soldiers armed men horsemen, or footmen, should either have under Collars of
Fustian conveniently bombasted to defend the heueth and poise of their
armours from the paining, or hurting of their shoulders and necks; or else that
their doublets should be very well bombasted in all that part under their
Collars both before and behind according to the depth of the same, which will
be a great ease to all armed men horsemen or footmen, for their often and long
continuing armed.

Also I would that no armed men should wear any cut doublets, as well in
respect that the wearing of armor does quickly fret them out, and also by
reason that the corners and edges of the lammes and iointes of the armours do
take such hold upon such cuttes, as they do hinder the quick and sudden
arming of men; as also that they are of more impediment to harquebuziers,
mosquetiers, and archers, for diverse respects to all skillful soldiors well
known, then doublets uncut are. Then I would wish that there should be
regard had to their hosen, that they might be easy for them to march and
fight in; which the new fashion straight hosen are not: and therefore I would
that they should rather wear Greygescoes too under the knee, that should be
large, wide, and easy, lined with a Cotton lining without any bombast; and
next to the thigh with a strong Canuas lining or false sloppe, whereunto the
nether stockinges should be set and sowed, and gartered under the knee, then
either these new fashioned little round hose, or new fashioned bombasted
Greygescoes that are very straight to the thighs and upper parts; which in
summer besides the vneasinesse of them, do with so much bombast keep armed men
exceeding hot, whereas the other being large and wide as aforesaid, something
after the fashion that the Spanish soldiers do use, are a great deal more
easy, and chiefly for all sorts of footmen. How archer^ should be armed and
weaponed.


Now as for their armors I would wish, that archers should either wear Ilet
holed doublets, that will resist the thrust of a sword, or dagger, and covered
with some trim and gallant kind of colored cloth to the liking of the
Captains, with their sleeves striped within, with certain narrow stripes of
serecloth or maile, to resist the cut of a sword, or else Iackes of maile
quilted upon fustian to resist a blow or a thrust, of a convenient length, and
the skirts not too long, in respect of the lightness and easines of them: with
their doublet sleeves as aforesaid; and for the defense of their heads, because
these steel. Cappes commonly used, are of very small comlines for soldiors,
and most of them too shallow, and therefore of small defense, I would wish some
new and gallant fashion morrions very light and easy to be made for archers
to wear without any covering upon them, but that they should be mild or
burnished white; which besides their greater defense, being well and aptly
made; would with their brightness greatly bewtifie the archers that do wear
them. And as for the archers bows, I would that they should not be short after
the new use which causes them often to break, but that they should be long
and well backed and nockt, according to the ancient use; and their strings
whipped with fine thread, or silk; and that they should head and make their first
sheafes of arrows, according to the length that they do commonly use to draw.
The blades of their swords I would have to be very good, and of the length of
a yard and not above; with their hilts only made with. 2. ports, a greater and
a smaller on the out side of the hiltes, after the fashion of the Italian and
Spanishe arming swords; and those swords I would have them to wear with
strong girdles of leather, their hangers of such convenient length, and so well
formed as their swords might hang upon the upper parts of their thighs; not
only ready and very easy to be drawn; but also by their well hanging of
them straight forward and backward, (I mean not athwarte their bommes, as
drommers, to give place and room to their drommes do use; nor yet so far
forward as they may lie athwarte their Codpeeces, as great boys do use at
their first wearing of swords when they come new from school) that the said
soldiors swords upon their hasty march, or any other occasion by their
straight and well standing of them, should hang firm without dancing, or
bobbing forward and backward, as swords vnsoldiorly worn, do commonly use. The
blades of their daggers also, I would wish them to be not above 10 inches long,
and that the hilts of the same should be only made of one single and short
cross without any ports, or hilts at all, and not with great hilts after the
fencers or alehouse fashion; and that they should wear their daggers not upon
their girdles at their backs, but hanging down upon their right thighs before
them, after the old English fashion; and because that their daggers should
stand the more firm and steadie without bobbing or dancing up and down upon
the hasty march of the soldiors; I would that they should wear them in
leathers, after the fashion that I saw some of the soldiors of Sir John Peter's
band devise and use, at such time as I mustered his band near unto Brentwood
the year 1588. Which leathers being of the length of 7. inches, and 3. inches
broad beneath, but above not so broad, and have in the upper parts two cuts
straight downward, for the waste of the girdle to go through, and in the
lower end, two cuts straight athwart, for the dagger sheath to be thrust
through and down even to the very locket; and then the locket of the dagger
being fastened a little above, to two holes through the leather right against
the same with a string or a lace; such daggers so worn, do stand wonderful
firm, and very ready for soldiers, archers, or armed men to draw, and with
thrustes to use the points of them. The archers also I would have them to use
shooting gloves with the inner parts of the fingers of Bucks leather, and in
no wise any leathers called finger stalles after the new fashion. Al their
bracers also I would have after the old fashion of our English archers to many
well known, and not according to the new devises. And thus far concerning the
election, apparelling, arming, and weaponing of archers. And now to the
election, apparelling, arming and weaponing of harquebuziers.

Harquebuziers I would wish them to be elected and chosen of the yoongest sort
of men, Concerning the election apparelling, arming, and we aponing of
harquebuziers.
and of the meanest stature and size of all other sorts that should be allowed
of, to be elected and enrolled, and chiefly of such as have small skill and
dexterity in the long bow, and archerie: For I would that such as were
skillful in the long bow; I mean good archers of what size of men soever; that
they should not be enrolled to any other weapon, considering that the number of
good archers of our Nation in these days are so few, and that, that kind of
weapon is of so wonderful and miraculous effect in services of the field as by
all ancient and modern experience amongst all Nations it has been and is
most manifest. Harquebuziers therefore I would have them to be of the youngest
sort of men, as aforesaid, because they should be the more nimble to trauesse
their grounds, and to stoop to their pieces, and to take all aduauntages of
grounds, and of the smallest sort and size of men, because they should be the
lesser marks in the sights of their enemies in skirmish near at hand, as is
in my former instructions at large contained.

Their apparel I would have to be dublets of fustian without any cuttes, and
Greigescoes all of the like sort and fashion, as I have before particulerlie
set down concerning archers; and that they should have every one of them a
saltenberg, commonly called a Mandilion of very good broad cloth that will not
shrink, to encouer and keep dry their flasks and touchboxes and the pans and
touchholes of their harquebuzes in the time of wet and moist weather; and the
same handsomely made to their bodies, and of such Colors as every one of
their Captains should make choice of.

And therewithal that every one of them should have an upright or sharp
morrion fast tied with a red skarfe under their Chins after the spanish
fashion, all white and graven, or at least, white vngrauen, and in no wise any
black mortions; because that the white does beutefie the soldiors more, and is
of greater terror in the eye and sight of the Enemy. The Cannons of their
harquebuzes I would have them to be all of the length of a yard and not any
longer nor shorter all ranforced backward, and conveniently thin forward;
and that the sights of their harquebuzes should be all open sights; I mean
without any pipes or couers upon them, because they might the more readily
take their sightes either from point at blanke if time will serve, or else from
the ends of their pieces. I would also that all those sights as also the pins
of their pieces should be very even and straight set and filed to a just and
convenient height; and their pieces chosen without any cracks or flawes within,
very well boared and drawbored, and therewithal their vices at the hinder ends
of their pieces of such convenient length, and so well made and filed, that
their harquebuzes should not recoile: besides all which I would that all their
bullettes should be of one Caliuer and height, and that of a mean size for
diverse causes, and reasons that I have before in mine instructions alleged.

All the stocks of their harquebuzes I would have them to be crooked (as we
call them) and of good form, and not straight stocks, because that being
crooked and compassed stocks they do more readily counterpoise the fore end of
their pieces, and more readily fall into level when they are in skirmish, and
have no leisure to take any sight from point at blanke, but from the fore ends
of their pieces, then straight stocks do: Besides that considering the
lightness of their pieces they may as well and as readily without rests at any
time take their sights from point at blanke with crooked stocks of good form
as if they were straight. The Cocks, or serpentines I would have to be of
convenient compass and able to receive any convenient match, and that the
feathers and springs that do belong unto them should be of so hard and good
temper, that they should cause the ^ockes or serpentines to fall and rise so
strong and quick, as by their strong falling with the matches into the pannes,
they may make the fire to sparcle, thereby in an instant to make the powder to
take fire.

Then I would that every harquebuzier should have a good and a fair flaske and
touchbox, with strings to them of convenient length, and that they should be
taught by their Corporalles very souldiorlie to wear them, and to keep their
powder in their flaskes and touchboxes very dry. And I would that the pipes or
mouths of their flaskes should be a just charge for their harquebuzes according
to the use of the Spaniardes and Wallouns, and that the feathers and springs
that do make the plate or cover of the lower part of the mouths of their
flaskes to open and cover again, should be of so good temper as they might
open and cover quick and close, that the soldiers thereby might be assured
not to ouercharge their pieces to their danger.

Then I would that every harquebuzier should have in a little purse, or in a
little bag in his pocket, a little steel with a flint, and a little piece of
a certain kind of tinder like a sponge, such as the harquebuziers Spaniards do
use, to strike fire to light their matches, with scourers, skrues, prining
irons, and mouldes, and all other things requisite for the well charging and
keeping of their harquebuzes clean and neat. Swords also the blads of the
length of a yard, with hiltes of the fashion before mentioned, with strong
leather girdles, able to bear their swords, flaskes, and touchboxes, I would
wish every harquebuzier to have; and that they should wear their swords of
such convenient height, as I have before declared, that archers and armed men
ought to do. But as for daggers, I would wish no harquebuzier to wear any,
because they have so seldom occasion to use them: and therefore do rather
increase heueth and burden then serve for any other purpose; the experience
whereof has taught the harquebuziers of all Nations to wear no daggers;
Besides all which, I would have the harquebuziers to be taught, as also the
mosquetiers, to know the differences of powder and of match, that they may be
the better able to know what charges they shall give to their pieces, according
to the goodness or badnesse of the powder, and therewithal always in
skirmish or otherwise to charge their pieces with some soft paper, or
something else betwixt their powder and their bullets, and after their bullets
to restrain the same: and to have their flaskes full of good and dry powder
well corned; and their touchboxes full of fine and dry touchpowder, with all
other things requisite to the well using of their pieces, and thus far
concerning harquebuziers.

Mosquetiers I would wish to be elected of such men as are of good force and
strength of body, How mosquetiers should be elected apparelled, armed, and
weaponed.
although they were but of mean statures, for the tallest and best formed men
I would have reserved for armed men piquers, and battleaxes or halbarders to be
reduced into squadrons or battles; and yet I would not as aforesaid, that any
good or strong archers should be enrolled to any other kind of weapon, but
only to the longbowe, for the causes before mentioned. But it is convenient
that mosquetiers should be of good force, and strength, in respect of the
heaviness of their weapons and furniture, that by their strength and agilitie,
they may the better carry, handle, and manage their mosquets: And I would wish
that they should be every ways apparelled, and that they should wear their
swords in strong girdles without any daggers as the harquebuziers aforsaid,
and that they should be armed with the like morrions to the harquebuziers
before mentioned. Then I would wish that all their mosquets should be of one
length well ranforced backward, The Author would that all mosquets curriers of
war, and other such pe^ces as are to be used in the field with restes, or in
places fortifi^d or against places fortified should have straight stocks and
tha^ ^ll other lighter pieces that are for the skirmish and therefore to be
used without rests, should have crooked stocks.
and of convenient thinness forward, and of one height, or caliuer of bullet
with open sights, and in all other things and particularities of the like
perfection to the harquebuzes that I have before mentioned.

But all the mosquets I would have them to be with straight stocks because
that considering their rests with the great heueth of their pieces they may the
better set the straight stocks to their shoulders and take their sights more
readily and certainly from point at blank, then if their stocks were crooked.
Their iron forkes, or rests I would have them to be well and even formed, that
when the staves are fixed in the ground, their mosquets might ly just and even
in their rests, which they cannot do if they be made higher on the one side
then of the other, as many are. The staves of their rests, I would wish to be
of just and convenient length and strength with piques of a good length that
they may enter a good way in and stand the more firm in the ground. Their
flaskes, touchboxes, and stringes I would have to be of as great perfection as
the flaske and touchboxes of ye harquebuziers before mentioned. And I would
wish that they should charge their mosquets with powder out of the pipes or
charges of the flaskes as the harquebuziers aforsaid, and not out of charges
that hang upon band rolls as many do use: Because that oftetimes the couers
of such charges do fly off, and shed the powder, in such sort as the
mosquetiers if they be not old soldiers or well practiced, do sometimes
think that they charge their pieces out of such bandrol charges, when the
powder was spilt before, so as sometimes they put in their bullets into their
pieces without any powder.

And I would that every society or fellowship of 10. mosquetiers should have
one great mould to cast 2. sorts of bullets, the one full bullets, and the
other 2. or 3. bores smaller to charge upon some occasion with the more
celeritie. Also that the same mould should be so long and big, as it should
be able to cast at one time 8. haileshot of war besides the bullettes, which
haileshot of War should be of the height and Caliuer of small pistol
bullets. And this great moulde with a melting pan and lead, and all other
things belonging to the same, should be for the common use of the whole
society of 10. mosquetiers: as the like pan and mould and other things which
I for breuities sake did omit should be for the common use of every society
of 10. harquebuziers. And yet it does behooue the societies as well of
mosquetiers as of harquebuziers to have some private mouldes for bullets,
besides their common and public mould. And thus far concerning mosquetiers.
And now to armed men piquers.

The arming doublets and greygesc^es for armed men piquers, How piquers should
be apparelled armed and weaponed.
I have before described, and therefore I proceed to the arming and weaponing
of them, as follows. I would have all the piquers armed with burgonets of
good depth well lined and stuffed for the easiness of their heads, and tied
with a red skarfe under their chinnes, and that they should not wear them
flapping open untied, as I have seen many of our Mosquetiers and armed men
here at home do. Also I would have them armed with collers of a good size,
with backs and with cuyrats not too flat but something high upon the stomachs,
that they may easily in any hasty march fetch their breaths: and the belly or
lower part of the Cuirasses, I would have to be low, and rather something flat
then any thing ri^ing or high, because they may having their vambraces on, the
more easily put their hands to their swords without any impediment of ye
overmuch height of the lower parts, or bellies of their Cuirasses. Also I would
have them to have tasses to ye mid thigh not too broad, but of convenient
length and breadth, comely and fit for their greygescoes.

Also I would have them to have pouldrons of a good compass and size, and
vambraces both joined together, and not asunder, because that the poise of the
pouldrons and vambraces, hanging upon the pinnes and springes of their collars,
they do not weigh so much, nor are not so wearisom as when they are separated;
and that they wear their vambrases tied with points to their doublets under
their pouldrons; Also I would that al armed men should wear gauntlets, as the
armed men piquers Italians, and Spaniards do, and not to be bare and disarmed
handed as our English and some other Nations of late years have used, because
that any small wound received upon ye hands does presently make such soldiers
impotent, and unable to use their weapons that have received such wounds
although they be but small. Their swords, their daggers, and their girdles I
have before particularly set down, how and in what sort I would have them to
wear them. Their piques also I would wish them all to be of the length of 18.
foot, and neither longer nor shorter for the causes in my former instructions
and discourses mentioned, as also contained in my Book of certain Discourses
printed 1590. and that they should have very good and four square heads of
good temper, and low armed with long cheeks, and in ye midst covered or armed
with black lether or black vellure, or with some other such thing, and ye they
should not be too great nor heavy in wood, that thereby the soldiers may
carry them and manage them with ease.

Also I would that the staves of the piques should be of a tite and stiff
ash, and not of ash that does sagge, and bend when the piquers do carry
their piques breast high before hand couched, because that such sagging and
bending ash, although it be very tough yet it is more heavy then the other
ash: besides that the piquers cannot carry the (...) of such sagging, and
bending piques so even and straight in their Enemies faces, as they may carry
the other piques that do not bend nor sagge, but are tite and straight. And
thus far concerning armed men piquers, And now to bat^leaxes or halbarders.

The election, choice and inrolment, of soldiers with battleaxes or
halbarders, Concerning the election apparelling arming and weaponing of
soldiors with battle^kes.
I would wish to be of the taller and stronger sort of men, and that all the
halbarders or battleaxes that should be to enter into squadron, should be
apparelled and armed in Corslets in all points and pieces of armor like unto
the piquers before mentioned: and yet if those halbarders or battleaxes in
stead of pouldrons and vambraces did wear sleeves of good reueted maile that
might cover all their shoulders and arms even from under their Collers,
breasts and backs, to the very Gauntlets, considering that by the good
defense and easiness of such sleeves of maile, they might manage their
halbards the better, I would for my part allow them for very well armed,
although I would that the piquers because they are the foremost ranks should
be in any wise armed with pouldrons, vambraces and gauntlets, as aforesaid,
and not with any sleeves of maile. Also I would that the halbarders should
wear their swords and daggers of the same length, and in the very same sort
that I have appointed the armed men piquers. But their halbardes or battleaxes
I* would have to be strong and of good weight with long straight edges, with
good piques backward, and strong points of convenient length, but in no wise
too long forward, and that they should for the strengthening of them, be armed
with two cheeks down the staff of a soote and more long, and that such
battleaxes, or halbardes for the squadron should not be above 6. foot long from
the top of the points to the lowest end of the little iron hoopes commonly
called the Feralles of their staves.

Also I would have certain other halbardes that should be incorporated in every
band of archers and likewise of harquebuziers, who should ser^e upon diverse
occasions, to do execution upon the enemy: And those Halbarders I would have
them called extraordinary because they are not for the squadron; And those I
would have to be armed only with burgonets with collers, very light Cuirasses
and backs, and without any tasses, and in stead of pouldrons; vambrases, and
gauntlets, the sleeves of their doublets I mean within the fustian striped
with certain narrow stripes of serecloth, or of maile, to defend the Cut of a
sword, and if that some of those extraordinary battleaxes, or halbarders, were
armed but only with burgonets and with short skirted Ierkins of buffe, with a
double buffe upon their breasts, and the sleeves of their dou blets with stripes
of maile or serecloth as aforesaid, and their swords and daggers worn after
th^same sort, as the piquers before mentioned, I think it allowable: But the
staves of the halbards of such halbarders extraordinary, I would wish to be
longer by a foot, or a foot and a half or more, then the armed and ordinary
halbardes that are to enter into squadron, that is of 7. foot and a half
long, or more, because that they being to succor troops and societies of loose
shot, or to do execution upon diverse accidents as aforesaid, and often times
to fight with the enemy hand to hand, and sometimes to encounter with two, or
three against one, it is requisite that their halbards for their advantage in
fig^t should be longer then the ordinary halbardes that are to enter into
squadron; And incase that those halbards were lighter also the^ the others that
are for the squadron, being of good strength, it wear not amiss.

But whereas I have before armed all the piquers, and battleaxes ordinary, I
mean, that are to enter into squadron in Corslets complete, and that
contrariwise I do understand that diverse of our Captains of this time when
they receive any English bands ready armed and furnished to serve withal
either in France, It is contrary to altrue discipline military for soldiors
to leave of their pouldrons vambrases and tasses.
or the Low Countries, and that the piquers of those bands are delivered unto
them armed in corslets complet all saving gauntlets; they presently give, or
throw away all their pouldrons, vambraces and tasses in such sort as the
soldiors do remain armed only with burgonets, Collers, Cuirasses and backs,
contrary to all true discipline: Certainly, it seems unto me very strange,
that the lack of Judgment, or rather the ignorance of this time in matters
Military should be so great, The greate^illes ensuing to soldiors by leaving
of their pouldrons vambraces and tasses.
that they should contemn the arming of their shoulders, arms, hands, and
thighs, and only seek to guarde their breasts, bellies and backs, in respect
as I do think that they would preserve only those their vital parts: when it
is very well known by all experience Military, that such as come to be
wounded in their shoulders, arms hands or thighs, do oftentimes by such
wounds, come to be in their Enemies hands, and mercy, who many times upon
such aduauntages do put them to the sword* Besides that it is more then
strange that such Captains do not censider that soldiors with their legs and
thighs do march forward to encounter with their Enemies, and with their
shoulders, arms, and hands, they do use their weapons and fight with their
Enemies; whereas cotrariwise with their bellies and backs, (which they
altogether seek to guarde) they do neither march forward against the enemies,
nor fight: which is a great skorne and mockery that some of the men of war
of this time should so imitate the French, and Flemish fashions, who of late
years, have scarce remained one whole year in one order and manner of arming,
but have still changed from fashion to fashion. Howbeit such of our Captains
as do contemn the wearing of pouldrons, vambraces, gauntlets, and tasses do
vainelie allege for the reason and excuse of their so doing; A very val^e
opinion and frivolous excuse.
that battles now a days do never come to join, but that they do only
fight in skirmish; which is a very vain conceit and a frivolous excuse, and
contrary to all reason and true experience of diverse battles, that themselves
may remember have been fought in France, and in diverse other Countries, within
these few years: considering that whenever there are two Armies of Enemies
in the field, or two puissant powers of horsemen and footmen, and that the one
army or power of them upon any advantage or conueniencie of ground espied,
shall resolve to give battle or fight, that the contrary power or army shall
not be able to refuse the battle, unless they will turn their backs and
betake themselves to their heels; and that by reason that armies when they are
in march, cannot assure themselves always to find grounds of such advantage
and strength, whereupon the enemies resolution to fight they may suddenly
entrench, or incampe and fortify themselves. Besides al which, it is to be
noted as Vigetius and diverse other ancient, The Romans observing their
ancient orders and discipline military prevailed: but neglecting the same,
came to utter ruin and destruction.
and more modern notable historiographers do write, that so long as the
Romans did observe their ancient orders and discipline military, they did
prevail against all other Nations; but that as soon as they began through
effeminacie to neglect the same, and to leave the covering and guarding of
diverse parts of their bodies with armor in respect of the poise and heueth
thereof, and other such important matters, that presently their Empire began to
decline: The neglecting of the well arming of themselves with the contempt of
archerie were the utter ruin of the two notable Christian Empires of
constantinople and Tr^pisonda.
in such sort as ye Goths, Vandals, Hunnes, and other septrional Nations, as
also of later years the Arabians, and the Sarasins did chiefly with weapons of
volee, overthrow them in many, and many battles, whereof and of the contempt of
their archery insued the loss of a great part of the Romain Empire, and
finally upon ye neglecting and forgetting of the like discipline did likewise
ensue ye utter ruin of ye two notable christian Empires of Constantinople and
Trepisonda with diverse other christian Kingdoms. And thus far concerning the
apparelling, arming and weaponing of halbarders, or battleaxes: So as I have
now finished the apparelling arming, and weaponing of all sorts of footmen by
our Nation in these days used, and therefore I will God willing proceed to the
apparelling, arming, weaponing, and horsing of all such different sorts of
horsemen, as we now a days do use, with some other such sorts of horsemen
also, as I would wish should be in use and exercise for the defense of the
Crown and Realm, as also for any foreign invasion.

And therefore to begin with light horsemen, such as in diverse shires of england
we do now use, How light horsemen should be apparelled, armed, horsed and
weaponed.
armed with red or pied cappes and steel sculles within them, and with Iackes
and spears by some called Gads; in stead of this rude kind of arming as I
account it, `I would wish that they should be armed with burgonets, or else
with upright morrions after the Spanish manner, with collers, cuirasses, and
backs, and short tasses, and with sleeves of maile and gauntlets, or else
gloves of maile in stead of gauntlets; And to the intent they should be the
more easily and fitly armed, I would wish that they should be apparelled I mean
in doublets and Greigescoes, in the very same sort as is before for armed men
declared; And as for their spears I would wish them to be of 18. foot long,
and those I would wish to be so long, because they might not only use them to
charge upon their thighs, but also that they might by taking and houlding them
in the midst, use them in stead of punching staves: And as for their geldings,
I would have them to be of good life and size, and swift of ca^rire, and that
they should ride them with light short cheeked bittes, according to their
horses mouths, and that their sadles should not be so little and ill
fashioned, as those which we commonly call scottish sadles, but rather that
they should be of that fashion, which we call now a days Morocco sadles,
with pommells of such convenient height as one single pistol in a case might
be buckled and set fast to the same, as also that the same should be made fast
and buckled athwarte the lower end upon a little boulster to make it to sit the
more firm, and fitly upon all occasions to be used according to the manner of
the Reistres: Also I would that no saddle should be without 3. girthes, and
there withal should have Patrells, and croupers with the raines and headstalles
light and of very good fashion. Besides all this, I would have those kind of
light horsemen to be very well practiced in the well riding and using of their
horses, and handling of their weapons in every kind and sort. And thus far
concerning that kind of light horsemen. And now to the apparelling, arming, and
weaponing of stradiots by me mentioned in my former instructions, and
discourses.

Stradiots are a kind of light horsemen that have been used by many Nations,
Concerning the appareling, arming, horsing and weaponing of stradiots.
as well Pagans, as Christians, and have been armed and weaponed in diverse
different sorts according to the liking of such different Nations: Howbe it
according to my opinion and best liking, I would wish those kind of soldiers
to be very well elected and chosen of such men as have dispositions of bodies
and minds to learn very well to ride, as also to diet, use, and keep their
horses, and therwithall to learn to handle al their weapons with great
dexterity: And as for their apparel, I mean their arming doublets and hosen,
I would have them to be after the very same sort as I have appointed unto
other armed men. And I would wish them all to be armed with good burgonets and
buffes, with Collers, with Cuirasses, with backs, and with long Cuisses, from
under the lowest lam, or skirt of their Cuiras^es to under the knee, and in
stead of pouldrons and vambrases, ^leeues of maile complete, with gloves of
maile also, or gauntlets, with all the upper parts of their thums and
forefingers of their right handed gaunt^ets covered with maile, thereby the
better to use their pistols and other weapons; with such good swords, daggers,
and girdles, as I have before appointed to other armed men, and in stead of
Lances or spears, I would wish them to have Lances commonly called
Laun^ezagayas of good, tite, and stiff ash, colored black, with double heads
of good and hard temper according to the use of the Moors, of 18. or 20.
footlong; to the intent that taking them in the midst, they may strike both
forward and backewarde, I mean as well their enemies that they have in frunt or
in flanks, as also their enemies and their horses that may upon any retrait
pursue them: I would wish them also to have horses or geldings, strong, of
good size and Carrire, with saddles of the fashion of the Reistres of Saxony,
with Croupers, pat^els, good headstalles and raines with small chains, to the
intent that if their raines should happen to be cut, they should not be
straight at the mercy of their horses, or of their enemies. And I would wish
them to have at their saddle po^mels very good single pistolles, in good cases
well and firmly set at their saddles as I have before mentioned, with touch
boxes full of fine powder in some convenient places about them carried, and with
a Cartage box of Iron of 7. or 8. cartages fast set upon every pistol case,
and the Cannons of the pistolles ranforced backward, and of small bullet; and
of the length of 12. inches, with good firelocks and no snaphaunces, because in
true understanding for diverse causes that I could allege, firelocks are a
great deal more certain and of less failing then snaphaunces are. Also I
would that they should have at their saddle pommels of the contrary side to
the pistolles, men at arms axes; which besides that they are good to fight
withal, are very commodious for horsemen to use for many requisite purposes,
and uses, which because they are things so well known to all men of War of
experience, I omit. And these kind of light horsemen Stradiots thus horsed,
armed, and weaponed, are meet for all sorts of skirmishes and incountries, and
also are of great execution against harquebuziers and mosquetiers, and to be
brief against al sorts of horsemen and footmen.

But because their so many weapons, as are before mentioned for one horseman to
use may seem strange to such of this time as do not love to trouble themselves
but with very few weapons, I say it is no strange matter, considering that such
as do mean to fight well, do like to have store of weapons, that incase one or
two should fail, they may presently betake themselves to the choice and use
of others, according to the time and occasion: But such as would think those
weapons by me before mentioned to be too many for one man to use, would think
it a great deal more strange, to see a Turkey horsman that traveling by the
way does besides his Cemeterie, and his crooked dagger, voluntarily carry his
Lance, his harquebuze, and his Turkey bow, with his sheafe of arrows, with
another weapon which now I have forgot, and all those weapons they do wear
and carry so conveniently, and aptly, as they may use every one of them in
his most convenient time and place. And thus far concerning Stradiots. And now
concerning dimilaunces.

Dimilaunces are horsemen next in degree and account unto men at arms, as well
in greatness, Concerning the apparelling arming, ho^sing and weaponing of
dimilaunces
and puissance of horses, as in strong and sure arming; and they ought to be
apparelled, as I have in diverse parts before mentioned. They ought to be armed
also, with their helmettes, with their beauers, with their sights not too high
nor too low, with collers, cuirasses, with rests very conveniently set not
too high nor too low, backs, tasses, and short cuisses too under the knee, or
else with long Cuisses from under the lowest lam of their Cuyrasses to under
the knee, without tasses. Also they ought to have good and well compassed
pouldrons, vambrases, and gauntlets, and gussets of maile well set for the
defense of their armeholes, and their weapons ought to be arming swords, and
daggers, worn in good and strong girdles, long, and strong lances, with a
curtilace of the one side of the saddle pommell, or a steel mace, or a man at
arms axe on the other side as aforsaid. Howbeit I have seen some both men at
arms, and dimilaunces use tocks very conveniently worn after the Hongarian
and Turkey manner under their thighs; which Tocks are long narrow stiff swords
only for the thrust: And others I have seen that in stead of Curtilaces and
tocks have worn single pistols, which pistols because men at arms or
dimilances are to give their charge in squadron with the points of their
Lances and shocke of their horses, they cannot have so much leisure to pull
out, and to pull down^ their cocks, as stradiots and other light horsemen that
do fight loose in skirmish or in other little troops may: Besides that the
gauntlets of men at Arms and dimilaunces are not fitly made to handle pistols
in, as all men may see that list to prove them: and those dimilaunces ought to
be all horsed upon puissant horses for the shocke and not upon geldings
unless they be very puissant; And their furniture for their horses ought to
be steel saddles of good form, and of a convenient bigness, and as light as
they conveniently may be made with good headstalles and raines with chains
as aforesaid; with good patrells and croupers. Also if there were any gentlemen
in those bands of dimilaunces, I would wish them not to be without the
forepart of steel barbes, to the intent that upon any day that were likely
to be of great service against the enemy, they should arm and barbe the
forepart of their horses, because that they being placed in the first rank, or
two ranks, should be the better able to give and receive the charge and
shocke with the less danger to their horses. And thus far for dimilaunces.

Now as for men at Arms because all men that are of any experience and
understanding in matters military, Men at arms out of use in Christendom.
do well know that they must be all armed, cap a pie, and their horses very
puissant, and all barbed as well behind as before, with the number of weapons
that they ought of ordinary to wear and use: And because that in these days
partly in respect of their great pay; but chiefly because the art and science
military has been of late years, and presentl^e is in great declination and
decaie, they are not in use in England, nor in any part of Christendom as they
have been, I ouerpasse them.

But now it is likely enough that some Gentlemen that have been trained up in
these late Civil wars of the Low Countries or France may think that I have
forgotten my self in not making mention in these aforesaid musters, of
Carabins or Argolettiers; unto which kind of horsemen they are greatly
affected: Whereunto I say that for the small effect that by experience I have
seen those Carabins in services work, An objection a^nswered.
through their great and many failings, which I have sufficiently proved in
the latter end of my book of discourses that I did set forth, and cause to be
printed the year 1590. as also in the former discourses of this book, where I
have written of them; I do not any ways hold them worthy to be compared in
their effects neither to archers on horseback, nor Crosbowers on horseback;
and therefore will in this place make but very small mention of them, but do in
stead of them wish that there should be an election and inrollement made of
certain archers and Crosbowers on horseback in every shire who should be armed
weaponed and horsed, and reduced into (...) bands under their Captains and
leaders, as here in this place I will out of my former book set down
again, and that is in this sort following.

All the Crosbowers on horsbacke under sufficient Conductors well skilled in
the weapon, How Crosbowers on horse back should be horsed, armed, and weaponed.
I would they should have Crosbowes of two pound and a half of the best sort,
with crooked gaffles hanging at their strong girdles after the manner of
Germany, that they might on horseback bend their Crosbowes the more easelie
and readily with 24. quarrels in a case, well, fitly, and firmly set at
their saddle pommels, and mounted upon good cold geldings, of mean size,
themselves armed with good morrions of the spanish fashion upon their heads,
Collers, light, and short wasted Cuirasses, and backs, with sleeves of maile,
or their doublet sleeves chained with ma^le, betwixt the lining and outside of
their said sleeves; or with certain narrow stripes of serecloth within their
sleeves, as aforesaid; or else chat they should be armed with morrions, light
and easy brigandines, and sleeves chained with maile, with broad short
swords by their sides of not above a yard in length, and short daggers. The
archers on h^rsebacke under their Captains or conductors skillful in archerie,
I would likewise have mounted upon good quiet geldings of mean size with deep
steel sculles in very narrow brimd hattes, well stuffed for the easines of
their heads: or rather with certain light morrions of some gallant fashion
invented and devised for them; and either Iacks of maile according to the
ancient manner when they were called Loricati Sagittar^, or else light and
easy brigandines, or at least Ilet holed doublets, very easy and well fitted
to their bodies; their sleeves chained within with maile, or else with certain
narrow stripes of serecloth betwixt the lining and outside of their sleeves for
the easines of their arms; with broad short swords and short daggers, their
bows of good yewgh, long, and well nocked and backed, and all their stringes
well whipped, with sheafes of.24. arrows ^ piece in cases, with shooting gloves
and bracers after the manner of our archers in times past. And all these both
archers and crosbowers I would have them to be well practiced, that they might
know how to discharge their arrows and quarrels galloping upon the hand and
in all other motions of their horses, and the Crosbowers to bend again with
great readiness; and diverse bands being thus horsed, armed, Crosbowers and
archers on horse back of greater service then weapons of sire on horseback.
weaponed, and exercised, as also reduced into bands of fifties under
sufficient conductors and other officers skillful in those weapons, should in
mine opinion be able to perform far greater service in ye field either against
horsemen or footmen, then any of the forenamed weapons offire on horseback:
Considering that both archers and Crosbowers may with their arrows and
quarrels very certenlie wound or kill in their points and blanks either
horsemen or footmen, that are in squadron, or troop. 2. or 3. skores of, and
rouing 6. 7. or 8. skores or a great deal further may greatly mischief and
annoie any squadron either of horsemen or footmen: where as the Argolettiers or
Pistolettiers are not to work any effect against squadrons or troops of
horsemen or footmen above 10 or 15. yardes off, at the furdest, and if it be
enemy to enemy single, then they are not to discharge their pieces above 4.
or 5. yardes off; unless they will fail 5. times, before they hit once, so
uncertain are those weapons of fire: The judgment whereof because this mine
opinion may seem strange to such as do not know the imperfections of those
weapons of fire on horseback, I refer unto any Captains or conductors of
those weapons, either Italians, Spaniards, Wallouns, or French, that are
soldiers of experience and judgment.

But now because I have diverse times seen new bands of diverse sorts of
horsemen very slightly mustered, With what cur^ os^tie musters of bands of
horsemen, and footmen ought to be taken.
as well beyond the seas, as also in England, I think it good in this place
briefly to write with what curiosity I would wish musters of bands of
horsemen and footmen for the defense of the Realm to be taken: And therefore I
say, that I would wish that the Mustermaister of horsemen and footmen of every
shire, Of what calling the mustermaister of every shire should be.
should be a knight or an Esquire of greatworship of the same shire, or some
other shire next adjoining, and such a one as had served in some war or
wars in former times, and therefore of some good experience in matters
military, who in respect of his good calling and worship would have special
care to the good and faithful service of the king and Realm, without any
ways abusing the performance of his duty in those services, as most of the
common Mustermaisters of this time do; who being either Captains newly come
up and of small account, or else such as have been soldiers and officers of
bands, and now reteiners and servants to Noblemen, and do procure and sue for
such offices, rather to have ordinary and yearly stipendes at the charge of
the shires, as also by diverse other ways and means to make their unlawful
gains and profits of the subjects (then any ways to perform their duties in
taking right and skilful musters, and reforming of military lackes and
imperfections) do wittinglie and willingly in respect of gain work but very
little good effect in those emploiments.

And because all the bands of horsemen of every shire are composed of knights,
of gentleme^s, and of yeomens servants and that betwixt musters and musters
they do sometimes change by putting out of their service, or otherwise, their
men that are enrolled into the bands of horsemen, whereof it comes to pass
that sometimes a mean man of stature, puts on a tall man's armor, and
sometimes a taller man puts on the armor of a man of smaller stature, in
such sort as many of them are very unfitly and uneasily armed, and as
unskillful in souldiorlie wearing, and using of their weapons, and altogether
ignorant to ride, handle, and use their horses: and that armed men being on
horseback may seem to be conveniently apparelled and armed, when if they
were a foot they would show to be far otherwise; The order that all muster
masters are to use in mustering o^ their bands of horsemen.
I would therefore that every such principal Gentleman Mustermaster should in
calling over of every horsman by name in order as they are in his muster roll
set down, make every one of them in order as they are called one after another
to alight a foot, and to view every horsman well, whether he have an arming
doublet fit for his armor or no, and whether both the armor and doublet be
fit for the man, and ^hether there be any buckles, or leathers broken, or any
piece, or pieces lacking; none of the which particular lackes are sufferable.

Then he is to peruse whether he have all the weapons belonging to horsemen of
his sort, as if he be a dimilaunce with such weapons as I have before
particulerlie named that do belong to a dimilaunce; and if he be a stradiot,
then the Mustermaister is to view him a foot as aforesaid, to see whether his
apparel and armor be fit for his person, and therewithal aptly and
soldiorlie worn, as also whether he have all his weapons belonging unto
horsemen of his sort, and whether they be good, and that he does wear them
aptly and soldiorly, yea he ought to view how he does wear his hosen and
Greigescoes, bootehosen, boots and spurs, and whether he does wear them
aptly and fitly like a horseman or like a Clown: And incase there be any
imperfections or imperfection in any of those particularities, he is presently
to give order upon some convenient penalty according to the desault or
imperfection to be imposed upon the party that does set forth the horse and
horseman, that the same with all speed by a certain prefixed day be supplied or
amended; Then he is to view his horse, and every part of the furniture of his
horse to see whether there be any lack, unfitness, or imperfection in any
part of the same, or whether his horse since the last muster has been
changed, or whether since that time he has by misusage been broken winded or
made lame; and therefore it behooves the Mustermaister to have a skillful
Ferrar with him at his taking of Musters, that can with skill Judge of their
lamenesse or soundness. All which performed, then the Mustermaister must
command the horsman to mount on horseback, Muster masters are to see that the
horsemen can well use their horses and weapons.
and to put his horse orderly into his Carrire, and to charge his staff
presently and soldiorlie from his thigh into his rest if he be a lance, and
not as they do commonly use to carry their staves at the tilt to beautify
their courses, as is before declared, and again at the end of his Carrire to
discharge the same, and to set it again upon his thigh and to stop and turn
his horse both of the right and left hand; and if he be a Stradiot, after that
he is remounted again on horseback he is to command him to gallop the field
as if he were in skirmish, and to use his double headed Launcegaie in striking
both forward and backward, as also on every side, as though he were in action
with his enemy, and suddenly to cast from him his double headed Lance, as if
the same were broken, or by some accident lost, and to draw his pistol, and
pull down the Cock, and discharge the same, and presently again to pull up
the cock, and to thrust it into his case, and to draw his sword, or to handle
some other weapon of his with dexterity; which being soldiorlike performed, he
is to be allowed to pass the muster for a sufficient soldior: but in case his
horse be restie or headstrong, such a horse how sound soever, is not to be
allowed, unless he may in short time be reformed. And so likewise if he be an
archer, or Crosbower on horseback, he must very particulerlie view, and see;
whether his apparel, armor and weapons with all other furniture belonging to
the same, be all in as great, or greater order and perfection then I have
before particularly set down: and so likewise he is very curiously to view
every one of their horses that they be of convenient age, and size, and sound
of wind and lim, as also whether their saddles, bridles, bittes, pattrels, and
croupers, and other furniture be in perfection.

All which being by the mustermaister throughoutlie viewed and found in order
and perfection, then he is to command the archer to mount on horseback, and
to galloppe upon the hand, and passing by some mark set up in the field, to
draw 2. or 3. arrows out of his sheafe one after another, and drawing every
one of them to the head, to discharge them at the same mark, some 3. or 4.
scores off; which being by him souldiorlike performed, he is to allow him for a
sufficient soldior and archer on horsback; and so al other archers that he
shall muster and find to be armed, horsed, weaponed and furnished, and of
sufficiency as aforesaid. And so likewise, having viewed, and perused every
Crosbower on horseback, with all their armor, Weapons and furniture, as also
their horses with all other furniture belonging to them, and finding them all
in perfection, then he is likewise to command the Crosbower to mount on
horsback, and to gallop upon the hand, and in passing by to discharge a
quarrel at some mark set up some 30. paces off, and again presently with his
gaffle to bend his crosbow and to discharge a second quarrel at that or some
other mark; which being by him, and al other crosbowers orderly and
souldiorlike performed; then he is to allow them to pass the muster as
sufficient soldiers, and so likewise he ought to allow the Archers being in
such perfection as aforesaid. The reducing of bands into one or diverse forms
appertains to the Captain and not to the mustermaister.


And in this curious sort a Mustermaister is to take the view and Muster of
every different sort, and kind of horsemen; For as for reducing any number of
them into any form or forms with many other particularities. those things do
apperteine to their Captains, and higher and lower officers; and so likewise
the mustering of them in such curious sort as aforsaid, does appertain also
unto every good and careful Captain, that does desire to have his band in good
order. When mustermaisters are to take their muster.
But because some such gentlemen as are appointed Captains of horsemen and
footmen for the defense of the Realm, are for lack of skill or care, not so
curious in having their bands in order as they ought to be: therefore the
forsaid knight or principal gentleman that is appointed to take musters,
should at certain convenient times in the year, when al sorts of men are at
most leisure from their country affairs and business, muster them in convenient
places, some at one time and some at another, to see y^ they should be always
in order, to be employed for ye defense of their Prince, and country: and
should also in calling them over one after another by his muster roll, be as
curious in viewing not only the sufficiency of the person of every soldior,
whether he be any ways by any accident decayed since his first election and
inrolment: but also should very curiously view ye fitnes of his apparel and
armor, least that since the first election and inrolment, or since the last
musters, the man, his apparel, or armor had been changed. Then he is to view
his weapons, and ye apt and fit wearing of them, and whether both armor and
weapons be clean and neat, Mustermaisters finding any abuses, lackes, or
imperfections, are to give order that the same be remedied, upon some severe
penalty to be imposed upon the part^ unto whom the same does appertain.
and in such perfection as I have before very particularly set down, in the
election, apparelling, arming and weaponing of al sorts of footmen by us in
these days used: and incase that he does find any abuses, lacks, or
imperfections in any of the particularities aforsaid, or any other, he is
presently to give order for the reforming of the same by a prefixed day upon
some severe penalty to be imposed either upon the parish that has set forth
that souldior, or upon the private rich man that does find and set forth the
same souldior, or upon the Souldior himself, incase he be of that wealth that
he is at his own arming, and furnishing.

Also whereas such soldiors either horsemen or footmen as are enrolled in such
bands as aforesaid, The order that is to be used for the suppliyng of soldiors
maimed, or mischieued, or other wise decayed.
do sometimes become so maimed or mischieued by some accidental chau^ces that
they shall never be after able effectually to use such weapons as they were
enrolled unto, or that by long sickness they are so decayed as they are not
likely in a long time or never to recover their forces thereby soldiorlike to
wear their armors, and use their weapons; Upon those and other like causes and
accidents I would wish that the parish that does find such soldiors, or else
the private rich men, incase they be set forth and found by them, should
presently notefie the same unto ye captain under whom and in whose band the
said soldior or soldiors do serve, and that they should with in a certain and a
prefixed day after, present unto him three other allowable, and able men,
already from their youth exercised, in case they be archers, or apt and
willing to learn to be soldiors, incase they be of other weapons, to the
intent that the captain should to his best liking, make choice of one of them
to be enrolled and supply the place of the soldior maimed or by long sickness
decayed.

Also incase that the soldior, or soldiors of any band or bands of horsemen or
footmen should happen to die, The order that is to be used for the supplying of
any soldiors deceased; or departing from their habitation into some other town
or hundred, or out of their masters ser^ice.
or upon occasion of new habitation, should remove out of the parish or
hundred, whereas he at his first inrolment did inhabit, or that any servant, or
seruingman enrolled to any weapon to serve on horseback, should depart out of
his miasters service; that in those and other like cases, the parishes upon the
death of any such soldior or soldiors, should presently notify the same unto
his or their captain or captains, and should within a certain prefixed day
after, present unto him 3. other able and sufficient men to make his choice of
one of them, to serve with the armor and weapons of the party, or parties
deceased. But incase that such a soldior or soldiors either horsman or footman
should upon the accasion of inhabiting else where, depart out of the Towns
where they before had inhabited, or been resident, or that such soldiers had
departed out of their masters services to serve elsewhere, as aforesaid: then
I would in those or any the like cases, that either the parish where such
soldiers did dwell, or the masters of such servants should signify their
intention of removing and departure of such soldiers, unto their Captains, a
full month before their departure, and that they should either 15. or 10.
days before their departure at the least, present unto him 2. or 3. very able
men, of the which he may make choice of one to be enrolled and to serve and
supply in the place of such a souldior remoouing.

And whereas all the armors and weapons of the soldiers footmen are at this
time placed diversely in all the shires of England, The di^ersitie of the placing
of the soldiors armors and weapons, in all the shiers of England.
in such parts whereas there are inrolmentes of horsemen and footmen, as in
some places that they are placed in the chief Town or Towns of the shire,
and in other places in the Captains, or other gentlemen's houses, and in other
parts that all the Corporals have the custody of all the armor and weapons
that do belong to the corporolates or societies that are under their charge;
and all this under pretense for the more safe, and clean, and neat keeping of
them, as also to take away the opportunities of the peoples sudden arming of
themselves incase they should take arms, Not the placing of armors nor weapons
here, nor there that can keep a people disposed to rebel from rebellion.
the same being already in their houses, with intention to revolt, and
rebel. Thereunto I say, that it is not the keeping or placing of the armor
and weapons of a shire or diverse shires, here or there out of the soldiers
hands as aforesaid, that can keep them, or a people disposed to rebel, from
rebelling, if the soldiers oaths of fidelity at their first election and
inrolments will not restrain and contain them; by reason that rebellions do
begin so diversely, and upon so many prepensed or accidental opportunities, as
they cannot be any ways prevented by such poor devises. Rebellions begin
sometimes upon the ambition or discontentacion of some nobleman, or (...) ^en.


For as rebellions in diverse Empires, kingdoms and Common wealths have begun
upon the ambition or discontentation of some Noble man, or Noblemen for
wrongs and iniustices at their princes hands received, that do confederate
together, or otherwise resolve to take Arms against the Prince: Upon such
conspiracies, or resolutions I say, it is not the placing of armor or weapons,
here or there in shires, that can ^eepe the same out of the hands of them,
Armors placed in great tounes are more ready to arm an vntuly multitude, then
if they were dispersed in the soldiors houses.
and the people that follow them, the reuoult and rebllion being once begun,
but the armor being placed in great Towns vnfortefied, as all our Towns of
England are, those armors and weapons being in such Towns vnfortefied kept,
are a great deal the more ready to arm and weapon a great multitude revolted
all at one time, then if they were dispearsed in the soldiors custodies and
houses to whom they belong, to serve withal, throughout such a whole Shire or
diverse Shires. So sometimes also rebellions do happen through the
discontentation of the Ignobile vulgus, or common people, and those most
commonly do begin in great Towns upon the assembly of many people; as of
faires, markets, and other such assemblies of people, Rebellions do often
happen upon the discontentation of the ignobile vulgus
so as great quantity of armor, and weapons being kept in such great Towns,
they are the more ready for the people reuolting to possess themselves of
them. And so likewise, armors and weapons, being placed either in the Captains
or Corporalls houses, they are a great deal more ready upon a rebellion by
the common people begone, to be by them taken to arm themselves withal, then if
they were dispersed into all the soldiors houses unto whom they belong to serve
withal for defense of the Realm, according to their oaths, throughout a
whole shire. But incase that the rebellion be universal througout one, or
diverse whole shires, then it cannot be avoided but that wheresoever the armor
and weapons of such shires are placed, they will presently possess themselves
of them.

And incase that all the armor and weapons not only of a few shires, but of all
the kingdom, were taken out of all the shires throughout, and were placed in
some place, or places well fortified, and under great garrison to be the more
safely and surely kept: I say that the same out of the hands of the people
without other prevention, can no ways hinder nor keep a common people from
rebellion that are disposed to rebel, considering that according to Virgill.
Furor arma ministrat; as it may be apparent, by the Bellum servile, Bellum
servile that happened t^ the romans when they flou rished most, begone and
maintained by Spartacus and other fencers.
that happened against the Romans in all their greatness, which consisted most
of slaves, and bondmen, having one Spartacus a Fenser, and other Fensers for
their Chief^aines, who at ye beginning of their reuoult had but very few or no
armors and weapons of war, but such as their rage and fury taught them to
invent, take, and use, and so likewise the common people of the kingdom of
Hongarie, The dangerous rebellion of the peasants of hongary and ^raunce, who
at the first had little or no armors.
and the peasants termed in the French Cronicles, the Iaccarie of France when
they first revolted and ^ooke Arms against the Nobilite of those kingdoms were
utterly disarmed, and all the Nobility of those Kingdoms very notably
armed, both for on horsbacke and on foot; and yet after the rebellion was once
begun, those common people presently invented and forged both armor and
weapons of war in great numbers both offensive and defensive, and in short
time reduced themselves into so great strength, as before that they could be
utterly suppressed, it cost the lives of a great part of the Nobiltie and
gentlemen of those kingdoms: Notwithstanding that both those kingdoms, I
mean France and Hongarie had many Cities, and Towns so well fortified for
the Kings and Nobility to make their retraites into, as the pesantes had
never the skill nor power to possess themselves of, which the Realm of
England has not.

And so likewise if we list to look upon the Rebellions The rebellions of the
common people of England and specially the rebellion under Ke^ in Norffolk^
that had at the first little or no armor.
of the common people that happened in diverse parts of England in one s^mer in
king Edward the sixthes time, and chiefelie the Rebellion under Kette in
Norffolke it is most apparent, that at the first beginning of the Rebellion they
had very little, or no armor, and very few weapons of war, but that in a
very short time after that they had begun their rebellion, they did invent,
forge, and make many weapons of war, in the which for a time until they were
suppressed, they behaved themselves in terrible sort; And of later time within
these 24. or 25. years, the Moors of the kingdom of Granada in Spain that
was a people utterly disarmed and without weapons and exercises of war, The
revolt of the disarmed mores of granada against king Philip of spain in all his
greatness which was in the year 1568.
did in all the greatness of king Philip of Spain that now is, revolt; and
ma^ing of necessity virtue, did first betake themselves to fight with stones,
and a few weapons that they had long before got by stealth and hid in their
houses: But after that their rebellion was begun, they in a very short time,
did invent, and forge, and win by force of the Spaniards Christians great
numbers of armors and weapons both offensive and defensive, and did so resist,
prevail, and defend themselves against the king of Spains powers sent against
them, that it was more then two years after the first beginning of the
Rebellion, ere it could be suppressed; in which space, it cost ye lives of
above 50000. Spaniardes: Amongst which number, there were many principal
Gentlemen, and Captains of good account slain.

By all which examples before rehearsed with many others, as all men that have
read and observed many histories do well know, it is most apparent, that it
is not the placing of the armor and weapons, here or there, or the disarming of
the common people, as the peasants in France, and Hongarie, and the Moors in
Spain were disarmed, that can prevent Rebellions that do happen and are begun
upon diverse occasions, Justice duly and equally ministered does take ^way al
occasio^^ and intentions of rebellion.
and chiefly for lack of justice duly and equally ministered: Howbeit Justice
duly and with great equality and order ministered throughout a whole Empire,
kingdom, or common wealth, with great care had to protect, preserve,
maintain, increase and continue the Common wealth of the subjects in all
prosperity, and by advancing and favoring the good, and by reproching and
punishing the bad: the same I say, how well armed soever the subjects and people
are, does take away all occasions and intentions of rebellion, as it is most
apparent by the notable City, and state of Venice, and their dominions in the
continent and Islands that do belong to that seniorie; The quiet and happy
state of the Venetians these many hundred years, caused by Justice.
which have been ever in many ages so well armed, as in Venice itself, the
common multitude of the Citizens and people, who never bear any office in the
common wealth, but certain base offices, do so well content themselves with the
government, and great and equal justice of the Magistrates and their superiors;
that although they have all sorts of armors, and weapons of war for footmen
in all their houses; yet it is not to be found in any Chronicles or histories
of Venice, that ever they did take arms or revolt against their Duke, Senate,
nor Nobility: And that in like sort, all the dominions that do belong unto
Venice, that are in the continent of Italy and elsewhere, although all the
common people of those dominions, be armed and weaponed; yet through the great
care had by the state of Venice of their prosperity, with equal and great
justice ministered even to the very least of them; they find themselves so well
contented to live under the quiet and happy government of the Venetians, that
they have not in many and many years, once offered any kind of revolt against
them; but have rather at such times as some parts of those dominions have been
by force won and possessed, sometimes by the Imperial, and sometimes by the
French and other Princes, at one time or other revolted from the government of
such strangers, and returned again to the obedience of the Venetians.

Besides which, it is to be noted, that the Cantonnes and confederate people of
Suitzerland, The force of Justice duly and equally ministered amongst the
Suissers and diverse other principalities of Germani^.
since they through the great extortions and iniustices of the Dukes of
Austridge and their officers and substitutes, did take arms, and by battle and
victory (with the death of the Duke Lupold, and slaughter of a great part of
his Nobility) redeem and reduce themselves into a civil and popular State,
have never revolted; nor that the people of certain principalities of Germany
through the great justice by their princes and Magistrates equally ministered,
and the well ordering and using of the people, have at any time rebelled: I
mean the Suissers against their Magistrates, nor those Almaines against their
princes. By which examples with many others, which for breuities sake I omit;
this old proverb is verefied, Princes that do duly and equaly minister
Justice need not to doubt any rebellion.
Opus Iustitiae pax; which may be interpreted, that the effect of justice is
peace.

From all which I come to conclude, that no Emperor, King, nor Common wealth
that do govern their Subjects with great and equal justice, and
therewithal do effectually show to have great care of their increase,
prosperity and happiness, need any ways to doubt any reuol^ or Rebellion
against them, A thing most requisite for all Emperors kings and common wealths
to well arm, weapon and exercise their subjects.
by their subjects and people, although they have al sorts of armors and
weapons of war in their houses; but that it is rather very requisite and
needful for all great Princes and Common Wealths, that will maintain and
defend themselves and their dominions against foreign Nations, to well arm,
weapon, and exercise their people in matters military; and that they do
establish good Laws for the good and orderly perfourmance of the same. Where
all the armors and weapons of all shires should be kept.
All which before considered, mine opinion clearelie is, that of all other
places it is most convenient, that the armours and Weapons of all Shieres
should be kept by such rich men as do find those armors and weapons, in their
own houses; and such as are found by the common purse of parishes, that they
should be kept in the chief men's houses of those parishes where the soldiors
dwell; that upon occasion of those services should wear and use them, as well
in respect that all men by all reason will be more careful to keep and
maintain in good order such apparel, armor and weapons as were bought at their
own charges, then great Towns, or Gentlemen, or Corporalles, that never
bought the same: Besides that upon any sudden alarm, or giving of fire to the
beacons upon the enemies coming to invade, or other occasion of service, when
the soldiers of the whole shire, should with all celeritie arm themselves and
march to the place of assembly general, there to reduce themselves under their
Ensigns and Captains, and under their higher and lower officers; I say that
all sorts of soldiers may presently, and with a great deal more celeritie,
apparel, arm and weapon themselves in warrelike manner, the same being in
their own houses, if they be owners of the same, or otherwise presently to
apparel arm and weapon themselves in such houses of the same Town whereas
the furniture is kept, and themselves do dwell, then to run to Gentlemen's or
Corporalles houses, or to great towns 3. or 4. miles off; where their armors
and furniture are kept, and there in hubbledeshuffe disorderly to arm
themselves; whereof, besides diverse other disorders that do ensue often times
upon such sudden Alarmes, and armings, little men do put on great or tall men's
armors, and leave little armors unfit for great men to put on; according to the
old saying, first come first served; And so likewise they do mistake the right
choosing of their apparel and Weapons; whereof inseweth great disorder and
confusion. And these sudden disorders with others that I omit, cannot upon such
sudden alarmes be possibly prevented, the armors and weapon^ being so placed,
although all the particular names of the soldiors, were written upon the
apparel, armor and weapons. And now as I have set down mine opinion concerning
ye election and enrolling as well of diverse sorts of horsemen as of footmen, to
diverse different sorts of armors and weapons with many other particularities:
So would I now wish (al matters military being brought into the perfection
aforsaid) that all the soldiers as well horsemen as footmen, should in some
convenient place appointed for ye purpose, When and ho^ soldiors that are
enrolled to any kind of w^apon ought to exercise themselves.
upon the holidaies, during certain months in ye summer, in the afternoon
after they come from church, exercise themselves with such weapons as they are
enrolled unto, as archers to shooting game at Rouers, and long buts, with their
long bows, according to the ancient use of England, and that the harquebuziers
in the presence of the chief men or officers of y^ parish in trauessing their
grounds as if they were in skirmish, should with their pieces well, and orderly
charged (as I have in my instructions and discourses before particularly
declared) at a great But discharge 4. shot; and so likewise that the
mosquetiers should with their mosquets well charged with full bullets from
their restes, discharge 3. or 4. other shot: And this at the charge either of
the parishes, or of such rich men as do find such soldiers, or otherwise as
it may be better considered of, and devised. Also I would that such soldiors as
are piquers being disarmed should with blunt piques, learn to march soldiorly,
as also with dexeritie to handle and manage them, thereby the better to know
how in service to handle their sharp piques; as also the halbarders with blunt
halbardes made for the purpose, should learn to give both blow and thrusts at
their enemies with their greatest advantage: Howbeit as for halbarders and
piquers there is no need that they should be so often exercised to the use of
their weapons as the soldiors with weapons of volee; because that soldiors with
weapons of volee, be they horsemen or footmen shall never be able effectually to
perform the use and effects of their weapons in services of the field in
earnest, if they be not often and long before exercised in sport with
dexterity to manage and use those weapons. And so likewise upon such
aforesaid holydaies, I would wish that all sorts of horsemen of what weapon
soever, should either before their masters or some other principal men where
they dwell, appointed for that purpose, ride their horses, and exercise
themselves on horbacke, with such weapons as they are enrolled unto. And all
these aforesaid private exercises upon holidaies I would wish to be performed
to the intent to make all the soldiors of all sorts of armors and weapons as
well on horsback as on foot to be the more apt, and ready to perform the
effects of soldiors upon all important emploiments and services Military, as
also at such general musters, and trainings as should be appointed, and
thought requisite upon some two special times in the summer, when the people
might have best leisure to be absent from their mo^ needful and necessary
Country affairs.

Also I would that no horsemen, No foot alter their (...) upon (...).
nor footmen to what armor and weapon soever they be enrolled, should alter or
change themselves from the same kind of armors and weapons that he or they
are enrolled unto upon very severe punishment, without the special appointment
of their Captain, or Captains; and therefore it is very convenient that al
Captains as well of horsemen as footmen should ever have all their officers of
their bands always ready and well known to their whole bands, The office al
bands (...) to be well known to soldiors of (...) bands and the^ bands to the
as also the whole ba^ds unto them: as their Lieutenantes, their
Ensignebearers, their Sergeants: And that all those officers should be men of
credit and account, and inhabiters in the same shires, and that al those
officers should have the muster Rolls of the names of all the soldiers with
their different wepons that they are enrolled unto, in as great perfections as
the Captains: that thereby, as also for diverse other causes they should have a
continual eye that the soldiers of their bands should not through any kind of
negligence grow into any imperfections, or disorders; And therewithal that the
Corporals of the footmen, who should have 50. soldiers under their several
charges, (their own persons in that number contained) should never be without a
perfect Roll of the particular names of the soldiers of their Corporalates,
and to what armor and weapons every soldior is enrolled, and where they dwell:
And therewithal that they should have special care, to see and diligently to
inquire, whether the soldiers of their charge and Corporalates do upon such
holidaies as aforesaid, exercise themselves with their weapons, in the Towns,
parishes, hamlets, or pla^es where they are ordinarily resident as also that
at convenient times they should see whether their arming ap^arell, armors and
weapons be well and orderly kept without any thing lacking: And for the
orderly observation and performance of all the most requisite matters by me
before set down, as also others that have no^ (...) present fallen into my
remembrance, or that may (...) better considered of and devised by others of
greater memory and consideration then I am of, I would wish they should be
with great consideration and advise of counsel propounded, (...)
considered of, and established by Act of Parliament with certain different
penalties for the refourming of the neglecters of such requisite matters
military, as also certain privileges, preheminences, or other aduancements, a^
rewards for virtue, to be bestowed upon such as do best or very well behave
themselves in their vocations, and ^egrees military.

And thus having for the great love that I bear to the continual safety and
prosperity of the Crown and Realm of England, (...)
and English Nation, performed and finished my intended propositions and
proiects military, I cease, (...)
attributing all such matters as I have rightly fallen into the reckoning of,
to the most high praise, honor and glory, of Almighty God, (as the only giver
of all right understanding, wisdom and science) and all my failinges and
errors unto mine own great lack and fault, in that I have not given and
yeelde^ my self as I ought to have done, to his divine grace, and direction;
thereby to have considered, learned, and observed more of the Art, and scien^e
Military, and of all other good things; then my simple capacity and power,
by seeing, reading, and hearing has been any ways able to attain unto.

Honor et gloria in excelsis Deo omnipotenti, sempiterno, et incomprehensibili
Amen.

