THE ETHIOPIAN EVNVCHS CONVERSION.

OR, The sum of thirty Sermons upon part of the eight Chapter of the Acts.

By SAMVEL SMITH, Minister of the Word.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Thomas Alchorne, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Green Dragon. 1632.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Sir RICHARD NEWPORT, Knight, one of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, for the County of Salop, Grace, mercy and peace be
multiplied.
Right worshipful,
THe whole body of Theology, may well be rendered into these two heads, The
knowledge of God, and of our selves; the latter consists principally in the
knowledge, first of a man's natural misery: secondly, of his
selfe-insufficiencie to come out thereof: And thirdly, the All-sufficiencie
that is in Christ. And all sound preaching, that aims at the conversion of
hearers, must aim at these things as most necessarily to be known, to life
and salvation. The Subject matter of the ensuing History of the Eunuchs
Conversion, is excellent to this purpose, if the workmanship were suitable. But
herein have I applied my self to my country hearers, ever endeavoring that
they of the lowest form might learn something. But now as my defects in
handling the History have need to be covered and graced by the countenance of
some, who is of note and respect in Gods Church: So why should I doubt of this
favor from you (Sir) having so constantly heard of your most religious respect
unto our Tribe, and love to the truth. Blessed be his Name that has so
engraven this part of his image upon you, whereby a good evidence is ministered
unto your own heart, that you are translated from death to life: It is the
portion but of a few, and therefore you are to esteem it your greatest honor,
and your vnperishing riches; whereas all earthly greatness abstracted from
this, cannot make you truly happy. Theodosius, that Noble Emperor was wont to
say, Magis se gaudere quod Membrum Ecclesiae Dei esset, quam Caput Jmperij: He
accounted it more honor that he was a member of the Church, then Head of the
Empire. Hoc est enim omnis homo, Eccl. 12.13. To fear God, and keep his
Commandments. Continue herein, and let your works be more at last then at
first; I dare promise your conscience more true tranquillity herein, and your
person more honor, then the whole world besides can afford you. And thus
humbly craving pardon for my boldness, I commend this work to your reading;
The Noble Ethiopian to your imitation, and your body and soul, with all yours,
to the protection of the Almighty. My self remaining,

At your worships service: SAMVEL SMITH.

A Short view of such Doctrines as are enlarged, with their Reasons and uses in
this Book.
Doctrines,
MInisters must discharge their duties, notwithstanding all appearance of
danger. Page, 9 Faithful Ministers most subject to persecutions. Page, 13 Good
Angels serve for the good of Gods people. Page, 20 God will teach men by men.
Page, 26 Good Ministers sometimes discouraged when they see not the fruit of
their Ministry. Page, 37 Ministers must be called before they preach. Page,
42 We must yield obedience to Gods Commandment, though we see no reason. Page
48 We are to take special notice of the obedience of Gods servants. Page 54 It
is a rare thing for great men to be good men. Page 60 Of all sorts of men God
has some that belong to his kingdom. Page 70 The Gentiles to be called. Page
75 The greatness of none may exempt them from the performance of holy duties.
Page 77 The public assemblies of Gods people ought highly to be esteemed, and
diligently frequented. Page 87 Catechizing a necessary duty. Page 104 Religious
duties ought earnestly to be pursued: Page 109 A true Christian must be the
same in private, he is in public. Page 121 In Gods worship we must setch our
direction from Gods word. Page 125 Godly must be conversant in the Scripture:
Page 133 Men must diligently read the Scripture, though many things be
therein obscure. Page 141 God will be found in the use of the means that he
himself has appointed. Page 149 Ministers must still have a calling for that
they do. Page 154 God has a seasonable time to speak to his people, Page 163
A great mercy of God to send a faithful Minister unto a people: Page 168 God
gives things not only for necessity, but for ornament and delight. Page 176
God loves cheerfulness in his service. Page 185 Truth of Gods word not to be
measured by outward appeara^ce. Page 193 Ministers to instruct in private, as
preach in public. Page 198 Holy duties must be performed with understanding.
Page 205 Sign of a gracious heart to confess ones ignorance. Page 211
Humility an excellent ornament in a Christian. Page 217 Men by nature
understand nothing in the S^^^ptures. Page 224 Without preaching of the word,
impossible truly to know Christ. Page 233 We must not only see our ignorance,
but labor to come out of it. Page 242 Great men must be great Professors. Page
253 Christians ought to be daily conversant in the Scriptures: Page 254 Christ
the true sacrifice for sin. Page 262 A dangerous sin for man to be Instrument
of his own death. Page 278 Christ went willingly to death. Page 289 No other
way to purchase life to the Church, but through Christ's death. Page 301 As
Christ's death is cause of mourning, his resurrection is cause of rejoicing.
Page 334 Godly must through afflictions enter into glory. Page 337 Christ's
death momentany, but his life perpetual. Page 361 Heavenly truths are hardly
believed and applied by us. Page 366 In all straights go to Gods Ministers for
direction. Page 378 True knowledge of God comes not by nature. Page 378 Gods
word must be handled with all reverence. Page 384 Ministers must choose
special texts on special occasions. Page 393 Christ the subject matter of true
preaching. Page 397 End of the preaching is to bring m^^^^ Christ. Page 405
Time (...) to be well spent. Page 411 God never wants means for the good of
his servants. Page 414 Gods will once known, must be obeyed. Page 419 Hearty
Christians must be hearty in their profession. Page 421 Ministers must first
instruct their people, before they administer the Sacrament unto them. Page 433
Faith necessary to the due participation of the Sacraments of the Church. Page
438 No perfection of Faith here. Page 451 A believing heart is a sincere heart.
Page 457 A particular Faith necessary to salvation. Page 469 True Faith, has
ever Christ for the object of it, Page 481 All must stoop to Gods ordinance.
Page 490 No place since the death of Christ more holy then another. Page 495
The Lord would have his servants settled and grounded in the truth. Page 509
Sound Conversion, breeds sound joy. Page 514 The calling of a Minister a
laborious calling: Page 537
The Ethiopian EVNVCHS Conversion.
ACTS 8.26, 27, etc. AND the Angel of the Lord spoke unto Philip, saying,
arise and go toward the South, unto the way that goes down from Jerusalem to
Gaza, which is desert.

27 And he arose and went, and behold a man of Ethiopia, an Eunuch of great
authority, under Candace, Queen of the Ethiopians, who had charge of all her
treasure, came to Jerusalem to worship.

28 And sitting in his Chariot, he read Esayas the Prophet.

29 Then the Spirit said to Philip, go near and join thy self to this
Chariot.

30 And Philip ran thither to him, and heard him read Esayas the Prophet, and
said, understand thou what thou read?

31 And he said, how can I without a guide? and he desired Philip that be
would come up and sit with him.

32 The place of Scripture that he read, was this: He was led as a Sheep to
the slaughter, and like a Lamb dumb before the Shearer, so opened he not his
mouth.

33 In his humiliation, his judgment was taken away, and who shall declare his
generation? for his life is taken from the earth.

34 And the Eunuch answered Philip, and said, I pray thee, of whom speaks the
Prophet this? of himself, or of some other man?

35 And Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same Scripture, and preached
unto him Jesus.

36 And as they went on their way, they came unto a certain water. And the
Eunuch said, see here is water. What does hinder me to be baptized?

37 And Philip said, if thou beleeuest with all thy heart, thou may. And he
answered and said, I believe that Jesus is the Son of God.

38 And he commanded the Chariot to stand still, and they went down into the
water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he Baptized him.

39 And when they were come out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught
away Philip, and the Eunuch saw him no more, and he went on his way rejoicing.


IN these words now read, to the end of this Chapter, is set forth the History
of a certain Ethiopian that came to Jerusalem to worship, and therein how God
in mercy did convey the knowledge of the Gospel, and so of Jesus Christ, unto
the Gentiles, and that by the ministry of Philip.

And the first fruits of the same, is this Eunuch, or great Noble man, being
Lord Treasurer to the great Queen Candace, Queen of the Ethiopians.

The History has in it

1 The Preface or Introduction into the History. 2 The History it self.
The Preface has in it

1 The Angels message or command unto Philip, v. 26. 2 Philips obedience, v.
27.
The History it self describes unto us,

1 The Ethiopian with his adjuncts: 2. Philip with his Ministry, and the
effects thereof.
The Ethiopian described.

1 By his person, (Eunuch.) 2 Country, (Ethiopian.) 3 Office, (Lord Treasurer.)
4 Religion, (came to Jerusalem to worship.)
Whose religion, or religious disposition is further commended,

1 By his diligence in reading the Scriptures, losing no time, therein, but
even in his Chariot, he read the same, v. 28. 2 By desiring Philip further to
instruct him in the knowledge of Christ, v. 31.
Philip his Ministry described.

1 By asking him a question, and Catechizing him, v. 30. 2 By preaching and
expounding the same Scripture, v. 35. 3 By Baptizing him, v. 38. 4 By the
effects of his Ministry, Conversion and joy, v. 39.
VERSE 26. And the Angel of the Lord spoke unto Philip, saying, Arise, and go
toward the South, etc,
THe circumstance of time is first to be considered, when the Angel gives this
charge to Philip.

It was in the time of the Churches great persecution and trouble, as it
appears in the first verse of this Chapter. Verse 1.
And at that time there was great persecution against the Church which was at
Jerusalem, etc.

And verse the third, Saul made havoc of the Church. Verse 3.


Caiphas the high Priest, and the Pharisees, bending all their power to
suppress the truth, who at this time stoned Stephen, when they could not
resist the Spirit by the which he spoke.

So as now Philip might be in great danger and hazard to preach the Gospel;
he saw before his eyes, Stephen stoned, and Saul's rage great against the
truth: yet now will the Angel of the Lord have Philip to go and preach the
word to this man.

And thus in all ages, and from time to time, has the Lord employed his
servants in most dangerous times. Ex. 3.9.
Moses must to Pharaoh, Elias to Ahab, and denounce Gods judgment against him,
1 Reg. 18.14.
even at that time when Ahab sought his life. And thus the Lord sent Esaias the
Prophet to the Jews, when their Princes were as the Sodomites for wickedness.
Esaias. 1.10.
And thus is Ezekiel sent unto a stif-necked people: and Amos at that time,
when the people pressed the Lord with their sins, Amos 2.14
as a Cart that is pressed with sheaues.

And thus he sent forth his Disciples, Mat. 10.16
Behold, I send you forth as Lambs amongst Wolves, to be a gazing-stocke to the
world, to Angels and to men, 1 Cor. 4.5^
as it is at this day.

We are taught then, that the Ministers of Christ must discharge their duties,
Ministers must discharge their duty notwi^hstanding all appearance of danger.
notwithstanding all appearance of danger. Though in the conscionable
performance of the same, they are to meet with troubles and dangers, yet they
are carefully to discharge the duties of their sacred calling. Amos does his
duty, though complaint be made to the Prince, Amos 7.10.
that the land is not able to bear his words. Zedechiah strikes Jeremy,
Passur causes him to be put into prison. What of all this? Jeremy must do his
duty, as the Lord had commanded. Fear not their faces, Ier. 1.17.
but speak all that I command thee, lest I destroy thee. So Paul, 1 Cor. 9.16.
necessity is laid upon me, and woe to me if I preach not the Gospel. Again,
when the same Apostle was foretold by Agabus, of the great troubles he should
meet withal at Jerusalem, which when the Church heard of, they besought him
not to go up thither; Behold we his godly resolution. Then Paul answered, Act.
21.13
what mean ye to weep and to break my heart? for I am ready not to be bound
only, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

And there is reason for it. First, Ambassadors of Christ, and therefore must
deliver their message truly and faithfully. Ier. 33.7.
They are the Lords Watchmen, and therefore must acquaint the people with the
danger coming.

Esaias over all his sorrows. Esaias.
My reward is with the Lord, and my recompense with my God.

sit over it, that feed not the flock, it cannot be, but many of the sheep
must perish. When I say to a wicked man, thou shall surely dye, Ezech. 33.8.
if thou do not speak to warn that wicked man, he shall dye in his
iniquity, etc.

Seeing then that the Ministers of GOD must conscionably discharge their
duties,

1 Ignorant Teachers that are not able to acquaint the people with the counsel
of God, such have no calling from God, and were never sent by him; for whom God
sends and imployeth in this honorable service, he furnishes with gifts, in
some measure, for the discharge of the same.

2 False Teachers, and such as by false and erroneous Doctrine, seek to poison
men's souls; and these are no less dangerous, then the former; for whereas the
one destroys men's souls for want of food, the other poisons them with corrupt
food.

3 Idle teachers, which feed of the flock, but feed not the flock: fearful
is the account that such men one day are to give unto God.

4 Flattering Teachers, these are also unfaithful in Gods house; these are
they of whom the Prophet speaks of, that sow cushions under men's elbowes, and
dare not, or will not, with Nathan, say, thou art the man.

faithful in their calling; who, when there is no danger in the way, no
Caiphas to call them to account, nor Saul to trouble or molest, or to make
havoc of the Church, as at this time; Neither their lives sought for, as
Elias was, yet are negligent and sloathfull in feeding the flock of Christ.

Then the A^gell said to Philip.

This being at that time when there was such great persecution at Jerusalem,
when Saul made havoc of the Church, and when Stephen is pu^ to death. We may
further observe,

Faithful Ministers most subject to persecutions.
That it is the lot and portion of Gods Ministers, above all others, to meet
with persecutions. When troubles arise in the Church, they are the first,
ordinarily, that come into danger. This was the condition of the Prophets
themselves, as our Savior testifies unto the Jews, Mat. 23.
Which of the Prophets have not your fathers persecuted?

Moses was often resisted by Iannes and Iambres. 2 Timothy 3.8.


There were seven thousand men in Israel that never bowed their knee to Baal. 1
Reg. 19.10.
But yet the Prophets were slain, and put to the sword. And Elias being left,
his life was sought for above all others. At the time of Christ's passion, there
were many faithful Christians in all places, yet Christ and his Apostles were
the object of the Jews malice, and they were singled out by the Scribes and
Pharisees, as men unworthy to live. So that Gods faithful Ministers may say
with Jeremy, This is my portion, and I will bear it. Ier. 13.
Now the reasons are,

First, I will put enmity, Genesis 3.
etc. This enmity is maintained in the world at this day.

These are the Spirits of devils, that go about in the world, that provoke men
to war against Christ and his Church. Reu 16.14.
And this battle betwixt Michael and his Angel, and the Dragon and his
Angels, shall not cease till time be no more. Reu. 12.


it is applied to a festered conscience.

I will strike the Shepherd, Zach. 13.7.
and the sheep shall be scattered. If the Pastor be good, it is many times the
sins of the people, that he is impeded of his Ministry; if he be evil, they
are his own sins that draw his miseries upon him.



This teaches Gods Ministers to resolve to fight that good fight, and to
suffer affliction, as the good soldiers of Jesus Christ. 2 Timothy 2.4.
They are the Lords Captains, to lead us his people in the face of the enemy.
Their lives must not be dear unto them, so that they may fulfill their
ministry with joy. Acts 21.
Nothing can more beautify the calling of a Minister, then a godly resolution
to suffer for Christ.

Secondly, let neither Minister nor people then think it strange, if this
betide us of the Ministry at this day. If this were the condition of Gods
servants in some one age, and not in another, it were to be wondered at. But
there is no age of the Church, wherein they have not met with persecutions;
yea, the more zealous the doctrine of Gods Ministers is, and the more it
strikes at Satan's kingdom, the more resistance and opposition will it merit
withal from wicked men, and such as are enemies to godliness.



Ministers, they are the Lords Captains, and many times are hard put to, is it
meet then that you stand still, and look on? Every good hearer then must set
to his hand to help his Teacher; I do not mean so much by any outward
strength or power, as by earnest and hearty prayer. So Paul, Brethren pray for
us, 2 These. 3 1.
that the word of the Lord may run and be glorified, and that we may be
delivered from unreasonable and wicked men. Thus did the Church for Peter, Acts
12.5.
and thus ought we to do for all the faithful Ministers of Christ.

And the Angel of the Lord spoke unto Philip.

The word Angel in the Original, signifies a Messenger, or an Ambassador.
And so indeed they are the Lord of Hoasts, according to that, Heb. 1.7.
He makes his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire: and again,
Heb. 1.14.
They are ministering spirits sent forth for the weal of those that be heirs
of salvation.

Whence we are taught, that he good Angels by Gods ordinance, serve for the
good of Gods people.

When Jacob was in fear of his brother Esau, Good Angels serve for the good of
Gods people Genesis 32.5. Genesis 18.3.
the Angel of the Lord met him to comfort him, and to defend him. The Angels
appeared to Abraham, to acquaint him with the destruction of Sodom. And when
destruction was nigh, the Angels came to Lot to fore warn him, Genesis 19.16.
and to hasten him out. When Eliah fled from Iesabell for his life, the An gell
came to him when he was asleep, and said, 1 Reg. 15.5.
arise, and eat, The Angel discomfited the Host of Senacherib that came up
against Israel. The Angel of the Lord kept Daniel from the Lion, Dan. 3.
and those three worthies in the fiery furnace, that they perished not. the
Angel showed Daniel the Dan. 10.
vision, and Philip here, what he was to do. So true is that of the Prophet
David, The Angels of the Lord pitch their tents round about the godly.

And this thing comes to pass in regard of the Lord Jesus Christ our head, to
whom all the Angels are subject, as to their sovereign Lord. It is true, such
is our vildenesse and wretchedness, by reason of sin, that the Angels, those
glorious creatures, are not able to abide our presence; but now, in regard of
our head Christ, and that we are members of his body, they rejoice to do us
service.

Psalm. 91.11.
and do his will; now the Angels obey Christ readily and chearefully.

Royal Priesthood; now Princes have their guard, and the Christians guard is a
company of glorious Angels that watch over them day and night.

This shows then the happy privilege of Gods Saints and servants, (...) ^.
that we that are but dust and ashes, should have such glorious Angels to be
our attendants.

Was it not a wonderful honor to have Mordacai, Hest 6.10.11.
a despised Jew, to have so great a Peer as Haman was, to hold his stirrup,
and to ride by his side. O there what an honor may this be thought to be, to
have a guard of heavenly Angels to be our attendants, and to do us that
honor? Let any of Gods servants be compassed about with many enemies, as
Elisha was; let his life be sought for, as Elias was; let him be in the fiery
furnace, as the three Children were; let him be cast into the Lions den, as
Daniel was; let him be bound in prison, as Peter was; yet still God has his
Angels to do them service, and to deliver them.

Great is the security of the world, that notwithstanding these excellent
privileges and prerogatives that belong unto the faithful, yet are no way
affected therewith.

But as these good Angels are messengers and Ministers for the good of Gods
children; so are they ready pressed at all times, to execute Gods judgments upon
the wicked: as they saved Lot, Genesis 19^
they destroyed the Sodomites: as they defended Elisha, 1 Reg. ^^.
so they struck with blindness, the messengers of the King of Aram. As the
Angel was for the good of Hezechtah, Act. 12.
so likewise for the destruction of Senacherib: as the Angel preserhaue Peter,
so he struck Herod. Let wicked men then take heed, how they flatter themselves
in sin; for the Angels are Gods Ministers for the execution of his wrath upon
the wicked, as they are his messengers for the good of his people.

Secondly, 1 Cor. 15.10.
because of the Angel, which some have understood to be the Minister. How much
more careful ought we to be in respect of the presence of these holy Angels.

Then the Angel spoke unto Philip,

But why did the Lord send Philip to this Noble man? he might have sent this
Angel unto him, and a man would have thought, that he would have heard him
sooner, and that his ministry would have been much more effectual, and that
he must needs have taken it as a singular favor of God, thus to have
instructed him by the ministry of an Angel. But the Lord would not; but
Philip must be sent unto him.

Surely, this commends the great mercy of God, that will be pleased to teach
us by such as we our selves are; for we are not able to hear the voice of
God, nor to endure the presence of an Angel.

When the Lord had spoken unto the people upon the Mount, how fearful were
they? and how instant with Moses, saying, Talk thou with us, E^^^ 3.19.
but let not God talk with us, lest we dye. They were not able to abide his
presence, nor to hear his glorious voice.

And so when Manoah had seen the Angel, he said to his wife, we shall surely
dye, because we have seen the Lord. Judge. 13.12.
Now the Lord knowing our weakness, and tendering our infirmities, is pleased
to send us men like unto our se^ues, to teach and instruct us, that are
clothed with the same infirmities that we our selves are; and herein will
teach us, and all men unto the end of the world.

What is the ordinary means whereby he will teach men, God will teach men by
the ministry of men.
and bring them to life and salvation, even by the ministry of men, and not by
the ministry of Angels.

When the Lord sent the Angel here unto Philip, he could, if it had so pleased
him, have sent the same unto the Eunuch, but the Lord will have his word rather
dispensed by earthly and sinful men, then by celestial and heavenly Angels.

When Saul had heard the sound from heaven, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? Act. 9.10.
he is sent for direction, not to an Angel, but to Ananias. Act. 10.
So must Cornelius send for Peter. When the rich man in the Parable desired
Abraham to send to his Brethren, the answer was, Luke 16.
they have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. Whosoever hears you,
Luke 10.10
(says Christ) hears me. To this, agrees that of the Apostle, where he
teaches, 1 Cor. 4.9.
that we are appointed unto this work, as men condemned unto death, that we
might be a gazing stock to the world, to Angels and to men. And thus in all
ages of the Church, the Lord has ever stirred up such instruments for the
enlarging of his kingdom; who, as Saint James speaks of Elias, are subject
unto the same infirmities that other men are: and there is reason for it.

For first, All things are of God, 2 Cor. 5.18.
who has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Christ, and has committed unto
us the word of reconciliation, where these two are joined together.

Secondly, times the base things, to bring great things to pass; 1 Cor. 3.
and this treasure has he put in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the
power might be of God, and not of man. Thus was David chosen from the
sheepfold, and many of the Prophets from their Herds. Matthew from amongst
the Publicans, and Saul from the state of a Pharisie and a Supplanter, to be a
master builder in his Church.

And this reason why the Lord has committed the dispensation of his word, of
the Epistle unto the Hebrews sets down to be the maine reason why Christ
took our nature upon him, Heb 5.2.
and so our infirmities, that be might be a merciful high Priest unto God his
Father. Heb. 2.16.17.


Seeing then that God has chose such instruments for his service, James
inforceth, when he says, Hearken, my brethren, has not God chosen the poor
of the world to be rich in faith, Iam. 2.5.6
and heirs of his kingdom, etc? But ye have despised the poor. This is
indeed to cross the proceedings of God, and to let our selves against him, in
despising those whom he has honored, and abasing those whom he has exalted.

Secondly, selves toward the Ministers of Christ, even as if they were more
honorable creatures. Thus Paul exhorts the Philippians to receive such with
all gladness, and to hold them in reputation for their work sake. Phil. 2.29.
How joyfully did the Shunamite entertain Elisha, and Paul gives this
commendations of the Galathians, that they received him as an Angel from
heaven; nay, more, I bear you record, (says he) that if it had been
possible, Gal. 4.14.
ye would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me.

But alas, i^ our days, the Ministers of the Word have the like enter
t^inement, that Christ their Master had amongst the Samaritans, they came and
besought him to depart out of their Coasts. Mat. 8.34.
So are many faithful Ministers accounted a burden to such places where they
live, and the greatest cross that possible could come unto them.

And last of all, Psalm. 8.2.
and to overthrow Satan. We are taught to praise God for his own gracious
power in his servants. This is thankfulness we owe unto God for so great a
mercy: by this means the Lord will be moved to bless the Ministry of his
servants unto us. and make the same effectual, without whose gracious blessing,
the most powerful means that are, can do us no good at all.

VERSE 26. Arise, and go toward the South, etc.
HEre we have Philips commission and calling unto the work; wherein we are to
observe two things: 1 The preparation that Philip is to make, Arise, and go. 2
The place or extent of his journey, toward the South.


Arise, and go, these two words differ in their signification; the one calling
up Philip as it were from sleep, arise; the other setting him forward in his
journey, go.

Q. d. Sit not still, be not any longer discouraged, there is now some work to
be done, Arise, and go.

It is like that charge the Lord gave unto Jeremy; Ier. 1.17.
Trusse up thy loins, arise and speak unto them.

The word arise, presupposes one that was either fallen down, or one that
sat own, as being weary.

If Philip were fallen down at this time, it was at the sight of the Angel;
and so indeed was Paul stroke to the earth, when the voice came from heaven.
And he fell to the earth. Act. 9.4.
So might the glory of this Angel, work this fear in Philip.

The like appears in Manoah, Judge. 13.20
when the Angel had declared himself unto him, and his wife, they fell both
on their face to the ground. So the Prophet Ezechiel fell on his face, ^zech.
1. vlt.
when the glory of the Lord appeared Even so when the vision appeared unto
Daniel, he confessed, Dan. 10.8.
there remained no strength in me. And the Angels appearing unto the
Shepherds, the Text says, Luke 2.9.
They were sore afraid.

Now then if Philip were thus cast down to the earth at the sight of this
glorious Angel that came unto him in mercy; cry to the mountains to fall upon
them, Reu. 6.16. Esaias. 2.19.
and shall creep into the holes of the rocks and caves of the earth, for the
fear of the Lord. O that all wicked and ungodly men would lay this to heart,
how fearful the coming of the Lord Jesus will be at the last day, when he
shall come with all his holy Angels with him, to take vengeance upon wicked men.

Secondly, the word arise, presupposes again, sometimes, a man that sits
down to take his rest, as being aweary, and so it might be that this was the
condition of Philip now at this time. Either in regard that he saw not the
fruit of his ministry as he desired, or else in regard of the present trouble
that lay upon the Church. This was the case of Elias, being persecuted by Ahab
and Iesabel. Sitting under the Juniper tree, he seems to be so much
disheartened, as if he were weary of his life. It is enough, O Lord, take away
my life, I am no better then my Fathers. And if this were the case of Philip,
we are taught,

That it is the condition of the best of Gods servants in the Ministry, Good
Ministers ^ometimes dis^^uraged when they see not the tru^^ of their ministe^y.
many times to be much discouraged, and out of heart when they cannot see the
happy return of their labors. And this is it, many times, that makes them
dull and heavy in doing the duties of their calling. This happily, might be the
condition of Philip now at this time, that he had preached the word unto the
people, and saw little fruit of his ministry; and again, the troubles and
persecutions of the Church which he now saw before his eyes, might make him
heartlesse, and beat him off the work of his calling, that he sat down as a
man forlorn and out of heart, till now the Angel gives him a call, to preach
the word to this man.

For the preventing of this in the Prophet Ezechial, the Lord tells him
aforehand, The house of Israel will not hearken unto thee, Ezech. ^.7
for they will not hearken unto me: yet the Lord would have him to do this
duty, and to leave the success to him. And this is that indeed which all Gods
people must look unto, to do their duties, and to leave the success to God.
We are not in Gods stead to mollify men's hearts; no, Paul may plant, and
Apollo may water, but the blessing is from God.

He that labors to bring men to heaven, though he effect not his desire,
shall notwithstanding have his reward. But yet not withstanding, such is the
weakness, even in the best of Gods servants, many times, that when they have
labored in the works of the Ministry, and see not their desired fruit
thereof to follow, much deadness of heart, and drowsinesse is ready to creep
upon them, that they are ready to be discouraged and beaten off from doing
their duty. But what may be the reason hereof?

First, men are naturally impatient of delays, That Israel may be gathered.
Now when after much labor and pains taken in the work of the Ministry,
their hope and expectation fails in this, they cannot but be discouraged and
disheartened, as Philip here.

Secondly, such do not consider that the word to some, which is wholly in God.

The use concerns Ministers, instruct still with meekness, proving if God
at any time will give them repentance. God has many hours to call men into
his Vineyard, some in the sixth, some in the ninth, and some in the eleventh. In
the morning (says Solomon) sow thy seed, and in the evening, with hold not
thy hand, for thou know not whether shall prosper. It may be the season of
grace is past with some, and that GOD will now have them left without excuse,
for certainly God does send his word to the greater condemnation of some, that
will not be gathered: what then? the Minister notwithstanding is to do his
duty. If a Husbandman be commanded by his master to ^^w his seed in a barren
soil where there is no hope of an increase; It is answer good, he did but his
duty. If the Lord send a Minister to a congregation where he can see little or
no fruit for his labors, yet still shall he serve the Lords purpose and
providence, and his labor notwithstanding shall be with the Lord, Esa. 49.4.
and his recompense with his God.

(And go)

The Angel, as he bids Philip Arise, so he bids him go. It is like, as
we have heard, Philip might be much disheartened and discouraged in his
calling, and so began to be drowsy and heavy in the discharge of his duty; in
which regard, Paul wills Timothy to stir up the grace of God in him. 2 Timothy
1.6
But now the Angel gives him a new call, and acquaints him with a special
service he is now to do, and therefore wills him to arise and go; he does not
go before he be sent, but stays until he have a lawful calling to the
work. Now here is his warrant and commission to go and preach to the Eunuch,
and herein will teach us, that

That Ministers must have a lawful calling to the work of the Ministry, M
Ministers must be called, before they preach.
before they take that sacred function upon them. None ought to speak and
teach in the name of the Lord, that is not able to show his authority from the
Lord. This was it whereupon all the Prophets did depend, both for their sitting
down, and rising up. Moses would not go unto Pharaoh, Ex. 3.11.
before he had learned his lesson perfectly; Ier. 1.6.8.
Jeremy is a child, Ier. 1.6.8.
and knows not what to say, till God had assured him to be with him. And the
Lord tells the Prophet Ezechiel, that he should hear the word from his mouth,
Ezech. 3.17.
and warn the people from him. So Paul, That which I have received from the
Lord, 1 Cor. 11.23.
deliver I unto you. And thus the Apostles, in all their Epistles they wrote
unto the Churches, first show their authority, that the same was from God,
before they taught the people: and the reasons are,

Vzza was: and the same God that ouertooke him in that sin of his, will never
suffer such intruders escape unpunished.

say with Nehemiah, Shall such a man as I fly? and with Christ, Neh. 6.11.
Go tell the Fox, Luke 13.32
I walk to day, etc. And with Paul, I pass not by my life, Act. 20.
so I may fulfill my Ministry with joy. Absalom bids his servants, 2 Samuel
13.28.
Smite, kill, and fear not, for I have commanded you, (says he) and shall
not they speak whom the Lord has commanded?

Thirdly, Esaias; Yet my reward is with the Lord, and my recompense with my God.
He has done his duty, he has delivered his own soul.

good in his place, that has not his calling from God.

I have not sent those Prophets, (says the Lord) yet they ran; Ier, 23.22
I have not spoken unto them, yet they have prophesied. Such can expect no
blessing from God; for whom he sends, he furnishes with gifts, and touches
their tongue with a cole from his Altar. Those then that have no gifts, yet
occupy the place of a Minister, doubtless were never sent of God.

that is committed unto them.

But how shall a man truly know that he is called to preach the Gospel?

This is known diverse ways. How to know a Minister to have his calling from
God.


First, by those gifts that qualify a man for the work of the Ministry; for
God never sends, but qualifies first.







bless his labors, this is as the Lords signet or seal set to his calling.

VERSE 27. And he arose, and went, Text.
etc.
HItherto of Philips Commission, now of the execution of his Commission.

The Angel bids him go, but tells him not what he shall do, or what
profit should come of his travail, yet Philip goes, And thus the Lord made
trial of the obedience of Abraham, when he called him to go into the land of
Canaan, Genesis 12.
not acquainting him with the end wherefore he sent him thither. And thus the
Lord tries the obedience of his servants.

And surely this served much for the commendations of the obedience of Philip,
that he reasoned not the matter with the Angel, but being called, presently
obeyed: He arose, and went.

Teaching us, We must yield o^edience to Gods commandment, though we see n^
reason. Genesis 7.
that we are to yield obedience unto Gods commandment, though we see no
reason: and we are to know that this is sufficient for us, that our obedience
be approved to God.

Thus Noah, when God commanded him to build an A^^^* though he might have had
many discouragements in that work, if he had consulted with flesh and blood,
as namely, how it could be possible that he should be saved, and all the world
drowned; The difficulty of the work, men having no experience of Ships, how
such a vessel should save; Length of time, one hundred and twenty years; the
mocking of that sinful world etc. Yet this is observed to the great
commendations of his faith, By faith Noah, moved with reverence, prepared the
Arc. Heb. 11.7.


Abraham received a commandment to go out of his Country, to leave his kindred
and his fathers house, to go into a place he knew not. Now this is likewise
observed as a great commendations of his faith; that he yielded obedience, not
reasoning the ca^^ with God. Heb. 11.8.
So likewise when God called him to sacrifice his son Isaac, he yielded
obedience, not consulting with flesh and blood, what should become of the
promise, if Isaac were gone, ver. 17.18.
but readily yields him up unto God. A contrary example we have in Saul, who
spared Agag the king, ^ Sam. ^5.
and the fat of the cattle, whereas the Lord had Commanded him to destroy them
all. And of the Prophet, that was commanded not to eat, yet disobeyed, and was
therefore killed of a Lion. 1 Reg. 13.8
And in what a miserable case had Naaman been in, had he persisted in his
opinion, and had not hearkened unto the Prophet. And there is reason for it.

First, in regard he is the Sovereign Lord of all,

that of Samuel unto Saul; Has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offerings
and sacrifices, 1 Sa^ ^5.22
as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? Behold, to obey is better then
sacrifice, etc.

If ye will hear my voice indeed (says the Lord) and keep my Covenant, Ex.
19.5.6
Then shall ye be my chief treasure above all people. And again, Deu. 28.1
If thou will hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe
and to do all his Commandments, etc. Then the Lord thy God will set thee on
high, above all the Nations on the earth, etc.

Fourthly, disobedience, as Samuel tells Saul, is as the sin of witchcraft,
and shall never escape the reuengefull hand of God. The Lord threatened this
unto the people, That if they would not hearken and obey, they should die of
the sword, Ier. ^^^^.
famine, pestilence, etc; so that none of them should escape. Disobedience shut
Adam out of Paradise, Moses out of Canaan, and Saul out of his kingdom.

Philip done this, now that the Angel bids him go, not telling him what was
to be done, he had never obeyed the Angel* The Minister, though he see not
that his preaching does, or is like to do any good, yet because God has
commanded, he must do his duty. Thus must Magistra^es do, though sin
abound still* Thus must masters of families do, though it take little effect:
for God has commanded these duties to be done, and must be obeyed.

And behold a man of Ethiopia, etc.

The word Behold is commonly verbum admirationis, a word of wonder, and calls us
to that special parenthesis of our Savior; Let him that reads, consider;
Mat. 24.15
And is, for the most part, of the same nature that Selah is, sooften used in
the book of the Psalms.

Behold, q. d. Consider this thing, that howsoever Philip at this time were in
great danger and hazard for preaching of the Gospel, by reason of Caiphas the
high Priest, and Saul, that made hauock of the Church; yet obeying the
commandment of the Angel, though for the present he could see no reason for
the same; mark what followed, see the good success of his obedience: Behold a
man of Ethiopia.

The instruction is plain, We are to take special notice of the obedience of
Gods servants.
That God would have us in a special manner take notice of the obedience of
his servants, and the examples of his children obeying him, and all to this
end, to provoke us unto obedience. This truth is clearly manifested by the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Heb. 11.1.
Having in the eleventh Chapter set down many examples of the admirable
obedience of many of Gods servants, that obeyed God beyond reason, as of Noath
that builded the Arc when there was no likelihood of a flood; of Abraham that
offered up Isaac; of Moses that left Egypt; of Iosuah, and the like: all which
obeyed God against reason. He presently infers, Seeing we have, says he, such
a cloud of witnesses. Heb. 12.1.
Let us cast away every thing that presses down, and run with patience to
that which is set before us. Yea, unto these examples he subioyneth the
example of the Lord Jesus Christ himself, who endured the Cross, and despised
the shame, to whom we must ever look, and have an eye, lest we should faint in
our minds. And thus indeed is the Lord pleased to teach us, not only by his
word, but by the examples likewise of his servants, omitting no means that may
do us good. And to this end are the examples of Gods servants many times
propounded unto us in the Scriptures. Ye have heard of the patience of Job,
Iam. 5.11.
and all to encourage us in well doing.

Yea, God has not only left us the examples of his children for our
imitation, but he has also left us the examples of his justice upon wicked
men, and disobedient sinners, and all to terrify us from sinning against him;
such as are Corah, Dathan, Number. 16.23.
and Abiram. Lots wife, of whom and whose sin, God has given a special
Memento, Remember Lots wife. Luke 17.32
Even so the Apostle Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 2.
having showed the Jews, to whom he wrote, what excellent promises they had
received: he exhorts them to give all diligence to walk in them. And the
better to persuade them, he sets down Gods judgments upon the disobedient,
and says, that God spared not the Angels, not the old world, nor Sodom and
Gomorah, etc.

And the reason hereof I take to be these.

First, because we are so prone to be led by examples, Moses; for patience,
Ioh; for chastity, Joseph, etc.

All Scripture (says Paul) is given by divine inspiration, and is profitable,
2 Timothy ^^ 16.
etc. And then do we profit aright by the Scriptures, when by the examples of
the godly therein recorded, we are provoked unto well doing.



Seeing the Lord teaches us thus, not only by his word, as so many lively
Sermons to provoke us unto well-doing. For surely the Lord will plead in the
last day, the very piety, zeal, and holy conversation that we have seen in
his servants, to be a swift witness in judgment against us. And not only so,
but also terrifying us daily against sin by his judgments upon the wicked. 1
Pet.
What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation? Those then
that notwithstanding the examples of Gods children to allure them, and the
examples of wicked men to terrify them from sin, will not be moved. What
do such in effect but say, Who is the Lord that we should serve him, Mal.
3.14.
and what profit comes, that we keep his ordinance? Such are like unto
Gallio, Acts 18.17
that cared for nothing, though the godly were beaten, no example moves them.
But they that truly fear God, must learn by the example of Gods children,
truly to obey him, and by Gods judgments upon the wicked, to learn
righteousness. Esaias 26.9.


Behold

This word Behold, calling for special animaduersion and attention, as we have
heard, Shows that it was no common matter, or ordinary thing that is now to
be related. And what was it that must be so specially noted here, as a strange
thing, not frequent or common in the world? it was this; That so great a man
should be so good a man, to take that pains, and to be at that cost, to
travail so far as Jerusalem to worship God. This is it we are now called
upon to consider, and therein are taught,

That it is no ordinary thing, It is a rare thing for great men to be good men.
to have great men, rich men, Noble men, or men in authority, to be truly
religious. A Lord Treasurer to come so far to Jerusalem to worship, and to be
so religiously addicted, as to read the Scriptures in his Coach or Chariot;
This may well deserve an ecce. No marvel though the holy Ghost call upon us
to observe this, as a rare thing indeed. And it will be no hard thing to
clear this truth, both by Scripture and Reason, to show that it is a hard and
difficult thing to have great men, good men. O generation, take heed to the
word of the Lord. Ier. 2.31.
There is the Lords admonition to the great men of that age. But will you know
their answer; But the people answered, we are Lords, we will not come to thee:
as if it had been a disparagement unto them to have been taught or directed
by the Lords Prophet. Again, I spoke unto thee when thou wast in prosperity,
but thou said, Ier. 22.21.
I will not hear. So the Prophet Hoseah; As in their pastures, so were they
filled, and their heart was exalted, Hos. 13.6.
therefore have they forgotten me. And this was that sin that Moses lays to
the charge of the people of Israel, Iesurun waxed fat, Deu. 32.1^
thou art covered with fatness, Then he for sooke God which made him, and
lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation. No marvel therefore though the
Lord give this warning by Moses, unto the people, that when they should come
into the good Land which the Lord had promised, which was the Land of Canaan;
Deu. 2^.10
Beware when thou art full, lest thou forget the Lord thy God. If ever men give
themselves to sleep and to rest, it is when their bellies be full. Ier. 5.7.
When I fed them to the full, they rose up Like fed horses, every one neighed
after his neighbors wife. It is wealth and abundance that lifts up the heart
of a man, and makes him say with Pharaoh, Exodus 10. 1 Cor. 1.26.
Who is the Lord? So Paul, You know your Calling Brethren, how that not many
wise after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, etc. And
therefore our Savior says, verity I say unto you, Mat 19.23.
that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. And this was
Christ's own observation in the days of his flesh. The poor receive the
Gospel: Mat. 11.6.
and therefore Timothy must charge rich men concerning the dangers of riches. 1
T.m. 6.17.
And surely such a vehement charge needed not, if they were not in danger.

To see a man that is great, and rich, and mighty in the world, yet zealous in
religion, as this Noble man, is as rare as to see Saul amongst the Prophets.

But what? do riches, honor,

No, not of themselves, Riches and Treasures shall be in their house: Psalm.
112.2
and wisdom (says Solomon) is good with an Inheritance. Eccl. 7.11.
Abraham was rich, so was Solomon, Job and many others of Gods servants. And
therefore the Apostle says Not, not any Noble, but not many Noble. So that
riches and honors hinder not Religion, as a cause, but as occasions, and that
through the occruption of our nature, who are ready to abuse all the good
things of God to our perdition. But would you know the reason of this? A man
would think that such men whom God has thus Honored above other, should be
the most forward to honor him above others, and this thing so comes to pass,

honor puff up the heart with pride, and make men high minded; and where
there is pride, there must needs be contempt of God and his word, as we may see
in Pharaoh, Who is the Lord? and therefore Christ teaches, first humility in
his servants, as the first lesson in Christianity, to deny themselves, until
which time we can never profit by the Word. And hence is it that the Prophet
exhortech thus, Hear, Ier. 13.15.
Hear, and gine and gine and be not proud: as if it were impossible, while
pride is in the hearts, that men should ever hear sauingly.

being fed to the full, is as a wild Asle, Ier. 2.
as Jeremy speaks, that will hardly be tamed and framed to obedience. Let a
man that is used but to a spare dyer, at any time eat something either for
matter or measure extraordinary, and does the not find a great dullness and
heaviness to creep upon him in good duties; yea, a marvelous unaptness to
be exercised therein. How much more they that are always full gorged?

Besides this, their outward abundance, makes them insensible of their inward
wants: and as het that comes to the Physician, and feels not himself sick,
is of all others in the greatest danger; so is it with those that are
insensible of their miseries.

should hinder men from Gods service, as we shall see hereafter, yet they
think themselves they may be excused because of their employments. When Paul
preached, Felix has now no leisure to hear him, he must come another time.
Howbeit Christ rebuked Martha for this fault, that seemed to be well employed.
But it had been her greater commendations, the pot had sod over at this time of
Christ's preaching.

The uses follow.

forward and zealous in religion. But afterward in times of prosperity, grew
fat, and wanton, and spurned against the Lord. As the Moon never suffers an
Eclipse, but when she is at the full, so when men are full of honor, wealth,
and pleasures, now they are in danger of an Eclipse, that the earth should come
between them and heaven.

Grudge not, (says David) at the prosperity of the wicked; for certain it is,
it had been good for many a man, that he had never known what wealth and
abundance had been, what honor and dignity had been, since through the
abuse of these things, they endanger their owns souls.

A man of Ethiopia, and Eunuch, Text.


The Ethiopian described.
Here we have the description of this Noble man described, first, by his person,
an Eunuch, By his person
Such have been of old time, and employed about the keeping of great
Personages, as Queen's, Mat. 19.12
etc There are some Eunuchs (says our Savior) which were so borne from their
Mothers womb, and there are some Eunuchs, which were made Eunuchs of men: and
there be Eanuchs which have made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of Gods
sake.

And that these have been employed about the keeping of great personages, it
appears by those Eanuchs that attended Iesabel the Queen, 2 Reg. 9.32.
and the which, at Iehu his command, cast her out at a window.

Many times they were descended out of the loins of royal blood, as it was
said to Hezechiah, Of thy sons which shall issue from thee, Esa. 39.7.
which thou shall beget, shall they take away, and they shall be Eunuchs in
the Palace of the King of Babylon. This argues this Eunuch to have been a
great man, and therefore the more admirable. The instruction is plain.

We are taught, Of allsorts of men, God has some that belong to his kingdom.
that God is no accepter of men's persons: but of all sorts and conditions of
men, he has some that belong to the election of grace, and appertain unto his
glorious kingdom. He accepts not the persons of Princes, (says Elihu) nor
regards the rich more then the poor, Job 34.19
they being all the work of his hands. To this accords that of the Apostle
Peter unto Cornelius. Act. 10 34.
Of a truth I perceive, that God is no respecter of persons, but in every
Nation, he that fears GOD, and works righteousness, is accepted with him.
And thus the Lord commanded Samuel when he was to anoint David King, Look not
on his countenance, nor on the height of his stature; 1 Samuel 16.7.
and he adds this as a reason, for God sees not as man sees, man locketh on
the outward appearance, but the Lord beholds the heart.

This truth is further cleared by testimonies and examples. God chose Abraham
an Idolater, Manasses a soothsayer, Matthew a Publican, Cornelius a Captain,
Paul a persecutor, Rahab a harlor, Zacheus an extortioner: Acts 10. Act (...),
Io^ 7. Lu^e 19.^^
yea, and our Savior says, that Publicans and Harlots shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, when others shall be shut out. (...).

Ephesians. 1.
his gifts and graces are on his part free, and on our part altogether
undeserved, and therefore often called in the Scripture, his free election, and
his free grace.

rich man have been preferred before poor Lazarus, and the proud Pharisie
before the poor Publican. Now this were an unequal valuation, to prize those
things that have no proportion to grace and goodness, to things that are not
to be valued, for betwixt temporal and spiritual things, is no compareson.

Matthew from the receipt of custom; Pharisees have been called, Paul a
Pharisie and bloody persecutor; Harlots have been called, Rahab, Mary;
Extortioners have been called, Zacheus; apostates, Peter; yea, God chooses
many times the weak and foolish things of this world, to confound the wise and
mighty, and the poor ones of this world to be rich in faith: yea, Jew and
Greek, bond and free, male, and female; they are all one in Christ, he
accepts of the person of no man.

No man knows love or hatred (says Solomon) by these things. Eccl. 9.2.
If outward privileges would prevail any whit with God, Antiochus, Herod,
Saul, Iezabel, Nero, etc. must needs have been deep in Gods favor, yet we
know the Lord left these, showed them no mercy, but caused them to serve his
justice.

An Ethiopian.

Moore; By his country.
a Gentile by nature, one that was without the pale of the Church, yet he
worshippeth God at Jerusalem, making good that prophecy of old, Esa. 2.2.
It shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lords
house shall be established, etc. and all Nations shall flow unto it: meaning,
indeed, of the enlargement of the Church by all Nations far and near, upon
the face of the earth.

So that in this Eunuch, we have an carnest of that promise that God had made
unto his people; The Gentiles to be converted.
That the Gentiles should be called, and brought in, and that little Sister
that had no breasts, Cant. 8.
made fruitful. This covenant and promise did the Lord think upon, in
calling, in all ages, and from time to time, so many of the Gentiles to the
knowledge of his truth. Such as are Ruth, Job, Rahab, Cornelius, this Eunuch,
etc.

light revealed unto us, especially in this part of the world, which we call
Europe, wherein the light of the glorious Gospel for these six hundred years
last past especially, has shone more and more, and still shall, until the
coming of the Bridegroom himself, the Lord Jesus.

Of great authority under Candace Queen of the Ethiopians, who had charge of
all her treasure, etc.

As this Noble man is here described by his person, and by his Country, so is
he likewise described by his office or place, By his office.
Treasurer unto a great Princess, employed, no doubt, in many great and
weighty affairs in the government of a kingdom, yet trauaileth up to
Jerusalem to worship God. Whose godly example, and zealous practice, may
commend to all posterities this lesson.

That neither the greatness of men's persons, The greatness of none must
exempt them from the performance of holy duties.
nor places, may exempt them from the performance of holy duties: if God have
once called a man with a holy calling to the knowledge of his Son Christ, it
is neither person nor place that may with hold us from his service; that must
be preferred above al. David, though he were a King, how frequent was he in
these holy performances? which shows, that they were more delightful unto
him, then his kingly robes. They were the very delight of his soul: Gods
precepts being sweeter unto him then the honey and the honey comb. Psalm. 5.3.
Thou shall hear my voice O Lord, early in the morning will I direct my prayer
unto thee, and will look up. Neither might this seem to be a work of
supererogation in David, because a King that might plead the public affairs
of his kingdom, for then would he not have exhorted others of the same
condition, to the same godly practice, Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, Psalm.
2 11.12.
etc And it is observed to have been the great praise of Hezechiah, 2 Chro.
20.19.
that he sent abroad messengers to call the people to the service and worship
of God; and not only so, but joined himself also in the same. And amongst all
other the titles that served to set out the honor of Solomon, and his
magnificence, this was not the least, Eccl. 1.12.
The words of the Preacher, son of David, King of Israel. And for this is
Abraham commended, a great Prince, yet instructed his family. Iosuah a man full
of employments in the public affairs, yet I and my house will serve the Lord.
Ios. 24.
The like of Cornelius; yea, the greatest honor that ever came to the Kings of
Judah and Israel, Acts 10.
was this, that they were zealous for the worship of God; and the greatest
dishonor that ever did betide them, was this, they were negligent and
careless therein. Now the reasons of the point are,

above others, looks to be honored by them above others; and indeed, who
should do the greatest work, but they that receive the greatest wages?

Arons oil, runs down to the meanest that are under them.

Pro.
The memor of the righteous is blessed, whereas the name of the wicked shall
rot. Whereas such as seek honor in the world, and to establish them selves
without this, they do but build Babels unto themselves.

It is the conscionable practice of piety and godliness, especially in Kings
and Princes, and great personages, when they are dead and gone, and their
bodies are mouldred to dust, that yields a fragrant smell and sweet savor to
succeeding generations.

The excellent Psalms of David were not enclosed and buried with him in his
Tomb. The labors and pains of this Noble man went not with him to his grave.
^osias zeal in redressing things ^misse, did not rot as his body did: but all
these are left in the treasury of the Church, to the everlasting praise of Gods
graces in his ser^ants to the honor of their names.

By this then men may try themselves, whether they be called or not, and
whether God has truly touched their hearts with the knowledge of his son
Christ. Can thou renounce, honors, pleasures, and all to wait upon God and
follow him, and make all stoop and veil bonnet to his worship and service,
with this Eunuch here; this is a sign of an honest heart, and mind disposed
to honor God. But if on the contrary part every slight occasion be matter
sufficient to draw thee away from his service; it is a clear demonstration
that the zeal of the Lords house has not yet consumed thee.

How many have we that would willingly serve God with Naaman the Syrian, yet
they will go into the idolatrous Temple, loath to hazard their honor, credit,
or place, for God or his truth; many such cold friends has religion nowadayes.

Abraham did, to ride and to go four or five miles to hear the Word, when
the same is not taught amongst them? this were too much niceness and
preciseness. But what say these to this Eunuch here, or what are they to this
Eunuch, a great noble man, yet took much pains and labor to worship God at
Jerusalem? O then let great men take heed how they contemn or lightly esteem
Gods service, lest whilst they think scorn to do him service, the Lord will
not afford such this honor, to admit them into his service,

David's was, that had a kingdom to govern? or then this Eunuch, so great in
authority, under so great a Queen? Have not great men souls as well as
others? and have they not sin in their souls as well as others? away then
with that dangerous and hateful error, they have no leisure. They are the men
that have received the greatest wages, why should they not do the greatest
work? They are the men God has honored above others, why should they not
labor in their places to honor God above others?

Went up to Jerusalem to worship, Text.


But why to Jerusalem to worship?

By his religion.
for so says the Psalmist, In Jury is God known, his Name is great in Israel,
at Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling in Sion. So Esaias the Prophet, Esa.
2.3.
The law shall go from Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem: and in
this regard Jerusalem is called the Mother of us all. In the time of Christ the
Disciples were forbidden to preach to any but to the Jews; Gal. 4.26. Mat.
10.5.
go not into the way of the Gentiles, but unto the lost, sheep of the house
of Israel.

After Christ's ascen^^^n. ^he Apostles were comm^^ded to preach the Gospel
first to them, Luke 24 47 Romans 15.19.
beginning at Jerusalem. All the Apostles did exercise their Ministry at
Jerusalem. All the Churches of the Gentiles conformed themselves to the Church
of the Jews, and esteemed Jerusalem as their mother Church.

And to Jerusalem, as to the mother Church, all the world did resort for
direction, and for the deciding of all controversies that might arise amongst
them.

Yea, Acts 15.2.
all the Churches of the Gentiles, first received the Word from Jerusalem, as
it was prophesied of old, Esaias 60.3.
The Gentiles shall walk in thy light. Had Rome these privileges, the world
should have rung of them at this day.

Here then was the reason why the Eunuch went to Jerusalem, because this was
the solemn place appointed for his service, and for his worship.

Hence we may note diverse instructions,

The public assemblies of Gods people ought highly to be esteemed.
ought highly to be esteemed, and diligently to be frequented of all Gods
people.

Behold this in David; O Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house, Psalm.
26.8.
and the place where thy honor dwells: and again, O Lord of Hoasts, Psalm.
84.12.
how amiable are thy tabernacles! my soul longs and faints for the Courts
of the Lords house. And this was the holy resolution of good Hezechiah, Esaias
38.22
after his recovery from his sickness, to go up to the house of the Lord.
Yea, David rejoices in this, I was glad when they said, let us go up to the
house of the Lord. And to this do those godly believers in the time of the
Prophet Esaias, provoke one another, when the Temple was built, and Gods worship
did flourish at Jerusalem; Come let us go up to the house of the Lord. Esaias
2.3.
And this was promised as a blessing from the Lord, I will bring them into my
holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: Esaias 56.7. 2 Chro.
20.13.
and all Judah stood before the Lord with their young, and with their old, with
their wives and with their children. Yea, those that have had in them the
greatest measure of knowledge and grace, have been ever most frequent in this
duty. The Disciples were continually in the Temple. Luke 24.52.
Even so in the Primitive Church it is said, that the true believers continued
with one accord in the Temple. Acts 2.46.
And Joseph and Mary, albeit poor, and dwelt far from Jerusalem, yet at the
time of the Passover, they went up duly to Jerusalem to worship. So that we
see it is a most clear and grounded truth, that Gods people in all ages, and
from time to time, have in no one thing testified their joy and delight, then
in this, to be employed in Gods worship in the public assemblies.

And there is reason for it.

First, in regard of Gods promise of special presence there. David calls
Sion, The habitation of Gods house, Psalm. 26.8.
and the place where his honor dwells. It is Christ's own promise, that
where two or three are met together in his Name he will be present amongst
them. Mat 18.20
Christ walks in the midst of the seven Candlestickes, that is, the
Churches, by his special presence.

And in this regard the Lord gives aspeciall charge concerning these
assemblies, Leuit. 26: 2
ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary. And this David
professes, by way of thankfulness, I will give thanks to thee in the great
Congregation, Psalm. 35.18
and will praise thee amongst much people.

there; the same Psalms ye may sing at home, that you sing there; the same
word you may read at home, that is read there; but not with the same fruit and
comfort, as in the public assemblies of the faithful. For David speaking of
Mount Sion, and the Temple there, says, Psalm. 133.2.
There the Lord promised his blessing and life for evermore: and again, Psalm.
87.2.
The Lord loves the gates of Sion, more then all the habitations of Jacob.

Mat. 7.7.
Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find. Now the more there be that
seek a thing, the more hope there is to find it. And this was the reason why
the Church in time of misery and distress, called for a solemn assembly: Blow
a Trumpet in Sion, Joel 2.15.
proclaim a fast, call a solemn assembly, as the most powerfullest means to
prevail with God.

Esaias, saying, In this mountain shall the Lord of Hoasts make to all people,
Esaias 25.6.
a feast of fat things, a feast of fined wines, of fat things full of marrow,
of wine fined and purified. Indeed I confess it is not every man's case to
find this sweetness in these things. It is possible at the daintiest feast,
some may loathe those things, that to others are most delightful and desired.

But this is the case only of the godly and regenerate man; so David, Blessed
is the man whom thou choosest and causest to come unto thee: He shall dwell in
thy Courts, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house, even of thy
holy Temple.

I will give thanks unto thee, Psalm. 35.18.
and will praise thee amongst much people.

Hence diverse sorts of men are justly to be reproved. Diverse sorts of men
reproved.


First, such as turn back upon Gods ordinance in the public assemblies,
Saul's dealing with David, Saul marked David's seat when he was wanting at the
feasts and assemblies: Surely the Lord does mark these empty Seats and
solitary Pewes of ours, when we are wanting. And were it not for their sakes,
that wanting the food of life at home, are feign to travail abroad, I should
long ere this have eased you of some of this burden, and my self of this
pains. Neither is this all, a sin of negligence in absenting of your selves
when God calls you to his service; But by this negligent and careless coming
unto Gods house, men do in effect say with those in the time of the Prophet
Malachy, Mal. 3.14.15.
It is in vain to serve the Lord, etc:

public duties. I may say of such a man's soul, as of the house shut up with
the Plague, Lord have mercy on them.

Gods people if at any time they grow dull or heavy in the performance of holy
duties, here they are refreshed, quickened, comforted; these meetings revive a
man's spirits, and put a kind of heavenly life in him. Blow the coals, and if
there be any fire, it will show it self; so will grace in the heart, when the
gales of the Word shall blow upon it. Now then to find no taste, no relish, no
comfort at all in these ordinances of God, is a clear demonstration of a dead
heart, and a graceless soul.

But what though for the present thou can not find that comfort in the word,
yet in coming to these public assemblies, thou shall testify thy homage to
God, and show thy reverence to his ordinance, and the Lord at last may cause
his Word to penetrate thy heart, and to warm thy soul, that thou may come
to desire it more then thy appointed food. And know that in our often urging
and pressing you to come, we do not herein require any duty or homage unto us,
but unto God. And if in refusing to come, you did but discountenance, disgrace,
dishearten, and show your contempt unto us, then the matter were not great. But
this you shall find true another day, that this contempt has reached unto God
himself.

Thirdly, there be others that make every light occasion, well be excused.
Surely God will make this Eunuch here a swift witness in judgment one day,
against such men, who albeit his employment were great, being so near the
person of so great a Queen, yet thinks no time too long, cost too great, or
ways too far, to worship God. I would pray such men but to consider these
examples; Esa. 38.21.
Hezechias having been sick of a dangerous and mortal disease, within three
days after, went into the Temple; he did not, as the manner is, keep in
whole weeks and months, for a little cold, for a small grief, or infirmity,
or the like, but so soon as ever he perceives any mitigation of his disease,
as that the danger thereof is past, to the Temple straight goes he. The woman
that had a Spirit of infirmity eighteen years, Luke 13.10.11.
was not held from Gods house, but upon the Sabbath day resorted unto the
Synagogue.

It is a sign of a barren and graceless heart, to slight the Sabbath, and the
holy exercises on that day. And know thou, whosoever thou art, that find
this to be thy case, that have no delight, and can find no comfort in the
communion of Gods people in these holy assemblies here, that thou shall have no
part nor portion, no, nor any fellowship with them, in the kingdom of heaven
hereafter: for those that have no heart to bear a part with the Church
Militant in their holy assemblies here, shall never come to bear a part in
that Quire, where Saints and Angels shall sing continually in the Church
Triumphant.

that stick not to say, they can serve God at home as well as at Church; they
can pray, and read good books at home, and so long as they employ themselves
thus, think they are not to be blamed. But what say these men to David, or
what are these men to David? could not he being a Prophet of God, and a man
after Gods own heart, endued with such a wonderful measure of the sanctified
graces of Gods Spirit, serve God in private in the time of his banishment, as
these in their houses or Chapels of ease? Yet he did long to come into the
Courts of the Lords house, yea, he did envy the very Sparrowes and Swallows
that might come into the Temple, (...) 4 (...)
and build their neasts near the Altar, whereas he might not come therein.

admonition, that we labor to bring our hearts more and more to be affected
with these holy duties, to prize these public assemblies, and to be thankful
unto God for the same, that we never rest until we bring our hearts in some
good measure to say with David, ^sal (...)
I was glad when they said, we will go up into the house of the Lord; and to
this end let us be^ exhorted to provoke one another, and to call one another,
as the faithful before; Come let us go up to the house of the Lord. And
herein, Masters of families and Parents, are to be exhorted, th^^ they think
it not sufficient, (...) they themselves come, bu^ to ^^e to their Children and
Serua^^^ that they come also to Gods wor^ship. Thou must suffer none to attend
thee in thy house, that will not attend thee to Gods house.

Remember the charge, Thou, thy Son and thy Daughter, Ex. 20.10.
thy Man-seruant and thy Maid-seruant, Josh. 24 15
etc. Iosuah undertakes for all that are in his house, I and my house will
serve the Lord; and this was one of David's greatest comforts, that he had gone
with a multitude, Psalm. 43.^^
and led them the way to the house of God.

Went up to Jerusalem to worship.

But why would the Lord suffer him to go up to Jerusalem, Philip sent before?

God, Philip at the first to have instructed him, but he would not, but
suffers him first to travail up to Jerusalem. No question the Lord was much
delighted in this obedience of his Servant: and in respect that his love to
religion was such, as made him endure any labor, cost or pains, he was moved
the rather to bless him with the ministry of Philip. God had left in his
Church means whereby he would have men taught, such as were those sacrifices
now done at Jerusalem, which he will not have neglected. It pleased the Lord
well that the Eunuch should be first instructed in the rudiments of the Law,
that he might be the fitter for the Doctrine of the Gospel. The Lord might
have sent down the holy Ghost upon Cornelius and his company, Act. 10.
before Peter preached unto them, but he would not, but first makes him fit for
Peter's ministry, and for the receiving of the holy Ghost. And thus the Lord
could have instructed Saul when he first heard that sound Acts 9.
from heaven, but would not until he were first fitted for prayer.

We are taught hence, Dect. Catechizing ^^ce^^^^y.
that if we would be fit for the strong me^t of the Gospel, we must first be
thoroughly instructed in the principles of religion.

Thus the Author of the Epistle unto the Hebrews, by a lo^ing obiurgation or
chiding, reproues the want of this amongst them: H^b. 5.1.
When for the time (says he) ye ought to be teachers, ye need that one should
teach you a^ai^e which be the first principles of the Oracles of God, and are
become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.

So Paul, 1 Cor. 3.2.
I cannot speak unto you as spiritual, but as unto babes. And hence is it,
that Moses commands the people to teach their children the Law of God, D^^.
6. Ex^ ^.14.
and the use of the Passover.

And surely this serves to condemn the great neglect of this duty,

To Jerusalem to worship.

This could not be done but with great cost, for so were the sacrifices and
service of God in the time of the Law, before the coming of Christ, very
costly. So likewise his pains in travel was very great, it being far
distant from that place to serusalem; yet not withstanding it is not the cost,
nor it is not the pains in travel, that can keep him back, or any whit
discourage him, but up will he go to Jerusalem, there to worship God: and
herein will teach us,

That the duties of Religion must earnestly be pursued and followed after, The
duties of religion must be earnestly pursued and followed after.
not coldly, negligently, and carelessly, but earnestly, zelously, carefully,
and constantly. Men must not stick for labor, for cost, for their pains, but
the Lord must be served intentiuely, and constantly.

In every service we do unto God, he calls for this zeal, and godly
resolution to go thorough with the same.

And surely this was the great commendations of the Prophet David, that he had
a zeal as hot as fire, Psalm 96.10
The zeal of thy house has eaten me up. This forwardness and zeal we may
see to have been in the people of God in building of the Temple, wherein they
spared no cost, as also in their diligent repairing to the same, wherein they
spared no labor: and to this are we exhorted. Seek for wisdom as for silver,
and search for it as for hid treasures. Now they that work in Mines of the
earth, dig deep, and are not beaten off with much labor; such resolution
becomes it Gods people to have in seeking the true treasure. The Lord cannot
abide that men should go about his service negligently, coldly, and carelessly.
Cursed are they that do the work of the Lord negligently; Ier. 48.10.
and How long halt ye between two opinions, 1 Re. 18.21.
etc. And it was that our Savior was so highly offended with the Church of
Laodicea, Ren. 3.15.
that she was neither cold nor not, and therefore the Lord threatens to spew
her out of his mouth.

It was the commendations of those in the days of our Savior, that they
flocked after him, and pressed upon him. And in diverse places we read that
multitudes followed Christ, to hear his heavenly doctrine. Yea our Savior
^^^onisheth us to labor, but for what? Not for the meat that perishes, Ioh. 6
but for the meat that endures to eternal life.

Zo^^^ (...) qu^^ed (...) ^u^^^ pa^^ o^^^o^^ wo^^s^^^.
And this zeal and diligence I ^^ig^^t have ^hewed how God requires the same in
every part of his worship and service As,

First in the preaching of the word. We are commanded to preach the word in
season and out of season, (...)
to improve, rebuke, and exhort, with long-suffering and doctrine.

swift to hear. I^^a. 2.19.


Thirdly, in prayer, we are com manded to be fervent in prayer. 3 R^^^. ^^. 12


And in all the duties of sanctification, we are commanded to redeem the
time, and to work out our salvation.

And great reason.

First, in regard that such as do the work of the Lord negligently, Cursed is
every one that does the work of the Lord negligently. Ier. 4^.^0.
But such are all those that come negligently unto Gods service, and therefore
lie under this curse.

Secondly, to do any duty to God negligently and carelessly, shall find
acceptance with the Almighty, further then the same is zealously performed in
faith, repentance, and obedience to Gods Commandment.

Thirdly, such as perform any duty formally, That shall be taken away which
they seemed to have. This was the curse of the Church of Ephesus, a drowsy and
deadhearted people: Reu 2 5.
Thou have lost thy first love. Such drowsy Christians are always under a
spiritual consumption; for it fares with such a one, as with him that has a
Consumption of the body; for there the natural heat decays daily more and
more, and threatens death. Even so such as have a spiritual consumption of
the soul, the spiritual heat does diminish, and threaten destruction.

Fourthly, Corinth: Your zeal has provoked many. 2. Cor. 9.2.


And last of all, Pro. 23.4.
If thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding: if
thou seek her as silver, and search for her as for hid treasure. What then?
Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of
God. Feruency and zeal in good duties, adds wings unto them, and makes them
sore aloft, and pierce the heavens even into Gods presence. Whereas duties
formally performed, and but with lip labor only, bring no fruit at all, but
hasten Gods sudgements upon him that does them.

Seeing then that the duties of Religion are so earnestly to be pursued and
followed after; Eunuch here, unto Jerusalem, to worship God, as that they mock
and scoff at others that do their duties herein. Certainly if this Nobleman
lived amongst us, it were not his greatness that would free him from the
imputation of Puritanisme and his zeal should not escape the disgraces of
wicked men.

Is not this common in the world? See we not that if there be any one in a
Parish (as many, God knows, there be not) that is more forward then others,
to sanctify the Sabbath, and to spend that day, as set apart wholly for Gods
service, in the public duties belonging thereto, how are these singled out
above all others, and derided and scoffed at for the same, when drunkards,
swearers, and profane persons are never wondered at.

This hard measure David met withal from Micol his own wife, 2. Sam. 6, 20.
who dancing before the Arc, therein expressing the inward joy of his heart,
she mockes him, How glorious was the King this day? To whom David made answer:
It was before the Lord, who chose me before thy fathers house, and I will yet
be more vile. Let it ever be the commendations of all Gods people, so to be
vpbraided and scoffed at for their godly zeal. As for wicked men, they are
never so zealous, as in the cause of sin. And this indeed is the misery of
this age and time wherein we live, that that which, indeed, is the greatest
ornament to a christian man; namely, to be zealous in religion, and forward in
good duties, should now become matter of scorn and derision. The sins of
this Land at this day, are many and grievous; yet this, if there were none
other, this, this, does prognosticate no good to this land.

Secondly, before. Our Savior tells us, that from the day of the Baptist,
until now, the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent pluck
it unto themselves.

But alas, in our days we may say, that the kingdom of this world, of
Darkness, Antichrist, and of the devil suffers violence: insomuch, that
men are more remiss in seeking for grace and the things that concern their
everlasting welfare, then they are for seeking for iron, for brass, for lead;
nay many prefer their seeking for Coals and Stone, Marle and Mortar, before the
rich pearl of the Gospel, that will make men rich unto salvation: what do
men think on less, what do they speak of less? what do they less labor
for? what do they less bewail the want of, then this?

If men make not good markets, they mourn; if their crop or cattle miscarry,
they cry out, or if any temporal calamity betide them, they are oppressed
with grief. But as for their deadensse of heart, their want of appetite to
heavenly things, and desire of grace, this does never trouble them. O that men
could see their barrenness in heavenly duties, and seeing it, bewail it, and
bewailing it, labor to come out of it. The Lord will be served with all our
might, with all our strength, and with all our power; the Lord cannot abide
that men should have a heart, and a heart, a heart for God, and a heart for the
world; a heart for Christ, and an heart for Antichrist. There is no halting
with God; 1. Reg. 18.21.
if God be God, worship him, is Baal be god, follow him.

Up to Jerusalem to worship.

But why found not this Eunuch an Apostle there to teach him?

The Lord sees not as man sees; only wise, Romans 8 7.
and knows when, and where, and how to bestow his blessings.

It may be, it was not so seasonable for Philip to have instructed him at
Jerusalem, for at Jerusalem his outward senses had been filled with goodly
shows, and with the great pomp of those ceremonies wherein the service and
worship of God at that time did consist: and during that time, happily he could
not be so sit for the glad tidings of the Gospel. For we know when men have
that which delights the outward senses, they are not so fit to receive that
which concerns the inward man.

Abigal would not tell Nabal what David had purposed against him, whilst he
was in his drunkenness, his senses being stupefied; and shall we think that
God does not observe his fittest time when to teach and instruct his people?

Again, it may be that a benefit or a treasure unlooked for, is more
acceptable; Jacob going to Lahan, was comforted by the way. Even so the good
tidings of the Gospel might be the more acceptable unto this man, because he
expected it not.

This teaches us still to wait upon God in the conscionable use of the means
wherein he will be found of us, until the Lord be pleated to teach, and to
reveal his will unto us.

And not to do as many do, because they have not the comfort they desire in
religion, and religious exercises, by and by cast off all care, and give over,
and so likewise in the time of affliction, especially when the rod shall be
continued upon them, use unlaw full means to come out of the same, as Saul
that resorted to the witch of Endor, this will yield no comfort in the end;
whereas to such as wait upon God, Deliverance will come, as Mordecai said to
Hester: and there is a reward for the righteous at last.

VERSE 28. Was returning and sitting in his Chariot he read Esayas the
Prophet. Text;

THe man, when he had been at Jerusalem to worship, he left not his religion
and devotion at the Church door, there to take it up when he came again, as
many do, that if they have been at the Church, and have made a few poor
prayers, heard a Sermon, and joined with the congregation in Gods service,
think they have done enough, and then betake themselves to their pleasures, and
live in all manner of profaneness all the week after; and think they may do
what they list, like that lewd woman Solomon speaks of, I have pence offerings
with me, Pro. 7.14.
this day have I paid my vows, let us take our fill of love. She thought that
she had then free liberty to do whatsoever she pleased, in regard of her late
service. So these think they may give themselves to all manner of licentious
courses, especially seeing they have performed the outward parts of Gods
service.

But this Eunuch is of another mind, being led by another spirit, he is the
same in private that he is in public, in his Chariot or Coach, that he is
in the Church. And herein will teach all men unto the end of the world.

That he that will be a Christian indeed, A true Christian must be the same in
private he is in public.
must regard the duties of godliness in private as public, at home as well
as abroad. It is not enough that we have borne a part in Gods service with the
assembly in Gods house, but we must bring religion home to our houses.

The disciples being met together, Luke 24.14
talked of those things that were done; and this was the great commendations of
those noble Bereans, they searched the Scriptures at home. Act. 17.
Daniel three times in a day prayed in his chamber, his eyes toward the
Temple. So David besides the public exercise of Gods worship, Seven times a
day (said he) will I praise thee. Ps. 19.164
And amongst all other the demonstrations of a godly man that shall be blessed
indeed, this is not the least, He meditates in the Law day and night. Psa. 1.2.
So Isaac, he went out in the evening to meditate; and so Job, it is said that
he rose up early to offer sacrifice, Job. 1.3.
and he called his family together, and there is reason for it, for,

First,

Secondly, Does an hypocrite pray always? says Job, meaning indeed, that he
does not pray constantly.

Thirdly, without this,

This serves then to reprove such as are present sometimes at the public
duties of Gods worship, can never approve themselves to God to perform either
in faith and obedience, as he ought, so long as he labors not after an
universal obedience, to be the same in private that he is in public.

Let us then be admonished in the fear of God,

He read Isaiah the Prophet.

This Noble man did not worship God at a venture, or as happily his forefathers
had done before him, as many in our days, who will do thus and thus, because
their fathers before them did so. But he will worship God as he had learned
out of his word. And herein will teach all men, unto the end of the world, a
necessary duty;

That if we will worship God aright, In Gods worship we must fetch our
direction out of Gods word
we must fetch our direction from Gods word, and not out of the Popes Chair.
The word must be our loadstarre, to guide us the way to Christ, and to keep
us in the way.

No service can please God, but that which is done by direction from his word.
The Lord himself gives express charge concerning this, Deuteronomy. 4.2.
when he says, Ye shall not add unto the word which I command mand you,
neither shall ye diminish ought from it, That ye may keep the Commandments of
the Lord your God, which I command you. The meaning is, Thou shall do no more
or less in my service, then what I command thee.

Yea, it is no better then Idolatry, Number. 15.39.
and spiritual whoredom for us to follow our own hearts, or to be led by
our good meanings in matters appertaining unto Gods service. This is such a
sin as does highly provoke God to anger, as we may see in Nadab and Abihu,
Leuit. 10.1.2.
in offering up of their strange fire, who were therefore destroyed with fire
from heaven. And for this cause Jeroboam drew the curse of God upon him, and
his posterity after him. Because of those golden calves that he had caused to
be erected at Dan, and Bethel, without warrant from God. And how sharply does
our Savior reprove the Scribes and Pharisees for this, who used a world of
ceremonies and traditions in Gods worship, which he commanded not, and
therefore says, In vain do ye worship me, Mat. 15.
teaching for Doctrine the traditions of men. Isa. 1.11.12.
And therefore the Lord will say to such, as to those idolatrous Jews of old,
Who has required these things at your hands? And hence is it that the Apostle
Paul, when he went about to remove those errors that we crept into the Church
of Corinth about the Sacrament, he brings them to the first institution of the
same by Christ himself; for where things are brought to the first institution,
all humane errors then cease. And this does the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.23.
when he says, That which I have received from the Lord, deliver I unto you,
etc. So that we see it is a most clear and grounded truth, that if we would
worship God aright, we must not be led by our fantasies and carnal reason,
good meanings, or the like, but we must fetch our direction out of Gods word.
And great reason: For,

God will be acknowledged the only Lawgiver, There is only one Lawgiver,
Iam. 4 12.
who is able to save and to destroy. So that none may presume in matters
appertaining to his worship and service, to add or detract, lest he incur
that curse: Cursed is he that shall add to the words of this book. Reu. 22.


Secondly, To. 14.23.
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Now faith, we know, is grounded upon the
word. So that it is impossible for a man to please God in any service he does,
that has not his word for his warrant and direction. It was Christ's last
commandment that he gave unto his Disciples, teaching them to observe all
things that I have commanded you. Mat. 28.20


And surely this strikes at the foundation of Popish Religion: word, as,
namely, their whipping of themselves, their crossings and coniurings, praying
on beads, going on pilgrimage, and a thousand the like, all which have no
ground or warrant at all out of Gods word: to whom we may truly say, as our
Savior to the woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4.22.
Ye worship ye know not what.

And surely herein we may justify our Religion against the Papists, and
against all the Adversaries of Gods truth, that we know whom we worship. And
if we be deceived, God has deceived us, and his word has deceived us, which
is impossible. For his word is true, as himself is.

Secondly, rule, and a perfect guide. Saint Peter calls it a Sure word, 2: Pet.
1.19.
whereunto (says he) ye do well, if ye take heed. So David, Psalm. 119.31.
I have cleaued unto thy testimonies, O Lord confound me not. And it is worth
our best consideration, what Samuel spoke unto Saul, that would sacrifice where
God had not appointed, Has the Lord (says he) as great delight in
burnt-offerings and sacrifices, 1. Sam: 15.22.
as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? Behold to obey is better then
sacrifice: and to hearken is better then the fat of Lambs.

And last of all, this shows the miserable condition that such are in, woe,
our Savior pronounced against the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23.13
They neither entered into the kingdom of God themselves, nor suffered those
that would. Now wanting the word to direct them, they serve Idols, yea they
worship Satan instead of God; For there is no worship can be pleasing and
acceptable unto God, that has not the word for it warrant.

He read Isaiah the Prophet.

Here we see ^is employment in his Journey, upon his return home into his
country; he was not idle, neither gave he himself to sleeping, nor spent he
his time in idle discourse, nor yet in reading vain, foolish, wanton, and
lascivious books, as the manner of many is to do. But he spent his time in
reading the Scripture, and in studying the word of God, for the further
building of himself up in the knowledge of God, and of Christ. Whose example
may commend unto all Gods people a necessary duty: namely,

That they be daily conversant in the Scriptures, Godly must be conversant in
the Scriptures. Deu. 6.6, 7.
and exercise themselves daily therein. This is that charge Moses gave unto the
people from the Lord: These words which I command thee this day, shall be in
thy heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall
talk of them as thou sit in thy house, when thou walk by the way, when
thou lie down, and when thou risest up. Again, Ios. 1.8.
The book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, But thou shall
meditate therein day and night.

This is Christ own charge, Search the Scriptures, Ioh. 5.39.
for in them ye leoke to have eternal life. This is likewise an Apostolical
iniunction, Col. 3.16.
Let the word of God dwell in you plenteously. To this Solomon exhorts
diligently, when he says, Prou. 7.3.
speaking of the word, Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table
of thine heart. And again, Say unto Wisdom, thou art my sister, and call
understanding thy kinswoman. And this was the great commendations of Timothy,
that he knew the Scriptures of a child. Therefore doubtless very conversant
in them. And of Apollo it is said, that he was mighty in Gods word. So that
we see, to spend much time in reading the Scriptures, and to be conversant in
Gods word, is an excellent things, a commendable duty.

Though the reading of the Scriptures do not ordinarily work faith and
repentance, is an excellent means to prepare the heart for the same work, and
to confirm our faith, to strengthen it, and to build up a man daily more and
more in the knowledge of Christ.

Secondly, Gods word must be the rule of out walking,

Thirdly, it is that only that must be our comfort, I had perished in my
affliction (says David) had it not been for thy word.

ought so diligently and frequently be read of us. How injuriously then does
the Church of Rome deal with men's souls, that will not permit men the reading
of the Scriptures, no private man in that Church, without special license, may
read the Scriptures, but must take all upon trust, and upon the bare word of
their teachers. But what is this, but directly to contradict the Lord himself?

We see that ignorant men pervert the Scriptures.

A poor filly shift, Resp:
because some abuse the Scriptures, shall others therefore not be permitted the
lawful use thereof, meats, drinks, etc. What is there amongst us that is not
abused? must therefore the lawful use be taken away?

This may serve to condemn thousands, amongst us, or never read the
Scriptures, never take the book of God into their hands; yea, such as give no
place to Gods word in their houses, hardly have a Bible at home; Cards and Dice
are rife amongst them, these are turned and tossed every day, but the book of
God is cast into a corner, lies covered with dust, and the Spider spins her web
over it.

This may serve also to tax many Noble men and Gentle men, and more then
needs. But they must have in stead of the Scriptures which are able to make
them wise unto salvation, idle, vain, and lascivious books; the Court of
Venus, the Palace of pleasure; books of love and venery, books of lies and
vanity, which do poison youth, stir up lust, and all uncleanness, and
drown men in perdition.

Well, let such men know, that while they bestow more time and leisure in
reading such vain and idle Pamphlets, then in Gods word; the Lord will plague
and punish them with a spiritual plague and judgment from above, that they
remain strangers from the comforts of Gods word; that is indeed a clapsed and
a sealed book unto them: whereas unto the godly, the word of God is their
greatest joy and solace. Thy word, (says David) is sweeter unto me, then the
honey and the honey comb; and again, Thy word is dearer unto me then
thousands of gold and silver. This comfort, such men are strangers unto,
whilst with the Swine, they feed on husks and draffe, and have no appetite
at all to the word of life.

And last of all,

We see a child will take delight to read his Fathers Will, to see what
Legacies be given him of his father. Now the word of God in the old and new
Testament, is the Will of God the Father, yea, Christ last Will and Testament,
wherein be many legacies given to Gods children, namely, remission of sins,
eternal life, the kingdom of heaven, etc. O then if we be the sons of God,
how can we choose but look into these Legacies, royalties, and privileges
given unto us of God our Father? We see how careful men be to get the book
of Statutes into their houses, how diligently will they read them, and
meditate upon them, that they may not offend? how much more ought men to search
into Gods statute Book, his Word, that they may not sin against him?

He read Esayas the Prophet.

But why took he such pains in reading the Scriptures, since himself
confesses, that he could not understand without a guide?

As he read with a desire to learn, so he was edified thereby, Quamuis multa
obscura, multa o^uia sunt.
as it appears by his traveling up to Jerusalem to worship. And howsoever he
confesses his ignorance in that place he now read, yet no man is so ignorant,
but in reading of that book, may get some profit.

Though many places of Scripture be hard to be understood, Men must read the
Scriptures though man things be therein obscure.
yet we must not give over reading; for that which seems hard to be understood
in one place, may be easy and plain in another. And when men make conscience
to be acquainted with Gods will revealed in his word, and are desirous of the
knowledge of the mystery of their salvation; God will at one time or other give
such to understand, and direct them to some Philip or other, that shall open
the same unto them.

Thus God commended the Book of the Law unto the people, not only to the
learned, but even to the unlearned also, that all sorts and conditions of men
might be familiar therein. Deuteronomy. 31.11.12.
Thou shall read the words of this law, before all Israel, that they may hear
it, and learn to fear the Lord: and in the same place he names their men,
women, Ier. 36.6.
and children. So Jeremy commands Baruch to read the word of the Lord before
all Judah, and in the audience of all the people. Therefore it concerned all,
and to this end our Savior gives this charge unto all, Search the Scripture.
Ioh. 5.39.
Now all these were not Clergy to whom these spoke.

What though some one place we meet withal be hard to be understood, shall we
therefore lay aside the whole Book of God, and read none at all, God forbid?
The Scriptures are such a fountain wherein the Elephant may swim, and the
Lamb may wade.

What man is there that having a Deed whereby he holds his Land, will cast
the same away, because it is hard, and he cannot understand it? Nay, will he
not the oftener look into it, and desire the help of those that have more
skill? Then much less should we cast aside the word of God, though some place
therein seem to be hard to be understood, which is our deed, and shows
unto us our assurance unto the kingdom of heaven; nay, we should read it the
more often, and desire the help of others, that we may understand the same.

The natural perceiues not the things that are of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neithe^ can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned.

Now the reason why the Scriptures are so hard to be understood of these men,
is not in the Scriptures themselves, but in this blind and corrupt nature of
ours.

A blind man, he sees not the light of the sun when it shines most bright;
is the fault in the sun, no? but rather in the imperfection of the man's sight.

Thus is it with the Scripture with natural men. But to that man whose eyes
God has opened, the Scriptures are not obscure, but this man coming thereunto
with humility and fear, in a sense of his own wants, with a desire to be
instructed, he is sure to understand them, at least so much as shall be
necessary for his own salvation, according to that of Solomon, ^o. 8.9
They are all plai^ to him that understands, and straight to him that would
sinde knowledge.

Ioh. 6.45.
and they shall be all taught of God: and again, He will teach the humble in
the way that he shall choose: Psalm 25 9 Verse. 12.
and What man is he that fears the Lord, him shall he teach in the way that
he shall choose. So the blessed Virgin in her Magnificat, He fills the hungry
with good things, and has sent the rich away empty.

hold, that because the Scripture is hard and difficult to be understood,
teach, that we must not read them, neither have them in a known tongue, but
lock them up from the knowledge and understanding of the simple, teaching them
to cast themselves upon the Church, and by a general implicit faith, to
believe as the Church believes, to rest there; a most damnable doctrine. Is
not this left in the great praise and commendations of this Eunuch, that he
searched into the Scriptures? Does Philip any where blame him for this his
prying into the Scriptures? nay, rather to show how pleasing and acceptable
this was with God, the Lord declares by sending of Philip unto him, to teach
and instruct him wherein he was ignorant.

to make conscience of this duty, to be frequent in reading the Scriptures, and
that we be not beaten off this duty through the hardness of any one place; we
see in other things, use makes perfect nesse, and that which at first seems
impossible to be attained unto, yet by industry, is attained unto at last; as
this is true in all Arts and Sciences in the world, so in the study of the
Scriptures. Here is milk for Babes, and meat for strong men; this is that
river wherein children may wade, and the Elephant may swim.

And to provoke us to the more diligent searching into the Scriptures, consider,

Motives to read the scriptures.
First, the Word of God is the only evidence a Christian has for his eternal
inheritance. Thy testimonies have I claymed as my heritage for ever, etc. Psalm.
119.


^^^l. ^9.7.
how simple soever thou be:



David, I had perished in my afflictions, (...).
had it not been for thy Word.

VERSE 29. Then the Spirit said to Philip, Tex^.
go near and join thy self to this Chariot.
HEre we have Philips commission to go and instruct the Eunuch. Where we are
to note first of all, the circumstance of time, when he went, Then, that is,
when the Eunuch was thus religiously employed in reading of the Scriptures, and
using the means to worship God aright, and to know him, ^hen is Philip sent to
instruct him, and to preach Christ Jesus unto him, to the salvation of his
soul. Note hence,

That God usually deals with his children, God will ^e found in the (...).
as with this Eunuch and poor heathen man; he read and searched the
Scriptures, conscionably employing himself in those weak means, for the
attaining of grace and knowledge; he was well employed, and now God takes pity
upon him, and sends Philip unto him to reveal Christ Jesus unto him, to save
his soul.

Thus, even thus, the Lord usually takes pity on men, and reueales Christ Jesus
unto them, and bestows mercy on them when they seek it in the means he has
appointed, such as are the hearing of the word, prayer, reading, meditation,
and the like.

And thus when Isaac was meditating and praying, Gen ^^
God sent him a gracious wife. When Daniel was in his prayer, Dan. 9.20.21.27.
God sent his Angel unto him, to acquaint him that the end of the Churches
captivity was at hand. Luke 1.8.
Whilst Zachary was executing his office in praying and sacrificing in the
Temple; the Lord sent an Angel with glad tidings unto him, that Elizabeth his
wife should bear him a son. Luk 2.250
Simeon being in the Temple serving of God, the Lord reueales his son Christ
unto him. And so is Peter sent unto Cornelius when he is fasting and praying.
Act. 10.
The point is clear.

These are given to some end, and to what, but to meet with God.

Mat 7.7.
Ask and ye shall have, etc. And, call upon me in the time of trouble, Psa.
50.15.
and I will hear thee, and deliver thee.

Seeing that God is thus found of those that seek him in the means he has
appointed; favor and love in Jesus Christ in the pardon of their sins, God
will take pity on such, and their hope shall not fail; Ask and ye shall
have, Mat. ^.7.
seek and ye shall sind, etc. And as for those that would feign come to
heaven, and yet turn back upon the means, will deceive themselves in the end.

this, ask still, seek still, knock still, humble thy self in prayer, and be
earnest with God in supplications, hear the word diligently, read it
constantly, receive the Sacrament preparedly, for nothing is more certain then
to find comfort, and to meet with God in the conscionable use of the means he
has appointed, Deliverance will come, says Mordecai to Hester, and it may be
at that time when we think least thereof, and then most welcome.

Then the spirit said to Philip.

That is, either the holy Ghost or else the Angel bad him go to the Chariot.
We heard before how the Angel commanded Philip to go toward the South, but
acquainted him not to what end, yet he declaring his ready obedience, meets
with this Eunuch. And now he meets with him, he speaks not till he was
commanded.

He will first have his calling and commission to the work, before he proceeds
to deal with the Eunuch, and herein will teach all men that are called to the
work of the Ministry, this necessary duty;

That they enter not upon this Calling without a calling, Ministers must still
have a calling for that they do.
nor to proceed further therein, then they receive warrant from God. Thus Moses
the Lords Captain of his people Israel, together with all Israel, were content
to be directed by the cloud, Exodus 40.36.37.
both for their going forward, and their standing still.

When Samuel was sent to an oint one of the sons of Iesse, when Eliah came
that was the eldest son, and so the second and the third, yet laid he his
hand on none of them, till the Lord commanded him. So Philip here, he will
first receive his charge from God, before he will presume to speak to this
man. Thus did David still ask counsel of God in any notable enterprise that
he took in hand. 2. Sam. 2.1.
The Ministers of Christ must not run before they be sent, but stay til they
a have calling from God, till he set them on work, and put them into his
service, till he bids them go, and furnishes them with gifts and graces, will
and skill to do the work of the Lord; and then they must readily put the same
in execution. None of all the Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremy, Amos, etc. None of all
the Apostles, no not Christ himself, durst take this calling before they were
called thereunto by God, and then they did most readily and willingly put the
same in execution.

And the reasons are, ^^am. 6 7 Number. 16.9
men are but intruders, as Vzza was, and that God which ouertooke him in that
sin, will not suffer such men to escape unpunished.

I sent them not, Let 23.32
nor commanded them, therefore they shall not profit this people at all.

They ran, but I sent them not, neither have they preached my ordinance. Such
are they that will usurp this public and sacred function without a lawful
calling. And within the compass of this reprehension are such Midwiues as
presume to baptize Infants, having no calling thereunto; I would commend unto
such, the example of the men of Bethshemish, who prying into the Arc without a
calling, 1. Sa^ 6.19.
the Lord smote of them 50070. men.

So Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, taking upon them the Priesthood without a
calling, Number. 16.9
the Lord destroyed them and their company, by causing the earth to open her
mouth and to swallow them. So is Azariah stricken with a leprosy to his death,
2. Kin. 15.5
and that because not content with his kingly office, he would take upon him
the Priests office likewise, to burn incense unto the Lord.

Now then if these usurpers and prophaners of Gods ordinances in the time of
the Law did not escape Gods vengeance, how much less now in the time of the
Gospel? And although God do not now execute judgment from heaven as before,
yet the sin is no whit lessened, nor Gods hand shortened, Nah. 1.2.
but the greater will be their judgment in the day of the Lords account.

Saul that went to Gigal, as Samuel had appointed him, but because that Samuel
came not at the day appointed, therefore he would presume to offer sacrifice
So many will go to Gilgal, Gods house, the place of his worship and service;
But if God answer not their expectation, they will do as Saul did, they will
prevent the Lord, and help themselves, this is to pass our calling.

And thus God calls men daily to his Gospel, which is the wedding of his
Son; which he compares unto a wedding, for the variety of delicates that is
offered in the same: Such as are remission of sins, Justification,
sanctification, yea and gloricatition it self. Now to partake of these things,
the Lord requires that men should put on their wedding garments. Now how many
be there that come, no way regarding whether they come fitted in faith,
repentance, and obedience, with pure affections, in love to Gods ordinance,
with an hungring and thirsty appetite unto Gods word, with an hatred and
loathing of their corruptions. Nay rather they come in their old garments, the
garments of the old man, such as are, ignorance, pride, covetousness,
malitiousnesse, etc. and yet they will come to the wedding. These men must
know, they go beyond their commission, for though God call men to the marriage,
yet he calls none such; let such fear the judgment that followed, Mat. 22.
to be bound hand and foot, and east into utter darkness. Let all drunkards,
swearers, adulterers, Sabbath breakets, and the like, take heed how they
approach near unto God, when they have no such warrant: for God will be
sanctified of all such as appr^^ch near unto him, either in mercy to their
salvation, or else in judgment to their confusion. Again, because God bids
us come unto the table of his Son, that holy Communion, and tells us withal,
how we shall be quali (...) ^^d made meet guests for the (...) and that by
examming our (...) concerning our knowledge, faith, repentance, love, etc. Now
when men shall presume to come to this sacred ordinance of God, without this
due examination, such eat and drink to their own destruction, and go beyond
their calling and commission.



Join thy self to this Chariot.

This was as much as if the Spirit, or the Angel, should have said; Go to
yonder poor man, instruct him, and teach him in the way of life and salvation,
preach Jesus Christ unto him, that his poor soul may be saved. O what happy
news was this to this poor heathen Pagan man, to have Philip thus sent unto
him, to save his soul.

This poor Ethnicke had traveled far, and taken much pains to find Christ,
and to be instructed in the mystery of his salvation; and behold now at last
he obtaines his desire, here is such a one sent unto him that is able to
inform his conscience, and settle his judgment in the way of life and
salvation. Note we hence,

That the Lord sets down a time when he will speak unto his, God has a
seasonable time to speak unto his people, Ioh. 2.3.
and when he will reveal himself unto his people: My hour is not yet come,
says Christ unto his mother. So here Philip did not by and by speak unto the
Eunuch, no not after he was come unto him, but he stayed a time, and heard
him read. God gave not his Law by Moses unto the people by and by, but he
continued a good time first. Christ did not preach the Gospel by and by, so
soon as he was able to preach, but he stayed a time. Neither did he forthwith
cause his Gospel to be published through all the world by his Disciples, but
there were added daily to the Church. Ioh: 5 5.


The poor man that lay at the poole of Bethesda thirty and eight years, could
have none to thrust him into the water to cure him; Yet at last Christ wrought
the cure upon him. Even so the poor woman in the Gospel, that had the bloody
issue twelve years, she had her time wherein she met with deliverance. Thus
was it with Christ's Spouse, his Church in the Canticles, Can. 3 4.
there was a time wherein she sought Christ, but could not find him. There
was a time again wherein she found him whom her soul loved. Howsoever the
Lord may for a tim^ frown upon his people, and not by and by answer them in
the desires of their souls, hungring and thirsting after comfort, yet in a due
time Deliverance will come, There being nothing in the whole world more sure
and certain, then comfort and deliverance unto the godly after their miseries
and troubles. The poor shall not always be forgotten: Psalm. 9.18.
The hope of the afflicted shall not perish in the end. And it must needs be so.

Call upon me in the time of trouble, Psalm. 50.15
and I will hear thee and deliver thee; and again, Ask and ye shall have,
seek and ye shall find, etc Now God could not be true in his word, nor
faithful in his promises, if he should not, at one time or another, be found
of his people that seek him in truth of heart.

Because of the deep sighing of the poor, Psalm. 12.5.
I will up, says the Lord.

Thirdly, if the Lord respect his own glory, he can do no less at one time or
other, the^ hear his people, and answer the desires of their souls,
unfeignedly seeking him. He has not despised the poor, nor hid his face from
him: My praise shall be of thee in the great Congregation.

This teaches us then to wait upon God in the Ministry of his word; David we
can pant after the word of God, he will satisfy our hungry souls with good
things. After two days he will revive us, Hos. 6.2.
in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. As he
has promised to feed our hungry souls, and heal our wounded consciences, so
he will perform his promise, and power in the sweet oil of the Gospel into
them.

Poor men, if they hear of a doale, they will wait all the day for it. We
then knowing the truth of Gods promises, that he will certainly hear and
answer us, ought we not with patience stay his leisure, till he make good his
promise?

Go near and join thy self to this Chariot. Text.


This being the means whereby the Lord would instruct this poor man in the
knowledge of Christ, and mystery of his salvation; and so in consequence to
bring him to eternal life: We are further taught,

What a wonderful mercy, A great mercy of God to send a faithful Minister
unto a people.
and high favor of Almighty God it is to send a Philip to any people, town,
or perish, to any house or family, for hereby Christ is preached and made
known, in whose name alone, salvation is to be had.

Such are ever messengers of glad tidings of the news of pardon and remission
of sins, of grace and mercy to them that truly repent, and are the
messengers of peace, giving men an admittance into the everlasting kingdom of
his dear Son.

The Lord promised this as a blessing unto his people, I will give them Pastors
after my own heart. Ier. 3.15.
And herein indeed did Christ manifest his great care and love to his Church,
both before and after his ascension, in leaving behind him a supply of
Apostles, Evangelists, Ephesians. 4.
Pastors and Teachers, to continue herein, even until his coming again.

What a blessing was this unto the Church of Corinth, that Paul should be sent
unto them, and to continue there a year and a half; see the blessed fruit
thereof, God had much people in that place. Acts 18.10 Acts 16.14
What a blessing was this unto Lydia, that Paul is sent to her, by which means
her conversion is wrought, God opening her heart? How happy was it with the
Iaylor to have such prisoners as Paul and Sylas were, Acts 16.26
by which means he became a believer? How happy was Zacheus to get a sight of
Christ, by which means, Luke 19.
salvation came to his house?

When Christ had preached the Word in Samaria, the Text says, Many believed in
him, and there was great joy in all that City. By all which testimonies and
examples, we may clearly see what a singular favor of God it is to such
persons and places, to whom the Lord is pleased to send a faithful Philip, and
painful Minister.

And this truth will the more clearly appear by the contrary. How that it is
a fearful judgment of God upon that people that want a Philip: when Paul and
Timothy had gone through Phrygia and Galatia, they were forbidden by the holy
Ghost to preach the Word in Asia, and were showed in a vision that the Lord had
called them to preach the Word in Macedonia: Acts 16.6.9.
which direction of the Spirit, restraining the Apostle from some places, and
appointing him to othersome, shows plainly the singular favor of God to the
one, and Gods heavy wrath on the other. This truth is further cleared by that
of the Prophet Amos, where the Lord threatens this as the most fearful
judgment upon the people for their sins, Behold (says the Lord) The days
come, Amos 8.11
that I will send a famine into the Land, not a famine of bread, or thirst of
water, but of hearing of the Word of the Lord. The like is that of Solomon,
Where prophesying fails, the people perish. Pro. 29.18.
Neither let this seem strange to any, that it is so singular a favor and
mercy of God to any, to have a painful and conscionable Minister, and that
the contrary is so fearful a curse: for consider but

Peter, Being borne again, 1 Pet. 1.23
not by corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, 1 Cor. 1.12
the word of God which lives and abides for ever. And again, it pleases God
by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe.

The word of faith. Rom 10.8


Philip to preach Jesus Christ unto them, none to tell them of their sins,
yea, they are weary of the company of such, they cannot be quiet till they be
rid of them? Oh the case of such is to be lamented, it is a sign that God has
given such up to their own hearts lust, and that such shall lie and rot in
their sins, until the Lord find them out in the searching day of his
account. And yet alas, such is the miserable condition of many a one, that
cannot abide the presence of Philip, but hate him in their heart, wish him out
of their company, as one that marrs their mirth, and they cannot be merry
whilst he is amongst them.

Philip amongst you, a painful and faithful Minister, to instruct you, to
preach Jesus Christ to you, to save your souls: Oh then acknowledge this a
singular favor of God, that he means your good, even the salvation of your
souls, and be thankful unto him for it, receive not the grace of God in
vain, but lay hold upon the Lords tender of grace offered, embrace the
Gospel, let Gods Ministers be dear unto you, and bless God for them; and if
you want a Philip, a faithful Pastor, O pray to God for such a one, that God
would show this mercy unto you, the fruition whereof is a singular mercy, as
the want whereof is a fearful judgment.

And last of all, this may provoke the people of this Land, to thankfulness,
inasmuch as he has been pleased to send many Philips amongst us, and has
opened unto us his chiefest treasure. The Lord has put the bars into the Rings
of the Arc, whereby his glory is carried throughout our Land, Psalm. 44. vlt.
The Lord has not dealt so with every Nation.

And let us know, that where much is given, much shall be required; and such a
people whom the Lord has thus honored above others, to enjoy this blessing,
the Lord looks for the fruits of the Gospel at their hands above others.

To this Chariot.

It seemed that this Nobleman, for all his zeal and forwardness, was much
addicted to his ease and pleasure, in that he would ride in his Chariot. The
Prophet Amos says, Amos 6.1.
Woe to them that are at ease in Sion: That lie upon their beds of Iuory, and
stretch themselves upon their couches* Verse 4.
That drink wine in bowls, and annoint themselves with the chief ointments.
What then? was this his sin? surely no; for then does the creature serve to
the true end and right use thereof, when the same does further a man in Gods
service. We see his wealth and abundance did nothing hinder him from religion,
or any religious duty; neither does the spirit of God find fault with him for
this, or refused to send Philip unto him, but said notwithstanding, Go join
thy self to this Chariot.

We are taught hence, God gives things not only for necessity, but also
fordelight. Psalm. 104.14.15.
that it is not only lawful to have things for our necessity, but for our
repast and delight also. So David, He causes the grass to grow for the
Cattle, and green herb for the service of men; he gives wine that makes
glad the heart of man, and oil to make him a cheerful countenance. Mat. 11.8.
They that wear soft raiment (says our Savior) are in Kings houses; wherein
our Savior shows, that soft clothing is lawful, not only for necessity
only, but for delight and ornament also. So David, Psalm. 23.5.
Thou deckst my table, thou anoyntest my head with oil, and my cup runs
over. And thus we read of Earings, Jewels, and Bracelets, wherewith Rebecca and
other godly matrons in the Scripture were adorned withal, whereby it does
clearly appear, that God gives his creatures, not only for necessary use,
but also for ornament and delight, and it must needs be so; for,

are given to some end, then to what end, if not this? The like may be said of
many sweet persumes to delight the sense, and many excellent creatures to
delight the sight; for God which is only wise, does create nothing in vain.



Seeing then that the Lord gives thus his children the comforts of this life,
alone, but for delight and pleasure also. Yet even herein we must keep a
mean, that we may always keep a good conscience. And therefore Paul
admonishes, that they that rejoice, 1 Cor. 7.30
should be as they that rejoiced not, and they that buy, as though they
possessed not, and that they use this world, as not abusing it.

But this mean is very hard to be kept; some offend with too much strictness,
because they would bridle the great intemperance of nature, will use nothing
but that which is mere for necessity. This I confess is well at some times,
with some persons, and upon some occasions; but ever to keep this course, is
to lay upon themselves, a straighter bond then God has done.

Some again go farther, as Crates Philosophus, that cast all his goods into
the sea, supposing, that unless he did cast them away, he should perish by
them. But were not Abraham, David, Job, etc. We may be rich and godly together,
though I confess it is a wonderful hard thing so to be.

But the most dangerous error is theirs, who under the pretense of their
Christian liberty, given unto them in the use of outward things, will let loose
the reine unto all manner of intemperancy, riot and excess; that many times
the pesant is as brave as the Prince; the Carter does ruffle it out as does the
Courtier; the poor man that lives by his labor all the week, to spend his
money as liberally at the weeks end, as he that pays him his wages.

Now then to avoid these extremities, we must look well unto our calling,
whereunto God has called us, and to keep our selves within the bonds of the
same, not passing our calling, places, or degrees. Such as God has called to
any eminent place, and betrusted with abundance of the things of this life,
these may use their Christian liberties in meats, drinks, and apparel, and
other blessings for their repast and delight. Solomon had his stately Throne,
his princely robes; His Queen, Pharaohs daughter, had her garments of curious
needle work.

And it is fit that those that have a more special and higher place of
government, should by these outward things, maintain the honor of their
places and persons; the want whereof many times causes contempt to light on
both.

But if thou be a poor man to whom God has denied such abundance, thou must
with patience bear this condition, and frame thy life according to it, and not
murmr against God, because he has not bestowed a better portion upon thee,
neither seek by unlawful means to help thy self, but in that estate the
Lord has set thee in, therewith to be content.

But does not the Apostle forbid Christian women broydered hair, 1. Tim. 2:9
1. Pet. 3.3:
gold, or pearls, and costly array, as things not becoming women professing
godliness?

The Apostle does not there condemn these things as simply unlawful, Resp.
but the abuse of them, when mean persons do take them up, as in these days.
Now the Apostle shows the unlawfulness of them in such a condition.

Besides the Church of God at that time was under grievous persecution, and for
such as professed Christianity, to give themselves at such times to delights,
and pleasures, which God had appointed for a time of humiliation and mourning,
was a great sin.

VERSE 30. And Philip ran thither, Text.
and heard him read Isaiah the Prophet, and said, understand thou what thou
read?
PHilip having his commandment and commission from God, here we have his ready
execution of the same.

He ran, or outranne the chariot; herein appears the great readiness, and
willing disposition of Philip, to obey the commandment of God, he might have
found, no doubt, many delays, and sundry excuses to have kept him from doing
his duty. As,

First, how shall I dare to speak to this Eunuch, he being so great a
Nobleman, Lord Treasurer to the great Queen of Ethiopia.

Again, I am a mere stranger unto him, and therefore he may be offended at
my rudeness and boldness, if I should offer my self to come into his
company: or else he might have alleged his own simplicity, alas, I am but a
poor simple man, and what hope can I have to do him any good.

But Philip, we see, alleges none of these, but being called and sent of God,
he goes boldly and most willingly about the work of the Lord, and the duty of
his calling. Philip ran thither. Our lesson is,

That God would have us to obey him, God loves chearfulnes in his service.
and to perform the duties of our callings readily, willingly, and cheerfully.
We may see this here, to the great commendations of Philip, who being bid to
go, he ran thither, says the Text,

He ran thither: not to get a Benefice, but to preach the Gospel, and this
is it indeed that pleases the Lord greatly, diligence and sedulitie in doing
his will, and the duties of our callings. That which Paul speaks of a
cheerful giver, God loves a cheerful giver, is true of all other duties, God
loves a cheerful hearer, a cheerful prayer, a cheerful receiver; and of
Christ it was said, That it was meat and drink unto him to do the will of his
Father. And for this we are taught to pray, that we may do Gods will on
earth, as the Angels do the same in heaven. Now the Angels do Gods will
readily, willingly, and cheerfully: and therefore are they said to have two
wings to fly, because of their speedy execution of Gods will. And this was the
great commendations of those Noble Bereans above those of Thessalonica, Act.
17.11.
that with willingness they received the word. And so was it the praise of
Abraham, Genesis 2^.
that being commanded of God to sacrifice his son Isaac, that he rose up
early in the morning to do it.

Yea this readiness and willingness to do the Lords will, is a thing so
pleasing unto God, that wicked men themselves, albeit in by respects, when they
have readily executed the Lords command, the Lord has taken special all
notice of it, and recompensed the same. 2. Kin. 10.30.
We may see this in Iehu, Because (says the Lord) thou have been diligent to
execute that which was right in my eyes, against the house of Ahab, therefore
thy sons shall sit upon the throne of Israel to the fourth generation. And
yet we know that Iehu did it not so much in obedience to Gods commandment, as
to settle himself in the kingdom. Men make no reckoning of such a servant
that goes about his business lazily, or grudgingly, much less can the Lord
away with such that do his work negligently, ^^r. 4^.10.
formally, customarily, and but for fashion sake.

This serves to reprove many in the Ministry,

Some are so far from doing the Lords work readily, willingly, and
cheerfully, as that they do it not at all, but are rather like the wild Ass,
^er. 2.24.
swift to wickedness and sin. They run to an Alehouse, but have no heart
at all to Gods house, have in them no compassion at all toward those thousand
in Israel, that like wandering sheep are out of the way, and are in danger to
perish everlastingly. Surely it is not the least blemish of our Church, that
there is no better course taken with such, these are spots and blots amongst
us, opening the mouths both of Papists and Atheists to speak evil of our
sacred calling, and are a stumbling block to many.

Some again are backward in doing the Lords command, like Jonas, who ran
from his duty another way. The Lord bids Philip go, and he runs with all
speed, and readily and cheerfully does the will of God. But though the Lord
command these men to run, they scant go; they must be called again and again,
they have so many excuses to hinder them from doing their duties. Yea were it
not many times more for fear of man's law, and shame of the world, then love to
God, and compassion to the poor souls of their people, I fear me that many
would make small haste to preach the word at all.

There is a Lion in the way, or a Bear; it is too hot, it is too cold,
something or other hinders them from their duty; or if they do come, they stay
not to the last, but come with the last, and go with the first, even as a Bear
comes to a stake, so come these to this duty. Well, the Lord loves a cheerful
giver, and no other duty can find acceptance with him, no farther then it
has cheerfulness, to commend the same unto God. Oh then let us run to Gods
house, it will be the more comfortable unto us, and then may we look to meet
the Lord in his own ordinances, when readily and cheerfully we set our selves
to meet him therein.

But understand thou what thou read?

Philip might seem to want discretion greatly, to begin thus bluntly with this
Nobleman. Much unlike is this dealing of his to other the servants of God, who
when they have been to speak unto great personages, have seemed to use more
reverence, and to give them better respect. Thus one of the sons of the
Prophets when he came to anoint Iehu king, comes with reverence to him, saying,
I have an arrant unto thee, 2. King. 9.5
O Captain. And thus Daniel, with his, O King, so often in his mouth, Dan.
4.18.
does show the reverend respect that he gave to so great a personage to whom he
spoke.

And this was that reverent carriage of Paul, Act. 26.7.
when he was to speak to King Agrippa.

So that this behavior of Philip at this time toward this man, a man would
have thought might have forestalled the good which otherwise he might have done
on the man. But surely Gods ways are not as man's ways. Here is Gods servant
now to deal not with a Iehu, as the son of the Prophet was, nor with a
Nabuchadnezzar, as Daniel was; nor with an Agrippa, as Paul was, men carnally
minded, proud, fleshly, and vain. But with an humble soul, a meek servant of
God, one that loved not to be soothed up, and flattered in his sins, but to
be truly and plainly dealt withal; and therefore was Philip so much the more
welcome unto him.

And thus again the Lord uses sometimes to speak unto his servants, 1. King.
21.
as Eliah to Ahab, It is thou and thy fathers house that troubles Israel. Amos
4.1.
So Amos to the Princes of his time, calling them that Fat kine of Bashan, that
fed upon the mountains of Samaria. Now this dealing of Gods servants thus,
commends unto us this instruction.

That we are not to measure the truth of the message of God, The truth of Gods
Word not to be measured by outward appearance.
by the outward form of words, or manner of delivery of it, or by the
messenger, for God is not tied unto such means, but he can by the foolish
things of the world, confound the wise, as the Apostle says, When the world,
by the wisdom of it, knew not God in the wisdom of God; 1 Cor. 1.21
it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe.
Even so by this poor and plain man Philip, the Lord converted this great
Noble man. We may not then think, as the manner of many is, that the power of
the Gospel consists in eloquence of speech; but the evidence and
demonstration of the Spirit, is best seen in plainness: So Paul, Our
rejoicing is this, 2 Cor. 1.12.
the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not
with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation
in the world. And why should the world wonder at this?

That no flesh should glory in his presence. 1 Cor 1.28.29.


And hence it is that the Lord chooses the foolish things before the wise, and
weak things to confound the mighty, and the base things of the world, to bring
to naught things that are, for the clearer manifestation and setting forth of
his own glory.

respects the heart, and not the outward appearance. And hence is it that the
Lord gave this charge unto Samuel, when he was to annoint one of the sons of
Iesse to be King; 1 Samuel 167
Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature, for the Lord
sees not as man sees, for man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord
looks on the heart. And hence is it that the Lord makes choice of such
instruments, which the world so highly condemn, in regard he sees the heart,
and principally regards the integrity of the same.

and Fathers, and humanity, think meanly of the Word, though otherwise he
speak unto the conscience, and convince the same of sin. Such must know that
simplicity does best become the Gospel of Christ, and that herein the Apostle
Saint Paul does approve himself a faithful Minister of the same, in that he
came not with the enticing words of man's wisdom. Let men then take heed how
they despise those whom God has thus honored, and set apart for this service;
for this is indeed to cross the proceedings of God, and to bar up the way
against our selves, and our own souls, of life and salvation.

that have no outward beauty or excellency in them; It teaches us then to
give God alone the glory and praise of his own work, acknowledging it to be
his own gift, and to return him the praise. Thus did our Savior himself, I
thank thee O Father, Mat. 11.25
that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent of the world, and
have revealed them unto Babes and sucklings; even so O Father, for so it seemed
good in thy sight.

And this indeed does belong as a special duty unto us, when we shall see and
take notice of those great works in the world, in the conversion of souls, as
ordinarily are wrought at this day, by such weak means and instruments of
Gods glory, so much contemned.

Understand thou what thou read?

Philip begins first with the Eunuch, not waiting until the Eunuch began with
him. And this indeed will a gracious heart do, even set forward Gods work
whenever, wheresoever, and in whomsoever any opportunity shall be offered to
do God service.

He begins first with a question, But understand thou? hereby first of all
to discover the state and condition of this man with whom he was now to deal,
Ministers must know the state of their flock, and in private as in public,
instruct them in the ways of God.
that so he might proceed the better in the work of his ministry.

Hereby teaching the Ministers of Christ a necessary duty, to labor to know
the state of their flock, over whom they are set, and to take all occasions in
private, as in public, to edify their people, and to do good to the poor
souls of men.

But especially by asking of questions, and Catechizing them as Philip does
here, and by laying amongst them the foundation of religion.

This was that most commendable practice of the Church in the Apostles time, as
it appears by the Author of the Epistle unto the Hebrews, Heb. 6.1.
where it seems there were six principles of Christian religion taught unto
the people.

1 Repentance from dead works. 2 Faith toward God. 3 The doctrine of
Baptism. 4 Of laying on of hands. 5 Of the resurrection of the dead. 6 Of the
last judgment.
Which Principles being first laid as a foundation in religion, the Author of
the Epistle, exhorts the Hebrews, not to rest there, but to go on unto
perfection; for this was Abraham, Genesis 18. Ios. 24. Acts 10.
Iosuah, and Cornelius, so highly commended in the Scriptures, their well
trayning up of their children and families in the fear of the Lord. This was
it in the primitive Church, and in all reformed Churches ever since.



For first by this kind of private conference and dealing with them,
especially by questions and answers, men are brought to the knowledge of God,
and of Christ.

have most freedom in propounding the doubts, and so may receive instruction.







shall leave all men without excuse in the day of the Lord. The uses follow.



First, Ministers that go about to raise up a building without a foundation
that teach their people the high mysteries of Christ and salvation, whilst in
the mean time they remain ignorant even of the Principles of religion. What
Scholar, when he is first set to school, is put the first day in his
Grammar? surely, this is the reason why in so many Congregations of this land,
there is so much preaching, to so little edification.

Secondly, such people that take it ill at the hands of their Pastors, if
either in public, or private, their Minister take trial of their estates, by
asking them questions, they think Philip too ouerbold to question them; this is
a manifest sign of a barren and graceless heart: Bankrouts would not have men
to pry into their estates, but a man of sufficiency will never fear it.

Secondly, man, or close hypocrite, that has knowledge, so long as his life is
not openly profane, then of a mere natural man that is civil, and void of
knowledge.

So should it encourage Masters and Parents, yea, all heads of Families, to
train up their children, and those that are under them, in instruction and
information of the Lord; for howsoever in the best families, some Esaus and
Ismaels may be found, yet if men belong to God, this course will prove one day
no small advantage unto them.

Understand thou what thou read?

In this Question of Philip, how plainly or bluntly soever propounded, we may
further

What are those things that God requires of every Christian, Holy duties must
be performed with understanding.
namely, that we understand the things we read, or hear, or speak, or sing;
all these duties must be performed with understanding. Who so reads, Mat.
24.15.
let him understand: Thus Christ after his resurrection, when he appeared unto
his Disciples, and they knew him not, Luk: 24.45
He opened their understanding, that they might understand the Scripture. So
Paul, Ephesians. 3.3.4.
I wrote before in few words, that when ye read, ye may understand. This is the
thing that David often prays for at Gods hand, Give me understanding, Ps
119.34.
that I may keep thy law. So Paul, 1 Cor. 14.15.
I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also. And
this is that grace the Apostle Saint Paul prays for in the behalf of the
Philippians, Phil. 1.9.
I pray that ye may abound more and more in know ledge, and in all judgment,
that ye may discern things that are most excellent.

Without this true understanding of the Scripture,



This serves to reprove such as content themselves to read now and then a
Chapter,

Secondly, who in singing or giving of thanks, neigher mark nor understand
what they do: how many have we amongst us, that will run over the Lords
Prayer, ten Commandments, and Creed, for prayers, and know not the meaning,
nor regard to know it. This is indeed little better then to take the name of
God in vain, lip labor, and such a service as God can no way accept.

Thirdly, our common Papists, who have all in an unknown tongue, in such wise,
that whether they bless or curse, they cannot tell.



How can I?

Here we have the mild, modest, and meek answer of the Eunuch, wherein he
does freely confess his ignorance, and that for want of an Interpreter, he
could not understand the Scriptures, and how desirous he was to understand
them, he shows by his request to Philip, to come up into his Chariot to
instruct him.

Though Philip spoke thus bluntly, and as it might seem uncivilly, yet he is
not by and by in a heat, as commonly great men are, when they are thus roundly
and plainly dealt withal. As Jeroboam, that when the prophet had denounced the
judgment of God against the Altat in Bethel, he commanded, saying, 1. Kin^ 13 ^
Lay hold on him. And as the proud Sodomites said sometimes to Lot, Genesis ^9 9
This Fellow came in as a stranger, and shall he be a Judge? And as the Priests
dealt with Jeremy, Ier. ^6.8.
who when he had denounced the judgments of God against Jerusalem, took him
and said, Thou sualt surely dye. And thus dealt Ahab with Micha: Amaziah with
Amos: and Herod with the Baptist.

And thus is it with many in these days, if they be told of their faults, will
swell and control a man; men cannot abide to be questioned withal touching
religion: A manifest sign that the spirit of envy and of pride dwells in
them; they had rather retain their swinish affections, and sottish manners,
then to submit themselves to be taught, like a man that has a festered sore
that cannot abide the searching of it.

But this man is led by another spirit, and guided by another principle, he
does truly confess his ignorance, and desires Philip to instruct him in the
ways of God. Note hence,

That it is a sign of a gracious heart and humble soul, It is a sign of a
gracious heart, for a man to confess his own ignorance Pro. 3^.2. Psalm. 73.22
Job 42.3.
to confess his own ignorance. Thus Auger, Surely I am more brutish then any
man, and have not the understanding of a man. Thus David, So foolish was I and
ignorant as a beast before thee. Thus Job, I have uttered words that I
understood not: Things too wonderful for me, which I knew not. This Eunuch
here is a pattern of a gracious heart, and humble soul, see how ready he is
to make publication to the world of his own ignorance and weakness, to shame
himself, and to become nothing in his own eyes, to the end he might be a
meet scholar in Christ's School.

And indeed that man that seeeth his own ignorance and sin, is poor in
spirit, mournes for that he knows so little in Gods matters. This is a soul
fitly qualified, to be taught of Christ: Psalm. 25.9.
They that be meek shall he guide in judgment, and teach the humble his
wa^* To such the promise belongs. The reasons are,

First, He has filled the hungry with good things, (...)
but the rich he has sent empty away. The rich, that is, such as see not, nor
perceive their own spiritual poverty; these (...) profit aright by the
means. The reason is, they are like a ^^^^ne Bladder, puffed up with ^^^^ceit
of their own worth, (...), and knowledge, and (...) ^^^ze the means of life
(...).

Secondly, the judgments of Gods people are rightly informed, which gives them
(...) and more to disco^^^ (...) ^^rall defects ^ha^ (...) Lord (...)
^^^^^standing a (...)* which the (...) into the mi^^^, ^he more (...) it
discouers the spiritual (...) thereof.

him who has promised to teach the Humble.

Whereas on the contrary, if upon examination, thou find no such want in thy
self, but rather with the Church of L^odicea, think thy self to be rich,
rich in knowledge, understanding and grace. Know, O know, these very thoughts
of thine prove sufficiently, thy spiritual poverty and nakedness, that thou
know as yet nothing as thou oughtst to know.

Eunuch here: for till we come to find out this natural ignorance that is in
us in heavenly matters, and mysteries of Christ's kingdom, and mourn and
lament for the same, it is impossible for us ever to attain to sound and
saving knowledge.

But how shall I attain to this saving knowledge you speak of?

The way is, Mat. 12.5
Have ye not read in the Law? And when the young man demanded of our Savior,
what he should do to inherit eternal life; The answer is, Luke 10.26
What is written in the Law, how read thou?

saving knowledge, and therefore must be sought for at his hands, without whose
blessing no man can profit aright; for he that is the Author or the
Scriptures, knows best how to give understanding to his servants, to edify
that ^^^ues in their holy says.

Emaus, they talked of the things that had happened touching Christ, and were
further instructed in the truth of the matter, and understanding of the
Scriptures.

How can I without a guide?

Notwithstanding Philips plainness, this Nobleman does not catch and c^^pe at
him again, as to reply, What is it (...) thee whether I understand, or not,
etc. but ^^e freely confesses his ignorance, that he could not understand
without a guide. Wherein we have further to observe, the great humility that
was in this holy servant of God, and in him are taught,

What an excellent ornament Humility in a Christian is; Humility an excellent
ornament in a Christan.
no one grace does more adorn the profession of the Gospel in men, making
profession of the same, then this gift and grace of true humility. Humility
indeed is the very first step unto Christianity, as the first sin was pride;
So when God does repair the decays of nature by the work of grace, the first
grace wrought in the renewed man is humility. The first work of true grace in
the heart of any, is to cast down the high thoughts of the heart, and to lay
them low. A man this is not humble, and has not (...) ^^ained a base and mean
(...) of himself, is not fit for any good. For so soon as the eyes of Gods
children come once to be opened to see their own sins, and the vileness of
their nature, they abhor themselves, the comb of their natural pride is
poole down, and they then come to abase themselves before God and men.

See the truth of this in those excellent worthies of the Lord mentioned in the
Scriptures, who are memorable, as for their faith and other graces, so
especially for this Mother grace, the grace of true humility.

Thus Ahraham, Genesis 18.17
I am but dust and ashes.

This was Jacobs voice, I am not worthy of the least of Gods mercies.

This was David's voice, Who am I Lord?

This was Gideons voice, Judge. 6.15.
My fathers house is the least in all Israel.

This was the Baptists voice, Whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to unloose.

This was Peter's voice, Lord go from me, for I am a sinful men.

This was Paul's voice, I am not worthy to be called an Apostle.

Thus, thus, have Gods children cast themselves down, that God might raise
them up, humbled themselves that he might ex^^^^ ^^em, and the more vile in our
(...) eyes at any time, the more pre^^^^^ Gods sight.

Wh^^^^ (...) the contrary, a (...) that ^^prou^, and has his (...) ^ow ^^sily
will this man shake (...) the yo^^ o^ (...) 1. Pet. 5 5.
And God r^^^steth the (...) g^^eth (...) to the (...) a pr^u^ man of the (...)
God, he feels not his (...) ^^^rall misery, and therefore (...) not for it.
P^^^^ to him of (...) plenteous redemp^i^^ ^^rough Christ, and he esteems it
not, by reason he is not sensible of sin, and so not fit to receive the grace
offered in Christ. So that you see how necessary the grace of humility is.
The Reasons make it more clear and plain. For,

The Spirit of the Lord was upon me, Isa. 61.1.
because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek; he has
sent one to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives,
and to open the prison to those that are bound. Luke 1.53.
He has filled the hungry with good things. Mat. 5.6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness. To whom will I
have respect, Isa. 66.2.
says the Lord, but to him that is of a contrite spirit, that trembles at my
word. Psalm. 51.17.
The sacrifices of God are a broken and a contrite heart, etc. The promises of
life and salvation belong unto such, and such only.

to be instructed, such a one may come to Gods ordinances long enough, for as
he comes, so he goes, his heart being filled with pride, has in it no room
at all for Gods grace to dwell there; but God in his justice gives such men
over to themselves, to be hardened in their pride, and that the means of grace
should no whit profit such at all.

Learn of me to be humble and m^eke. How many have we that would be taken
for good Christians indeed, whose hearts are yet proud, and looks haughty;
the word has not yet humbled them unto this day. This does manifestly declare
that they are strangers indeed to the true work of grace, for true grace does
first of all subdue the pride of the heart, as the greatest hindrance of the
work of the spirit in a man.



There is besides this another pride in the world in those who lean so much to
their own wisdom, that they despise instruction, and make but a mock of the
preaching of the word. This pride of all other is most dangerous, for it breeds
a contempt of Gods ordinances, and so bars up against a man's own soul, the
means of grace, and the way to salvation*

How can I?

He does freely confess and acknowledge, that he was ignorant in the
Scriptures, and did not understand them.

In him we may see the condition of all men by nature. We understand ^o^ the
Scr^p^^^e^ (...) n^^u^^
Though men by nature have good wits, be wise and understanding in other
things, yet in Gods matters the ^^fest the world, b^ing me^^^ n^^^r^ll men, are
as blind as be^^^^^, and understand not the things of God, until they come to
be regenerate, and the Lord do open their eyes, and inlighten their
understandings by his spirit, all Gods counsels in his Word, are as a clapsed
and sealed book unto natural men, they know nothing as they ought to know.
The natural man perceiues not the things that are of God, 1 Cor. 2.14.
for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, for they are
spiritually discerned. Paul says, that our cogitations are darkened through
ignorance: and again, Ephesians 4.18. Romans 8.7.
the wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God. This is plain in this Noble man a
man of good gifts, no doubt, of great wisdom, and dexterity of wit, of great
policy in matters of the world, and State affairs, yet in Gods matters, does
ingenuously confess his own ignorance, that he could not understand the Word.

This we may clearly see in Nichodemus, Ioh. 3.
though a Doctor and seacher in Israel, yet was altogether ignorant in the
doctrine of Regeneration. And the Athenians, as learned as they were, when Paul
taught the doctrine of the resurrection, Act. ^7 32
they did but mock at him; so that we see, that they, that otherwise, are men
of great capacities, are strangely sottish and blockish in conceiving the
things belonging to Gods kingdom. We may see this more clearly in the
Disciples themselves, that when Christ had bidden them Beware of the leaven of
the Pharisees, Mat. 16.7.
they understood him, of material leaven; and if they were so ignorant, whose
eyes the Lord had begun to open, how great must the blindness and ignorance
of mere natural men be?

We are like unto Samuel, that when the Lord had called him three times, he
perceived it not to be Gods voice, but the voice of Eli, and the Text says,
Thus did Samuel before he knew the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.10
and before the word of the Lord was revealed unto him. And thus it is with us,
many a time have we heard the Lord speaking unto us, but we perceived it not,
for this knowledge is supernatural, and must come from the Father of light.

Would you know the reasons of it?

Adam, Genesis 3.6.
who aspiring to a greater degree of knowledge, then that he had by creation,
through Gods righteous judgment, lost that he had, and so brought this
spiritual blindness and ignorance upon himself, and upon his posterity*

1 Cor. ^.14.


Romans 8.7.
The wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God.

But this wisdom is weak and insufficient to bring men to heaven. Achitophel
was a great politician, his answers were as the oracles of God, 1 Samuel 16.23.
yet was not all his wisdom able to conduct him to heaven, 2 Samuel 17.23.
or to keep him from desperation. Thou may perish, and be damned eternally,
for all thy natural knowledge, and dexterity of thy wit, if thou have not had
the Spirit of God to be thy Schoolmaster, and thou taught the knowledge of God
by his Word, all thy natural knowledge will never bring thee to heaven. (...)


preaching of the Word? how many that are so far from making the Sabbath the
delight of their souls, as that the same is a burden unto them? how many have
we amongst us, that have their bodies here in the Church, but their hearts are
at Rome, that notwithstanding all that can be said or spoken against the
idolatry, superstition and open profaneness of that side, yet dote upon
popery, and are in love with that scarlet strumpet of Rome, notwithstanding all
her filthiness, spiritual whordomes, and abominations? How many learned men
be there, that are great disputers against the Gospel? why should we marvel
so much at these things, or so wonder at these men, seeing they do but their
kind, and show but the power of nature in them: all this while nature has
been their Schoolmaster, and the Apostle tells us, That the natural man
perceiues not the things that are of God. But if you will wonder at a man, cast
your eyes upon such a one that sets himself to obey the Gospel of Christ,
that has learned to deny himself, and to part with riches, honors,
pleasures, and to become a mortified man to all these for Christ's sake, and the
Gospels sake; here is a man to be wondered at; miracles make men wonder: the
conversion of a sinner is the greatest miracle that ever God wrought.

1 Cor. 1.2.
that we may be made wise. It is a special point in a Scholar of Christ, to
confess his ignorance, and to acknowledge his blindness in Gods matters. And
therefore if we would be truly wise, and learn to know Christ aright, let
us acknowledge our spiritual ignorance, for till then we can never profit
aright in Christ's school, nor be truly wise.

How can I without a guide?

We see the Eunuch, although a wise and prudent man, yet confesses that he
could not understand the word he read, without a guide.

It is the Apostles own conclusion, Romans 10.14.
How shall they hear without a Preacher? it is impossible; for, where
prophesying fails, Pro. 29.18.
the people perish. The conclusion is,

That without the Word preached, it is impossible truly to Christ, Without the
preaching of the Word, it is impossible truly to know Christ.
or to attain the work of regeneration: I speak in regard of the ordinary
means: for all the Eunuch his reading of the Scripture, though he did the same
never so diligently, he stood in need of a Philip to come and interpret the
same unto him.

Nay, he confesses it to be a thing impossible to know Christ, and to believe
unto salvation, without a guide, that is, without a Preacher.

How shall I? taking it for granted, to be a thing unlikely, yea, impossible
that he should ever attain to the true saving knowledge of God, or of Christ,
without the preaching of the word. Pro. 29.18.
Where prophesying fails, the people perish. To this purpose, excellent is
that speech of Elihu unto Job, Job 33.23.
If there be a messenger, or an Interpreter, one of a thousand to declare unto
man his righteousness, then will he have mercy upon him, and will say, deliver
him, that he go not down into the pit, for I have received a reconciliation.
If bare reading of the Scriptures would have served the turn, then must this
Eunuch needs have been happy and blessed, that was so diligent and careful to
read the same, yet he could not profit aright, without a Preacher; Faith
comes by hearing (says the Apostle and hearing by the Word preached. Romans
10.14.
When the world in the wisdom of it, knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching, 1 Cor. 1.21.
to save them that believe. To this agrees that of the same Apostle, 1 Cor.
4.15.
In Christ Jesus, through the Gospel, I have begotten you. 1 Pet. 1.23.
So Peter, We are borne again, not of mortal, but immortal seed, the word
of God. There is no one truth more clear in all the Book of God, then this,
that it is the preaching of the word that is the ordinary means by the which
we are brought truly to know Christ.

The Reasons are,



fire, to a hammer, Heb. 4.12.
to a two-edged sword, to the entering through, to the dividing asunder of the
joint and marrow, soul of the spirit.

1 Timothy 4.6
and is therefore called the wo^d of faith.

But is not reading, Moses of old time has in every city, them that preach
him, seeing he is read in the Synagogue every Sabbath day. Acts 21.


I grant, and not suffering their garments to wax old upon them, but when they
came into the land of Canaan, now they must not look to be sustained in such a
miraculous manner, but must sow their land, plant vineyards, and labor for
their sustenance.

Again, it may be answered thus, that the word read, it is true in a general
sense, does include the preaching of the word, and so does all other ways and
means whereby Gods power, wisdom, truth, goodness, mercy, etc. come to be
declared. But in that strict and common sense wherein the preaching of the word
is taken, it cannot be understood of reading. See we this clear in that of
our Savior, who when he came into the Synagogue upon the Sabbath day, the Text
says, He opened the Book, and read the Scripture, Then he closed the Book,
sat down, Luke 4.17.
and the eyes of all them were fastened on him, and he began to preach unto
them. Thus Nehemiah, The Levites read the book of the Law, Neh. 8.7.8
that done, they gave the sense, and caused the people to understand. So that
we see the Scripture takes notice of reading and preaching, as two distinct
things. And unto the preaching of the Word, is the promise made.

in season, and out of season: 2 Timothy 4.2
hereby they shall not only deliver their own souls, but shall turn many to
righteousness. This is the end of their calling, and the happy fruit the Lord
has promised to the powerful preaching of the word, the conversion of souls,
the enlarging of Christ's kingdom, and the winning of many to God.

Guide, especially in dangerous ways and places. Much more are such people and
congregations to be pitied, in regard of the peril of their souls, who want
a Guide to direct them, it is an heavy judgment of God upon such.

VERSE 31. And he desired Philip that he would come up and sit with him. Text.

THe religious disposition of this Nobleman comes further to be described unto
us, as by his great pains in traveling up to Jerusalem, there to worship God;
and by his diligence in reading of the Scriptures, and that in his journey, and
in his Chariot, so by his desiring of Philip to come and sit with him, to
instruct him in the knowledge of Christ.

And herein again we have another instance of his great meekness and
humility, that he would thus accept of Philip a poor man, thus to come into
his Coach and to sit with him.

Much unlike to this Eunuch are many men in these days and times, though far
inferior to him, yea it may be to some of his servants, yet would think
scorn to call Philip into their company. Nay, they would hardly endure Philip
to be so bold with them, as he was with this Nobleman. What else mean these
disgrace full speeches, so often spoken by so many men, what! shall he teach
me? does he think to have our heads under his girdle? O how far are these
men from the spirit of this Eunuch.

Yet, God be thanked, we have some Chief Rulers that believe on Christ. Ioh.
12.48.
We have some Corneliusses that will receive Peter; Act 10.
Some Sergius Paulas that will entertain Paul the Apostle. The Lord increase
the number of such daily more and more.

This, this must needs be no small commendations unto this so great a man, to
entreat Philip thus to come into his Chariot to instruct him.

He does not only acknowledge his igno^^nce that he could not understand the
Scriptures without a guide; but he does also desire Philip to teach and
instruct him. Note hence,

That it is the property of a true disciple of Christ, It is not enough to see
our ignorance but we must labor to come out of it.
and of a gracious heart, not only to see his ignorance, but also to desire to
come our of it, to be taught and instructed in the ways of God. This is in
deed Gods own ordinance; The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, M^l. 2.7.
and the people shall hear the law at their mouth. And thus the men of
Macedonia came to Paul, and besought him that he would come and preach in
their City the word of God. And indeed none profit more, we know, in the
school of Christ, then they that desire to be taught, that hunger and thirst
after knowledge, that will go to the Ministers of God, as she widow did to the
Prophet, in the new Moons and solemn Feast days. Indeed in the matters of
the world men will not be a shamed of their ignorance, but will confess it, as
in the sowing of their ground, when, after what manner, with what kind of
seed, etc. and they will desire to be directed. But, alas, in this heavenly
art, how many dissemble their ignorance, will not desire the direction of Gods
husband men, by which means their hearts lie untilled and barren.

It is a sign of a good stomach and perfect digestion, when men grow in
strength and have a good appetite to their meat. Pro. 9.5.
A wise man (says Solomon) will hear and increase in knowledge. And thus it
is with that man that is made wise by the word, he grows still in grace, and
hungers and thirsts more and more after wisdom. And there is reason for it.

Luke 8.18.
To him that has shall be given. But from him that has not shall be taken
away. God having betrusted any of his servants with a Stock of saving
knowledge, they increase in the same daily, and thrive and prosper in grace and
godliness. Whereas wicked men and hypocrites, that have all but in show, and
nothing in truth, God many times does take from such, that which they seem to
have.

their understanding and knowledge, and in them is that verified of Solomon,
He that increases knowledge, increases labor. For none labor and travel
more earnestly after knowledge and grace, then such as have already attained to
a compet^nt measure there of. It is with a Christian herein, as it is with a
worldling, the more the world comes on hand, the more gripple and covetous they
are; So the more knowledge and grace that any of Gods people have, the more
they covet after it.

Ignoti nulla cupido. Such as know it not, neither prize it, nor labor after
it. A godly man is insatiable in his desire after knowledge and grace, he is
greedy in having, he reads daily, he hears as often as opportunity serves,
he takes all occasions, with this Eunuch here, to edify and build up himself
in his holy faith. And what might be the reason of all this, he knows his
wants, and withal the worth of this heavenly treasure, and this makes him, the
more he receives, the mote to hunger and thirst after it.

Isa. 30.10.
Prophecy not; and with those wicked ones Job speaks of, Job 21.
We desire not the knowledge of Gods ways; Who refuse instrudion, though the
Ministers of God do tender their service unto them, they scorn them, and care
not for them: Pro. 1.22.
O ye fools, how long will ye learn foolishness, and the scornful take
pleasure in scorning, and the fool hate knowledge. They think themselves wise
enough, and good enough, and therefore desire not to be taught in the word.
But what says Wisdom there, I will laugh at your destruction. How many have
we in the world, that conceit themselves to have knowledge enough, yea they
will not stick to say, they know as much as the Preacher can tell them, and
out of the abundance of their pride, they slight Gods ordinance. But let such
hear what the Spirit of God testifies in this case to the conceited
Laodiceans, Reu. 3.17.
When they said they were rich, etc. Christ tells them that they were indeed
wretched, and poor, and blind and naked. He that has as much knowledge as
he does desire, did never as yet desire to know as he ought.

And this serves likewise for the just reproof of those that make no reckoning
and account of Phillips company, or use of Philips presence. This Nobleman
desires his company, and makes good use thereof. Many in our days will have
their household Chaplains, and sometimes a Philip about them, to be in their
company, and at their tables: but what use make they of them; Surely little
more then if they were a dumb Minister. Let a Lawyer be with them, and they
will make use of his knowledge; Let a Physician be with them, and they will
make some use of his skill. But how long may many a faithful Minister of
Christ be in the company of many before he be asked one question, or have one
doubt or case of conscience propounded unto him.

Gospel, in the midst of a crooked and forward generation.

VERSE 32.33. The place of Scripture that he read, was this, He was led as a
sheep to the slaughter, and like a lamb dumb before the shearer, so opened he
not his mouth. In his humiliation, his judgment was taken away, and who shall
declare his generation, for his life is taken from the earth.
THe Text is a relation of that portion of Scripture which the Eunuch was
reading, at such time as Philip joined himself to his Chariot.

The place is Esaias 53.7. where the same words are used.

The Eunuch desiring to know the mystery of man's salvation, and to be
acquainted with the word, whereby he might attain the knowledge of the same.
By Gods special providence, lights here upon such a place of Scripture,
wherein is contained the very sum of the whole Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
of the Christian faith; yea, such a place, wherein Christ's death, passion, and
glorious resurrection, are most clearly and perspicuously set out unto us.

In handling these words, we have 1 The Preface, the place of Scripture that
he read. 2 The Scripture it self, He was, etc.


In the Preface, 1 Who? the Eunuch. 2 What? he read. 3 The subject: matter, the
Scripture,


In the Scripture it self we have 1 Christ's humiliation, v. 32. 2 Christ's
exaltation, v. 33.


In Christ's humiliation (...) have 1 The person (He) 2 The passion, (was lea) 3
The illustration, 1 (as a sheep). 2 (like a Lamb)
4 The extent of his passion. 1 (to be slain) 2 (to be shorn.)
5 The reddition or application.


So opened he not his mouth.

The place of Scripture that he read.

(He) that is, The Preface.
the Eunuch, this great Noble man, as we have heard before. The note is,

That great men must be great possessours; Abraham a Prince, his great
commendation, Great men must be great professors.
was his zeal in religion: so David, Heze chias, Josias, Kings of Judah and
Israel, all of them very memorable in the Scriptures, for their forwardensse in
religion. The point we handled before.

(He read) he was not idle, nor gave himself to his ease or pleasure, but was
well employed in reading. And because he might read many idle lascivious
books, to no profit, therefore this was it that added greatly to his praise,
that he read the Scriptures, and therein spent his time in his journey.

The place of Scripture that he read, etc.

We are taught hence, Christians ^^ght to be conuer^^nt in the Scripture.
that it is an excellent duty belonging to every Christian, to be conversant in
the Scripture. The Lord would have men familiarly acquainted with the Word, and
to have it at hand with them, as their Councellor, upon all occasions to advise
them.

And hence is it, that the Lord has commanded, besides the ordinary course of
teaching by the Levites in the Temple; Deuteronomy. 6.6.7.
These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart, etc. And
thou shall bind them as a sign upon thy hand, and shall write them upon the
poasts of thy house; and upon thy gates, etc. and all to this end, that men
might be familiarly acquainted with the word. This is Christ's own charge,
Search the Scriptures: Io. 5.39. Col. 3.16. 2 Timothy 3 15
so is it likewise an Apostolical iniunction, Let the word of God dwell
plentifully in you, etc.

And great reason.

Psalm 19.7.
The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; when Paul had preached
unto the people, the Text says, Acts ^3.48
As many as were ordained unto eternal life, believed, and the Apostle Peter, 1
Pet. 1.23
We are borne again, not of mortal seed, but immortal, the word of God. etc.

Secondly, it is a christian man's evidence for life and salvation, Thy
Testimonies have I claymed as my heritage for ever, for why, Psalm. 119.111.
they are the very joy of my heart: we can never have true faith, firm hope,
undoubted assurance without it.

Thirdly, it is by the Word, All things are sanctified by the word and prayer.
So David, I had perished in my affliction, Psalm 119.
bad it not been for thy word.

Seeing then that it is so necessary a duty, weapon in their hands, who could
but think that he intended to betray them into their enemies hand, And is not
this the practice of that grand Captain of Rome, that whereas the word of God
is the sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6.^7.
a part of a Christian man's armor, both offensive and defensive, whereby we
repel the fiery darts of the Devil; how is this wrung out of the hands of
men, they must not dare to meddle therewith; then the which, what greater
injury can there be to the souls of men?

Hitherto of the Preface, the Scripture it self follows.

He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and like a lamb dumb before the
Shearer, so opened he not his mouth.

The words are the Prophet Esayes in his fifty third Chapter, and the seventh
verse. This Text is a clear prophecy of Christ, and this 32 verse sets out his
humiliation only:

Wherein are obseruable, 1 person, he. 2 passion, was led. 3 the illustration,
1 as a sheep, 2 as a lamb.
4 extent, to be slain, to be shorn.
5 the reddition or application of the whole unto the person of the Lord Jesus
Christ, so opened he not his mouth.


He was led as a sheep, etc.

Q.d. And that, as you have heard, Me^^ph.
he was reading in his Chariot. So that ye may know what he read, the very
place of Scripture on which he was employed at the instant of Philips approach
unto the Chariot was this, and none other, He was led, etc.

First for the meaning of the words.

(He) that is, Christ Jesus the eternal son of God, (...)
for so does Philip expound it, verse 35. He began at the same Scripture, and
preached unto him Jesus.

(Was led) that is, was taken and carried away by the traitor Judas, and the
high Priests servants, with swords and staves, as if he had been a thief or
male-factor.

(As a sheep) as an innocent and harmless sheep that had been altogether
profitable and commodious, and never hurtful or injurious unto any.

(To the slaughter) to be slain and sacrificed for the sins of men, as
sheep in the time of the Law, being offered in sacrifice, were first
slaughtered and slain.

(And like a lamb) and that ye may yet more fully conceive of his innocence,
(...)
if a lamb, a meek and harmless lamb, be meet more fully to express the
manner of his suffering, he was like an innocent lamb, a very lamb,
undefiled and without spot.

(Before the shearer) that meekly and without resistance, (...)
does remain quiet before the shearer, suffering his fleece to be shorn off.

(So opened he not his month) even as it is with a sheep when he is slain,
(...)
and a lamb when he is shorn, so was Christ Jesus silent, he did not strive
nor cry, nor was his voice heard in the streets, according to that prophecy of
old, He did not cry, Esa 4^.2.
nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street. He roared not like
a Swine, nor raued like a Dog, nor strugled and bit like a wolf; but silently,
meekly, and patiently submitted to the putting off his fleece, his tabernacle,
his life he yielded up without resistance.

The sum of all is this, that he that was Lord of all, and had all power in
heaven and earth, was content to be taken by wicked men, and carried to the
slaughter, to the place of shearing; yea, as a sheep is slain without noise,
and a lamb shorn without resistance, so was it with the Lord Jesus Christ in
his death, in laying down of his tabernacle.

Hitherto of the sense of the words, the particulars follow.

He was led as a sheep, etc.

(He) First for the person (he) 1 The person.
that is, the Lord Jesus Christ, for so does Philip expound the place, verse
35. He began at the same Scripture, and preached unto him Jesus. It is Jesus
then that is the proper subject of this Text, of whom the Prophet speaks.

Then the Lesson is,

That Christ Jesus in the only high Priest, Christ the true sacrifice for sin.
anointed of his Father, by the sacrificing of his own body, to put away sin;
he is the true Paschall Lamb, that was slain from the beginning. To him give
all the Prophets witness, poynting at Christ, as the only Mediator betwixt
God and man; by his death and passion we are fully and perfectly redeemed, and
the justice of his Father fully satisfied* that place of the Prophet Esaias is
clear to this purpose, Esa. 53.5.
He was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities; the
chastisement of our peace, was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
The Heave offering, Leuit. 21. Gen 22. Numb. 21.
the sacrificing of Isaac, the Brazen Serpent, were all of them but types of
Christ. And the like may be said of all those sacrifices in the time of the
Law, as Lambs and Beasts that were slain, and their blood shed; whereto served
these, but to lead us to Christ, who by his own death and bloodshed put an
end unto them all. Heb. 9.12.
Not by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood, he entered in
once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. We are
sanctified by the body of Jesus once for all: Heb. 10.10
and again, He was made sin for us, who knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. So the Apostle Peter,
1 Pet. 2.2^
Who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being
delivered from sin, should live unto righteousness, by whose stripes we are
healed.

This was that Lamb slain from the beginning, as Saint John testifies, Reu.
13.8.
All that dwell upon the earth, shall worship the Beast, whose names are not
written in the Book of life, of that Lamb that was slain from the beginning
of the world. And the Author of the Epistle unto the Hebrews, calls him
Christ Jesus yesterday, Heb. 13.8.
and to day, and the same for ever.

And howsoever this suffering of Christ was now in the last age of the world,
yet was he that Lamb that was slain from the beginning. What was the
Paschall Lamb to the Jews, and their sacrifices in the time of the Law, but
Looking-glasses wherein they might clearly behold Christ. And hence is it that
our Savior says, Ioh. 8.56.
Abraham desired to see my day, and he saw it, and rejoiced.

But what might be the difference betwixt the state of the Church in the time
of the Law,

In respect of the matter, or person of the Redeemer, Christ, to have their
period and determination.

And the reason is,

Because by the coming of Christ, With one offering he has consecrated, for
ever, them that are sanctified.

Which may serve wonderfully for the confirmation of our faith, in a point of
the greatest moment and consequence that may be, and that is, that Christ is
the undoubted Messiah and Savior of the world. For how can we rest upon Christ
for life and salvation, if we be not fully persuaded and assured that it is
he that was promised and prophesied of of old, and are to look for none other.

And therefore it is an excellent thing for the confirmation of our faith in
the maine ground thereof, Christ the Messiah, that we parallel the old
Testament with the new, and see how all those prophecies that went before of
Christ, have all their periods and determination in him: to give instance in
some of them.

The prophecies concerning Christ are,
1 It was foretold concerning the Messiah, that when he did come, he should
not be known, nor acknowledged to be the Messiah, but refused and rejected of
the Jewish Nation, Esa. 53.3. He is despised and rejected of men.

Psalm. 118.22. The stone which the builders refused, etc.

2 That he should be borne of a Virgin, Esa. 7.14. Behold, a Virgin shall
conceive, etc.

3 That the place of his birth should be at Bethlem.

Micha 5.2. And thou Bethlem, Ephrata, etc, Out of thee shall he come, that
shall be the Ruler in Israel.

4 That at the time of his birth, the Infants in the Country round about,
should be slain.

Ier. 31.15. A voice was heard in Ramah, etc.

5 That there should go a messenger before him, to prepare the way before him,
Mal. 3.1. Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare, etc.

6 That he should be poor and of no reputation, Zac. 9.9. Behold thy king
comes unto thee, poor, etc.

7 That he should preach good tidings to the poor, and bind up the broken
hearted, Esa. 61.1.

8 That he should ride thorough Jerusalem upon an Ass, Zach. 9.9. Thy king
comes unto thee lowly, riding upon an Ass.

9 That he should be betrayed into the hands of his enemies by his own
familiar friend. Psa. 41.9. Yea my own familiar friend, etc.

10 That he should befold for thirty pieces of silver, Zach. 11.12. They
weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver.

11 That he should be beaten, and b^^feted of the Jews, spit upon, Esaias 50.6.
I gave my back to the smiters, I hid not my face from shame and spitting.

12. That he should be put to death amongst Thieves and malefactors, Isa.
53.12. He was numbered with the transgressors.

13. That the manner of his death should be the nayling of his hands, etc.
Psalm. 22.16. They pierced my hands and my feet.

14. That his garments should be parted by lot, Psalm. 22.18. They part my
garments amongst them, and cast lots upon my vestu^*

15. That after his death and burial he should rise againt out of his grave.
Psalm. 16.10. Thou will not leave my soul in hell, etc.

16. That after all this he should ascend and go up into heaven, and there sit
at the right hand of God, his Father, Psa. 110.1. The Lord said to my Lord, Sit
thou at my right hand, etc,

And thus fulfilled.
Ioh. 1.11. He came amongst his own, and his own received him not.

Mat. 1.18. Before they came together, she was found to be with child by the
holy Ghost.

Mat. 2.1. Now when Jesus was borne in Bethlem, etc.

Mat. 2.16. Then Herod sent forth his men of war, etc.

Fulfilled in John Baptist, Luke 1.17. He shall go before him in the spirit of
Elias, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.

Mat. 8.20. Foxes have holes, and the fowls of the air have nests, etc. But
the son of man has no where, etc.

Mat. 4.28. Who went about preaching the Gospel, and healing every sickness,
and disease amongst the people.

Mat. 21.7. And brought the Ass and the Colt, and put on them clothes, and
they set him thereon.

Fulfilled in Judas, Ioh. 13.2. Supper being ended, Satan put it into the
heart of Judas to betray him.

Matt. 26.15. What will ye give me, etc. And they appointed him thirty pieces
of silver.

Matt. 26.67. Then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him, etc.

Luke 23.32. And there were also other malefactors, led with hm to be put to
death*

Luke 23.23. And when they were come to the place called Caluary, there they
crucified him.

Matthew. 27.35. And they crucified him, parting his garments, casting lots.

Matthew. 28.7. Go tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead.

Mar. 16.19. He was received up into heaven.

I might stand also to show how the time appointed for the coming of the
Messiah, should be in the time of the fourth Monarchy, which was the Roman
Monarchy or Empire, Dan. 2.4^.
as Daniel foretold.

And in the time that the second Temple stood, ^ag. 2 (...)
as the Prophet Haggai foretold.

And at such a time as the Scepter was departed from Judah, Genes. 49.10.
as old Jacob foretold.

That he should come of the seed or David, as Jeremy foretold. Ier. 23 5.6.
Firmitas sidei in eo est quod omnia in Christo implentur quae praedicta sunt.
Aug.
All which particulars were fully accomplished in Christ our Savior. All which
do serve to settle our judgments, and to confirm our faith in Christ, the
true Messiah, in whom all things are accomplished that were foretold of him.

the true Messiah, and Savior of the world, ^y whose sacrifice of himself
once for all, Gods wrath is satisfied, and the curse and malediction of the Law
removed. This shows the miserable estate and condition of the Church of Rome,
that will have many Mediators and Saviors, by whose merits and intercessions
they look to be saved; Such as are Saints, Angels, the Virgin Mary, and the
like; then the which what can be more injurious unto the all sufficiency of
Christ's sufferings, To which of all these did any of the Prophets give
witness, did they all point at him, and is he able perfectly to save all that
come unto him, Hebr. 9.
by that all-sufficient sacrifice of his once for all? Let us for ever then
rest upon him, and make him our sole and alone Savior.

Zech. 12.10
when we shall come thus to look on him whom we have pierced. It was upon
good ground that the Lord commanded the Passover to be eaten with sour
Herbs, Christ's sufferings should never be thought upon but with hearty
sorrow, and with melting affections.

Thus much for the person.

Was led.

Judas, Passion.
and by the high Priests servants, with swords and staves, as a Thief or
Malefactor.

Though Christ were willing to dye, and that by his death life was to come unto
the world, yet he did not procure his own death, not wilfully put himself
into danger. The Text says, he was led, that is, taken by Judas, and the
servants of the high Priest, who carried him along to Caiphas the high Priest,
for so says the Evangelist: Mat. 26.57
And they that had laid hold on Jesus, led him away to Caiphas the high Priest,
where the Scribes and Elders were assembled. And again, Then the Band and the
Captain, Ioh. 18.13.
and the officers of the Jews, took Jesus and bound him, and led him away to
Annas the high Priest. So that it appears in the History of the Gospel, that
Christ did not voluntarily thrust himself into danger, but was first taken and
led, and then went willingly to his death, as we shall see in the next place.
Our lesson is,

It is dangerous sin for a man to be the instrument of his own death.
That it is a dangerous and fearful sin for a man to be an instrument to
hasten his own death. It is such a kind of sin, that, for ought we know,
none but notorious wicked men have ever been guilty of. Christ went not of
himself, vnled, neither did he willingly and wilfully thrust himself into
danger, but first taken, then led. It was a Saul, Ahitophel, Zimri, and a
Judas, that became their own executioners. The Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
and those blessed Martyrs, that were put to death, yet would never offer any
violence to themselves, what torture or torment soever they endured from the
hands of others. Job had a burden of sorrows and calamities upon him, some
inward, some outward, insomuch as in his passion he said, My soul chooses
rather to be strangled and to die, then to be in my bones. And yet
notwithstanding he never attempted to slay himself, or rid himself of life:
nay rather mark his godly resolution, All the days of my appointed time I
will wait until my change shall come. Job 14.14.
Our Savior acquainted his Disciples aforehand with the troubles they should
meet withal in the world, Mat. 10.16. Luke 21*1^
namely, that they should be persecuted, delivered up into prisons, and be
brought before Kings and Rulers for his Names sake. Yet Christ never bad them
work their own deliverance, Luke 21.19
but to possess their souls by patience. So that howsoever our Savior was by
his death to bring life unto his Church, and by that his bitter passion to
redeem mankind; yet he would not make away himself, or any ways thrust
himself into danger; But he stayed the appointed time of his Father, until
the hour came, the hour of Darkness, that he was to dye.

In Sanctis Canonicis libris nusquam reperiri potest. etc. Aug.
Yea, one of the Ancients is very peremptory in this case, that in all the
Canonical Scripture we have neither precept nor permission of any in misery to
procure their own death.

Sampson, who, pulling down the house upon the Philistines, killed himself.

Sampson, therein,



The condition of such men is miserable and fearful, Heb. 13.
and never to leave them, nor forsake them. Yet it is not safe for us to pass
a final doom upon such; and that for these reasons.

1. For that Gods mercy is infinite, who can at his pleasure distill some drop
thereof, even at the last breath:

2. This fact is commonly committed in the heat of some violent temptation,
frenzy, or height of Melancholy, when indeed the party is not himself.

Inter ponte^ and fontem.
3. Such commonly live some short time after the fact done, and so may be
brought to the sight of sin, and repentance for the same.

Nevertheless we are still to know, that the practice is detestable, the
sin damnable, and the condition of that man so dying, most desperate.

And that for these reasons.

Commandment, Legal, Evangelical, Exodus 20.13. Ex. 20.13.
Thou shall not kill: again,

No man hates his own flesh, Ephesians. 5 29.
but nourishes and cherishes it. Now if a man may not take away the life of
another, much less his own life.

The day thou eatest thereof, Genesis 2.17.
thou shall dye the death. Now death being a punishment for sin, a man cannot
seek it, but he seeks his own judgment.



Fourthly, it is an injury to the State wherein a man lives, to the King, to
the Country, to the Church, to a man's friends and family; for every man is pars
rei publicae, a part of the State wherein he lives, both politic and
Ecclesiastique; now to deprive himself of life, is as much as within him
lies, to mayme that body whereof he is a member.



procures then preuents misery; and it is much to be feared, that whilst by
this means they seek to shun some temporal calamity, they procure unto
themselves eternal misery, verifying the Proverb of the fish, that leapeth
out of the Frying pan into the fire.



Such sin against Christ's blood, and put the lie upon all the principal
attributes of God; such as are his love, his power, his truth, his mercy, and
the like, as if he were not able to help, or that he had forgotten to be
gracious. Let every man take heed of Satan's assaults in this kind, the
deepenesse of whose policy and malice, is seen in nothing more, then in
soliciting men unto sin, and then afterward in taintering the same to the
utmost pin, and all to draw men into desperation.

But what shall we do to resist these temptations,

Contemplate much and often.

1 Of Gods love, which is such as can never be altered or changed. Can a woman
forget her child, Esa 49.15.
and not have compassion on the son of her womb? yet will not I forget thee,
says the Lord: q.d. this were a thing impossible. Now all the Love in the
creature, is but as a drop of a bucket, in comparison of the love of God.

2 Contemplate of Gods faithfulness, who keeps covenant with a thousand
generations, He abides faithful, 1 Ioh. 1.9.
and cannot deny himself. Has he said it, and shall he not do it? Who has
resisted his will?

3 Contemplate of the infiniteness of Gods power, who can make our crimson
sins as white as snow, and can as easily cover a multitude of sins, as one
in his servants. I have put away thy transgressions as a cloud, Esa. 44.22.
and thy sins like a mist. Who for my names sake, says the Lord, will put
away thy sin.

4 And lastly, contemplate much and often of the greatness of his mercy, that
he is a God of mercies, Neb. 9.17. Psalm. 145 9.
and the father of all consolation. His mercies are over all his works. That
he is rich in mercy, and has a multitude of mercies in store for such as sue
for mercy. Psalm. 103.13.
He remembers whereof we be made, he considers that we are but dust.

As a sheep to the slan^^^er.

The illustration of Christ's passion.
and that is the illustration of his Passion: the meaning is, As a sheep.
and no way injurious or hurtful unto any; thus went Christ to his death.

Wherein the Spirit of God will teach us, that as sheep and Lambs, especially
the Paschall Lamb, in the time of the Law, being offered in sacrifice, were
lively representations of Christ, the true Paschall Lamb, slain from the
beginning; So it was Christ himself, in whose death there was an end put unto
them all, who was that Sacrifice for sin, in whom his Father was well
pleased: Who, as the Apostle, says, Heb. 9.12.
Not by the blood of Goats and of Calves, but by his own blood he entered in
once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us: for all
those sacrifices in the time of the Law, served but till the time of
reformation came.

Now Christ in his death, being thus compared unto a sheep, in regard that he
went so voluntarily unto his death, does commend unto us this doctrine.

That Christ did voluntarily, Christ. wen^ willingly to his death. Ioh. 10.18.
willingly, and freely lay down his life. It was not by constraint, but he
offered up the same freely, as he says, I lay down my life, that I might take
it again. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self. I have
power to lay it down, and to take it again. Romans 5.19.
So Paul, By the disobedience of one, many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one, many are made righteous. Phil. 2.8.
He was obedient even to the death on the Cross.

And surely had not this death of Christ been voluntary, it had never been
acceptable with God. I have (says Christ) a Baptism to be baptized with, Luke
12: 20.
and how am I strained, until it be accomplished. Thereby manifesting that his
earnest desire after the accomplishment of the work of man's redemption; yea,
those who crucified Christ, were not more willing to do it, then he to suffer
himself to be crucified.

This truth does most manifestly appear throughout the whole history of
Christ's passion; when he told his Disciples the things he was shortly to suffer
at Jerusalem at the hands of the Jews, Peter entreating him to favor
himself, was called Satan for his pains. Get thee behind me Satan. When
Christ was come up to Jerusalem, he did not withdraw himself as at other
times. And albeit he knew that Satan had put it into the heart of Judas to
betray him, yet kept he accustomed time, and place of prayer, where Judas
might be sure to have him.

Yea, when the company came with swords and staves to apprehend Christ, what
did he but as it were offer himself into their hands, by asking them, saying,
whom seek ye? and when they said, Jesus of Nazareth, Christ plainly affirmed,
and denied not, saying, I am he.

Yea, by how much the more he feared so lately in the Garden, when Gods wrath
was poured out upon his soul, and he constrained to sweat water and blood,
and to pray thus unto his Father, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass
from me. By so much the more undaunted is he, when that soule-affliction of his
is over, to meet his adversaries in the face, that sought his life, that so he
might accomplish the will of his Father.

And albeit the Majesty of his word were such, that when he said, Ioh 18.
I am he, the Soldiers that came to take him fell backwards to the ground. And
that he was able, as he told Peter, to command a legion of Angels, if he
pleased. Yet notwithstanding, Christ suffers himself to be led by them, to
be carried to Pilate, the Roman Judge: and when he comes before him, what
says Paul, 1. Tim. 6.13.
He confessed a good confession before Pontius Pilate.

And when he came to the place where he was to suffer, how does he behave
himself, but praying unto his Father for his very enemies, Father forgive
them, Non compulsu patris sed consensu sui. Bern.
they wot not what they do. And so readily and willingly resigneth up his soul
into the hands of his Father. Not more by his Fathers command, as with his own
voluntary consent.

willingly himself became a sacrifice for sin. This love of Christ we are
never able to comprehend. If David in contemplation of Gods goodness toward
man in the work of Creation, could say, Psalm. ^.4.
Lord what it man that thou have such respect unto him: or the son of man,
that thou so regardest him. O how much more have we cause to cry out and say,
considering his wonderful and unspeakable mercy toward us in the work of
Redemption: Lord what is man, 1. Ioh. 4.9.
etc. In this (says Saint John) appears the love of God toward us, because
he sent his only begotten Son into the world. It was the Lords manner of
reasoning with Abraham, Now I know thou love me, Genesis 22.12
because thou have not spared thine own son, etc. How much more have we
cause to say, Hereby we know the love of Christ Jesus toward us, etc. and to
break out with the Apostle Paul and say, Romans 9.
O the deepnesse, etc.

that has suffered so great things for ours.

What are we that we should think it much to part with goods, name, liberty,
and life it self for his sake, who has readily and willingly laid down his
life for our sakes. Excellent was that resolution of Ignatius, I value not my
life at such a price, that I should love it more then my Lord. And being to be
devoured by wild beasts, I am (says he) Gods corn, let me be ground between
the teeth of the Lions, that I may be fit to make pure bread. So shall I be a
true disciple of Christ. And let every Christian labor to get this resolution
in his own soul, that neither tribulation, nor distress, Romans 8.35
nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor sword, etc. can
be able to separate him from the love of Christ.



And as a Lamb.

Here we have the second part of the illustration, as Christ is resembled unto
a Sheep, so he is likewise unto a lamb. Which prophecy we see fulfilled in
Christ, who being asked of the chief Priest and Elders, the Text says, He
answered them nothing. Mat. 27.^^
So meek and quiet was Christ, as a Lamb in his death.

And as a Lamb. Christ may well be resembled unto a Lamb, in diverse respects

1. In regard of harmelesnesse, no creature being of the like harmless
disposition as a Lamb is.

2. In regard of meekness and patience, and in that respect especially is
Christ here resembled unto a Lamb. And as in the whole course of his life, so
especially in his death, according to that prophecy of old: He did not cry,
Isa. 42.2.
nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street. Ier. 11.19.
I was like a Lamb, or an ox, that was brought to the slaughter.

3. In regard it was that sacrifice that above all others does most clearly
point out Christ, who is called the Lamb slain Reu. 13.^.
from the beginning. The paschall Lamb above all other sacrifices in the Law,
was the clearest representation of Christ.

1. The blood thereof must be first shed.

2. Sprinkled upon the dooreposts, that so those families might escape the
destroying Angel. So is it the sprinkling of Christ's blood, by the which the
Lords wrath is appeased, and we come again to be reconciled unto him.

4. A Lamb was one of those clean creatures in the time of the Law. No
creature is more free from pollution then the Lamb is, his feeding is sweet
and clean, delights not in mire and filth, as the Swine does. Thus is it with
Christ, and thus is his holiness and purity shadowed out unto us, by the
similitude of a spotless Lamb, slain from the beginning.

Seeing that Christ is thus resembled unto a Lamb,

Wherein we are to imitate Christ as a Lamb.
1. To labor to be like unto Christ in our sufferings, that is, that we put on
us the same mind, that is, with meekness and patience to suffer wrongs,
imprisonment, 1 Reu. 12.11
who suffered so many things for our sakes.

frees us from the wrath to come.



Hitherto of the illustration of Christ's passion.

To be slain. To be shorn!

Here we have the extent of his passion. Extent.
That Christ did not only suffer himself to be buffeted, to be smitten
only, or to be crowned with thorns in derision, No other way to purchase life
to the Church, but by Christ's death.
but he suffered even to the effusion of his blood. And herein will teach us.

That there was no other way to purchase life unto the Church, but through
Christ's death, and to this end Christ submitted himself to the lowest degree
of humiliation. Now this humiliation of the Lord Jesus, is not to be restrained
to the time of his death, but is indeed of a more large extent, even to the
whole course of his life. Yea, the very incarnation of Christ was no small
degree thereof, that he should be pleased to lay aside that majesty and glory
that he had at the right hand of his Father, and become man, yea such a man as
was subject unto all our infirmities, sin only excepted, as hunger, thirst,
wearienesse, etc. yea he became every way subject and obedient unto the law,
that was the only Lawgiver.

But the height of all was in this, that he that was the Lord of life, should,
as my Text says, submit himself to death, yea such a kind of death, that was
not only ignominious before men, but accursed before God, as it is written,
Cursed is every one that hangs on the tree. Deu. 21* 23
That so he that was his Fathers darling and delight, might become the object
of his wrath, and bear that intolerable burden and displeasure for sin,
that would have crushed men and Angels into pieces to have borne.

Now this humiliation of Christ has diverse degrees thereof, it began at the
time of his incarnation, as we have heard before. And those infirmities of our
nature that he bore, were part thereof. But the principal part of all was in
or about his death.

And the beginning hereof was in the Garden, where, the Text says, Luke 22.44.
Being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was like drops of
blond trickling down to the ground. Saint John has it, Ioh. 13.21.
He began to be sore troubled. Now surely the end of his passion must needs be
mournful, when the beginning is so fearful. Wherein it may as truly be said
of Christ's death, as ever it was of his life; Never any man spoke as this man
does. Ioh. 7.46.
So never man dyed as this man dyed.

And herein let us first stand awhile, and behold the lamentable distress of a
troubled and perplexed spirit. When a man is in distress indeed, of whom does
he look for comfort but from his Father? and who are fittest to condole a man's
misery, but a man's dearest friends, of whom Job speaks thus, that A man in
affliction ought to be comforted of his friends. Thus was it with Christ at
this time. Now that he is so sore troubled, now that his soul is so heavy,
even to the death, how earnestly prays he to his Father, Father, Mar. 14.34
if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. And from whom might Christ ^t
this time look for comfort, but from his dearest friends: and who might these
be, if not Peter, James, and John? These above the rest of the disciples were
most conversant with Christ, were eyewitnesses of Christ's glorification upon
the Mount. But, alas, Christ bids these watch with him and pray: But when he
was sweating, they were sleeping, they yield him no comfort, they stand him in
no stead; so as back again he goes to his Father, and from his Father to his
Disciples again: but here is no help at all. Ah Lord, that he should be
brought to this low ebb, so to be desolate and forsaken on all hands! When he
was in Caiphas Hall, Peter denies him; when he went to the Cross all the
Disciples forsake him, and those that loved him most dearly did stand a far
^ff. Thus was he alone in his sufferings.

Wounded at the heart with sorrows, troubled in mind, melting in soul,
afflicted in body, and in the midst of all these sweating water and blood,
trickling down to the ground. Here are unknown sorrows, secret sufferings, and
sufferings unspeakable. The Physicians say that blood is the life of man, now
this blood of Christ was exhausted, and his body became as a bottle dried in
the smo^ke.

And as this agony of his began with water and blood, so did his passion end
with blood and water, first blood then water, when no more blood, what can come
but water?

So that truly does Jeremy cry out in that patheticall lamentation of his, O
thou hope of Israel, and Savior thereof, Ier. 14.8.
why art thou as a man astonished, and why is confusion gone over thy face?

There is neither form nor beauty. Esa. 53.2.


He made his soul an offering for sin. ver. 10.


But what was the reason why Christ was thus perplexed in the garden, Q.
before he was apprehended, or taken?

This was not for fear of the bodily death that Christ was now to suffer, R.
as it appears by the godly resolution and courage of many of the blessed
martyrs of Christ, who albeit they were men that, no doubt, had their
infirmities, yet did readily and willingly embrace the sentence of death
without any such agony.

But this arose principally from the sense of the most horrible wrath and
displeasure of God his father, that at this time lay so heavy upon him for the
sins of the world, and which he was now to endure and to undergo. This, this
was it that pressed out both water and blood, and made him to cry out in the
bitterness of his soul, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? This bred
that inward fear and terror in the soul of Christ.

But wherein then is the difference betwixt Christ's sufferings and the
sufferings of martyrs,

The martyrs were persuaded that their sins were pardoned, and the guilt
thereof done away through Christ, by which means they feared not death, the
sting thereof being plucked out, for the sting of death is sin. Whereas
Christ in his death, 1 Cor. 15.
as our surety, stands charged with the sins of all the world, and now was to
satisfy Gods wrath for the same; and hence it was that he was left to
himself void of comfort in the midst of all his sufferings, and prays
against the terrors of death, whereas those blessed martyrs were assured and
supported with the inward consolations of Gods spirit.

But was this all that Christ did suffer and undergo for us? oh no. I remember
the Lords speech unto Eliah, being distressed at mount Horeb, and lying hidden
in a cave alone, the Lord says thus unto him, What do thou here Eliah?
arise, for thou have yet a further journey to go. So may I say, Blessed
redeemer, what do thou here in the garden in this plight, the holy Ghost be
thy comfort, thou have yet a further journey to go, thou must hence to
Caiphas, from Caiphas to Pilat, from Pilat to Herod, from Herod to Pilat, back
again, from Pilat to the judgment Hall, there to receive thy doom, to be
crucified upon mount Caluary, a long and weary journey.

And thus we have seen the first degree of his humiliation, his agony in the
garden.

Now we are to see those great things the which he suffered at the hands of
sinners, as the history in the Gospel sets out unto us.

And while he yet spoke, Lu 22.47.
Behold a multitude and he that was called Judas, one of the twelve went before
them and drew near to kiss him.

To handle every part and circumstance of Christ's passion, how he was taken
with swords and staves, as a thief and malefactor, bound and carried away,
co^^e^ted before Herod as an evil doer, and howsoever they could lay nothing
justly to his charge, worthy of death or punishment, yet how spitefully they
scourged him, spit in his face, arrayed him scornfully in kingly robes, crowned
him with a crown of thorns, put a reed in his hand in stead of a Scepter: to
speak of every of these, would ask a large discourse. I intend it not,
howbeit in every one of these, his humiliation does in part appear.

We shall rather accompany him to mount Caluary to his Cross, the place of
execution, as my Text says, As a sheep to the slaughter, that is, to mount
Caluary, there to suffer, where we have his body racked, his blessed hands and
feet pierced with nails, his side opened with a spear, vinegar and gall
given him to drink; the high Priests mocking him, the soldiers flouting him,
yea, the very thief that suffered with him blaspheming him, and yet all this
was nothing to that burden of Gods wrath that lay so heavy upon his soul,
that made him to cry out and say. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? By
which words it does appear that Christ was not only tormented in body by those
rackings and tortures they put his body unto, but that he suffered also in his
soul, according to the prophecy that went before. Esa. 5^.^0.
It pleased the Lord to bruise him, to put him to grief, his soul was made an
offering for sin: God the Father leaving him to those unutterable sorrows in
his soul for a time, and withholding from the humane nature of Jesus Christ,
those inward consolations which might comfort and support him.

We have known and have heard of many notorious malefactors executed and put
to cruel and shameful deaths, as the Gunpowder Traitors, etc. but did ever
any seem so miserable in death, as Christ did? of whom the Prophet truly
speaks, Esa. 53.2.
He had neither form nor beauty, but was despised and rejected of men.

And why did the Lord pour out all this contempt upon his Son, but to free
us from that shame and misery that did justly belong unto us, for so says
Paul, He was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21
that knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.
Having all the sins of all the elect imputed unto him, so as Christ seems
not to be clothed with all the Drunkennesses, Adulteries, Murders,
Blasphemies, etc. of all the elect throughout the whole world, which were now
laid upon him, and in his body and soul suffered for them all. He was made a
curse for us. Gal. 3.13. Gal 4*4.
He was made under the law, that he might redeem them that were under the law,
etc. Heb. 5.7.
He offered up Supplications with strong crying and tears. He sweat water and
blood. Luke 22.44.
He bare the curse of God in such wise, as that it forced him to cry out and
say, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat 27.46.


So that that which the Prophet speaks of the Church in another case, may
truly be said of Christ at this time, Behold, Lam 1.12
and see if there be any sorrow like my sorrow, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me in the day of his fierce wrath.

And wherefore has Christ undergone all these great things for us, but to
satisfy the justice of his Father, and to free us from the wrath to come? And
hence it comes to pass, that the blood of Christ speaks better things then
the blood of Abel. Heb. 12.29
By Abels blood, Gods wrath was kindled, by Christ's blood, Gods wrath is
appeased; the blood of Abel cries for vengeance, the blood of Christ cries
for mercy; the blood of Abel cried and had done, the blood of Christ cries and
will never have done, but it avails for all the elect, unto the end of the
world. He alone trod the wine press of his Fathers wrath; He alone bath put
out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, Esa. 69.5.
and took it out of the way, and fastened it on the Cross, Heb. 10.14
and with one offering has consecrated for ever them that are sanctified.

Let us come to the uses.



And if this were such a misery unto our blessed Savior, to be forsaken of
his Father thus for a time, and thus to suffer. O then what shall be the
condition of the wicked in the last day, that shall be forsaken for ever, and
for ever suffer that intolerable burden of Gods wrath to lie upon them in
those insufferable torments of soul and body.

Thou that art a Drunkard, Swearer, unclean person, that live yet in thy
natural estate, and art yet in thy sins, not reconciled unto God in Jesus
Christ, know, O know, that thou art under the Law, a cast man by the Law,
Christ has not yet undertaken for thee, but thou thy self stand charged
with thy own sins, and for the same shall one day be cast into prison, from
thence, never to depart until thou have paid the uttermost farthing. And if
God did thus torment his own Son, that never knew sin, how will he spare
thee that have been a transgressor from the womb?



When tidings was brought to David that Jonathan his friend was slain, O how
did David rent his clothes, fast, mourn, and cry out; O noble Israel, 2 Samuel
1.26.
how were thou overthrown? woe is we for thee, my dear brother; very kind
have thou been unto me, and thy love has passed the love of women.

The case is now ours, a more lovely then Jonathan is here, the Messiah is
slain, he is crucified on Mount Caluary, he is dead and gone; great cause
have we to cry out and say, O noble Redeemer, how art thou distressed, woe is
me for thee my dear Savior; very kind have thou been unto me, thy love
has passed the love of women; thou have wounded my heart with thy love. I will
not mourn for thee a few days, as David did for Jonathan, but all the days
of my life, when I think of this thy passion.

How can we, my brethren, behold him thus in the Garden, combating with Gods
wrath, swearing drops of blood, all on a gore blood, and in this plight upon on
the Cross, where his hands I and feet are rent with nails, and his side
opened with a spear, from whence there issued water and blood; when his blood
was totally exhausted, then came there out water; and not have our hearts moved
to pity.

Christ justifies us, who shall condemn? Romans 8.
He dyed for our sins, Romans 4.5
and rose again for our justification. Sampson, Judge. 14.
out of the wounds of the Lion, took the sweetest honey; so in Christ's wounds,
we have the liquor of life that shall refresh the weary souls, and nourish us
unto eternal life.

Abels blood cried for vengeance against him that shed it, what will Christ's
blood do against those that spill it, and sin against it, which those do;

How many ways men sin against Christ's blood.


2 That join their own merits and works with the sufferings of the Lord
Jesus in the work of justification.





Consider him that endured such contradiction from sinners against himself,
Heb. 12.3.
lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. O what a shame is this, that
every mock, every check, every taunt or frown of a mortal man, that is but
dust, should make us stagger in the good way of righteousness, whereas the
Lord Jesus Christ himself endured so great things for us.

who with one offering has consecrated for ever, Heb. 10.14
them that are sanctified, by that sacrifice of his that was made once for all.

If they say it is the continuing of that sacrifice of Christ on the Cross,
this is blasphemy: for what means then the Apostles once for all, Heb. 10.10
that by his one sacrifice once offered, has consecrated for ever them that
are sanctified. This were in effect to put the lie upon those words of the
Apostle, and to say that the sacrifice of Christ were not perfect on the
Cross, but only begun.

If they say, the sacrifice of the Mass is but an iteration of that Sacrifice
of Christ's, this is blasphemous likewise: For what is this but to make Christ's
sacrifice imperfect? Was not this the Argument of the Author of the Epistle
unto the Hebrews, to prove the sacrifices in the time of the Law imperfect,
because they were daily offered? The abomination of that Idol in the Mass.


Besides herein appears the abomination of that Idol in the Mass.

taken away: for must the Church still rest upon shadows, when the body is
present? It is Christ who is the true High Priest unto God his Father, who
through his own blood has entered into the holy of holies, and there made an
everlasting atonement for his people. Neither shall there be an end of that
sacrifice until his coming to judgment; Which we keep daily in remembrance
in the Sacrament of his Supper, not daring, as the Church of Rome does, to
renew any propitiatory sacrifice then that that was once so perfectly made.

Heb. 9.22.
for without blood there is no remission of sins. And again, Heb. 9.28.
Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many. Which shows that it
cannot be renewed or iterated; and therefore that un bloody sacrifice in the
Mass must needs be a mere Idol, and an abomination to the Lord.



Fourthly, the sacrifice of Christ was visible, and in one place,

1. Ioh. 1.7.
to purge away the sins of every true believer. To justify us in Gods sight:
Romans 5.9, 10.
and by the same we come to have an admittance into the kingdom of heaven, By
that new and lining way which he has prepared for us through the veil that is
his flesh. Heb 10 19 20.


Whereas in the sacrifice of the Mass, there is no benefit at all to any of
these uses.



(So opened he not his mouth.)

Here we have the reddition or application of the whole unto the person of
Christ, that as the sheep goes unto the slaughter, and Lamb, to have his
fleece shorn off, so was it with Christ in the putting off of his tabernacle,
and laying down of his life. And herein has left us in his admirable patience
of his, an admirable pattern of patience, and an example, as the Apostle Peter
says of suffering affliction, 1. Pet. 2.21.
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we also should follow
his steps: who when he was reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, he
threatened not, but committed it to him that judges righteously.

Now should we think much to take up his cross and to follow him, to suffer
afflictions for his sake, and for his Gospels sake, that has suffered so great
things for us. Shall we not be content to loose a little, nay all if need be,
seeing we shall receive an hundred fold. Mat. 29.
And what though we meet with mockings and scoffings at the hands of men: say
with David, It may be that God has bid him do it. 2. Sam. 16.11. Number. 12:
Mat. 11.29
Moses suffered Aarons and Miriams reproof patiently. Take my yoke upon you,
says Christ. The greatest honor that can betide any of Gods children is to
suffer for Christ. Phil. 1.29.
So Paul, To you it is given not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for
his sake. But of this before.

VERSE 33. In his humiliation his judgment was taken away, and who may declare
his generations? for his life is taken from the earth.
THe Spirit of God having spoken of Christ's humiliation, of his death and
passion, how he was smitten and afflicted of God his Father for our sins;

Now lest any should be dismayed, beholding nothing but his death, and those
insufferable sorrows he underwent, and think that he was swallowed up of these,
as the nature of man is to fear at such a spectacle.

He therefore comes here to show the notable victory he got over these.

In his humiliation his judgment was taken away.

The meaning is, Christ having been thus humbled, and brought so low, not
willingly, but voluntarily; seeing he had power to resist, he could have
commanded legions of Angels to fight for him, for by his own word he made
those that apprehended him to fall backward to the ground, yet was he content
to be humbled to the death.

And in this his humiliation so meek and humble, so perfect, and so exceeding
great.

(His judgment was taken away) that is, the sentence he under went by Pilate,
under whom he suffered, was removed: For that it was impossible he should be
held down by death. Act. 2.24.
He was at last taken away from prison, Isa. 53:
and from Judgment: for as Christ says, Ioh. 19.18:
I have power to lay down my life, and to take it to me again.

(And who shall declare.) The meaning is, that now that he is delivered and set
at liberty from the grave, and from death, Pilats Judgment being removed, and
the bitterness of death being over past

(Who shall declare?) That is, who shall set forth or express to the sons of
men: the meaning is, it is beyond all humane art and Science to demonstrate the
number of his days, the length of his life, or the perpetuity of his
kingdom, the exceeding glorious success of his death and resurrection again,
according to that of the Prophet, Who can number his seed, Isa. 53.10.
or measure his days?

(For his life is taken from the earth)

That is, he lives now no longer upon earth, a place of mortality, but in
heaven a place of immortality, he laid down his life that he might take it to
him again. He was cut off from the land of the living, not for his own
transgressions, for his very Judge pronounced him innocent; Mat. 27.24
But he was taken off for the transgressions of the people, even for those
whom God had given him to redeem by that death of his, according to that of
the Prophet, For the transgressions of my people he was smitten. Isa. 53.8, 9.


And now his Judgment being removed, and he again raised from the dead,
dies no more, Death has no more dominion over him; for he indeed dyed unto
sin, or for sin once, but now lives unto God, or for God.

The sum then of this verse is this, That Christ so humbling himself, and
meekly submitting himself to death and the grave, in the very depth of his
humiliation he was extolled, his judgment removed, the bands of death broken,
and himself set at liberty. And now being raised up again, his life is
everlasting, his days past numbering, and his kingdom shall never have an end.

And therefore no man can be found that is able fully to express his
generation; for his life is no longer on earth, but in heaven. He is no longer
subject to mortality: but is he who only has immortality, and shall enjoy
the same for evermore. Thus of the sense of the words.

In his humiliation was hi^ Judgment, etc.

The Spirit of God having spoken of the death of Christ, and how he was
afflicted of God his Father for our sins; lest any should now think the
state of the Church desperate and forlorn, or that Christ was swallowed up of
these miseries: He comes now to show the happy victory he got over them all.
And herein will teach us,

As Christ's death is cause of mourning Christ's resurrection is cause of
rejoicing.
That to behold Christ's death that he dyed for our sins, and not to consider
his resurrection, will cause nothing but sorrow unto us. It is the
consideration of his glorious resurrection, That he arose again for our
Justification, that yields the most solid comfort unto a Christian soul. And
hence is it that the Apostle Paul does usually join these two together,
Christ's death, and Christ's resurrection, that as the one does cast down, the
other might raise up: as the one might cause us to mourn, the other might
cause us to rejoice. So Paul, Phil. 2.8.9.
He humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the
Cross: rests he there? no, Wherefore God has exalted him, Col. 2.14.15.
and given him a name, etc. He has spoiled Principalities and powers, and made
a show of them openly, triumphing over them; again, Christ dyed for our sins,
Romans 4.25.
and rose again for our justification. For as it will nothing comfort a man
condemned to death, to know that one has sued to the Prince for his pardon and
life, unless he have obtained the same: even so we being all cast men by the
Law, by reason of our sins, it will yield small comfort to a distressed
soul, to know that Christ has interceded betwixt God and us for our pardon,
and wrestled with death and the devil, with Principalities and powers, except
we know that he has triumphed over them. Except we (...) this, we can have no
comfort, for when Paul would furnish himself with strength against the time of
trial, he comforts himself in this, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods chosen? Romans 8.33
it is Christ that is dead, nay rather which is risen again, and sits at
the right hand of God making request for us. And here-hence he triumphs thus,
What shall separate us from the love of God, etc.

We are taught then, seals up all sound comfort; for being justified through
faith in him, we are at peace with God.

Again, in that Christ vas first humbled, before exalted,

Godly must through afflictions enter into glory.
We may further note what must be the condition of his members, They must
follow him, and through afflictions enter into glory. Every member must be made
conformable unto Christ the head, according to the proportion of strength and
grace received, to suffer with him.

And hence is it that the Apostle Peter exhorts thus, 1 Pet. 4.12.
Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is to try
you, as though some strange thing happened unto you; but rejoice, inasmuch as
ye are made partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be
revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. Afflictions now are the
Lords trodden path to heaven. And hence is it that the Apostle Paul rejoiced in
his sufferings, and in his bands, I now rejoice, Col. 1.24.
(says he) in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the
afflictions of Christ in my flesh. Indeed, all the afflictions of all the
members of Christ, are but as a remnant in respect of the afflictions of Jesus
Christ, for of him it was prophesied thus, I have trodden the winepresse alone,
Esaias 63.3. Gal. 3.13.
and of all people there were none with me. He was made a curse for us. So
that now the afflictions that are laid upon his members, are not inflicted upon
them as a curse, for that has Christ borne for them, being made a curse for
us, but they now become the loving chastisements of a loving father, which
bring forth, at the last, the quiet fruits of righteousness to all them that
are thereby exercised.

Yea, all the godly in their sufferings, they do but bear a part with Christ,
therein to be made conformable unto Christ their head, and therein are
pronounced blessed, Blessed are ye when men revile you, etc. and again, Mat.
5.11.12. 1 Pet. 4.14.
Blessed are ye if ye be railed upon for the name of Jesus, for the spirit of
God and of glory, rests on you. Verse 13.
Inasmuch as ye are made partakers of Christ's sufferings.

But how shall I know that I suffer with Christ,

By comparing our sufferings with the sufferings of Christ's,

not so much to the malice of Judas that betrayed him, nor of the Jews that
pursued him to his death, as to God his Father, without whose counsel,
purpose, and will, they could do nothing. It is an excellent thing, when in
our miseries and troubles, we can ouerlooke the instruments, and take notice
of Gods own hand correcting us, as David in Shemi his railing.

Father, if thou be willing, Luke 22.42.
remove this cup from me. Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done. So it
is a good sign of a heart prepared to suffer, and to whom afflictions shall be
sanctified indeed, when we can with patience and humble submission, submit our
selves unto the Lords good pleasure in suffering.

David, Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now have I learned thy
commandments; This is an excellent sign that our afflictions through Christ
are sanctified unto us. Let us come to the uses.

into glory. This may teach us then in the midst of all our sufferings
whatsoever, to consider what great things Christ has suffered for us. When we
find any pain or misery bitter unto us, it will be an excellent means to
sweeten the same, to consider what bitterness there was in the whole
sufferings of Christ. He drank the full cup of his Fathers wrath and
displeasure for sin. Now why should we startle so much at shame, disgrace,
or some small affliction what we may meet withal here, since the Prince of our
salvation was thus consecrated through affliction.

Surely the consideration of this may quell those repining thoughts, which may
times arise in the hearts of Gods children afflicted, that never were so
grievously afflicted as they; this was Jobs case, who complained, Job 6.2.3.
that his misery was heavier then the sand, and this was likewise the case of
the Church, Behold, Lam. 1.12.
and see if any sorrow were like unto my sorrow, etc. But consider that this is
but the time of thy trial, thy triumph is at hand. If we look upon Lazarus
on the dung hill, Joseph in prison, and David in exile, their case might seem
most miserable. But this is but the time of their humiliation, their exaltation
followed this at hand. 1 Cor. 15.
If in this life we have only hope in Christ, then are we of all men most
miserable* But now the hope of a christian reaches further, and answers us,
That if we suffer with him, Rom* 8.
we shall be glorified with him.

time of their greatest troubles, that their light and momentany afflictions,
which last but for a few days, should bring with them such an eternal weight
of glory. Romans 5.3.
The saying is, That is well, that ends well. I confess, many are the seares,
cares, sorrows, and troubles that betide the godly here, yet in the midst of
them all, we are more then Conquerours through him that has loved us. Say
then, Why art thou then cast down my soul, and why art thou so disquieted
within me? wait on God, for I will yet give him thanks, which is the help of
my countenance, and my God. Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes
in the morning.

Hitherto of the general Doctrines.

In his humiliation, his judgment was taken away, etc.

The meaning is, that after Christ had been thus humbled and abased in
suffering so cursed and shameful a death, His judgment was taken away. That
is, the sentence of death and condemnation was removed from him, which was done
in his glorious resurrection, Acts 2.24.
for that it was impossible he should be held down by death. Thus was he
taken from prison, and from judgment, for as our Savior says, I have power
to lay down my life, and to take it to me again: so that every part of
Christ's humiliation, had an end in is resurrection, and coming out of the
Sepulcher. Now follows his exaltation and glorification.

(His judgment was taken away.)

In handling the doctrine of Christ's exaltation and glory, diverse circumstances
are to be considered,

1 The degrees of his exaltation. 2 The reasons why Christ was to be thus
exalted. 3 The fruits and benefit of this his exaltation.
The degrees of Christ's exaltation.
The first degree of Christ's exaltation, is his raising himself from the dead.
He losed the pangs of death, because it was not possible he should be holden of
it, Raising himself from the dead. Acts 2.24.
even as a man that chops up a morsel that is too hot for his mouth, is glad
to put it out again; so death having swallowed up our blessed Savior, and
finding him too hot for him, could not hold him, but renders him up again,
according to that prophecy that went before of Christ, Psalm. 16.10
Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thy holy one to
see corruption.

But what was it of Christ that went thus to the grave,

There are in Christ,

1 A humane body. 2 A reasonable soul. 3 His deity quickening both.
The soul of Christ that went presently from the Cross into heaven, according
to Christ's own speech to the penitent Thief, To day thou shall be with me in
Paradise.

The Deity of Christ could not suffer, but was at this time veiled, and
forbeareth the execution of it power, during the time of Christ's passion.

It must needs therefore be Christ's body that went thus to the grave, which
the third day is raise^ aga^^^ and that by it own po^^^, w^^^h i^^^ed puts the
differe^^^ (...) Christ's resurrection and (...) again from the ^^ad by ^is own
power, we by the power of Christ; as many men be (...) out of a Boat into the
wat^^, if there be any one in the company expert in swimming, as many as hang
on him, are safe, and are brought to land. And thus are we saved through
Christ, for so says the Apostle, As in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be
made alive, 1 Cor. 15.22 23.
but every man in his own order. Christ the first fruits, then they that are
Christ's at his coming; He is the first fruits of them that sleep. Reu. 1.5.
The first borne of the dead. The first degree then of Christ's exaltation is
the resurrection from the dead.

Exaltation, Christ's ascension in to heaven. Mar. 16.19
is his ascending up into heaven. So when the Lord had spoken unto them, he was
received up into heaven. And again,

And it came to pass when he had blessed them, Luke 24.51 Act. 1.11.
he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven.

So that Christ Jesus in regard of his bodily presence, is in heaven, far
from the malice of any mortal creature, no more to be assaulted by Satan, or
wicked men, but is now at the right hand of his Father, there to be and
remain, until his second coming to Judgment. So that it is a foolish and
absurd conceit of the Papists, that hold Christ's real presence in the
Sacrament of the Altar. If the Article of our faith be true, that He ascended
into heaven: That Doctrine of the Real presence is false.

But did not Christ say to his Disciples, Mat. 28.20
that he would be with them, and with his Church, unto the end of the world?

I answer, Christ is present with his Church according to his Godhead and
spiritual presence, Resp.
and by his grace whereby he works effectually by his own spirit. Mar. 16.20
And so is Christ still present with his Church and people. But in regard of
his bodily presence, so is he not always present, inasmuch as he is now
ascended up into heaven, there to be and remain until that his second coming
to Judgment.

The third degree of Christ's exaltation, is his sitting at the right hand of
God his Father, Creed. Now to speak properly, Christ's sitting at the right
hand of his Father.
God has no right hand, nor left; but is a Spirit, infinite, and
incomprehensible: but thereby is meant how he is next unto God his Father, in
majesty, power, and glory. So that after all his labors, sorrows, and
sufferings, after that his bitter death and passion, he is now at rest in
heaven in unspeakable happiness, blessedness, and felicity, there to be and
remain until that his second coming to Judgment, when he shall come again
not to be judged as before by Pontius Pilate. But to judge all flesh, to whom
every man shall give up an account of all the things he has done in his body,
2. Cor. 5.10.
whether they be good or evil.

The Reasons why Christ was to be exalted.
And thus we have seen the degrees of Christ's (...). We come now to the reasons
why Christ was to be thus exalted.

of God: Luk 24.46
Thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise again
the third day. Luke 24.26
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into glory?

To this agrees that of the Apostle Peter, 1. Pet. 1.11 Psalm 16.10
When it testified aforehand, The sufferings of Christ, and the glory that
should follow.

Yea Christ himself foretold the same, Ioh. 20 9. Mar. 26.54 Matthew. 20.18.19.
saying, They shall condemn him to death, crucify him, and the third day he
shall rise again.

exaltation, that should follow. As that of Isaac being bound, Genesis 22.
yet not slain.

That of Sampson, Judge.
in carrying away the gates of the City, by the which he escaped the malice of
his enemies. Leuit. 16.5
Of the escape Goat: and that of Jonas. All which pointed at this thing, Mat.
12.39
the exaltation of Christ.

Exaltation of the Lord Jesus was necessary, in respect of himself, in regard
of the dignity of his person, Act. 2.24.
being the Lord of life, and of glory; in which regard it was impossible he
should be holden down of death. And wherein might he prove himself the
Son of God more, then by raising himself from the dead.

Fourthly, he was a Just man, and without sin,

Exaltation, of his,

1. He must be the Everlasting King of glory, and of his kingdom there must be
no end. 2. He must be that high Priest for ever, Psalm. 110 4
after the order of Melchisedech. 3. He must be that Prophet that perpetually
must teach and instruct his Church until the end of the world, until we all
meet in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son of God.
All which Christ could never have been, had he abode still amongst the state
of the dead.



Hitherto of the Reasons showing the necessity of the exaltation of Christ.

Exaltation of Christ, The benefits of Christ's exaltation.
are diverse.

First, this Exaltation of Christ does assure us of our Justification from all
our sins, Paul, Christ dyed for our sins, and rose again for our
Justification. God the Father delivering up his Son to death in our flesh,
hereby condemned sin in the flesh. Romans 8.3.
Even so by letting him out of the prison of his grave, which he did in this
his glorious resurrection, he did discharge him of that bond of obligation that
lay against him, and therein acknowledged himself to be fully satisfied.

For if Christ had not paid our full debt, so as any one sin had been left
behind, Christ could not have risen from the dead, the guiltiness of that one
sin would have kept him in the prison still of his grave, and then had we
been yet in our sins, and so of all men most miserable. But now Christ being
risen from the dead, 1 Cor. 15.17.
and exalted on high, God the Father declares himself herein fully satisfied
for our debts in the enlargement of our Surety.

God which is rich in grace, Ephesians. 2.4.5.
even when we were dead in trespasses and sins, has he quickened together
with Christ: and has raised us up together, Col. 2.17.
etc. Again, And you being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision of your
flesh, has he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all your
trespasses. Again, Romans 6.4.5
As Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also
should walk in newness of life. As it is a shame for the servant to lie in
bed when the master of the house is up: So Christ being risen, it shall be our
shame if we lie still asleep in sin. Know ye not (says the Apostle) that so
many of us as are baptized into Jesus Christ, Romans 6.3.
are baptized into his death? And we are buried with him by baptism; so as
now if our sins be brought into his grave, they will not away and consume
daily more and more, as it does with a dead carcass lying in the grave.

exaltation of the Lord Jesus, we come to our assurance that these bodies of
ours shall rise again, being members of Christ, and living by the same Spirit
that ^^^ed up Christ from the dead. For so says the Apostle, If the Spirit of
him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, Romans 8.11
he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortable
bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you. Can the head and the members be
severed? Seeing that Christ which is the head is raised from the dead, no one
of his members then can be left under the power of death. His resurrection
being full of power, draws after him all his members: for so says the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 15.20 21.22.
Christ is risen from the dead, and is made the first-fruites of them that
sleep: for since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the
dead: For as in Adam all dye, even so by Christ shall all be made alive, etc.

Nay to put it out of all doubt, he has carried up our flesh into heaven, as
anearnest of the whole, and is himself possessed of that kingdom in the name of
the whole body his Church. What greater comfort then this to be assured before
we go to lay down our bodies in the dust, that the Lord will raised them up
again by his own Almighty power: and that howsoever they taste of corruption,
they shall not perish in corruption: for that at the last day this corruptible
shall put on incorruption: 1. Cor. 1^.53.
and this mortal, shall put on immortality.

Father, Ioh. 17.24
I will that those that thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they
may behold my glory. For as a friend takes possession in another name, and it
is good in Law, as if he had done it himself: Even so Christ in our name, and
in our stead, has entered into heaven, and taken possession of that glorious
and immortal kingdom, not for himself alone, but also for all his members,
that believe in his name, which through Christ are as sure one day to be put
into the real possession of the same, as if they were now already glorified
with him; according to that of the Apostle, He has raised us up together, Ephesians.
2.6.
and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

Hitherto of Christ's exaltation.

Who shall declare his generation?

Having set down Christ's death and glorious victory over the same, now he
comes to set out the perpetuity of his reign, and this he does by way of
acclamation, who shall declare? that is, who is able to demonstrate and
express to the sons of men? the meaning is, that it is beyond all humane Art
and Science, to demonstrate the number of his days, the length of his life, or
the perpetuity of his kingdom, according to that prophecy of old, Esa. 53.10
Who can number his seed, or measure his days? The note is,

That Christ's death was momentany, Christ's death momentany, but life perpetual.
but his life is beyond the declaration of any mortal. It is not with Christ
as it is with men, who being delivered from death, may dye, nay, must dye. But
Christ never more to taste of death, but through this victory he got over death
and the grave, he became himself, the death of death, therein making good his
own word, O Death, I will be thy death. This truth stands clear by diverse
places, Heb. 1.8.
Unto the Son he says, thy Throne O God is for ever and ever, a Scepter of
righteousness, is the Scepter of thy kingdom; and thy years shall not fail.
Verse 12.
This was prophesied of of old, Thy kingdom is everlasting, and, the increase
of his government and peace, Esaias 9.7.
shall have no end. He shall sit upon the throne of David, and upon his
kingdom to order it, and to stablish it with judgment and justice from
henceforth, even for ever. To this agrees the testimony of the Angel unto the
Virgin. Luk 1.32.
God shall give him the throne of David his father, and he shall reign over
the house of Israel for ever, and his kingdom shall have no end: and is
therefore called the mighty God, Esaias 9.6.
the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace.

Reu. 5.12.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and glory, and praise.

Reu. 1.^.
He has made us Kings and Priests unto God. Now Christ has made us to be
inheritours of his kingdom, which himself holds by a double right, by
Inheritance, by Purchase.

The title of Inheritance he reserueth to himself alone: the title of purchase
he communicates to us, and thereby we come to be interessed thereunto.

a chosen generation, 1 Pet. 1.9.
a royal Priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people; Our head is crowned
with glory and immortality, the members may be glad, for they shall reign
with him in glory.

For his life is taken from the earth.

These words contain in them the reason wherefore Christ shall never admit of
any alteration or change in regard of his glory, He lives unto God, no more to
be judged by men as before, but himself to be the judge of quick and dead.
He lives no longer on earth, a place of mortality, but in heaven, a place of
immortality, being now raised from the dead, and sit on Gods right hand in
heavenly places.

Now inasmuch as the Prophet Esaias in this Text, Ephesians. 1.20,
uses a reason to persuade us of the truth of Christ's exaltation and
glorification; a doctrine so profitable and beneficial unto us. We may first
of all observe this general instruction.

Namely, Heavenly truths are hardly believed of us, and applied by us.
what an indisposition there is in every man by nature to believe and apprehend
those things that appertain to our chiefest good. Heavenly truths are hardly
believe of us, and applied by us.

And indeed, this was the great hurt and loss we sustained in Adam, not so
much his casting out of Paradise, the curse upon the creature, and a temporal
death, these compared unto Gods judgment upon the soul, are but small, for
now is the understanding darkened, that before was full of divine light and
knowledge, the will rebellious, the affections disordered, yea, the whole frame
of the whole man, quite disordered, and his soul robbed and spoiled of all
heavenly dispositions. So true is that of the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 10.14.
Every man is a beast in his own knowledge.

We may see this in Nichodemus, Ioh. 3.
that could not easily be brought to understand the necessity of a new birth;
it seemed a thing most absurd unto him.

We may see this in some sort in the Disciples themselves, Mat. 13.
they could not conceive the parable of the Sower, until Christ had expounded
the same unto them. Till the eyes of our understandings come to be enlightened,
Ephesians. 1.18.
we are all mere naturals in the knowledge of God, and mysteries of Christ's
kingdom. Let Paul speak before Agrippa, of the heavenly vision, Acts 26.24
Festus will count him a fool. And Lot seemed unto his sons in law, Genesis 19.
as if he had mocked, when he labored their greatest good.

The reason is rendered by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.14
where he says, The natural men perceives not the things that are of God, for
they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned, Romans 8.7.
and the wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God, for it is not subject to the
law of God, neither can it be.

stupefied, as that he should please himself in this condition, and neither
labor to come out of it, nor accept of deliverance if the same were offered
unto him. Surely the condition of such a one were most lamentable. This, my
beloved, is the condition of every man by nature, til we have had the spirit of
God to be our Schoolmaster, and we come to be cast into the mold of the Word,
we are all in this miserable condition, not being of our selves able to think
a good thought, 2 Cor. 3.5.
our understandings, wills, affections, and all being so miserably captiuated,
that we can do nothing but sin.

wrought upon by grace, and turned from sin to God, they are to magnify Gods
goodness herein: for these gifts and graces are none of those plants that grow
in the garden of our hearts by nature. It is not of our selves, it is the gifts
of God, and by how much the more our nature is depraved, by so much the more
ought we to magnify his goodness and power in his mercy toward us.

(His life was taken from the earth.)

This might seem strange that Christ should thus reign, triumphantly in
glory, being cut off from the people, as unworthy to live.

But herein appears his great love toward us, that he should be pleased by
this means to learn us the way whereby we shall come to glory, and that is,
by shame, reproach, persecutions, and afflictions, yea, through the horror of
death and of darkness: through these did the light of salvation appeace: out
of the gulf of death, life flowed. And because he was humbled himself to the
death, even the death of the Cross, and took upon him the state of a servant,
therefore God has exalted him. Phil. 1.27.


Lazarus hindered not his joy: nor David being but a keeper of sheep, did not
keep him from the kingdom.

as Kings and Priests, we must not be ashamed of his Cross, nor to think
strange of those troubles we must suffer for his sake. But to follow our head
and Captain, who was himself consecrated through afflictions, and by misery
and shame entered into glory. But of this before.

VERSE 34. And the Eunuch answered Philip and said, I pray thee of whom
speaks the Prophet this, of himself, or of some other man?
THe Eunuch having read, now he asks the meaning: It is not sufficient for
men to be conversant in the Scripture, and diligently to read the same,
unless men understand that they read. Ezra not only read the law unto the
people, but he caused them also to understand the same. And to whom goes the
Eunuch at this time to be taught and instructed, but unto Philip, whose office
and calling was to interpret and expound the Scriptures, and to instruct the
ignorant in the ways of God. The lesson is,

That in all our straights we are to go for counsel all direction to Gods
Ministers. In all our straights we must go to Gods Ministers for direction.
Men are not negligently and carelessly to pass over that they read or hear,
and understand not, but to seek to find out the meaning, and to labor to be
resolved of the truth thereof. And to this end, to go to those Teachers that
are appointed of God to the same end, to be rightly informed therein. It is the
Lords own ordinance it should be so. Mat. 2.7.
The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they shall seek the law at his
mouth. Again, Deuteronomy. 17.9.
Thou shall come unto the Priest and Levites, and unto the Judge that shall be
in those days, and enquire, and they shall show thee the sentence of
Judgment. It was the counsel that Iehosophat gave unto the king of Israel, 2.
King. 22.5.6.
when he was to go up against Ramoth Gilead: Enquire, I pray thee, at the word
of the Lord this day. Then the King of Israel gathered the Prophets together,
about four hundred men, and said, Shall I go up to Ramoth Gilead? And thus
came the disciples unto our Savior to have the parable interpreted unto them.
Mar. 4.10.
So when our Savior taught the doctrine of divorce, Mar. 10.10.
the Disciples afterward asked him of the same thing. Where they saw the man
that was borne blind, Ioh. 9.3.
they asked our Savior, whether it was his sin, or his parents. And hence is
it that Paul so earnestly exhorts Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.15.
to give attendance to reading, to exhortation, and to doctrine, and to study
to show himself approved of God, a workman that needs not to be ashamed:
rightly dividing the word of truth. And this is the Lords own decree, They
have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. Luk 16.31
And there is Reason for it.

He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, Ephesians. 4, 11.12.
and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints for the work
of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.

else, Luke 16 31
no, though one come from the dead.

Ezekiel. 34.4.
The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed the sick, nor
have ye bound up that which was broken, neither heave ye brought again that
which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost. Such stand
guilty before the Lord of no less sin then the blood of souls.

tempting him. Ioh. 8.3.6.
And as they which came with good pretenses unto Christ, Master we know that
thou art true, and teach the way of Christ truly, etc. This is a thing too
common in the world, to demand questions, but not to edification; rather to
entrap the Minister, and to get advantage against him, then as Josias did of
Huldah the Prophetess, 2. Reg. 22.13.14.15.
to be acquainted with Gods will.

Philip may be a long time amongst us, yet few make this use of his presence.
This is one of the maine causes why ignorance does so abound amongst us, this
day as it does. Well then as we desire to come out of our ignorance, and to be
made acquainted with Gods will, let us labor to imitate this admirable example
of this Eunuch here, by improuing well our time and opportunity, when we shall
have Philip amongst us.

Of whom speaks the Prophet this?

Albeit this Eunuch was a very wise and prudent man in worldly affairs, and in
the government of a kingdom, yet does ingeniously confess his own blindness
and ignorance in the things of God, The knowledge of God comes not by nature.
and mysteries of Christ's kingdom. And herein will teach us,

That Religion and the knowledge of God comes not by nature. Every man is a
heast in his own knowledge. Ier. 10.14.
When Peter had confessed Christ to be the Son of God: Mark Christ's answer,
Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee. Mat. 16.
The natural man perceiues not the things that are of God: neither can he
know them, 1. Cor. 2.14.
for they are spiritually discerned. Even they which otherwise many times have
the best capacities, and are of great understanding, yet are strangely sottish
and blockish in the things appertaining to Gods kingdom. But of this before.

1. Cor. 2.7.8.
We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, which none of the Princes of this
world knew; Might David say, being advanced from a sheepfold to a Scepter, What
was in me, or in my fathers house, that thou should choose me to feed thy
people? How much more may those admire the Lords mercy, whom the Lord has
delivered out of that more then Egyptian Bondage and darkness, and brought
them to the knowledge of his Son Christ?



But why does the Lord thus keep his servants from the true knowledge and
understanding of his word?



First, that herein and hereby he might try their patience and faith, whether
they will hold out, or not: as the Lord dealt with Cornelius, Act. 10 9.
he sent him not by and by to Peter; he did not straight way instruct this
Eunuch; nor Paul, Act. 9.
immediately after he had heard the voice from heaven, because patience
brings forth experience; Romans 5.
experience, hope; and hope makes not ashamed. God does not cast off such, to
whom he denies necessary knowledge for a time.

diligently wait upon the means, which God has ordained to make men wise
unto salvation; we know that want will make men look about them, and seek
where to have a supply.

James says, If any man want wisdom, let him ask it of God: we must seek
saving knowledge only at his hands, whose only it is to dispose of. And
herein the Lord is not like unto man, who being often pressed to give, at last
grows weary; but he delights most in the constant prayers of his servants.

thing, they will the more carefully keep it.

VERSE 35. Then Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same Scripture, and
preached unto him Jesus.
THe Eunuch had desired Philip to sit with him, he had read the Scripture, and
demanded of him, of whom the Prophet spoke when he said, He was led as a sheep
to the slaughter, etc.

Now at last Philip opens his mouth, and preaches the word unto him.

First, it is said that He opened his mouth. This is an Hebraisme, as Calvin
has well observed.

He opened his mouth. That is, he began in a solemn manner to preach unto the
Eunuch. It is like unto that of our Savior, of whom it was said, Mat. 5.1.
that when the multitude were gathered together he ascended the mount: And when
he had opened his mouth, he taught them, saying. The phrase of speech showed
that it was no ordinary matter that he was now to declare unto the people, but
the high and heavenly mysteries of his kingdom. So Philip here opened his
mouth to teach this man serious and weighty things. The instruction is plain.

The Minister of God is not lightly, Gods word must be handled with reverence.
or at all adventure, to take in hand the handling of the word of God, but with
great advice and deliberation. Gods word must be handled with great respect and
reverence: of which it is well said, It is not safe to play with holy things.
The Apostle Paul speaking of the doctrine of the Gospel, That it is the savor
of life to life to them that are saved; says, 2. Cor. 2.15.
who is sufficient for these things? Verse. 16.
The Apostle Saint Paul was a man indewed with the singular gifts of the
spirit, yet how often in all his Epistles does he desire the prayers of the
people. The Minister of Christ must be as a wise Scribe taught to the kingdom
of heaven, Mat. 13.52.
Bringing forth of his treasury things new and old: and therefore must come
well prepared unto the work. Ministers must come to the work with good
aduisement and premeditation, and so handle the word of God with fear and
reverence.

When Peter came to Cornelius, Act. 10.
he did not forthwith speak unto him, before he had first acquainted him with
the heavenly vision. And hence is it that Paul charge Timothy, 1. Tim. 4.13.
To give attendance to reading, to exhortation, and doctrine: That is, in a fit
manner to prepare himself aforehand for the work of the Ministry. And no
doubt the Apostle Saint Paul himself was diligent therein, and found much
fruit and profit thereby, that he exhorts Timothy to be so diligent in the
practice of the same.

And if Saint Paul, so worthy an Apostle of Jesus Christ, called immediately
by Christ himself, gave himself to the study of Gods word; how much more ought
the Ministers of Christ now that have no such immediate calling as they had.

The Minister then must study to make himself fit to speak unto the people,
and not to do as the manner of some is, trot up and down all the week about
worldly affairs, and then on the Sabbath deliver whatsoever comes to hand.
This is not to divide the word of God aright. The Ministers of Christ must
first eat the roll of Gods book, Ezekiel. 2.1.
and have their tongue touched wito a Cole from the Altar, Isa. 6 7.
before they come ^^to Gods place, and in his st^^d to speak unto the people.

And is there not reason, think you?



Ier.
and are not such accursed that do the work of the Lord negligently?

Mal. 2.7.
Now if the people must learn to know Gods will from the mouth of the
Minister, it is requisite that he should be well acquainted with Gods will.
For to this end is he placed over them.

to speak something unto the people.

This is indeed no better then to tempt God, when men shall neglect the means
which God has appointed for this work of the Ministry. Wherefore has God
given Arts and Sciences, and the knowledge of tongues, but that men might use
them as helps and handmaids to this work of the Ministry?

I could wish such men would but consider Jacobs diligence and pains in
attending of Labans flock, Gen 31 40
In the day time (says he) I was consumed with heat, in the night with
frost, and my sleep departed from me. Alas, what comparison between Christ
and Laban; the one, a churlish master; the other a merciful Redeemer? And what
comparison between the sheep of Laban, and the sheep of Christ; what a shame
were it, (...) the sheep of Laban, should be better served, then the sheep of
Christ purchased with his own blood.

If this move us not, cast we our eyes upon the Lord Jesus Christ himself,
the Cheef Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, sometimes in the temple, sometimes
in the garden, sometimes preaching, sometimes praying, and sometimes suffering. A
Minister that is so sparing of a little sweaet for Christ, what would he do
if he should call for his blood? Surely he will ill abide the pangs of burning
for Christ, that will not abide the pains of preaching for Christ.

Would any man give wages to such a sheepherd that should neglect his flock,
and suffer them to be starued for want of pasture, or leave them to be
devoured? I trow not. What then can such expect at Gods hand, that feed
themselves, and not the flock which he has purchased with his own blood.

Peter was to preach the Word to Cornelius, Cornelius and his whole company
were ready prepared to receive the same, we are all here before God (says he)
to hear whatsoever is commanded us of God. Act. 10.


(He began at the same Scripture)

Philip being to preach Jesus Christ unto this Eunuch, and having considered
what to say, he begins at this Scripture, herein taking the present
occasion that was thus by Divine providence offered, it serving so fitly to his
purpose in hand. For albeit there be many places that set forth Christ, and
the mystery of our Salvation through him, yet none to this. For indeed
throughout all the Prophets we have no where a clearer Prophecy of Christ's
death and resurrection, then this place of the Prophet Esaias. And therefore as
the Lord was pleased in his good Providence to direct the Eunuch at this time
to fall upon this Scripture to read it; Philip takes the present opportunity,
and the text of Scripture now read, as the fittest text to preach of unto him.
And herein will teach the Ministers of Christ a necessary duty.

Namely that they ought to be so wise to make choice of special texts,
Ministers must make choice of special texts for special occasions.
and places of Scripture to treat of unto their people, as occasion still
shall be offered unto them. For albeit that all Scriptures are full of Divine
and heavenly truths, yet some Scriptures fit some persons and occasions better
then others.

There are many comfortable promises which God has made in his word. Come let
us reason together, though your sins were as scarlet, etc. Esaias 1.18 Mat.
11.28
Come unto me all ye that travail and are heavy laden, etc. But for a man
that is not yet truly humbled, the threats of the Law are fitter.

That place of John, Ioh. 9.31.
God hears not sinners; Is an excellent Scripture and very requisite to be
taught, but not to one distressed in conscience, and beaten down in the sense
of sin.

A Steward in a family must have as well wisdom to know what is necessary for
every member of the family, as fidelity to dispense his Masters goods. The
Minister is to know when to speak, and what to speak, for as Solomon says, A
word spoken in due time, is like Apples of gold and pictures of silver.

Arons Bells must be wisely rung, sometimes the treble of Mercy sounds well, at
another time the tenor of Judgment sounds better. A Minister is wisely to
change his note as occasion shall require, approving himself to every man's
conscience in the fear of God. 2 Cor. 4.2.
sometimes we are to come in a still voice, as the Lord appeared to Elias.
sometimes again to play the part of a Bonarges, a Son of Thunder.



What if he meet with an old festere soar that is cauterized, and must have
corsiues to eat out the dead flesh, if this be not had, does he not (through
his ignorance and unskillfulness) kill the man? doubtless such Ministers are
never able to acquit themselves of the blood of such men's souls in the last
day.

(And preached unto him Jesus)

By his text, we may judge of his Doctrine, the text of Scripture being a
clear prophecy of Christ's humiliation, and of Christ's exaltation, no doubt the
scope of Philips Sermon tended principally to convince the judgment of this
Eunuch in the truth of both of them, how that every part and particle of that
prophecy had it determination and period in the Lord Jesus Christ.

And herein will teach us,

That Christ, Christ the subject matter of true preaching.
is the subject matter of the Gospel, yea the subject matter of al true
preaching. Christ and him crucified, is the whole scope of the whole Scripture.

Yea the Doctrine of the law it self is but a Scholemaster to lead us to
Christ. For the more clearly the law has convinced the conscience of sin,
the more ready shall we be to go out of our selves, and to seek Salvation in
Christ. The matter then of true preaching is Jesus Christ. We preach Christ,
the power of God, and the wisdom of God. 1 Cor. 2.
And hence it is that the Gospel is called the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Mar.
1.1.
and the World of Christ; and again whom we preach, Col. 3.
(says the Apostle) speaking of Christ. Paul calls the Galatians, Folish
Galatians, for not obeying the truth. Gal. 3.1.
Before whose eyes (says he) Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth,
and crucified amongst you. And hence is it that the same Apostle places all
his happiness in Christ, and Christ alone, God forbid (says he) that I
should rejoice in any thing, but in our Lord Jesus Christ. He is the only King,
Priest and Prophet of his Church. And all true happiness and felicity
consists in the true knowledge of him. This is life eternal to know thee to
be the true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Ioh. 17.3.


Now the grounds of this are,

First, Paul, Christ is made unto us wisdom and righteousness, sanctification
and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.31.
and all to this end, that he that glories, might glory in him.

It pleased the Father that in him all fullness should dwell, Col. 1.19.20.21.
and having made peace through the blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all
things to him, whether they be things on earth or things in heaven.

Thirdly, by his death he has destroyed death, O Death I will be thy death;
O Death where is thy sting? and again, Thanks be to God who has given us
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 15.55.57.


Jesus Christ and him crucified, and to apply the same close to the conscience
of every man, in such wise as some change and reformation may follow. Pity it
is to see how many Teachers now a days do choose out hard texts of Scripture,
and make learned discourses thereon, show much reading for Fathers and humanity,
of whom it may truly be said, that they preach, many of them, themselves and
not Christ: is preaching Gods ordinance? was it ordained then, my Brethren, to
please the ear, or to prick the heart? Never let a Preacher think, that he has
preached Christ as he should, unless by his preaching he bring men to
Christ. For as all lines do meet in the point of the Center; so must it be
the end and scope of a Ministers function, to bring men Christ.

doctrine to desire to hear, and to rest satisfied in, Even such kind of
preaching as serves most clearly to set out Christ.

I know not how it is come to pass in this old age of the world; Men have got
them Athenian cares. To preach Christ and him crucified, is too homely a thing;
men delight in novelties and must have their preacher sore alofte in sublimitie
of doctrine, or else he is not worth the hearing; these are wanton Christians,
that now begin to play with the word, as little children with their bread. O
let us labor with our own hearts herein, and learn to prize that ministry,
wherein we may se and discern the true estate of our souls. And withal let
us labor that we may be cast into the mould of the Gospel; That our
Judgments wills and affections may stoop to the Scepter of the Lord Jesus, for
without this we preach but in vain, and you hear but in vain, yea the word
shall become at last the woeful savor of death unto death unto you.



Let it be duly thought upon and considered, whether they or we rest most on
Christ, magnify Christ and the allufficiency of his sufferings. Do we look
to merit by our own works? do we mingle his blood with the blood of martyrs
in way of satisfaction for sin? do we join with the intercession of Jesus
Christ, the Intercession of Angels or Saints? or do we not rather rest wholly
upon him? Surely this is not the least argument to assure us of the truth of
our Religion against the Church of Rome, that we can rest wholly and totally
upon Christ.

VERSE 36. And as they went on their way, they came to a certain water, and
the Eunuch said; See here is water, what does hinder me to be Baptized?
PHilip having thus preached Jesus Christ unto him, and that through him alone
we must look for life and salvation, through faith in his name. And having
likewise preached unto him the necessity of being Baptized into Jesus Christ,
that thereby we put on Christ, are ingrafted into him, and admitted into his
Church. For howsoever every thing is not here recited that Philip preached unto
this man, yet considering the Text of Scripture Philip had in hand, and the
question of the Eunuch here, it is our of all question that Philip had taught
him the maine Principle sof our faith, and mystery of our salvation through
Christ. Such as were, Christ's Incarnation, Christ's humiliation, and those great
things he suffered for our sakes. His Resurrection and exaltation on high, at
the right hand of his Father, together with the use of the Sacraments of the
Church, Baptism, and Christ's Last Supper. That these things were taught unto
the Eunuch, this Text does make it clear, by his desiring of Philip, so soon
as they came to the water, to baptize him.

And as they went on their way, Text.
they came to a certain water, etc.

Here we see the fruit and effect of Philips Ministry in another particular;
first we have heard before that he is brought to be a believer; here again to
put on Christ by the badge and livery of his profession, Baptism. It teaches
us then,

What is the true end of preaching the Gospel, The end of true preaching is to
bring men to Christ.
namely, to bring men to Christ. See the truth of this in the scope and drift
of Paul's Ministry. Unto the Jews I became a Jew, that I might gain the
Jews: 1. Cor. 9.20, 2^, 22.
To them that are under the Law, as under the Law. To what end? That I might
save them that are under the Law. To the weak I became as weak, that I might
gain the weak. I became all things to all men, that I might by all means
save some. And this I do for the Gospels sake. Go ye into all the world, and
preach the word to every Nation; Mar. 16.16
he that believes and is baptized shall be saved. So that salvation is the
end of preaching. So Paul, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, Romans
16.17.
because it is the power of God to salvation. For therein is the righteousness
of God revealed from faith to faith, begetting faith in us, and is therefore
called, 1. Tim. 4.6.
The word of faith; because it begets faith in the hearts of Gods servants.
This is the maine end of the preaching of the word, and so of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. See the exhortation of Paul to Timothy, Instruct them with
meekness which be contrary minded, 2. Tim. 2.25.
proving if at any time God will give them repentance unto salvation. This is
the true end that the Minister of the word must aim at, namely, to bring men
out of darkness into his marvelous light. Thus Paul and Sylas wills the
Iaylor to be leeue in the Lord Jesus, Act. 16.
and he should be saved; All true preaching aims at this, as the true end
thereof.

this. And indeed the true glory of a Minister consists in the number of those
that by his Ministry are gained to Christ. Such are his crown and glory, the
Seals of his Ministry: And comfortable will the reckoning and account of
such, one day, be, when they shall say, Here come I, Father, with those thou
have given me.

thy back upon the word, this ordinance of God, Ion. 2.
Thou forsakest thy own mercy. For the word preached is the word of faith, and
it is faith that brings us to Christ.

burning: for so says the Apostle, The earth that drinks in the rain that
comes often upon it, 1. Cor. 3. Heb. 6.7.
and brings forth fruit meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives the
blessing from God. But that which bears thorns and briars, is near unto
cursing, whose end is to be burned. Let us then, at last, my brethren, be
awakened out of our security, and whilst it is called To day, not to harden
our hearts, but answer the Lords call, lest we come at last to be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin: and by our wilful rebellion and contempt
of grace offered, shut up at last the gate of grace against our selves.

(And as they went on their way.)

It seems then that Philip preached in his travel sitting in the Chariot,
and as they iournied.

Certainly great was the zeal and piety of this man in the improuing of his
time so well. He would either read himself, or hear Philip preach, even in
their travels, and in their journey.

Now inasmuch as the Spirit of God is so careful in setting down this
diligence of his in every circumstance thereof, it teaches us,

Time is to be well spent.
That the careful improuing of our time is a thing well pleasing unto God, and
that delights him: and hence it is that we are exhorted to redeem the time.
And our Savior tells us, Ephesians. 5.
That for every idle word that men shall speak, Mat. 12.36.
they shall give an account in the day of Judgment. Our Savior reproved this
in those husbandmen in the Gospel, Why stand ye here all the day idle? Mat.
20.
Time, precious time is one of those Talents for the which we are one day to
give up account unto God.

Which shows indeed the greatness of their sin, time, as if it were their
own to spend it they list. Many men set their wits on work, how to spend
time, and to drive it away, as they say, as if time were so slow footed, as
that it stood in need to be driven. Surely there are many thousands now in
hell, that shall there suffer the reward of the damned for evermore, that would
give a thousand worlds, if they might, for a few hours of that precious time
we so wastfully mis-spend. My brethren, there is no prodigality in the whole
world like unto this of mis-spending of time. If a man waste his estate, and
mis-spend his inheritance, it is possible to recover it again: But time,
precious time, once lost, can never be recovered.

(They came to a certain water.)

See here through the especial providence and goodness of God, how happily
every thing comes to hand, to set forward this man's salvation.

If the Lord do but give him once an heart to seek him, and to serve him,
here is a Jerusalem to go to, to worship God. For the further building of him
up in the knowledge of Christ, here are the Scriptures to be read: does he
stick at them as being beyond his understanding. Here is a Philip ready to
teach and instruct him, and to interpret the Scriptures unto him.

Does Philip tell him how necessary a thing it is to be baptized, see here,
They came to a certain water.

Whatsoever his wants and necessities are, the Lord still makes supply thereunto.

Thus, thus, deals the Lord with his servants, he never wants means to
bring his own purpose to pass. Our Instruction then is this.

That God never wants means for the good of his children; God wants not
means for the good of his servants.
what soever the wants and necessities of his servants are, God never wants
means for the supply thereof: whether we consider their corporal
necessities, or spiritual wants, he is God all-sufficient for them both.

Let the Israelites, his own people, be in misery and distress, the Lord can
supply their wants with Manna from heaven. If there be a time of famine and
dearth in the Land, he can cause the widows oil to increase, and not to
diminish, until the Lord send plenty in the Land; rather then Jonas shall
perish, the Whale shall attend his service: rather then Elias shall perish for
want of food, the Ravens shall feed him.

And as for the spiritual miseries of his servants, he is able to send
comfort and deliverance many ways. Act. 9.
Paul being a chosen vessel, the Lord can bring him home many ways, at his
pleasure, as by that sound from heaven, and afterward to send him to Ananias.
Let Cornelius with an upright heart seek the Lord with fasting and prayer, he
shall not want a Peter to instruct and comfort him in the ways of God. Act.
10.30.
Let Peter be cast into prison, he shall have the ministry of an Angel at
hand for his delivery. Act. 12.
And this Eunuch that traveled far to worship God, and to know Jesus Christ
and him crucified, rather then his expectation shall fail, and his labor
shall be in vain in the Lord, the Lord will raise up a Philip, by whose
ministry he shall be brought to believe. And why should any wonder at this?

Is he not the Lord of Hosts? Daniel be cast into the Lions den, he can muzell
the mouths of those cruel beasts. Dan. 3.
Let the three Children be cast into the fiery furnace, the fire shall have
no power at all against them. It skills not what the miseries of Gods servants
are, so the Lord be with them.

David's case, Has God forgotten to be gracious, and has he shut up his
loving kindness in displeasure? This was Jonas case, Ion. 2.
I said I am for ever cast out of thy sight. Whereas indeed God does never
forsake his people. He has said, Heb. 13.
He will never leave them nor forsake them.

wants not means of deliverance when he is pleased to help. Thou art kept
under many corruptions and infirmities which cleave unto thee here, which feign
thou would shake off, and be rid of: Know thou for thy comfort, that God is
able to tread down Satan under thy feet; with whom all things are possible.

(Here is water, what does let me?)

Philip having, no doubt, instructed him in the use of the Sacraments, that by
Baptism he was to be admitted into the Church, and that it was the badge and
cognizance of a Christian; See we now his ready disposition to put on this
Christian profession, the Livery of such a Lord and Master. See here is water,
what does let me?

Q. d. Is Baptism a sign of our profession, and is it a symbol of our
putting on of Christ: Here is water, what lets but that according to thy
Doctrine I be now baptized?

See here with what readiness and cheerfulness we should put the Lords will
in execution, Gods will being once made known, we ought readily to put the
same in exacution
being once made known unto us. Is Baptism so needful and so necessary? well
fare a good heart, it will not omit any opportunity offered, but takes the
benefit of the first water he met withal in his journey, to be baptized.

Men should make haste to be in covenant with God and Christ, like the sons
of Zebedeus, would leave all to be entertained into his service. All our
actions will find acceptance with God, so far forth as they savor of
cheerfulness; For that which Saint Paul speaks of giving, is true of all
other duties, God loves a cheerful giver. God loves a cheerful hearer, God
loves a cheerful receiver; cheerfulness is all in all in the doing of good
duties. And hence is it that this is observed to the great commendations of
Abraham, that when the Lord had commanded him to sacrifice his son Isaac,
Genesis 22.
Abraham arose up early in the morning to do it. But of this before.

(What does let me to be baptized?)

The Eunuch having readily and willingly entertained the word in his heart,
does now in Baptism desire to put on the outward profession of Religion also,
to testify unto the world the ^^uth of his profession. And herein will teach
us,

That he that has truly put on Christ, Hea^tie Christians must be hearty
p^ofessors. To. 10.10.
will be ready to make profession of the name of Christ. With the heart man
believes to righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made known unto
salvation. For this public profession of the truths sake, Daniel was cast
into the den: The three Children into the fiery furnace. The Apostles being
charged to hold their peace, and to preach no more in the name of Jesus,
Answered boldly before the Council, Whether it be right in the sight of God,
Act. 5.29. Act. ^1.11.12. 1. Tim. 6.12.13.
to obey you rather then God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak the things
that we have seen and heard. How resolute was the Apostle Paul this way, when
Agabus had told him the things that should befall him at Jerusalem, and his
friends went about to dissuade him from going up thither what do ye weeping
and breaking my heart, I am ready not only to be bound, but also to dye at
Jerusalem, for the testimony of the Lord Jesus. And in this does our Savior
comfort his Disciples against all the miseries and afflictions of this life,
Luke 22.28
Ye are they which have been with me in my temptations, therefore I appoint
unto you a Kingdom.

The point is clear and plain. That such as by faith have put on the Lord
Jesus, will not be ashamed to make confession and profession of his name;
Every man must be at the least a Confessor, if not a Martyr, that would reign
with Christ in glory.

And there is Reason for it,

Because we have the same spirit of Faith, according as it is written, I
believed, 2 Cor. 4.13
and therefore have I spoken, we also believe, and therefore speak. No better
testimony of true Faith, then heartily to confess Christ, whereas he that is
afraid to confess Christ, has no Faith.

Mat. 10.32.
He that shall confess me before men, him will I confess before my Father,
which is in heaven. Mar. 8.38.
Whereas the contrary is threatened with a fearful curse, Whosoever shall
deny me before men, him will I deny before my Father, which is in heaven.

wants not means of deliverance when he is pleased to help. Thou art kept
under many corruptions and infirmities which cleave unto thee here, which feign
thou would shake off, and be rid of: Know thou for thy comfort, that God is
able to tread down Satan under thy feet; with whom all things are possible.

(Here is water, what does let me?)

Philip having, no doubt, instructed him in the use of the Sacraments, that by
Baptism he was to be admitted into the Church, and that it was the badge and
cognizance of a Christian; See we now his ready disposition to put on this
christian profession, the Livery of such a Lord and Master. See here is water,
what does let me?

Q. d. Is Baptism a sign of our profession, and is it a symbol of our
putting on of Christ: Here is water, what lets but that according to thy
Doctrine I be now baptized?

See here with what readiness and cheerfulness we should put the Lords will
in execution, Gods will being once made known, we ought readily to put the
same in execution
being once made known unto us. Is Baptism so needful and so necessary? well
fare a good heart, it will not omit any opportunity offered, but takes the
benefit of the first water he met withal in his journey, to be baptized.

Men should make haste to be in covenant with God and Christ, like the sons
of Zebedeus, would leave all to be entertained into his service. All our actions
will find acceptance with God, so far forth as they savor of
cheerfulness; For that which Saint Paul speaks of giving, is true of all
other duties, God loves a cheerful giver. God loves a cheerful hearer, God
loves a cheerful receiver; cheerfulness is all in all in the doing of good
duties. And hence is it that this is observed to the great commendations of
Abrabam, that when the Lord had commanded him to sacrifice his son Isaac,
Genesis 22.
Abraham arose up early in the morning to do it. But of this before.

(What does let me to be baptized?)

The Eunuch having readily and willingly entertained the word in his heart,
does now in Baptism desire to put on the outward profession of Religion also,
to testify unto the world the truth of his profession. And herein will teach
us,

That he that has truly put on Christ, Hea^tie Christians must be hearty
professors. To. 10.10.
will be ready to make profession of the name of Christ. With the heart man
believes to righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made known unto
salvation. For this public profession of the truths sake, Daniel was cast
into the den: The three Children into the fiery furnace. The Apostles being
charged to hold their peace, and to preach no more in the name of Jesus,
Answered boldly before the Council, Whether it be right in the sight of God,
Act. 5.29. Act. 21.11.12. 1. Tim. 6.12.13.
to obey you rather then God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak the things
that we have seen and heard. How resolute was the Apostle Paul this way, when
Agabus had told him the things that should befall him at Jerusalem, and his
friends went about to dissuade him from going up thither what do ye weeping
and breaking my heart, I am ready not only to be bound, but also to dye at
Jerusalem, for the testimony of the Lord Jesus. And in this does our Savior
comfort his Disciples against all the miseries and afflictions of this life,
Luke 22.28
Ye are they which have been with me in my temptations, therefore I appoint
unto you a Kingdom.

The point is clear and plain. That such as by faith have put on the Lord
Jesus, will not be ashamed to make confession and profession of his name;
Every man must be at the least a Confessor, if not a Martyr, that would reign
with Christ in glory.

And there is Reason for it,

Because we have the same spirit of Faith, according as it is written, I
believed, 2 Cor. 4.13
and therefore have I spoken, we also believe, and therefore speak. No better
testimony of true Faith, then heartily to confess Christ, whereas he that is
afraid to confess Christ, has no Faith.

Mat. 10.32.
He that shall confess me before men, him will I confess before my Father,
which is in heaven. Mar. 8.38.
Whereas the contrary is threatened with a fearful curse, whosoever shall
deny me before men, him will I deny before my Father, which is in heaven.

a Napkin, or put under a Bushel, but that the same should shine forth to the
praise of his own grace to lighten others. Let your light so shine before men,
Mat. 5.15.
that they may se your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

Let us hear the uses,

for every change and alteration, like the wether-cock that turns with every
blast of wind. I would comend unto such these places of Scripture to meditate
on.

Then should I yet have comfort, yea I would harden my self in sorrow, Job
6.10.
let him not spare, for I have not concealed the words of the holy one.

The Just shall live by Faith, Heb. 10.38.
but if any man withdraw himself, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.

The fearful and unbelieving shall have their portion in the lake which
burns with fire and brimston. Reu. 21.8.


Whosoever shall be ashamed of me before men, Mar. 8.38.
of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his
Father, with the holy Angels.

It is lamentable to see the pass that many men are at, in the company of
zealous Protestants, they will be Protestants, in the company of Papists, they
will be Papists; we have of these amongst us. Let not such men deceive them
selves and their own souls, for whilst they will be thus of all religions,
they remain indeed and in truth of no religion, yea every simple man and
little child can discover such to be no better then Atheists.

Was Religion my Brethren ordained to serve men's humors, and to be fitted as
men's garments are to fashions and times?

Surely God will make this poor Ethinck man a swifte witness in judgment one
day against such, who albeit he were in some danger herein to the hazarding of
his place and office, to loose the favor of the Queen his Mistress, now that
he shall forsake her in her idolatrous service. Yet being now by the Ministry
of Philip brought to the knowledge of Christ, he is content to run all the
hazards that may come, will be baptized and therein take upon him the open badg
and cognizance of his Master, and profess openly unto the world the truth of
his religion.

such cold Professors has religion now adays. Now if these men startle so at
a little shame, or disgrace, what would these men do if they were called to the
stake to seal their profession with their blood? O what a shame is this, that
every check, every taunt, every frown of a mortal man that is but dust, should
make us stagger in the good way of righteousness. If we be ashamed of Christ
before men, what loses he thereby? But if he shall be ashamed of us before
his heavenly Father, and before his holy Angels, what shall then become of us?

see in others, because they will not run with them into the same excess of
riot.

When the Lord was pleased to restore the light of the Gospel amongst us, and
brought this land out of the Romish Superstition and Idolatry, how did our
Adversaries the Papists gnash upon us with their teeth, and were ready to
break a sunder through envy of that pure light of the Gospel that was risen
amongst us? How did they set their wits a work to reproach us and our
Religion, branding Professors with the names of Puritans, Precisians, holy
Brethren, and the like; Which contumelies and reproaches we have taken out of
their mouths, and are ready to spit them in the face one of another. It is
high time my brethren to send these reproaches back again to Rome from whence
they came, The Mother of all bitterness and cruelty, and not vpbraide any with
his zeal, but rather be provoked by their example to walk in their steps.

Sun, Moon, and Stars, against us. And indeed he that is truly religious,
cannot but stand to the truth.

We cannot but speak the things that we have heard and seen. Act. 5.92.
The hundred forty and four thou sand had their Fathers name written in
their foreheads, Reu. 14.1.
to show that they were not ashamed of their profession; Though all men be not
honored with the honor to be Martyrs for Christ, yet all men must at least
be Cofessors of Christ.

VERSE 37. And Philip said if thou beleevest with all they heart, thou may.
And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.
THis verse contains in it the answer of Philip, unto the former question
made by the Eunuch. Wherein we have,

1. The condition propounded, If thou beleeuest. 2. The Eunuchs Concession, or
allowance of the condition: I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.
And Philip said, If thou beleeuest.

Howsoever the Eunuch desired greatly this Sacrament of Baptism as a seal of
the covenant, and badge of his profession; and howsoever here is water ready
and at hand for the same purpose, Philip notwithstanding does not presently
descend into the water, but first of all does tech and instruct him in the
necessity of faith to the due participation of this sacred ordinance. And
herein will commend unto every faithful Minister of Christ a most necessary
duty.

Ministers must first instruct their people before they administer the
Sacraments.
Namely, that they must first teach and instruct their people in the nature of
the Sacrament, and the necessity of saving faith to the due participation
thereof, before they administer the same unto them. Every one must thoroughly be
instructed in the Sacraments, before he come to participate of the same. This
was the charge the Lord gave unto the Levites in the time of the Law, before
they came to the Passover: Ye shall sanctify your selves, 2. Chron. 35.6.
and prepare your brethren, that they may do according to the word of the Lord.
And thus does Philip here instruct this Eunuch in the necessity of saving
faith, before he receive this Sacrament of Baptism. Neither does Paul
presently baptize the Iaylor, before such time that he had preached the word
unto him, and thereby made him fit to partake of the same.

This was that holy order that Christ himself commends unto his Disciples: Mat
28.19
Go teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, etc. And
again, He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Wherein we see that
faith is most necessary to precede Baptism: Men are first of all to be taught
to believe, before they receive the Sacraments; which are indeed The seals of
the righteousness of faith. And there is reason for it.

Heb. 13.17
as they that must give up an account thereof unto God. And therefore must
warn them of the danger of unworthy receiving, lest the people rush upon holy
things unworthily, and vnpreparedly, and so incur Gods wrath, and they
themselves hereby become guilty of their sins.

Mat. 7.6.
nor pearls cast before swine; it is requisite then that the Pastor should
take away the precious from the vile, and as much as in him lies, Ier. 15.19.
put the difference betwixt the one and the other.



This serves then for the just reproof of such Ministers as make no conscience
at all of their duties in this kind, their people to the due participation of
the Sacraments, but promiscuously hand over head suffer all to partake of the
same, and so to defile these holy ordinances.

This was Eli's sin, for the which the Lord threatened to plague his house
for ever, That his sons made themselves vile, 1. Sam. 3.13.
and he restrained them not. Surely it is not the least sin whereof the Tribe
of Leui stands guilty of at this day, that men are no more restrained, and
that herein we deal not so faithfully with men's souls are we should.

the seals of Gods covenant. Wherefore should we require these things at Gods
hands, when our conditions are not observed? It is lamentable to see the
general neglect of this holy preparation amongst the most sort of men; men
almost disdain to be admonished and instructed in their duties herein.

If thou beleeuest with all thy heart, thou may.

Though the Eunuch desired never so much to be baptized, yet Philip does not by
and by satisfy his desire therein, but shows him first the condition that is
required on our part, namely, Faith necessary to the due receiving of the
Sacraments.
that he must believe. The Doctrine is,

That to the participation of the Sacraments of the Church, faith is necessary.
The words are plain, If thou beleeuest, thou may.

Q. d. there is more in it then so, presently to be baptized, now here is water
ready. This may be done, and thou no whit the better; nay it may be done to thy
further condemnation. If then thou would have true comfort by this Sacrament,
this is required of thee, that thou believe.

The point is cleared by that of our Savior unto his Disciples, immediately
before his ascension up into heaven. Mat. 16.15, 16.
And he said unto them, Go ye unto all the world, and preach the word to every
Nation, he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved.

And hence is it that Philip does instruct this Eunuch in the great necessity
of saving faith, to the due participation of this Sacrament. So Paul, Act. 16.
the Iaylor, before the would baptize him, shows him the necessity of faith.
And hence is it that the Sacraments are called The seals of the righteousness
of faith. Rom 4.11.
Now it were absurd to set a seal to a thing that is not, as to a blanke. For
a man to come to the Sacrament for a confirmation of his faith, when he in the
mean time understands not what faith means; what an absurd thing were this?

And therefore the practice of the Primitive Church herein was most
commendable, who had their Catechumeni, a certain sort of people that were
well instructed in the principles of Religion, and then were admitted to the
Sacraments of Baptism, and the Eucharist, being drawn to the Church from
Heathenisme and Paganism.

If faith be so necessary to the due participation of the Sacraments of the
Church. How comes it then to pass that Infants are baptized, that are not of
years actually to believe?

This may be answered diverse ways.

1. Cor. 7.14.
If the root be holy, so be the branches. And in this sense may the children of
believers, be said to be believers.

Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, etc.
Howsoever their faith be secret, In infantibus qui adhuc per aetatem credere
non possunt Spiritus sanctus in ^o^um cordibus fidei vices agit. Pet. Mar. in
Romans 6.
as their life it self is: Though they know not that they do live, yet there
is life in them. So may the Lord in a marvelous manner give them the seed and
spirit of faith, as he dealt with Jacob, Jeremy, the Baptist, etc. That were
sanctified from the womb. Howsoever we are not able to describe the Lords
manner of secret working by his spirit herein.

Adams corruption should do more to the pollution of Infants, then Christ's
blood should do to their sanctification and clensing: who never wants means
to effect what is the purpose of his own will, even from the womb to
sanctify them and make them his own, though we be not able to fathom the
depth thereof. Thus much for the baptising of Infants.

But now of men of riper years the point is clear for both the Sacraments of
the Church. If a Jew, Turk, or Pagan were a among us, and should desire
baptism, it is requisite such a one should first be instructed in some good
measure to give an account of his faith, before he were admitted to be baptized.

And as for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the place is clear, 1. Cor.
11.28.
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, Mar. 16.
etc. He that believes and is baptized (says our Savior) shall be saved.
And, Romans 10.
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

1. These. 3.10.
That he that will not work, should not eat. That therefore Infants ought
not to be nourished, because they cannot labor.

But, say they, it is not found in all the Scriptures that any one Infant was
baptized by the Apostles. Neither is there mention made that they were
excluded. If this Argument were good, then might we say as well that women
ought not to be permitted to the Sacrament of Christ's Supper, because we find
not in the Scripture that the Apostles administered the same to any such. Yet
the Scriptures show that Crispus believed on the Lord and all his house and
were Baptized, and the same is said of Lydia and Stephanus, and their
households, who were all Baptized, and it is not unlike, but that there might
be some Infants amongst them.

For the further clearing of this truth, we are to know, that Baptism serves
to the same end to us, that Circumcision did to the Jews in the time of the
law. Namely to be a seal of Gods covenant. Now it is apparent that their
children must be Circumcised when they were eight days old. Are Infants of
Believers now under straighter conditions in the time of the Gospel, then the
Infants of the Jews in that time of the Law? God forbid. Does not Christ say,
Suffer little children to come unto me and forbid them not; and again, Mat.
19.14
To you is the promise made, and to your children. Act. 2.39. Object.


If Infants then have an interest into the covenant, and so unto the Seals of
the Covenant, the Sacraments, why then are not Infants permitted to the
Sacrament of Christ's Supper. Resp.
Some of the Ancients, as Cyprian and Augustine, mistaking the words of our
Savior, Ioh. 6.53.
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you; Understood these words to be meant of the Sacrament of his last
Supper, and hence conceived the use thereof absolute necessary to Salvation,
and would have little Infants to participate thereof. Whereas indeed the Reasons
that do interest the infant into the Sacrament of Baptism, do not prove a
necessity of the use of this Sacrament likewise. The one gives men an
admittance into the Church, and so belongs to Infants; the other of proceeding
and grouth in Christianity, and so belongs to men of riper years. Besides to
this Sacrament of the Lords Supper hear is required of all that would receive
the same worthily, that he examine himself, and that he be able to Discern
the Lords body, which Infants are not able to do, and therefore until they
come to years of discretion, are not to be admitted to that Sacrament.

their children being Baptized, have good cause to examine themselves, whether
they be within covenant with God, yea or no. What greater comfort to a man,
then to have his Seed within the Covenant of grace, Justified, Sanctified,
washed with the blood of Jesus, made a Member of the Church? this comfort may
thou have if thou be a believer, yea thou may boldly challenge the same at
Gods hands in regard of the covenant made to thee and thy Seed. But if thou
be an unbeliever that lie in thy sins without repentance, thy
Circumcision will be counted for uncircumcision, and thy baptism will not
profit thee at all.

O that Parents did duly consider this for themselves and for their children,
It is not Baptism that will avail, as if it did confer grace, as the Church
of Rome does teach, without the inward Baptism of the Spirit. Thou may go
to Hell for all thy Baptism, if thou be not a believer. Rest not then in
this, thou that art a Parent, that thy child has been Baptized, but labor to
bring him to be a believer, that he may likewise receive the inward grace of
Baptism, without which the outward cannot save.

Faith is the tenure by the which we all hold heaven, Baptism is but the seal
to confirm it, what is the Seal, if we have not an interest into the
covenant it self?

ex opere operato confer grace. This is to lift up the Sacrament above it
self. Was not Simon Magus baptized? Act. 8.23.
and yet remained in the gal of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. Were not
many of the people of the Jews Baptized under Moses, and under the cloud, and
had not God in many of them no delight? So that the Sacraments are effectual
unto men, so far as they believe. To the unbeliever they profit not at all.

Faith that is all in all. Thy Faith makes the Sacrament effectual, if thou
want Faith, thou wast never yet Baptized with the Spirit, and that which the
holy Ghost speaks of the word preached; The word thy heard profited them not,
Heb 4.2.
because it was not mixed with faith in them that heard it, may as truly be
said of the Sacraments, they profit not, being not mixed with Faith in them
that receive them.

If thou beleeuest with all thy heart.

Hereby is not meant the perfection of Faith, but the sincerity of Faith, that
our hearts may be blamlesse in holiness, 1 These. 3.13.
that the hid man of the heart be vncorrupt; According to that of the Apostle,
Singing to the Lord in your hearts, that is sincerely. Against this is opposed
a heart, and a heart which Saint James calls a wavering minded man.

Such a single and sincere heart, such a Faith that is thus unfeigned, is here
permitted to this Sacrament, as one qualified for the same, and so the
Sacraments become excellent means for the confirmation and building up of the
same Faith. Our Instruction is,

That the Faith of a Christian in this life is not so perfect, No perfection of
Faith here
but it stands in need of increase and help. Our knowledge, says the
Apostle, is but in part; 1 Cor. 13.9
and therefore our Faith it self must needs be imperfect, and hence it is
that we are often urged and pressed in the Scripture to grow in grace, 2 Pet.
3.18. 1 These. 4.1
and to increase more and more.

The grace of Gods Spirit by the Prophet Ezechiel are figured by waters, Eze.
47.
issuing out of the Sanctuary, which came first to the ancles, then to the
knees, and at last to the loins.

The Psalmist compares the godly to trees: which bring forth much fruit in
their age. And hence it is that the spiritual life of the godly in the
Scripture is compared to several ages of men, some are babes, some are men of
perfect strength. Now it were a wonder in Nature, not to see an Infant grow,
but to stand at a stay, 1. Pet. 2.2.
As newborn babes desire ye the sincere milk of the word: To what end? that
ye may grow thereby Grace is likewise compared to light which shines brighter
and brighter. Isa.58.8.
Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thy health shall spring
forth speedily. The Doctrine is clear and plain, and the grounds hereof may be
these.

Fitst, in regard that the greatest measure of grace that any man in this life
can possibly attain unto, is no more then needful to salvation, as the least
measure of the true sanctified graces of Gods Spirit shall suffice, so no man
has ought to spare, when Death comes.



got a good measure of knowledge, and are able to discourse of Religion,
presently conceive that they need not to be at that pains as in times past,
and so begin to slugge in their Christian race. I would say to such, as our
Savior sometimes to the Church of Sardis, Be awake, Reu. 3.2.
and strengthen the things that remain, that are ready to die. Our nature is
wonderful prone to be filled with these things, as the Israelites were glutted
with Manna, howsoever in other things we are insatiable. Surely it is a sure
note of a gracious heart, when men can see and bewail their own emptiness in
heavenly graces, complain still of their own deadness of heart, backwardnes
in holy duties, and their want of zeal in Gods service. Whereas that man that
conceits himself to have knowledge enough, and grace enough, and so grows
more and more negligent in the use of holy means, for the perfecting of Gods
graces begun; this man never yet had true grace. For if he had, he would labor
more and more for the confirmation and increase of the same grace, with this
Eunuch here, and so be led forward daily toward perfection.

Demos, Hymeneus, and Philetus, counterfeit grace will not abide long, it will
not increase.

If then we would not deceive our selves, we must not rest in the beginnings
of grace, but stir up the gifts of God within us.

Means for the increase of grace.
Now the means for the growth and increase of grace, are,


(With all thy heart.)
Having before showed the necessity of saving faith to the due participation
of the Sacraments of the Church: as also that oy the use of the means, such as
ar^ the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, and the like, we ought daily to grow and
increase in the same. Now he comes to show the nature and quality of that
faith that is so precious, it must be pure, sincere, hearty, and unfeigned. If
thou beleeuest with all thy heart: The Doctrine is,

That true faith makes the heart of that man sincere and pure that has it.
Faith purifieth the heart, A believing heart is a sincere heart. Act. 15.9.
Act. 26.18. Deuteronomy. 6.5.
a believing heart is a sincere heart, and sanctifies him that has it. This
is that the Lord requires of his people, Thou shall love the Lord thy God,
with all thy heart, etc. the Lord cannot abide that men should have a heart and
an heart; a heart for God, and a heart for the devil; a heart for Christ, and
a heart for Antichrist. Such double mindedness, as Saint James speaks, Iam.
4.8.
is abomination unto him. Mat. 23.
The Pharisees could wash the outside of the cup, and of the platter, but
inwardly were full of all hypocrisy. Pilate washed his hands indeed, but not
his heart. An hypocrite will sometimes stumble into a Church, and pray to be
seen of men; But the honest and good heart will enter into it chamber. Mat.
6.6.
These are they that are pronounced blessed of God: Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes no sin, and in whose spirit there is
no guile. Be glad oh ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord. But who are
righteous? And be joyful ye that are true of heart. Ver. 10.
Hear we David's prayer for such, Psalm. 125.4
Do good to those that be good; and upright in heart. Whereas that man that
wants this soundness of heart in doing of good duties, he does but loose his
labor, they are but abomination unto the Lord: As it is said of Amazia, 2.
Chron. 25.2.
He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a sound
heart. Now the grounds of this are,

Genesis 17.1.
Walk before me, and be thou perfect, or sincere.

derided as David was, when he danced before the Arc. But this was Jobs
comfort, when his friends laid such an imputation upon him, Job 27.5.
I will not part with my innocence (says he) until I dye. And this was
Hezechias his comfort at such time as he was summoned to death, Isa. 38.3.
Remember Lord that I have walked before thee in truth, and with an upright
heart.

these receive the word with joy, and believe for a time: Matthew. 13.
only the good ground are they, which with honest and good hearts hear the
word and keep.

We must al appear before the judgment seat of Christ, 2. Co. 5.10.
that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad.



But how shall I know in the performance of holy duties,

There are many marks and tokens of this integrity of heart,

Marks of a sincere heart.
First, it is discerned by the manner of performance of any duty, it does the
same humbly,

God loves a cheerful giver. This was the great commendation of the Church of
the Romans, Ye have obeyed from the heart the form of doctrine that has been
delivered unto you.

and love: Psalm. 119.
So David, O that my ways were so direct, that I might keep thy statutes, etc.

Cornelius, when he could say, Act. 10.
We are all here before God, to hear whatsoeeuer is commanded us of God. So
David, I shall not be confounded whilst I have respect unto all thy
commandments.

Job, Does an hypocrite pray always? Job 21.
The meaning is, he does not.

matter of singular consolation unto the godly, that can approve themselves
unto God, that whatsoever they do in his service and worship, they do the same
in singleness of heart; such need not to doubt but they shall meet with the
Lord in his own ordinance. And albeit they may have in them many wants and
infirmities, yet this singleness and integrity that is in the heart, makes
amends for all, and causes the Lord to pass by them all. An husband bears
with many infirmities of his wife, so long as she keeps her faith to him in
the maine duties of Matrimonial love. So deals the Lord with his servants,
so long as they keep their hearts upright with him. See we this in King Asa, a
catalogue of whose infirmities the Scriptures afford unto us, as, namely, that
he took not away the high places, that in his displeasure he cast the Lords
Prophet into prison; that he oppressed his people; that in the time of his
sickness, he sought to the Physician, and not to the Lord. And yet for all
this, see the account the Lord made of this man, the Text says, 1 Kin. 15.14.
Asas heart was upright with the Lord all his days. The Lord so regarded that,
as that he passed by all the rest.

(And he said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.)

Philip has no sooner put the question, A Christian must be ready to give an
account of his faith. 1. Pet 3.15.
but the Eunuch makes the answer readily and willingly.

It is a commendable duty in a Christian to give an account of his faith,
whenever he shall be demanded: it is an Apostolical iniunction; Sanctify
the Lord in your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer to every man
that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you. And hence is it that
Christians are exhorted To keep the profession of our faith without wavering.
Heb. 10.23
See this in Paul, in his boldness before Felix, I confess unto thee, Act.
24.14.
that after the way which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers.

The grounds of this we have heard before.

The use serves to persuade to this duty, faith, Psalm. 116.10.
I believed, and therefore did I speak. What faith believes, the mouth will
speak: He that is afraid to make an open confession of Christ, has not as
yet by a lively faith put on Christ.

But is a Christian bound at all times to give an account of his Faith, and of
his Religion he does profess, to whom soever shall require an account thereof?

No,

But when a question shall be asked us to no other end but to deride the
truth, or for some other evil end; We have the example of our Savior
himself not to answer in such a case. Jesus held his peace, Mat. 26.63.
at that time when they went about to entrap him in his words. So that if a man
be questioned concerning his Faith or Religion, he is wisely to consider
whereto the question tends, and accordingly return his answer.

(I believe.)

This was the thing that Philip so much desired, that this Eunuch might be
brought to believe in Christ, that so the Sacrament might be effectual to the
sealing up and confirmation of his Faith.

Here we have the happy fruit and effect of his Ministry, he is brought to
be a believer.

Philip has not beat the air in vain, neither has the word been cast as
the Seed on the high way side, on the stony or thorny ground, but it has
lighted now on a good heart, a heart prepared for the same. The happy fruit and
effect whereof is here set down, he is made a believer. (I believe.) It
teaches us

That there is a particular Faith required of all that look to reap life and
salvation through Christ. A part^cular Faith, necessary to Salua^i^n.
If we look to reap fruit and benefit by the Sacraments of the Church, we
must every particular man have a particular Faith of our own, to qualify us
for the same: to this are we often exhorted. To stand fast in the Faith, 1 Cor.
16.13.
to be rooted and grounded in Faith, To make our calling and election sure. 2
Cor. 13.5.
And to work out our salvation with fear and trembling. Phil 2.12
For the further clearing of this truth. Hear we the speech of Faith in those
whom God has honored with this grace in the scripture, Job 19 25. Esaias 45.24
truly to believe. I am sure my Redeemer lives. He shall say, surely in the
Lord have I righteousness and strength. Doubtless thou art our Father, Esaias
63.16
though Abraham be ignorant of us. We may see herein the marvelous affia^ce
the faithful have had through their own particular Faith. Gal 2.20.
They were sure and certain of their own salvation after this life. Heb. 2 4.
We know that we are translated from darkness to light, etc.

They were sure of the grace of perseverance, they should persevere in Gods
love unto the end. Doubtless kindness and mercy shall follow me all the
days of my life. Psalm. 23.6.
It is not presumption but Faith (says an Ancient, Non est arrogantia sed
fides predicare quod acceperis. August.
) to say thou shall be accepted through Christ. The point is clear and
plain, The grounds are,

Christ has loved us (says the Apostle) and given himself for us; whereupon
a learned Divine says, From the universal every one is to bring the benefit
of Christ's death to his own particular, Ab Universally quis que debet ad suum
particulare hoc Christi bew ficium transfer Z^nch in Ephs 5.
that he may be able, in some good measure of Faith, to say with the Apostle,
Christ gave himself for me, and without this there can be no sound comfort,
for what though we have by us never so precious a salve that will heal all
soars, if this be not applied we are not the better for it, such are the
promises of the Gospel to an unbeliever, the man wants the hand of Faith to
make the application.

I believe, not we believe, which is to be referred to every Article, I
believe in God the Father. I believe in Jesus Christ, in the holy Ghost, etc.
An evident proof we must have, this particular Faith of our own.

Jesus march furiously to meet his enemy in the face, this valor does well
become Christ's Soldiers, who has made us Kings and Conquerors, through Christ.

coniecturall, unless by special revelation. He that will be a Papist, is
bound by the renet of the Church, all the days of his life to live in
suspense, a most uncomfortable Religion, a most uncomfortable Doctrine. Nay
more, let him be accursed, says the same Council, if he either think or
endeavor any grounded certainty or assurance. Miserable comforters are they,
and herein what do they else but rob God of his glory, and deprive a Christian
soul of his cheifest comfort. Surely it must needs be a Satanicall and
Antichristian Spirit, that shall contradict the spirit of God in so plain and
evident a truth.

admonish us to labor for this assurance, and to provoke hereunto Consider,

Motives to get a particular faith.
First, that it is an excellent means to free the heart of man from slavish and
servile fears, and to work an holy security in the soul. David, Psalm.
46.1.2.
God is our hope and strength, therefore will we not fear though the earth he
moved. Again, Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, Psalm.
23.4.
I will fear none evil, for thou art with me.

being here; But when we shall consider that we are here but in the suburbs,
and that whatsoever we have and enjoy, is but the earnest of a more glorious
inheritance; we shall then put the knife to the throat of our intemperate
lusts, and prepare for those more lasting pleasures.

David, I am thine, Seruus sum exp^cto alimentum a Domino. Ambros.
O save me: this makes a man to come unto God, as a child unto a father, and a
servant unto a master, with boldness to expect and desire things necessary.
Whereas that man that wants this assurance, wants therewith the principal
royalties and privileges of Gods sons.

But do not many wicked men persuade themselves that they have this faith and
full assurance of Gods favor in Christ, when indeed they have it not, but
rather presume?

It is true, Cheater that will foyst in slips for current coin; and these are
so like to each other, that many times the wisest are deceived. For the true
faith of God, Satan has his presumption, which does carry many a man along
with this persuasion, as if he had the faith of the elect. And therefore as
wise men will first bring their gold to the touchstone before it pass for
current; so should a wise Christian, be careful to try and to prove himself
whether he be in the faith, lest he build upon the sand, and the same suffer a
ruin in the end.

How faith may be known from presumption.
Now true faith may be discerned from presumption diverse ways.

First of all, by the ground of faith, humble, whom he does exalt: Humiliation
in the order of working of grace, is the ground of exaltation, I mean in a
man's own apprehension. Otherwise, I confess, there must be faith that must
keep the soul in life, hold it close unto God, that with Adam it fly not away
from his presence to despair. Otherwise men would never repent and turn unto
him. Well then, try thy faith thus: Did thou ever truly see thy sins, and
that miserable condition of thine by reason of sin, so as thou have even
passed the sentence of condemnation against thy own soul. If the Lord should
deal in justice with thee, have thou gone mourning all the day long, and made
it the cause of thy chiefest sorrow, thy sins done against so good a God, and
gracious a Father in Jesus Christ: so as thou have prised the pardon of them
above all the world; And to this end have sought earnestly at Gods hands for
the pardon of the same, confessing thy sins, bewailing thy offenses, have
sought his favor in the midst of his Sanctuary, in the use of his
ordinances, wherein he has promised to be found of us. If after all this, I
say, we come now to be persuaded of his favor and love toward us; that he
has received us again into favor, in the pardon of our sins in his own
Son; This is undoubtedly the work of faith, and not presumption. But if on
the contrary, thou never yet saw thy self in what case thou stand by
reason of sin, never had thy heart truly touched with sorrow for sin,
never yet came to prise the blood of Christ at such a rate, that thou
would give all the world for the least drop thereof, for the saving of thy
soul; but have passed over thy time in security, with the neglect of Gods
ordinances, as finding no such sweetness in them: This is presumption, and not
faith.

presumption commonly is accompanied with gross ignorance, they usually
accompany each other. Now he that thus persuades himself that he has faith
in Christ, and yet lives in blindness and ignorance, deceives his own
soul* for an ignorant heart is commonly a faithless heart. A faithful heart
is ever a fruitful heart, for so faith the Apoltle, As the body without the
spirit is dead, so is faith without works dead also: a presumptuous heart and
a fruitless life go together.

presumption builds on the sands, as the Papists upon traditions; but true
faith has ever an eye to Moses and the Prophets. Faith comes by hearing,
Romans 10.
etc. True faith never separateth the end from the means, but waits to see
the face of God in the midst of his Temple. Whereas presumption would have the
end, though it regard not the means conducing thereunto.

(I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

As the faith of the Eunuch was commendable for the nature of it, it was a
particular faith of his own: I belee^^. So here the commendations of the same
is further enlarged by the object of it, it was such a faith as was fixed only
upon Christ. And herein will teach us,

True faith has Christ for the object of it.
That true justifying faith is bounded and set upon Christ only. Christ, and
he alone, is the object of true justifying faith, it looks unto Christ, and
rests upon him alone for life and salvation. There is no one point more
clear in all the book of God then this. The Sacrifice in the time of the Law
with the brazen Serpent, taught this unto the Jews, that health and salvation
is to be looked for only in Christ. As many as received him, Ioh. 1.12.
to them gave he power to be made the sons of God, even to as many as
believed in his Name. Ioh. 3.6,
God so loved the world, that all that believe in him should not perish, etc.
This we may see in that prayer of our blessed Savior: Ioh. 17.20.
I pray not for them alone, but for all that shall believe on my Name. Act.
16.30.
Thus Paul, and Sylas, willed the Iaylor to believe in the Lord Jesus, and he
should be saved. Again, Gal. 2.16.
A man is not justified through the works of the Law, but through faith in
Christ Jesus. And hence is it that the faith of the elect is called, The faith
of Jesus. And in this regard we are said to be justified by faith, not in
regard of any quality inherent in us, or in regard of any such excellency
that faith has in it self, but in regard of the object of faith which is
Christ, in applying him, his righteousness and obedience unto a man's self, as
the hand does the gold that is given it. So that indeed to speak properly, it
is not faith that does justify as of it self, but Christ himself, whom by
faith we apprehend. The Doctrine is clear. The Reasons are,

Paul, 1. Cor. 1.30.
He is made of God unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption* Amongst men there is no other name given whereby we shall be saved,
Act. 4.12.
but only in the Name of Jesus Christ. Heb. 7.23.
He is able perfectly to save all that come to God by him.

believe in God, and in Jesus Christ, etc. But when we come to the Church, we
say, We believe the Catholic Church, not in the Catholic. Church: The
communion of Saints: not in the communion of Saints. For Christ is the proper
object of true faith, it ever looks unto him.

Ex congruo, we receive grace and salvation. Then the which, what can be more
derogatory to the all-sufficiencie that is in Christ? For faith and works in
the matters of Justification are opposite, and cannot stand together.

Heb. 11.6.
for without faith it is impossible to please God. And seeing again that faith
it self does not justify any further then it has Christ to be the object
there; What then can our best actions do in the matter of Justification? But
indeed every man is a Papist naturally, which is no small argument to show that
their Religion cannot be good. Feign we would have some thing in our selves to
commend unto God, in liew of his mercy toward us. O the pride that is in man's
heart by nature! Is not all fullness in Christ? 1. Cor. 1.30
Is not he made of God unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption? We must then learn to go out of our selves, that we may be found
in him, renouncing all confidence in our own righteousness and merits, that
we may partake of Christ's, who is our Righteousness.

VERSE 38. And he commanded the Chariot to to stand still, And they went down
both into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him.
PHilip having showed the necessity of saving faith to the due participation
of the Sacraments of the Church; and having received good satisfaction by the
Eunuch his confession, that he was rightly qualified for the same; Now he
comes to the celebration of this holy ordinance it self: He commanded the
Chariot to stand still, etc.

Men rightly qualified must not be denied the Sacrament.
Note we hence first of all; That the Seal does of right belong to such as have
the Evidence. Where men are rightly qualified for this holy ordinance, they may
not be denied to participate of the same. The Minister is not to neglect it.
When Peter had preached to Cornelius and his company, whereby they were brought
to believe. Can any man forbid water (says he) that these should not be
Baptized, Act 10.47
that have received the holy Ghost as well as we, meaning, that it should be an
injury unto such, to whom God had given grace to believe, not to have the
Sacrament, which is the Seal, for the Confirmation of the same.

Dogs, and Swine amongst us, to whom holy things are not to be given, as our
Savior says, give not that which is holy unto Dogs, neither cast ye your
pearls before Swine, etc does this hinder, but that the children should have
their portion? For their sakes only we must often administer this Sacrament.
Though wicked men abuse it as they do all things else to their perdition, yet
God will have his children regarded, for whose sakes he has betrusted his
Church with this nearest and dearest pledge of his love.



(And they went both down.) But had not the Eunuch men enough to fetch the
water up to him? No doubt he had, yet herein is his humility and obedience
seen, that he can so readily and willingly stoop to Gods ordinance, to leave
his chariot, and to go down with Philip into the water. Our lesson is,

That there is no degree or calling whatsoever, but must yield obedience to
Gods ordinance. All, must stoup to Gods ordinance,
This Noble man must out of his chariot, and he must into the water. How base
and simple soever the ordinances of God may seem unto men, the greatest
amongst the sons of men must stoop unto them. We may see this in Abraham a
great Prince, yet was Circumcised he and all his house. And in those noble and
Religious Kings of Judah and Israel, whose greatest honor was, that they stood
for religion, were zealous for Gods glory, and were frequent in the exercise of
holy duties, but of this before.

And this shows indeed by what spirit his holiness of Rome, Peter, but is
better acquainted with the Sword, then the word, preaching is too mean and
base a thing for his greatness to be exercised in, Peter's kayes have unlocked
unto him such treasures that he has left off the feeding of Christ's flock.
Where are those Gregory's, Damasens and other faithful Bishops of that Sea?
whose pains in preaching and writing proved them Faithful in Gods house.
Surely their pride and pomp in these later days, has devoted them wholly to
their pleasures and ease, and made them forget the service of the Church:

(And they went down into the water.)

Some question may hence arise both concerning the time, and the place, of the
Baptising of the Eunuch. It might seem strange that Philip gives way thus to
the Eunuch, that he must thus suddenly be Baptized by the way side; was it so
dangerous to have put it off any longer, as that the Eunuch might have hazarded
his own salvation? I answer no, it is not the want of Baptism, when it cannot
conveniently be had, that is so dangerous or damnable, but it is the contempt
of it.

Which may be noted against that vain and uncharitable opinion of those, that
think if an Infant dye unbaptized, it cannot be saved, and so conceive that
there is an absolute necessity of Baptism to salvation. Whereas Circumcision
in the time of the law was to be done on the eight day. Now it is like that
many Infants dyed before, which to imagine must therefore needs be damned, were
an opinion most uncharitable and most absurd. And hence came in that practice
of Baptizing of Infants by Midwiues, because they heeld an absolute necessity
of the same to salvation. An opinion that first came from Rome, who hold this
Sacrament so necessary, that they have Baptized an Infant even in the Mothers
womb, as my self have heard a devout Papist affirm.

But now for the Eunuch, it was expedient that he should at this time be
Baptized.

First, in regard he had now the ministry of Philip, which he was shortly to
part withal, and to see no more, And none more fit for the administration of
this sacred rite, then he that by his ministry had so prepared the man
thereunto.

Secondly, in regard of his cuntry whereto he went, which was Idolatrous, and
no whit acquainted with the service of the true God, where he could not expect
the celebration of the same with the like fruit and comfort, as at this time.

And as for the place, this might seem strange likewise, that it should be done
by the way side, had it not been better that they had both repaired to some
Synagogue or Temple, or to some other consecrated place, where the service and
worship of God was now erected? it might seem strange that Philip should thus
give way to his desire, considering they were now on their journey, and had not
a place that was appointed for the celebration of this so sacred an ordinance.

But this may likewise be answered thus. That it was not the place that could
either add to, or detract from, the validity of this Sacrament, or make the
same the more or less effectual. In regard that all Religious difference of
places is taken away, since the Death of our blessed Savior; So as no one
place is more holy then another. So that the Instruction will be this,

No place since the death of Christ more holy then another.
That howsoever before Christ's death, some places were more holy then others,
yet now all Religious difference is taken away. It is true, the time was, when
Jerusalem was the place of Gods worship and service, whereof it was said, My
eyes shall be open, and my ears shall be attentive to the prayer made in
this place. 2 Cro. 7.15
And again, I have chosen and Sanctified this place, that my name may be there
for ever, and mine eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually. And was
therefore called the holy City, Mat. 4.
and the holy Temple. Psalm. 5.8.
Principally in regard of the Law and Testimonies that were there. But now
since the Death of Christ every City is Jerusalem, every Church is the Temple,
yea the Lord is near unto all that call upon him in Spirit and truth.

This is clear by that of our Savior unto the woman of Samaria, Woman believe
me, Ioh. 4.21.
the hour comes when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem
worship the Father. But the hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers
shall worship the Father in Spirit and in truth. Prayer is now auailable in one
place, as in another. 1 Cor. 1 2.
The Apostle describes the Faithful to be such as in every place call upon the
name of the Lord Jesus; Even so I will (says the Apostle) That men pray every
where, 1 Timothy 2 8.
lifting up pure hands without wrath and doubting. Yea our Savior wills us, To
enter into our Chamber, and to pray in secret, Man. 6.6.
with this promise, That our Father which sees in secret will reward us
openly. And the promise is, where two or three be gathered together in my
Name, Mat. 18.20
there am I in the midst of them. Now the reasons will make it more clear.

There is neither Jew nor Grecian, bond nor free, male nor female, for ye are
all one in Christ: and therefore all difference of places must needs be taken
away.

I will make this place as Silo, and this City a curse to all the Inhabitants
of the earth. ^er. 26.9.
Which thing so came to pass about forty years after the death of our
blessed Savior; since which time, there is no one place, that has had the
same promises, or the same privileges.

Jerusalem, the holy City, more then any other City, but the word and Oracles
of God, which it is true they had amongst them? these being for the sins of
that Nation and people removed; the same word and institution of Christ can
make any other place as holy: ^. T^m 4 3.
A^ things are sanctified by the word and prayer.

Loretto, our Lady of Walsingam, etc. which to hold and to maintain, is gross
superstition: nay more, it is a flat denial of Christ to be come in the flesh,
to hold one place to be more holy then another since his death.

so the same may be so many Churches to God; We are not now, in the time of
the Gospel, to travel a long and tedious journey, as the Jews to Jerusalem,
there to worship God; neither are our services so costly as their sacrifices
were in the time of the Law. What manner of persons ought we then to be? and
how conversant daily in holy duties, that are thus privileged above them? This
was the great commendations of Nymphas, Col. 4.15. Phil. 2.
and Philemon, that their several houses were several Churches unto God. How
did the Lord bless the house of Obed-Edom, while the Ark of the Lord was in
the same? whilst such houses and families lie under Gods curse, and are no
better then cages of unclean beasts, that have not the word nor prayer amongst
them. Ier. 10.25.
Pour out thy fury, O Lord, upon the heathen that have not known thee, and
upon those families that have not called upon thy Name.

(And he baptized him.)

The manner was, as it seems, in those days, to dip the whole body in the
water, for so the word signifies, to drown, or to be put under the water.

Wherein indeed diverse excellent mysteries are set forth, and represented unto
us.

First of all, The diverse mysteries represented in baptism.
our washing and clensing by the blood of Christ, according to that of the
Apostle, Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it, Ephesians (...) 2^.
that he might sanctify it and cleanse it, with the washing of water by the
word. According to his mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the holy Ghost. And again, Such were ye, but ye are washed, ye are
justified, ye are sanctified. Not simply by water, but by the holy Ghost, and
the Spirit of our God.

Mortification, for so says the Apostle, Romans 6 3.
Know ye not that so many of us as are baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his death. And again, Being buried with him in Baptism, Col. 2
^.
wherein also you are risen with him, through the faith of the operation of
God, who has raised him from the dead. That even as the body being once dead,
has in it no motion at all ever after to sin; even so such as are baptized
into Christ's death, become as dead men in respect of sin.

^ol. 2.1^
We are risen with him. And again, Romans 6.4
We are bu^ried with him by Baptism into his death, that like as Christ was
raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk in newness of li^^. For as Christ's death is powerful in all his members
to their mortification of sin; So is his resurrection no less effectual to
their vivification, and quickening to righteousness.

Symbol of our regeneration for sin, and newness of life. He came into all
the country about Iordane, Luke ^.3.
preaching the baptism of repentance for remission of sins; they were
baptized of him in Iordane, Mat. 3.6.
confessing their sins. And it is the counsel of the Apostle Peter, that he
gave unto the Jews, Act. 2.38.
Repent (says he) and be baptized every one of you, in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, for the remission of si^nes.

1 Cor. 12 13.
For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body. So that we must now grow
up together with Christ in holiness. So Peter, 1. Pet. 3.21
The like figure whereunto even Baptism does also now save us, not the putting
away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ: Not with water, but our consciences being
sprinkled with the blood of Christ: So that in Baptism is represented,

1. Our sanctification. 2. Our mortification. 3. Our first resurrection. 4. Our
repentance from sin. 5. Our union and communion with Christ.
Which manifold fruits and benefits which accrue unto every true believer,
through the reverent use of this sacred ordinance, should teach us to desire
it, and to prise the same at a high rate, as the dearest pledge of Gods love
unto his Church.

But does Baptism of it self confer all these excellent gifts and graces to
such as are baptized?

No corporal thing properly can work upon a spiritual: For so says the
Apostle: According to his mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and
the renewing of the holy Ghost. So that unless the Spirit of God cooperate and
work together with the outward washing in water in Baptism, the soul
remains still polluted, and the conscience defiled, and the Sacrament
profits not at all. ^. Cor. 12* 1
By one spirit (says the Apostle) we are all baptized into one body. So that
it is not water alone, but the Spirit accompanying the outward washing, that
sets us into the body of Christ by Baptism. The true material cause of all
our good, is the blood of Christ; the holy Ghost applying the same to the soul
and conscience of every true believer.

VERSE 39. And as soon as they were come out of the water, the spirit of the
Lord caught away Philip: And, the Eunuch saw him no more, and he went on his
way rejoicing.
WE have in this Verse the happy fruit and effect that followed the ministry
of Philip: wherein are obseruable two things.

1. That miraculous transportation of Philip. 2. The wonderful joy that
followed.
First, it is said, that the spirit of the Lord took away Philip. After what
manner were curiosity to enquire: For, as one faith well, why should we with
danger determine that, that without danger we may be ignorant of. It is
sufficient for us to know that the Lord having effected, what was the good
pleasure of his own will in the Eunuchs conversion, he removed his servant to
another place, even to Azotus, to preach the word to another people, as we have
it in the last verse of this Chapter.

Now it came not to pass, but by the good providence of God, that Philip in
this strange and miraculous manner should be taken away at this time; for
herein and hereby the Lord would confirm this Nobleman in the truth that
Philip had preached unto him, when he should now consider that he was sent from
heaven by a divine providence to instruct him, in regard of that his strange
and miraculous departure from him.

Wherein we may take notice of the wonderful love of God toward his people,
The Lord would have his servants setle in the truth.
that he would not have them waver, or be doubtful in the weighty matter of
their salvation, but he would have them to be grounded and stableshed in the
truth; and hence is it that the Lord would have this Eunuch settled in the faith
by this miracle that he wrought. Thus he was pleased to confirm his Gospel
at the first by miracles from heaven, that men might see that it was not from
men, but from God, as our Savior says, The works that I do, bear witness of
me. And with those signs and wonders we ought to rest satisfied, and not to
look for new ones daily, as the Church of Rome does, to confirm so clear a
truth For thus to do, were but to cal^ the truth again into question and to
require signs from heaven as the Jews did.

We will be content that the Popish Imposture should brag and boast of their
Miracles, as their Straw miracle at Garneis death not worth a straw; the
miracles daily done by the relics of some of their he Saints, and she Saints:
this they brag and boast of, this they make a Mark of the true Church.

Surely the Papists pride it to have his holiness of Rome to be known to be
Antichrist, otherwise they would never stand so much upon Miracles now in the
time of the Gospel, to confirm that, that was at first confirmed, by so many
signs and wonders from heaven. Does not the Apostle make this a mark and
brand of Antichrist; 2. These. 2.9.
Whose coming shall be with signs and lying wonders. What, Church ever since
the Apostles times stood so much for miracles as the Church of Rome? We are
content herein they carry the Bell; it is not the least argument to prove their
Church Antichristian.

(And the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip.)

His departure was on a sudden, before he had any reward for his labor.

The Eunuch might now see that he insinuated not himself into his company at
the first for gain, or preferment, which many are ready to conceive of
painful and laborious Ministers of Christ, who when they see them diligent in
preaching the word, think presently they do it to have a reward, to gain a
living, or get preferment; and were it not for that, they suppose, they would
be idle enough; and hereby take occasion to neglect that good which otherwise
they might have by their ministry.

And surely it is that complaint that may most justly be taken up of many, that
for a time were very painful and laborious, whilst they had but some mean
place in the Church; But afterward when they have got some great preferment,
have abated their zeal, labor, and diligence, to feed the flock of Christ.
Many such have we known in our times. An evident demonstration that they
never at any time propounded unto themselves the the advancement of Christ's
kingdom above all things else, that honor and preferment should abate their
diligence in the maine duty of their calling. But the Eunuch is prevented of
these or the like thoughts, whereby Philips Ministry might be made
unprofitable unto him, whilst the Lord, in this wondrous and miraculous
manner does take him away.

Let Ministers then take notice of their duties, 1 Cor. 9.2.
they may live of the Gospel, but not as the manner of many is, to hunt after
livings and preferments in the Church, and leave their flock to hirelings. Act.
18.25
It was Apolloes comendation, that he was fervent in the Spirit, and taught
diligently the things of God.

(And he went on his way rejoicing.)

In these words we have the happy fruit and effect of Philips Ministry, the
Conversion of the Eunuch, manifested hereby one of the proper fruits and
effects thereof, his wonderful joy. He went on his way rejoicing. Having now
attained the knowledge of Christ, and the assurance of the pardon of his sins,
being now made of an Infidel a true believer. See here the happy fruit and
effect thereof, He went on his way rejoicing. The Instruction is,

That sound conversion breeds sound joy, Sound conversion breeds sound joy.
now that by the preaching of Philip he is brought to Christ, and so to be a
believer. Now that by Baptism he has put on Christ, and by a lively Faith
got assurance of the pardon of his sins, and of his own reconciliation with
God, now is he a joyful man, rids on the rest of his journey with great joy.
He went on his way rejoicing.

It is a thing incident to true conversion, to work sound joy: in the
beginning of this Chapter we may see that when Philip had preached the word in
Samaria, there was great joy in that City. And David, after he came to see his
sins of Adultery and Murder, how earnest is he with God for the pardon of the
same, that so his soul might have comfort. Make me to hear the voice of joy
and of gladness, Psalm 51.8.
that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. Meaning indeed, that until
the Lord should (...) speak peace unto the conscience, in the assurance of the
pardon of sin, he could have indeed no joy, no comfort, and therefore in
another place he prays thus. Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance
upon us, Psalm. 4 6.
for thou have given me more joy of heart, etc.

We may see this in the Iaylor, how hard hearted and cruel soever he was
before his conversion, yet when the Lord by the Earthquake had prepared his
heart for the ministry of Paul and Sylas, as that at last he is brought to be
a Believer; The text says, That he rejoiced, that he and all his household
believed in the Lord Jesus. Act. 16.34


Yea the Lord has commanded his servants to rejoice, Rejoice in the Lord o ye
righteous, Psalm. 33.1.
etc. and again, Be glad in the Lord o ye righteous, and shout for joy, Psalm
32.13
ye upright in heart. So Paul, Rejoice in the Lord always, and again, I say,
rejoice. And is this any other thing, Phil. 4.4.
then that which God promised unto his Church. My servants shall rejoice, and
ye shall be ashamed, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, etc. See this by
that of Solomon, the transgression of an evil man is his snare, but the
righteous shall sing and rejoice. Pro. 29.6.
And so Peter, In whom now though ye see him not, 1 Pet. 1.8.
yet do ye believe and rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious.

And howsoever every true convert and believer attain not to the like measure
of joy and consolation that others have and enjoy, yet in every soul where
true conversion and saving Faith is wrought, this inward joy and consolation,
in some measure or other, at some time or other is wrought.

And there is reason for it, for

your sins have made a separation betwixt me and you, says the Lord. Now the
Godly come to know that their sins are pardoned in the blood of Christ, that
the band of their debt is cancelled, and why should not the thoughts of this
breed joy?

joy, Gal. 5.23.
This Spirit is called by our Savior, the Comforter, Ioh. 14.16.
which is given only to the Godly, and this spirit is an everlasting spring of
joy, Esaias 12.3.
and an earnest of our eternal salvation.

Add here unto those royalties and Privileges, that the Faithful have in
being reconciled to God, As,

with all creatures. Romans 5.1.
2 Have a guard of heavenly Angels to attend them. Psalm. 34.
3 Have a heavenly Father to take care, and to provide for them. Mat. 6.
4 Have assurance that their names are written in the book of life. Mat. 1^.
5 Are reserved for a glorious Kingdom. 6 That crosses, Romans 8.
miseries and afflictions shall all turn to their comfort, and death to their
advantage, And have not these cause to rejoice?
continual feast? Pro. 15.15.
The poiut is clear, let us first remove some doubts that may lie in the way,
before we come to the uses.

Do we not see that many of those that go under the name of Gods people, men
that hear the word diligently, etc. Seem to be strict Christians in their
lives, yet go heavily, hang down their heads, and mourn more then others,
where then is their joy?

Besides, none live more merrily and have their lives full of iolity and
pleasures, then wicked men that run most licentious courses, and make no
reconing or account at all of grace or godliness.

Give me leave to answer to them both.

Solomon says of the joy of wicked men, In the midst of laughter the heart
is sad. Pro. 13.14.
So may it as truly be said of the Godly in the midst of their sorrows,
their hearts are full of joy. Howbeit their joy is not carnal, nor in carnal
things, as before in the time of their unregeneracy, for so says the Apostle,
As sorowing, 2 Cor. 6.10
yet always rejoicing.

Secondly, If the Godly at any time seem to be full of sorrow and heaviness,
it is not Religion and godliness that makes them so, but rather indeed the
want of it. See this in David, Thou did turn away thy face from me, and I
was sore troubled. When the Lord shall withdraw himself at any time from his
servants, as one that will not be spoke withal, no mervaile then, though
trouble and anguish sease upon the soul.

own estate, and herein deprive themselves of that comfort which otherwise
they might have, living more by sense then by Faith. A man may have true grace,
and yet for the present want the use, and comfort of the same, which the Lord
is pleased to withold from them to humble them, to make them search more
narrowly after their corruptions, thereby to discover some sin that yet has
not been discovered, and to make them to prise his favor and love at the
higher rate, when the Lord shall be pleased again to smile upon them.

Ye shall sorrow for a season, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. So
Paul, we are afflicted on every side, but not forsaken, cast down, 2 Cor. 4.8.
but perish not. Mark the upright man, and behold the just, Psalm. 37.
the later end of that man is peace. Nothing is more sure and certain, then
comfort to the Godly, after their time of mourning.

But now come unto a wicked man, he has many times the semblance of joy, but
no true joy, it is not hearty nor sound, in the face not in the heart; the
reason is, a wicked man, has in his bosom a halter that strangles his joy, a
guilty and an accusing conscience, which howsoever he labors to smother and
stifle, yet is always telling him heavy news, so true is that of the Prophet
Esaias, Esaias 48. vlt.
There is no peace to the wicked, says my God.

But these are the men that seem to have the pleasant lives?

Is their condition the better, because they are insensible of their misery?
have we not seen a fellow drink and swill the same morning he has gone to the
execution, would any envy this man's felicity, and desire his condition? how
many traitors have had a Satin suit on their backs, when they have looked every
day to be quartered. Surely all the mirth and pleasures of wicked men is none
other, he is ever destitute of the true ground of joy, and that is Gods spirit
assuring his soul of the pardon of sin. Now joy is a fruit of the spirit,
Gal. 5.23.
and wanting this, such must needs want true joy.

And howsoever a wicked man does not by and by meet with the wages and stipend
of his sins, but has joy now in stead of sorrow, yet as our Savior says, Woe
to you that now laugh, Luk 6.
for you shall wayle and weep, as they have multiplied their sins, so shall
their sorrows be multiplied at last, when the Lord shall cause them to
possess the sins of their youth. Job 13.26.


We come to the uses,

adieu to all joy and mirth whatsoever. Thou lie, thou profane worldling, as
our Savior said, I have meat to eat that ye know not of. So has the child
of God a joy and rejoicing that the world knows not of. Indeed now his
cheifest joy is not in eating and drinking, in vain pastimes and pleasures, as
in times past; But in the inward consolations of Gods spirit. The Kingdom of
God stands not in meat and drink, but in righteousness and peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost. This peace, this joy the world knows not; and whilst the
wicked mock and scoff thereat, the righteous solace themselves therein. Surely
this disgrace thus put upon Gods people, and on the profession of the Gospel,
that it overthrows al comfort and delight, came not but from hell, to dash the
countenance of grace and godliness, and to bring the profession of Religion
more and more out of request. Whereas indeed none have more cause to joy and
rejoice then they, they have their sins pardoned in the blood of Christ, they
have the ministry of Angels to attend them, have a heavenly Father to care for
them, have a Sanctified use of all estates and conditions of life, are assured
their names are written in the book of life, and are reserved for an
everlasting kingdom: what then should hinder their joy?

Jonas Gourd, and are wormeaten ere we be aware, and many times they prove our
greatest discomforts, and work our greatest sorrows; never making good what
they promise unto us? How suddenly was Hamans glory dashed, ^est. 5.11.
and turned into ignominy and shame? Balshazzer in the midst of his banquet
sees the handwriting, which turned his mirth into mourning. The rich man that
had enlarged his barnes and his heart, how suddenly was he stripped out of all,
and his soul sent to hell? How many have risen well in the morning, that have
made their bed in the dark ere night? How many unexpected miseries have men
met withal, when they have thought themselves farthest off from them? O then,
my brethren, let us labor for this peace, for this joy, which, as our Savior
says, no man shall take away from us. Peace with God, joy in the holy Ghost,
assurance of remission of our sins, and our acceptance with God in Christ:
one dram of this is better then all the world besides; If thou have this,
thou art an happy man, how miserable soever thou may seem to the world. If
thou want this, thou art cursed, wretched, and miserable; how happy soever
thou may seem unto men. This joy is like that new name, that none could
read but those that bad it. It passes all understanding, did men know it,
they would say as David did of Goliahs sword, None like to it, give it me. 1.
Sam. 21.9


What peace, says Iehn to Iehoram, 2. Kin. 9 22
so long as the whoredoms of thy Mother Iesabel remain? What peace, what joy
can there be to such? so long as they want the ground of peace, and of joy; and
that is the pardon of their sins, and assurance of their reconciliation with
God. I confess indeed, there is a mad mirth, and a drunken peace, such as is
the joy of worldlings, who rejoice in their corn, and wine, and oil, but this
is a swinish and a brutish joy, in the face, but not in the heart; This joy and
rejoicing is but as the crackling of thorns under a pot, Eccl. 6.7.
soon in, soon out. For the spirit of fear and of bondage rests upon them:
such have but the semblance of joy; But as for the true joy, they have it not,
they are strangers unto it; for this is the fruit of repentance for sin, of
a man's gracious acceptance with God in Christ, which the sinful world are
strangers unto.

wrought in their hearts, why should we discourage others to possess the
promised Canaan, with the sad reports of walled Cities, and sons of Giants,
when we are sure to obtain if we seek. Surely, we deserve to have our
portion with Reuben, on this side Iordane, if we do, and never to come into
Canaan it self. Wherefore does the Lord command his servants to rejoice
always, Rejoice always, and again I say rejoice, Phil. 4 4.
if joy were not their portion? And why does the Lord give so straight a charge
to his Prophets, to comfort his people, Comfort you, Isa. 4.1.
comfort you my people, says our God; but that he would have his servants to
credit their Master, by expressing such joy, the world is ignorant of. We
cannot honor God more, then by giving the graceless world to see that there
is a reward for the righteous, that there is a God that judges the earth. This
shall provoke others to think well, to speak well, and to resolve to taste
and see with us how sweet the Lord is. Away, away, with that dumpish, austere,
and melancholy carriage that is in too many that have so good ground of joy;
Rejoice in the Lord always: it becomes well the just to be joyful. What
though we have fallen, what though we have sinned; and many infirmities still
break out in us, yet our God is unchangeable, I am the Lord and change not, ^al.
therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. His unchangeable love and
decree does not depend on our will, which is mutable and changeable.

course here; what is there to be looked for hereafter? if on earth, what in
heaven? where all imperfection shall be done away, where there shall be no
Satan to tempt, no sin nor corruption to ouercloud or hinder the sun of
righteousness continually to shine upon us.

Had David such raptures, such secret and sweet joys, that he must needs
dance before the Arc, how will he leap before the Lamb?

Could the prison yield such comfort to Paul, and Sylas, that they could not
but sing for joy, when they suffered for Christ; what happiness is there to
be looked for in heaven, when they shall come to reign with Christ? If the
seed time be so joyous, what will the Harvest be, when we shall come with joy,
and bring our sheaues with us?

VERSE 40. And Philip was found at Azotus, and passing through he preached in
all the Cities till he came to Caesaria.
WE have heard before of the miraculous translation of Philip; If any would
know what became of him afterward, he is to know that his translation was not
like to that of Enoch, or Elias, that when they were translated, they were no
more seen, but this was but Philips remouall from one place to another.

Having finished his work with the Eunuch, his work is not now at an end, but
he is to go to another people. It is not enough for a faithful Minister to
preach a Sermon or two, or once in a month to preach to his people; but he
must be still setting forward the Lords work, and by all means possible,
seek the advancement of Christ's kingdom, whersoeuer the Lord shall call him,
and dispose of him. This is the maine thing to be looked after. So that our
Instruction will be this.

That the calling of a Minister is a laborious and painful calling* The
calling of a Minister is a laborious calling. Episcopatus nomen est operis, non
honoris. Aug.
it is an endless task they have to do, there is still in the same (...) a
remainder, some thing or other left still for them to do. The calling of a
Minister is a laborious calling; and hence it is, that in the Scriptures they
have such names given unto them, which above all other import labor and
travel. They are called Husbandmen, Watchmen, Mat. 9.37.
Shepherds, Laborers, whose names serve to put them in mind of their duties.
The harvest is great but the laborers are few. The word in the original
signifies labor unto weariness. So Paul, The Elders that rule well, Tim. 5.7.
are worthy of double honor, especially they that labor in the word and
doctrine. What calling may be compared to the calling of an husbandman for
labor and travel, sometime plowing, manuring, sowing, reaping, every season
brings with it its work. Thus fares it with the Ministers of the Word. They
must study constantly, meditate earnestly, instruct diligently, exhort
carefully, reprove zealously and boldly, comfort cheerfully, and to do all
this, will it not ask labor? Many of our hearers are weak in knowledge; we
must labor to inform them: Many are obstinate, we must labor to reclaim
them: many go mourning all the day long under the burden of sin, these must
be supported in love. Ministers must preach and pray, and pray and preach, and
will not all this ask labor? Can you hear these things, my brethren, and not
pity us? No marvel though Paul wills Timothy to drink no longer water, but
to take a little wine for his infirmities sake. It seems that Timothy was a
weak young man, to whom Paul prescribes a little wine, but not a little
preaching: Will you know the grounds of this?

First, it is Gods own ordinance, that eue^^ calling in the sweat of the face
should eat its bread. Now there is indeed the sweat of the brain, as well as
the sweat of the brow; which thing, had it been duly considered, then needed
not that Priest that read the place, In the sweat of thy face, etc. have
betaken himself to bodily labor.

Peter, ^oh. 21.15.
Peter love thou me? feed my sheep: and so the second and the third time.
Not only that his threefold confession might satisfy for his threefold
denial, as some suppose; but rather that Peter's threefold love might be seen
in his threefold diligence in feeding of Christ's flock.

a Minister so easy a life. Indeed there are in the Church, that deserve the
names of Loyterers, and not of Laborers; such were never sent of Christ into
his vineyard, neither can they look to have the penny when the Evening
comes, when every man shall receive according to his works. But such as are
faithful indeed, find it to be a laborious calling.

Nemo nos conduxit: No man has hired us. O then what a shame is it then for
those that stand all the day idle, not in the Market place, but in the vineyard
of his Church; Surely such have cause to blush, and to hang down their heads
with shame, in the conscience of their own negligence. But of this before.

FINIS.

