THE HECTOR OF GERMANY. OR The Palsgraue, Prime Elector.

A New Play, an Honorable History.

As it has been publicly Acted at the Red-Bull, and as the Curtayne, by a
Company of Youngmen of this City.

Made by W. SMITH: with new Additions.

Historia vita temporis.

Printed at London by Thomas Creed, for Josias Harrison, and are to be sold
in Paternoster Row, at the Sign of the Golden Anchor. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT WORsh pfull, the great Fauou^er of the Mus^s, Sir John Swinnerton
Knight, sometimes Lord Mayor of this honorable City of London.
SIR
Poesy is a divine gift, borne with many, without which donation no man can
be a Poet, though he be Princeps doctorum; and have all the Languages
(adv^guem.) Ovid found this inclination in himself, and that was the reason
he said, Quicquid conabor dicere versus erit; where Nature speaks so
forcibly in any, there is no suppressing it: For, Naturam expellas furca
licet vsque recurrit, your Worcester: is so far from offering such violence, that
you are known to be a great cherisher of the Muses. And I having received some
favors from you, for private things, thought it might be acceptable, to give
you some Honor in Print; So that this Play, intuled The Palsgraue, being made
for Citizens, who acted it well; I deemde it fit to be Patronizde by a
Citizen. And not knowing any so worthy thereof as your self, I made choice of
your Worcester: to be my Mecoenas: The kind acceptance whereof, will make me
proceed farther in your praise. And as I have begun in a former Play, called
the Freemans Honor, acted by the Now-seruants of the Kings Majesty, to
degnifie the worthy Compa^^e of the Marcha^taylors, whereof you are a principal
Ornament, I shall ere long, make choice of some subject to equal it. In the
mean time, I leave the Palsgraue in your hand, as a pledge of my good meaning,
and will rest*

Your Worcester: most dutious, W. Smith

The Prologue.
OUr Author for himself, this bad me say,
Although the Palsgraue be the name of the Play,
It Is not that Prince, which in this Kingdom late,
Married the Mayden-glory of our state:
What Pen dares be so bold in this strict age,
To bring him while he lives upon the Stage?
And though he would, Authorities sternebrow
Such a presumptuous deed will not allow:
And he must not offend Authority,
It Is of a Palsgraue generous and high,
Of an undaunted heart, an Hectors spirit,
For his great valor, worthy royal merit;
Whose fair achieuements, and victorious glory,
Is the main subject of our warlike Story.
Mars gouerns here, his influence rules the day,
And should by right be Prologue to the Play:
But that besides the subject, Mercury
Sent me to excuse our insufficiency.
If you should ask us, being men of Trade,
Wherefore the Players faculty we invade?
Our answer is, No ambition to compare
With any, in that quality held are;
Nor with a thought for any grace you give
To our weak action, by their course to live:
But as in Camps, and Nurseries of Art,
Learning and valor have assumed a part,
In a Cathurnall Scene their wits to try,
Such is our purpose in this History.
Emperors have played, and their Associates to,
Soldiers and Scholars; it is to speak and do.
If Citizens come short of their high fame,
Let Citizens bear with us for the name.
And Gentlemen, we hope what is well meant,
Will grace the weak deed for the good intent.
Our best we promise with a dauntlesse cheek;
And so we gain your love, it is all we seek. Exit.
Palsgraue.
A Bed thrust out, the Palsgraue lying sick in it, the King of Bohemia, the
Duke of Sauoy, the Marquess Brandenburgh, entering with him. A Letter.
Palsgraue. Sick at this instant now to be infirm,
When the English King has his kind Letter sent:
For me to place this honorable prince,
The Duke of Sauoy in the Empires rule:
That Nation my great Grandfather did love.
And since I came to understand their valor,
I held them the Prime Soldiers of the world:
And think no Martial Tutor fittes a prince,
But he that is a true borne Englishman.
Ill comes this Letter, and your Grace at once,
A worser time then this you could not choose.
Though I am chief Elector of the seven,
And a mere Caesar now the Chair is void:
Sickness has weakened all my powers so much,
I shall be slighted as a worthless thing.

Sauoy. Why should the Palsgraue so mistrust his Friends?

Palgr: Sauoy, because I know them factious.
And though Bohemia love me as his life,
And Vmpeare-like, should pacify our iars,
What is his voice when Saxon draws his sword?
Mentz of a Cleargie-man is stout and proud,
Trier his like, in nature and in vice.
And the bold Bastard, late expulst from Spain,
Has a blood-thirsty heart, a vengefull spleen.
Misfortune cannot daunt him though he fled
Out of his own Realm, and has lost his Crown.
His impudency yet aims at Caesar's Throne,
I Would freely part with mine inheritance,
If it could purchase health to tame his pride,
But in you only I repose my trust.
Reserve your voices for this Noble Duke,
Who were I well should be an Emperor:
Sickness will be obeyde, I must decline,
For my speech fails me to urge more discourse,
Pray for me all, if that they chance to win,
And I recover I Will help all by War.

The Bed drawn in. Exit Palsgraue. Bohem. The strength of Germany is sick
in him,
And should he die now in his prime of life,
Like Troy we loose the Hector of our Age:
For he alone, when he was strong and well,
Curbed all their pride, and kept the worst in awe.

Marqu: We must expect war: and prepare our selves
With expedition to resist their force:
For a more dangerous Foe for Treachery,
Then is the Bastastard, lives not in these parts.

Sauoy. I am sorry, that presuming on the health
Of the most valiant Palsgraue now fallen sick,
I came so ill provided for the Wars.

Bohem. We are strong enough to meet them in the field

Enter the Bishop of Cullen. Cullen. Prepare for War, the Bastard is in arms,
With him the fiery Saxon, Mentz, and Trier:
And they will besiege this Castle, to constrain
The Palsgraue, to elect him Emperor.

Marq: Shame to us all, if we give aim to that.

Sauoy. Begyrt this Castle, and disturb the health
Of our dear friends, it is insufferable.

Bohem. Let us convey him lower down the river,
Unto a stronger Castle of his own:
And with such Forces as we have prepared,
Give battle to the Bastard and his crew.

Sauoy. You have a Caesar of your own Election,
To lead the Vangard, do but follow me,
I Will guide you where the greatest danger dwells:
And like an Emperor fright it from the field:
The Bastards but a Coward; and a Spanyard,
Coward and Spanyard oft-times go together.
Their greatest valor does consist in Braues,
And once repulst, theyl run away like Slanes.

Enter Prince Henry, the Bastard, the Duke of Saxon, The Bishop of Mentz, Drum,
Colors, and Soldiers. Bastard. This Land of Germany yields valiant men,
Haughty in heart as they in stature are:
Ten thousand such had I been Leader of
When the Blacke-Prince, lately my greatest Foe,
Opposde me at Mazieres, and won the day,
I had been Lord of that most noble Field,
And where an Hermit now tells ore his Beads,
Had sat a Soldier and a Conqueror.

Saxon. That Hermit is too bookish to reign long.

Bastard. When The Imperial Scepter fills my hand,
And I have Caesar's wreath upon my brow,
As had my Grandsire, and his royal Father,
I Will make Iberia wreake with my foes blood,
And force the Dotard to his Hermitage.

Mentz. Such thoughts becomes the German Emperor,
Has courage to wage War with all the world.

Saxon: Harry, a word in private in your ear,
When you are Emperor, as in time you shall,
I must rule all, although you wear the Crown:
The Edicts I propose you must enact,
And call them your own Laws, not being vexed
At what I do, although I mince your honor.

Bastard. How Saxon?

Saxon. Harry, Darst' thou wreath thy brow,
In any contumelious form against me?
It Is by my favor that thou art alive.
My greater greatness has repaird thy fame,
And being but my creature, it is fit
I should be known to be the worthier man.

Bastard. Between our selves in private.

Sax: Publicly, and in the view of all, you will swear.

Bastard. I must.
But being installed in the dignity,
I Will alter what I swea^e.

Saxon. Come, Come, your Oa^h,
Being an Elector, I am bard the only Throane,
And therefore will rule by a Deputy.

Mentz. This is the Castle, shall we sommon it?

Enter Trier, another Bishop. Trier. Emperor elect, and princes of the State,
In vain you labor to begyrt this hold
With hostile Arms, for Sauoy is yth field,
The Bishop of Cullen, and stout Brandenburgh,
With the Bohemian King, are already pressed,
To give you battle ere you stir your foot.

Bast. Are they so brave, so hot, and full of courage?

Sax. The Palsgraue has breathed spirit into them all.
Though sickness make him droop, weel meet the^ straight
Battles are gouernd by the will of Fate.

An Al^arum. Enter to them Sauoy, Bohem, Marquess, and Cullen, They are beaten
off by the Bastards side, and exeunt. A Flourish, enter in triumph, Bastard,
Saxon, Trier, Mentz, leading the king of Bohemia, Brandenburgh, and Sauoy,
Prisoners. Bast. So moves the Sun in glory through the sky,
Having outpast the clouds that shadow him.

Sax. Now Spanish Henry, thou have proved thy self
Worthy the Germane scepter, by thy valor,
And he that says not Aue Caesar, dies.

Bohem. Swell not too high thou bubble, least thou

Bastard. I Will break thy heart first.

Sauoy. Ere my tongue pronounce
Aue to any that is my enemy;
I Will bare my breast to meet thy conquering sword,
And make it crimson with an Emperors blood.

Bast: There must be but one Emperor, that's our self,
Therefore to prison with the counterfeit,
Whence neither County Pallatine, nor King,
Shall with their Forces if they were co^ioynd,
Have power to set thee free.

Saxon: For you my Lords, that are Electors like unto my self,
Give but your free consents that he shall govern,
And that shall serve as ransom for you all.

Marq: Never while life lastes.

Bohem. Or I breath this air.

Mentz. Then let them share like fortune in his doom
As they have done this happy day ith field.

Bastard. To prison with them all.

Saxon: Not till you are Crownde.
That sight shall serve in steed of a Tormentor,
And I rejoice to vex mine enemy.

Bastard. Give us our rights.

The^^ Bishops, Ments, and Trier, Crown the Bastard. Mentz. Rex Romanorum, and
magnus Imperator GerViue Caesar.

Saxon: Viue Caesar.

Bastard. Enough those Viues, take away my life,
In the delitious wrapture of my soul,
For there is no heaven me thinks like royal thoughts,
The Palsgraues Castles raste unto the ground,
And peace established, we mean once again
To try our Fortune for the Realm of Spain.

Exeunt. Enter Peter the Hermit, King of Stain in a disguise. Peter. Since the
decease of Englands royal Son,
That placed me lately in Spaynes government,

Those that did fear me for his valor sake,
Are by the traynes and falsehood of my brother,
Revolted from me, and to save my life
I was constrained put on this disguise,
To go to England for a new supply
Of men and Soldiers would but weary them.
I have therefore been in France, and failing there,
Am come to Germany, to implore the aid
Of the Ele^ctors, but by ill success,
Bohemia, Brandenburgh, and Sauoyes taken:
The Bastard has bewitched the other Peers.
So that my Foe is now an Emperor,
And all the hope I have to get mine own
Lies in the Palsgraue sick I hear to death,
Hear I expect his answer to my Letter.
Enter the Palsgraue, led in by Cullen, and others. Palsgr. Are you the Hermit
that did bring this letter?


Peter. And personate him that sent it.


Palsgraue. What Spaynes King?
Oh that I were as I was wont to be,
Before this dangerous sickness was my Foe,
No Christian King that came to me for aid
But he should speed.

Peter. In time you may recover.


Palsgr. Mean time be welcome, sit,and take your rest,
And now my Lord of Cullen I me preparde,
To hear the woeful tidings you have brought.
Comes noble Sauoy, and Bohem^as King,
With the stout Marquess Brandenburgh in triumph
And is proud Saxon taken, with the Bastard,
Trier and Mentz made subject to your sword?
Oh if they be speak it, and make me well.

Cullen. Alls lost, We are conquered, Sauoy is surprizde,
And our best Friends in bondage to our Foes:
Heaven has forgot the Justice of our cause.
And only I escapt to tell the news.

Palsg: This were enough to kill some man in health,
But in me the effect is contrary.
All lost, all conquered, Sauoy made a Slave:
My Friends in prison, and none escapt but you,
He that can hear such ill news and be sick,
Deserves nere to recover, in my blood,
I feel an inflammation of revenge:
There Is greater strength gathered into my nerves,
Then ere before, since that I grew infirm:
They will not rest thus, and stay only there,
But having conquered them, assume the Crown,
And make the Bastard Emperor.

Cullen. He is Crowned.


Palsg. More blood increases, and some more ill news
Would make me cast my Nightcap on the ground,
And call my Groom to fetch me a Warre-horse,
That I may ride before an Army royal,
And pluck the Crown from off the Bastards head,
That is another right.

Cullen. It Is thought my Lord,
Your Castle which you left to save your life
Is beaten to the ground, and your goods theirs:
And further, that they will pursue you hither,
As if you fled before their conquering swords.

Palsgr. Be sick who will, mine Ague does retire.
And Cullen thou have cured me with ill news.
Come valiant Soldiers show your selves like men,
And be assured we will ^inne the victory.
Hark how they shout as they applauded me:
And see how bravely every Leader rides,
Plumed from the Beauer to the Saddle bow,
Whilst the bold Soldier makes his lofty pike
Stretch in the Air with tossing it aloft.
Bravely done fellow: that trick once again,
And there is gold for thy pains, he fights like Hector.
Whilst at his seete the amazed Grecians fall,
And though Achilles would renew the Field,
He dares not do it, the enemies so strong,
Me thinks I hear a peale of Ordinance play,
They are the Bastards Cannons, planted high,
To overthrow my Castle to the ground.
Now they shoot off, Death, all my foes are come.
Marshall my Troops, and let Drum answer Drum.
My self in person will be general.
But I fainte, and am not what I would be.
My spirit is stronger then my feeble lyms,
Lead me once more with grief unto my bed,
Few know the sorrows of a troubled head.

Manent Cullen, and Peter. Exit Palsgraue led in. Cullen. How feign would
valor sickness ouercom?
But his infirmity denies such power.
And I am more grieved for his weak estate,
Then for our late great loss.

Peter. Palsgraue may help him.

And as I liu'de a fellow amongst Hermits,
I learnt some skill that has curde many a Prince.
See him safe guarded from his enemies.
And on my life I will recover him.

Cullen. We are strong enough to waste him to his Fleet,
And when the Enemy shall miss him here,
They Will turn their conquering Force another way,
And go for Spain.

Peter. My Kingdom.


Cullen. To subdue it.


Peter. Let them proceed, but when he has got his strength, they will rue their
boldness; Mean time trust to me. For next to Heaven I Will cure his malady.


Enter old Fitzwaters, and his Steward. Exeunt. Old Fitz: Thou art his hand,
the agent of his thoughts,
And only enginor, by which he works
Some dangerous plot to blow his Honor up:
Is It possible my Son should be from Court
So often, and the cause unknown to thee,
That art his bosome-friend, his Counselor?

Stew. I know no cause except to take the air.


Old Fyth. My wrath shall find another in thy breast.
Know that thou tread'st on thy last foot of earth,
From whence is no remove, but to the grave:
Fly me thou can not, and to make resistance,
Will draw upon thee for one Lions rage,
All the whole den. Offers to kill him.

Stew. Hold, and I Will tell your Honor.
Know that his usual haunt is to the house
Of the Lord Clynton, whither he is gone
To see his Daughter, whom he does affect.

Old. Doats he on my betrothed, my Love, my wife?
Had he the lives of many hopeful sons
Incorporate with his own, my rate is such
I should destroy them all, ere lose my Love.
But how does she affect him?

Stew. As her life:
Alleging, that the Contract made to you,
Was by constraint to please her honored Father:
But he was precontracted, first made sure.
And this I heard her speak, with pearled tears;
Then Love, no passion ought to be more free,
Nor any agreement like that sympathy.

Old Fyth. I have put on Dianiras poisoned shirt
In the discourse, and every word cleaues to me
As deadly in the apprehension,
As that which killed the Iew-borne Hercules.
But wherefore do I combat with my self,
That have a greater enemy to curb?
Oh, but he is my son! What is a son?
The effect of a sweet minute, he shall dye,
Being my pleasure to effect my pleasure:
Attend me where he is, I may destroy him.

Exeunt. Enter a Page. Page. I have a sweet Office, to be Gentleman Porter to
a back door; but it is for a Lady, the best beauty in England: and if there be
any Pandering in the business, though I am accessory in the fee, because I live
by it, I have no knowledge in the fault. Many a Courtier would be glad of my
place, yet I hold it not by pattent, for term of life, nor for years: but as
young Gentlemen get Venison upon sufferance or by stealth. If the Lord Clynton
should have notice of this Key or evidence, by which the young Lord Fythwaters
is conveyed to his Daughter against his will, though she be his Wife by a
precontract, I might be conveyed to the porters-lodge. But if all
Court-secrets come to light, what will become of the Farthingales think you
that cover them? No, since Ladies wear Whale-bones, many have been swallowed,
and so may this. Here comes the Young Lord.


Enter Young Fythwaters. Y. Fyt. Always at hand, thy carfulness is great:
Where is thy Lady?


Page Walking in the Garden.


Y. Fyt. So early, then I see loves the best lark;
For the Corn builder has not warbled yet
His mornings Carroll to the rising Sun.
There Is for thy pains.

Page. I thank your Lordship. And now like the Keeper of a prison, having my
fee, it is fit I should turn the Key. You know the way to my Ladies chamber.


Y. Fyth. I do. Exit Young Fythwaters.


Page. Sure liberallitie was a lover, or he would nere be so bountiful: some
think it a chargeable thing to keep a Woman of any eminent fashion, and so
it is, but to keep them as I do under lock and key, and suffer none to enter
but such liberal Gentlemen, is the only way to make a rich Keeper. I must
walk still to watch his coming forth. Enter old Fythwaters and Steward.


O. Fyth. You have been with the Lord Clynton?


Stew. And he promised to meet you in the Garden covertly.


O. Fyth. Is this the place?


Stew. And this is the Ladies Page that lets him in.


Page. Help, help.


Stop his mouth. O. Fyt. If you bellow here, you breath your last; by ways,
Back doors, come sir along with me.
If that her father meet, as I desire,
What Is but a spark, will prove a mount of fire.
Lock the door after us.

Steward. My Lord I will. Exeunt all.


Enter in the Garden, Floramell the Lord Clyntons Daughter, and Young
Fythwaters. They sit on a bank. Flo. The delian Lute is not more Musical
Then thy sweere voice, Oh my Apollo speak,
That with the wrapture of thy words, my soul
May be intranst, and wish no other joys:
That by the discord of two Broken harps,
(Old and unfit for Lovers harmony)
Our joys should suffer a distate of fear;
And in our most delights a qualme of grief
Run like a vain of Lead through a Gold-mine.

Old Fyth-waters and the Lord Clynton some behind, and ouer-heare them. Flo.
We grow too jealous of our prosperous days,
Making an evil, where no ill is meant:
Like hallowed ground, love sanctifies this place,
And will not suffer danger to intrude.
Here we are ringd in earthly Paradise,
And may have all the heaven to our selves:
Be then Mistrust an exile from my breast,
Where lives no jealousy, dwells present rest.

Clyn. But we will disturb it, and your amorous joys.


Y. Fyt. Our Fathers present; Sweet, we are betrayed.


O. Fyt. Betrayed to death: why do you hold my Sword?
There Is greater fury kindled in my breast,
Then can be quenched by any thing but blood:
I shall turn frantique if you brand the Sea
Of my displeasure in such narrow bounds,
And with a Deluge, equal to the first,
That ouer-spred the world, swell up so high,
Till not a Mountain ouer-looke the stream,
Nor heaven be seen for Rivers of the Land.

Y. Fyt. If I could fear the wauing of a Sword,
Mine enemies had frighted me ere now;
But I Am invaluable, like my mind,
Not to be wounded but with darts of love;
And I as little estimate a Father
In these Pathaires, as he esteems my grief.
There Is no preoritie in loves high Court
Granted unto the Fathers' fore the Son;
But like the purest government of all,
Every man's mind is his own Monarchy:
Where reason nere set foot to make a law,
Shall common sense keep one, that were absurd.

O. Fyt. Would fight with me?


Y. Fyt. Not if you will forbear me;
But in a war defensive I will stand
Against an Army of my Ancestors,
Did their enfranchiz'd souls break open their tombs,
And reassumed their bodies as they lived,
In their full pride and youthful iollity.

O. Fie. Let Ravens perch upon these blossomd trees,
Night Owls their stations in this Garden keep,
And every ominons portence draw near:
For here I Will offer unto Hecare,
A hellish sacrifice in a sons blood.

Clyn. I feel an Earthquake in my trembling flesh,
And my well boding Gemms bids me draw
A sword of vengeance on this hasty Lord,
Ere suffer him to be a pariside.

O. Fyth. Will the Lord Clynton buckler out my foe?


Clyn. No, but restrain you from a wilful murder.


Flo. And like the best oblation for your wrath,
Lo, I the subject of this variance fall
prostrate on my knee, to suffer death,
Ere such a rude act, most vnfather-like,
Be put in practice on so good a son.

O. Fyth. Good to deceive me.


Y. Eyth. The deceit is yours.


O. Fyth. Forswear him, and I shall rest satisfied.


Flora. Never.


Y. Fyth. Nor I.


O. Fyth. Give way.


Y. Fyth. I need no buckler.


Clyn. I stand not here to offend, but to defend
Your lives and honor against so vile and act
Would blurre the Conquerors fame perpetually,
Making your swords the furies firebrarnds,
Bathed so unnaturally in others blood.
Where neither Honor, nor Religion springs,
It Is better far such combats be unsought:
I know your pleas, her father has my grant,
You her affection got against my will:
The place whereon you stand is our own ground,
And here it is fit I abritrate the cause.
Among reasonable men peace is held good:
None love dissension, but they thirst for blood.

O. Fyt. Counsel preuailes, I am glad he is not slain.


Y. Fyt. I live with joy, that I Am no Father-killer.


Clyn. Will you subscribe to what we shall inioyne?


Old Fyth. and Y. Fyt. We do.


Clyn. In brief it is this. You must forbear my house,
And never more be seen within my gates.

Y. Fyt. This is extreme.


O. Fyt. I have a heavier doom,
Which on my curse I charge thee to observe:
Which is, That instantly thou leave the Land,
And trouble me no more to get her love.

Y. Fyt. How am I crossed!


Flor. How is my heart tormented!


Y. Fyt. Yet I have all the world to trafique in,
Except in England, and your Honoues house:
But as the dissolution of the soul
From such a body as desires to love,
Is burdensome and grievous to the man;
Such is my heart disseuered from my Love.

Flo. And such is mine to lose thy company.


Y. ^yt. You are cruel to impose a curse upon me,
That sentence is extreme, I feel it work.
More deadly on my grieved faculties,
Then to have dyed upon my fathers sword:
For now mine own woes must destroy my self.
And that's a murder worse then paracide. Exit Y. Fyt.

Flora. My knife shall end me.


Old Fyth. Hold thy desperate hand,
Would make our Nuptials prove a Tragedy?

Flo. I would, and be inhum'd within the ground,
Rather then measure out a hated bed.

Clyn. Never regard the passions of a woman,
They are wily creatures, and have learnt this wit,
Where they love most, best to dissemble it.

O. Fyt. If that prove so, my heart will be the lighter.


Manet Steward. Exeunt. Stew. I have done an act will make me odious
To all succeeding times, betrayde my friend:
But here he comes, I Will stay and speak with him.

Enter young Fytzwaters. Y. Fyt. Careless of foes, of father, or his curse,
Come I again to challenge Floramell,
Which I suspect the Steward has betrayde.

Stew. Within my breast bathe a reuengefull sword,
Lo, I oppose it to your greatest wrath:
Yet if you saw the counsels of my heart,
There you may read, it was not I but fear
That was the Author of your loves betraying;
Your angry father threatened me with death,
And I had no evasion but to tell it:
But if your Lordship please to pardon me,
I Will lay a plot to help you to your Love.

Y. Fyt. He that is once false, will be never true.


Stew. Then wherefore serves repentance?


Y. Fyt. Well, proecede.


Stew. Set down the place where I shall find your Honor,
And if I bring not thither Floramell,
At our next meeting take away my life.

Y. Fyt. Meet me at York house.


Stew. I Will be there ere long.
I have done amiss, and will amend the wrong. Exeunt.

Enter old Fythwaters, Clynton, and a Bishop. Clyn. The Bride not up, and the
Archbishop come,
Some call her down.

O. Fyt. Welcome my reverend Lord.
Do not you Bishops use sometimes to dream?

Bish. We have the same incitements of the blood
That others have, and in our fantasies
We see strange shapes, and diverse things to follow.

Clyn. What was your dream to night?

Bish. As I remember,
Himen was turned into a Mercury,
And he is the Patron of all slye deceits.
But what is my dream to your affairs my Lord?

O. Fyt. That such another dream I had last night:
And if I should be cheated of my Bride,
Twere a strange premonition.

Clyn. Fear it not, see where she comes.

Enter the Page, dressed in one of Floramells Gowns, wearing a Mask. Floramell
and the Steward above. O. Fyth. March forward to the Church.

Exeunt Lords and Page. Ste. So, whilst he takes your place, we are for
Yorkhouse.

Flora. I come Fythwaters flying.

Stew. Let Us away.

Enter young Fythwaters. Y. Fie. The stay of my fair Mistress makes me wild,
Sure I shall never more behold her face;
The Stewards false, and Floramell may change.
I Will therefore give a period to my grief,
And in despair finish what life denies:
Yet ere I dye, let all the World this know,
A Woman's love procured my overthrow.

Enter the Steward and Floramell. Y. Fith. My Floramell, to Sea. Exeunt.

Enter from Church, old Fythwaters, Clynton, Bishop, and the Page discovered.
O. Fyth. Oh my distracted soul, this is extreme,
Gulled with a Boy, dressed in your Daughters gown:
This is a cross that patience cannot bear.

Clynton. Who was the cause of this, speak;
Where Is my Daughter?

P^ge. Fled to your Son.
The Steward laid the plot; What I have done
Was for my Ladies sake.

Old Fitzw: That Steward is a Villain.

Clinton. Lets go seek him.
Take several streets, but let your meeting be
At the Waterside, least they should flee to Sea.

Old Fi. To the water side; Lord Bishop keep the boy.

Exeunt Old Fitzwater and Clynton. Bishop. I will.
My Dream is fallen out right, Hymen is changed
Into a slye deceyuing Mercury:
But it is most requisite, they that do wrong
Should feel the penalty by suffering it.
I witness can the Young Lords precontract,
Bad Fathers that infringe a holy act.

Exeunt. Enter King Edward disguised like a private man, a Lord with him. King.
This day I think I promised the Lord Clinton
To be his Guest.

Lord. It was my Liege this Day.

King. I have dismissed my Train to steal upon him,
But what is the season all things are so quiet?
A Lords house at so great a Cerimonie
As is a Marriage, should be like a Court:
Multitudes thronging up and down like waves;
And the Gate kept with an Officious porter,
To give kind entertainment to all Comers;
Here Is no such a matter.

Lord. Here Old Fitzwater: comes.

Enter Old Fitzwaters. O. Fyt. Some Pegasus has borne her from my sight
For nere a horse I keep can overtake them:
By all conjectures they are gone to Sea,
And Shipped by this.

King. His Bride.

Lord. Belike it is so.

O. Fyt. Some whirle-winde follow them;
And making the Ocean rougher then my brow,
Ye dancing Porpusses caper aloft,
And mud the white foame with your ietty backs;
A perfect sign a tempest is at hand.
Rise from the bottom of the deep ye Whales,
And ouerturne the Ship that carries them:
But let a Dolphin save my Floramell,
And back unto the haven guide her safe.
As for the boy, make him your watery pray,
Eat him alive, that he may hear his bones
Crash in the jaws of the Leuiathan:
But save his head for me to know him by,
Author of all my grief and misery.

King. I Will interrupt his passion.

Lord. Stay my Liege.
You shall hear more, here comes the other Father.

Enter Clynton. Clyn. How now my Lord, have you surprizd your Bride?

Old. I think thy treachery conveyed her hence,
And by thy means another was attyr'd
In her habilaments to vex me thus.

Clyn. You highly wrong me.

Old. I would right you better,
Were I assured of your close tretchery.

Clyn. Threaten me?

Old. With no more then I Will perform.

Clyn. Not in cold blood.

Old. No, but in blood like fire.

Clinton. In choler, passion and a crazed brain,
But when you have slept upon your menaces,
You will not then make good a noble challenge,
And enter single combat like a Lord.

Old Fitz. There lie my gage I dare thee to the field,
And will aver without the advice of sleep,
That thou were privy to the Stewards blot.

Clint. I Will take your gage, and meet you when you dare.

King. But we will not suffer it, that love the lives
Of every subject, much more of our Peers:
And as for you Fitz-waters, that are grown
Hotter then I exspected from your age,
Except you can produce good witnesses,
That Clinton has deceived you of your Bride,
I Will stay the combat or imprison you.

Fitz. I cannot prove it, but I think it is so.

King. Correct such thoughts, and give him back his gage.

Fitz. Withal my heart.

(gives bake the gage. King. Clinton I am satisfied.

Enter a Messenger with a Letter whith he offers to the King. King How now,
what news bring you?

Messenger Letters my Liege from the Count Palatine

King. Our noble friend Bauaria's valiant Duke.

Messenger. From him my Liege.

King. We Will read them instantly.

The Contents of the Letter. Alls lost, our elected friend Sauoy taken
prisoner, with him Bohemia, and Bran^enburgh; sickness would not suffer me
to wear Armor, but by the help of the Royal Hermit, Peter the King of
Spain your friend and Beadesman I am recovered. The Bastard is made Emperor,
and has shipped himself for Spain, whither I purpose to sail to hinder His
intendements, If I survive the Battle, and be conqueror. I Will unfit you in
England, except the Sea be my Sepulcher.

Your Friend in Arms, ROBERT the Palsgraue. Ill news, not suddenly to be
amended,
The Palsgraues sickness was the greatest loss.
The Bastard Crowned, vncrowne him if thou can,
Thou that art matchless for thy Chivalry.
Send but his head from Spain, to tread upon,
And I should count it an vnvalued gift.
As for good Sauoy, and his German Friends,
Ere long I Will set them free, or make the soil
That holds them prisoners a Marsh-ground for blood,
Till I hear news from Spain of good success.
Each day I live will be a year of grief.
Clynton. Pleases my Liege to lay aside your sorrow,
And with your Royal person grace my house,
Clynton will hold it an exceeding favor.

Old Fitzw. So will Fitzwaters gracious sovereign.
And though this day look black with my disgrace,
Your Royal presence whites an Aethyops face.

King. I accept your kindness, and will be your Guest.

Exeunt. Enter the Palsgraue; Cullen: and Peter the King of Spain, Drum,
Colors, and Soldiors. Palsg. Next unto heaven to you, we give the praise,
Most zealous King for our recovery,
And now my Lord of Cullen show your self,
As good a Soldier as a Clergy man.
In stead of Beads now use a Martial sword.
For here in Spain where the Black Prince incampte,
And made the Bastard fly, our Tents are pitched,
And the proud Foe comes with a Spleen inrag'de,
To drive us from Mazieres; Harry shall know,
As he has Kingly blood within his veins,
And is a Caesar, he shall meet with Caesar's.

Cullen. I hear their Drums.

Peter. And I rejoice to hear them,

Enter to them the Bastard, Saxon, Mentz, and Trier. Bastard. The Palsgraue
here, now we shall have
Your voice to our Election, or for that your life.

Saxon. You were sick in Germany.

Palsgraue. But now recovered.
And hither come to beat you out of Spain.

Trier. He bears himself, as he were sure to co^quer.

Mentz. And looks more like a Jove then like a man.

Palsgraue. I hold my thunder here, and my right arm
Has vigor in it, when you feel my blows
To give you cause to call them Thunderboltes,
If there be any in this Martial Troop
That with a Soldiers face, has a bold heart,
And dares auerre that this religious prince
Is not the lawful and true King of Spain,
I will make good his Title by the sword,
And against that proud combattant oppose
My self as challenger to fight for him.

Bastard. I dare take up your gage, and answer you.
But that I should impair this days renown,
By giving desperate men such means to dye,
Who for you know your Army weak, and few
Would hazard that upon a single fight.
Which in the Battle you are sure to loose,
No Foxlike policy shall blind my sight,
But that I Will see the ruin of you all.
This day ith Field, thine Palsgraue and the rest,
He combats well rips up an Armies breast.

Saxon. I Will answer his proud challenge.

Bast. We forbid it, that are your Emperor, both in style

Saxon. In style, but not in power, that strength is mine,
Except you will be forsworn.

Bastard. This for an Oath,
Thou Art but the step by which I did ascend,
And being up, rest there till I descend.

Saxon. You Will answer this anon.

Bastard. Here, or elsewhere.
Did ever know a Caesar that could fear.

Saxon. I Will stabbe the Bastard.

Trier. Worthy Duke desist.

Stays him. Palsg: No Combat then will be accepted of.

Bastard. In general, with our powers in the open field,
But not betwixt the Generals privately.

Palsgr: Then you are Cowardes al^.
I Will so proclaim you in my thundering Drums,
And by the gloryes that I hope to win,
Prove it this day to thy perpetual shame:
But to a hartlesse foe words are but vain.
Alarm Drum, that showers of blood may reign.

Exeunt omnes. Alarm, The Bastards side beaten off. Enter in an excrision
Bastard, Saxon, Mentz, and Trier. Bastard. It shall be treason to my Fame to
day,
If I encounter any Foe ith-field,
Till I have combatted this drunken Saxon.

Saxon. How Bastard, how?

Bast. Bastard!

Saxon. What else?
Thou were twice misbegotten, once in Nature,
And secondly, in being any prides defalt,
By which thou art a Bastard Emperor.

Bastard. Stand from about me, or I Will strike you dead

Mentz. Remember where you are amongst your foes
Who by your discord may destroy us all.
And this advantage of your variance
Gives them the victory with easiness.
If not for your own Honors and your lives,
Forbear for ours.

Trier. They shall not combat here:
I Will make my Rotchet crimson like your Colors,
Ere I stand by and suffer such a wrong.

Sax. How these brave Churchmen talk.

Bast. Are you in your Pulpits? Strikes the Bishops on their Targets, and
fights with Saxon.

Enter Palsgraue, Peter, and Cullen, with Soldiers. Trier. Here Is those will
strike you.

Bast. What, the Palsgraue come?

Sax. Emperor be wise, and join thy force to mine,
Till we have driven away the enemy,
And then return to our old variance.

Ba. I am Saxons till the Palsgraue dye or fly.

Pa. You should have fought still, twould have bin my glory,
To have given aim, and then the conqueror conquered:
But what your variance leaves vnfinish here,
I Will end with the destruction of you both.

Bast. We fear you not.

Pals. Upon them valiant friends.
Charge upon them, and the Bastard taken Prisoner on the Stage, Saxon and the
Bishops beaten off. Saxon is fled, Caesar my captive is,
I must not lose him; guard the Emperor sure,
Whilst I pursue the Duke.

Peter. We will.

Bast. Am I your prisoner?

Peter. Not so good, my slave.

Cullen. To trample on, or use as he likes best.

Bast. We are Brothers.

Peter. Now: but in your high estate,
No greater enemy then you had I.

Cul. Best that we guide him to the Palsgraues. Tent.

Enter Saxon with two swords, and meets them. Saxon. Although he be Ambitious,
and my Foe,
Honor commands me that I reskew him.
That I may have the honor of his death.
When we (...) Maisteries in a single fight.

Peter. It Is Saxon, Guarde him sure.

Cullen. To our best power.

Saxon. No further, if you mean to save your lives.
The Palsgraues slain, ^is blood wreakes on my sword,
And I advise you for your own discharge,
To give this valiant Emperor liberty.

Peter. Not whilst we live.

Saxon. Help to release your self.

Saxon gives him a sword. Bastard. Most willingly.
They beats of Cullen the King of Spain, Thanks for your pains, but yet we
will be Foes.

Saxon. To horse, to horse, and talk of that elsewhere.

Exeunt. Enter again Cullen and Peter. Peter. This was the most ill chance
that ever happened.

Cullen. He said he had slain the Palsgraue,

Peter. It Was his cunning to astonish us with fear, but
If he live, how shall we answer him for this mischance.

Cullen. See where he comes, I would the storm were past.

Enter Palsgraue. Palsgraue. I lost him in the preasse, his snowy steed
Was crimsond over with the blood of men,
And Lyon-like he fought with all his strength,
But since the Emperor is my prisoner,
I shall die less regard the Dukes escape.

Peter. Oh Noble Sir, we have deceived your trust,
And lost the Jewel you had us keep.
Caesar by Saxon is rede^end and fleed,
And we (...) for his escape.

Palsgraue. When fortune is disposed? (...) a man.
Valor and foresight are of no effect:
Releast by Saxon, and his Keepers live;
You are not as I thought you, valiant men;
But worse then these that run away for fear.
He should have made passage through my heart,
Ere escaped from me by Saxon or his plots:
But now it is too late to follow him;
And the whole Field is made a liquid Sea,
Sink may they both into the crimson fenne.
But why should they sink, you deserve it best:
From henceforth I Will nere take a Spaniards part,
Except he had a far more valiant heart,

Peter. Let my blood speak for me; fair words displease.

Palsg. Well, since I think it was weakness and not will,
By which they are escapt, I calm my spleen,
And rest content that we have won the field.
After you are establish in your Throne,
I Will sail to England to regreete the King:
And then to Germany, where if we meet
Bauaria's, air shall be his winding sheet.
Retreat, retreat, and thank heaven for the day.

Enter Bastard, Saxon, Mentz, and Trier. Saxon. At your requests my Lords, I am
contented
To receive this Emperor into grace and favor.

Bast. He floue^ me, would you have me suffer this?
At their requests they have requested me
To allay my spleen, and take thee into favor.

Mentz. They Will nere be friends.

Trier. Lets leave them both to fight.

Bastard. Away.

Saxon. We Will force you else.

Mentz. We are a going.

Exeunt Bishops. Bast. So, now I will imagine that this ground
Is all the Empire that my greatness swayles^:
And that the heads of many rebel Subjects
Are plaste on thee; that striking off thy head,
I cut off half a Nation at a blow.

Sax. And I the Emperors of a Nation.

Fight, and Saxon is down. Why do not kill me, since it is in thy power?

Bast. Thou sau'dst my life, for that I Will set the free.


Sax. Caesar, thou art a Noble enemy;
Henceforth I vow to relinquish every ill
That may displease thee, and obey thy will.

Bast. Such be my conquests over those I love.


As they embrace, Enter Trier and Cullen. Mentz. So, they are friends, they
have fought away their anger.


Sax. Has conquered me with courtesy and valor.


Men. Then now to counsel how we shall proceed
In this most dangerous war against the Palsgraue,
Who as I hear by firm intelligence.
Means with his Fleet to touch the English Shore,
And draw the valiant Edward to his part.

Bast. If such a day come, twill be black to us:
For of all Nations in the world, I hate
To deal with Englishmen they conquer so.

Saxon. Follow his example and lets get a King
To take our part, as well as they have done:
France has been wasted by their cruelty,
And cannot but in spleen desire revenge,
Were he solicited to be our friend,
We should with the more ease be conquerers.

Mentz. Send thither.


Trier. Or fail thither.


Bast. That's the best:
But shall we only build our hopes on strength;
I think twere good to piece the Lions skin
Where it too short falls, with the Foxes skin,
A couple of Protean villains I have ^eady,
For any dangerous attempt in peace,
And they can poison, stab, and lie in wait
Like Serpents, to intrappe and cease their prey,
Mendoza and Vandome, those are the men:
Let them be called in.

Mentz. They are hear, great Caesa^.


Enter Vandome and Mendoza. Van. Most mighty Emperor, what is your Highness will?


Bast. That unto England presently you sail,
And there consort you with the Earl of Artoyes,
A Frenchman borne, but one that loves us well;
Let him and you send us intelligence
Of the proceedings of the English King,
With the haughty Palsgraue, give the Earl this Letter,
By which ye may win credit in his trust:
And er't be long I will devise a plot,
Which you shall manage, for the general good.
Be careful; as you do respect our love,
And hope for gold in showers, mean time take this.

Mend. Your will shall be obeyed.


Vand. It shall be done.


Sax. Great Jove can say no more:
That State thriues best that has such Slaves in store.

Bast. See our Fleet ready: and ye swelling gales,
That blow the good hours, fill our empty sails.

Exeunt. Enter the King the Qu^ene, and Poytieres. F. King. My Lord of
Poytieres, as you are informed,
Where means the Emperor and his ^ray^e to land?

Poyt. Here at this (...) of Bolleigne, and the news

Is certain that his Mightiness is near.

Qu. How angry has the heavens as bin with the sea,
That it has boyld so much, and cast the sands
Into such mountains that they ouer-looke
The bounds that held them in.

F. King. Well may our friends
Escape the danger of this heavy storm:
Small gusts at Land, sink a whole Fleet at sea;
And whilst our Cities keep us from their rage,
The Rocks bea^e them, ^s Tennis-Courts do balls.
I Would have an Atheist travel through the deep,
And he shall see such wonders, that his soul
Would make him soon believe there is a God.
But what sayre Gemle woman have we here,
Which is a Ship-wrackt creature, comes a shore?

Enter Floramell. Flo. All wet and weary with a boisterous storm,
At last I have set my foot upon the Land;
I tremble as a Fever shook my ^oynes,
But it is the Ocean that has frozen me:
Drop there thou moisture of a swelling Flood.
And let me see, no Fisherman at hand,
To tell me in what Coast I am arrived:
Alas I see none, I shall dye with cold.

Q. Poytiers Speak to her, give the woman comfort.


Poyt. How is it with pretty Gentlewoman?


Flor. Sir, I am very cold, and we, and ^,
Would you could help me to a little fire
To dry my self, and I would pray for you.

Poyt. It Is now no time to reason of your state:
Here take my Cloak. A taffata Cloak.

Flora. Alas Sir, it is but thin,
And makes (...) the more to (...)
I would be shifted into warmer Roa^es,
If I could meet with some kind Gentlewoman.

Qu. Make use of me, you ^^all not want for help.


Flo. You seem to be of a Ma^e^^que state,
What should a poor distressed Gentlewoman,
Trouble a person of such eminence?

F. King. Thy state wants present pity, women take it


Flo. I have seen a King ere now,
And by your Diadem you should be one:
Pray, rather let me dye then trouble you.

Qu. It Is perfect charity to help the poor:
Yet by these Jewels, you should bear a place,
If not amongst the Royal, with the Noble.

Flo. Indeed I am but a poor Gentlewoman,
Punished for wearing Jewels in a storm:
But I have lost a husband whom I loved,
For marying whom, I have endured this cross;
And now his friends, if they should find me out,
Would finish what the storm has left undone.

Queen. His name?


Flo. It Was Infortunio, as mine is,
With the alteration of a letter only.

Quee. Good Infortuna go along with me,
I Will find some help for this thy misery.

Flo. May the Sea never use you of this fashion;
I take your courtesy, and will attend.

Exeunt Queen and Floramell. F.K. Young, sayre, and lovely, is she not
Poytiers?


Poyt. She is a comely, and a sweet Gentlewoman.


F. King. In my opinion she is the sayrest creature
Nature ere made.

Poyt. In love my gracious Liege?


(strange. F.K. What and my Queen alive, that would seem strange.


Poyt. Love does regard no person, nor the time.


F. King. Love is a power will overrule a King.


Poyt. Finding her honest, though of mean estate,
You may do well to raise poor virtue up,
And marry her to some great Nobleman.

F. K. I Will think of that hereafter: now, the news?


Enter Queen. Qu. The Emperor and the Electors are arrived.


Enter Bast ard, Saxon, Mentz, and Trier. Bast. Health to the Majesty and
Seat of France.


F. King. As welcome hither is your Mightiness,
As if you were arrived in Germany.

Bast. I thank King John.


F. King. Saxon, with Mentz, and Trier.


Saxon. We rest your loving friend for War.


Trier. For Counsel.


F. King. And Counsel is as great a friend as War.


Mentz. It has preuaild as much.


Queen. Thrice welcome all.


Bast. The storm has kept us ouerlong at Sea:
But Mighty King of France, worse storms then these
Have and will shake us, if you help us not:
All things go Backwards, that should bode us good;
And he that is Conqueror already,
The haughty palsgraue, is to England sayld,
To join with Edward in our overthrow.

F.K. We have felt the valor of the English King,
And of his son, the Black Prince now deceased:
Witness Poytiers and Cressey, where our blood
Royal, although it be saved to make clay
Moist with the showers, and temper the dry earth:
When I and all my sons were prisoners taken,
And had to England to be wondered at:
Ransomed although I was, it grieves me much
I cannot do the like unto my foe.

Sa. Let your French Soldiers join themselves with ours,
And we will invade his Kingdom.

Bast. And constrain him and the Palsgraue to the like disgrace.


Me. Fortune was never steadfast unto any.
But like the Ocean that bounds in the Land,
Both ebbs and flows according to the Moon.

Quee. But if I might advise your Majesty,
By former losses you should be more wise,
Then hazard France again to the like snoyle:
Edward is fortunate in all his wars;
And wise men will not strive against the streame^
Therefore be circumspect, and keep your own.

F.K. This theme our counsel shall at large discuss,
Till when, to England we will Embassage send,
To advise King Edward not to be our foe,
Left it offend us, that are friends to both:
If the Dove speed not, we will the Serpent prove.

Sax. And win by craft, what may not be by love.
Who shall have that employment?

Bast. Not your Honor, because your spirit is rough and turbulent.


F.K. No, if I might entreat these reverend Bishops,
By them I would direct this Embassy:
Since it concerns them, it behooues they stir,
Who know the sweetes, will cause no war.

Trier. We Will undertake it, if the Emperor please.


Bast. When I send thither, it shall be in thunder:
Yet as the French King orders it proceed.

F. K. You know your charge, be mild, but yet not base,
Though we give ground, we will not lose our place.

Manet Saxon. Exeunt. Saxon. Even now a bold conceit has entered me,
And that's to visit England in disguise:
As well to further our conspiracy
Against the Palsgraue and King Edwards life,
As to surueigh the Country, and observe
What Havens best to entertain a Fleet:
The English Nation with my soul I hate,
And would do any thing to win the State. Exit.

Enter Edward, Clynton, old Fytzwaters, the Palsgraue, Cullen, and others.
King. Not possible my Lords to find those men?
Are they so wily to deceive us all?
Sure they are harbored by some near about,
That does affect the English Diadem:
He Is worse then mad would aim at Englands Crown,
Though the Black Prince be dead, so many sons
I have left to govern, which marres their rule.
Edward himself has left a hopeful heir,
The Princely Richard to inherit it.
Plots yet, tricks yet, well we must hope the best.

Pals. I rather think the ill was aymd at me,
Because I came to move your Majesty.
For the deposing of the Emperor:
And it is known the Bastard is my foe,
Witness the Wars in Germany and Spain:
Treason by him is evermore in act,
His brain coins faster then the English Mynt;
Tretcherous proceedings, gold has many friends:
And he must be a man of excellent virtue
Whom it corrupts not. Howsoere, I am sorry
The Saylors did escape.

Clyn. Here are their cases. 2. Saylors canuas Suits.
Under the which I think were better clothes,
And for their Steedes, thought could not be more quick,
Or we had took them.

O. Fytz. They were swift indeed.

King. As swiftly with their flight vanish our fears.
And now most Noble Palsgraue of the Rheine,
Think your self welcome to the English Court:
And reverend Cullen.

Cullen. I do thank your Grace.


King. Your Father loved me well, and for his sake,
As well as for your own, I Will honor you:
And after feasting we will try your force
In friendly manner at a Tournament,
Which as I think, you have prepared my Lords.

O. F. We have my Liege, and the most youthful blood
That the Court yields will show their Chiualdry,
In honor of Bauaria's Royal Duke.

Palsg. Let him sit fast that shall contend with me,
Or I shall shake him, be he nere so Royal:
I show no favor when I am in Arms,
Nor look for any from my Opposites.
But Tournaments are revels made for sport,
And he runs well, that gets a good report.

King: We Will try your valor, and perchance run with you.
Lead on. Exeunt.

Enter the Earl of Artoise. Artoise. The discontented English like to me,
Hates all delight, I and the Court it self:
To lead a private life, where they may plot
Revenge on those that are their opposites;
Not many years past, who but I esteemed,
King Edward has upon my shoulder leand,
And thankt me in mine ear many a time,
For making France his, I betrayed Valoys
My sovereign King, in England to get grace:
And now I lookte to be a Duke at least:
Artoise is slighted as a thing forgot,
But I have sent my Attendant to the Court,
And if he speed not, I shall prove as false
Edward to thee, as to my Native French.

Enter a Servant. Servant. The King is not at leisure
To listen to your suit; All his thoughts now
Are taken up to give the Palsgraue grace,
Who is come to Court, and means to Turney there

Art. Treason run with them, or some dangerous plot,
Take life and being to destroy them both;
Must my affairs give place unto a Palgraue?
It Was I that quartered with the English Lions,
The Arms of France, in opening Edwards Title,
Which but for me had in oblivion slept,
Then I was as the Palsgraue in his breast,
My sight his food, my saying his hearts rest.
Who Is that, that knock's look forth, and bring us word?

Seru. A couple of Gen^l^me^ would speak with you.


Arto. Let them com in, were they a pair of mischiefs,
They are welcome now. For I have thoughts like Held,
Black and confusde.

Enter Vandome and Mendozze. Seru. These are the Gentlemen.


Vandome. Our business is to you most noble Artoise,
The Emperor does salute you in this Letter,
And prays you by the Honor of an Earl,
You fail not to conioyne your aid with ours,
About some plot against his Enemies.

Artoise. The Letter speaks the words, but names no plot.

Mendo: It Is not deuisd as yet, but ere log great Caesar.
Will set it down, and send it to us all.
Now as his Mightiness desires is this,
That you give shelter to us while we stay
For his Affairs in England, and your pension
Which every year you have received from him,
Shall from henceforth be doubled with his love.

Artoise. Caesar is gracious, and has my heart:
But were not you the Servants that attended
On the last Emperor that was made away,
And helped to send him to a timelesse grave?

Vandome. We were my Lord.


Artoise. Let me embrace you in mine arms for that.


Mendo: But that ill speed followed our hopes to day,
We had given a period to King Edwards life,
And to the Palsgraues.

Vandome: We attempted it.
Habited like Sailors, but our pistolls failde,
And after long pursuit, our Roabes thrown off,
We escapte with life.

Mendozze. And come to live with you.


Artoise. Live here as safe as in a Fort of brass.
Such men I wished for to a sit my spleen,
Unto one mark all our affections tend.
And they both dye if that the Emperor send.

Exeunt. The Trumpets sound within as at a Tournament: A great shoute. Enter
old Fytzwaters and Clynton. O. Fytz. Did you ere see a better Tournament,
Or brauer Runners then this day appeared
In the Tilt-yard?

Clyn. The best that ere I saw.
What a brave Horse the Palsgraue rid upon,
And with what courage, nimblenesse, and strength,
Did he unhorse his valiant opposites?
Spears flew in splinters, half the way to heaven,
And none that ran against him kept this saddle,
Except the King, and he demeand him well:
It joys my soul, that he has yet in store
Such manly vigor; and the peoples hearts
Were not a little glad.

O. Fytz. Here they come all.


Enter King Edward, Palsgraue, Cullen, and others. King. I fear you are
ouer-wearied with our sports,
To speak the truth. I feel them troublesome,
Whether it be by discontinuancce or age, I know not,
But my breath grows short.

Pals. What Oak is ever strong? age makes Jove's tree,
The fairest King, and Emperor of the wood,
To bend it self, and bow his lofty arms
Downwards unto the earth that softred it.
No Caeder grows straight till his latest day:
As there is a weakness in their springing up,
So is there in their declination.
The middle age the luffy does express,
And there flows vigor, like a sea of strength,
Able to bear down what does stand the stream:
Such is mine now, but as my years do flow,
Like Oaks and Caeder^ they must straight bow low.

King. Sit by our side, and wear a Caesar's wreath.

A Wreath of Laurel. Palsgr. Victorious Edward keep it as your right,
And let it mingle with your Royal Crown,
That have deserved it in a field of war,
Not as it is mine, given for a Turnament.

King. It is our gift, and you shall wear it still,
Bring forth the other honor we intend
Unto this thrice renowned Gentleman.

Enter an Herald, with a fair Cushion, and the Garter upon it. Herald. My
gracious Liege here is the Garter ready.

King. Which to the Palsgraue we command you bear,
Garter and Herald here presents your Honor
With the Order of the Garter, whence he takes
His Office and his Name, by our Decree:
This is a favor which no Foreign Prince
Ever enjoyed yet, but the time may come
When Kings in seeking it may be instald,
It was my Institution, and is worn
By none but the most Noble, and those few
Hereafter I will tell your Excellence
The Motive why the Order was deuisd':
Mean time his hand shall claspe it to your Leg,
For it is a custom which you must not break.

Palsgr: Your Highness honors me exceedingly.

King. You are now my Fellow-Knight, and you must swear,
To fight for Ladies,and their Fames preserve,
But that we leave to Deputation,
It shall suffice now, say on, paffe your word.
My Word and Oath, so please your Majesty,
The Motto, as I red it was in French,
Ho^^y, soit qui Mal y p^ns^:
Ill be his meede makes goodness an offense:
Or, Evil be to him that evil thinks.
I have learnt the sense, the Order I will keep
Inuiolate, by Hand and by my Sword;
And hope in time it shall as famous prove,
As that of Malta or Ierusalems.

Clinton. The Bishops, Mentz,and Trier, sent from France,
By the French King desire to be admitted.
With them associate comes the bold Poytiers,
But as I think he is no Ambassador.

King. Give them admittance.
We could not wish for a more brave assembly,
Then at this instant to give Audience.

Enter Mentz and Trier, and Saxon disguised like a Frenchman. Mentz. Because
the matter does concern our selves
Most mighty King of England, we have taken
This Embassy in hand, not sent by Caesar,
But from your Neighbor, the great King of France:
Who by us first intreates, after enioynes
You take good heed how you the Palsgraue aid,
For that he says, and will maintain as much,
It were unjust now Caesar to depose,
Who by his valor, if all Titles fail,
Merits the honor of an Emperor.

Trier. And that he is peerlesse for his mind,
And haughty resolution through the world,
That none so well as he deserves the style,
And being invested in the dignity,
Twere a dishonor great and Capital,
Now to constrain him to a lower place:
Which if you seek, heel shield from such disgrace.

King. Has France forgot our former victories,
That his Commission is so peremptory?
Or is it but the Stratageme of Caesar.
To blind us with the Name of the French King?
And John of France be ignorant of this,
Before we answer your proud Embassy,
Weel send Ambassadors to know the truth:
And if we be deceived by a trick,
Caesar shall know he has dishonourd us.

Saxon. I am a Frenchman, and a Peer of France,
My name Poyctiers,but no Ambassador.
Yet by the Honors that my sword has won,
King John of France delivered what they spoke.

King. Being no Ambassador, why came you hither
To be a Spy, and to surueigh my Land?

Saxon A Spy, one of my blood without disguise,
Being the first Reuealer of my self,
How can this hold King Edward to be true?
I use no Intelligence but with my sword:
Nor seek for other corners then deep wounds.
So if I come by any great man's heart
In honorable difference I surueigh it.

Palsgraue. At whose heart aim you now, that you are come?
To justify an Embassage against me?

Saxon. I say who wears the German Diadem
Deserves it better then the best that is here;
Or any whom the English King, or thou
For private reasons would prefer to wear it,
And that it is not honor prompts you to it;
But secret pride, to have a person govern,
Which Palsgraue, thou might rule ambitiously.

Palsgr: Thou fowl-mouth'd sla^derer eat thy proud words up,
Wherewith thou have asperst me; or my fury
Shall make thee curse this bold-fac'te impudence.

Saxon. Come, Come, you cannot do it.

Palsgraue. Cannot.

Saxon. Nor dare. I Will stand the fury of thy prowdest shocke,
Not fearing danger in so slight a Foe:
Should I put off these Masks,my wounds would fright,
And these wide mouths which I have got in war
Not half heald up, pronounce it in thy blood.
Thou art too weak to enter Arms with me.

Palsgraue. Since mildness cannot temper your stern wrath,
But that your spleen must vomit upon me.
I Will teach you Sir to have your tongue locked up.
By taking off your lock. Pulls off his lock.

Saxon. My hair torn off. They part them.

Palsgr. Who have we here? This is the hauty Saxon.

Saxon. Grant me the co^bat Edward, of this Palsgraue.

King. He is a prince himself, and knows his power.

Palsgraue. Now by the honor of my Fathers house,
Saxon I Will meet thee in the Realm of France,
In the Kings Court, or place where thou were borne,
So I may have good Hostage, and fair play.

Saxon. Now by my gage thou shall. ( His glove.

Palsgr: This shall suffice.
I have your lock to me a better pledge.

Saxon. I would I had thy head to counteruayle it.
A whyrl-winde be thy guide, and a rough Sea
Plague thee before thou comst for my hairs loss,
Hell and some Devil was author of this cross Exit Saxo^.

King. You have paid him soundly and deservedly.
But now to answer you in brief, it is thus,
The Palsgraue and our self will see the King
With expedition, where (if he make good
The proud Iniunction you have chargde us with,
We will lay wast his Country, and once more
Put France in hazard of a sound loss.

Palsgraue. This Saxons brave, gives courage to us all.
But I Will requite it with a German braule.

Enter Saxon, Artoise, Vandome, and Mendoza, Trier, and Cullen. Sax. You are
the cause next to disgrace the Palsgraue
For which I came. The Emperor greetes you well,
And would have noble Artoise lend his hand,
Both to cut off Bauaria and the King.

Artoise. Where?

Mentz. Here in England.

Trier. Or what place you will.

Vandome. France is the safer for the Stratagem.

Mendoz. And Edward is determined to sail thither.

Saxon. In France then give it birth.
Where if it sail I Will be the Palsgraues death. Exeunt.

Enter French King solus. F. King. The care of Kingdoms is a weighty charge
So is the care of children. But Loves care
Exceeds them all: That dryes the blood of life
More then the Fever, though they burn like Fire:
And to submit it to the law of reason,
Makes reason folly, and discourse a Fool.
Then irresistible all ruling power
Revel in young men's hearts, and leave the old,
Or meddle with inferiors, not with Kings;
We should be privileged, because most high,
But what is a King unto a Deity?

Enter Floramell, with a Napkin, and a cup of Wine. Floramell. Your Majesty
called for a cup of wine.

F. King. I did fair creature,and I thank your pains.
But when I view the color of your lip.
And look on this, the wine me thinks looks pale:
You have a better luster in your eye,
Then any sparkel that can rise from hence:
The silver whiteness that adornes thy neck,
Sullyes the plate, and makes the Napkin black.
Thy looking well, makes all things else look foul,
Being so fair in body, what is thy soul?

Floram. My soul and body are the gift of heaven,
And I will use them to my Makers praise:
If other service (great King)you require,
I am ready, attend your hearts desire.

F. King. I think sweet creature, what thy tongue has vtterd
Is distant many paces from thy heart.
My hearts desire, it is not in bending low,
After the afficious custom of a Court:
Nor lies it in the use of common things,
To bring and take away; my hearts desire
Is to enjoy thee in another sort,
Which if thou yield unto, thou shall be great,
Greatest in France, next, nay before my Queen:
For I Will find means to to take away her life,
So I may have thee as a second wife.

Flora. The Saint of France forbid it, and all powers,
That have continued both so long together
In sacred rites of Marriage, heaven deny
I should be Author of her Tragedy:
Or give content where murder is opposed.
If I should yield, and your Queen made away,
Might you not use me so another day?
It Is fearful building upon any sin,
One mischief entered, brings another in:
The second pulls a third, the third draws more,
And they for all the rest set open the door:
Till custom take away the judging sense,
That to offend we think it no offense.
Wherefore my Lord, kill mischief while it is small,
So by degrees you may destroy it all.

F. King. Diui^e is thy discourse, like to thy beauty.

Flo. Does not Idolatrize, beauties a flower,
Which springs and withers almost in an hour:
Sickness impayres it, but death kills it quite,
It vades as fast as shadows in the night.
Why should your Grace call it Divinity?
There Is naught divine, but that which cannot dye.
Least I offend by staying here too long,
I Will take my leave, and so curb in my tongue.

F. King Speak still, I Will hear thee. (Exit Floramell.

Flor. To our Sex it is bard,
We should be twice seen, ere we be once heard.

F. K. She Will never yield! why do I woo her then?
Because I cannot bridle my desires,
Nor sleep, nor cate, but as I dream of her:
She Is to me as my Genius, or my soul,
And more then they, because she gouernes them.
Some way I Will take, my freedom to recover:
That there is no physic made to cure a Lover!

Enter the French Queen. Queen. My Lord.

F. King. My Love.

Queen. Yes.

F. King. Infortuna.

Queen. How! Infortuna?

F. K. I mistook thy name:
Yet now I think on it, I had busy thoughts
How I might raise that Virgin to some Honor,
And match her with some worthy Peer of France.

Qu. Your self my Lord in some Adulterate kind.

F. K. Nay then you wrong me, I meant virtuously;
Believe me Sweet I did, I love thee so,
No evil thought should make me wrong thy bed,
By this it shall not, this, and this, my Love. Kisses her.

Queen. You flatter me.

F. K. I love thee as I should:
What, we have lived together twenty years,
And never wronged each other, should I now
Be the first causer of the marriage breach?
Banish such thoughts, let all mistrust begone.
If she grow jealous, I am twice undone. Exit. F. King.

Quee. I Will have about with her, to find out all.
Within there. Enter Floramell.

Flo. Madame.

Queen. What Medea was it,
Of whom you learnt the Art of Sorcery,
To inchaunt a King, and draw him to your bed?
Think you, because you are my Maid of Honor,
I Will honor you so far, to have my Lord,
Thou shameless Callet? it is ingratitude,
Into my Husbands heart so to intrude.
I could have helped thee to a wealthy choice,
Had you spared mine; but now it cannot be,
For I must hate thee for thy tretchery.

Flo. I am accused, that ought to be excused,
And blamed as one unchaste, for being chaste.
I Inchaunt the King, and use Medeas Art?
Witchcraft I have always hated with my heart:
And except Modesty a Circe be,
I know no other kind of Sorcery.
Your Highness sent me with a Cup of Wine
Unto the King, the occasion of his wooing;
Was it my fault to do your Highness will?
Judge gracious Majesty but as you ought,
And do not blame me for a Virgins trial:
His love was answered with a strong denial;
And so denied for ever shall he be,
That seeks by such means to dishonor me.
Before I wrong a Queen so truly kind,
I Will mar my face, and make my sad eyes blind.

Queen. In. Exit Floramell.
We Will consider farther of your tears:
I Will hau^ her watched, if she proves false, she dies;
But if continue constant to the end,
Never had Lady a more Royal friend. Exit.

Enter young Fitzwaters aloft. Y. Fytz. Since I was cast upon this fatal Rock,
And saw my Love disseuered by the waves,
And my kind Steward in the Ocean drowned,
Here I have lived, fed only with raw Fish,
Such as the Sea yields: and each Ship I see,
(As daily there are some furrow this way)
I call unto for aid, but nere the near.
Once ask't me, What I was? I answered him,
An Englishman. Quoth he, Stay there and starve.
To the next that past, I said I was a French-borne.
I Will aid no French quoth he. Unto a third,
That I a Spaniard was. He bad me hang:
So that I know not what I ought to say,
Nor whom to speak to: but in happy time,
From this high Rock, I see a tall Ship come,
Furnished with all his Sails; and as it ploughes
The Ocean up, it rayses hills of snow,
That fly on both sides as they did give way,
To make a valley for the Ship to pass.
Their Captain as I think looks upon me,
And has took notice of my wauing hand.
Now the Ship turnesand this way ploughes amain,
As if it meant to run it self aground:
In happy time, now I shall be relieved.

Enter Saxon, Artoise, Mentz, Vandome, and Mendoza. Saxon. It Was here abouts
the Gallant beckned me,
He seems a person of some eminence,
By the glittering of his Suite against the Sun,
Cast Anchor here, and let us question him.

Men. Yonder he stands, mounted upon the rock.

Sax. The very same. What art thou, what is they name?
Thy place of birth, fortune, and parentage,
That thou art left upon this desolate shore?
And what requirest thou stranger at our hands?

Y. Eytz. As you are men, and therefore may be crossed,
Be favorable to a wretched man:
Know, that the Sea has cast me on this place,
Where I have led a discontented life,
Ere since the last storm, and no passenger
Has taken pity to remove me hence.
Though food I want not, cause the sea yields sish,
I woul'd be shifted to a better place.
My name's Fitzwaters, by my birth a Lord:
My natural residence in England was,
Some of your company I have often seen,
Set me aland where dwell inhabitants,
And thankfully I will require your love.

Artoy. It Is young Fytzw^^ers, pray f^r take him in.

Sax. You know my li^^^ (...) all Englishmen.
Since my disgrace, and shall I pity him?

Meant. But he is descended of a Noble house.

Sax. The more should I rejoice to see him dye.

Trier. Has valor.

Sax. Let him use it on the Rocks.

Vand. But every (...) bears not your mind,
Some have been favorable to their foes.

Mend. And it is an honor in an enemy
To save where he may ^ill.

Y. Fytz. Your answer there?

Sax. You speak as you would compel it.

Y. Fytz. In the honorable intercourse of men
I should do so, and were you in my case,
You would enforce your own necessity.

Sa. What would this Stranger be in prosperous state,
That bears so high a mind in his distress?

Y. Fytz. I would be as thou art, proud of nothing.

Sax. Is a Ship nothing?

Y. Fytz. As it ankers here
It bears a goodly show; but launcht again,
And a stormerise, it may be cast aland
As I have been: nay worse, it may may be sunk,
And then what is it, but a fair something, nothing?
What is, and now is not; man's life, or a dream,
Now swimming, and then swallowed in the stream.

Sax. His words are piercing, some go take him in:
Come down, and be received into our Boat.

Art. That shall be my charge. Exit Artoise.

Sax. Could we draw this spirit
Into our plot, he would help to manage it
Unto the life, and I should take it better
Then yet I do.

Vand. Persuasion may corrupt.


Meant. But be adjust'd how you persuade him to it.


Trier. And take his Oath at first for sacrifice,

Vand. We are no puny Pollititians,
To be instructed in the rules of evil;
Here comes Fitzwaters.

Enter young Fytzwaters and Artoise. Sax. Your hand.

Y. Fytz. And sword but that the Sea devoured it.

Sax. Know sir, we have business of import in hand,
Wherein our purpose is to crave your aid,
And as we sail to France we will open it.

Y. Fyt. I am yours in all things that are honorable.

Sax. Honorable be not, your shall do what we list.
Launch forth into the deep. Exeunt.

Enter King Edward, Palsgraue, old Fytzwaters, Clynton and Cullen, Drums,
Colors, and Soldiers. King. We did not think to have footed the French ground
A second time in such Hostility;
But when the conquered bears so proud a head,
It Is fit we make him stoop: yet least, the King
Be not himself, or be abused by any,
My Lord of Cullen, we entreat your pains
To enquire it out by our Ambassador,
as Mentz and Trier his a say that our force
Might spoil his country, and make waste his land;
But that with French blood we have surfetted,
And therefore care not greatly to shed more.
Say, We will meet him at an enterview,
There to discourse our griefs before we fight,
Where if he have wronged me, he shall do me right.

Cullen. I shall delate your Highness Embassy.

Pal. But say from me my sword nere drunk French
And therefore it is thirsty for their lives:
That are I leave the Continent of France,
Without good satisfaction from the King,
None of his Caualieres shall were a lock,
I Will have them all cut off, and every year
Be paid in such a tribute for my wrongs.
As for proud Saxon, Say my word is kept,
And bid him warily respect his own:
The French Kings Palace shall not save his life,
Nor the best rampierd Bulwark in the Land,
Except he answer me as fits a Pee^e.

Cul. But to the Emperor, what is your will to him?

Pals. That as he run from Spain, he shall run hence,
Or I shall make him a poor Emperor.
His Bastard bravery tell him must go down,
And the legitimate wear Caesar's Crown.

King. Fail not to utter every syllable
Both of the Palsgraues sending and our own.

Cul. I shall deliver both.

Pals. Take It how they please,
If they fly hence, we will follow through the Seas.

Cullen. I go. Exit Cullen.

King. High is this Embassy, like to your valor,
Which I admire, and love ardently;
That I could wish your presence all my days,
And think your company to me more sweet
Then mine own Kingdom, or my Crown besides.

Pals. Your love and Royal presence I desire.

K. Clynton, and bold Fytzwaters, be it your charge,
Provided well of our best ships and Soldiers,
To sail to Germany, and free our friends,
Kept as we hear there with a slender guard,
In a weak Castle.

Old Fitz. Which we will soon beats down.

Passgr. And bring them hither.

Clinton. Or return no more.


King. March forwards to the place where weel encampe

Exeunt. Enter Fitz-waters, Artoyse, Vandome, and Mendoza. Vand. What should
the reason be of this dissension
And why is young Fitz-waters froward thus?

Artoyse. His arguments are strong and forcible.

Mendoz. Single us hither to the forest side,
Under pretense to plot more privately,
And now not only to mislike! our drifts,
But call us punies, and unskillful men,
If shows a spleenefull hatred to us all.

Y. Frytz. Not unto all, but only to you two:
Why should the Earl and I borne a Lords son,
Join with a pair of base companions,
In such a weighty cause as a Kings death:
I know you will say you have been physicians,
Sailer, and Soldiers, ^ and in such disguise,
Done some exploit that have deserved respect,
I grant as much, but yet your birthes are mean.
No gentry in your bloold was ever known
By natural Heraldry, your low discents
Disables us, and we must seek to rise,
With others of our own condition.

Men. Come Vandome, of our selves we will do the deed

Y. Fitz. That were the engrossing of the same from us
And so you would have all the thanks your selves:
Neither commixt with us, nor yet alone,
Shall it be acted, but as we are the best
In brith, and ablity to do it,
We Will have the privilege of doing it:

Vandome. And we should give it over.

Y. Fitz. To your betters.
Or having fit place, Artoise and my self,
Will kill you first, then cast you in the River.

Artoise. Heespeakes what we intend.

Mendozze. Intend your worse?
Caesar has promisde him the Palsgraues place,
And I shall be the Marquess Brandenburgh:
Think you such Titles shall be lost by fear.
Our valor has been tryde with worthy men,
And ere we loose the glory of the Act,
Vandome and I do mean to use you so.

Y. Fyth. They Will nere be honest.

Vandome. Come Sir, are you ready?

Artoise. Most resolute villains, how they would outbraue us?

Y. Fyth. But noble Artoise, now the fire is giuea
The Cannon must go off.

Artoise. Unto their deaths.
Fight. Y. Fyth and Artoise kill Vandoume, and Mendozza. So they are dead, and
now the Fame remains
Only to us, that will accomplish it.

Y. Ftyh. Only to me, that will perform't alone.
Thinks Artoise those were slain cause they are base?
Or that I wrought you to assist my plot,
Because you are of the Nobility?
No, I have still this Maxim in my thoughts,
That a Competitor, though nere so Noble,
Takes away half the same in every thing:
I could have opend this unto you all,
But that I thought my self too weak for three:
And therefore prouidently used thy strength,
To kill them first, that I might slay thee after.
Now they are dead, thy life must follow theirs,
And so I share the honor to my self:
I will be Palsgraue, Marquess Brandenburgh,
And the Bohemian King in me alone,
Caesar shall write himself three Friends in one.

Artoise. I do not think thou meanst to be a traitor.

Y. Fitz. Now you come near me, but that secrets mine,
And seeking i^ you must dig through my heart,
Or it will nere ^e found, it lies so close.

Art: I Will know it, or a reason in your blood.

Y. Fytz: Will thou turn honest?

Artoise. Do not torture me,
With repetition of that Beggars name:
Whom none but Idiots, Innocents, or blocks
Will entertain.

Y. Fytz. I would change your mind
From this erroneous and ill boding thought,
Because of late you freed me from the rock,
But if it be so hurtful to your sight
Be your own death, I Will not reveal my mind.

Arto. If that I cannot force it with my sword,
I Will let it alone.
Fight, and kills Artoise. So lie together, three a pair Royal makes,
And here is a pair Royal of excellent Villains;
These have slain princes by their own confession,
These made a Nation swim in her own blood,
The stream is turnde with you, it is now high flood:
But I must cast you all into the River.
Yea, swords and all, to clear me from suspect;
Suspect? by whom this place yields no such eye,
It Is well the worlds rid of their villainy. Exit.

Enter severally, the French king and Floramell. Floram. His Highness here, then
Floramell give back.

F. King. It Is she, a word; there is no retiring hence.
In vain you strive, my force opposde against yours,
Will easily subdue your woman's strength,
But there is a power included in your eye
That conquers Kings, subdues a Deity.
And he that had the strength to rule those graces,
Might nere be caught, yet view the brightest faces:
One kiss, and I Will no more importune you.

Floram. On that condition, I will grant you one.


F. King. But you must give it me.


Floram. Dian forbid, that were immodestie.


F. King. It must be so.


Floram. Upon your Kingly Oath,
Never hereafter to renew your suit.

F. King. Now by my crown I swear.


Floram. Take it.


F.King. It Is done:
And with this kiss, a second Fire begun,
More ardent are my thoughts now then before:
Ilou'd thee well, but now I love thee more.
Thou shall not leave me, but for ever dwell,
Where I abide, thy absence is my hell.

Floram. Think on your Oath.


F. King. At Lovers perjury, the Gods themselves do wink.

Flo. A king say so, pardon me sir, your will I Will not obey.
But your oath broken mainely run a away. Exit Floram.

Enter the Queen, having heard their conference. Qu. So, so, so: This is the
affection that you bear to me?
Thinks the French King I Will not revenge this wrong?
As I am Queen of France, I Will make her know,
What it is to be corriuall in my Love:
She dies by Heaven.

F. King. If thou but spoil a hair,
Or shed one drop of her celestial blood
For any courtesy I have offered her,
My wrath shall: as a fury haunt the deed.
And I Will torment thee for such cruelty,
Worse then the damned in the world below.
I seeldome threaten, but I do it straight,
Her death thy Hell, look to it, it is a shrewd fate.

Exit King. F. Queen. He ever yet was sovereign of his word,
What shall I do, brook this corri^alship?
No, since I cannot in the Realm of France,
Have the revenge my longing heart desires,
Elsewhere I Will seek it, I of late behold
An English Lord in favor at the Court,
His Name Fitzwaters, and I love him well:
By his procurement I will lay a plot,
To yield King John unto his enemies,
So to obtain my purpose, if it take
How ever Fools may think to project ill,
It likes me well, because I have my will.

Exit. Enter a Frenchman and an Englishman. Frenchman. What are you?


English: An Englishman and a traveler; what are you?


French: A Frenchman, and no traveler.


English: Then give way; For I am the better man.


French: The better man?


English: I, the better man, by the porambulation of 2. or 3. thousand miles, I
have seen the great Turk borrow Money, and never mind the repayment ont.


French: Peuh, is that all? we have a number of great Christians that will do
so, and when a man comes to demand his own somewhat holdly, he shall be
committed to prison, or made a Fool, to stand waiting at the foredore where
the Coach stands, whiles the Lord steals out at the backe-dore by water.


English: Is It possible?


French: That our Tradesmen can tell, to their great hindrance, and I my self
know this, that being in poverty, a Lord called me by my name thrice, but he
would not remember it once, when he came to his Lands.


Englishman. The reason is, least thou should beg some of his New-liuing.


French: Nay rather for fear of paying the old score.


English: Sure thou art some N^k^emans bastard, thou can tell their tricks so
right.


French. And by some great woman: For I can tell you their tricks too.


English. As how?


French. Your only fine Lady is wantonness, and new Fashions, your Citizens
wife gallops after. But she is not so well horste to overtake her.


English: Now we are in the discourse of women, What Countrey-women do thou
love best?


French: I love none.


English: I love all, and to kiss them after the fashion of all Nations.


Frenchm. Why I pray sir, do not all Nations kiss alike?


English: You are no Traveler, and therefore I Will bear with your ignorance: but
know this, your Spanyard, as he is proud, he kisses prowdly, as if he
scornde the touch of a Ladies lip; marry you Frenchmen draw it in, as if he
would swallow her alive: Now the Italian has soon done with the upper parts,
to be tickling of the lower: and we Englishmen can never take enough at both
ends.


Frenchm: Is not your name Master do much?


English: It is, and yours (I think should be Monsieur do little.


Frenchman. We ere somewhat a kin in the first part of our names, and I pray
heartily let us be better acquainted together.


English: You must do as I do then, and since we were both appointed, to
wait here for the French Queens coming, lets take her gold, and forswear
our selves.


French: Here comes her Majesty.


Enter the Queen. Queen. Are you resolu'de to undergo this charge? It Is but
an Oath, which I will guild with Crowns, And bear you out against the Law.


Frenchm. I can do little being so animated, if I should not forswear my
self, for so fair a Queen.


Englishm: And I Will do as much as your Majesty will have me do.


Queen. Take this in earnest, and when it is done, you shall have more.


Frenchman. We will.


Englishman. And from this time forwards, let us be forsworn brothers.


Frenchman. Content. Exeunt French. and English.

Queen. I Will instruct you: Here comes Fitzwaters.

Enter Young Fytzwaters. Y. Fytz. According to your Majesty's command,
I come to know your pleasure for the Letter
I should deliver to the English King,
With that base strumpet that has Injured you.

Queen. There is the Letter, which I charge you bear unto King Edward, and
assure his Grace I will perform what I have promis'de in it, I Will send the
strumpet to you instantly. Exit Queen.


Y. Fyth. I know not by what influence I am fallen
Into the affection of this potent Queen:
But she has sworn she loves me as her soul:
And to enjoy me in her amorous Bed,
Would spend the revenues of the Crown of France
Were it her own: I Will temporize with her,
To effect some plot upon my Sovereigns foes,
But she shall know, Although she love me well,
My hearts desires were drowned with Floramell.

Enter Floramell. Floramell. By all descriptions this should be the man,
To whom I am directed by the Queen;
But whom do I behold the young Fytzwaters?

Y. Fyth. It Is she, Oh no, she is in the Ocean drowned,
No; She escapt it seems as well as I.
But I will take no acquaintance of my Love,
Till she has cleerd her from the Queens suspect.

Floramell. It is not meet I take acquaintance first,
Nor will I till I know a just cause why,
Of his Familiar dealings with the Queen,
Here is the key her Highness promiz'd you.

Y. Fytz. And you the prisoner to be safe locked up,
For your incontinence and wanton life.

Floramell. You do me wrong, I hate incontinence,
Nor did I ever love a wanton life:
I am a desolate Lady, shipwrackt here,
And had a Husband once, too like thy looks,
But not of such a rude condition.
Oh were he present, and should hear thee speak
Such boystrous terms against his honored wife,
He would out of the virtue of his mind
Knowing my conversation to be good,
Write this base slander in thy villains blood.

Y. Fytz. So confident, her innocence is great,
That can do this sincerely without tricks:
But if you be the same that you would seem,
How comes that your reputations grown,
Into such scandal, and your name the theme,
Of every idle fellow in the Court?
That Grooms report, fair Unfortunate is:
The French Kings love; Nay worse his concubine.
The voice of men is held the voice of God:
And where an evil is so far proclaimde,
The generality approues the guilt,
And she is unworthy to surviue a minute,
To be the separation of two hearts,
Made one by Marriage.

Floramell. Kill me, kill me then.
Having my sentence, wherefore am I sparde?
Or do you take delight to torture me?
Before you serve the Execution^
The Law requires no more but death for L^st.
The lingering is a no^^ of Tyranny.
It is sufficient that the wretch must die,
The sooner done, the lesser cruelty.
But if your conscience urge you to forbear,
I shall confute your worthless Arguments,
And tell you in the pureness of my soul,
Report's a liar, common talk a Fool.
Wayters and Grooms, lightheaded like their plumes,
And those that do attend in Princes Courts,
Too active and quicke-witted to deprave
A Courting they proclaim for a consent,
A favor for the deed, believe them not:
It is too common, this they hourly do,
And think none chaste, but her whom none did wo^^,

Y. Fytz. But you did kiss the King.

Floramell. The Queen did see it,
Vrg'de by constraint, and Kingly violence.
Upon condition he should woo no more:
And for that kiss I am esteemd a whore:
If you believe I am, I pray proceed,
I kissed the King, do you a murderous deed.

Y. Fytz. Rise, rise, hereafter the discourse I Will tell,
Mean time Fytzwaters welcomes Floramell.

Floramell. So then I am honest by your own confession,
But ere I entertain you as a Husband,
I Will be resolved what Love has past between
The Queen and you, that you her Agent are,
In such a weighty cause as is my life.

Y. Fytz. Runs the stream this way, is the wind turned thus?

Floramell. I must know all.

Y. Fytz. In sight of Heaven I vow
She is as chaste for any lust from me,
As unborn Infants, and I use her love,
But to acuance my soueraig^e and his Realm.
No other case by honor I p^o^e^t,
In sign whereof I oppose ^n innocent breast
Against the sword: if you believe not, kill,
But never man died for a lesser ill.

Floramel. I am satisfied, rise love, and let us go,
There Is no true joy without some taste of woe.

Exeunt. Enter French King, Bastard, Saxon, Trier, and M^ntz, Qu^^^^. F. King.
Prosperity I think was borne in France,
It Is so ^^^^ipuious unto all our act^;
And like ^ subject waits upon our will:
To morrow is this happy enterview,
In which Fitz-waters and the Earl of Art^ise,
Have promisde to surprise the English King,
And the ambitious Palsgraue.

Bastard. If it take,
We shall have cause to praise our happiness.

Saxon. Take, out of all surmise: and in my thoughts
It is as good already as perform'de.

Trier. I think no less.

Mentz. It is most probable.

F. K. Where is the Queen she promisde us a mask?

Quee^^. The (...).

F. K. Be Iouiall Caesar: mitrth began the night:
And we will end it with the like delight.

Enter King Edward, the P^^sgr^ue and Y. Fitz, Floram^^, Cullen, and diverse
Lords in the Mask, they da^nce there. F. King. We are beholding to you
Gentlemen,
For this your Court-ship, pray discover now.

F. King. We will, and make you all die prisoners.

F.K. King Edward here?

Saxon. The Palsgraue.

Bastard. All our foes.

Mentz. Whose plot was this?

Trier. Or is it not a Dream?

Palsgraue. It Is such a Dream you will never wake^ from?
To talk of this strange admiration,
Which like the night houers on every eye:
Know that I have deluded you with hopes
Vain, like those villains, which my sword did kill,
And by a Letter to the King delivered,
Sent by your Queen, to be revenged for lust,
I causde his Majesty to enter thus.

Queen. I received them in at the back G^te.

King. Where Is the Lady that has wronged the Queen^

Y.Fytzw: Here is my tro^h-plight wi^e,
Freer from that soul imputation,
Then is her Majesty from jealousy.

King. Is she then chaste?

French King: I Will answer for the Virgin,
By my good Fortunes once, now by my beard,
She is as nobly virtuous of a stranger,
As ere I knew, and though I sought her love,
I nere obtaind it.

Queen. No, where is my witness?

King. Son, c^ll them in.

Enter (...). Palsgraue. What can you swear?

French: What must he swear?

English: I Will swear that the Lady is a good Lady,
The Queen a good Queen^ th^rs an end of swearing.

King. Is this all?

English. And more then you should get of me, but that the Queen gave us
gold to say something: but who have we here s^rr^h?


Frenchm. Players, by this light players: Oh I love a play with all my heart.


English. Begin, begin, we are set.

Si^ on the Ra^^es. French: That's a brave King.

English: That's a brave boy that plays the Queens part.

French: He shall be my Iuggler.

English: And when the play's don, I Will be at charges
To bid them all to supper.

Palsgraue. Away with them.

French: I am very sleepy.

English: Would I were a bed,

Y.Fitz. I Will lead you thither.

English. God a mercy good Chamberlain.

French. The play's done, and now we must go home. Farewell. Exeunt Fools.


Queen. But shall the stream turn, this way is my plot
Become so weak? you will believe a Subject
Before a Queen? I have out-shot my self,
In seeking Justice at an enemies hand:
This is a cross beyond the strength of brain;
Sure I shall end my days in Lunacy,
Like one to whom due vengeance is denide,
Because of weakness, on my self I Will turn
The fury that should light upon my foe,
Scatter my hair, like chafe before the wind,
Hell in this world dwells in a jealous mind, Exit. Q.

Pals. Our reuelling has struck day out of night,
And bright Aurora vshers forth the Sun
To his diurnall course; yet neither night,
Day, nor the morning, with her flaring beams,
Can stir up valor in this Saxons breast:
What, is thy mind made captive with thy body?
Or think thou that I take advantages
Where honor should be showed, I Am still my self
Ready to give an answer to thy challenge
As at the first, and if thou conquerst me,
By my Atchiuements I will set thee free.

Sax. You show your self in this a Noble foe,
And I receive more honor then I hoped:
I thought, because I was your prisoner,
You had esteemd captiui^e ^ cong^^st.
But since you have awa^ed ^^eeping valor,
And given your Captive such a privilege?
I am the same bold combattant to dare,
And do as much as erst I did intend.

Palsgraue. Choose your own Weapons, and I Will meet you straight.


Saxon. My Armor there. Exeunt.

Enter Cullen. Cullen. Clinton and bold Fitz^^ters are arriu'de,
And bring with them releast from servitude
Brandenberg, Sa^^y, and Bohemia.

King. Guide them in.

Enter Old Fytzwaters, Clinton, Dr^m, and Cu^^^^^ with Sauoy, Brandenberg, and
Bishops, with Soldiers. Old Fytzw: Those with our selves, we humbly do present
unto your Majesty.


Clinton. Such as our Swords by a glorious victory set free.


King. When Heaven is pleased to give prosperity, How it flows in ^ welcome
my honored Friends: I am glad your thraldomes prove your liberty.


Sauoy. The King of England has been always kind.

Bohem. I have ever found it so.

Brandenb: And so have I.

Old Fytzw: Whom do I fee? my Son that stole my Bride? As you respect my
service (gracious King) Let me have Justice.


Clint: Clinton kneeles with him.

Y. Fytz. To their great service, greater I oppose,
And do beseech your Highness wrong me not.

Old-Fyztw: Wrong thee?

Y. Fytzw: I wrong me, may not King^ do wrong? Or dare you think because you
are my Father, I Will loose my wife.


Clinton. Daughter come from him, least I force you hither.

Floramell. Father I may not.

Y. Fytz. Fathers both she shall not.

King. We Will heat no^ie^e of these bold menaces
On pain of death I charge you both forbear:
And let my censure sway this difference.
In England as your house the Bishop told me
That Clintons Daughter by a precontract,
Was young Fytzwaters wife, and that some trick
Betwixt the Fathers to preserve their wealth,
Broke off the match, to have him wedde the old.
This being true; I charge you on your lives
Urge him no further in his lawful choice,
But as it was wrong enough to hinder it,
Make him amends, by being reconcilde,

Y. Fytzw. Which I entreat upon a du^ious knee.

Floramell. And so do I.

Old Fytzw. Rise, rise, I am friends with you both, and
When my Angers over you shall find me a kind Father.

Clinton. So shall you.

Y. Fytz. All lets are now removed, I am truly happy.

Cullen. The Combattants are ready.

King. Guide them in.

Enter severally Saxon and the Palsgraue Armd, and in their shyrts, Drum and
Culiors. Palsgr. Idle are words where we must use our swords,
Yet that it may appear what minds we bear,
Now we are marched into this dreadful Lists,
Know that this day my Honor shall exceed.
Or I lie breathless where I set my foot.

Saxon. Were thy breast Marble,and thy ribbs of brass,
Saxon will have the superiority,
Or in this dreadful place, his life expires.

Palsgraue. Sound trumpets, and the destinies guide all.

Fight, and kills Saxon. Bastard. The Palsgraue is invincible I think.

F. King. Not to be overcome.

Mentz. Nor to be ta^ide by any.

F. King. Matchless, and far beyond the praise of words, are all thy
actions, let me honor thee.


Palsgraue. Our Friends returned in safety cheers more

F. King. Caesar resign your Title vntyo S^^^y, and Sauoy, fit you up, whilst
the doctors hear ioyn all their hands to make thee Emperor.


Palsgr: (...) as the first.

Boh^m. Trier. And to get your love,
We will disgrace our selves to honor him.

Bastard. Receive the Crown, but as he weare^ the same may it crush out his
brains.


Palsgr. Long live and happily the (...) Caesar.

Sauoy. As happily as your kinded loves have made me.
And long as please the Heauend.

Palsgraue. Your fare^^^ rights (...) perf^^t ^^ with State in Germani^,
whither I make the Majesty of England, and all our F^ie^ds.

King. I Will bear you company.

Palsgr: Fair winds and prosperous ^^ our several
Realms, we wish and pray for, it is not our least good
To be the Favorites of the wa^^ng Flood.

Ex^^^t. W. S^^yth.

FINIS.

