An artificial Apology, articulerlye answering to the obstreperous
Obgannynges of one W. G. Euometyd to the vituperacion of the tryumphant
trollynge Thomas smyth. Repercussed by the right redolent and rotounde
rethorician R. Smyth P. with annotacio^s of the mellifluous and mystical
Master Mynterne, marked in the mergent for the enucliacion of certain obscure
obelisques, to the end that the imprudent lector should not tytubate or
hallucinate in the labyrinthes of this lucubratiuncle.
Moved with mercy, by pytye provoked
Of duty I am dryue^, somewhat for to write
In defense of one, whom I se sore boked Pietas in potentes.

And sore assauted, to be beaten from the right
But if I live, some of them shall be smoked
His part will I take with al my power and might. Ot decet hetetioos.

My heart does blede, to se my friend thus dreast
So that my pen will write, though I say nay
I gaynst this brothyshe graye, this bitter bytyng beast
That seeks nothing else, but for to pull away
The good name and fame, of one that is honest
And full of lytterature, as all that love him say Alii, aliter.

Master Thomas smyth, his name need not be hyd
Whom to se so handled, I have great remorse
For the stocks sake, of which he is descended
He comes of the smyth, that shed saint Georges horse
By right dessent, it may not be denied
But if any would, it shall not greatly force. Zans generis.

Who made this bagnrde so bold, this gresely graye
Or what heart has he, that he thus assayles
Our smyths, if S. Georges horse were a live I say
He dorst even as well have eaten both his nails
But though he be gone, all beasts be not away
I could say more, but he does naught that rayles. Dinsi^ a^ c.

Betwyxt the smythes and grayes, no doubt there is great odds
Look in vitas patrum, I say thou wylfull wagge
How smyths have been bishops, saints and almost gods
Record of sweet saint Loye, that help a cloyed nagge Witatulum.

Mulcant was god and smith, whose curse light on thy coddes
Why then with us smythes, art thou so bold to brag
Mark this malycious, and sore bytynge broch
Because master smyth, called him these in sport
Speaking it but merely, I dare say in mock In bono ioco.

How lewdely of him, he has made report
But say what thou can, he did it not by cock
For by saint tankarde, he is none of that sort. Nota quod non potest portate
setuisiam.

The money and the woman, wherewith thou do him charge
He may full well aduoyde, it is no great thing
God save the king, a pardon does dyscharge Misericordias ^n^i ineternum
cantabo. Id est cibus pro pauperibus d^ nou^ porto.

Mo things then that, which else might hap to bring
Both him and you, but skant to walk at large
Within an iron grate, your Christmas song to sing
As for the woman, alas it was no wonder
She was a whore, and he has such a charm A spiritu fornicationis etc.

If she be arrant, to bring her shortly under
And yet I promise you, he does them little harm
But bryngs them to his house, where they part not asonder
He covers her, he colleth her and keps her good and Warm. Amor vincit ola.

And forsooth full well, toward his old days
Ye poynted him a place, to be in the stable
But he never dressed horse, as he him self sayca We hoc doctores dubicant.

Wherefore for that rome, he is nothing able
His living he must seek, by some other ways
Well enough I warrant you, without hode or babble
If he had no master, ner none would him take
Skant into the stable, yet ere it were long
He has so many friends, thou say would shyft make
To promote him to the skourynge, of some good ma^s gonge Melior est amicos in
curin, qua^ denatius in bursa.

Thou art to spytefull, and I for anger shake
To se how thou do, this poor man so much wrong.
Ye call him papist, because ye se him worche
In all he does or says, by doctors and decrees
Of our old ancient mother holy church
And for because, he does defend their dygnytyes Distingus de eccles^.

Like a sort of lorrelles, you would him give a lurche
His credyte and his fame, to cause him for to lose.
Our smyth can forge, and fetely fabrycate Qnod natuta debit, nemo collere
potest.

A myllyon of mentyres, in less then half a day
Look in all his works which are consolydate
Like a wyttye man, dawe can thou say nay?
In such an honest forge, lo he was educate
And such his bringing up, his craft cannot decay Experientia decet.

And yet this bytynge brocke, says he is unworthy De homini illi per quem
scandaliun venit.

To be a paryshe clercke, God give the woe and care
But yer he come thereto, we trust to se the lie
Asking for gods sake, in poverty full bare
Wylt thou pare with our smyth, ah pylde pratynge pie Per syn^open quasi
dicitur compare.

Well do not so I advise you, I council you beware.
It wylbe a good while or you master Graye
Have such qualylytes as master Smyth has Nota donum linguatum.

He speaks even as good french, I dare well say
As any Popengay, between this and bathe
Crack me that nut, nay fie I pray you away
Meddle not withal, least that it does, you skathe.
Sir he has been in Paris, far beyond the sea Didit plus qu^ mandneam^ per
etc.

where thou durst never, yet pepe out of thy door
And I my self, did here him once say
With so starne a look, Dieu vous donc bon iour
That ever sense, I thought him right well worthy
To have the little room, within the kings toute
Hercules was stronger, then any of the grayes
Yet was he not hable to mache with two at once
Beware I say thou brocke and shortly walk thy ways Waree ei (...), nihil
eni sunt dicscius.

For we be many smythes, and if we catch the once
We will find the means, to shorten thy good days
And in our flammyng forge, we will burn the flesh and bones.
Becant therefore betyme, least we the momorde Bonum co^^lium.

And beat the with our hands, as iron the styth
Causynge the for ever, to be a good record
How any man herafter does rail upon a smyth Cauete a fabris quorua^ multi.

Thy fame we shall pollute, for sowenge soch discord
Maugre all their hearts, that be displeased therewith.
I warrant you this graye, has little good manner
To call master smyth, bedlem and lunatycke
What though he be gogle eyed, and tawny as atanner Nota quod chole, rici su^t
itacsidia ^m Auio^. c. viii.

It is but his compleceyon, swart and collerycke
But sythen that he does fight, under holy churches baner
His lybels are allowed, for good and catholycke.
And though he be a smyth, by face and eke of name
Yet to God and the king, the man may be wellwylled
For was not there a smyth that propre feats did frame
The chronycles make mencyon, whosoever them well behylde
Report me to the black smyth, a man of worthy fame In memoria ete^ na erit
instus.

How many at his commandment, had he at blackheth field.
Now for that smyth, and all smythes yt mean as he did mean v. Pater noster.
v. Ane Maria. vnum Cred^ ^n De profundis.

Or that against God and our king, ought conspyre or say
That such of there offenses, may be confessed clean
And just reward to take, this prayer will I pray
And also that all other, that to their sects do lean
May trudge with the^ for company, to anger Wyllyam Graye.
Thus forced by frendshyp, and lykenes of name
I have compyled this brefe apologye Quia sunt de vno cognoic.

Propungnyng therein smythes, and their honest fame
And their vylependers, to shame and turpefye
Implorynge, that Lord, that forged the frame (...) aucthor ^otu ^at i^
^ethori^s.

Of fire and water, of earth and of sky.
To preserve King Henry that prince potencyall
And Katheryne our queen of curtesye the flower
With Edward our prince, that ympe emperyall
In health, in wealth, in riches, in honor,
And to conserve the counsel heroical
To pauyse the people by prudencyall power.
God save the King.
Imprynted at London by Richard Banks. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
And be to sell in Pater noster row, at the sign of the Rose.


