AN EXPOSITION UPON THE SIXTH Chapter of the Prophecy of HOSEA.

Wherein is set down the true repentance of the Godly, as also the
Hypocritical repentance of the wicked; most needful for these times.

WHEREIN 1. The Sum and Scope. 2. The Doctrines. 3. The Reasons. 4. The Uses.
Of most Texts are observed.


FIRST PREACHED BY SAMVEL SMYTH Minister of Roxwel in Essex, and now by him
published, intending the further good of his charge, and the profit of as many
as shall please to read it.

Seen and allowed.

PSALM. 34.11. Come Children hearken to me, I will teach you the fear of the
Lord.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. P^^^oot for Richard Woodroffe, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the golden Key, near the great
North door. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FAther in God, JOHN by Gods providence, Lord Bishop of
LONDON: Grace and peace from the Father, Prince and Spirit of Peace.
IN the building of the material Temple, which the Lord himself commanded
(Right Reverend Father in God) As Moses the servant of the Lord delivered the
form of it, Exodus 25.40.
as he had received of the Lord in the Mount: So the people of Israel with
ready hearts, and willing minds furthered the same, howbeit, one after one
manner, Exodus 35.22.23.
and an other after an other. The wealthiest amongst them, and such as were
best able, brought silver and gold earerings, bracelets, and Jewels of gold: A
second sort of people brought blew silk, purple, scarlet, and fine linen:
Others, in regard of their poverty brought Goats hair, Rams skins, and Badgers
skins, every one answerable to his ability: No man appeared before the Lord
empty: and God accepted of the meanest gift that proceeded from a willing
heart, as well as the greatest. So fares it with me a poor Labourer in the
Lords Vineyard, I acknowledge my own wants, that I am not able to bring any
great and glorious offering: yet I have brought here a small present, as it
were, a little Goats hair, or (as with the widow) two Mites to be cast into
the Treasury of God. It is the old and ancient doctrine of faith and repentance
that I here entreat of, a needful Subject, especially in these dangerous
days, wherein men labor more for the shows of godliness, then for the power
of it: for we need not so much to complain of ignorance in this age (for many
have knowledge) as the want of sincerity. I have endeavored in this short
Exposition to set out the nature of true repentance, which only is to be
found in the godly, being sound and sincere: as also the hypocritical
repentance of the wicked, which is but for a time, not durable, nor lasting. If
my lines be plain, they best answer a straight and an even level. The
evidence of the spirit is best seen in plainness. And now this poor labor of
mine flies to your Lordship for protection, not fearing your judgment in the
allowance, or doubting of your favor in the acceptance thereof: for matters of
learning, are most fit to be presented to those that excel therein; for, as
the Proverb is, Scientia neminem habet inimicum, praeter ignorantem, so by the
same rule, may I say, Scientia neminem habet amicum and Mecaenatem, nisi
studiosum fautoremque bonarum literarum. And although (Right Reverend) I know
right well, that you not only favor Religion, but are an earnest professor
thereof, and that I need not exhort and stir you up therein; yet let me in
most humble manner desire you, that as you have done much good since you came
into this place, so your works may be more at the last, then at first, and
that you would still honor him, who has honored you, and employ still those
rich talents of learning, authority, and favor of your Sovereign, (which your
great Master has bestowed on you) to the advancement of Gods glory, and the
good of Gods Church. That by you, godly and painful Ministers may more and
more be encouraged in their holy calling, and that those malicious enemies of
Gods truth, the Papists, may be more and more discouraged, and rooted out from
troubling Israel: They are Babylons Children: Blessed are they that dash their
heads against the stones: Some shall have the honor) I assure my self) to be
the instruments under God, utterly to root them out of this land; Let it not
pass your hands: Who knows whether you are come to your place for such a
purpose? Use your favor you have with his Majesty, to waken his sleeping
laws, that as he has long sung mercy, so he would at last tune Justice
against the Papists of our land; and command that his laws may have their
course, that they may not bear it ont with full breast, and go uncontrolled as
they do amongst us. It is a work not unfitting your Lordship (being called to
be a Governor of the Church) to incite his Majesty to this.

I beseech your Lordship pardon my boldness, being a stranger unto you, and
one of the meanest of the Tribe of Leui, within your Diocese; yet one that
wishes all good to Sion. Be you still for God in all your ways, and God will
be still for you in all your ways; advance him still, and he will advance
you, yea perpetuate unto you an honorable name and memory amongst his
faithful here, and crown you with an everlasting crown of glory amongst his
Saints in the heavens.

Your Lordships in the Lord to be commanded, SAMVEL SMYTH.

A Table of all the principal Doctrines contained in this Book.
VERSE. 1.
Doctrine 1. AFflictions are of excellent use to turn us to God. Fol. 6 Doct:
2. What counsel it is that we must give to others in adversity. Fol. 11 Doct.
3. It is the duty of every Christian to labor to draw others to God. Fol. 14
Doct. 4. A man by sinning turns from God. Fol. 19 Doc. 5 A right
understanding, and a true acknowledgement of our own misery, the first step
to Salvation. Fol. 25 Doct. 6. Men must defer no time, but repent out of
hand. Fol. 29 Doct. 1. Man's nature so corrupt, that it stands in need of muny
reasons to persuade to holy duties. Fol. 42 Doct. 2. Gods judgments must move
men to repentance. Fol. 47 Doct. 3. All chasticements and afflictions come from
God. Fol. 50 Doct. 4. God does chastise his own children when they sin
against him. Fol. 56 Doct. 1. The mercy of God must lead men to repentance.
Fol. 63
VER. 2.
Doctrine. 1. IM all our miseries we must fly unto God for deliverance. Fol.
74 Doct. 2. Afflictions laid upon Gods children, are neither durable, nor
incurable. Fol. 78 Doct. 3. All men by nature are dead, in respect of any
spiritual life. Fol. 84 Doct. 4. Regeneration a work of new creation. Fol. 88
Doct. 5. Regeneration begun, must be continued. Fol. 92 Doct. 6. Godly by
repentance, are brought into Gods favor. Fol. 97 Doct. 7. Godly, live in Gods
sight. Fol. 104
VER. 3.
Doct. 1. HVmiliation for sin, must go before the sanctified knowledge of
God. Fol. 109 Doct. 2. The true knowledge of God in Christ, is given only to
the Elect, after their conversion. Fol. 114 Doct. 3. It is God himself that is
the object of a sanctified knowledge. Fol. 122 Doct. 4. Ignorance of God and
his Word in matters of Religion, is dangerous. Fol. 128 Doct. 5. Labor and
pains required in all that will get saving knowledge. Fol. 739 Doct. 6.
Perseverance and constancy, is required in seeking for saving knowledge. Fol.
141 Doct. 7. A godly man seeks after knowledge willingly and chearefully. Fol.
144 Doct. 8. Gods children labor for an increase of knowledge daily in them.
Fol. 146 Doct. 9. Howsoever God does humble his children for a time, he
forsakes them not for ever. Fol. 150
VER. 4.
Doct. 1. GOd does not proceed in judgment before he has offered all means
of mercy. Fol. 160 Doct. 2. Wicked men continue still in sin, notwithstanding
all means to the contrary. Fol. 167 Doct. 3. The Lord takes it hardly that the
means of our good should be contemned. Fol. 170 Doct. 4. No outward
privilege will free a man from punishment, when reformation of heart and life
is wanting. Fol. 174 Doct. 5. Though God does offer the means of salvation
unto all, yet few receive them. Fol. 180 Doct. 6. It is the property of
hypocrites, to mind more the outward part of Gods worship, then the inward.
Fol. 184 Doct. 7. The wicked have sometimes good motions in them, but not
lasting. Fol. 187 Doct. 8. Sincerity of heart, and perseverance in godliness,
a true note of the child of God. Fol. 194
VER. 5.
Doct. 1. TO contemn the means of salvation, is a grievous sin, and never
goes unpunished, Fol. 199 Doct. 2. The Lord is the author of all punishments
for sin. Fol. 204 Doct. 3. Hard heart, the greatest judgment that can be
laid upon man. Fol. 208 Doct. 4. The Word of God is able to pearce the hardest
heart. Fol. 215 Doct. 5. The Word of God in the mouths of his Ministers shall
be accomplished. Fol. 219 Doct. 6. God never strikes with his judgments before
he give warning. Fol. 227
VER. 6.
Doct. 1. GOd esteems not of our outward service, when it it is not performed
in faith and obedience. Fol. 233 Doct. 2. Lawful things must be done
lawfully. Fol. 238 Doct. 3. Property of an hypocrite, to content himself with
the outward parts of Gods worship. Fol. 247 Doct. 4. Wicked men make Religion
a cloak for sin. Fol. 253 Doct. 5. God does prefer the duties of love and
mercy to men before his own worship. Fol. 256
VER. 7.
Doct. 1. THe breaking of our covenant with God, the cause of all judgments.
Fol. 258 Doct. 2. Man by nature unconstant in any holy duty. Fol. 271 Doct. 3.
That which is most excellent in the sight of an hypocrite, is most abominable
in the sight of God. Fol. 272
VER. 8.
Doct. 1. THose that have the greatest means of knowledge, should abound most
in holy duties. Fol. 278 Doct. 2. Those places that have had most means, shall
be most severely punished for the neglect thereof. Fol. 280 Doct. 3. For no
worldly respect must men be drawn to pervert justice. Fol. 285
VER. 9
Doct. 1. MInisters that teach not at all, or else teach erroneous doctrine, no
better then thieves and murderers. Fol. 289 Doct. 2. Nature of the wicked to
devise all the mischief they can against the godly. Fol. 292 Doct. 3. Councels
may err, and Magistrates and Ministers in matters of Faith and Manners. Fol.
294
VER. 10.
Doct. 1. AS the Minister is, so is the people. Fol. 299 Doct. 2, Ignorance
will excuse none, if they live in sin. Fol. 304 Doct. 3. It is a heavy
judgment of God upon a people, when the chief governors be Idolaters. Fol.
308
VER. 11.
Doct. 1. MEn by nature are apt to suck in Popery and superstition. Fol. 312
Doct. 2. Sin is very fruitful. Fol. 316
The End of the Table.
The Contents
COme, let us return to the Lord: for he has spoiled, and he will heal us:
he has wounded us, and he will bind us up.

2 After two days he will revive us, and the third day he will rayfe us up,
and we shall live in his sight.

3 Then shall we have knowledge, and endeavor our selves to know the Lord:
his going forth is prepared as the morning, and he shall come unto us as the
rain, and as the latter rain unto the earth.

4 O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat thee? for
your goodness is as the morning cloud, and as the Morning Dew it goes away.

5 Therefore have I cut down by the Prophets, I have slain them by the words of
my mouth, and thy judgments were as the light that goes forth.

6 For I desire mercy and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more then
burnt offerings.

7 But they like men have transgressed the Covenant, there have they trespassed
against me.

8 Gilead is a City of them that work iniquity, and is polluted with blood.

9 And as thieves wait for a man, so the company of Priests murder in the way
by consent: for they work mischief.

10 I have seen villainy in the house of Israel: there is the whoredom of
Ephraim: Israel is defiled.

11 Yea Judah has set a plant for thee, whiles I would return the Captivity
of my people.

AN EXPOSITION upon the sixth Chapter of the Prophecy of HOSEA.
HOSEA. 6. VER. 1. 1. Come let us return to the Lord: for he has spoiled,
and he will heal us: he has wounded us, and he will bind us up.
THe Lord our God, Exodus 34.6. Ier. 31.20.
as he is gracious and merciful, flow to anger, and abundant in goodness and
truth, and therefore not easily drawn to punish, and to take vengeance upon
hard hearted and impenitent sinners: So, when he punishes, and afflicts any
man or woman, as a most gracious God and loving Father, he aims at their good,
and seeks the salvation of their souls; that being tamed, and truly humbled
for their sins, they might turn unto him by true and unfeigned repentance,
that so he might have mercy upon them, in pardoning their sins, and saving
their souls: And as this is manifest in the whole book of God; so it is very
apparent out of this place: when as the Lord had threatened the people of the
Jews with present destruction, by and by he begins to exhort them to true
repentance, showing this to be the only way, both to avoid the anger of God,
and to save their own souls.

This 6. Chapter contains two general and principal parts. Parts of the
Chapter.
In the first is set down, the godly practices of true repentance, and the
fruits thereof, in the person of the believing Jews, from the first verse to
the end of the third; the which we must carefully embrace and follow. In the
second is set down, the counterfeit repentance of Hypocrites, from the fourth
verse to the end of the Chapter, which was neither sound nor sincere, nor yet
durable and lasting; whereof we must take heed, and labor to avoid all
hypocrisy in the service of God, who, as he is a spirit; so he loves truth
in the inward affections, And will be served in spirit and truth.

Psalm. 51.6.
The three first verses, contain a most holy and christian persuasion of the
believing Jews, Text divided.
to turn unto the Lord from all their sins, especially from that vile and
horrible sin of Idolatry. And in the same we are to consider three things.

Come let us return, etc.

He has spoiled, he has wounded. The other, drawn from the mercy of God in
these words; He will heal us, he will bind us up. And because this argument
taken from the mercy of God, is a reason of all reasons, and such an argument
as Paul makes choice of above all others, saying; I beseech you brethren by the
mercies of God, that ye give up your bodies, Romans 12.5.
etc. As if he should say; If the manifold mercies of God, both for soul and
body; if the bloodshed of Jesus Christ will not move a man to turn unto God,
he is in a woeful case. I say, because this argument is of special force to
move hard-hearted sinners to turn unto God. The people of God in this place
urge it further, and amplify this argument by two other circumstances. First,
The shortness of the time, After two days he will revive us, and the third day
he will raise us up, If we draw near unto him by true and unfeigned
repentance. The other circumstance is taken from the greatness of Gods mercy,
He will revive us, He will raise us up: answerable to the two former words:
He has spoiled us, he has wounded us: So here the mercy of God exceedes his
justice: for it is not said, that he had kilde us, or cast us away, but only
spoiled us, and wounded us with a blow, or stripe, or twain: But his mercy is
above all his works: for though he had utterly killed us, yet he will revive
us; Nay, he will raise us up, though we had layne not four days, but four
hundred days in the grave of sin; yet his merciful right hand can and will
raise us up again.

The third special thing in these verses, is the fruits We shall live in his
sight; that is, in his favor, and in the light of his countenance: Nay, we
that are truly converted, shall live and behave our selves as ever in Gods
presence, and before his blessed face.

The second fruit of our true Conversion and sincere Repentance is, Ioh. 17.3.
That we shall have knowledge. The Lord will in mercy pour into our hearts,
the true saving knowledge of himself, even the knowledge of the whole Trinity,
Father, Son, and holy Ghost: Nay, we shall not only have this heavenly
knowledge poured into our hearts by the Spirit of Jesus Christ; but as a man
in a dropsy, the more he drinks, the more he thirsts, and desires drink: so
We shall endeavor our selves to know the Lord: That is, we shall hunger and
thirst after this heavenly knowledge, as the food of our souls, and never to
be glutted with it, but labor to abound more and more in it.

The third fruit of our Conversion, is in the third verse; That as we do by
true and unfeigned repentance draw near unto our God: So will he be most ready
to help and to comfort us. The Lords coming forth, is prepared as the
morning: True it is, that the sense and feeling of Gods mercy, is oftentimes
extinguished in the hearts of his children, as the comfortable light and beams
of the Sun under a thick cloud, or when it is gone under the earth: So, as
oftentimes we think that God forgets us, and hides himself from us: But his
coming to help us is Prepared, and therefore most certain: and he shall come
as the Morning, most comfortably unto us. Even as the bright beams and clear
countenance and face of the Sun, after a windy, tempestuous, stormy, and
boisterous night, is very comfortable: So the bright beams of Gods mercies,
breaking forth, and shining upon our hearts after a dark and cloudy night of
affliction, it is most comfortable to glad and rejoice the distressed Soul of
a poor sinner.

Nay, in the second similitude he shows, that the coming of the Lord, shall
be not only joyful and very comfortable, but most effectual to a wounded
Soul that lies languishing under the heat of Gods wrath; that as help long
looked for, and in time of greatest danger, is of al other most welcome: so,
when the Lord shall come with help and deliverance, after great danger, and
long expected, this is most set by, and most esteemed: And therefore the
Prophet says; The Lord will come as the rain, even as the latter rain unto
the earth. Now, as moderate rain is welcome at all times, so especially in the
heat of summer, after a great and a long drought, when the earth is scorched
with the heat of the Sun, and begins to capper and gape for want of
moisture: so then a gracious rain, a sweet shower is most welcome; then it
does most good, not only to cherish the thirsty and scorched earth, but also
to ripen the fruits of the field, and to bring them to perfection: Even so,
when a poor Soul does pant and breath under the burden of his sins, and is
scorched with the burning heat of affliction: then if the Lord in mercy send
a gracious storm and comfortable rain into our thirsty souls, and send a
heavenly shower of his blessed mercy; Nay, if he distill but one little drop
of his mercy in the burning heat of affliction, this is most welcome, this is
most comfortable to assuage, and to comfort the heat of a sinner, scorched and
tormented for fear of the burning anger and wrath of God against sin.

Thus much briefly for the unfolding of the words, and the meaning of them in
general.
IN the former Chapter, the Lord told them, Coher:
that he would bring great and grievous Judgments upon them, until such time
as they would turn and seek him, confessing their sins and amending their
evil lives: And in the last verse of the former Chapter, the Lord says, In
their afflictions they will seek me diligently. Showing that there is nothing
better to turn the pride of man's heart, then afflictions: So Manasses a wicked
Idolatrous King, 2. Cro. 33.12
yet in his afflictions he sought the Lord, and prayed unto the Lord his God,
whom he dishonored before. Psalm. 1 19. Lam. 3 27. Luke 9.23.
And David confesses, that it was very good for him that he was afflicted, for
before he was careless of the service of God. Yea, the Prophet Jeremy says,
that a man can never begin too soon to suffer the cross: It is good that a
man bear the yoke of afflictions from his youth. And our Savior himself
says, That we must take up the cross daily; and in very deed nothing is
better for young or old, man or woman, then affliction: if God sanctify the
same unto us, and give us the true use of them, they will make a man search his
heart, and call his former life to account, they will humble us, and make us
see our weakness, they will compel us to run to God by most earnest and hearty
prayer, to deny our selves, to put our whole trust, confidence, and affiance in
the mercy of God in Jesus Christ. Now the Lord had no sooner spoke the word,
that in their afflictions they would seek him, but here we see it is effected,
Come (say they,) let us return unto the Lord, etc.

Afflictions are of excellent use to turn us to God.
So that the first point of Doctrine we observe from the text, is this, That
afflictions are of excellent use to turn us to God; the Church of God in
general, and the servants of God in particular, when they cannot profitably
use prosperity, and bear themselves thankefully in the days of peace, do
learn in adversity to turn unto God, and are thereby brought home again; and
this comes to pass not by means of the cross, for in it self it is a curse,
but in that the Lord does sanctify the same unto his, it comes to pass that
the state of affliction is a safer estate, Judge. 14.14. Rom 5.3. 2 Cor. 4.13.
Heb. 12.11.
then the estate of prosperity. It is true, that as the Philistims could not
understand Sampsons riddle, how sweet came out of sower, and meat out of the
eater, so cannot worldlings understand, that tribulation brings out patience,
and that our light and momentany afflictions cause unto us a far more excellent
and eternal weight of glory. But the Children of God, they find it true by
experience, that albeit no visitation be sweet for the present, yet
afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them who are
thereby exercised, Esaias 26.16. Psalm. 107. Luke. 15.18.
and that there is more solid joy in suffering rebuke with Christ, then in all
the pleasures of sin which are but for a season. Genesis 21.16.
This the Prophet sets down in the song of the faithful, Lord in trouble
have they visited thee, they powered out a prayer when thy chastising was upon
them: yea, the people of God the Israelits in the time of their afflictions
were humbled and sought the Lord, Jonas 1.5. Lam. 3.27. Psalm. 119.71, Io. 15.2.
who in time of prosperity forgot him, and the mighty works that he had done
for them, They wandered in the desert and found no City to dwell in; Then they
cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their
distress. The Prodigal son never intended to return home again to his
Father, until a famine had met with him, and he was pinched with want, then he
resolved with himself, to acknowledge his fault, and to entreat for pardon.
Hagar was proud in the house of Abraham and despised her Mistress, but in the
wilderness humbled by want. Jonas sleeps in the ship, but in the belly of
the Whale watches and prays. It is good therefore (says Jeremy) for a man
to bear the yoke in his youth, and David acknowledges it was good for him
that he was afflicted, yea our Savior says, Every branch that bears fruit,
my heavenly father purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit. All these
testimonies and examples of the servants of God, as evident and direct consents
of the Scripture, do teach us that afflictions are of special and singular use
to turn us to God. Amos 3.6.
And this comes to pass, by reason they are the works of Gods hand, there is
no evil in the City which the Lord has not done. He has his Quiver full of
arrows to strike us, and to punish us, the Sword, Famine, Plague, Pestilence,
yea, he has all Creatures at a beck, and at a call, to humble the rebellious
heart of man, and to this end we may pray to the Lord, that so he do still
remember the promise made to the Sons of David, I will visit them with rods
if they sin against me, 2. Sa. 7.14.15
but my mercy will I never take from them; that rather then that we should be
frozen in the dreggs of our own natural corruptions, and spend our days in a
careless security without the fear of his holy name, that God would chang our
estates, and awaken us with the touch of his own hand, purge us with fire, and
chasten us with his rods.

Esaias 5.4. Job 33.16. Romans 11.13.
but when that will not serve, but that his patience and long suffering is
abused, and his word contemned, the Lord has sundry judgments in store, which
being sent from God, are powerful to turn our hearts, and to make a way for
Repentance. Oh the deepenesse of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge
of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out.
Let us then here acknowledge the greatness both of the mercy and power of God,
in working out the salvation of mankind so wonderfully, and that by so many
means, bringing light out of darkness, and good out of evil.

Seeing that afflictions are of such excellent use to then enjoying health,
peace, prosperity, strength of body, etc. they should abuse the same to the
great dishonor of God, and the ruin of their own souls.

Lam. 3.39.
or no? This duty is urged by Jeremy. Wherefore is the living man sorrowful?
Man suffers for his sins: Let us search and try our ways, and turn unto
the Lord. For surely, this is the mark that God does aim at, not by
affliction to destroy us, or to confound us for ever; but to make us to call
our own hearts to account, to see our sins, and to bring us home to himself.

Eccle. 9.2.
either by prosperity or adversity: for, as Solomon says; All things come
alike to all, and the same condition is to the just and to the wicked. And as
the Apostle says; Romans 14.17.
The Kingdom of God stands not in meat and drink, etc. So that if we desire
some evidences of Gods favor and love toward us, we must not seek for it in
our outward peace and tranquillity of body and mind here, or in continual
adversity, both which are common to the just and unjust, to the good and bad:
only try them by the effects of affliction: for in the godly they bring forth
the quiet fruit of repentance, whereas they make the wicked but the more
obdurate and hardened in their sins: the godly in their sufferings communicate
with the Cross of Christ, Psalm. 126.6.
whereas the wicked in their sufferings communicate with the curse of sinners;
and take this for a rule that never fails, That the Cross (if care be had
to profit thereby) never departs, but it leaves a blessing behind.

Come let us return, Here we may see, what is the counsel that they give one
to another in affliction, namely, to make speed to turn unto God, whose wrath
and heavy displeasure they had provoked against them by their sins, and whose
judgments were already gone out against them: they were assured, that there
was no other way or means to pacify the wrath of God, Luke 13.5.
but only to break off their sins by repentance: and therefore they call
one unto another, Come let us turn, etc.

Here we are taught this lesson for our instruction, What counsel it is that
we must give to others in adversity.
stirring up one another in the time of affliction, to return again unto God
by repentance, from whom they had departed by their sins: What is the counsel
that we must give one to another in affliction; namely, to exhort men to turn
unto God, to confess their sins, to be grieved for them, Dan. 4.24.
and to beg the pardon of them. This is the counsel that Daniel gave to
Nabuchadnezar; namely, to break off his sins by repentance: Wherefore, O
King, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by
righteousness: and thine iniquities by mercy toward the poor, etc. Again,
the Prophet Jeremy observes the same: Lam. 3.39.
Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? Man suffers for his sin; Oh let us
search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord. And surely, this is the best
counsel that any Christian man or woman can give to another in affliction,
namely, to break off their sins by unfeigned repentance, and turning unto the
Lord: This is the right way to stop the breach of Gods wrath, and to call in
his judgments. Many men have sought other means and ways to prevent the
Lords judgments; but (alas) as the cause of all judgments are our sins; Our
sins turn many good things from us, And a fruitful land makes he barren
for the wickedness of them that dwell therein: So unless they be taken away by
true and unfeigned repentance, we do but weary our selves in vain: for we
must first remove the cause of Gods judgments, our sins; else the hand of
God cannot be removed. We see in a lack, so long as the weight hangs upon
the cord, it moves the wheels; but take off the lead, and it will cease. Our
sins be as a mighty Millstone, to pluck down Gods fearful judgments upon
us: now remove our sins, then Gods anger shall cease: but let us know, till
we cease from sinning, Leuit. ^6. Hos. 4.1.2.
the Lord cannot cease from smiting: Nay, if we walk stubbornely against him,
and will not turn, he will even whet his sword, and never cease smiting, till
he make an end of us. Yea, the Prophets, and holy men of God, in such times
when we lie open to Gods wrath, have called us to repentance, stirred us up to
prayer, moved us to humiliation, and acknowledgement of our sins, which have
deserved such chasticements. What is the reason that the Lord sends such
barrenness upon the earth, unseasonable weather, immoderate rain: surely, our
sins, our ignorance, contempt of the Word, our abuse of the Sacraments; yea,
our abuse of plenty in drunkenness, whoredom, swearing, etc. Now, what is the
way to have plenty and abundance? how may we remove the anger of God, and his
judgments, either already upon, or else eminent over our heads? Surely, remove
the cause of Gods judgments; namely, sin; else the hand of God cannot be
removed. And therefore let us all practice this counsel, and wisely consider
what the Lord has against us, and wherefore he is angry with us; that so we
may be reconciled unto him, and brought into his favor again.

This Doctrine, Ionasses in the ship of their own souls, that have moved the
Lord to send those storms of afflictions; Oh, this they never think upon. And
as they themselves fail in the maine point of all, that is, to try their own
hearts, to look into their ways, and to turn unto the Lord by unfeigned
sorrow: So deal they with others: for what is the counsel else they give unto
others in time of sickness, but this; Be of good cheer, Eat warm meats, Use
good physic, etc. Oh! this is not the counsel we should give; but to say
with the godly here; Come, return to the Lord; Repent of thy sins, beg the
pardon of them at Gods hands: This is the counsel we must give to the
afflicted, and not to seek help from men, before we have sought forgiveness
of sins of God.

Come let us return unto the Lord. Here we may see the fruit of true
conversion, they seek not every man his own good, but the good of their
brethren, and therefore use godly motions and christian perswasio^s one to
another, to return unto God.

It is the duty of every christian to labor to draw others to god.
that it is not enough for a man to go to heaven himself; but it is the duty
of every Christian to labor to draw others with them, as these holy Servants
of God say here, Come let us return, these be their godly persuasions one to
another, they labor to go hand in hand in their repentance, and as we say to
men and women, Come will ye go to the Market, fair, etc. So in Religion we
must call one upon another, to draw men to God: and as one wicked man seeks
to make another like himself; so he that is truly converted, will not rest
in that inward comfort of his own conversion, but will labor by all means to
convert others unto GOD, and labor to make them partakers of the same comfort
which they themselves have received from God. This thing is very apparent in
the conversion of the godly; when Andrew was brought to Christ, he found his
brother Simon, Io. 1.41.43.45.
and said unto him; We have found that Messiah that is Christ. So when Christ
called Phillip and said unto him, Follow me: Io. 4 28.
Phillip found Nathaniel and said unto him, We have found him of whom Moses
did write in the Law and in the Prophets; Jesus the son of Joseph that was of
Nazareth. The like appears in the woman of Samaria, when Christ had reueiled
himself unto her, and offered her to drink of the water of life, after which
she should never thirst agane, she ran into the City and said, Come see a man
which has told me all things that ever I did, is not he that Christ? being
moved her self, she labors to move others. And this does the Prophet David
promise unto the Lord, that if he would restore him once more unto the joy of
his salvation, that then he would become a Preacher, Ps. 51.12.13. Ps. 66.16.
Ps. 116. Gal. 3, 2. Cor. 1.4. Esaias 38.19. Luke 22.23.
and Proclaimer of the same mercy unto others. And surely this is a special
fruit of faith and true repentance, to labor by all means possible, to convey
grace unto others, and to show them what God has done for our souls, and to
draw out the blessings which God has bestowed upon our selves, to the good and
benefit of others. The Prophet David does labor herein: Come (says he) and I
will show you what God has done for my soul: And the Elect are called vessels
of mercy, because they being themselves filled with the mercies of God, should
draw out the same as good liquor, for the use and comfort of others. Saint Paul
says, God had mercy on him, that he might show mercy unto others. The child of
God is not like unto Nabol, All for himself: but he is taught of God, to love
his brother. And thus we see how we ought to behave our selves, in respect of
Gods gifts: we must not hide them in the ground, or in a napkin; but we must
employ the same to the good of others.

This may serve to reprove that common conceit they sink or swim, whether
they go forward, or backward, grow upward, or downward, to God, or the
Devil: but it is impossible for any Christian man or woman, who has truly
tasted of the work of grace in his own heart, but he must communicate the
same to the good of others. Indeed, most men little regard this, they cannot
be persuaded that they be bound to save the souls of their brethren, and
therefore they say, every man for himself, and God for us all: but the truth
is, that when every man seeks himself, the Devil gets all. To save souls, to
draw men to Christ: Oh, we think this is the Ministers duty, it belongs to
him alone, it belongs not to us. True it is, that it belongs especial to the
Minister to labor to save men's souls; and therefore they are especially bound
to labor by continual teaching and preaching of the word of God; as also by
their godly life, to draw men to God, to exhort them, to call upon them to
turn unto the Lord: and if they be negligent and careless, the flock of
Christ must needs go to ruin: yet many there are that feed themselves to the
full, but regard not to feed the flock, over which the holy Ghost has made
them Overseers. These are they that live of the Altar, but care not to minister
at the Altar: They will be sure to reap carnal things, but they have no
conscience to sow spiritual things. The Apostle could say, I seek not yours,
but you. But these men, if they would speak the truth, might say, We seek
not you, 1. Cor. 9.16.
but yours. Paul cries out: Woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel. Oh! woe,
and ten thousand woes unto thee that art a careless shepherd; who, though
thou have taken upon thee the Cure and Charge of Souls, yet by thy
carelessness in thy place and calling, and by thy evil example, art a
stumbling block unto others, that wilt not turn to God thy self, nor help
them forward that would.

Well, as it is the duty of the Minister; especially, in public: so it is the
duty of every Christian man in private, to bring others to God. Art thou an
husband, thou have the charge of the soul of thy wife: art thou a father, thou
shall answer for the soul of thy child: art thou a master, well, look to
draw thy servants unto God. The charge of souls is committed to you. Our
Savior Christ says to his Father; Heb. 2.13.
Behold Father, here am I, and the children which thou have given me, Oh,
what a comfort is it to a christian soul, to a godly man, or a christian
woman, when they can say, O Lord, here am I, and here be my wife, my
children, and my servants, which thou have given me. You are careful to
provide for your wives, meat, drink, and apparel; and for your children,
lands, and livings; and have you not care of their poor souls, but let them
perish for want of instruction?

But such is the negligence and grievous carelesnes of Masters and Parents in
this miserable and cursed age of the world, that it were better to be some
men's sheep then their sons, and their horses then their servants; for no man
is so careless, but he will pity his horse, and look to his sheep: but as
for their sons or servants, they may sink or swim, they care not for them:
Well, thy wife may perish in her sins, thy son may perish in his ignorance,
and thy servant for want of thy instruction; but the Lord will require their
blood at thy hands. Nay, we may see in this present example, that it is not
only the duty of the Minister, and those which be Masters and Parents, to
seek to draw those that are under them to God; but the same is the duty of
every Christian man and woman; it is that which belongs unto all men, to call
on others to draw them to God: Nay, if thou do not labor to draw him to
repentance, Leuit. 19.17.
thou do but hate him in thy heart: Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy
heart, but shall rebuke him, and suffer him not to sin. In every commandment
is two parts, Negative and Affirmative: Now, in the sixth Commandment we be
forbidden to kill; and therefore every one, not only the Minister, as most men
erroneously think, are bound to save men's lives; but every one of us, be we
what we may be, are bound by this Commandment to save the soul of our
brother, Exodus 24.3.
to dtaw him to God. If thou see thine enemies ox or sheep go astray, thou
must bring him home, Oh how much more, if thou see the poor soul of thy
brother, of thy wife, or of thy child, straying from God; nay, going the broad
way to eternal destruction: how much more art thou bound to bring him back
again to God: If thou see his horse lie under his burden, thou art bound in
conscience to help him up: Had God such care over Oxen and Asses, and will thou have no care of the Soul of thy brother?

Esaias 55.1.
Oh, come, let us go to the Lords Market to buy the food of our soul: Labor
to bring thy Family, thy Wife and Children to the house of God, to the word of
God, to the food of their souls: Oh, thou shall do a blessed work, Iam. 5.20.
thou shall convert a sinner to God, save a soul from death, and cover a
multitude of sins. Oh, what a comfort will this be unto those, who have
been careful for the performance of this duty, that have been careful to
make others partakers of the same comforts they have reaped themselves. It is a
blessed thing indeed, when men have endeavored to their power to benefit
others, to exhort them, to admonish them, and to comfort them, and in all
things to have sought their good. Oh, what a wonderful consolation and comfort
shall this be unto us, when we leave this world, and go the way of all
flesh, to remember we have fought the good of others: Dan. 12.3. Luke 12.43.
They that turn many unto righteousness shall shine as the stars in the
firmament. And blessed is that servant, when his Master comes, shall find so
doing. We shall then find more comfort of heart, and joy of conscience when
we depart this life, that we have been faithful in that little committed to
our trust, and made others partakers of the same, then if we had had great
abundance of earthly blessings.

Come let us return to the Lord. Here we see, that they A man by sinning,
turns from God.
by Idolatry and damnable hypocrisy: and here they labor by their godly
counsel, to exhort one another to turn again unto God by repentance. So then
here we see, what it is that turns a man from God; surely, sin is that
which turns and auerts a man's soul from God, according to that of the Prophet
Esaias: Esaias 59.2.
Your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have
hid his face from you. True it is, that Idolatry is that, which principally
turns a man from God; only, the difference it this, that Idolatry turns a
man from the whole service of God: but other sins, as theft, whoredom, etc. in
some one commandment. The spirit of God speaking of the whole race and
generation of mankind, says, That all are gone out of the way: Psalm. 14.3.
Romans 3.10.
And again, in the Prophet Esaias: All we like sheep are gone astray. There is
no creature more apt to wander, then sheep, and being strayed, Esaias 53.6.
none more unapt to turn into the way again: Esaias. 1.3.
We (says the Prophet) like sheep are gone astray, Esaias. 53.8.
to show our simplicity, and how impossible a thing it is of our selves, as of
our selves to return home again: Romans 3.16.
yea, the Prophet adds further, We have turned every one to his own way:
Yea, we walk the paths that our own sinful affections have chosen to our
selves, and the way of truth we have no desire to know. And howsoever many can
make blind excuses for their own evil life: surely, the beginning of all
evil is this, to turn away from God. It was the case of the Prodigal Son,
and in him of all sinners, that when he had received his patrimony, Luke 15.
He took his journey into a far Country: far away, and yet he thought
not himself far enough from his Father: but who willed him to depart, was
he put out of his Fathers house? Surely, no; but he himself of his own accord
would needs be gone. Even so, does a sinner make a voluntary separation
betwixt God and his soul. God does never forsake till he be forsaken. Now a
sinner is said to depart from God in two respects: First, by an opposite and
far different disposition, Gods volo being man's nolo, Gods will being man's
nill: by omitting that which he should commit, and by committing that which
he should omit: As when we see two sitting and talking together, and the one
varieth from the other in opinion, we say, the one is far from the other: and
in the same respect, is a sinner said to go far from God. Secondly, a sinner
is said to go far from God, in regard of the greatness, or the multitude of
his sins that he does commit, which the more they are, the farther they lead
a sinner: for every sin being a departure from God, a sinner may rightly be
said to depart lesser or farther, according to the number and quality of the
sins they commit: Some, being the sins of infirmity, some of ignorance, some
of malice, and some of presumption; but He that has eyes like a flame of
fire, Reu. 2.18.
does still behold them; and although Adam do go about to hide himself
amongst the thickets of the garden, from the presence of God: yet was he still
in Gods presence, neither could he escape: Many think they cannot run far
enough from God, Psalm. 1 39.
of whom the Prophet speaks: Whither shall we fly from Gods presence: shall
we fly into heaven? It is no part of our thought; shall we fly into the
utmost part of the earth? the whole world is under Gods government: shall we
take a voyage by Sea? it may be, God will send us farther then we are minded
to fly: for little did Jonas think, by flying from God, that God would vex
him with all his storms: But if we will not venture so far, but only fly
into the darkness, we must know, that with God The darkness and light are
both alike. There is no distance of place betwixt God and a sinner: but alas,
the cause of all is this, we know not the mischief that will follow by our
departure from God: how many sighs and groans, even of our dearest hearts it
will cost us, ere we can get into favor again. This did David find by
woeful experience, that having left the Lord, and made a departure from his God
by walking in the broad paths of ungodliness, Psalm. 51.1.2. Psalm 6.
adultery and murder; did not the Lord bring him back again by the weeping
Cross, that he lay a long time wala-daying his grief of heart, ere he could
be persuaded that God would receive him again into favor? Genesis 16.
What found Hagar out of Abraham's house, but want and sorrow? What found the
Prodigal child, Luke 15.
being departed from his father, but want and poverty. When Cain went away from
God, there was no more account made of him then of a vagabond and odious
person, Behold, says Cain to God, Genesis 4.14.
thou have cast me out this day from the earth, and from thy face shall I be
hid, and shall be a vagabond and a runnagate upon the face of the earth, and
whosoever finds me, shall slay me. This is the danger and fearful estate
of them, which committing sin, depart from God. Oh that we were wise, then
would we consider our latter end. Deuteronomy. 32.


Reason of the Doctrine.
Now let us see the reason of the Doctrine, that so it may work the deeper
impression in every one of our souls. We have heard, that sin is a departure
from God, and that a sinner having left the ways of life, finds no comfort nor
peace, till with the prodigal son, they return to God again. The reason is,
nothing can satisfy the soul of man, but God himself: as a pottle or a gallon
cannot be filled with the measure of a pint: so are the pleasures of sin,
but as a grain of musterseed in the belly of an Elephant: The desires of the
soul remain infinite, and must have an infinite God to satisfy them; whereas
the profits and pleasures of this world have their bounds: so that there is no
other remedy for us in this life, but to remove our minds from the desire of
these earthly things, and to transport the same unto God, that there they may
rest content, and be satisfied: for the grace of God, and the heavenly gifts of
his spirit, they are the only comforts unto the soul, because his presence
and goodness is most agreeable thereto, being created after the likeness of
God: as for all other things, they are but death and famishment, as stones and
gravel are to the body.

Hence then, let all men learn to be warned betimes: In whose presence is the
fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there is pleasure for evermore. And
now thou art traveling with the Prodigal son into a far Country, wandering
from God to serve sin and Satan. Well, know (O man) that if thou will needs
go, that thou do now run upon manifest hazard and danger: for, who can
tell whether in this thy disordered course thou shall come to mischief, or to
some miserable end, or whether thou shall have that mercy granted thee, to call
thy self to better remembrance. Oh, go not then after thy concupiscence, nor
follow not the inticement of thy lust; let reason and judgment take place.
Pray with the Prophet, O Lord, Psalm. 17.
lighten my darkness, that I sleep not in death. The Jews having their
choice, desired rather Barrabas to be delivered unto them, then Christ the
Savior of their souls. O follow not the example of so bad Merchants to make a
worse choice then they; for, if thou yeeldest thy self to sin, and wandrest
from God, refusing Christ Jesus, the salvation of thy own soul, and go a
whoring after sin and Satan: hereby, thou show thy self far worse then
ever the Jews were in their choyee: And albeit thou go not from God, all on
a sudden; yet thy departure will steal upon thee by degrees, as a man goes
far, step by step. First, there may creep upon thee a dislike of goodness
of preaching, prayer, etc. Then to the loathing of it, and so by little and
little to be drawn away from godliness. And thou, which sometimes wast an
earnest professor, shall grow key cold in Religion. And so, for the committing
of some evil, if the Devil can but spy the casements of thy soul to be
open, thy eyes, thy ears, etc. he will then easily wind himself into thy
heart: if he can but prevail so far with David, as but to cast his eyes
upon naked Bethshaba, the battle then is half won. Thus did this wily
Serpent deal with our first Parents: First, he presented unto the view of Eve
the forbidden fruit: Secondly, she desired it: Thirdly, she tasted of it:
Fourthly, she gave to her husband, and he did eat. Thus the Devil by degrees
does steal us away from God, from one sin to a second, from a second to a
third, and from a third to a fourth, as by so many steps, until at last, he
has even plunged us into the gulf of perdition. Oh that men would consider
this betimes, when they commit sin, lying, swearing, stealing, whoredom,
drunkenness, etc. By this sin, I turn my self from God, I run from God,
and serve the Devil: The Lord stands on the right hand, the Devil on the
left; the Devil he calls me by pleasures, profits and preferments. If I
listen to Satan, I shall turn away from God, Oh, if men had this
consideration in their hearts, what a bridle would it be unto them, to keep
them from many sins.

fearful expectation of judgment: Follow the counsel of the Prophet
Jeremy, O search, and try thy ways, and turn unto the Lord: Lam. 3.39.
Endeavor by all means possible to return to God again, from whom thou have
departed; the which thou shall the better perform, if thou have respect to
that way, the footsteps whereof thou have left behind thee, and which are
abominable unto the Lord, and by which thou wentest from God. Follow the advice
of the blessed Apostle, Cast off lying, and speak every man truth unto his
neighbor. Ephesians. 4.
He that has stolen, let him steal no more, but rather labor, and work with
his hands, that he may give to him that needs. If thou have been a proud
man, by which sin thou have made a departure from God, become now humble and
lowly of mind: For God resists the proud; but gives grace unto the humble.
If thou have made a departure from the Lord by drunkenness, return again by
sobriety; the unclean to be chaste, the covetous to be charitable: yea, if we
have made a departure from God by any sin whatsoever, let us draw near unto
him again by a reformed life, holy manners, and godly conversation; that it
may be spoken of us, as Paul speaks of the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.
Ye which were a far off, are made near.

Come, let us return unto the Lord.
These words containing in them the effectual conversion of a sinner to God;
show withal, wherehence it proceeds, namely, from affliction, and from the
knowledge and feeling of our own misery. Let us return (say they) and
therefore it is a token they knew themselves to have gone astray, and that
there was no true comfort to be found in those paths of sin, in which they
walked: and howsoever before they thought well of their estate when they
committed Idolatry, and made conscience of no sin: yet, now (by the mercy of
God) having got to the sight of their sin, they call themselves to
remembrance, they see there is no sound comfort, but only in the favor of
God: this is the matter that they debate amongst themselves, and conclude of
this, To turn again unto the Lord.

The Doctrine then which by the authority of the A right understanding and a
true acknowledgement of our own misery, the first step to Salvation.
that there ought to be in every one that desires eternal life and
salvation, a right understanding, and a true acknowledgement of his own
wandering. And to this end, in the Word of God, the Lord there oftentimes calls
upon men to consider their ways, to call their lives to account, that so they
may attain to the sight of their own sins. Know thy sins, Ier. 3.13. Zeph.
2.1.2:
O Jerusalem: The like speech is used by the Prophet Zephany, Fan your selves,
Oh my people. Yea, the Prophet Jeremy does oftentimes put us in mind of this
duty, Lam. 3.40.
Oh let us search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord. Yea, common
reason does require the same, before a man can frame himself to enter into a
right course, he must thoroughly be resolved and persuaded within himself,
that he has been mistaken in his former course of life; for, why else should
this man alter his former course, if he were not mistaken: Reason it self
will persuade us to this: Yea, what meaned God in those his variety of demands
to our first Parent when he had sinned; but that God labored to bring Adam to
the sight of his sin. Genesis 3.
Where art thou? Who told thee that thou wast naked? Have thou eaten of the
tree? David lay a long time in his sin, 2. Sam. 11.
and never sought unto God for mercy: but being at last awakened by the
reprehension of Nathan; he sought the Lord incontinently; yea, the Lord by the
Prophet does assign this as a reason of all those rebellions of the people of
Israel, even ignorance of their estate; saying, The Ox knows his owner, and
the Ass his Masters cribbe: but Israel has not known: Esaias. 1.3. Luke 15.
Esaias. 46.12. Psalm. 16.12.
my people understand not. The Prodigal son a true pattern for all sinners;
he never seeks to his Father, till at last that He came to himself: which
is a token that he went far astray, and was as it were in a swound of sin;
but being a long while in a trance, at last he revived, and that his
disordered life upon his understanding thereof, he reformed, calling himself
to better remembrance, what kindness he had in his Fathers house, and now what
misery he had brought upon himself by his own wilful disobedience. I might
easily multiply examples of this kind, but these may serve, to show that the
sense and apprehensio^ of our own wandering from God, is the only way and
means to bring us to God: And this was the happy condition of this people
here, who being for a time entangled and ensnared in sin; It pleased the Lord
by affliction to humble them, and to bring them to a true sight of their
wandering; that now they resolve incontinently to turn unto the Lord.

Here we see the maine cause, why there is so little Lam. 3.40.
or do not search themselves, they never call their hearts to account. Now then
going on in security, seeing and fearing no danger; alas, how should they
repent? how should they turn to God? for, if thou could see the misery of
thy soul, and thy woeful estate, by reason of sin, if thou could see the
number and greatness of thy sins; Oh, thou would even tremble for fear:
Oh, let this serve to help us forward in this most needful point, the right
judging of our own estate: let us not be wilfully careless herein: We all
have a hope that it is well with us. Oh let us look to it, that this hope of
ours make us not ashamed: Romans 5.5.
there is no hurt got by the trial of our selves, only security is dangerous:
many thousands are now in hell, that in their life time thought nothing less,
till they came there. Oh then in the fear of God, let us look to it: We are
all travelers in one of these two ways, and we shall most certainly arrive
at one of these two places; who would not now be glad to know in which of
these two he is, that if he be in the evil way, he may spedily come out of
it: if he be in the right way, that he may continue his race with
cheerfulness? Well, this is the truth of this doubt, and I deliver it unto
you as the truth of God, that all which are partakers of life eternal, they
are the heirs of grace and salvation: this is their first step unto it, the
true sight and understanding of their own wandering; that they perceive
themselves that they live that course of life, the issue whereof must needs be
eternal death; and that they now stand and wonder at their own folly and
extreme madness, and withal Gods infinite goodness and patience, and would
not be in that case again for all the world. Well then, mark this doctrine,
do not lightly pass it over, but esteem it as the blessed truth of God: that
the sight of our own wandering, is the first step to eternal light and
salvation. Well then, let me ask thee this question, or rather demand it of
thy own soul: Did thou ever see thy woeful misery, the wretched estate
wherein thou art by reason of sin: what a miserable sinner thou art, out of
the favor of God; yea, indeed in the state of damnation? did thou ever find
thy self to stand in need of Gods mercy, and in extreme want of Christ's blood
to save thy soul: so as thou have even with sighs and tears entreated for
the same at Gods hand, as for life and death? If thou have not found and felt
these things in thee, in some measure, thy case then is dangerous and
fearful; thou did never as yet truly repent, the mercy of God belongs not
unto thee.

feel our selves to stand in extreme need of Gods mercy, and of every drop
of Christ's blood to save our souls: and the contrary is a fearful plague and
judgment of God, for men to lie and snort in sin without remorse of
conscience, without the sense and feeling of sin, or want of mercy. This
David, and the rest of Gods servants knew by woeful experience, that if they
had dyed without repentance, they had perished. Of all diseases, they are most
dangerous that are least felt, as a Lethargy, or dead palsy, or the like: so
it is a most fearful estate for any man to lie in sin without the feeling
of it: for ^^at is a sign that the heart is hardened in sin. A m^^ that
thinks he is well enough, will scorn the Physician: so those poor blind
sinners, that think they are well enough, and feel no want of Gods mercy, of
all men they are most to be pitied, they be in a most dangerous estate and
condition. And therefore we see, that it is a great blessing of God to be told
of our sins, and to be reproved for them; that so, seeing them, and the
danger into which they have plunged our poor souls, we might seek to God
for mercy.

Come let us return unto the Lord. Hitherto we have spoken of their
exhortation and godly counsel one to another. Come let us, etc, Before we
leave the words to come to the reasons of their exhortation. There is one thing
more which I may not omit, and that is the time of their repentance, when they
should make this their return unto God, and that is presently, without any
delay: for the word here used does signify a Tense or Time that is present.

From whence we gather another point of Doctrine; namely, Men must defer no
time, but repent out of hand.
that we must not stand to debate in the motions of the Spirit, but presently
to proceed to execution. Indeed, in worldly business of good deliberation
comes no harm; but it is a point of wisdom to deliberate before a man
determine of any thing: But in spiritual matters it is dangerous; and
therefore says the Prophet, Esaias. 55.6.7.
Seek the Lord while he may be found, Call ye upon him while he is near;
let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations,
and return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon us, and to our God, for
he is very ready to forgive. Psalm. 119.60.
I made haste (says the Prophet David) and I delayed not to keep thy
commandments. And it was a thing commendable in Peter and Andrew, Mat. 4.20.
Luke 19.6. Gal. 6.10.
that when Christ called them, they left their Nets straightway, and followed
him (...) And when Christ called Zacheus, he came down hastily from the
Fig Tree, and received Christ joyfully. While ye have time (says the
Apostle) let us do good unto all men, Heb. 3.7. Eccl. 5, 7. Act. 8.36. and
10.33.
but specially unto them that are of the household of faith. And again, To day
if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Now, as this Christian
duty is to be observed in the performance of any holy duty: so especially in
the work of repentance, we must never debate the matter with flesh and blood;
for then we shall never proceed to execution: but whenever God shall work
in any of us a godly purpose to forsake our sins, of all things in the world,
we must now take heed of delays; for such is the policy of Satan, and such
is the deceitfulness of our own hearts, that they will cause us to neglect
it. And this ought so much the more to hasten our return unto the Lord,
because many are dead and gone, which in their life time purposed to return
unto God, and to break off their sins, which were prevented by death, and
never performed the same. Yea, although thou did know that thou should
live long, yet ought thou to repent soon: for then is thy repentance most
acceptable to God, when thou do offer it in the prime of thy youth, and in
the flower of thy age. In the sacrifices of the Lord, Deu. 15.21. Mal. 1. Pro.
1. Mat. 25.11.
they were commanded to offer a Male of a year old, withou spot and blemish,
and they that offered the blind and the lame, were reproved. How then should
the Lord accept of thy crooked sacrifice of old age, which is as lame and
blind before God, and the Lord does seldom accept of it? Nay, it is rather
most just with God, that at the last he should reject us and our prayers, who
have before contemned him in the strength of our years, when that God did cry
and call unto us. Oh what yelling and crying will there be at the last, Lord,
Lord, open unto us. When that heavy Depart from me ye cursed, I know you not,
shall be their portion. Oh that men were wise, then would they consider their
latter end. Let us look unto the practice of men in temporal affairs, and
learn to be wise. What makes the husbandman to break his sleep, to rise up
so early, and to be so diligent in plowing, digging, and sowing? Ask him,
and he will tell thee, the season requires it, and the time lost, cannot be
redeemed: And shall we think that we have repentance at command? no, no,
thou may seek it at last, even with tears, Heb. 12.17.
as Esau did, and yet go without it, if thou omittest the season and time,
when God does now offer the same unto thee. Let this that has bin spoken,
serve for the confirmation of the everlasting truth of this Doctrine; that men
must defer no time to repent, and to turn unto the Lord. Now let us see some
reasons that may enforce the same.

The first reason showing the necessity of timely repentance, Reasons to show
the necessity of timely repentance.
may be taken from the great uncertainty of man's life, if he omit the present
occasion when it is offered: for God does call home from his work, some in the
morning, some at noone, and some at night: For, as his Laborers enter into his
Vineyard; so they go out, that is, in such manner, and at such hours; Mat.
20.1.2.etc.
some dye in the dawning of their life, passing (as it were) from one grave to
another; some dye in their youth, as in the third hour; some at middle age,
and some stay until the evening of man's years, that is, old age; yet more
before ten, then after threescore. Luke 12.20. Genesis 6.
That rich man in the Gospel that promised unto himself many years to come,
had in a moment of time, his soul taken from him. The old world never thought
themselves more freer, or surer from vengeance, then when they were eating and
drinking, Luke 17.27.
marrying wives, etc. But then did the judgments of God overtake them: The
morning was fair when Lot went out of Sodom, Genesis 19.23.
and yet, before night lay Sodom in ashes. Herod was well when he began his
Oration to the people; but by and by after, Act. 12.23. 1. These. 5.3.
the Angel of the Lord stroke him, that he was eaten up of worms, and so gave
up the Ghost. What then is our life, and how vain and false is our hope of
long life? Shall any say with Agag, Surely, the bitterness of death is past,
1. Sam. 15.32
because we dye not so soon as others; when we hear a solemn knell, we
say, some body is departed: and why should we not think, that the feet of them
who carried out that body, is at the door to carry us out also? Act. 5.9.
so that, if we defer our repentance but one day, yea, but one hour, we
have no warrant to assure us that we can repent the next, but that the Lord
may prevent us by death, and so we perish.

Secondly, if we slip the opportunity of well doing, when God does offer the
same unto us, we shall be more unapt and unfit afterward; whilst the wax is
pliable, it is the fittest time to set on the seal, whereas if it cool
again, it will then hardly receive any impression: Even so, if our hearts ever
begin to soften and to yield, if we now resist the spirit of God, and the
work of grace, we shall hardly have the like opportunity again, as at the
first. And therefore that which Solomon exhorts in the case of vows, is to
be practiced of all holy purposes and good desires. Eccl. 5.3.
We must not defer, nor be flacke to perform them. And this has been
carefully practiced of the godly; Psalm. 119.60.
David says of himself, I have considered my ways, and turned my feet into
thy testimonies: I made has^^, Luke 19.6. Act. 8.36.
and prolonged not the time to keep thy commandments. David does not take any
days with God, like a bad debtor day after day, and keep none of them; but
whatsoever good duty he had purposed in his heart, he would presently perform
the same. Zacheus came down hastily, and received Christ joyfully. The Eunuch
being instructed in the saving knowledge of his salvation, by the preaching of
Philip; so soon as ever he name where water was, he would be baptized, land
receive the Seal of grace: and as this care is to be had of every Christian
in the performance of all holy duties, so especially, in the work of
repentance; because the longer a man does put off his repentance, the harder
will it be for him to perform the same at last. Ier. 13.23.
Can the Blacke-More change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Then may they
do good, that have been accustomed to do evil. The Prophet does account it
as a thing almost impossible, for a man that has a long time continued in
sin, to leave the same, and to become a good man at the last. Oh when sin
grows up with a man, it will grow at the last to be so inward with him, as
his dearest friend, and being so long acquainted together, and bred in the
bone, they will handly part, or out of the flesh. Oh that men would consider
this, that the custom of sin causes a hardening in sin: for so says the
Apostle; Romans 2.5.
Thou, after thine hardness, and heart that cannot repent, heapest unto thy
self, wrath against the day of wrath; And that custom will add to nature,
and turn sin unto nature, that a man can be no more without it, then his
natural food. This is the danger that those are in, that defer their
repentance, the harder is their recovery at the last.

In righteousness and holiness all the days of our life. Luke. 1.57. 1. Cor.
6.20.
And again, the Apostle says, Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify
God in your body, and in your spirit, for they are God. So that God must have
all, we may not take so much as one hour, no, not so much as a minute of an
hour, to bestow the same upon the world, the flesh, Tit. 2.11.12.
or the Devil. Excellent is that place to Titus, The grace of God that
brings salvation unto all men, has appeared, and teaches us that we should
deny ungodliness and would by lusts, and that we should live soberly and
righteously, and godly in this present world. The meaning is, that the doctrine
of salvation is preached unto all, not to embolden men in sin, but to urge
them to lay aside all profaneness, and to renounce their own lusts, and to
have their fruit in holiness, as they hope to have the end everlasting life.
And to these may be added that of the Apostle Peter, 1. Pet. 1.17.
Pass the time of your dwelling here in fear, knowing that we were redeemed,
not with corruptible things, etc. And therefore, in all these respects; you
see, we must immediately, without any further delay, apply our hearts to
wisdom, to seek those things which do concern the glory of God only, and
to take no more care for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. So that
nothing is to be preferred before the Lord, but the Lord before all things: so
that our repentance is not to be deferred any time; but the works thereof are
to be done out of hand, that so God may have his due and right, in being
served, and obeyed before all things, as he ought to be.

The use of this Doctrine serves to reprove those Hos. 6.4.
quickly dispersed. I have known many, that while they have been under the
Ministry of the Word, have been touched with sorrow for their sins, their
consciences being convinced, and for the time present they have purposed to
forsake them. Act. 26.28.
So that as Agrippa said to Paul, Thou have almost persuaded me to be a
Christian: So, they have almost been persuaded to a better course: but alas,
how suddenly it has been forgotten, it may appear by their falling into the
same sin again; for, so soon as they have been out of the Church, they
remember it no more, but return to their former courses; As the dog to the
vomit. 2. Pet. 2.22.
Others again, when the hand of God has been upon them by sickness, loss of
goods, etc. and when their consciences have been (as it were) upon the Rack,
they have then made vows unto God, and promised reformation of life, that they
will never do as they have done, but that they would become new men, and walk
more carefully and conscionably then ever they did before: but as soon as ever
the Lord has removed the rod, and set them at liberty, they never remember it
more. And herein they deal with the Lord, as the people of Israel did, who,
Psalm. 78.33.
when God brought any judgment or calamity upon them, then presently they
returned, and sought God early; but when the judgment of God was removed,
they started aside like a broken bow. Then the swearer makes, great
protestation to leave his swearing, the drunkard his drunkenness, the
whoremaster his whoredom, etc. But if the Lord restore them to their health
again, they fall a fresh to their sins again, which they made show to have
forsaken. Oh then, let us not defer the time of our repentance, but so soon
as ever we hear our sins reproved, and the judgments of God threatened
against them, that our consciences are convinced: Oh let us then with speed
address our selves to perform it. If we should hear of a man, that having
committed treason against his Prince, and for the same should die, unless he
would seek to pacify his wrath, and to stay the execution against himself,
that would defer it from time to time, and make light account of it; would
not all men condemn him, and say, he were worthy to die? Well, this is the
folly, or rather extreme madness of many a poor soul, who, though they know
how to assuage the anger of God that is kindled against them for their sins;
yet defer the same, and put it off from time to time. And herein the Devil
deals with men like a racking Usurer, who is wont to give day after day of
payment unto a man, until at last he wind his inheritance into his hand:
Even so does the Devil deal with sinners, he does harden them on still from
day to day in their sins, until at the last he has gotten them into his
own inheritance, and made them partakers of eternal darkness with himself
for ever. Oh, let us not then give place to the Devil, and strangle our good
motions by profaneness; but let us immediately prosecute them, that they may
work the good effect of grace in us.

Here we are taught, that if we have hitherto failed Luke. 13.5.
to get a room in the Kingdom of God, which we can never have without
repentance, and he which omitteth the present occasion when it is offered, can
never repent. This made our Savior to weep for Jerusalem, Luke 19.42.
and say; Oh if thou had known at the least in this thy day, the things
that belong to thy peace! And again, She knew not the time of her Visitation.
Now then if thy conscience tell thee, that thou have not yet repented, and that
thou art not yet a lively member of Jesus Christ; Oh delay no longer, no, not
one minute of an hour, but with all speed repent, and turn unto God, and bring
forth the fruits worthy amendment of life, that thou may have comfort when
the hour of death, Genesis 22.3.
or the day of judgment shall be. And as Abraham rose up early in the morning
to sacrifice his dearest son, which made much for the commendations of
Abraham, that he went about the commandment of the Lord so cheerfully: so
do thou likewise; it is not thy son that thou art to sacrifice, but thy
sin, which otherwise will cut the throat of thy soul. Oh rise up early with
Abraham, defer no time; this shall be the best sacrifice that ever we
offered up unto God. Now all of us do confess, that sin is to be left, and
that God is to be served of us, but we cannot accord of the time when to
begin this worthy work. I remember the report of the Prophet against the
people that neglected the reedifying of the Temple, Hag. 1.2.
This people (says he) say, that the time is not yet come, that the Lords
house should be builded. So many think it is not yet time for them to look
to heauenward: Youth must have a Spirit, and the pleasures of the flesh must
first he tasted; We must first go take our leave of our friends, and then we
will follow Christ. We may safely adventure our young years, and when we are
old, Reu. 2.24.
and going out of the world, then we will retire our selves; let God bear with
us a little, and yet a little, and in time we will repent: This is indeed the
very Deepenesse of Satan. But the time is present that we must lay hold on, to
turn to the Lord. Did ever any whom we read of in the Scripture, feeling the
piercing power of Gods spirit, smiting upon their hearts, indent with the Lord,
and say so, that God would be pleased to let them continue in their sin a
month or two, or a year, that then they would leave their sin, and serve
the Lord in new obedience? No, no, I never read of any that did thus covenant
with the Lord, but presently as God did smite them, so they were humbled, and
were converted; they deferred not the time, but embraced the truth from God
without delay. Oh lay this to heart, and the Lord give you a right
understanding in all things, that this day, wherein I now speak unto you, may
be the day of your Conversion unto the Lord, and for the which hereafter you
may rejoice for evermore. It was too late for the foolish Virgins to knock,
and to cry, Mat. 25. Luke 16.
Lord, Lord, open unto us, when the gate was shut against them, the gate of
repentance, and the gate of mercy: And it was too late for the Glutton to cry
for one drop of water to cool his flaming tongue, which in his life time
refused to give one dram of comfort to poor Lazarus. Oh, remember your
selves betimes, bless the name of God that you have not been prevented with
death in the time of your ignorance and blindness, as many have been before
you; It is the greatest mercy that men can enjoy, that the sun of death has
not yet set upon them, but that they may yet repent, Oh seek the Lord while
he may be found, and call upon him while he is near; while ye have light
walk in the light, least darkness come upon you: make no covenant with your
sins, but utterly renounce them for ever. And albeit they say to thee, as the
Devils said to Christ, Why do thou torment us before the time? Yet hearken
not unto them, for the time is already come, if not past already: for indeed,
we should have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes, if we had done as we
ought to have done: but seeing we have spent so much time in the service of
sin, and of Satan, how careful should we be now to redeem the time, and
to defetre no day nor hour longer? but while the word is sounding in our
ears, let us be converted unto the Lord, that we may live in his sight.

But notwithstanding all this that has been said, it is strange to see, how
men imbolden themselves in their sins, under this pretense, that God is
merciful, and that therefore they may repent as their leisure; because God is
a God of mercy, he will forgive us whenever we shall repent, and turn to
him. It is true indeed, that God is a God of mercy, and his mercies are over
all his works: Psalm 145.
And therefore if men would make a right use thereof, the mercy of God should
lead them to repentance; for so says the Apostle, Romans 2.4. Gal. 5.22.
Despisest thou the riches of his bountifulness and patience, and long
suffering, not knowing that the bountifulness of God should lead thee to
repentance? but as he is merciful, so is he just, and the longer that God in
mercy expects thy amendment, so much the more grievously will he punish thee,
E^od. 20. Psalm. 18.26. Pro. ^.34. and 28.
if thou neglect it: look in the second commandment, how the Lord does there
threaten To visit the iniquities of the Fathers upon their children unto the
third and fourth generation of such as hate him; Yea, the Lord threatens
obstinate sinners, that he will not regard them when they seek unto him; Then
shall they call upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early,
but they shall not find me, because they hated knowledge, and did not choose
the fear of the Lord. So that we see that all hope is taken away from
presumptuous sinners, that God should ever receive them into favor at last;
seeing that the Lord there threatens, that he will then be so far from
pitying them, as that he will even laugh at their destruction. Oh, happy then
is he that sins least, next he, that returns unto God soonest; but most
woeful is the estate of him, Heb. 10.26. Heb. 12.17.
that with Jeroboam has sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of the
Lord, that has quenched the good motions of the spirit, that has denied the
power of salvation, they have despised the spirit of grace: Alas, alas, though
at the last, such a one should seek the blessing with tears, they can find no
place to repentance: Oh, what a fearful and lamentable estate is this for a
man to be thus left unto himself, given up to Satan, and to be forsaken of
God for ever! From this estate, the Lord for his mercy sake keep us. But
notwithstanding all this, will some say, That the thief upon the Cross, at
the last gasp was received to mercy, who had spent all the course of his life
in sin; why then may not I likewise hope for the same mercy in the end? But
alas, one Swallow makes not a summer, and of one example, where a precept is
wanting, nothing is concluded. The Lord in mercy has left one extraordinary
example of his mercy, that men at the last gasp, might not altogether
despair, and but one, that no man might presume. Now, would not all men
condemn him of mere foolishness, that would go about to spur his Ass
till he speak, because Balams Ass spoke? It is far greater madness in any
man to harten himself in his sin by one man's example. Were it not a safe
course to follow the example of David, Peter, Paul, Zacheus, Cornelius, etc.
who, so soon as God did touch their hearts with a sight of their sins,
presently returned unto the Lord by repentance; then that we should presume by
the example of one, and so miss of salvation, as many thousands have done
before us. Wherefore, to conclude this point, let no conceit in the world, nor
persuasion whatsoever, hinder us from a present conversion unto God, but out of
hand, while it is called To day, let us turn unto him.

Thus much for the Exhortation. The Reasons follow.
For he has spoiled, and he will heal us: he has wounded us, and he will
bind us up.
WE have heard already the godly persuasion of the believing Jews one to
another, Reasons to enforce the former exhortation.
to turn to the Lord, from whom they had departed by their sins. Now follows
the reasons of their exhortation; and they are twofold; The first, is drawn
from the justice of God, in these words, He has spoiled us, he has wounded
us. q. d. We have been plagued and smitten: Well it is the Lord that has laid
these heavy judgments upon us, it is the correcting hand of God that has
brought these grievous afflictions upon us; therefore let us now Return unto
him. The second, is drawn from the mercy of God in these words: He will heal
us, he will bind us up, q. d. Though the Lord has smitten us, yet he will
help us, and heal us, if we will seek to him for succor. And surely, these
two reasons ought to be of force to move every one of us to turn unto God: if
his judgments cannot compel us; yet his loving mercies ought to draw us, and
allure us to turn unto him.

Return unto God, Man's nature so corrupt, that it stands in need of many
reasons to persuade to holy duties.
but use reason upon reason to induce and to persuade them thereunto: Hence we
may observe the frowatdnesse and the untowardness, and great backwardness
that is in all men by natuae, to perform any holy duty: That we thus stand in
need of so many arguments, and so many reasons to perswadr us thereunto. In the
whole Scriptures it is the usual manner of the Prophets and Apostles, and holy
men of God, when they exhort to any virtue, or dehort from any vice; to add
sundry reasons, that by the force thereof, they might draw men to obedience.
This is practiced of the Prophet David, when he persuaded his son Solomon to
have a care to learn, and practice the will of God: 1. Chro. 28.8.
And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him
with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: (And he adds reasons to
persuade him thereunto;) For the Lord searches all hearts, and understands
all the imaginations of thoughts; if thou seek him, he will be found of
thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. Again, when
Moses does exhort the people of Israel to observe and to keep the
commandments of the Lord, how many forcible arguments and reasons does he
allege to move the people, and to persuade them thereunto, some taken from the
mercies of God: If thou shall obey the voice of the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy.
28.1.2.3. and v. 15.16. etc. Leuit. 26.14. Mal. 2.2.
and observe all his commandments which I command thee this day: all these
blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee: Blessed shall thou be in the
City, and blessed in the field, etc. Others, taken from the justice of God: But
if thou will not obey the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep, and to do all
his commandments and ordinances which I command thee this day, Deu. 6.5.
cursed shall thou be in the town, and cursed in the field, etc. And in all
Paul's Epistles, it is his usual manner, Romans 12.1.
where he exhorts to any virtue, or dehorts from any vice, to add sundry
reasons, that by the force thereof, he might the better prevail: 2. Cor. 9.7.
I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that ye give up your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God. And again, As every man
wishes in his heart, so let him give not grudgingly, or of necessity; for God
loves a cheerful giver. And in the Ephesians, Ephesians. 5.22.23.
exhorting diverse estates and degrees of men, as husbands and wives, Parents
and children, masters and servants, to the performance of the duties of their
several callings, he does still second the same exhortations with diverse
arguments and reasons. Ephesians. 6.5. Col. 3.22. 1. Pet. 2.11.
Wives submit your selves to your husbands, as to the Lord; and he ads a
forcible reason thereto: For the husband is the wives head as Christ is the
head of his Church; and so likewise of husbands, servants, etc. This course is
likewise practiced of the Apostle Peter, when he says: I beseech you as
Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts which fight against the
Soul. These and the like examples, whereof the Scriptures are plentiful,
serve to manifest unto us the corruption that is in our nature, that are so
backward in the performance of any holy duty, that we stand thus in need of
reasons to persuade us to the same.

Now, this comes to pass by reason that the Theoricke part of man, his will,
(since the fall of man) is so blinded and corrupted, that it understands not
the things that are of God, but the will and understanding are so depraved, of
grace, that now they are direct opposite to Gods will: And this is the cursed
nature of all men unregenerate, as the Apostle says: The wisdom of the flesh
is enmity against God, Romans 8.7.
for it is not subject to the law of God, neither can be: Where the Apostle
shows plainly, that the will of a natural man, 2. Cor. 3.5.
that lives in sin unregenerate, Phil. 2.13. Genesis 6. Romans 3.7.
is flat contrary; nay, Enmity it self against God, and neither will nor can
be subject to Gods will: So that whatsoever God wills, man wills not: We are not
able of our selves to think a good thought. It is God alone that must touch
our hearts, and work in us power, either to will well, or work well: Nay, the
Lord says more: Pro. 14.12.
That the whole frame of man's heart is altogether evil continually. The whole
frame of man's heart, the mind, will, understanding, conscience, reason,
affection, yea, the whole frame of man's heart is evil only, and that
continually: so that it is clear, our wills are contrary to Gods will by
nature, and we can no more set our selves to the performance of any good duty,
then a dead man can of himself rise out of his grave and perform any action:
but our wills are so infected and poisoned with sin, that we now only seek
and desire that which is evil, and against the will of God, and the good of
our own souls.

Even unto every good work, Reprobate: that we are not able not so much as to
move one finger to the performance of any spiritual duty: Ibo. 42.6.
This should make us to Abhor our selves in dust and ashes: Oh, in the matters
of the world we are quick of conceit. If a man should tell us, how we should
get some profit, or enjoy some pleasure, or come to preferment: These things
are we ready to conceive of: They shall not need to allege any reasons to
persuade us to seek after them, nor arguments to move us. But, how eagerly do
we hunt after these temporal things, and that with great delight: but when we
shall be taught out of the Word of God, how we may attain that true treasure,
that the rust and moath cannot corrupt, and which shall never be taken from us,
even the Kingdom of heaven, and the everlasting salvation of our own souls:
how carelessly do we listen after it: Nay, the Ministers of Gods word had need
to use reason upon reason, and all to little to persuade us, to seek after
them? Oh, that we should be so careless, when we are exhorted to Return unto
the Lord for the pardon of our sins; that we should thus sleep still in
sin, and bless our selves in our evil and ungodly ways: Nay, that which is
worst of all, how many be there that when they are exhorted to any holy duty,
that are so far from yielding unto them, that they object against them
fleshly reasons, as it were, laying stumbling blocks in their own ways to
keep them from God! We see this clear in many, who being exhorted unto a new
course of life, and told of the necessity of laboring, to get knowledge, and
hearing the Word of God: They can object for themselves, I shall then lose my
time, neglect my business, hinder my estate, and make my self a laughing stock
unto the world. These are like those Guests in the Gospel, Mat. 22.5.6 Mat.
13.22.
who being bid to the banquet, made excuses, and would not come, but made light
of it: Yea, our Savior teaches, that when the Word of God is preached unto
us, the cares of this world, the deceitfulnes of riches, and the lusts of or
her things choke the Word, and it is made unfruitful. Oh, let us beware, that
we be not led aside by the subtilty of Satan, and these corrupt imaginations
of our own hearts: but when the Word of God reproves any sin in us, though
the same seem never so sweet unto the flesh; Oh, stride over all the rocks of
offense that stand before us to make us fall; that so, we may hearken unto the
voice of God, and that God may delight in us, and take pleasure in our
obedience, proceeding from the heart.

Turn unto the Lord; Ioh. 15. Mat. 13. Ioh. 10.1. Mat. 3.10. Luke. 8.4.
they must exhort, they must entreat, they must persuade, and use reason upon
reason, and argument upon argument, and all will be too little to draw men to
seek unto God, and to obey his blessed Word: This has been the course which
the Prophets from time to time have observed in their Sermons unto the people,
that have stooped down to the capacity and understanding even of the simplest,
raising diverse Similes and Comparisons to illustrate the doctrines unto the
people, and to press the same with diverse reasons and arguments, to the end,
that all men might be left without excuse, and that as the Apostle says: 2.
Cor. 4.3.
If the Gospel be hid, it is hid unto them that be lost.

He has spoiled us: he has wounded us.
Now, we are to come to the words themselves. And it is all one, as if they
should have said, Behold, we are grievously spoiled, we see how the Lord has
been offended and angry with us for our sins; how he has for our rebellions
thus spoiled us of our liberty, spoiled us of our Country, of our goods,
possessions; yea, and spoiled us of his mercy and favor he was wont to show
unto us: Nay; he has wounded us, and that grievously, he has laden us with
the grievous burden of afflictions: We see it is the correcting hand of God
for our sins; and therefore let us Return unto him by true repentance, that
he may heal us, and help us.

Seeing then that they use the remembrance of Gods Gods judgments must move
men to repentance
and to bring them to repentance: We may hence learn what is the end of all
Gods judgments, either general upon a whole land, or private, upon any
particular man or woman. What, has the Lord any delight to punish and to
plague men and women with his heavy judgments? no verily, the Lord does not
punish us willingly, Lam. 3.33.
he takes no delight to afflict the children of men. God sent his Prophet to
cry in the streets of Nineueh, Yet forty days, Jonas. 3.
and Nineueh shall be destroyed. They made the true use of Gods judgments
threatened against them, when they fasted and prayed, and did put on sackcloth,
from the greatest of them, to the least of them, and did turn from their evil
ways, and from the wickedness that was in their hands. 1. Reg. 21.27.
When Ahab had heard the judgments of God threatened against him and his house,
Psalm. 78. Psalm. 107.
He rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth upon him, and fasted, and lay in
sackcloth, and went softly. So did the rebellious Israelites from time to time,
when the judgments of God were upon them, they sought the Lord. This appears
likewise by the example of the progigal son, when judgment followed him at the
heels, and had overtaken him (as it is the wages of al sin) he then came to
himself, and resolved of a return home to his father. Whenever therefore God
shall lay his rod upon our backs, either in our own persons, in our goods, or
in our good names, or in our wives and children, or any other that are dear
unto us; it is for this end, that feeling the smart, we may humble our selves
under his hand. And withal let us know, that whenever our stubbornnes and
disobedience shall drive the Lord to take this course with us, it is never
without his great grief, as that place of the Prophet Hosea is worth our best
consideration, Hosea. 11.8.
where the Lord says: How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? how shall I
deliver thee, O Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as
Zeboim? my heart is turned within me, my repentings are rolled together: So
that the words show unto us, how that the Lord is (as it were) troubled and
perplexed in himself, that he could not tell what course to take, when the
sins of the people stirred up his displeasure; on the one side, the
hainousnes of the peoples sins provoked him to punish them, and to make them
as Sodom and Gomor: but on the other side, his fatherly love and tender
compassion moved him to hold his hand, Judge. 10.16.
and to stay his judgments. And in another place it is said, That his soul
was grieved for the misery of Israel. Even as a tender hearted Father does
many times correct his child when the tears stand in his own eyes: Psalm.
89.33.
So that we see that true of the Prophet, That the mercy of God is over all his
works, and that in judgment he remembers mercy: yea, he has promised, that
though he whip and scourge his children, yet his mercy he will never take
from them. And howsoever for the present time no affliction is joyous but
grievous, yet, if we have grace to submit our selves unto it: It brings with
it the quiet fruit of righteousness. Thus have we seen with what affection
the Lord does chasten us, as also, that all judgments whatsoever laid upon
us, should move us to repentance.

And the reason is, But if a Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from
their wickedness, Ier. 18.8.
I will repent of the plague that I thought to bring upon them. This appears
by the example of Nineueh, whom we named before, and the like; and therefore
let all such as lie under any chastisement, always search out their ways, and
descend into their own consciences, to see how they have moved God to wrath,
and provoked him against them* This is the only practice that the Prophet does
prescribe us to take, under any judgment or calamity whatsoever: Lam. 3.39.
Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? Man suffers for his sin: Let us
search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord. This is the right way to
stop the breach of Gods wrath, and to call in his judgments when they are gone
out against us.

This Doctrine may serve to direct us, windings and turnings that are in their
hearts to escape the judgments of God; but yet never resolve of this which is
the only way of all, To turn unto the Lord. Oh, let us therefore be
admonished hereby, to search our ways, to suruay our own hearts, and to prove
by the touchstone of the Word, our own thoughts, words and works that we have
conceived, spoken and done; that has moved the Lord to proceed so in justice
against us, and when we have found out our falls and infirmities, we are in a
serious manner to mourn for them, and to turn unto the Lord with all or
hearts. This duty is urged by the Prophet Jeremy: Lam. 3.39.40.41.42. Heb.
12.5.6.10.9.
Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? Man suffers for his sins: Oh, let
us search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord. Let us lift up our hearts
with our hands unto the God of heaven saying, we have sinned, and have
rebelled, therefore thou have most spared: for surely this is the only mark
that God shoots at, and this is the end of all his chasticements; namely
this, to bring us home to himself, and not to destroy us for ever.

He has spoiled, he has wounded.
All chasticements and afflictions come from God.
and brought all this woeful misery upon them: they do not say, it was the
Assirians that had spoiled and wounded them, but they look higher, and
attribute all to the Lord, and say, The Lord has spoiled, and he has wounded
us. From whence we observe a third point of Doctrine; namely, that all
chasticements and afflictions, judgments, and corrections come from the Lord
alone, he sends them, imposes them, and lays them on his people, he
moderates them at his pleasure; for so says the Prophet, Is there any evil in
the City which the Lord has not sent? That is, any judgment or punishment,
sickness, Amos. 3.6.
poverty, crosses, afflictions, or calamities, but they come from the Lord, he
sends them, and lays them on his people: his Quiver is full of these arrows,
Exodus 9.32. Psalm. 148.8. Ier. 25.9.11.
he has the sword to strike us, he has the pestilence to consume us, he has
famine to pine us; yea, he has all creatures at command to humble man, and
being sent of God, they shall prevail, As the Flies, Frogs and Lyce did
prevail against Pharaoh and his people; yea, Fire and Hayle. Snow and Vapors,
Deu. 4.27.
Storms and winds do execute his wurd. If it hayle in Egypt, God sends that
hail on Pharaoh: If an east wind bring in Grasshoppers, Hos. 2.6.
and a west wind drive them out; Moses tells us, that both come from the Lord,
what judgments, chastisements or afflictions soever light upon man, they come
not by chance, or any blind fortune, but they come to pass through the
sovereign power of the Almighty Creator: I will send (says the Lord) and take
to me all the Families of the North, and I will bring them against this land.
And again, I begin to plague that City where my name is called upon. And
again, when the Lord would bring his Church from Idolatry, he says: Behold,
2. Reg. 19.6.
I will stop thy ways with thorns, and wake an hedge that she shall not
find her paths: So Esaias comfort the messengers of Hezechiah against the
blasphemy of Senacherib: So shall you say to your Master: Job. 1.12. and 2.6.
Mat. 8.31.
Thus says the Lord, Be not afraid of the words which thou have heard:
Behold, I will send a blast upon him, etc. And we see in the History of Job,
that the Devil could not slay the servants of Job with the sword, burn up his
sheep with fire, spoil him of his Cammels by robbers, destroy his children
with winds, nor touch his person with byles, before the Lord had said unto him,
Lo, all that he has is in thy hand, but save his life. The like we see in
the Gospel, when Christ had dispossessed the two possessed with Devils which
came out of the graves; they had not the power of themselves being dispossessed,
to enter into the heard of swine, before that Christ had given them leave: So
that the tyranny of Satan himself, and of all his wicked instruments, be it
never so great, yet it is bounded within the lists and limits of the power of
God. All these, and the like examples, whereof the Scripture is full, serve for
the confirmation of the everlasting truth of this doctrine, that all
judgments, chastisements and afflictions whatsoever, they happen unto us, nor
by chance or fortune (as men say) but they come from God. And this is
acknowledged by the godly Jews in this place, where they say, The Lord has
wounded us, etc. And the reason is this, because the providence of God rules
all things, both in heaven and earth, as well the smallest as the greatest; so
that there is no room left for chance or fortune, but by the special
providence of God do all things come to pass: This does our Savior teach
most clearly, when he says, Are not two Sparrowes sold for a farthing, and
one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father: yea, the hayres
of your head are numbered. Now if the providence of God be in such small things,
as in Sparrows, and the hairs of ones head, how much more in weightier things?
This is acknowledged by the Apostles in the Acts: Doubtless, Act. 4.27.
against thy only Son Jesus whom thou have anointed, Both Herod and Pontius
Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel gathered themselves
together, to do whatsoever thy hand and thy council has determined before to
be done. So that the Apostles of Jesus Christ do there acknowledge, that
whatsoever happened unto Christ Jesus, both for his apprehension, arraignement
and condemnation, it came not to pass alone through the trecherousnes of
Judas, nor the malice of the whole nation of the Jews; but that God in his
eternal decree had fore-ordayned the same. So then, if we look unto the
providence of God which rules al things both in heaven and earth, and without
whose providence nothing can come to pass; ir must needs clear this Doctrine
unto us, that all judgments, chastisements and afflictions come from God. Now
let us come to the uses of this Doctrine.

Seeing that all judgments, chastisements and afflictions Genesis 15.13. Ier.
25.11. Io. 19.10. Luke 22.53.
or by the malice of the Devil, but by the most wise decree and purpose of
God, yea, the years and days, the very hours and moments of time, touching
the afflictions of the godly, are determined of God: Oh let us then learn to
possess our souls with patience, whenever God shall humble us in our bodies,
goods or name, by any judgment or calamity, either inward or outward; assuring
our selves, that if the fault be not in our selves, the cross when it does
depart, will leave a blessing behind it, and we shall be sure to gain more in
the Spirit then we can lose in the Flesh. And howsoever the wicked may
persecute the godly here; yet they are but the rod of God, and they cannot
pass the bonds of their commission granted them from the Lord; they cannot
shorten one moment of our life, or add unto our afflictions more then what God
has purposed. And in the end God will cut them off, when it pleases him, that
they shall proceed no further.

Secondly, this may condemn those that never come by fortune, or else do only
look on the means, but never look up unto God who smites by them, like a
dog that snatches the stone, but looks not after him that flung it. Job.
1.21.
Job was of another mind, he does not so much as look upon the Caldeans,
Sabeans, or the Devil that had spoiled him: but Job acknowledges, that it was
the Lord that had done all this: Not like many amongst us in these days, who,
if they have any loss in their cattle, or sickness in themselves, wives or
children, by and by they be bewitched and so run to the Devil for counsel:
How far was this from godly David, when Abishai the son of Zeruiah would have
killed Shemi for cursing David: What have I to do with you ye sons of
Zeruiah (says David) he curses because the Lord bade him curse me. 2. Sam.
16.10
And surely, this must needs be the notable policy of the Devil, that men not
considering that it comes from the Lord, should never seek to him for remedy.
And here we may take occasion to reprove one common fault amongst many, who
think that Witches have power to destroy men's goods, to afflict men's bodies,
lame their cattle, kill their children, and the like: Deu. 18.10.
whereas, if we consider the matter aright, we shall find it otherwise.
Indeed, there are Witches, which upon their conviction are to die, and not to
be suffered to live: but withal, we must observe for what cause they are to
die; not because they destroy men's goods, afflict men's bodies, or kill men's
children; for the Scriptute never attributes these judgments to come from
Witches, but from God, whose purpose and providence is in all things: but they
are to die, because they have made a league with the Devils, which are Gods
enemies, and because they seduce the people of God, and draw them into error,
and into many devilish practices, to leave God their Creator, and to seek for
help from the Devil or his cursed instruments; Amos. 3.6.
whereas indeed, all judgments and afflictions whatsoever, laid upon our
bodies, goods and children, come from God; and there is no more, nor less hurt
done, then if there were no Witches at all; neither can the sending of the
Devil by a Witch give him any power or commission to do any thing more then
that, for the which he has received commission from God. But here is the
policy of the Devil, Note.
and here is the judgment of God upon sinners that will be deluded: the
Devil when he has received commission from God to hurt, he will not by and by
execute the same, till (if it be possible) some Witch or Sorcerer do send him,
seeming all this while unto them to be their servant and slave, whereas indeed,
all this while they are his vassals and bondslaues, using them as his cursed
instruments; not to receive help by them, but only for a color, that he
might by that means draw many to seek help from him, and so carry them
headlong into eternal condemnation: for indeed, the Devil is more forward to
do hurt, then any Witch can be: Oh then let us labor to become so spiritually
wise, that we may discover the policy of the Devil herein; and to help us
herein, let us assure our selves that All power is of God; Mat. 28.
that neither the Devil, nor the Witch can kill man or beast at their
pleasure; till they have authority first from God; for, it is the Lord alone,
by whose wise providence and purpose, all things both in heaven and earth come
to pass, only our sins provoke him to chastise, and afflict us: God gives
the Devil leave as an executioner of his vengeance, to correct and scourge us
for our sins, and when he has obtained leave of God, he seeks to do it at
his best advantage, as may further his own kingdom, and delude the simple.

For he has spoiled us, he has wounded us.
We have heard before, how that they do acknowledge God does chastise his own
children when they sin against him.
and that most justly for their sins, especially, for their sin of
Idolatry. Before we leave the words of this their first reason, we are to
observe one thing more from the persons afflicted; He has spoiled us, etc.
Even they that were the Church and people of God, whom God had honored above
all other nations and people under heaven; yet when they fell away from God by
Idolatry, God did not spare to bring even upon them, many and grievous
judgments and afflictions. Hence we observe this point of Doctrine, that God
will not spare to chastise his own children if they sin against him,
although he take not his loving kindness from them, nor suffer his truth to
fail: Numb. 11.33
Yet he will visit their transgressions with the rod, and their sins with
scourges. The history of the Israelites in their iourneying toward Canaan,
their manifold murmurings and rebellions, is a plentiful witness of this
truth, when they lusted for flesh, and loathed Manna: How did God smite them
with exceeding great plagues, even judgment upon judgment, until he had
consumed the greatest fort of them? We may fee this in the example of Solomon,
when his heart was turned away from the true God, the Lord was angry with him,
therefore the Lord stirred up one adversary against Solomon, 1. Reg. 11.
and afterward another adversary which did much mischief and evil against
Israel. When Jonas had disobeyed the voice of the Lord, being sent to preach
against Nineueh; how did the Lord vex Jonas with his storms, Jonas 1.2.3
that the ship could have no rest, till she had disburdened her self of
Jonas? The judgments of God as a Serieant pursued Jonas to arrest him, as a
fugitive servant: so that albeit Jonas fled from God, yet the hand of God
followed after him, and ouertooke him. Number. 12.10.
When Miriam the sister of Moses, contemned Moses because she was not a
Prophetess, as great in authority as himself: although Moses meekely suffered
it, yet the Lord revenged the wrong, and stroke her with a Leprosy, that for a
season she was shut out of the host. When David had fallen into his sins of
Adultery and Murder, though he were a man beloved of God, yea, 2. Sam. 12.9
a man after Gods own heart; yet the Lord did stir up evil against him out of
his own house: yea, Christ Jesus himself unto whom sin was but imputed, for
he never committed any; he was afflicted with sorrows for our defaults, he
was bruised for our iniquities, and the chastisement of our peace was laid
upon him, Esaias. 53.5.
and by his stripes we are healed. The like may be said of Manasses,
Iehosaphat, Josiah, Hezechiah, and the like: Al which serve to confirm us in
the truth of this doctrine, that God will not spare, no, not the godly
themselves, be they never so near or dear unto him, but will bring upon them
many and grievous judgments if they sin against him. And this did this
people in this present Text, find to be true by woeful experience; for, sinning
with a high hand against God, and committing Idolatry, the Lord did bring most
heavy and grievous judgments upon them for the same.

And the reason is, is not a God that loves wickedness, neither shall any evil
dwell with him; for he hates all them that work iniquity, be they what they
will be; if they be found to commit sin against God, God will not spare them:
He accepts not the persons of Princes (says Elihu) nor regards the rich
more then the poor, Io. 34.19.
They being all the works of his hands: This does the Prophet David
acknowledge, when he says: Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, 1.
Sam. 16.7. Psalm. 51.4.
and done evil in thy sight, that thou may be just when thou speak, and
pure when thou iudgest: So that if men break his statutes, and keep not his
commandments, God will be sure to visit their transgressions with the rod,
and their sins with scourges, and all to manifest the truth of his own Word,
and to make good those threatenings gone out of his mouth against sin: yet we
must know, that there is great difference between the children of God and the
wicked; when the Lord corrects his children, they are bettered by their
afflictions, they are humbled, confess their sins, and bewail them, they
labor to reform their lives, and to Turn unto the Lord by true Repentance:
but the wicked, the more the Lord spoils and wounds them, they are the worse
by it: and whereas the children of God take occasion by affliction to Turn to
God, the wicked are by them driven the further from God; they either see it not
that afflictions come from God, and so repute them to fortune or chance, or
some secondary causes, or else they murmur and break out into impaciency, as
we may see in Pharaoh, the more the Lord plagued and spoiled him, the more he
hardened his heart.

eye, as we have seen by the example of the Israelites, Gods people, of
Miriam, David, Solomon, and the like. Oh then, what miserable wretches are we,
that we should presume of Gods mercy, seeing we have such fearful
spectacles of his justice? for the Lord does lay to heart the sins of the
godly, more then the sins of the wicked: There can be no greater despite done
unto a man, then when his own children rise up against him: Even so, what
greater dishonor can be offered unto the most high God, then when his sons
by adoption and grace, shall rebel against him, from whom he expects the
greatest honor: And therefore if they sin against God, God does ever take it
hainously at their hands, and will assuredly punish them for the same. And if
this be the course of Gods justice against the Elect, how safely may we thus
conclude, that the wicked and ungodly shall not escape; howsoever the Lord
bear for a time with the vessels of wrath, according to that of the Prophet
Jeremy: Thus says the Lord of Hoasts, Ier. 25.29.
Ye shall certainly drink, for lo, I begin to plague the City where my
name is called upon, and shall you go free? Oh, how may this terrify all
ungodly wretches to consider, that howsoever God spares them for a time, and
let them run on in their ungodly courses, yet their damnation sleeps not all
this while; their transgressions are recorded in the book of God, and are
laid up in store for them against the day of reckoning. This is that which
Solomon calls to their remembrance, when he says, Behold, the righteous
shall be recompensed in the earth, Pro. 11.31.
how much more the wicked and the sinner? And to the same purpose says the
Apostle Peter, 2. Pet. 4.17.
The time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God: And if it
begin at us, what shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of God?
If the righteous be soarsly saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?

Solomon says; All things happen alike to all, Eccles. 9.2.
and the same condition is to the just, and the wicked. We may not then condemn
those on whom we see the Lord to lay great and grievous afflictions, as many
natural men use to do: Nay, on the contrary, seeing the Lord corrects every
one that he loves, we may rather judge afflictions, tokens of his love; as if
we see a man beat or correct a child, and let another go, we will judge him
his son whom he corrects. Oh then art thou spoiled and wounded in thy soul,
be not any whit discouraged: if thou be one of Christ's Lambs, thou must be
content then to be spoiled of thy Fleece, and to have the bloody knife at thy
throat all the day long: but if thou be a Sheep to be sold, then thou
should be pastured and fatted in the best grass. Mat. 3.
The children of God, be the Lords Wheat: Now then, they must be content to be
cut with the Sickle, to be carried into the Barn, they must undergo the
blows of the Flaile, they must be fanned and grownde to powder with the
Millstone of afflictions, and baked in the Oven and Furnace of a wounded
conscience, before they can be bread for Gods Table. Oh that we could see how
our poor and miserable souls be spoiled and wounded by sin and Satan! Oh,
we have many a deadly wound in our souls by Sin; and this is the reason why
so few seek unto Jesus Christ, the good Physician of our souls; and why so
few run to God for the pardon of their things; namely, because they see not
themselves spoiled; they never feel the bleeding wounds of their poor souls
and consciences: Oh that the Lord would open our blind eyes to see our misery,
how we be utterly spoiled, and touch our hard hearts to feel the bleeding
wounds, and bloody issues of our souls surely, it is the beginning of all
grace, to feel themselves wounded at heart for their sins.

Alas, the blind and carnal men of the world, if they see one spoiled or
wounded at the heart for sin, they by and by condemn him for a wicked man,
as the Heathen men did Paul: Act. 26. Psalm. 6. and 130.77. Job. 13. Esaias. 38.
Act. 2.37.
But who ever were more spoiled then the dearest Saints and Servants of God
have been? Look upon David, who ever was wounded both in Body and Soul as
Job was, who thought that God had become his enemy? he says, that the Lord
shot his arrows at him, as if he had been his mark to shoot at, and that
the very venom of his arrows pearsed his soul, and drunk up his spirit.
Look upon good King Ezechias, he says, that the Lord broke his bones like a
Lion, and wounded him sore, Who ever was so spoiled and wounded as the Son of
God himself: and therefore we may not take them as tokens of Gods anger? no,
no: Judgment begins at Gods house, and if God do not try: men by crosses and
afflictions, let them suspect themselves, that they be rather Bastards, and not
Sons; for the Lord does chastise them he loves; and if he suffer men to
run on in their own ways without breaking and taming them as young Colt^
and vntaimed Heyfers, it is a sign rather that God cares not for them. Well
then, let us confess the hand of God in all our troubles, and withal confess
our sins, as the procuring cause of all Gods judgments, and turn, and seek
to him for mercy and forgiveness, and take his fatherly corrections as tokens
of his love, that he would thereby humble our hearts, purge our souls, draw us
to love him, and to seek to him for mercy.

spoil them of all hope in themselves, to bring them to a flat nothing, in
regard of themselves, that they may say, I am the greatest and the chiefest
sinner: Oh miserable man, who shall deliver me from this body of sin? Men
must be thus wounded, else they cannot be healed: and as for them which never
felt themselves spoiled and wounded at the heart for their sins, they are not
yet truly called, they be not yet truly converted: therefore let it be spoken
to every soul here present, if you never felt your souls wounded, never felt
your hearts pricked, and your consciences touched, grieved and afflicted for
your sins; Alas, you are not yet turned to God, you never had as yet true
grace wrought in your hearts. But those which feel the smart of sin, and
feel their hearts wounded for sin, they will esteem more of one drop of
Gods mercy for the pardon of the same, and of one drop of the blood of Jesus
Christ for the salvation of their souls, then of ten thousand worlds if they
were offered unto them: whereas the secure and hard hearted Sinner, which finds
not himself to be spoiled and wounded, does make no account at all of the
same, nor never seeks unto God for mercy.

He will heal us, he will bind us up.
NOw follows the second reason drawn from the mercy of God: For though he
has spoiled us and wounded us, yet he will heal us and bind us up again. And
these be the most gracious words of God himself: Behold, I am he, and there
is no God but I: Deu. 32.34. 1. Sam. 26.
I kill and make alive, I wound and make whole again. And therefore this
reason drawn from the mercy of God, seeing he offers himself to heal us,
and to bind up the wounds of our souls: Oh, it ought to move us greatly to
turn unto him.

So then the point of Doctrine that offers itself to The mercy of God must
lead men to repentance.
that as the judgments of God must alluremen to repentance, and to return
unto God, so must his mercies. I remember the speech in the Prophet, where the
Lord is pleased (to make us the better to conceive of his mercy) to take to
himself the affections of a man: Ier. 31.20. Hos. 11.8.
His bowels were troubled for Ephraim. And again; How shall I give thee up,
Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how
shall I set thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned within me, my repentings are
rolled together. It is all one as if the Lord should have said; Oh, it goes
near me, O Ephraim, Exodus 34.6.7
O Israel, that I should even be forced by thy rebellion and horrible
impieties, to deal so straightly with thee. And the Lord tells Moses; Psalm.
86.15.
that he is a Merciful and a gracious God, slow to anger, and abundant in
goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands and forgiving iniquity, and
transgression, and sin. He is called again of the Psalmist, A pitiful
God. And the like is intended in the language of the new Testament; That when
he saw the multitude dspersed as sheep having no shepherd, his bowels earned
within him. Mat. 9.36.
These examples and the like, whereof the Scriptures are full, all serve to
confirm the everlasting truth of this doctrine, that God is a God of mercy, and
that his mercies ought to allure men to repentance: for though the thundering
out of the threatenings and judgments of the Law, be a means to awake a secure
heart, yet nothing will so much affect a man's mind, and even melt a man's soul,
to make a man return unto God, as the due knowledge and consideration of the
unspeakable riches of Gods mercy; and therefore it is no marvel though the
Prophet here do use this as one forcible reason to stir up men to make their
return unto God by unfeigned repentance, for that he will be ready to Heal
our sores, and Bind up the bleeding wounds of our souls, which we have made by
sin, if we will repent and return unto him. And indeed this is one of the
maine differences betwixt the godly and the wicked: The justice of God does
sometimes so far prevail with the wicked, as that they fear and tremble,
but it is not for the loss of Gods favor, but for fear of torment: But on
the contrary, the goodness and mercy of God, does even cause the servants of
God to quake and to tremble, lest by any means they should deprive themselves
of the comfortable enjoying of his love, according to that of the Prophet
David: Psalm. 130.4.
There is mercy with thee O Lord that thou may be feared. Oh blessed fear,
when the mercy of God does beget it in a man's Soul: So, then we see that the
mercy of God is infinite, his compassion is higher then the heavens, it is the
greatest dishonor done unto God that can be, to doubt of his favor, and to
call his loving kindness into question. Let us build up his promises as a sure
foundation that shall never be removed: Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but
his word shall not pass away. We have the Word and the Oath of God as two
unchangeable Witnesses; so that it is impossible he should lie or be deceived:
Again, we have the Sacraments of God as two Authenticke Seals to ratify his
promises, and to make them most sure unto us. Mat. 5.18. Heb. 6.18. Romans 8.16.
And we have withal, the earnest penny, as a pawn left unto us, and all to
assure us of his favor and love, and therefore this reason of the Church and
people of God drawn from the mercy of God: seeing that he is so ready to
pardon sin, and to entertain poor penitent sinners, that sue to him for
mercy, it ought to be most forceable unto us to move us to Return unto him.
Now let us come to the uses.

First, seeing that the Lord as he does wound us, and chastise man for sin;
so it is he alone that is the spiritual wounds, so he heales, as he breaks
asunder, so he binds up. If a man have some dangerous disease in his body,
or other deadly wound, if he know any man to be of skill, and a faithful
Surgeon, he will seek to him, and let him out and la^nce him: Well, this is
our case, we be spiritually sick, even unto eternal death, in regard of
ourselves, our souls be grievously and dangerously wounded, what shall we now
do but run to Jesus Christ the blessed Physician of our souls, who is most
able and willing to cure us and heal us? And as the poor Begget vnlaps his
legs, and shows his grievous sores to those that pass by, and all to move
compassion; So let us not be ashamed to lay open our souls to Jesus Ghrist,
let us confess our grievous and manifold sins: Let us not be ashamed to let
him see our spiritual wounds; but let us make our moan to him, and crave his
help, and beg as for life and death for the pardon of them: and if we can
get but one drop of his precious blood, it will be a plaster to heal our
wounds, and cure the deadly diseases of our souls. When the children of Israel
had grievously sinned, Number. 21.
the Lord sent fiery Serpents amongst them; now many of them by the stinging
and biting of them, were so inflamed that they died, and could not be cured:
But when they repented and cried to God in their misery, behold, he commands
that Moses should make a brazen Serpent and set it upon hie, that so many as
were stung with those fiery Serpents, might cast their eyes immediately upon
that brazen Serpent, and so might be cured: Even so, all of us are stung by
the fiery Serpents of our sins, and we newly wallowing in the blood of our
souls: Yet see, Oh see the mercy of God, who has given unto us his own
son, who is the brazen Serpent to cure our souls; for no other creature in
heaven or earth could heal us or help us, but he must be our Physician to
make a plaster to heal our wounds; the pains that he took to temper this
plaster, it made him sweat both water and blood; and in the end when nothing
else could do it, Luke. 23.
he was content to temper a plaster of his own heart blood: such a blessed
Savior, such a loving Physician have we: Oh then let us run to Jesus Christ,
let us make our moan unto him, let us not fear to lay open our wounded souls
and distressed consciences unto him, who is so loving and merciful a Physician
to poor distressed souls. Art thou an hard hearted, and an impenitent sinner?
thou art sick at the very heart, thou art wounned by sin and Satan unto
eternal death, though thou see it not, yet thy poor soul is ready to bleed
unto eternal death, See, Oh see here Jesus Christ thy Savior, he offers
himself to become the Physician, he has tempered a plaster that is able to
heal thy sick soul if thou will come unto him: Alas, will thou then run on
in sin, and suffer thy poor soul to rot and fester with sin, and contemn
the mercy of God, and the kindness of Jesus Christ, who offers to heal thee,
and to help thy wounded soul? The poor man which fell among thieves who
spoiled him and wounded him, and left him for half dead: Luke 10.
alas, what had become of him if the good Samaritan had not come by and pitied
him? Sin and Satan has spoiled us and wounded us body and soul. Now alas,
what shall become of us, if that Jesus Christ the good Samaritan and blessed
Physician of our souls do not pity us, bind up our wounds, and power in the
oil of grace into our hearts, to cure our sick and wounded souls? but he is
so pitiful and tender hearted a Surgeon, that he will pull off the rotten
rags of our sins, and lap them up in the most precious white robe of his
own righteousness, and pour into them the oil of grace, even his own dear
and precious heart blood, to our everlasting comfort and salvation.

Secondly, we observe hence a further use, that if David does speak
excellently of this, saying, The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to
anger, and of great kindness: He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor
rewarded us according to our iniquities: Psalm 103.
for as high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward
them that fear him. As far as the East is from the West; so far has he
removed our sins from us: As a father has compassion on his children, so
has the Lord compassion on them that fear him. But some may object and say,
that it is true, the mercy of God is exceeding great indeed, but the sins
that I have committed against God, have not been so much sins of weakness,
or sins of infirmity, as they have been presumptuous horrible sins; yea,
multitudes of them, besides all this, I have continued a long time in them,
ten, twenty, thirty, or more years together; and therefore I may well doubt,
whether the Lord has any mercy for me: Esaias. 1.18.
Mark therefore what the Lord himself says unto such: Come, let us reason
together, says the Lord, though your sins were as Crimson, they shall be made
as white as Snow, and though they be as Scarlet, they shall be as wool. So
that no man can say without injury against his own soul, and giving the lie
unto the glorious majesty of God: My sin is greater then can be forgiven.
True it is, that the Scripture makes mention of an unpardonable sin that
shall never be forgiven either in this world, Mat. 12.31.
or in the world to come. The blasphemy against the spirit, but that is not in
respect of the sin it self, that it should exceed the mercies of God, or for
that God is not able to forgive it; but because they cannot relent, and repent
that commit it, they are so far gone that they can never Return back again;
for, as no sin is so small, but is able to plunge us down to the bottom of
hell if we live in it without repentance: so no sin is so great and
grievous, but upon repentance there is pardon and mercy to be found with God:
yet men must take heed that they abuse not Gods goodness and mercy, as an
occasion of liberty to turn his grace into wantonness, saying, as the manner
of some is, Oh, God is merciful, he is gracious to great and grievous
sinners, and so conclude thereupon, that they may live as they list, and so
defer their repentance, and Return unto God till the last gasp: but the
holy Apostle will teach us, an other use of Gods mercy then so, when he says,
Despisest thou the riches of his bountifulness and patience, Romans 2.4.
and long sufferance, not knowing that the bountifulness of God should lead
thee to repentance? So that, do we hear of the patience of God, the mercy of
God, and the long suffering of God: Oh, what may it teach us all but this
lesson especially, to make haste, and to defer no time to return unto him;
for, what is God so merciful and so patient, that he has spared thee so
long, and given thee so large a time of repentance? Oh then how just, and how
great shall thy condemnation be if thou reject it, and make no other use of
it, then to boulster thee in thy sins; but of this before.

Last of all, hete is matter of consolation to all the children of God that are
dejected and cast down with the sense and feeling of their sins, their
souls being heavy, and their consciences oppressed with their sin, they go
drouping and hang down their heads; well, let them cheer up their souls, such
they are that Christ calls, Math. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you, for my
yoke is easy, and my burden is light. When our terrors and temptations grow
thus strong upon us, and that Satan shall seek to persuade us, that our
sins are more then God can forgive, and the punishment that is due unto us
for them, is greater then can be pardoned: What shall we do at this time, but
labor herein to discover the Arch-enemy of our souls, Satan, who, thus as a
lying spirit seeks to draw us from this doctrine of Gods mercy, and to plunge
our souls into the gulf of desperation: but if our sins be never so great,
have we committed them without number, have we committed them never so long,
be they as Crimson, double dyed sins, as infectious as a Leprosy, as red as
Scarlet, and as filthy as dung; yet if God give repentance, and we can believe
here, we have the promise of Gods mercy, yea, assurance of forgiveness. Let us
return unto the Lord, and he will heal us, he will bind us up. Oh then, let
none be discouraged from seeking unto him for mercy: but let them seek it
rightly, and that by Repentance, and they shall obtain assuredly.

VERSE. 2. After two days he will reviue us, and the third day he will raise
us up, and we shall live in his sight.
IN these three verses, we first observed these three special points? First, a
most godly and christian exhortation of the believing Jews, wherein they
persuade each other mutually to Return unto the Lord. Secondly, the reasons
that they use the better to move and induce one another to perform this duty
of Repentance, the first drawn from the justice of God in these words, He has
wounded us, He has spoiled us: The second, drawn from his mercy: He will
beale us, he will bind us up. And because this reason drawn from the mercy of
God is a reason of all reasons, yea, a most special reason to move any one to
turn to God that has any spark of grace; therefore the the holy Ghost does
amplify this reason by two other circumstances; the first, drawn from the
shortness of the time, wherein the Lord afflicts his people; it is but for a
day or twain, or at the most for three days, a short time, the Lord will not
always be angry with his children, but howsoever, he shall chastise them for a
time, it will be but for a time, Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy
comes in the morning.

The second, taken from the greatness of his deliverance, that though he has
spoiled us, yet he will Revive us, and though he had grievously wounded us,
yet he will bind up all the bleeding wounds of our souls, if we will patiently
abide his leisure.

The third special point, is the fruit of true repentance, which are three:
The first is, that if we have once been spoiled of our own righteousness,
and wounded truly for our sins, and been healed, and wrapped up by the
merciful hand of God, We shall then live as in his presence, in all holiness
and righteousness. Secondly, he will power into our hearts that knowledge which
will bring us unto eternal life, to know his will, how he is affected toward
us: and this knowledge shall direct us to walk wisely before his face, so that
we shall desire to grow in this knowledge, and study daily to attain to a
greater measure of it: We shall endeavor our selves to know the Lord. And the
third and last fruit of Repentance is, that if we will draw near to God by
true repentance, he will draw near to us, to comfort us; set out by two
similitudes, the first of them is in these words: The Lords coming is prepared
as the morning: for indeed, many times it comes to pass in the betwixt the
Sun and the earth; so, many times we think that God forgets us, and hides
himself from us: but his coming to help us is prepared, and therefore most
certain. And he shall come as the morning, and therefore most comfortable: for
as the bright beams and clear countenance of the Sun after a windy and
boisterous night, is very comfortable: Even so, when after a cloudy night of
affliction, wherein we have been wounded and broken in our souls for our
sins: the bright beams of Gods mercy breaking then forth, shall be most
comfortable to glad and rejoice the soul of a poor sinner: This then is the
first fruit that shall follow our true conversion unto God, The Lords going
forth (to comfort us, and to deliver us) is prepared, the Lord has purposed
it, and determined it of fold, that those that repent and Return unto him,
shall find comfort and refreshing.

The second similitude which shows the second fruit of repentance, shows
that the Lords coming shall not only be comfortable, but also most
effectual, and most welcome unto the soul of this same poor sinner, that as
help and deliverance in time of greatrst danger is most welcome: So, when the
Lord shall come with great and effectual comfort, and bring help and
deliverance in time of greatest affliction and danger. Oh then it will be most
set by and esteemed, and to assure the poor child of God of this comfort in
time of need, the Prophet says, that the Lord will come as the Rain, even as
the latter rain unto the earth: Now as moderate rain is welcome as at all
times, so especially in the heat of summer after a great and a long drought,
when the earth is scorched with the heat of the Sun, and begins to capper
and gape for want of moisture, then a gracious and sweet shower is most
welcome: Even so, when a poor soul does pant and breath under the burden of
his sins, and is schorched with the burning heat of affliction: then if the
Lord in mercy send a gracious rain, an heavenly shower of his blessed mercy in
this heat of affliction, this would be most welcome, this would be most
comfortable; and this does the Lord promise and assure his Church and children
if they will Return unto him.

Of the exhortation we have spoke of before, as also of their reasons; the
first, drawn from his justice, He has wounded us, he has spoiled us. And
the second, drawn from his mercy, He will heal us, he will bind us up.

Now because this reason or argument drawn from the meccy of God, is the
chiefest of all other, as Paul teaches when he says, Romans 12.1.
I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God: therefore the holy Ghost here
amplifies this reason: first by the shortness of time wherein the Lord
afflicts his people, it is but for a day or two, a very short moment, After two
days, or at the most, in the third day, he will come unto us, if we humble
our selves under his mighty hand,

After two days. It is all one as if they should have said, True it is, the
Lord has grievously spoiled us for our sins, and wounded us for our
iniquities, so as his hand seems grievous unto us: yea, let us break off our
sins by repentance, and let us Return again unto him from whom we have
departed by our sins, and the Lord will soon remove his judgments from us.

In this verse note three things: first, the person from whom all help,
comfort and deliverance does come, He. Verse divided.


Secondly, the circumstance of time, in the which the Lord will deliver us:
After two days, or at the most, the third day.

Thirdly, the deliverance it self with the several fruits of it: He will
revive us, Raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.

The Person.
for this is that the Church acknowledges here when they say, He will revive
us, he will raise us up. It was he that had wounded them and spoiled them, so
they seek only to him for help and deliverance.

In all our miseries we must fly unto God for deliverance.
unto whom we should sue for deliverance, even to the Lord, who, as it is he
alone that kills, so it is he alone that makes alive again. And in the
performance of this duty, the holy Servants of God have gone before us, who in
the midst of all their troubles and afflictions, have evermore had recourse
unto God, as that of the Prophet David so often in the book of the Psalms:
Lord, how are my adversaries increased against me? Psalm. 3.12.
many say to my soul there is no help for him in his God, But thou O Lord art
my Buckler. Psalm. 7.1.2.
And again, O Lord in thee have I put my trust, save me from them that
persecute me, 1. King. 17. Exodus 12. Deu. 32.39.
and deliver me. Who was it that sent Manna to the Israelites when they wanted
bread, but the Lord? Who was it that could give water out of a stony rock, but
the Lord? And who was it again that could command the Ravens to feed his
Prophet, but the Lord? And who was it that brought the people out of Egypt when
they were so pursued by Pharaoh, even to the red Sea, where through they passed
safely when the Egyptians perished, but the Lord? This does Moses set down, 2.
Kin. 19.3. Act. 12.1.2. Io 5.14, Dan. 9.17.
at large when he speaks in the person of God: Behold now, for I am he, and
there is no Gods with me, I kill and give life, I wound and make whole, neither
is there any that can deliver out of my hand: This duty was practiced of good
King Ezechi^s when Jerusalem was besieged, and the Temple was in danger to be
desolated? What was the course that this godly King did take in this time of
great calamity and misery of the Church? surely, he sought unto the Lord, and
prayed, saying: Io. 11.41.
O Lord I beseech th^e save us out of his hand, that all the Kingdoms of the
earth may know, that thou (O Lord) art only God. Besides these plentiful
examples, and the like whereof the Scriptures are full; we have the promise of
God that he will hear us, and deliver us if we seek only for help and
deliverance at his hands. As that place of the Psalmist: Psalm. 50.15. Mat. 7.7.
Psalm. 34.9. and 37.5.
Call upon me in the day of thy trouble and I will hear thee, and deliver
thee. And again, Ask and you shall have, Seek and you shall find, Knock and
it shall be opened unto you. Oh what gracious and merciful promises has God
made unto his Church and people, and all to make us to rely upon him? It is not
tribulation, it is not afflictions that shall any whit hinder our blessedness,
the Lord has promised to sanctify them all unto us, and that they shall work
for our good, they shall never depart from us, but they shall leave a blessing
behind them. Now let us come to the uses of this Doctrine.

The Doctrine being thus cleared, that as all judgments Brand of a wicked man
to resort to Witches for health in time of distress.
and that the Lord does strike their bodies with long and tedious sickness,
loss of Cattle, or the like, where they might see clearly the hand of God,
and the finger of the Lord: What do they, out by and by ^^nd out to some
Cunning man (as they call them) of Cunning women, or rather indeed, unto the
Devil himself, never look unto the purpose and providence of God which
rules and governs all things from the highest to the lowest in the world,
without whose purpose and providence nothing could come to pass, no, not the
least ache in a man's little finger, as our Savior teaches, The farthing
Sparrow cannot light on the ground without the providence of your heavenly
Father. Oh, what folly and madness is this in men, that they should thus
forsake the Lord, and run to the Devil; surely, it is a note and a brand of
a wicked man, for the child of God in the time of misery and affliction does
ever turn unto God by true and unfeigned repentance, and does bring forth
fruits worthy amendment of life, they believe in God and rest upon him for
comfort and deliverance: But of this before.

Secondly, we may observe hence the endless Comfort to the godly, that he is
privy to their miseries, and will deliver them.
for if the Lord command us to seek unto him in time of trouble and great
distress, surely, then the Lord will not send us away empty, not suffer us to
depart away ashamed: let our present care then be to serve the Lord, and then
we shall have our part and portion in this perogatiue, which all the wicked
and ungodly wretches of the world come short off: I called upon the Lord in
trouble (says the Prophet David) and the Lord heard me at large: Mat. 28.
All other comforts come short of this, that in time of Sickness, Trial,
Trouble, Assaults of Satan, Temptation and hour of death, we shall find
comfort if we Return unto him* Oh* blessed life, Oh happy condition, that God
(...) leave his comfortless, but will be thus with them (...) end of the
world. So that no man can now (...) vain to serve the Lord: Mal. 3.14.
And what profit (...) ^^^ping the commandment, herein we see our Labor is
not in vain in the Lord, because in the midst of all our troubles, miseries
and afflictions here, Romans 8.37.
We are more then Conquerours through him that has loved us. Oh then let us
go unto God, and seek ever for help and deliverance at his hands: No Father
is more ready and willing to hear his child, then the Lord is ready and near
at hand to hear us. Let us tread in the steps of David, Ezechias, the Prophets
and Apostles, and other holy men of God, who have ever in their greatest
troubles resorted unto the Lord for help and deliverance. And howsoever the
Papists may teach men to pray to Saints and Angels, to the Virgin Mary, and to
Stocks and Stones, pretending therein humility, that they will not be so
bold to come to God themselves, but use the mediation of such as are about
him: Yet let us know, that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Moses and the Prophets
were as humble men, yea, more humble then any Papist can be; yet their humility
did no whit hinder their holy boldness to come into Gods presence, and to sue
to him for grace and favor.

The second general observation, is the circumstance of time, in the which the
Lord will deliver us: After two days, and the third day he will raise us up.
q. d. True it is the Lord has grievously spoiled us for our sins, and
wounded us for our iniquities: we have tasted and felt the powerful hand of
God upon us, there is no way to escape his judgments, but to break off our
sins by true and unfeigned repentance, After two days, etc. Circumstance of
time.


(...) we gather, that the afflictions that are laid (...) children, are
neither very durable, for or intolerable, Afflictions laid upon Gods
children, are neither durable, nor incurable. Esaias. 54.7.8. 2. Cor. 4.17.
for God will raise us out of them all. This does the Lord himself make clear
unto us by his Prophet, when he says, For a little time have I forsaken thee,
but with great compassion will I gather thee: for a moment in mine anger hide I
myself from thee, for a little season, but with everlasting mercy have I had
compassion on thee. The holy Apostle Saint Paul teaches us that our light
afflictions which last but for a moment, bring unto us a far more excellent,
even an eternal weight of glory. Where note how the Apostle calls all our
afflictions first light, Mat. 11.28.
for Christ's yoke is easy, and his burden is light. And secondly, Momentany,
lasting but a very short time, a day or twain as the Text says here: Hereunto
comes the saying of the Psalmist: Psalm. 30.5.
He indureth but a while in his anger, and in his favor is life: heaviness
may endure for a night, 1. Cor. 10.13.
but joy comes in the morning. Again, They that sow in tears, shall reap
in joy: So that the afflictions of Gods people last but from evening till
morning, Heb. 12.2.
from sowing time till harvest; and howsoever God makes the wicked men his
Rod, Psalm. 37.74.
yet the Rod of the wicked shall not always rest upon the lotte of the
righteous: Psalm. 125.3.
Though the Lord appoint his children for a time to be afflicted, yet it shall
be but for a time, Heb. 18. Genesis 47.14.
And which shall come, will come, and will not tarry. This point of Doctrine is
further cleared by the example of Joseph, the Israelites in Egypt, of David, of
Daniel, and of many of the Saints and dear servants of God, Exodus 12.41.
who suffered shame, and endured the Cross; were some of them tried by one
judgment and affliction, some by another, yet the Lord awaked at last, as a
man out of sleep, and as a Giant refreshed with wine, and when the time of
refreshing came, they were delivered. So that by this that has been said, Dan.
6.23.
we may safely conclude of the truth of this point, that how (...) ^he Lord may
humble his Church and people (...) some Cross for a time, yet he will never
leave them destitute of his help and comfort, but at last deliver them out of
all.

And the Reasons are plain: for first, the Lord is He knows whereof we be
made, he remembers that we are but dust: What Father but will pity the
wants of his Child, and when it is ready to fall into danger, will not help it?
the Lord is more tender to his children, then any earthly Father can be
toward his child: Mat. 6.7.11
Now if ye which be evil, know to give your children good things how much
more will your heavenly Father? And therefore says the Apostle, That God is
faithful, which will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, 1.
Cor. 10.13.
but will even give the issue with the Temptation, that we may be made able
to bear it.

Secondly, his ears are always open to the cries I have seen, I have surely
seen (says the Lord) the troubles of my people, I have also heard their cries,
and I will deliver them: So long therefore as we have a voice to call upon
God, or a heart to sigh and groan unto him, we need not to doubt of our
deliverance: so that, whether we consider that the Lord is privy to our wants
or weakness, and always hears the prayers, yea, the sighs and groans of his
children; we need not any way to doubt, but that the Lord will put an end unto
all our troubles here. The uses follow.

Seeing then that the Lord our God in afflicting lesson, namely, to possess
our souls with patience, and to wait the Lords leisure: for if we seek to
him by true repentance and hearty prayer; He that shall come and will come,
Luke. 21.
and will not tarry: This must be our comfort, that after two days, or at the
most three days he will visit us, and rid us out of our trouble and
affliction (if the Lord do see the same to be good for us:) And let us take
heed that we fall not to murmur against God, to repine and grudge at his
chastisements, much less to charge God of cruelty: no, he afflicts but with
light affliction, and such as be but for a moment, a very short time, and
therefore let us run to God, patiently endure his trials, kiss his rod, and
his hand that smites us, seeing he afflicts us for our good, and seeks only
our reformation, comfort, and salvation.

revive his children after two days, or at the third day at the most? Do we
not see many good Christians that are the dear children of God, have grievous
afflictions, some sickness, some poverty, some imprisonment, some exercised with
the grief of a wounded conscience, and they pray earnestly for remedy, yet the
Lord does still continue them in their misery; how then does this stand, that
afflictions last but a day or two, or some short time?

An. True it is indeed, that the Lord oftentimes throws his children into
continual miseries and afflictions, their faith and patience, to mortify
their carnal hearts, to make them more earnest with God in prayer, and by
their continual afflictions to preserve and keep them, and prevent them from
manifold sins and rebellions. And yet notwithstanding, God hears his
children in their miseries, and forsakes them not, but in two days, or at the
most in three days, that is, in a very short time, sends them comfort; though
he take not their afflictions away, yet he gives them that which is better for
them. Our Savior Christ prayed unto his Father most earnestly with cries and
tears, to be freed from death, Heb. 5.7.
And was heard in that he feared. How was our Savior Christ heard in his
Petition, praying to be freed from death, and yet he must needs taste of the
bitter cup of death? Ans. He was heard on this manner: first, in that he was
strengthened, not only to bear and suffer the death upon the Cross, but to
overcome it, and to vanquish it, his Father sent an Angel to comfort him, and
afterward he was freed from the sorrows of death.

And so it is with the poor members of Christ, they be afflicted, they live in
sorrow, in poverty, in sickness, in grief of mind: Well, the Lord he gives
them patience to suffer this affliction, so as it is not tedious and grievous
unto them, and by his continual afflicting of them he humbles them, and purges
them of their cankered corruption, and stirs up in them the feruency of
prayer, makes them out of love with the world, and makes them more to hunger
after his mercy, and to depend on his fatherly goodness. And thus though men
think God forgets us in our afflictions, yet he does remember us, and gives
us that which is better for us, then if he should altogether remove his
correction. Jacob served seven years for Rahel, and it seemed unto him but a
few days, because he loved her: Genesis 29.20.
And surely, if we be persuaded of the love of God, that though he afflict us
seven times seven years, we shall think it but a short time.

But the child of God often complains, that they be afflicted not only with
continual poverty and sickness, but that they be tormented with grief of
Soul, and feel the heavy burden of their sins, and the anger of God
against them for the same: yet remember what befell thy Lord and Master Jesus
Christ when he went to execution, the cruel Jews made him carry his own
Cross on his back so long, till he could carry it no longer he was so
faint; then behold, the Lord sent a good Simon of Siren to carry his Cross
for him: So, art thou crossed with affliction? is thy soul wounded with the
grief and smart of sin, and do thou pant and breath under the heavy
burden of the Cross? remember what thy Savior says unto thee: Come unto me
all ye that travel and be heavy laden, Mat. 11.28.
and I will refresh you: If thou can run to Jesus Christ in the midst of
thy grief and misery by true repentance and earnest prayer, then he will
become a blessed Simon to bear thy Cross for thee, he will put under his
own shoulder, he will take thy sins, and the anger of God, and bear them
on his own back; and if we can but fling our selves into the blessed Arms
of his mercy, he will give everlasting rest unto our souls.

And lastly, whereas many of Gods children complain, Lam. 1.12.
as Jeremy, See if there were ever any sorrow like my sorrow; And as the
Prophet David complains, Has God forgotten to be gracious, and has he shut
up his loving kindness in displeasure? Yet they must know and confess, that
God does in a short time comfort his children, and that his afflictions are
neither troublesome nor tedious, for though they last for the space of a man's
life, what is a man's life, but a spanne long? and a thousand years with God,
are but as a day. Again, when they be past and gone, though they lasted many
years, it seems but a short time. And what is twenty years affliction in
comparison of eternal joy and happiness in heaven? who had not rather lead
their lives in misery here, then in eternal torment in Hell fire in the life
to come?

Well, seeing the afflictions of Gods children be Paul teaches us, namely, to
rejoice in affliction, knowing, Romans 5.3.
that affliction brings forth patience; patience in suffering brings forth
experience of Gods love and favor; and experience, hope; and hope makes us
rest our selves wholly content to wait the Lords leisure; and were it not for
this hope that God will one day ease us, the hearts of Gods children would burst
in sunder; and his hope makes us not ashamed, seeing that such is the love of
God, that he never fails nor forsakes his children: Many indeed are our
infirmities, fears, cares, sorrows and troubles here, yet in the midst of
them all we must say with the Prophet: Psalm. 42.5.
Why art thou cast down Oh my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me?
Wait on God, for I will yet give him thanks, he is my present help and my
God: Let us not therefore despair in the time of trouble, Romans 16.20.
The God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly, he is faithful
which has promised. Affliction must be our portion here, we must then get
faith and patience into our souls, that so we may hold out unto the end.

The third general observation, is the deliverance He will revive us, he
will raise us up, The deliverance it self.
and we shall live in his sight; Ephesians. 2.1.
which words are expounded by the Apostle Paul, when he says: Ye that were
dead in trtspasses and sins has he quickened: Meaning thereby, that until
such time as we are quickened, and that the Lord does revive us by the grace of
Regeneration, we be no better then dead men, howsoever we walk and talk,
hear and perform the actions of men; yet in respect of any spiritual life,
or any spiritual actions, alas, we are stark dead till the Lord revive us:
this being so, we learn hence a twofold Doctrine: First, that by nature we
are all stark dead in trespasses and sins: And secondly, that our Regeneration
is as hardly wrought, as to raise up a dead man, and to restore him again to
life.

All men by nature are dead, in respect of any spiritual life.
namely, dead in trespasses and sins, sin is the bane and death of our
souls: for the Wages of sin is death: Death brings us into the full and
absolute power of the Devil, that we are all of us thus servants unto sin:
It is plain by the Apostles complaint: Ephesians. 2.1. Romans 6.23. Romans 7.14. Romans
6.16. Genesis 2.17.
I am carnal sold under sin, and then unto whom soever we give our selves
as servants to obey, his servants we are. Now that we are all by nature
servants unto sin, and unto death, it cannot be denied; for what was it that
God said unto Adam, In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the
death: As soon as Adam had sinned, presently the sentence took place, and
Adam is now become the child of death, and eternal destruction became his
portion; and this is the condition of all Adams posterity; there is not the
greatest, the noblest, the wealthiest, nor the fairest amongst the sons of
men, but we are thus bound till the Son make us free: Men are not only
sick with sin, or wounded by sin, or half dead, but stark dead, bereft
of all spiritual sense and motion: And this does the Apostle most lively and
effectually set out unto us in another place, when he says, Ye were once
darkness, Ephesians. 5.8.
but now are light in the Lord; He does not say, we were in darkness, Io. 3.6.
for then perhaps we might have come of our selves into the light again: But
ye were darkness: Darkness it self, yea, nothing else but Darkness: and
hence again is it, that natural men are called Flesh, not Fleshly, but flesh
it self; and the wisdom, that is, Romans 8.7.
the best part that can be in a natural man, what is it but Enmity with God,
it may bring a man to Hell, but it cannot lead him one inch nearer unto heaven:
and therefore being thus stark dead in sin, Alas, what can a dead man do to
help himself? No more can a natural man move so much as one finger to procure
salvation to himself; no, no, being dead in sin, we cannot so much as think
one good thought; much less have we free will of our selves to seek for
salvation, until such time as the Lord has revived us, and quickened us by the
Spirit of grace. Lazarus in the Gospel had layne dead four days in the
grave, so as he began to rotte and to stink; yet when our Savior Christ
cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, Io. 11.
come forth, he arose incontinently, and came and stood forth: This is our
case and condition, yea, the estate and condition of every soul in the world,
we be stark dead in trespasses and sins, nay, we lie rotting and putrefying
in the grave of our sins, and until Jesus Christ by his spirit and loud
voice of the preaching of the Gospel, which is the Word of life, shall breath
within us the breath of life, and revive us poor souls, we cannot move so
much as one little finger to the Kingdom of heaven.

This may serve in the first place to confute that erroneous he can dispose
himself to the work of his regeneration, Condemns the Doctrine of the
Papists touching Free Will.
whose opinion, if it were granted, then were the power of God less seen in
our second birth, then in our first birth, which were injurious to the Spirit
of God so to think: for, what can a dead man do to his own quickening and
raising up from the grave? can he turn himself, or any way fit or prepare
himself to be raised? surely no, it is altogether impossible, nay, let a dead
man have all the help that may be to be Raised up, yet unless the soul be
given unto him, all is in vain; so fares it with the natural man, he can by
no means dispose himself to any spiritual action or motion, unless some
spiritual life be put into him: But what says the Adversary, he may give his
consent to his quickening, though he quicken not himsele: But say I, what
consent, call we the consent of a man that is dead; but not to stand upon
their presumptuous doctrine of Free will, the which amongst many other points of
Popery maintained by them, has lifted up many so high amongst them with this
vain opinion of their own worthiness, that they find not themselves to stand
in need for the Lord to lift them up.

Then in the fear of God let every man and woman, Serves to humble us in that
we are dead, till the Lord quicken us by his spirit.
seeing we be as the poor Flies in Winter stark dead, not able to move our
little finger to heaven, pray unto the Lord, that he would cause the blessed
Sunshine of his Word and Gospel to shine upon us, to warm our cold and
benumbed souls, to quicken our dead consciences by the word of Life, and the
blessed work of his holy Spirit: for, so long as God does not quicken us, nor
revive us, alas, our souls be dead in sin, and this death is the next step
unto eternal death in the fire of Hell: And therefore their case is dangerous
and miserable which sleep and snort in sin, and lie stark dead in the grave
of sin, until it please the Lord to revive them by the preaching of the
Gospel, which is the Power of God unto Salvation, to Revive and to quicken our
dead souls. This being so, Note.
we see then it is no marvel though many that are present in the Assemblies of
Gods people at the preaching of the Word, and yet reap no profit by it; the
reason is, they are dead, now sound a Trumpet in a dead man's ear and he hears
it not: Even so, Esaias. 58.
let the Minister of Gods Word cry never so loud, and lift up his voice like a
Trumpet, men are no more moved, either with the comforts of the Word, or with
the threats of the Law, then the seats men sit on, because they are dead,
till the Lord do please to put life into them; And as for those that have
ears to hear with profit and comfort, bless God for it, and give him the
glory for so great a mercy; for certain it is, by nature the condition of all
men is alike, till the Lord has wrought in us the work of grace, and Revived
us with the breath of life. Oh what cause then has man by nature to swell with
pride, or to be lifted up with any conceit at all of his own worthiness,
though they have never so many excellent parts of nature, as wit, capacity,
strength, beauty, or outward gifts, as riches, honor, authority, etc. yet
surely, men may see, that if they be not Revived, if they be not borne
again, translated out of Adam, and ingrafted into Jesus Christ; alas, they are
but as a dead corpse that is trimmed and stuck with so many goodly flowers; yea
the due consideration of that miserable estate and condition in the which they
are by nature, may cause them to droupe, Tit. 1.15.
and to hang down their heads, for by their own filthiness and impuritie,
all these their excellent ornaments are defiled, and become impure, for so
says the Apostle, To those that are defiled is nothing pure, but even their
minds and consciences are defiled. Oh, if this point were well considered, how
it would pull down the pride of man's heart, and make men to hasten to come out
of so fearful an estate and condition.

Regeneration a work of new creation. Romans 5.12. Romans 6.23.
as to raise up a dead man, and to restore him again to life, as hard a thing
to save a soul that is dead, as to give life to one that has a long time lain
rotting in the grave. Death is gone over all, says the Apostle, and The wages
of sin is death. And God told Adam, Genesis 2.17.
that in that day that he should eat of the forbidden fruit, He should die
the death. Now, in so much as we have all taken part with him in his
disobedience, we must also partake with him in his punishment, and the
punishment is Death, not death in respect of any being of the creature (as all
wicked and ungodly sinners might wish it were:) but Death, in respect of our
eternal separation from God, In whose presence is life, and at whose right
hand is pleasure for evermore: This is our estate and condition by nature,
until the Lord do Revive us: and to Revive us, and quicken us, is as hard a
matter, as to raise up a dead man out of his grave. This does the Prophet David
acknowledge, when he desired of God, that he would Create in him a new heart.
Psalm. 51.10.
And surely, it is as great a matter to Create a new heart, as for the Lord
again to Create a new world; yea, and in some respects it may seem harder,
for in the Creation of the world, the Lord but spoke the Word, and all was
made, there was no hinderance, there was no opposition; but in the creation of
the heart a new, there are many lets and hindrances; first, within a man, for
every man by nature is an enemy unto his own salvation, and the flesh resists
this work: besides, the Devil he labors by all means possible to hinder so
blessed a work. Besides all this, it is a work of great difficulty, not
accomplished without great labor and pain, and therefore it is called in the
Scripture, A Birth, a Death, a Circumcision: now as no Birth, no Death, no
cutting off the Flesh can be without pain and sorrow; no more can the
conversion of a sinner; the Infant is not delivered out of the Mothers womb
without pain; and do thou think (O man) to part with sin that is within
thee, which was conceived in the womb with thee, and ever since has been
nourished and brought up with thee as a familiar companion, and not taste of
pain, Ephesians. 2.1.
and heart smart in thy new birth? no assuredly, it will not be, but it will
cost thee much sorrow, many a sigh, and many a bitter tear before this work of
grace be effectually wrought in thee. It is not in this case, as in producing
the forms of many Natural things here below which are brought e potentia
materiae, out of a capable pronenesse of the thing it self, to receive such a
form: but in the work of our Regeneration, God does by his spirit deliver the
mind from blindness and ignorance, the will from rebellion, the affections
from disorder, and all the powers and faculties of the soul from corruption,
when man is altogether opposite thereto.

This Doctrine does justly condemn most men and at the heart with sin, and
unless thou be revived and quickened, and raised out of the grave of sin by
the wonderful work of God, thou can not be saved. Our Savior Christ being
working of some great miracle, he tells his Disciples that they should do
greater works then that; namely, they should save men's souls, and that is
far greater then to save and help the body. God created all things with his
bare word, breathed into Adam the Breath of Life; Genesis 2. Io. 11.
Our Savior Christ raised Lazarus with his word; but before he can raise a
Sinner out of the grave of sin, and put into us the breath of spiritual
life, the Son of God must come from Heaven and suffer a most cruel and
shameful death, 1. Cor. 1.21. John. 17.17.
even the death upon the Cross before he can quicken and Revive us; and
therefore it is not so easy a matter as most men take it to be, to become a
good Christian: No, no, it is the hardest thing in the world to become a good
Christian, and so to be saved. And therefore seeing this is the estate and
condition of us all; Oh how careful ought we to be to use all good means
that God has appointed, Act. 15.9.
to save our souls, as namely, the Word preached, the Sacraments, Prayer,
Meditations in the Law of God, seeing that by these means the Lord does
quicken and Revive our dead souls. Ps. 119.


Adam by nature, until such time as the Lord does quicken us, and Revive us;
let no man then content himself with this devilish conceit and persuasion,
that he can at his own time and leisure deliver himself from the bondage of
sin and Satan, as it is the corrupt thought of many, that though they have
been the servants of sin and of death, twenty or forty years together, yet
they think that one Lord have mercy upon me, will open the Heaven gates: but O
thou vain man, O thou vain woman, Oh, see here, that it is the Lord that
must work in thee this work of grace, for by nature thou art Reprobate unto
every good work: And this new birth is not given to every one; No, no, only
Gods children, who are careful to use the means, as hearing the Word preached
and taught, Sacrament, Prayer, etc. for, by these does the Lord Revive us and
quicken us, else we cannot think a good thought: and as the Lord must begin
grace in our hearts, so he must continue it, and increase it; and therefore it
is said here, Reu. 20.6.
He shall raise us up, and make us able to walk in the duties of piety and
religion, of faith and repentance, and sincere obedience: Holy and blessed are
they that have part in the first Resurrection, for, on them the second Death
has no power. If then God has begun to Revive thee, and to Raise thee out
of the grave of sin: Oh, then thou art blessed and happy, for thou may be
sure that the second death, that is, eternal death, shall have no power over
thee: but as for those which are yet in the state of Nature, unregenerate, not
Revived, not quickened by the life of grace; Alas, alas, they be at the next
door to eternal death, And unless, they seek unto the Lord by true and
unfeigned repentance, that he may Revive their dead Souls, and Raise them up
from the grave of sin, they must needs perish eternally: And therefore,
until such time as the Lord shall Revive us, and that we shall feel the
power of Christ's death within us dye to sin, whatsoever the vain and foolish
persuasion of our hearts may be, yet we are in a most cursed and wretched
estate and condition.

And in the third day he will raise us up,

These words contain in them the second degree of their deliverance; where we
may see that there be degrees of our spiritual life; Regeneration begun, must
be continued.
As we see a child first learnes to stand alone, then to go in the hands of
the Nurse, and after, coming to more strength, to walk alone: So fares it
with Gods Children; First, the Lord must Revive and quicken us, else we cannot
think a good thought; and as the Lord must begin grace in our hearts, so he
must continue it, and increase it, and therefore it is said here: He shall
raise us up, and make us to walk in the duties of Piety and religion, of
Faith, Repentance, and true obedience.

So that the point of Doctrine which we are to observe, hence is this, that
the work of Regeneration begun in us, must be continued, and daily more and
more increased; so as we may feel the power of the Spirit daily subduing
sin in us, 2. Cor. 7.1.
and our natural corruption and carnal affections that are so deeply rooted
in us by nature. It is the exhortation of the blessed Apostle, Heb. 6.1.
That we cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, and
grow up unto full holiness in the fear of God. And the Author of the Epistle
to the Hebrews exhorts men, not to satisfy them selves with the Principles of
Religion, which he calls the Doctrine of the beginning of Christ, as though
it were enough that they had made an entrance and a beginning, but that they
be led forward to Perfection. q. d. It is true, you have begun well, yet
ye must think that it is not sufficient, but there is a kind of perfection to
be aimed at. And Paul speaking of the excellent estate of a Christian, Phil.
3.13.14.
says, I count not my self that I have attained it: And yet Paul was
wonderfully expert in the mystery of Christ: But one thing I do says he, I
forget that which is behind, and I endeavor my self to that which is before,
and follow hard toward the mark for the price of the highest calling of God
in Christ Jesus. 2. Tim. 3.13.
It is noted as a brand of a wicked man, that he waxes worse and worse, Deu.
29, 19.
and falls away daily more from one extremity to another: adding Drunkenness to
thirst whereas, on the contrary part, It is a true note of the spirit of God in
a man when they grow in grace, and are led nearer and nearer to perfection. And
this same spiritual growth in grace and in godliness, is not in man's power by
nature to perform, no more then the beginning thereof, as we heard before, but
it is the proper work of the holy Ghost: 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
The very God of peace sanctify you through out: It cannot come from our
parents: For who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? Job. 13. Job.
1.16.
but Of his fullness we all receive grace for grace. It is a point no doubt,
well known unto us in speculation, that we are to go on from one degree of
sactification to another, from one measure of grace to another: and therefore I
forbear any further to enlarge the point.

This may serve to reprove those that think they have got knowledge enough
into their souls like the Laodicea; Reu. 3.16.
and are not ashamed many times to cloak their own neglect of holy duties, to
say, that they know as much as the best Preacher of them all: And indeed, were
it not so that men were so persuaded, that for matters of religion they were
forward enough, and had learned enough; It could not be that they should make
so little account of the means to bring them unto more perfection: How is it
possible, that they should not be ashamed of themselves, to be found out of
Gods house on the Saboath day, and to make their chimney corners their Chapel
of ease? And how could it be, that they should be now as ignorant in the
grounds of Religion, as they were many years ago? Alas, how can this hold
good with this Text of Scripture, that those that are once revived by God, and
quickened by the Spirit of grace, that they are also Raised up, that is, daily
more and more drawn away from the earth and earthly things, to Seek those
things that are above? Oh, let us look unto our own ways betimes, And turn
our feet into his Testimonies. And when we perceive in us any beginning or
inclination to seek after grace, resolve with David, to Run the way of Gods
commandments. Psalm. 119.
Not to go forward, is to go backward in Religion; And howsoever the gift of
Regeneration, the spirit of grace can never utterly be extinguished and lost;
yet when we grow not in it, it is just with God that we should lose the
comfort of that grace, and the feeling of that joy we were wont to find in
the same; and we can never recover it without much sorrow and grief of heart.
Let us therefore remember that exhortation of the Holy Ghost: He that is holy,
let him be more holy; and not to content our selves with the beginning of
grace, Reu. 22.11.
but labor to go on in grace, from one degree to another, till at last we
become perfect men in Christ Jesus.

Luke 11.26.
Their last estate (says our Savior) shall be worse then the first. And
again, It had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, 2. Pet. 2.21.
then after they have known it, to turn away. The righteous are by Solomon
compared to the Sun that shines more and more till it be perfect day. Pro.
4.18.
Ezec. 47.3.4.
And the Prophet Ezechiel figures out the graces of God by waters flowing from
the Sanctuary, which were at the first to the Ankles, Heb. 6.6.
then to the Knees, then to the Loins; and last, as a River that could not be
passed over: so are the graces the which God bestows upon his children. And
therefore on the contrary part, what is it but a fearful judgment of God upon
the soul of that man that does decay in spiritual grace, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
and a fearful sign of Reprobation? for, They which have been once
enlightened, and have tasted of the gifts of Gods spirit, if they once fall
back, it is impossible they should be revived by repentance: Oh then, 2. Pet.
3.18.
let the exhortation of the Apostle be precious with us, That we increase yet
more and more, that we grow in grace, and be led Forward to perfection; that
so we may minister true comfort and rejoicing unto our own souls, that the
Lord has begun that good work in us, that he has Revived us, even because
he has Raised us up, and that there is a spiritual growth of Gods graces in
us.

And we shall live in his sight.
THe third principal point in this Text, is the fruit The fruit of true
repentance. Mat. 12.33. Mat. 3.10.
as our Savior Christ says; Every tree is known by his fruit: And again,
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is h^wen down, and cast into
the fire. Even so, that Repentance which brings not forth fruit in our life
and conversation; namely, a reformation of the whole man to live in the fear
of God, and in the true knowledge of God, it is but a barren and fruitless
faith, a counterfeit and fained Repentance. And therefore, though thou profess
thy self a Christian, and take thy self to be the child of God, hear the
Word, and receyuest the Sacrament; yet if thou find not these fruits of faith
and repentance, more or less in thy heart and life, thou deceyuest thine own
Soul; for it cannot be, that those which truly believe in Christ, and repent
unfeignedly, but they must needs lead holy lives in righteousness and true
obedience.

And we shall live in his fight. First, the Lord must quicken and Revive us,
then we shall live: He must first raise us up, else we cannot Live in his
sight: For indeed, we are like unto trees, which seem all the Winter time to
be dead trees, without buddes, blossoms, leaves or fruit; but in the Spring
time, they are warmed and revived through the heat of the Sun, and bring forth
fruit accordingly: Even so, all the Winter, that is, the time of our remaining
in the estate of nature: We are Dead in trespasses and sins, and we are so
frozen in our sins, that we have neither budde nor blossom, neither can we
bring forth any fruit till such time as Jesus Christ warm out dead and
benumbed souls, and quicken us by the blessed beams of his grace and mercy.
When as the dead bones of the man were put into the grave of the man of God,
they revived: Even so, when as Jesus Christ shall but touch our dead hearts by
the gracious working of his blessed Spirit, we shall be Revived, raised up,
and we shall live in his sight.

We shall live in his sight. These words may be taken two ways, Gods sight,
What?
1. Vel in fau^^ (...), that is, in his favor: Vel conspectu illius, that is,
in his most blessed presence; both of which Expositions be profitable and fit
for this place.

First, We shall live in his sight, that is in his favor, and in the bright
Beams and Sunshine of Gods mercy, 1. Gods favor.
for so are these words, Before his face, often taken in the Scriptures, Psalm.
31.22.
as that of the Prophet David, I said in my haste, I am cast from thy presence,
or face. Again, Psalm. 4.6.
the same Prophet says in another place: Many say, who will show us any good?
But Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. So these words,
We shall live in thy sight, that is, we shall live in thy favor, whereas, for
our sins thou have been justly angry, and offended with us, and turned away
thy love and favor, and been angry with us: Yet now, if we shall repent and
turn unto thee, we shall then find thee gracious and merciful unto us, and
that thou will show us thy loving and amiable countenance, now after the time
that thou have plagued us.

Here we are taught what is the woeful fruit of Godly by repentance, are
brought into Gods favor.
to auert and turn away the loving countenance of the Lord from a man, and to
cast him out of his favor. As also, what a wonderful blessing we get and
obtain at Gods hands by true and unfeigned repentance; namely, this, that we
shall then live in his sight, that is, in his favor, when we shall enjoy his
loving favor, his goodness, and comfortable presence. This Doctrine is clear
by the scope of the whole Scriptures, how that the godly by their hearty
repentance, and Turning unto God, have a gracious acceptance with God, and are
received again into favor: He will not always be chiding, Psalm. 1 c 3.9.
neither keeps he his anger for ever. Indeed, he shows sometimes his
heavy countenance and his wrathful displeasure against sin and sinners: but
so soon as the sinner is humbled, and Returns unto him by unfeigned repentance,
he receives him to mercy; the sin is pardoned, and the punishment removed:
When David had sinned in numbering the people, 2. Sam. 24.17 1. Chr. 21.15.
the Lord was moved to wrath against David for this his sin, and sent the
pestilence three days in Israel, that many thousands of the people dyed: But
when David's heart smote him, and that he had confessed his sin, the Lord
repented him of the evil, and said unto the Angel, It is enough, let thy hand
cease: This is further confirmed by that general proclamation of the Prophet
Ezechiel, where he says: Ezez. 18.21.22.
If the wicked will return from the sins he has committed, and keep all
my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live,
and not die: All his transgressions that he has committed, shall not be
mentioned unto him, but in the righteousness that he has done he shall
live. This is further confirmed unto us by the example of the Prodigal son,
a true pattern of every penitent Sinner, when he had entertained within
himself this purpose of heart, to Return again to his Father, his Father
prevented him with his love, he went out to meet him, and when he met him, such
was his joy that he fell on his neck, and kissed him. This Father of the
Prodigal, is indeed God our Father, and his love and kindness remembered in that
Parable, is recorded for all posterities to the end of the World, to assure
them of Gods merciful dealing toward those that do truly repent and turn
unto him, that he will receive them again into favor, which is here meant
by The sight of God, or his presence. And the Prophet David says, Ps. 16.11.
In his presence is life and fullness of joy and happiness for evermore. And
thus we see, that howsoever by our sins we make a separation betwixt God and
us, and cause him to plague and punish us here; yet, His mercy is over all his
works, And upon our repentance he will receive us again into favor.

let us not think that the Lord will shut that door of mercy upon us, ere we
repent, who has opened the same to so many before us, He has been found of
them that sought him not, says the Prophet, Hos. 11.4.
and will he hide himself from us, if forsaking our sins, we seek him in
Spirit and truth? His mercies showed to others, must be unto us, Cords of Love,
to draw us amongst the rest unto him.

The Doctrine being thus cleared: Let us now come to the uses of it.

First, seeing there is mercy in store for the Penitent, and howsoever by sin
we deserved utterly to be cast out of Gods favor, yet if we can repent and
Return unto him, he will receive us again into favor, And we shall live in
his sight. It requires of us speedily to repent, and to Turn unto him, and
not to defer our repentance from day to day, lest it come to pass, that our
hearts be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. As no sin is so great,
but upon repentance it is pardonable: so, no sin is so small, but without
repentance it is able to pluck us down to the bottom of Hell. Let us then
take heed that we abuse not his goodness, nor to take occasion of liberty,
Romans 4.2.
to turn his grace into wantonness; for, we do not know how soon the
thread of our frail life will be cut off, when there shall be no place for
Repentance, though with Esau we seek the same with Tears. Heb. 12. Luke
12.20. 1. These. 5.3. Luke 17.27.
There was but a little time between Soul eat, drink, etc. and Thou fool,
this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee. And again, the Apostle
says, When men shall say, peace, peace, then shall come upon them sudden
destruction. The old World never thought themselves more secure, then when the
flood came upon them: G 9.23.
The morning was fair when Lot went out of Sodom, and yet before night were
the Sodomites destroyed. Act. 12.23.
Well was it with Herod when he began his Oration, but before it was ended,
the Angel of the Lord smote him that he was eaten up of worms. Oh, let us
lay these examples to heart: And whereas, we have by our sins turned away
the loving kindness of God, and caused him to turn away his favorable
countenance from us, and have drawn down his heavy judgments upon us; Now
that the Lord has denied us the deawes of heaven. Zach. 1.3.
so as we are cast out of his sight. Oh, let us labor to be reconciled to him
again, let us pray much and often, that he would lift up the Light of his
countenance upon us, as in times past: Let us Turn from our sins, and the
Lord will Turn unto us. And this duty we would the sooner practice, if we
could but consider the woeful and miserable estate in which we stand, until
such time as we be reconciled to God. If a man were convicted of high Treason
against his Prince, and for the same were condemned to some cruel and shameful
death, and that every moment of an hour he expected the execution of it, who
could express the grief of heart of this man? What comfort could he take in
wife or children, in lands, or goods, in meat, or music? surely, nothing in
the whole World could cheer his dead heart, save only the pardon of the
Prince: such a Traitor is every impenitent sinner, convicted of hie Treason
against the King of Heaven and earth, and he is within an ynch of death and
hell, there wants nothing but the execution of Gods judgments, which is sure
and certain to come, without repentance. Good Lord, who would not now labor
for his peace with God, Before the decree come forth? Yet we are in the way, we
may now make our peace with our Adversary: but if we be once arrested by Gods
Serieant, Death, and we be cast into prison, there is no departure to be
hoped for, till we have paid the utmost farthing.

Secondly, seeing it is so blessed a thing to enjoy To live in his sight: How
should this move us to Turn to God, to avoid all sin, and every evil way,
and to take heed that we do nothing that may auert and turn away his loving
countenance from us? If it be a matter of great honor to live in the presence
of an earthly Prince, and to be in his favor, how much more to be in the
favor of the Lord, to Live for ever in his sight, 1. Reg. 10.8.
and to enjoy his love and favor? If the Queen of the South did truly
pronounce Salomons servants happy that stood in his sight, and heard his
wisdom? Oh, how much more are they happy men and women that live in Gods
presence, and be in high savor with the Almighty! Oh, that we could labor
for this privilege: Well, let us pray much and often, that the Lord would lift
up the light of his countenance upon us, and cause his face to shine upon us,
that we might draw near unto his presence by true repentance and holy
obedience.

Thirdly, we may hence conclude the blessed estate Haman one day the happiest
man in a Kingdom next to the King; the next day the most wtetched; Hest. 5.12.
and 7.9.
one day honored, the next day hanged: Yea, it is the condition of the godly
themselves, as we may see in David, Who greater in Saul's Court then David?
made the Son in Law of the King, and Captain of the Host; yet by and by
disgraced, degraded, and in peril of his life. But it is not so with God, for
whom he loves once, he loves ever: He does not change, he cannot lie, his
gifts are without repentance. Oh then, let us seek for his favor above the
favor of Princes, and when we have it, make much of it, for the estate of
that man is happy and blessed; he is at peace with heaven and earth, with men
and Angels, with himself, and all others, with life and with death, and has
this comfort and assurance from the almighty, that nothing shall be able to do
him hurt.

Indeed, the child of God has no promise to be freed from trials and
temptations, sickness, poverty, and the like; but the child of God has this
promise, that these things shall never hurt him, the Lord will sanctify them
to his children, and they shall be sure to leave a blessing behind them. This
is it which the Prophet David handles at large, Psa. 91.1. etc.
Who so dwells in the secret of the most high, shall abide in the shadow of
the Almighty: Surely, he shall deliver thee from the snare of the Hunter, and
from the noisome pestilence, etc. Not that the godly shall be freed from all
these calamities; but the meaning is, they shall not hurt the godly, but the
Lord will ever give them a sanctified use of them, that they shall gain more
in the Spirit, then they can lose in the Flesh: so that we see what a
marvelous comfort it is that we are at peace with God, that he is our
friend, and that he has no controversy against us: for, if God were against
us, who should be able to stand for us? but being justified by faith, we are
at peace with God: Besides that, we are at peace with the elect Angels of God,
with the children of God, with the creatures of God, and with himself for, if
a man were at peace with all the world, with men and Angels, and yet were at
war in himself, that his own sins did muster themselves against him, he
should then see what a blessing it is to have a clear conscience: But he is at
peace with himself; so that the godly man alone that repents of his sins, is
he alone that is the blessed man. He lives in Gods sight.

Fourthly, and lastly, seeing that he that repents and Turns unto God, is he
alone That lives in Gods sight, Ismael, his hand should be against every man,
and every man's hand against him: God is become their enemy, the Angels of God
are armed to destroy them, and their own consciences convince and condemn
them; Heaven gates are shut against them, and Hell opens her mouth marvelous
wide to swallow them: there is not any thing in the whole world that can truly
and properly be called a wicked man's, but hell and damnation, and this, one
day shall sure be his portion. Mark then the difference between the child of
God, and the wicked; the condition of the godly is many times in show,
miserable to the outward appearance; 2. Cor. 6.9.
but yet in it self most blessed and happy: They are as unknown, and yet
known: as dying, and behold they live; as chastened and yet not killed; as
sorrowing, and yet always rejoicing; as poor, and yet making many rich; as
having nothing, and yet possessing all things. Whereas, on the other side, the
estate and condition of the wicked, is in show many times blessed and happy,
whereas indeed and in truth, it is in it self most desperate, most wretched
and miserable: for if those that Repent and Turn unto God, Live in Gods sight,
and in his favor; then those that are yet in their sins, are under Gods wrath
and heavy displeasure.

We shall live in his sight, or before his face; that is, Vel conspectu illius.
we shall endeavor to lead holy lives and godly conuersations, even as we
lived and stood before the eyes of the Lord himself, denying all ungodliness
and worldly lusts, and living soberly, justly, and godly in this present world.

Godly live as in Gods sight. Genesis 5.12. Genesis 22.1.
namely, that in all we do, we must consider, that we be ever in the blessed
presence of God: So it is said, that Enoch walked with God, that is, in his
whole life behaved himself as in the presence of God. So Genesis 22.1. I am God
all-sufficient, walk before me, and be thou perfect: And surely, it is a
worthy fruit of true Repentance, and a sound note of a man regenerate, Genesis 39.
when as in all his ways he walks and lives as in the sight of God. So did
David, I have set God at my right hand, that I might not fall. It is a true
note of him that repents truly, when he does walk as before the face of God,
and is afraid to sin, because he would not offend his God in whose presence
he stands: Phil. 3.20.
Our Conversation (says the Apostle) is in heaven, from whence we look for a
Savior, even the Lord Jesus: David makes this question, Psalm. 15.1.
Lord, who shall rest in thy mountain, that is, in heaven, not as Pilgrims
for a time, but as heirs for ever? Ver. 2.
And God makes this answer, He that walks uprightly, and works
righteousness; that is, he that lives holily here, as in Gods presence, he
shall live for ever; he that loves the face of God in his Church, shall one
day see the face of God in his Kingdom: he that professes the Gospel, and
is careful of his ways, not walking with a leg and a stumpe as they do who
seem religious, and live ill appearing righteous, and yet profane, He shall
stand before the Lord for ever, And indeed, Ps. 24.3.4.
though we have our being here in this veil of misery, yet our conversation
must be in heaven: We are but Exiles here in this world, our Country is
heaven, We are Pilgrims and Strangers here, our home is heaven, therefore we
must live according to the laws of our Country, even as if we were in the
Kingdom of Heaven, where we be free Denizens. And as Pilgrims behave
themselves in an Inn, they stay not seven or eight years, but a night or two,
and so are gone: So must not we settle our dwelling here, where we are but
Pilgrims, but in heaven our dwelling place must our conversation be; as if
now we were in Heaven, and in the presence of God. And as a stranger being
far from home, desires to come to his own house, thinks ever of his Wife and
Children, and of his own land and living: So must we here being in a strange
country, think of our home, desire still to see the face of God and of Christ
our most blessed Redeemer, that so we may live in his blessed presence.

Seeing this is a special note of a man truly regenerate, and that has
truly repented, to behave in his sight: so as he dares do nothing that may
offend the eyes of God. This shows most plainly, that most men and women are
far from true repentance, and were never borne a new. Seeing many will make
conscience of sin in the sight of men, which yet make no bones to commit it in
the sight of God: What man is so shameless to commit Adultery in the sight of
men? yet there be many that fear not, nor blush not to commit it in the sight
of God: Saint Paul says, They steal, commit Adultery, and do all evil in
the night: Alas, Phil. 4.5.
night and day be all alike to God, the Lord is at our elbowes, and therefore
let us remember this, and as we would not dare to commit any unseemly thing
in the presence of the King: so let us not dare to commit sin in the presence
of God. Men will look carefully to their behavior, while they are in the
presence of the Prince or temporal Magistrate, though otherwise wicked and
godless men; yet in the presence of the Prince they will abstain from evil:
Oh that we were as careful to behave our selves in the most glorious presence
of the great King of heaven and earth, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords:
He sees all we do, hears our words, pierces into the secrets of our hearts:
neither can the least though of ours escape the piercing eye of the Almighty:
and therefore we should labor to watch over al our works and words, yea, over
the very thoughts of our hearts, that they may be sincere, and such as we need
not be ashamed of; for, be we well assured, that we shall give account of the
very thoughts of our hearts, yea, of every idle word; how much more of
blasphemous oaths and most monstrous sins. The thief steals in the night,
the drunkard is drunk in the night, and the filthy person commits his
uncleanness in the night, and they think they be sure, who sees them? who
can accuse them? Oh, thy God sees thee, thou stand in his presence, he
hears and sees all thou do: and though thou may keep it close from the
eyes of men, yet thou can not hide it from the eyes of the Almighty, who will
one day call thee to an account for the same.

VERSE. 3. Then shall we have knowledge, and endeavor our selves to know the
Lord: his going forth is prepared as the morning, and he shall come unto us as
the rain, and as the latter rain unto the earth.
IN this third verse, we have here described unto us two other most heavenly
and blessed effects of sound repentance, Two other effects of true repentance
set down.
and true conversion unto the Lord.

First, that all those which do unfeignedly wounded souls, but enable them by
the gracious work of his holy and sanctifying Spirit, to live holily in his
sight: but he will with all pour into their souls this heavenly and blessed
Knowledge, which shall direct them to the true service and worship of God.

And secondly, if we do draw near unto God by Sun after a tempestuous
storm: Secondly, by the latter rain, distilling upon the scorched earth, by
both of which, the Lord will show, that he is ready in due time to comfort the
distressed soul and conscience of a poor sinner.

Then shall we have knowledge, and endeavor our selves to know the Lord.
Text divided.
IN these words being the first part of the Verse, we are to observe three
special points.

Then.



Thirdly, we have to consider another special fruit Knowledge, that it will
never suffer those men and women which have this Knowledge put into their
hearts by the finger of God, to be content with a little, or a scant measure of
this knowledge; but it is of that divine nature; that it will whet them on, and
inflame their hearts to hunger, and thirst after a great measure and portion of
this heavenly and blessed Knowledge; so, as it will make men to labor, and to
endeavor to come to a greater measure of it: To grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ.

And first of all, for the root from whence this true, Knowledge is derived,
Point.
and the fountain from which it does spring, it is laid down in this word,
Then shall we have Knowledge; that is, Repentance goes before sanctified
knowledge.
when men are truly humbled for their sins, do mourn for them, and when that
men have the fear of God before their eyes, so as they live as in the presence
of God, and look carefully to themselves, not only outwardly in regard of
their words and works, but even inwardly to the thoughts of their hearts, and
therein labor to be approved of the Lord: then will the Lord pour into their
hearts this heavenly and blessed Knowledge, even when that men have the fear
of God before their eyes, to live and behave themselves, As in his sight.

Here then we are taught in the first place, what Humiliation for sin, must
go before the sanctified knowledge of God. Io. 17.3.
will bring a man to eternal life, and without which we cannot be saved.
Namely, this, the sight of a man's sins, and of his wandering from God by error
of life; When a man sees the most woeful and miserable estate in which he is by
reason of sin, and has in him a godly purpose of heart to cleave unto the
Lord, and for the time to come, so to live and to walk, as ever in the sight
of God: Surely, this is the foundation that must be laid by every Soul, to
get this Knowledge of God; Pro. 1.7.
Agreeable to this is that of Solomon: The fear of the Lord is the beginning
of Wisdom. It is the chiefest part of true wisdom indeed: Deuteronomy. 4.6.
This is your wisdom and understanding, that you keep these ordinances, and
do them. If we look into the Scripture, we shall see good proof for this
point, namely, that the true sight of our own wandering from God by our bypast
error of life, with a godly care and christian resolution, that for the time to
come, we will Live as in his sight, that is, in his blessed presence, is the
groundwork or foundation of this Knowledge of God, which will bring a man to
life eternal: Wherefore did almighty God so expostulate the matter with our
Grandfather Adam after he had sinned, Genesis 3.
by his variety of demands; Adam, where art thou? Who told thee that thou
wast naked? Have thou eaten of the tree? But all to this end, to bring Adam to
the sight of his sin, and thereby to make way for a further work of grace.
Ier. 8.6.
And Jeremy lamenting the backwardness of people, that there was no true
conversion to be found amongst them, Psalm. 14.3. Romans 3.10. Esaias. 53.6. Esaias.
1.3.
assigns this as the cause of all. I hearkened (says he) but none spoke
aright, no man repented him of his wickednesst, saying, Alas, what have I done?
q. d. There was not a man to be found amongst them, that had so much as a
conceit of his own wandering from God, but every man was highly conceited of
himself, and of his own worthiness, that their present courses were right
and unblameable; and that is the cause why so few convert and turn to the
Lord. So then, by this that has been spoken, it appears clearly, that true
humiliation for sin, and reverent awe of the presence of God, must be the
groundwork and foundation of this sanctified Knowledge of God, which, as our
Savior says, will bring a man to life eternal. And now we come to the uses.

of heart, to leave and forsake them, and a reverent awe of Gods presence, is
the beginning and foundation of that true sanctified Knowledge; which will
bring a man to life eternal. If then we do think that there is a God in
heaven which is true of his word, and that this Doctrine now delivered, is part
of that holy truth, by the which we shall all be judged at the last day: if
we be not able to deny but the renouncing of our old and accustomed sins,
which have been so near and so dear unto us, Io. 17.3.
must ever go before this Knowledge of God, which will give us one day an
admittance into eternal life. How should it be then that we should so much
deceive our own souls, as to think that we can be saved; seeing yet we
have not forsaken the deeds of the flesh; nor yet never set one foot forward in
the way that leads unto life; for our own hearts do know, and besides, the
world is privy to it, that what sinful courses heretofore we lived and
delighted in, in the same we continue at this day. Alas, alas, it is the just
complaint that may be taken up of those times, that Every man turns to his
race, as the horse rusheth into the battle. Where is the man amongst us that
enters into a strict examination of his own estate, and to say, Alas, what
have I done? How is it with me? how shall I be able to answer for this course
of life, in the which I have lived, when the Lord shall call me to a stricct
account for the same? Alas, I find that I have gone astray as a sheep that is
lost, I have wandered a long time in the by-pathes of sin and wickedness, and I
will now at last, Arise and go to my Father, and say to him, Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and against thee, Luke. 15.
and am no more worthy to be called thy son. O, where is the man that thus
communeth with himself, and with his own heart in his secret Chamber betwixt
God and his own soul? but rather on the contrary, every man holds on in his
wonted fashion, vain pleasures, and violent catching after the things of this
world, as if we were born to no other end, but to add sin unto sin, and to
add unto the measure of Gods wrath, to be heaped up against us, against the
day of his wrath, and manifestations of his most righteous judgment. And that
this is so, I appeal unto the conscience of every one amongst us: What sin
is there whereunto we have formerly been addicted that (by the Ministry of
the Word, now more plentifully revealed unto us then in former times) we have
for conscience sake reformed, and in stead thereof have brought forth the
fruits of the Gospel? Oh, how can we look at the last day to stand with joy
and comfort before God and his Angels, when he shall come to judge the secrets
of all hearts, when as that witness in our own bosoms, I mean, our own
consciences, cannot testify for us, that we have reformed any one corruption.
Well, to end this use, commend me to thy conscience, and tell it thus from me,
whatsoever thou be, that if thou abidest still in thy old sins, thy
ignorance, blindness, prophanenes, adultery, uncleanness, drunkenness,
swearing, covetousness, malice, etc. 2. Cor. 5.17.
This Pearl here spoken of, this sanctified Knowledge of God, which will give
a man one day an admittance into eternal life, can never be thine: he must
become a new Creature that will come into that new Jerusalem: Deceive we not
our own selves therefore any longer; either we must begin here at the
sight of our old errors, or else we can never tread the path that leads unto
life.

Secondly, seeing that the true sight and feeling eternal life; let us then
pray unto God that he would put his fear into our hearts, that we may not
sin against him, for till such time as we have this fear of God, till we
be truly humbled for our sins, and mourn for them, and live and behave our
selves as in the presence of God, we shall never attain to this Knowledge,
which is the right way to bring us to eternal life: for though men have never
so great knowledge in the word of God, and can speak of it never so well,
though they can dispute of it, and discourse of the Scriptures; yet if our
knowledge be not joined with the fear of God, to live according to our
knowledge; Alas, it is but a brain knowledge, it is far from that saving
knowledge which we ought to have; and therefore if we would be assured that our
knowledge is sound, and such as one day will give us an admittance into the
kingdom of heaven, and yield true comfort and rejoicing unto our own souls:
Let us then labor to find our hearts humbled for sin past, and a watchful
eye over our own ways for the time to come, and thtt we so carry and behave
our selves, as always in the presence of God: for otherwise, though men think
never so highly of their knowledge, if these things be wanting in us, we can
never attain to this true sanctified knowledge here spoken of.

Now I come to the next point, that is, to consider knowledge is, which is
here a most blessed fruit of Repentance, Point.
and of the fear of God. And surely, What knowledge it is, he here speaks
of. Io. 17.3.
we shall find that this knowledge, it is no carnal knowledge, it is no
worldly knowledge, it is not the knowledge of Philosophy, or of humane arts and
sciences, vhich in themselves are good too: but this Knowledge here spoken of,
it is a heavenly Knowledge, whereof our Savior Christ's speaks, having powered
forth unto his Father that his heavenly prayer, that he would give unto his
children eternal life; in the third verse he shows wherein this eternal life
consists, namely, This is life eternal, to know thee to be the true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Of this knowledge speaks the Prophet Esaias,
saying; By this knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, Esaias. 53.11.
Io. 6.68.
for he shall bear their iniquities. And of this Knowledge we shall read of,
when our Savior Christ taught, that all they which must live for ever, must
eat the flesh of the son of man: It is said that many of his Disciples
departed from him: Christ says to the twelve: Will ye also go away from me?
Peter answers in the name of the rest; Master, whither shall we go from
thee? Thou have the Word of eternal life and we believe and know that thou
art Christ the son of the living God: Where, mark how the Apostle ioines
faith and knowledge together; noting indeed that this knowledge is a fruit of
faith, for till men believe in God the Father, as our Father, and in Jesus
Christ his son, as our redeemer, and in the holy Ghost, as our sanctifier,
we cannot know God as we ought to know him.

Now then, in that this Knowledge is promised from knowledge of the Lord Jesus,
which will one day give us an admittance into the eternal inheritance:

The true knowledge of God in Christ is given only to the Elect after their
conversion.
We are taught, that the true knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ, is given
only unto the Elect, and does follow their repentance and conversion unto God:
for so is it taught us here, after that these believing Jews had exhorted and
stirred up one another to return unto the Lord; they promise this knowledge
unto themselves as a fruit of their repentance and conversion unto God, Then
shall we have knowledge; that is, howsoever we have heretofore deceived our
own souls, resting upon our own selves, our own knowledge and righteousness,
which indeed is but general and confused, and such as the wicked themselves
may partake of; yet now, if we will repent of our sins, and Return again
wnto the Lord, from whom we have departed by our manifold impieties, we shall
have given unto us a sanctified knowledge of the Lord Jesus; yea, such a lively
knowledge that will never leave us, till it set us into the full possession of
life eternal, according to that of our Savior: This is life eternal, Io.
17.3.
to know thee to be the true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. And
again, our Savior witnesses the same in another place, where he says: Io.
6.45.
All the Elect are taught of God. And the Prophet Jeremy makes it the glory of
all the Elect; Thus says the Lord, Ier. 9.24.
Let not the Wiseman glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his
strength, neither let the rich man glory in his riches: but let him that
glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me, says the
Lord. It is the singular gift of Gods grace, not given (as I said before) unto
al men indifferently, but only to the Elect (as our Savior testifies of his
Disciples: Mar. 4.11.
To you it is given to know the mystery of the Kingdom of God: but unto them
which are without, all things are done in Parables, Phil. 3.9.
that they seeing may not see, etc. Romans 10.2.
And the Apostle Paul esteemed al things but dung incomparison of this
knowledge: without it, zeal is little worth, and sacrifice is in vain. Hos.
6.6.
And this knowledge is brought and conuayed unto us by the ministry of the
Gospel of Christ. Romans 1.20.
It is not the knowledge of God reueiled in the Book of his Creatures, that he
here speaks of, 2 Cor. 4.6.
nor a knowledge of God revealed in the moral law of God, where God requires
absolute and perfect obedience; but it is that knowledge which is made known
unto us through the covenant of grace in the glorious Gospel of Christ: And
hence it is that the Apostle says, Romans 10.3.
that the Jews knowing the righteousness which is by the Law, and went about
to stablish it, and to seek to be justified by it, being altogether ignorant
of this Evangelical righteousness which is by faith without the works of the
Law: and no marvel, for as the Apostle says, that they whose cogitations are
darkened, are strangers from the life of God. Well then, know thou not
Christ, what he is, and what he has done, and how his death and sufferings
may be available for thee, to the salvation of thy Soul? Let me tell thee,
that thou art not yet in the way to eternal life; for, if thou had faith,
it would apply Jesus Christ unto thy own soul in particular, though not at
all times, with the like assurance: this Paul begged for the Colossians, That
they might be filled with all wisdom, and spiritual understanding, that
they might be able to comprehend what is the breadth and length, and depth,
and height, Col. 1.9. Ephesians. 5.18.
and to know the love of Christ: So that we see, that the true knowledge of
God, and of Christ, it is such a jewel that God will not trust all men with,
but only the Elect. Now let us see what uses this Doctrine may afford us, for
our further instruction.

knowledge as may be had by the light of nature, or such as may be gathered
by the sight of creatures: but will some say, are there any such amongst
Christians? undoubtedly there be, who having lived in the bosom of the Church,
and in the clear light of the Gospel, ten, twenty, yea, thirty, or more
years together; and yet to their shame be it spoken,) have no more true saving
knowledge of God, then the very heathen that never heard of Christ: so that,
Heb. 5.12.
whereas in regard of their continuance in the Church, and the means that have
been offered unto them, They might have been teachers of others, yet have
they need to be taught the beginning of faith; and are such as have need of
milk, and not of strong meat; who can consider without grief of heart, in
what state the greatest number of our people stand at this day? how many have
we amongst us, I will not say, as God said of the Infants of Nineueh, that
know not their right hand from their left? but men grown, and of riper years,
which in regard of their time might have been teachers of other; yet
themselves are ignorant in the maine principles of Religion: these are like to
the Potters clay, ready to take any form. What false religion and idolatrous
worship (if it were authorized) would they not subscribe unto? a lamentable
case that we should be still as babes and children, ready to be drawn away
with every blast of vain Doctrine, not being able to decerne the darkness of
error from the light of truth; seeing as our Apostle says; 2. Cor. 4.3.4. 2.
These. 2.11.12.
If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them which perish, in whom the God of
this world has blinded their minds: Thus does God send them strong delusions,
that they should believe lies; That all they might be damned which believe not
the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Io. 5.39.
Let us then seek for knowledge as for treasures, and let us Search the
Scriptures, that in them we may have eternal life: Let us have the word of
God dwell plentifully in us, which is able to make us wise to salvation: Let us
use all good means to beget knowledge in us, even this sanctified knowledge
which will bring a man to eternal life; Let us often call our own ways to an
account, and labor to be humbled for our sins; beg hard for mercy and pardon
of them at Gods hands, and then use all good means, as hearing the Word,
reading, praying, etc. For, if by these things we make not way to our
knowledge, whereupon it may be built as upon a sure foundation: Alas, our
knowledge it will be but vain, idle, swimming in the brain, and far from
leading a man to the Kingdom of grace, or of glory. Oh then, think of this
betimes, whilst the day of grace lasts. Oh man, thou art labored with from
Sabbath to Sabbath, that thy heart may be seasoned with the knowledge of
salvation, and that now thou may be prepared for Christ: if now therefore
thou reject this kindness of his, it shall at last be just with God to turn
this thy great ingratitude as dung into thy face, and because thou have hated
knowledge, Mat. 1.23. Pro. 7.22.
therefore the Lord may justly say, Depart from me ye cursed, I know you not.

And that we may be able to try our selves, whether we have this knowledge in
our hearts, which puts us into the real possession of eternal life, it has
certain notes and properties whereby it may be decerned.

The properties of this saving knowledge. 1. Io. 3.3. Act. 15.9.
The first effect and property of this saving knowledge is this, that being put
into the heart of a Christian, it will purge a man's soul, mind, will and
affection: Every one that has this hope (speaking of this knowledge of God)
he will purge himself as he is pure. And again, Faith purifieth the heart:
so then hereby thou may try and prove thy knowledge whether it be this
saving knowledge of God, 1 It purges the heart.
or not: if thou find that it purifies thy heart, purges thy mind, will and
affection from sin; this is an infallible mark and token, that it is this
blessed and sanctified knowledge that is begun in thee: whereas on the
contrary part, carnal knowledge puffes up the mind, but this knowledge expels
pride, and casts a man down for his sins: and therefore if thou find thy
heart filthy, and thy will rebellious, thy knowledge then is but fleshly and
carnal, and it is not this saving knowledge that is within thee.

Secondly, this knowledge is not a dead knowledge, but it is a living
knowledge, 2 It will quicken those that have it.
it is a quickening knowledge, and therefore called Eternal life, because it is
living, and will quicken those that have it in their breasts; it will not
suffer a man to lie dead in sin, and rotting in sin, but it will raise him up,
and quicken him in all holy duties to do the Will of God.

The third property of this Knowludge is, 3 It is ever working to destroy sin.
it is not an idle knowledge, only swimming in the brain; but it is an
operative and working knowledge; it will work in them that have it the
mortification of sin, and it will abolish natural corruption by little and
little, it will be powerful to work many graces in them which have it, as
Faith, Repentance, Mortification, and newness of life, love of God, zeal of
his glory, sincere obedience to his Will in all things.

The fourth property of this saving knowledge is this, 4 It is permanent, it
lasts for ever.
that being put into the mind of any Christian man or woman, it is durable and
permanent; and therefore our Savior calls it Eternal Life, because this
Knowledge lasts, not for a day or two, or for a year or two, but being
begun in this life, it lasts for ever: We know in part only in this life,
but our knowledge shall be perfect in the life to come.

Now seeing what this Knowledge is, and what properties Knowledge is such a
blessed gift of God wrought in the hearts of his children alone, as being
powered into the breast of any man or woman, it will purge from sin and dead
works; it will quicken our dead and benumbed souls, it will work the
mortification of the flesh, and enable us daily more and more to obey the will
of God in holiness and righteousness: and lastly, that this Knowledge is
durable and permanent, not only for this life, but also for the life to come.
Oh let us then every one of us in the fear of God try and examine our selves,
whether we have in us the knowledge of God, yea, or nay: If we find the same
to be in us by the notes and properties of it, as abouesaid, we be then
blessed and happy, we be in the right way to eternal life: nay, this blessed
Knowledge will put us into real possession of eternal life, and the salvation
of our poor souls. But did thou never find this blessed knowledge as yet
in thy heart, but in stead thereof thy mind full of ignorance: Thy will froward
and rebellious, thy affections loving and delighting in sin and uncleanness?
Alas, thou art then in a most cursed and miserable estate; thou abidest in
death, and in danger of eternal damnation: And yet if we try our selves, it
will appear that most men and women have not this saving Knowledge in them,
but live in a most palpable ignorance, notwithstanding these clear sunshine
days of the Gospel.

knowledge such an excellent gift and grace of God, that it puts men into a
real possession of eternal life? Oh, how should men therefore labor and
study for this knowledge all the days of our life: If a man have all the
knowledge in the world, and yet want this knowledge, namely, that he has not
this knowledge to know God the Father to be his Father, God the Son to be his
Redremer, and the Spirit of God to be his Sanctifier; all other knowledge is
but carnal, and shall not profit him to salvation. We see men can be
content to take great pains to study for worldly knowledge, the knowledge of
the tongus, of Arts and Sciences, the knowledge of Philosophy, of Trades and
Occupations, and that to maintain a temporal life: And shall we which be
Christians take no pains to study the word, and to hear it preached and
taught unto us, thereby to attain to this blessed knowledge which shall last
for ever and ever, and never leave us till it bring us to eternal life. And
yet alas, we see that most men and women are so bewitched with the love of the
world and earthly things which are but momentany, and last but for a time, that
they either contemn, or at least they neglect this blessed Knowledge of God and
of Christ, which will make them happy and blessed for evermore: this they never
seek for, nor will not put their heads out of their doors to come to hear the
Word, whereby they might attain to this knowledge: but let such carnal men
and women know, that they contemning this knowledge of Christ here, he will
likewise contemn them hereafter, and say unto them, Depart from me ye
cursed, I know you not.

Seeing this knowledge thus to know God the Father ungratefully contemn this
Knowledge, and refuse instruction, and trample this precious pearl under foot:
Surely, these men and women be they what they will be, they do voluntarily
strippe themselves of eternal life; nay, like blind Bayards they run their
poor souls into the pit of Hell before they be aware: and therefore in the
fear of God, if we never had this Knowledge of God as yet: Now let us labor
for it, if we have it, then let us labor that it may become effectual unto
us, to purge us, to quicken us, to change us, that it be not idle and naked.

Hitherro have I showed the nature and property of this knowledge: Now,
because this knowledge is so excellent, so heavenly and divine, therefore it
must knowledge is not of Arts and Sciences, It is God himself that is the
object of a sanctified knowledge.
it is not the knowledge of tongues, it is not the knowledge of Philosophy, and
of the nature of things, all which are commendable in themselves: but the thing
which we must know, and which is the object of this heavenly and blessed
knowledge, it is God himself. This is taught by our blessed Savior: Io. 17.3.
2. Cor. 13.^
This is life eternal, that they know thee the only true God, and whom thou
have sent, Jesus Christ. And this knowledge is so needful and so necessary,
that our hearts can never be rid of the occasion of fear of our reprobation,
till we do know God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, with
their distinct offices.

Object. But alas, how can we which live in darkness, attain to the knowledge
of God, who inhabiteth in that light which none can attain unto.

Answer. Certain it is, that this knowledge of the true God is not attained
unto by nature, knowledge, Romans 8.7.
let natural education be never so good, and men never so excellent in wit
or understanding, or any other gift of nature: no, no, flesh and blood can
never attain to this heavenly knowledge of the true God: But this knowledge
thus to know the true God, is the proper gift of Jesus Christ alone, put into
our hearts by the finger of his own spirit, according to that of the Prophet
Esaias, Esaias. 53 11.
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many. And again, No man
knows the Father but the Son, Mat. 11.27.
and he to whom the Son will reveal him.

Object.

Ans. Knowledge unto us which is eternal life, by the finger of his own
blessed Spirit, Paul may plant, Apollo may water, 1. Cor. 3.6.
but God alone gives the increase. The Preaching of the Word, it is the
ordinary means to beget this saving Knowledge: But men can only preach to the
outward ears; it is the spirit of God alone that must open our hearts as he
did the heart of Lydea, and anoint our blind eyes, Act. 16 Reu 3.18.
else we shall never see. And therefore the Spirit of God is said to reveal
such things unto men, as never came into the heart of any carnal man once to
think, 1. Cor. 2.10.
Even the secret things of God: And what be those, surely, such things as the
most learned in the world maybe ignorant of: And the poor unlearned and
unlettered man may have greater knowledge in these then the greatest Doctor of
all; namely, Note.
the Spirit of God makes known to his children the love of God in Jesus
Christ: the pardon of sin; he sees in his Soul and conscience, Romans 8.15.
what a blessed thing it to have the pardon of sin, to feel the comfortable
power of Gods Spirit, teaching us to cry to him, Abba Father, and none else can
have this same saving knowledge of God, so as the same may be powerful and
effectual unto their souls and consciences, save the children of God.

How God the Father is to be known of us. Deu. 6.6. Math. 22.37. Luke 10.17.
Now, concerning God the Father, we must know and acknowledge, and that truly,
soundly and believing, that he is the only true God, and that there is none
other God in heaven or earth, but him alone, and therefore he alone must be
adored, worshipped, believed, and prayed unto, as the only true God.

Secondly, we must know and acknowledge, that God the Father is not only the
true God, but our God, not only the Father of Christ, but also our Father, and
has adopted us to be his children in Jesus Christ; and has put his Spirit
into our hearts, whereby we cry Abba, father; and he that does thus know God is
in the right way to eternal life: But he that cannot thus believe God sauingly,
2. Tim. 1.12.
soundly, and particularly, that the only true God is his God, and that the
Father of Jesus Christ is his Father, that he loves him as his child, and will
bestow the Kingdom of Heaven upon him as his inheritance; alas, he abides in
death, and has not this sanctified knowledge of God within him.

Then we must not rest upon this bare knowledge, to know that God the Father
is the only true God, and the Father of Christ; for this is a bare knowledge,
and a naked knowledge, and such a knowledge as may befall a wicked man, Iam. 2.
Mar. 1.23.
yea, the Devil himself: for he believes and trembles, he acknowledges
Christ to be the Son of God. And yet alas, how many thousand souls amongst
us come short of this knowledge of God which the Devil has? how many fear
and tremble to think of God, and of the day of judgment; but let us every
one, every man and every woman, and every mothers child amongst us (if we would
not be in worse case then the Devil himself) labor to go beyond the Devil
and all wicked men watsoeuer, to know, and that soundly and particularly, that
the only true God is our God, and that the Father of Christ is our Father,
that we labor to get assurance of his love toward us, that he loves us as
his children, and will bestow the kingdom of heaven upon us at the last. And if
we thus know God to be our God, and our blessed Father; we must labor to
perform all such duties as belong unto him, as our God and loving Father.

First, that man that believes God to be the true Duties that are to be
performed unto God.
this man must imitate him, and follow him, for it is the will of God that his
Children should be like unto himself.

Secondly, every one that knows and believes If I be a Master, where is my
fear? Mal. 1.6. Mat. 12.50.
If I be a Father, where is my honor? And again, Whosoever shall do my
Fathers will which is in Heaven, the same is my Brother, my Sister, and Mother:
M. Perkins on the Creed
Where we see plainly taught us this second duty, that if God be our Father,
then as good children we should show obedience unto him; but if we disobey
him, then we must know, that that saying of Christ will be verefied upon us; Ye
are of your Father the Devil, Io. 8.44.
for the works of the Devil ye will do: And indeed, no man can be so like to
his Father that begot him, as are the disobedient and rebellious sinners like
to their Sire, the Devil.

Thirdly, every one that knows and believes God to be the true God, and in
Christ his Father, he must learn to bear all crosses and outward afflictions
patiently, knowing that they come from God, and to wait for deliverance from
him; For, whom God loves he chastises. If two children should be fighting,
and a man coming by should part them, and give correction to one of them,
every man would conceive that he were his child whom he corrected: and surely,
when the Lord does lay his rod heauiest upon his children, yet even then does
he show himself a loving Father unto us: Now, if our earthly Fathers
corrected us, and we gave them reverence, taking it patiently; should we not
much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits, that we may live. In a
word, if we thus know God to be our God, and our blessed Father, we must love
him as our God and Father, fear him as our God, obey him, believe in him, and
rest upon him both in prosperity and adversity, as upon our merciful God.

How God the Son is to be known of us.
And therefore seeing no man can know the Father unless he know the Son;
therefore this knowledge is as necessary as the former, and concerning this,
Saint John says: We must not only know the Father, but him also whom the
Father has sent, Jesus Christ. Now to that end we may know him aright, we
must know and believe particularly, that he is our Jesus our blessed Savior
and Redeemer, who by his perfect obedience, and his bitter death and passion,
Reu. 1.7.
has saved us from all our sins, and from the curse of God and eternal
damnation due to the same.

And in this one point is contained the height and depth of all knowledge, thus
assuredly and beleeuingly to know in particular, that Jesus Christ was sent of
his Father, that in our Nature he might die for our sins, and rise again for
our justification. Oh blessed and thrice happy is that man and woman which has
this blessed knowledge put into their hearts by the spirit of God, Romans 4.23.
thus particularly to know and believe that Jesus Christ is their Jesus and
Savior, who has died for them to save their souls: And indeed, this is the
sweetness of the Gospel, and the marrow of all Religion, not simply to know
that Jesus Christ is a Savior, but to know that he is my Savior; not simply
to know that he died for sinners, but for me the chief of al sinners; not
simply to know that there is an eternal life, but to know that there is
eternal life laid up for me: So that we see, that it is not enough for a
Christian to know the history of the Bible, that Jesus Christ is the Savior of
the world, and dyed for those which believe in him: for this knowledge the
Devil himself has, he knows, and does acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the
Savior of the world: but we must labor for this particular knowledge, this
certain and experimental knowledge: so as we can say in truth of heart, Note.
I believe and know that Jesus Christ is not only the Savior of the world,
but my Savior, not only that he dyed for them which believe in him, but that
he dyed for me, and shed his blood to save my soul: And though this were
true, that though but one man or woman in the whole world should be saved, yet
we ought to have this certain knowledge, to believe I am the man, I am the
woman: and they which have this certain and vnfalilble knowledge, they are in
the right way to eternal life, but they which have only a general and confused
knowledge, swimming in the brain, alas, they abide in death.

The third special thing which we must know, is the Spirit of God, How God
the holy Ghost is to be known of us.
when as we can find and feel the work of Gods Spirit within us, when we
acknowledge him to be the author and sole worker of this knowledge, when we
can know by experience in our own selves, in our souls and consciences, that
the Spirit of Christ is in us, Gal. 2 20. 2. Cor. 13.5.
that we can say with the Apostle, Christ lives in me, and that he does
make us with boldness to call upon God, and to cry unto him Abba father, Romans
8.15.
when we do feel the blessed work of the Spirit to mortify our corrupt
nature by little and little, weakening the strength of sin, and natural
corruption within us, and daily raising us up to newness of life, and
repayring in us more and more the blessed image of God in holiness and
righteousness, which has greatly defaced in us by reason of sin and Satan.
This is that Knowledge, which whosoever finds put and powered into their souls
by the Spirit of Christ Jesus, they are happy and blessed: they are in real
possession of eternal life: but as for those which want this knowledge, seem
they never so excellent, nor think they never so well of themselves, they be
but miserable and cursed, and abide in eternal death and damnation.

knowledge here spoken of, Ignorance of God and his word in matters of
Religion is dangerous.
and also the excellent fruits and effects that come from it; and what it is
that we must know; as also what great profit this knowledge brings to all
those which have it, namely, eternal life: It shall not now be amiss to
consider in a word, how dangerous a thing it is to want this saving knowledge,
and what great misery come to men and women by ignorance, and want of knowledge.

The blessed Son of God himself, who being most true, nay, the very truth
and life it self, when he would show the root and very spawne of sin and
iniquity, he tells the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 22.29.
Ye err because ye know not the Scriptures, and the power of God.

And to what should we impute this in these days; that men run into errors,
and teach false, heretical, nay, damnable doctrine? surely, to this, because
men know not the Scripture, and have no knowledge in the word. What is the
cause that men live in sin, in drunkenness, whoredom, adultery, swearing,
covetousness, etc? Alas, the cause of all is this, because they have no
knowledge: There is an excellent place to this purpose, in the Prophet Hosea,
Hos. 1.2.
where the Lord by his Prophet takes up a great and grievous complaint against
the inhabitants of the land, because there was no Mercy nor Truth to be found,
but that men lived in Swearing, lying, killing, whoring, theeuing, etc. And the
reason of all these, is there laid down in these words: There is no knowledge
of God in the land. Read the fourth Chapter of Leuiticus, Leuit. 4.
and there it will appear, how highly Almighty God condemned this sin of
Ignorance by those Sacrifices that were to be offered up even for the same.
Heb. 2.1.


Now Ignorance is threefold. 1. It is a simple and mere ignorance. 2. Is a
careless ignorance. 3. Is a wilful and an affected ignorance.


All these kinds of ignorance are here forbidden and condemned, as the
greatest enemies to this knowledge.

The first of these, is simply for want of means, 1 Of simple ignorance.
which few men in these days and times wherein we live, are able to object;
for the voice of Gods Ministers have sounded the Lords Trumpet of warning in
most places of this land: so that if men now should be ignorant, it must needs
be a wilful and an affected ignorance; for by the mercy of our God, we live
now in such times as knowledge is even thrust upon men, both by public
authority, and the restless labors of Gods faithful Ministers: 2. Cor. 4.
so that we may conclude with the Apostle; If the Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that perish, whom the Prince of this World has blinded their minds: yet
notwithstanding that men should want these means of knowledge, yet will not
their ignorance excuse them in the day of the Lord; It may excuse a tanto, but
not a toto, as Divines affirm, their punishment may be something the less,
but it shall not free them from having any at all.

The second kind of ignorance that is here condemned as an utter engine to
this knowledge, 2 Of careless ignorance.
is careless ignorance, which is indeed the only sin of these times, when
having the means of knowledge, we care not for it, but neglect and contemn it:
this is far worse then the former: and if the former sort of ignorance will
not excuse a man, much less will this: Oh, it is the sin of thousands in the
world at this day, that out of negligence and carelessness, neglect the means
of knowledge offered unto them: 2. Cor. 4.
Oh what a fearful sin is this, considering, that if the Gospel be hid,
it is hid to them that perish; and that Christ Jesus will come at the last to
render Vengeance to them which know him not, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
and obey not the Gospel of Christ.

The last, is the wilful and affected kind of ignorance, 3 A wilful and
affected ignorance.
when men shall please themselves in their own ways, and will not know their
error, but labor and strive against it: when a man is addicted to some
particular sin, and will not see the same to be a sin; this is the highest
degree of ignorance, according to that common Proverb, None so blind, as he
that will not see. These are like those rebellious Jews the Prophet Jeremy
speaks of, which said, Ier. 44.16.
The word that thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not
hear it of thee, but we will do whatsoever thing goes out of our own mouth.
Alas, how many are there of this sort in these days and times wherein we live
that are wilfully blind and ignorant, Psalm. 58.5.
That will not hear the charmer, charm he never so wisely. Oh let us take
heed, as of all ignorance, so especially of this last, for to sin in this
degree, is to sin with a high hand against God, and it is a step to that sin
against the holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven.

This may serve to condemn that cursed and damnable Rome, who teach, that
ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, and the more ignorant, the more devout and
religious: Yea, one of their fellows in this land, in a seditious book is not
ashamed to say, Radford in his directatory to the truth. page 419 Mat. 22.18.
that the poor Plowman that says his PATER NOSTER, not understanding the
words, may pray with more devotion, and please God better, then the greatest
Doctor that can make a Sermon of every Petition of the same. But our Savior
Christ the chief Doctor of the Church, he teaches, that ignorance is the
mother of error, sin, rebellion and damnation: And in every place the word of
God shows the danger of this sin; that those that live in ignorance, and
without the knowledge of God in his world, live in a most fearful estate and
condition, abounding in all manner of sin and iniquity, both against God and
man. And surely this Doctrine of ignorance is one of the maine pillars of
Popish Religion, to keep men in blindness and ignorance, that they may not
see their filthy abominations: for, if men were not extreme ignorant in the
matters of God and his Word, how could they be so abused and deceived, to
worship stocks and stones, to fall down to dumb Images, etc.

Hos 4.1.
it is a fearful judgment of God upon this people: for, as the Prophet
says, There is no knowledge of God in the land: so we may say generally,
There is no knowledge of God amongst many; Act. 17.30.
but al kind of sin and wickedness abounds, because men live in ignorance
without the knowledge of God and his Word, as Popery, Idolatry, carnal
security, presumption, swearing, blasphemy, contempt of the Word, profanation
of the Sabbath, neglect of all religion and good duties, all spring from this
root; want of knowledge. Luke 23.
Paul persecuted the Church of God, but it was through ignorance: And our
Savior prayed to his Father for his persecutors, Mat. 11.20.
because they knew not what they did. Oh, if men knew what a fearful thing it
is to live in ignorance, and to want, neglect, or contemn the means of
knowledge: how durst they dishonor God as they do? but so long as men live in
ignorance, so long they will run into al sin, be profane and wicked.

But of all ignorance there is none more dangerous and pernicious, and so a
fearful sign of Reprobation, as wilful ignorance, when men shall shut their
eyes at the light of the Gospel stop their ears, harden their hearts, and
despise knowledge: Wisdom cries without, Pro. 1.20.
O ye fools, how long will ye love foolishnes, and the scornful delight in
scorning, and Fools hate knowledge? because I have called and ye refused, I
have stretched out my hand, and none regarded: but ye despise all my counsel,
and would none of my Nurture, I will also laugh at your destruction.

Well, you hear that ignorance is a great sin, especially, wilful
ignorance. You hear again that it abounds in most places, generally, the body
of our people be exceeding ignorant, as though they had never heard of God:
Now, where ignorance abounds, there sin abounds, and where sin abounds, the
curse of God must needs hang over their heads, as in that place of Hosea, the
Lord threatens, Hos. 4.2.3.
that because of sin, he will make the whole Land to mourn.

Thus having showed the sin it self, Ignorance, the Nature of the same, that
it is opposite to knowledge, we will proceed a little further, and show the
causes, why this fearful judgment of God reigns in most places, and why
people are so ignorant. And secondly, the remedy of this sin, how people may
get out of it, and so come to the knowledge of God, and Eternal life.

The main cause why people be so ignorant as they be, Causes of ignorance.
is the want of teaching in most Congregations, howsoever it has pleased God
that this complaint cannot be taken up of this Country, and parts: 1 Want of
Preaching
yet I am not ignorant, that in some Towns and Parishes they have the Word
very seldom preached unto them, perhaps monthly, or less: Now, Pro. 29.18.
Where the Word is not preached, there the people perish; or where vision
fails, the people are naked, void of knowledge, Romans 10.14.
grace, or the fear of God: How shall they believe without a Preacher? so, how
should they know God, Mat. 15.14. Hos. 4 9.
unless they be taught? for, if the Blind lead the blind, both fall into the
ditch: And again, There shall be like Priest, like people: Like Shepherd,
like sheep; an ignorant, careless and unconscionable Minister, an ignorant,
blind, and profane people. And how can it be otherwise: And therefore in the
three first Chapters of the Revelation, where the Holy Ghost commends or
discommends the Minister; he does likewise commend or discommend the people,
for the good estate of the people, depends (for the most part) on the good
pains of the Minister.

2 Carelesnes of the people.
Another cause why ignorance abounds, is the wonderful security and
carelessness of the people, they have no desire to know God, nor love, nor
desire to the sincere Milk of the Word: yea, they are well content to live
still in their damnable ignorance and blindness: 2. Pet 2. Job. 21.15. Mal. 3
14.
Who is the Almighty that we should serve him, and what profit should we
have if we should pray unto him? And again, It is in vain to serve the Lord,
and what profit is it that we have kept his commandment? Poor Souls, they
think themselves to be in good estate, that they have knowledge enough, so
long as they can say the Lords Prayer, the ten commandments and the Creed; and
so it comes to pass, that they despising knowledge, and contemning the means,
especially, the Ministry of the Word, they remain so blind and so ignorant
as they be.

The third maine cause of ignorance, is man's natural corruption; 3 Natural
corruption of man Ier. 10.14.
Every man by Nature is a beast by his own knowledge: Man by Nature has no
more knowledge of God, then a beast; When Adam fell, he lost that excellent
knowledge of God, and now by Nature we are blind and ignorant, without the
true knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, till the Lord do enlighten us, and open
our eyes, and reveal his Son Jesus Christ unto us in the Ministry of his
Word, the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Now let us come to the remedies: Ignorance of Gods word is a great sin,
Remedies of Ignorance.
and a fearful judgment of God upon any people; for, they can never come to
faith, repentance, obedience, and etetnall life so long as they live in it; no,
they must needs live in all sin against God and man.

Well, 1 To see our ignorance, and to repent of the same.
would you know how to get out of your ignorance, and so from under this
fearful and heavy judgment of God that lies so heavy upon you? would you
come to knowledge to know God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, which is
the only way to eternal life? You must then repent of your ignorance, Io.
17.3. Act. 17.20.
you must carefully see it, and acknowledge it that you be extreme ignorant
in Gods matters, blind in Gods word, without the true Knowledge of God in Jesus
Christ; you must see it and confess it, and withal be sorry for it, and
bewail your estate that you have lived so long in ignorance; and withal, you
must desire the pardon of the same at Gods hands, and labor to come to
knowledge in time to come.

Secondly, if you would get out of your woeful ignorance, and come to true
knowledge, 2 Attend upon the ministry of the Word preached. 1. Pet. 2.2. Romans
1.21. and 10.14. 1. Cor. 1.21. Act. 2.37.
you must then carefully use all holy means to come thereto. First, above all
the rest, you must hunger and thirst after the Word of God, the preaching of
the Word: Frequent Sermons, and tread in Gods house where wisdom cries unto
you, and vtters her voice. The preaching of the Word of God is the most
excellent means to bring men out of the gulf of their ignorance to saving
knowledge, true faith, and eternal life.

A third means to get out of ignorance, and to attain unto this saving
Knowledge, 3 To read the Scriptures.
is the diligent and careful reading of the holy Scriptures, the old and new
Testament, according to that of our Savior, Search the Scriptures, Io. 5.39.
Psalm. 119. Psalm. 1.2.
So that serious reading of the Word, with meditating upon the same, it is a
most excellent means to get out of ignorance, and to come to knowledge.

4 The reading and hearing of godly Catechismes.
A fourth means to get out of ignorance, and to attain to this saving
Knowledge, is the reading and learning of Catechismes, which contain the sum
of Christian Religion: It is a special means to bring men to knowledge; and
howsoever men think base of this kind of teaching; yet it is exceeding
profitable and necessary, and a special means to bring men to knowledge; and
as for those that understand not the Principles of Religion, certainly, their
case is dangerous; for Faith is not without the knowledge of these Principles
in some measure, of the Law, the Gospel, Faith, Sacraments, Prayer, the
Trinity of persons, etc.

The last special means to get out of ignorance, and to attain to true and
saving Knowledge, 5. Care to practice that we know.
is for a man to frame his life according to the Word of God, to lead a holy,
a Christian, and a godly life; that howsoever his knowledge is not great, yet
his care and desire to walk with God, Luke 12.47.
to lead a holy and sanctified life, and to live according to his knowledge,
this pleases the Lord well: Hos. 6.6.
for I doubt not but little knowledge when the same is found in Christian
obedience, is far better, 1 Samuel 15.
and more acceptable with God, then much knowledge when obedience is wanting.

Well, to conclude this point, the use of this Doctrine concerns both Minister
and people.

The Ministers duty. Io. 21.
and stand bound unto God by a solemn vow and obligation, To feed the Flock
of God that depends upon them, and over which they be made Overseers and
Shepherds: and therefore woe unto such Ministers as be themselves ignorant,
1. Pet. 5. Hos. 4.6. Ezec. 3.
and cannot teach; or profane and unconscionable, and therefore will not take
the pains to teach the people of God, but suffer them to lie and rotte in
their ignorance, and so suffer them to perish for want of knowledge: How will
such answer it in the day of the Lords wrath, when God will lay the blood of
men's souls to their charge? And surely, Soule-murder, it is the highest degree
of murder. Christ was moved with pity when he saw the people scattered abroad
as sheep, having no shepherd: Mat. 14.14.
But these Dumbe-dogs that cannot bark, so they may have the Flesh and the
Fleece, they care for no more. Christ says, that his Ministers that love him,
will Feed his Lambs; and he gives this commandment three times to Peter's,
Io. 21.
as the trial of his love to Christ: but if we may try the love of Ministers
to Christ Jesus by this mark, namely; their careful, conscionable, and
continual feeding of Christ's Sheep: We may then say, the love of many to
Christ is like that of Judas, he kissed him and killed him al at once,
betraying him into the hands of his enemies to be crucified. These contrary
the members of Christ, by them betrayed into the hands of the Devil, to destroy
both soul and body in Hell fire: and therefore all such unconscionable
Ministers, as either preach not at all, or else but coldly and carelessly,
though they should swear that they love Christ Jesus, yet the love of Christ
is not in them. Oh then, let this admonish all Ministers of Gods Word, that as
they love their own souls; yea, as they desire Gods glory, and love the Lord
Jesus Christ, and have any pity of the poor Souls of his members, that they
may not perish for ever in hell; so they would use all careful diligence in
Preaching the Word in season, and out of season, in laboring and using al
careful diligence to save men's Souls; to teach them, to Catechize them, and to
instruct them, that so they may be saved.

The Hearers duty.
and a heavy judgment of God upon this Land, it abounds wonderfully with
ignorance; and so long as men be ignorant, they will be profane. I would to
God I had no just cause to complain of this our people: but the truth is, that
though we be the Lords Vineyard, and he has hedged us about, and planted a
Vine-presse, even the Preaching of the Gospel, to water the Land, yet as Paul
says; Mat. 22.29. 1. Cor. 15.
I speak to your shame, some have not the knowledge of God. Now, if Paul might
say so to the Church of Corinth; surely, this may as well be verefied of many
in our Church; I speak to your shame, some have not the knowledge of God: Nay,
that complaint of the Holy Ghost in another place may justly be taken up
against us; Whereas, concerning the time, ye ought to be Teachers: yet had
ye need to be taught the Principles of Religion. Even so, whereas the most of
us, if we respect the long time God has taken in teaching us, we might have
been teachers; yet the truth is, the most had need to be taught the a. b. c.
even the principles of Christian Religion. Oh then, I beseech you in the fear
of the Lord, that you would now at last look into your estates; It is not the
least of Gods favors toward us, that he has spared us so long, that he has
not cut off the thread of our life in the days of our ignorance and blindness,
as many have been before us: Let us now make have to Return unto the Lord, and
repent of this sin, That we may live in his sight.

Thus much for the second fruit of our conversion and sincere Repentance, We
shall have knowledge. Now it is further added, And endeavor our selves to know
the Lord.

AS a true, lively, Meaning of the words.
and saving Knowledge is a fruit of true Repentance and Conversion unto God: so
in these words, We shall endeavor our selves to know the Lord; is here laid
down the fruit of saving knowledge: namely, to hunger after more knowledge, as
the Man of God had no sooner cast his Mantle upon Elizeus but he ran after
him: so, if the Lord do but cast one dram, and put one spark of this saving
knowledge into the heart of any man or woman, it will make them to run after the
Lord, with an earnest desire and endeavor to get more knowledge.

The Word here translated Endeavor, it signifies to prosecute earnestly,
Three things required, to get this saving knowledge.
and to hunt after the knowledge of the Lord, even with no less pains, nor
less perseverance, nor with no less pleasure then the Huntsman does follow
his game. So then this word commends three most excellent virtues unto us, in
seeking after the Knowledge of God: for, as those which follow the game, take
great pains, run through thick and thin. And secondly, they persevere, and
continue from morning till night, and will not leave til they kill; and thirdly,
take great delight in their pains. Even so should we, in seeking this blessed
knowledge of God, use these three: First, use all pains and diligence.
Secondly, persist and continue in seeking. And thirdly, take pleasure in it.

Hence then out of the first of these, Labor and pains required in all that
will get saving knowledge.
we are taught this Doctrine, that a Christian man or woman must not be
secure, idle, or slothful: but use all possible pains, diligence and labor
for the attaining of this saving knowledge. We shall endeavor our selves to know
the Lord, says the Text; that is, we shall use al possible means to attain
to this saving knowledge of the Lord Jesus. For, it fares with this heavenly
knowledge as with a man in a dropsy, the more he drinks, the more he thirsts
and desires drink: so, We shall endeavor ourselves, that is, we shall hunger
and thirst after this heavenly knowledge, as the food of our Souls, and never
be glutted with it, but labor to abound more and more in it. And for the
further confirmation of this point of doctrine, the Scriptures afford us diverse
examples of Gods children, who have been content to take great pains to seek
this knowledge of God. 2. Reg. 4.23.
When the Sunamite would go to the Prophet Elizeus, her husband answered, Why
will thou go, seeing it is neythor New Moon, nor Sabbath day? Out of which
words it appears, that upon such days they used to go, yea far iourneys to
be instructed in the Word: L^k. 8.1.2. Act. 8.27. Luke 13.24.
So, in the Gospel we shall read, that the people took long iourneyes and
great pains to hear our Savior Christ: It was not the tediousnes of the
weather, the distance of place, nor the weakness of their Sex, being many of
them women, that could any whit discourage them from seeking after Jesus Christ
the Savior of their souls. And we read of the Eunuch, who went a long,
troublesome and costly journey to Jerusalem to get this knowledge of the true
God: And it is the Precept of our blessed Savior himself, That we strive to
enter in at the straight gate: These examples, and the like, whereof the
Scripture is full, al serve to confirm the truth of this point unto us; that
diligence, labor and pains are reqvired in all those that would attain to
this blessed knowledge. It is not for a Christian man while he is here to cast
himself upon a bed of ease, as Iezabel upon her bed of fornication, and to
promise a rest unto himself here: but there must be a continual growth and
proceeding of knowledge, faith, repentance and the like graces: And if a man to
gain worldly riches or honor, or knowledge, or the like, will go far and
near, by sea, and by land; how much more ought a Christian man to take pains
to obtain that knowledge which will bring us to eternal life, and puts us into
a real possession of Gods Kingdom?

This does most justly condemn many amongst us of great contempt and damnable
negligence; Io. 17.3.
and also the good and gain which comes by it, namely, eternal life and
salvation; then surely we would seek far and near for it, as the people of
God do and have done. But of this before.

Secondly, Endeavor does import unto us the perseverance that is required in
all those that seek for this Knowledge. Perseverance and constancy is required
in seeking for saving knowledge. Act. 17.12.
We see the Huntsman for his pleasure in his game, he can be content to
seek in every bush, and to plod every furrow till he find his game, and then
he never leaves from morning till night! Oh, how much more should we seek and
never lin seeking for this heavenly and saving Knowledge till we find it. The
men of B^rea are commended for seeking and turning their books, to confirm and
to increase this Knowledge in them: So should we not only hear, but also
Search the Scriptures, examine every Chapter, leaf by leaf and line by line
till we find this Knowledge: It is not enough to begin to seek, bot we must
continue seeking for this Knowledge: Luke 11.62.
He that puts his hand to the Lords Plough, and looks back, is not meet for
the Kingdom of God: Mat. 24.4.
but he which endures to the end, shall be saved. Again, 1. Cor. 16.13.
Stand fast in the faith, quite you like men, and be strong. This is further
cleared by that speech of our Savior to the Church of Smyrmye: Reu. 2.10.
Be thou faithful unto death, Gal 33.
and I will give thee a Crown of life. And Paul blamed the Galathians, and
called them Foolish, for beginning in the spirit, and ending in the Flesh: for
not holding on as they had begun: and surely, the estate of such men is most
fearful, it had been better for them that they had never known the truth:
Nay, it had been better for them that they had never been borne, 2. Pet. 2.20.
as Christ speaks of Judas, and as the Apostle observes: If they after they
have escaped from the filthiness of the World, through the acknowledging of
the Lord and of the Savior Jesus Christ, are yet tangled again therein, the
latter end with them is worse then the beginning. And the reason of this
Doctrine is clear; If a righteous man turn from his righteousness; Ezec.
18.24.
and do the thing that is evil, all the righteousness that he has done,
shall be remembered no more, hut in the wickedness that he has committed, in
the same he shall die. And therefore we may safely conclude, that continuance
and perseverance in seeking after more knowledge, and every spiritual grace is
that which does crown all our virtues whatsoever.

If then thou have entered into the profession of Religion, Demas fall into
love with the world, Reu. 2.4.
and with the Church of Ephesus loose their first love, and grow secure and
careless: nay, neither hot nor cold in Religion; but the Lord one day will
spue such back sliders out of his mouth: Alas, we are hardly brought on to
make a beginning in matters of Religion; for, it fares with us as it did with
Zacheus, Luke 19.
when he had a purpose to see Christ, the multitude stood in his way, that he
was constrained to go up into a Fig Tree: so fares it with every Christian
man and woman, when we have entertained any good purpose of heart to seek the
Lord, to labor to get knowledge into our Souls, and to grow and increase in
the same: Oh how many lets and stumbling blocks will Satan now begin to lay
in our way, inward and outward, and all to keep us from enjoying of Christ!
But when a man shall over stride them all, and give up his name to Christ, and
then fall away, this were a most woeful estate and condition, Note.
they are no better then dogs and swine; and it had been better for such
that they had never known the truth, then after they have known it to fall
away: for, how does this man or woman cause the Lord by degrees a little and
little to take away from them his Spirit, that whereas, in times past they had
a love to the truth, and were careful to hear, and to sanctify the Lords
Sabbath; he might now upon their contempt of grace give them over as prisoners
to Satan, who shall so manicle their hands, feet, yea, heart and all, that by
degrees they shall grow to hate and contemn both grace itself, and the means
to obtain the same.

Thirdly, we must not only use pains, and persevere in seeking for this
knowledge; A godly man seeks after knowledge willingly and chearefully.
We see those that follow their sport, take great delight in it; and this
pleasure of theirs swallows up all their pain, and makes it seem nothing unto
them: So should we in seeking for this blessed knowledge, find our hearts
ravished with a love and a liking; and a godly pleasure in the same: You shall
see, that this has been the affection of the children of God in all ages.
Thus did Job, I esteemed thy word more then my appointed food: Job. 23.12.
And this affection was in the Prophet David, when he says, Lord, what love
have I unto thy Law, Psalm. 119.
all the day long is my study in them. And in the description of a godly man,
the Prophet David observes this to be one property in him, Psa. 1.2.
He meditates in the Law of God day and night: which show unto us that he
takes delight in it: for otherwise he would never, by night especially
meditate upon the same. And Jeremy, after he had found the Word of God, Ier.
15.16.
he did eat it, and it was sweet unto him; nay, it was his joy, and the
rejoicing of his Soul. Psalm. 16.10.
And the Prophet David speaking in another place of this knowledge, says; That
it is more to be desired then gold, yea, then much fine gold; sweeter also
then the honey and the honey comb. And that which the Apostle sets down
concerning Alms, Mat. 22.37. Rom 12.8. Deu. 6.5. 2. Cor. 9.7. Ezec. 3.3.
As every man wishes in his heart, so let him give, not grudgingly, or of
necessity, but willingly, for God loves a cheerful giver; may truly be
understood of every Christian duty. When we pray, we must pray unto God
chearefully, when we are to hear the Word preached and taught, read, receive,
or what duty else we are to perform in Gods service, cheerfulness is
required. And indeed, this is that which puts the difference betwixt the godly
and the wicked in all Christian duties whatsoever: The wicked man with Cain
comes with his Sacrifice as well as Abel: And so, for hearing, reading, prayer,
receiving, and the like, the Hipocrite comes so maskt unto these duties, that
the child of God at all times is not able to decerne betwixt them both, the
godly and the wicked: yet if they would sit as Judge over their own hearts,
they might even by the rule of this Doctrine, Note.
perceive a great difference: for, the one does perform these duties for
fashion sake, for fear of the Law, shame, punishment, or the like; whereas the
child of God does perform them willingly and chearefully, notwithstanding no
temporal Law did require the same, but only in obedience unto Gods most
righteous laws and holy commandments. And surely, there can be no greater
joy to any Christian soul, then to know how God the Father is affected unto
him, and loves him as his child; to know that Jesus Christ has been content to
shed his own heart blood to save his soul; and to know the power of Gods
Spirit, weakening our corruption, and making us to cry Abba Father: this
knowledge passes all knowledge in the world, Romans 8.15.
this will bring peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

Seeing that we must seek after Knowledge so willingly and so chearefully,
but according to the affection of the doer: This is clear by the Lords own
words, when he says, This people come near me with their mouth, Esa. 29.13.
and honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me. Alas,
what the better to draw near to the Lord with our lips, when our hearts are
from the Lord: It is the service of the heart that tht Lord looks after: and
this was Ezechias comfort and cheer, when he was to go the way of all flesh,
that he could say in truth of heart; Esa. 28.3.
Remember Lord that I have walked before thee in truth, and with an upright
heart. And what is the cause why carnal men and women never seek for this
knowledge, but come always to the Ministry of the Word for custom and for
fashion sake? Alas, they could never find the excellency of this Knowledge,
they never felt the power of this Knowledge, they never yet tasted of the
sweetness of this Knowledge, and then no marvel they prize it not, nor hear
it with any cheerfulness at all. Oh then, let us all labor to feel our
spiritual want of it, that so we may hunger and thirst after it as the
spiritual food of our Souls.

Then shall we endeavor our selves to know the Lord.
One thing more may be noted from these words, that seeing the child of God
upon his Repentance and true conversion unto God, Gods children labor for an
increase of knowledge daily in the^.
Then shall we have Knowledge, but more then that, We shall endeavor our
selves to know the Lord: that is, not rest content with a small measure of the
Knowledge of Gods will; but to attain every day to a greater measure of the
same.

Hence we are taught this point of Doctrine, that the children of God are not
content with a little knowledge, but they still desire for more, and labor to
grow, and to increase in Knowledge. The covetous man the more he has, the
more he couets: Even so the Christian man and woman is right covetous of
heavenly matters, he couets daily for more knowledge in the Word, to have a
greater part in this blessed Knowledge of God, and of our salvation by Jesus
Christ: and in this regard the child of God is like unto a man in a dropsy,
the more he drinks, the more he is a thirst: Even so, the more knowledge the
child of God has, the more he hungers and thirsts after this Knowledge, that
he may grow in the same.

And this is a special point to be noted, that there is no standing at a stay
in Religion, for either we must go forward or backward, either we must grow
daily in Knowledge, 1. These. 4.4.
or else we must needs decay in Knowledge. And for this cause Saint Paul does
often pray for those Churches to whom he writes, that they may grow in
Knowledge and spiritual understanding; and Saint Peter he exhorts us, 1. Pet.
2.2.
As newborn Babes to desire the sincere milk of the Word, that we may grow
thereby. Where he lays down three most excellent points. First, that here we
be but as babes in Knowledge, and children in understanding of the Word: We
know here but in part. Secondly, he shows the means whereby we must increase
in knowledge, namely, the sincere Milk of the Word of God, the Preaching of
the Gospel of Christ; it is the food of our souls whereby we must be
nourished to eternal Life. And thirdly, the end of the preaching the Gospel;
namely, that we may grow in knowledge, grow in faith, grow in obedienc: so
that though men hear the Word, yet if they grow not, and are not bettered by
it, they are no good hearers, the Word has no good fruit in them. This duty of
growing, and increasing in Knowledge, and all spiritual graces is often urged
in the Scripture: 1. Cor. 13.9. 1. These. 4.4. 2. Pet. 3.18. Heb. 6.1. Pro. 4.18.
We beseech you brethren, and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that ye increase
more and more, grow in grace. And again, Let us be led forward to
perfection. And the Prophet compares the graces of God in the Elect, to the
waters flowing from the Sanctuary, Ezec. 47.3.
which were at the first to the Ancles, then to the Knees, next, to the Loins;
and last, to a River that could not be passed over: So are the graces of God
in the Elect, though their beginning be but small, yet they increase daily till
they come to that full measure the which the Lord has allotted to every
Christian. The Doctrine being thus cleared, we will now come to the uses of
the same.

is the farewell Peter makes to the Jews, to whom he wrote, exhorting them to
Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ.

We see, that men do try themselves whether they grow in wealth, they will cast
up their books, take account to see how they have gained at the years end. Oh
let this be our practice, I beseech you, to try our knowledge, whethet we
grow in knowledge, whether we have more knowledge this year, then we had the
last, If we have not, alas, we are vprofitable Scholars in the School of
Christ: Now, what a shame is this, that after long teaching and preaching,
there should be no profiting, no more knowledge in men and women now, then
three, four, or ten years ago; but that they should remain as blind and as
ignorant as many years ago: Oh, it is a dangerous thing, for if we grow not
forward, then we go backward. If a man should put his child to Nurse, and
after two or three years should find his child nothing grown, he would surely
be grieved. Alas, if we shall after many years preaching grow nothing in
knowledge, it is a manifest sign that we are indeed but staruelings: and
therefore let us every one in the fear of God, labor to Grow in grace, and in
the knowledge of Jesus Christ. And seeing the food of our souls, and the
means whereby we must grow, is the preaching of the Word; Let us hunger and
thirst after it, let us seek for it, for if that be wanting, it is impossible
we should grow in knowledge, or in any grace of God to eternal life.

And thus much for the third fruit or effect of true Repentance; namely, a
hungring after more knowledge, and a daily growth and proceeding in the same.
It follows.
His going forth is prepared as the Morning.
IN these words is here laid down the fourth fruit and effect of true
repentance; namely, that when as sinners do truly Turn unto God, and draw
near unto him by true repentance, then will he draw near unto us to help
us, and to deliver us out of all our misery.

The meaning of the words.
His going forth is prepared as the Morning, that is, as though the people of
God should have said, Although the Lord has let us lie a long time in misery,
so as he seemed to have clean forgotten us; although he has hidden his face
from us for a little time, yet now he is coming to succor us: for by this
coming forth of the Lord, is signified his help and comfort, which he is
ready to show to his people in time of great extremity and need.

As the Morning, The meaning is, that even as the bright beams and clear
countenance of the Sun, after a windy, tempestuous, stormy and boisterous
night is very comfortable: even so, the bright beams of Gods mercy breaking
forth, and shining upon our hearts after a sad and solemn, nay, a dark and
cloudy night of affliction, it is most comfortable to glad and rejoice the
distressed Soul of a poor Sinner.

Howsoever God does humble his children for a time, he forsakes them not for
ever.
yet he forsakes them not for ever; the Lord puts under his own hand, he
is privy to the sighs and groans of his servants, and in his due time he will
deliver them; howsoever their afflictions may continue upon them, perhaps a
long time together, and that they have no breathing time, No, not to swallow
their spittle, as Job complains; Psalm. 37.24. Job. 7.19.
yet He that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep, and when he has
sufficiently humbled us, He will then arise, and have mercy upon Sion. Esa.
54.7.8.
This the Lord expresses by the Prophet Esaias, For a little time have I
forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I gather thee: In a moment in my
anger I hid my face from thee, for a little season, b^t with everlasting mercy
have I had compassion on thee: Psa. 34.15.18
This is acknowledged by the Prophet David, where he says, The eyes of the
Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry: The Lord is
near unto those that are of a contrite heart, and will save such as are
afflicted in spirit. What larger promise can be made unto the afflicted then
this, that his ears are open to their cry, and that he will save such as are
afflicted in spirit. And this is it which our Savior himself often alleges
for the comfort of his Disciples; Ioh. 14.18. Mat. 18.20. Mat 28.20. Genesis
41.14. Iam. 5.11. Exodus 12.41. Psalm. 18.1. Dan. 6.23. Micha. 7.8.10
I will not leave you comfortless, but I will come unto you, lo, I am with
you to the end of the world: This appears by the histories of Joseph, of Job,
of the Church in Egypt, of David, of Daniel, whom the Lord did humble for a
time under the heavy burden of fore affliction; but it was but for a time; for
comfort was even then prepared: and when the time of refreshing came, it brake
out as the rising of the Sun, and tne bright beams of the Morning after a
tempestuous night, which of all things is then most joyful and comfortable.
And so shall it be with all the godly; let their afflictions be what they may
be, inward or outvard, of body, or of mind, or of both; the Lord may seem for
a time to have forgotten his; but he that should come will come, and will not
tarry, and when deliverance is most welcome, and that we utterly despair of
any comfort of our selves, then will the Lords Mercy and deliverance break
forth as the Morning. And to this purpose are the words of Solomon, where he
says, The hope that is deferred, Pro. 13.12.
is the fainting of the heart: But when the desire comes, it is a tree of
life. All these Testimonies are so many witnesses of this truth, that howsoever
Gods children go drouping for a time, through the sense and feeling of their
sins, and cannot any way, or by any means receive any comfort, or howsoever
outwardly they may be afflicted, yet God has determined their deliverance:
His coming forth (to comfort and deliver them) is prepared as the morning,
etc.

Now, this deliverance which the Lord has promised to his children, to comfort
their wounded consciences, Gods deliverance compared to the morning in three
respects
and those that are in misery, he compares it to the rising of the Sun, and
the bright and comfortable beams of the morning for these three causes.

A Similie.
to shine into our distressed souls. If a man were in a waste wilderness in a
dark and solemn night, and see neither Sun, Moon nor Star, but hear the
fearful and terrible roaring and velling of wild beasts: Oh how glad would
this man be, after a dangerous, tempestuous, stormy and solemn night, to see
the face of the Sun, and the comfortable dawning of the day: Even so, what
can be more comfortable to a poor distressed Soul, and a wounded conscience,
after many black and stormy nights of affliction, when the conscience of a
poor sinner is upon the Rack, and when a poor Soul shall see the anger of
God against sin, see the torment of Hell, and his own conscience accusing
him for sin? What can be more comfortable or more longed for of such a man,
then to behold the bright beams of Gods mercy in Jesus Christ; to see the
comfortable face of God to shine upon him, and to have a sense and feeling of
his mercy? Act. 27.
When Paul and his company had not seen the Sun nor Moon for a long season,
at length they were glad to see the light appear, Even so, when a poor soul
has been plunged, even to the bottom of the sea of desperation, and sees no
one glaunce or glimmering of Gods mercy, but rather has a long time wrestled
against the waves of desperation, then to see but one spark or glimmering of
Gods mercy, it is that which makes the hearts of Gods children to leap for joy.

Secondly, it pleases the Lord to compare his help to the rising of the
Sun, because as nothing prepared the help of his people, and the Devil, nay
all the Devils in Hell cannot hinder him, no more then we can by all our skill
and might, hinder the rising of the Sun. And surely, this is greatly for the
comfort of Gods children, that when the Lord is once: Prepared, and coming to
help them, no Creature in heaven or earth can stay or stop him.

Thirdly, as the morning does not diffuse and spread his light over the earth
all at once, but by degrees,

Seeing the Lord is Prepared to help us, and that with abundance of comfort,
and so as no Creature, no, not the gates of Hell cannot hinder him, but he will
make his love known unto us: We must all learn to possess our souls with
patience, to awayte the Lords leisure for our deliverance; not to prescribe
unto him the manner or the time when we would be delivered. It is sufficient
for us to know that comfort is prepared: We are ready in our troubles when we
find not present help at hand, to suppose the Lord to be far off, and so
grow impatient of delay, and cannot abide to wait the Lords leisure; so soon
as Gods hand is laid upon us, we look to have it taken off, and so soon as
we feel the heat of affliction, we look that God should quench it: This made
the Prophet David in the heat of his affliction to cry out; Psalm. 10.1.
Why stand thou so far off O Lord, and hidest thee in due time, even in
affliction? And in another place he says, Has God forgotten to be gracious,
and has he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure. Thus the children of
God have wonderfully been assaulted, and the flesh sometime wrestling against
the Spirit prevails, and for a time gets the upper hand. But seeing our
doctrine has taught us (as we have heard) that howsoever God does humble his
children for a time, yet he forsakes them not for ever: but in the midst of
all their afflictions and trials, mercy and deliverance is prepared for them.
Let us learn here (how great so ever our conflicts be) not to despair of
Gods mercy, but to Tarry the Lords leisure: for it will surely and certainly
come, even as the Sun is sure to rise though it be set for a time, or hidden
by a thick cloud, yet it will break out and appear most comfortably.

prepared, and therefore most certain to come: So the same shall come as the
Sun in the morning, most comfortable: We are taught here that our
deliverance from God shall be sure to come, when we can most of all prize it,
and when the same shall be most welcome unto us. A Merchant takes his voyage
into a far Country, A Similie.
and makes his reckoning within so many months to return, his loving wife at
home, about that time appointed, with gladsome heart looks daily for his
return: but by distress of weather, or some other accident, she hears not of
him; or if she do, the news is most uncomfortable: thus she has her heart
possessed with sorrow, having more cause of fear, then hope: At last, when
stee thinks least, her dearest husband returns safe with great store of
wealth; who is able to express her joy, and is not her joy the greater, and
her husband so much the more welcome for that he stayed so long? Yes
doubtless. So it fares with our God: his delaying of comfort and deliverance,
makes us to prize the same the better when it does come: When we have layne a
long time under the heat of Gods wrath, and suffered a sore night of
affliction, when our sins have mustered themselves before us, and gone over
our heads, as before burden too heavy for us to bear; and when we shall
seem altogether lost in our selves, then to be found of the Lord is most
sweet and comfortable: Oh it is the case of many of Gods dear children that
have undergone a sore night of affliction and sorrow for sin, A principal
comfort for the afflicted soul.
and have been ready to say, I am cast out of thy favor: yet has the Lord at
last answered their long expectation with a joyful Morning of Sunshine of
his mercy and favor, and the bones that seemed to be broken have rejoiced: Oh
then let us stay our souls upon this, that howsoever, No chasticement for the
present seems to be joyous, Heb. 12.11.
but grievous: yet there is a time when it shall bring the quiet fruit of
righteousness unto them that are exercised thereby: Deu. 8.16.
In regard hereof, Moses the man of God says, That the Lord humbled his chosen
people, and proved them, that he might do them good at their latter end. And
in my poor judgment, a man may gather far more undoubted assurance of Gods
everlasting favor toward his soul by these inward afflictions, then by any
outward prosperity in the world whatsoever: the Lord grant unto his poor
afflicted servants, that their troubled souls, which with sorrow for sin,
are cast down so low, that they may reap this gracious blessing. It follows.

And he shall come unto us as the rain, even as the latter rain unto the
earth.
IN these words the Prophet does yet more fully express the mercy of God
toward poor distressed souls, by the later rain that falls upon the earth:
that even as rain is most welcome to the scorched and parched earth in the
time of summer, after a long drought to cool the heat, and to quench the
thirst thereof (as our own experience this last summer has taught us) as also
to ripe the fruits of the earth, and to bring them to perfection: Even so, when
poor souls be wounded and spoiled of all sense and feeling of the mercy of
God in Jesus Christ, and lie bleeding in their miseries, scorched and tormented
with the heat of Gods anger for sin even when men seem to be past hope: then if
the Lord send a gracious rain, and a blessed shower to quench the heat of
their poor afflicted souls for sin, it shall be most welcome, for then is
mercy most welcome when men have felt the bitter smart of sin. But of this
more largely the doctrine before.

Now, The ends wherefore the Lord does defer his help.
if any ask wherefore the Lord lets his own people lie oftentimes so long
soking in misery before he help them, and then helps them when as there is
least hope of help. I answer, he does this.

First, for the trial of their faith, whether they will depend and hang upon
him, also, for the exercise of

Secondly, to make them see and know, that they

Thirdly, to stir them up to seek and pray unto

And lastly, to make them highly to esteem of his

This may teach us to continue our patience, and to wait still his leisure:
though he defer long, and seem to forget us; yet We must live by faith, We
must hope for life in the midst of death, and say with Job, Though thou kill
me, yet I will trust in thee. So, though the Lord defer his help and comfort
many years, yet we must never let go our hold, but still hang upon his mercy
with the hands of faith.

And thus much for the first general part of this Chapter, the godly practice
of true repentance, and the several fruit and effects thereof. The second
follows.
VERSE. 4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat
thee? for your goodness is as the morning cloud, and as the Morning Dew it goes
away.
The second general part of this chapter.
IN the Chapter going before, the Lord has threatened many great and grievous
judgments against Ephraim and Judah, as verse 14. I will be unto Ephraim as a
Lion, and as a Lions whelpe to the house of Judah: I, even I, will spoil and
go away: I will take away, and none shall rescue it.

And in the three first verses of this Chapter, we have seen what fruit it
had in the believing Jews; namely, that they were truly humbled for their
sins, feared Gods anger, and Returned unto him by true and unfeigned repentance,
Come, say they, Let us return unto the Lord, etc.

In the second part of this Chapter, is set down what fruits and effects Gods
denuntiations and terrible judgments threatened against sin, had in the
unbelieving Jews; namely, a most vile and stubborn rebellion against all the
means that the Lord used to convert them, ver. 4. Secondly, the punishment of
their rebellion, ver. 5.

So that the sum of these two verses is nothing else but a pitiful
complaint of the Lord for the stubbornness and rebellion of the Jews, that
could not by any means the Lord used, be reclaimed. The sum of these two
verses.
O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat thee? for
your goodness is as the morning cloud, and as the morning dew it goes away.

Secondly, the just punishment of almighty God upon them for the same, ver. 5.
Therefore have I cut down by the Prophets, I have slain them by the words of
my mouth, and thy judgments are as the light that goes forth.

In the first of these, we are to note 3. things.
1. The complaint, What shall I do unto thee? how shall I entreat thee? 2. The
persons of whom the Lord complains thus, Ephraim, Judah. 3. The cause of the
complaint, or the thing whereof the Lord complains, Your goodness is as the
morning cloud, and as the morning dew it goes away.
In the second we are to note 4 things.
1. Who was the author of their punishment, and did inflict it, I have cut,
etc. 2. The greatness of it, I have cut down and flaine them. 3. The means or
instrument God used in punishing them. By my Prophets and the words of my
mouth. 4. The equity of this judgment, and punishment inflicted upon them: For
thy judgments were as the light: So clear and so manifest that no man could
complain or excuse themselves by ignorance; they were in the view of all men.
Of these in order, and first to begin with the complaint.

What shall I do unto thee, how should I entreat thee.
THese words contain in them the complaint the Lord takes up against these
rebellious Jews; and it is as much, as if he should have said; I have for my
part used all the means that possible I could, to humble you, and to bring you
to repentance; but now alas, I know not what to do unto thee more, or what
course to take to do thee good; and yet I can bring thee to no good pass, but
all is in vain that ever I have done unto thee: and therefore in great grief,
pitying thy wretched and forlorn estate, I can but mourn for thy misery.

God does not proceed in judgment before he has offered all means of mercy.
as first to use all the means he could to convert them, and humble them
before he punished and destroyed them. If the Lord had but showed one means
as the Word preached; it was his great mercy, for he might justly take all
advantage at our hands, to cut us off in the height of our sins; and damn us
presently for the same; but in that he uses so many means, so long a time, it
shows his wonderful mercy to these people, in that he says: Oh, what shall I
do? how shall I entreat? It shows, the Lord had used all the means he could,
his word, his mercies, his judgments, threatenings, punishments; and yet all
would not humble them.

So that hence we may observe the wonderful mercy of God toward his people, in
that he uses so many means to humble them for their sins ere he cut them
off. The truth of this Doctrine is confirmed by diverse places of Scripture,
Ier. 7.13.
as that of the Prophet Jeremy, I rose up early and spoke unto you: but when I
spoke ye would not hear me, neither when I called would ye answer. And
that of the Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 68.2.
I have stretched out my hand all the day long unto a rebellious people. Joel.
2.13.
This is further confirmed unto us by the Prophet Joel, when he says; Rent
your hearts and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, Ezech. 33.11
and repents him of the evil. And so much does God himself teach us of
himself, when he says, As I live says the Lord God, I desire not the death
of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live. 2. Sam. 12.1.
When the Prophet David had committed very heinous and horrible sins, how
graciously did the Lord send unto him his Prophet Nathan, to awake him out of
his sin, and to call him home by repentance. And again afterward, 2. Sam.
24.10
when in the pride of his heart he had numbered his people; he sent the
Prophet Gad unto him to humble him for the same: Yea the Lord is so rich in
mercy, that he offers the same unto the wicked themselves, though they in
their profaneness neglect and contemn the same. When Cains heart began to
boil in malice against his brother Abel, Genesis 4.6.7.
the Lord said enough to him if he had had grace to have kept him from that
horrible sin of murder: Why art thou wroth (says Almighty God to Cain) and
why is thy countenance cast down, If thou do well, shall thou not be
rewarded? etc. And after that Cain had slain his brother, the Lord left him
not, Genesis 6.3.
but labored to bring him to remorse, when he asked him, Cain, where is thy
brother Abel? And again, The voice of thy brothers blood cries from the earth.

And when God was purposed to destroy the old World, 2. Pet. 2.1. Genesis 19. 2.
Reg. 21.28
what means did he use first to reclaim them? he gave them a hundred and
twenty years to repent in, and all this while sent unto them Noah that
Preacher of righteousness, to warn them of that judgment to come, yet they
repented not: So dealt he with the filthy Sodomites, by placing just Lot
amongst them to labor their conversion, Mat. 27.19.
and was so far prevailed with by Abraham, that if ten righteous souls had
been found in those Cities, God had spared them for their sakes. The like may
be said of Ahab and of Pilate; yea, the Lord offered his mercy unto Judas,
when as before any thing was effected, Christ put him in mind of his bloody
thoughts against him, making it manifest that he was the man that should
betray him. Thus have we seen cleared the truth of this Doctrine, that God is
a God of mercy, and that he will not easily proceed in judgment before he
has offered all means of mercy, What shall I do unto thee? how shall I
entreat thee?

The means by the which the Lord does humble men.
Now the means by the which the Lord does humble men, are diverse:

First and principally, the Ministry of his Word. Thus dealt the Lord with his
servant David, as we heard before, sending his Prophets unto him to bring him
to the sight of his sin: 1 The Ministry of the Word.
and to this end has the Lord commanded his Prophets and Ministers to cry
aloud, Esa. 58.1. Pro. 8.1.2.3 and 9.1.2.3.
and to lift up their voices like Trumpets, to preach the Doctrine of
repentance, and to show the people their sins. And Solomon in diverse places of
his book of Proverbs brings in Christ Jesus, the wisdom of God, sometimes
crying aloud in his own person, and sometimes by his Ministers, to summon men
to repentance. Thus dealt he with the Nineuites, sending unto them his Prophet
Jonas to preach repentance unto them, that there rested but forty days, Ion.
3.4.
and then (without repentance) Nineueh should lie in the dust: And hence is it
that the Apostle Paul calls the Ministry of the Word The power of God to
salvation to every one that believes. And in another place he says, Romans
1.16.
that howsoever the seeming Wisemen of the World do account of Preaching but as
foolishnes, yet it has pleased God By that foolishness of preaching, 1. Cor.
1.21.
to save them that believe. And this Word of God is called the Lords Hammer,
Ier. 23.29.
whereby he knockes at the door of our hard hearts: and this is the most
principal, the most powerful and effectual means, being Gods ordinance to
convert sinners, and to bring them to repentance,

Secondly, his manifold mercies and blessings, the which he Renueth toward us
every morning: 2 His Blessings
and by this means does the Lord seek to woo and win our hearts to him;
he gives us life, and health, meat, Lam. 3.23.
drink, apparel, lodging; he keeps us from many dangers, and poures down
thousand blessings upon us, and every one of these give a knock at our hearts,
and cry aloud in our ears, that the Lord by them does labor to draw and win
us unto him; and this was that that made David's sin exceeding sinful;
namely, That God had anointed him King over Israel, 2. Sam. 12.7.8.
and had delivered him out of the hands of Saul, and had given him his Lords
house, and his Lords wives into his bosom, etc. And would if that had been too
little, have given him much more; and therefore his unthankfulness must needs
be the greater, to sin against so gracious and merciful a God.

His judgments.
by these does the Lord ring many a warning peale in our ears, sometimes by
long and tedious sickness, diseases, crosses, losses, troubles, calamities, in
wife, children, goods, good name; the Lord has many of these ways to humble
us, that by them perceiving his angry countenance toward us, we might be
humbled for our sins, and sue to him for mercy; and whenever the Lord is
constrained to take this course with us, he does it unwillingly, with grief
of heart, as is manifest by that notable place in this Prophet: Hos. 11.8.
How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee O Israel? how
shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned
within me, and my repentance is rolled together. The justice of God in this
place requires vengeance, the mercy of God requires pity and compassion, and
betwixt them both God seems to be straighted, which shows, how hardly he is
drawn to punish that, notwithstanding the sins of Ephraim and Israel did
require that the Lord should punish them as he did Sodom and Gomorrah and the
Cities about them: yet his fatherly love and tender compassion toward them
stayed his judgments.



This serves in the first place to reprove and condemn the desperate behavior
of al wicked and ungodly sinners, that neglect and contemn (if not stubbornely
resist) all the means of their good that the Lord does offer unto them: so as
the Lord may justly complain of them as of Ephraim and Judah here: O Ephraim
what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat thee? His word, his
mercies, his judgments, what means soever the Lord may use for their
conversion, they frustrate them all. If he do cry in their ears by his
Prophets through the preaching of the Word, which is the power of God: Alas,
how many be there amongst us, that Like the deaf Adder stop their ears at the
voice of the Charmer charm he never so wisely? Psalm. 58.4.5.
but this Word the which now they seem so much to despise, shall leave such an
impression in their souls and consciences, that at the last day if there were
no witness to accuse them for their contempt thereof, yet their own
consciences would hayle them to judgment: or else, if they do hearken unto
it, and attain to some knowledge by it, yet they hate to be reformed by it,
Psalm. 50.4.5.
and so by that means procure unto themselves the greater damnation.

Again, if God allure them by his gracious benefits, how many be there
amongst us that most carelessly and most wretchedly abuse them, That turn the
grace of God into wanto^nes; or if the Lord proceed further to correct them,
they are never the better by it, but with wicked Ahaz, Trespass yet more
against the Lord: 2. Cor. 28.22
so that the Lord may justly complain of them, as sometimes he did of the old
rebellious Jews, I have corrected them, but they have not been humbled. And I
would to God that this complaint might not justly be taken up of us the people
of this land, unto whom the Lord has used every one of these means. His
faithful Ministers that have cried unto us almost these threescore years
together; besides how many blessings have we enjoyed, liberty, peace,
abundance; every man may sit and rejoice under his own Vine; besides this,
many times again He has hedged in our ways with thorns, as famines,
pestilences, sicknesses, Hos. 2.6.
unseasonable weather, as this Winter and Summer last do testify. And now
again has turned our sorrow into joy, by giving us a happy season this latter
part of the year: so that in these respects the Lord may say unto us as he
said sometimes of Israel, What shall I do unto thee that I have not done, or
as my Text says here, Oh Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? Oh Judah how
shall I entreat thee?

Never age had more experience of the goodness of God toward them then this
age wherein we live, if we either regard the preaching of the Word, his
judgments or his mercies: by some of them the Lord has still sought unto us;
and yet alas, as though all this were nothing, Esaias. 5.12.
we pass our time in carnal security and sinful pleasures, Never
regarding the works of the Lord, nor considering the operation of his hands. So
that now the Lord may justly take up that complaint against us, Esaias. 5.4.
as here he did against Ephraim and Judah, O England, what shall I do unto
thee? O England, how shall I entreat thee? And therefore we may well fear that
he that thus called upon us, Pro. 1.24.26
and that by so many means, and we refused, that the time shall come that we
shall cry and call upon him, even till our hearts are ready to break within
us, and he will not hear us, but be so far from pitying us in time of our
distress, as that he will rather laugh at our destruction.

Secondly, this may serve to admonish us all in the hearts as he did the heart
of Lydia; if that do not, yet let his mercies wherewith he does, as it were,
follow us at the heels, most rebellious wretches, as we be: move us and
mollify our hard and stony hearts; if not his mercy, yet let his judgments
prevail with us to make us to stoop under his mighty hand. Otherwise, if we
will needs be desperate, and harden our hearts against all such blessed
means; Oh then let us assure our selves that that judgment shall come upon
us, and overtake us, Ver. 5.
that here he threatened against Ephraim and Judah. I have cut them down by
the Prophets, I have slain them by the words of my mouth: that is, because no
means that I could use would do them good, but they did harden their hearts
against the same; therefore now those threatenings of my Propbets shall come
upon them, and I will make good the words of my mouth, that is, bring to pass
all my judgments threatened against them.

Secondly, in that the Lord complains here, that Wicked men continue still in
sin, notwithstanding all means to the contrary.
could do them any good, saying: What shall I do unto thee? how shall I
entreat thee? We may heete behold how desperate the case of this people were,
and their marvelous obstinacy and rebellion, in that though Almighty God did
use all means to humble them and reclaim them, yet they could by no means
be brought to goodness, to be humbled, but notwithstanding all the gracious
means God used, they continued rebellious and stubborn still: And this
appears by the Lords complaint, in vpbraiding them with sin still, q. d. I
perceive thou will be stout against me, thou will not yield, thou will be
brought to no good pass, thou art exceeding obstinate and rebellious; and thus
does the Lord complain of them in another place, Wherefore should I smite them
any more? And again, Esaias. 1.5.
Thou O Lord have stricken them but they have not sorrowed, thou have consumed
them, Ier. 5.3.
but, they have refused to receive correstion: for they have made their faces
harder then a stone, and will not return: Amos. 4.6.
And again, by the Prophet Amos he complains thus; I have given you
cleanness of teeth in all your Cities, and scarsenes of bread in all your
places, yet have ye not returned unto me says the Lord. If we look upon
examples, Gen 4.6.
we shall find diverse in the Word of God that prove the same, as that of
Cain, albeit the Lord did forewarn him of that wrath he had conceived against
his brother Abel, that he would never be at rest till he had killed him. And
this is clearly seen in the old World, when the Lord saw the wickedness of
man to wax great upon the earth, Genesis 6.3.
he stirred up Noah that Preacher of righteousness, to warn them of
judgment to come; yet they continued still in their sins: The like may be
said of Sodom and Gomorah, of Pharaoh, Judas, and the like: So that it
appears to be an evident truth, that wicked men continue still in sin,
notwithstanding all the means that God does use to the contrary, Pro. 27.22.
according to that of Solomon, If thou bray a fool in a mortar, yet will not
his foolishnes depart from him.

And this thing so comes to pass in them, because God in his just judgment
has given them over to a reprobate sense, Paul, God gave them over unto vile
affections, Romans 1.26.
to work filthiness against nature, etc. And as it was said of the sons of
Ely; 1. Sam. 2.24.
They would not hear their Fathers voice, because the Lord would destroy them.

their judgment; and by this means they do but increase their punishment,
Romans 2.4.5.6
and hoard it up as a treasure against the day of Gods wrath; Despisest thou
the riches of his bountifulnes and patience, and long sufferance, not knowing
that the bountifulnes of God leads thee to repentance? but thou after thy
hardness, and heart that cannot repent, heapest up unto thy self wrath
against the day of wrath. In which words we may see the woeful and miserable
estate and condition of all those that run from evil to worse, that their
damnation all this while sleeps not; but when the measure of their iniquity
is once full, the Lord will be sure to bring his judgments upon them.

Again, to apply this doctrine somewhat more nearly Egypt (if they were amongst
us) would acknowledge it to be the finger of God. When that Moses smote the
Rock it gushed out with water: the Lord has often smitten our hard and
flinty, and rocky hearts with the rod of his judgments, and still smites, but
all in vain; for we are stubborn and rebellious still. So that we may justly
fear, that as he cast off this people, slew them, consumed them, and destroyed
them; even so will he deal with us in his anger, and that because we have
not profited by his judgments, nor yet no means that he has used can
prevail with us, to bring us to repentance. If we contemn so great salvation,
how can we think to escape?

The Lord takes it hardly that the means of our good should be contemned.
O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat thee? We
may learn that it is a grievous thing unto the Lord, and vexes his spirit, to
see all the means he does use in mercy to do us good, and to save us, to be
carelessly regarded, and lightly esteemed, or proudly and desperately contemned
of us: for the Lord has tried all possible means to do them good, yet they
regarded them not, but lightly esteemed them and passed them over; and
therefore the Lord takes up this pitiful complaint, O Ephraim what shall I
do unto thee? O Judah how shall I entreat thee? It is all one as if he should
have said, It grieves me right sore to see you so stubborn against me. This
Doctrine is cleared in diverse places of the Holy Scriptures, as that speech of
Almighty God himself, when he says to the people of Israel, Deu. 5.29.
when they had made that solemn promise to obey Moses the servant of the Lord
in all things: Oh that there were such a heart in them to fear me, and to
keep my commandments always, that it might go well with them, and their
children for ever. Psalm. 81.13.
This affection the Lord expresses in another place when he says, O that my
people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways: Yea, our
Savior himself does express the same affection in him, in the days of his
flesh: Luke 19.41.42.
And when he came near it, he beheld the City, and wept over it, saying; Oh
if thou had known, at the least in this thy day those things that belong
unto thy peace. These testimonies and the like, whereof the Scripture is full,
serve to confirm the truth of this Doctrine unto us, how hardly the Lord does
take it at our hands, when we neglect and contemn the means of our good. The
uses remain to be handled.

Does the Lord take it so grievously to see his ordinances Nehem. 1.
All the means God has used to humble us and to save us, and to bring us to
repentance and reformation of life: Alas, they fall to the ground generally, no
man takes them to heart. Daniel in his prayer acknowledges, Dan 9.14.
that the Lord did justly plague them for their sin, because they had not
profited by Gods judgments. Now if the Lord were sore angry and grieved with
his people for the not profiting by the means: and will he not much more be
stirred up to wrath against us for the contempt of all those gracious means
the which he in mercy used to humble us? yes, no doubt, Hos. 4.1.
and for the same cause the Lord has a Controversy against the inhabitants of
the Land, and has taken the Rod into his own hand, and chastened and whipped
us diverse ways, and unless we do meet him by repentance with prayers and
tears, surely, he will pour out even the dregger of his anger against us at
last.



thereof, he be moved to send more fearful, and that eternal damnation in
the end.

Fourthly, and lastly, here is matter of comfort and consolation to the
children of God, and all those that Nehemie heard that Jerusalem was waste,
Nehem. 1.9.
that the people were in heaviness, and the Church afflicted, He sat down
and wept, and fasted, Hab. 3.16.
and prayed unto God for them. And again, When I heard, Ezech. 9.
my belly trembled, etc. How did the Lord command his servant, clothed in
white, with a pen and ink at his side to set a mark upon all those that
mourned for their own sins and the sins of the people. Well then, ask this
question of thy own Soul: Have thou been grieved at Gods anger, and mourned
for the sins and rebellion of the land? Do thou take Gods judgments to
heart, Oh then comfort thy Soul, for the Lord will love thee, and set his
Mark upon thee, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
They are blessed that can mourn and weep for sin, and can take Gods
judgments to heart to be affected with them; but alas, how few are the number
of those that are humbled for their own sins to fear Gods anger, and
profit by Gods judgments upon others.

Thus much of the complaint, the persons follow.
O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat thee?
The persons of whom the Lord complains.
is Ephraim and Judah, namely, the whole body of the Jews, and the people of
both the kingdoms, Israel and Judah, the greatest Tribe being put for all the
rest.

So then the complaint is very general, even of the common people, and all the
multitude of both the Kingdoms, except a very few that did repent and believe
the Word, as in the three first verses of this Chapter.

Concerning the persons, Ephraim and Judah, there is the common people and
general multitude of both Kingdoms, Deu. 8.7.
seeing they were those whom God chose to be his peculiar people; even because
he had a love unto them, to whom belonged the adoption, glory, and the
covenant, and to whom did belong the service of God, the worship and oracles
of God, and unto whom all the Prophets were sent: which had many privileges
above all other Nations, of whom it is said thus; He shows his Word unto
Jacob, his statutes and judgments unto Israel. Ps. 147.19.20
He has not dealt so with every Nation, etc. Yet of this people, even of
Judah and Israel does the Lord complain here, that they were rebellious; and
therefore must be destroyed and cast off.

No outward privilege will free a man from punishment when reformation of heart
and life is wanting, Psa. 132.4
will keep back Gods anger, and deliver a man from destruction if they live
in sin, and be not reformed in heart and life. There was never Nation or
people under heaven, that were graced with more outward privileges and
prerogatives then this nation and people of the Jews. They had the Temple of
the Lord amongst them, of the which the Lord speaks thus: This is my rest for
ever, here will I dwell: for I have a delight therein: They had amongst them
the Arc of Gods covenant, the Mercy seat, they had amongst them the true
service and worship of God, and what not: yet for all this Judah and Israel
must be destroyed, defaced and extinguished, and made spectacles of Gods wrath
to all posterities for evermore. This point is clearly to be seen by those
threatenings of Almighty God himself by his Prophet Jeremy, where he says,
Ier. 7.11.12 13.14.
Is my house become a Den of thieves, whereupon my Name is called before your
eyes? Behold, even I see it, says the Lord. Therefore will I do unto this
house, whereupon my name is called, wherein also ye trust, even to the place
that I gave to you and your Fathers, as I have done unto Shilo. And I will cast
ye out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brethren, even the whole seed
of Ephraim. Ier. 16.4.6.
The like threatening he uses by the same Prophet in another place, saying, If
ye will not hearken, and turn every man from his evil way, etc. Then will I
make this house like Shilo, and will make this City a curse to all the Nations
upon earth. And this is further confirmed unto us by that threatening of our
Savior himself against Ierusalom, where he says, Thy house shall be left
unto thee desolute. Mat. 23.38.
And thus have we seen this Doctrine confirmed by the example of this Nation
and people of the Jews, who were graced with many and excellent privileges
and prerogatives; yet the Lord does esteem them as nothing, when reformation
of heart and life is wanting. The same truth is further cleared by diverse other
examples in the book of God. Judas had many outward privileges, and yet for
all that a damnable hypocrite: for his calling he was an Apostle, a calling
more honorable then any other in the Church of God, Act. 1.17. Gal. 1.1.
because the ordination was not of Man or by man, but by Jesus Christ. The
company with whom he was conversant was matchless, for he was conversant
with Jesus Christ and his Disciples, his gifts they were not mean, for he was
a Preacher. And lastly, his behavior was very sober: for when Christ told his
Disciples that one of them should betray him, they were far from suspecting
Judas, that they rather misdeemed themselves, Master, is it I, says one,
Master, is it I, says another? and yet for all this Judas a desperate
reprobate.

This is further to be seen in Cain, who was as forward in offering sacrifice
as his brother Abel, Genesis 4.3.4.5
yet because he came in hypocrisy for fashion sake, the Lord rejected both
him and his sacrifice. Mar 6.20.
Herod loved John Baptist, and did many things at his request; yet by reason of
his Incest he is branded for an hypocrite. What shall I say of the foolish
Virgins, who went out to meet the Bridegroom as well as the wise? Mat. 15.1.2.
yet because they wanted the oil of graee in their hearts, were rejected. Act.
8.13. Act. 5.8.
The like may be said of Simon Magus, of Ananias and Saphira, and diverse the
like examples, all serving to this end, to confirm the everlasting truth of
this Doctrine unto us, that no outward privilege in the world will free a man
from Gods judgments, when reformation of heart and life is wanting.

I perceive (says Peter) that God is no accepter of persons, Act. 10.34.35.
but in every Nation he that fears him and works righteousness is
accepted of him: He will clear his justice, to hate sin, wheresoever,
whenever, or in whomsoever he finds it.

Now let us come to the uses.

This may serve in the first place for the just reproof of those that flatter
themselves in respect of an outward profession, and bear themselves aloft, in
respect of some outward privilege, and think that they shall therefore
escape: but alas, it is not all the privileges in the world can do us good,
if the inward sincerity be wanting. This we have seen cleared here by the
example of Ephraim and Judah, the Nation and people of the Jews, who were
graced with many and excellent privileges, as no Nation or people under heaven
were the like: yet because they wanted this reformation of heart and life, the
Lord threatens here to destroy them. And now to apply this Doctrine to our
selves, we are by Gods blessing the people of God, and have as many privileges
as ever they had: What then, because we are now the Church of God, and enjoy
the Gospel, Word, and Sacraments, peace and plenty, shall we grow secure and
wanton, like an untamed Calfe, Ier. 19.31.
and cast off the yoke of obedience? God forbid: for then the Lord will reject
us as he did them. And yet alas, is not this the state of this land at this
day, from the highest to the lowest; we are guilty of the sins of this
people. Hos. 4 1, 2.3.
Among the men of Ephraim and Judah were found many great and grievous sins, as
the Lord does charge them with by this Prophet, as swearing, and lying, and
killing, and whoring, and that blood touched blood. Now alas, are we strangers
to these sins? no, no, We are too well acquainted with them, and new sins
that Ephraim and Judah never were acquainted withal; and what is the Lords
hand shortened that he should not plague England as he did Ephraim and Judah:
Surely, if we partake with them in their sins, we shall one day partake
with them of their punishments: And look how much the more familiar we have
been acquainted with the best of Gods graces, the greater shall be our
judgment for the abuse of them: Yea, it had been better for us that we had
never known God, nor heard of his Word, but been borne even Turks and Canibals,
Pagans and Infidels, then to have the Privileges as we have amongst us;
namely, the Word and Sacraments, and the like, and not to be reformed by them.
Mark what terrible and fearful words our Savior denounces against those
Cities where the Word had been preached most, and they wanted this
reformation: Mat. 11.21. etc.
Woe be to thee Corazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida, for if the great works
which were done in you, had been done in Tyrus and Sydon, they had repented
long ago in sackcloth and ashes: but I say unto you, it shall be easier for
them in the day of judgment then for you. And thou Capernaum which art lifted
up into heaven, shall be brought down to Hell, for if the great works which
have been done in thee, had been done amongst them of Sodom, they had
remained to this day. But I say unto you, that it shall be easier for them of
the land of Sodom in the day of judgment then for thee.

In this place our Savior declares unto us, that such places as have had the
preaching of the Word amongst them, and have accounted light of the same, shall
receive at the last day a greater measure of condemnation, then those that
never heard the sound thereof. You will think it a harsh comparison, if I should
compare our land to Sodom and Gomor: we know how the Lord destroyed them with
fire and brimstone from heaven: And yet I say unto you in the name of God from
the warrant of his sacred word, by the which we shall all one day be judged;
that if we live in the open contempt of Gods truth, ignorance, blindness and
profaneness, which sins are scarce the tenth that may be found amongst us at
this day, it had been much better that we had been borne Sodomites and
Gomoreans; yea, the time shall come, when many amongst us shall cry out, and
wish that they were Sodomites and Gomoreans: Oh that I were a Sodomite, Oh that
I were one of them of Gomorah, and that, because we knew not the day of our
Visitation. And this favor and mercy of our God that now we enjoy, to hear
him, to speak unto us in his Word, and that we have his service and worship
amongst us, shall be so far at the last day from procuring us any favor or
mercy at Gods hand, as that we having had the same amongst us, and we most
profanely did neglect and contemn the same; shall reap even therefore the
greater measure of condemnation: Deu. 32.29.
Oh that men would be wise, then would they consider their latter end.

Secondly, seeing that most excellent prerogatives If ye will hearken and
obey, ye shall then eat the good of the land. We must not stand so much upon
the largeness of the leaves of our profession, who should profess most; as
we should upon sincerity, who should practice most. I am sure it is our
behavior concerning the things of the world: There is no man but had rather be
rich, then accounted rich; be wealthy, then seem to be wealthy. And yet for
that true riches that shall make us rich unto salvation, we can content our
selves with shadows and shows of it, and look not after the substance; Like
Iehu who made great boast of the zeal he had for the glory of God: Come with
me says he to Ionadab, And see the zeal that I have for the Lord: 2. Reg.
10.16
but yet for all this, his heart was not upright in the sight of God: Act.
24.16.
but the Apostle Paul was affected otherwise, who endeavored himself to have
always a clear conscience toward God and man. And surely this is it that shall
be our comfort in life, in death, and after death, Esaias. 38.3.
that we can say with good King Ezechiah, Remember Lord that I have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart.

Ephraim and Judah, that is, of the whole body of the people, and the general
multitude of both Kingdoms, Though God does offer the means of salvation unto
all, yet few receive them.
that they were wicked and rebellious, and profited not by all the gracious
means that he used to reclaim them: we learn hence, that though the Lord do
offer the means alike to all, as his Word, judgments, admonitions,
corrections, etc. yet very few do receive them and profit by them, and the
greatest part remain ignorant, unrepentant and rebellious against the means,
as we may see here in this people: they had the means al alike to call them
to repentance; yet the greatest part and the greatest number unreformed still;
so that the Lord speaks here of the whole Nation and people of the Jews, O
Ephraim, O Judah, those that resolved to Return unto the Lord, as in the three
first verses of this chapter, their number was exceeding small in comparison of
those that did neglect and contemn the same; and therefore he speaks of them
wholly together, Ephraim, Judah.

This Doctrine is further cleared by the example of the old World, that
notwithstanding the means of deliverance was offered to all men alike, yet
only Noah was moved with reverence, Genesis 6.3. Heb. 11. Genesis 19.
to fear Gods judgments, when all the rest of the world were even drunk in
security, and lay weltring in their sins. So in Sodom, one righteous Lot.
Elias says, He was left alone: he could not see one open professor of
Religion in his time. Woe is me (says the Prophet) For I am as the Summer
gatherings, and as the grapes of the Vintage; Mich. 7.1. Ier. 3.14. Luke 12.32.
Mat. 27.
there is no cluster to eat. Alas, when the harvest is in the gleaning, it is
very small, here an ear and there an ear; One of a City, and two of a Tribe.
And Christ calls his flock a little flock; Fear not little Flock. All cried
against the Son of God, Crucify him, Crucify him. Reu. 13.
All received the Mark of the beast.

This is plain by woeful experience in our days, how few true worshippers of
God, sound Christians, though we have the means alike, how few profit by
them, the greatest part remain ignorant still, vile, rebellious and profane;
and so few, that they be like a handful of corn in a heap of chafe, many
hypocrites, many mere Laodiceans, neither hot nor cold; Reu. 3.17.
many half Christians with Agrippa, only those that profit truly by the
means, are exceeding few.

Hence we see that Multitude is no note of a true Rome, who would make men
believe, that therefore they must needs be the true Church, because their
Religion is so generally received and embraced of many Kingdoms: But here we
see, Luke. 12.32.
that the greater part is the worst; and Christ's flock is a little flock; and
therefore this Doctrine beats and batters down one of the maine pillars of
Popery, whereupon they ground their religion, and supplant their Church, they
ground upon this sandy foundation, and the pillar is a number and multitude of
men, that many receive their religion, and few ours; but if this reason be
good, then those few believing Jews that repented, as in the three first
verses of this Chapter should not be the children of God; but Ephraim and
Judah, even the common multitude should be accounted the Church, which is most
false: for, seeing the Flock of Christ is small, and they few that believe be
the true Church of God; this reason is more against them then with them.

Secondly, this may serve to condemn them that Psalm. 50.18.
We see it is dangerous to do as most do. The gate is wide that leads to
destruction, and many go in thereat: Let us rather suspect our selves, because
we do as the most do: and Fashion not our selves like unto the world, but
join with the little Flock of Christ: and if there be but one Elias that
fears God, let us join with him to obey God. And therefore let men know, that
by shrouding themselves under the multitude, Exodus 23.2 Ier. 6.13.
they are so far from excusing themselves, as that the rather they accuse
themselves, because commonly the greatest part is the worst.

Elias; but this must be our comfort, that it has ever been so in old time,
in the Prophets times, in Christ's time, and since, and will be so to the end of
the world: only let every faithful Minister of Jesus Christ do his endeavor,
and commit the success to God.

And thus much of the persons of whom the Lord complayneth: the complaint it
self follows.
For your goodness is as the morning cloud, and as the Morning Dew it goes
away.
HEre is the third general point in the complaint; The complaint it self.
which so moved the Lord to complain of this people: And it is indeed the
preventing of an objection and cavil of this people: for they might object and
say, What aileth him, he has no cause so to exclaim and complain of us, that
he cannot bring us to repentance, and to serve God: why do we not bring our
Sacrifices to his Altar? do we not come daily to serve God? Yea, we have
lamented our sins and humbled our selves before his face, craving pardon at
his hands. What would he have us to do more?

To this cavil of theirs the Prophet answers, in laying open the cause of
this complaint, in these words For your goodness, etc. By goodness, here he
means their outward service and worship of God, their feigned repentance; they
had some outward show of holiness, and of repentance, and service of God; but it
was void of sincerity and soundness of heart, it was not in truth, but from
the teeth outward; and therefore it was vanishing and unconstant, and of the
sudden, like unto the Dew or Morning cloud, which is dispersed in a moment by
the Sun.

In this people here we may behold the nature and It is the property of
hypocrites to mind more the outward part of Gods worship, then the inward.
never looking for the truth of it in their hearts and souls: for though they
offered Sacrifices and oblations, came to the Temple, seemed to repent; yet it
was only in outward show, not sound nor sincere, it never came from their
hearts. And what account such service of God is with God, he declares by his
Prophet Esaias, when he says, Esaias. 1.14.
My soul hates your New Moons, and your appointed Feasts: They are a burden
unto me, I am a weary to bear them. They would keep the Sabbaths, and
frequent the solemn assemblies, but it was but for custom and for fashion
sake: they would learn nothing at al; though their bodies were there, yet
their hearts were not there. And this sin of theirs Almighty God lays to
their charge else where, when he says, Esaias. 29.13.
This people come near unto me with their mouth, and honor me with their
lips, but their hearts are far from me. He blames them, not for that they
came not into Gods Temple, and into the Assembly of Gods people; for, herein
they were very forward; but that they brought now a lame Sacrifice unto the
Lord, it was but a lip service, and a Will worship, and the Lord does
esteem no better of it then the killing of a man, and the cutting off of a
dogs neck, or the offering up of Swines blood; all which are abominable unto
the Lord: for God is a spirit, and therefore will be worshipped, Esaias. 66.3.4
not only according to the outward ceremony of his worship, but in spirit
and truth: To whom will I have respect unto, but to him that is poor, and of a
contrite spirit, Ier. 7.7. Pro. 15.11.
and trembles at my words, And if this be wanting, all that we can do in
the service and worship of God, is but sin unto us, and shall add unto the
measure of our iniquities. And surely, this is the only reason, as I take, why
men profit no more under the Preaching of the Word, in this time of the
Gospel; namely this, because men persuade themselves, that so long as they
perform the outward rites of Gods worship and service, as to come to Church,
hear the Word, receive the Sacrament and the like, all is well with them, they
need no more.

In these Jews we may clearly see a counterpane of our people and time. What
is the cause, why after

And is not this the sin of our times and people? Note.
do not most men content themselves with the outward service and worship of
God, to come to Church to hear the Word, and receive the Sacrament? and think
then they have honored God highly, and served him as well as the best of them
all, and that God can require no more at their hands: I appeal unto your
hearts and consciences whether this be not so, that most do content themselves
with the very outward action of Gods worship, never looking for soundness of
heart to come in faith, repentance, and obedience.

Oh then let this move us all to be grieved for this sin; Let us amend it:
Esaias. 1.16. Pro. 15.11.
Let us labor to come with penitent and obedient hearts, else all our prayers,
and all things else that we do in Gods service, Ier. 7.7.
is but Abomination to the Lord. And indeed, when men are once come to this
pass, that they think they have knowledge enough, faith and repentance
enough, and are forward enough so long as they come to Church, and hear the
Word: when men are once come to this pass, many means and great means can
do them no good. This people of the Jews had many means, the Lord sent his
Prophets early and late, Ier. 7.
but they could not convert them, and why? because they cried, the Temple,
Mich. 6.6.7.
the Temple, and trusted in lying vanities. So the Lord sent his Prophet Mica,
threatening them with judgments, yet they were not reformed: and the reasons
is, because they contented themselves with these outward shows of repentance,
and thought their outward worship was enough, and that God would be content
with their sacrifices. And again, he heard the Prophet Ezechiel preach and
denounce Gods Judgments; Ezec. 33.31.32.
yea, they commended him, and were forward to hear him; yet this vile thought
and persuasion being in their hearts, that it was enough to hear, though they
went no further, stopped their hearts so as they could not repent: Mar. 6.^0.
This was Herod's sin, who was come to this height of impiety, that if John
Baptist would be content with his hearing, so it was, but reformation of life,
especially of his beloved sin, he should never see in him. Reu. 3.15.
And surely, this is that that makes all good things unprofitable to us,
because men think they are wise enough, and good enough. Is it not a wonder
that men should live so many years under the means, hear so much, and read
so much, and yet profit so little? Indeed it could never be so, if men did
see their wants, and come with penitent and obedient hearts. Oh then I beseech
you in the fear of God, lay aside this proud conceit, lay aside this vain
persuasion, that you should think your outward service and worship of God is
enough, that you know enough, and are good enough; rather think the worst of
your selves, and desire more grace, that ye may seem good with more feeling
and comfort.

Secondly, in that the Lord compares their repentance and goodness, all their
piety and service of God to a Morning cloud, and to the dew before the Sun,
he shows that their Repentance was not only unsound but also uncertain, of
no continuance; some good motions came into their minds, and some pricks of
conscience for their sins; but yet they would not leave their old sins,
and turn to God with all their hearts.

From whence we observe a further point of Doctrine, The wicked have sometimes
good motions in them but not lasting.
When Gods hand is upon them by long and tedious sickness, how ready are many to
make solemn vows unto the Lord of reformation of their lives; but alas this
is but while their consciences are upon the rack, but when that his judgments
are removed, it may be said of them, as of wicked Ahaz, 2. Chr. 28.22
They trespass yet more against the Lord. This was the desperate estate and
condition of this people, the Lord threatened them with many great and grievous
judgments, as in the former chapter, under the which they seemed to be
humbled for a time: but alas, it was but for a time, for it quickly vanished
away, even as the Dew when the Sun shines hot upon it. This was the case of
the people in Moses time, they made a fair show for a time, Deu. 5.27
saying to Moses the servant of the Lord, Go thou near and hear all that the
Lord our God says: Number. 23, 10.
and declare thou unto us all that the Lord our God says unto thee, and we
will hear it, and do it. Balam that false Prophet, that loved so the wages of
iniquity, as that he would have done directly against the commandment of the
Lord; yet having his mind enlightened, desired that he might Die the death of
the righteous; which was in it self a good and a godly prayer, had it not
proceeded from a wicked and a graceless heart: but it was not constant in
Balam, but as a sudden flashing of a lightning quickly vanishing away. Exodus
9.27.
What shall we say of Pharaoh, who cried out, I have sinned, the Lord is
righteous, but I and my people are wicked. This appears further in the Jews,
who wished to come to happiness if that would have served the turn, Io. 6.34.
Lord give us evermore this bread: they had grievously sinned against the Son
of God, and yet in a certain remorse of conscience they wished to be partakers
of eternal life. This the Apostle condemns in the Galathians, Gal. 5.7.
Ye did run well, what did let you that ye did not obey the truth? Was not
this the case of Hymeneus and Philetus, 1. Tim. 1.10. 2. Tim. 2.18 2. Tim. 4.10.
were they not held to be great Christians in their times, and obtained a good
report in the Church of God, in the which they lived? yet afterward fell away,
making shipwreck of faith, and a good conscience. What shall we say of Demas,
Philemo^. 24.
who went so far in Religion, as that he suffered imprisonment for the
truths sake, and yet fell in love with the world? What did it profit Iehu to
be zealous for the Lord in slaying the Priests of Baal, seeing he Departed not
from the sins of Jeroboam? 2. Reg. 10.25 v. 31.
What did it profit Lots wife to go out of Sodom, commanded by the Angel,
Genesis 19.26.
accompanied by her dear husband, seeing she looked back, and was turned
into a pillar of salt? We must therefore contend for more faith, for more
knowledge, and for more grace, that we may find in our selves a daily
increase in the same; for not to go forward in Religion, is to go backward,
and not to increase in spiritual graces, is certainly to decrease and decay
in them. We have in the Scriptures many laws to incite and provoke us to go
forward to perfection, to walk, to labor, and to strive for godliness: but we
have none to give liberty, to sit still, to be idle, or to loyter, to be
careless or secure. This does the Lord himself teach us, when he says; If a
righteous man turn from his righteousness, Ezec. 18.24.
and do the thing that is evil: all the righteousness that he has done
shall be no more thought upon, but in the wickedness that he has done, in
the same he shall die. 1. Cor. 9.24.
And this is taught by the Apostle Paul, when he says, Know ye not that they
which run in a race, run all? yet one receives the prize: So run that
ye may obtain. So then we have seen this Doctrine cleared, that the wicked
themselves are not so far given over to themselves, but that at sometimes they
have some touch of conscience, and remorse of heart for sin, as this people
here then seemed to be humbled under Gods judgment, and they seemed to
repent for their sins; but all this was but for a time, it was not durable
and lasting, but as the Morning cloud, and as the Morning dew it went away. God
grant the same be not our sin.

Now this thing comes thus to pass in the wicked, Act. 24.25.
they shall quake and tremble as Felix did.

Seeing that many begin well, and yet prove but as the Morning cloud, which
is quickly gone. We may Judas, It had been good: for them if they had never been borne. This the Apostle Peter sets down fully, when he says, If they
after they have escaped from the filthiness of the World, thorough the
acknowledging of the Lord, 2. Pet. 2.20.21.22.
and of the Savior Jesus Christ, are yet tangled therein and overcome; the
latter end is worse with them then the beginning: for it had been better for
them not to have acknowledged the way of righteousness, then after they have
acknowledged it, to turn away from the holy commandment given unto them But
it is come unto them according to the Proverb: The Dog is turned to his own
vomit, and the Sow that was washed, to the wallowing in the mire. Oh that all
wicked and ungodly sinners would consider this aright, how the holy Ghost does
esteem of them, even no better then dogs and swine: Let them seem never so
holy and religious, if they do not persevere in piety and religion, alas, they
are never the nearer heaven, but having been acquainted with Gods Word,
Sacraments and Prayer, the greater shall be their torment at the last for the
abuse thereof. Yea, it is a righteous thing with God to give over such men and
women unto a reprobate sense, taking his spirit from them, so that they shall
grow by degrees to be worse and worse, as we may see in these Jews, unto whom
the Lord had used many means to humble them, and to bring them home by
repentance, as his Word in the mouths of his Prophets, his blessings and
benefits; besides all this, his judgments one upon the neck of another; yet
all would not serve to humble them; but all labor was lost, and all cost was
ill bestowed: Well, what was the end of all this, did they not grow to be the
greatest enemies to the Gospel and Cross of Christ? And thus fared it with
Judas, being an Apostle, became a most desperate reprobate. And thus does
Almighty God as a most just revenger of sin, many times punish one sin by
another. Oh let these judgments, of God upon the wicked, break in sunder the
hard and stony hearts of the wicked, that so they may anew renew their Covenant
with God, that he may have mercy upon them, and that they may live in his sight.

Secondly, we are taught here, that it is not innough David was humbled for
his sins all the days of his life: And it is reported of Peter, that after
his repentance, Stella in Lucam.
he rose ever at the call of the Cock to prayers, and other the like duties
of piety and religion: And so must it be with us, otherwise God cares not for
it, and it will stand us in no stead in that day of Gods searching account.

Now, if we may judge of your Repentance by your life and outward behavior,
truly, it is to be doubted, The great drought.
that it is little better then the repentance of this people, not worth a
button, but counterfeit and feigned: For, does not the Lord even call men to
fasting, weeping, lamentation and mourning, to amendment of life and true
repentance? and how do men perform this? who lays the judgment of God to
heart, who mournes for Gods anger upon the land? nay rather, do they not make
this time of fasting, a time of feasting. Many seem to repent, and to hang
down their heads like a bul-rush, and cry, Lord help us, but truly it is but
lippe-labour, but forged from the teeth outward; it comes not from the heart,
but as this people in this place. Men are like to Scholars and Children, when
the rod is upon their back, they cry and yell, and promise to do so no
more; yet as soon as the rod is removed, do the same things again. Even so
fares it with most men amongst us, while the judgments of God are upon them,
and their consciences are upon the rack, they are ready to cry to the Lord for
help and deliverance: but if the Lord do but remove his hand, you shall see
them with the dog to the vomit, and the Sow to the mire, covetous still,
cruel still, ignorant, filthy, and unclean still. Is not this the common
repentance of our times? And is not this like the Jews here, which the Lord
so highly condemns? Oh alas, it is, and therefore the Lord must needs be as
highly offended with us as ever he was with them: And therefore it is now hie
time to look to our selves, to join to our outward profession, true
reformation of heart and life, to build upon the Rock Christ; and for the time
to come, to lay a sure foundation, and be sure of an honest heart, that it be
sound in the worship of God; for the Lord prefers such a heart that comes in
faith, repentance and obedience, before most glorious and goodly shows, when
sincerity of heart is wanting. And truly it is greatly to be feared, that
many now professing the Gospel in these days of peace, if the Sun should wax
hot, if storms should come, and trial for the Gospel sake, they would fall
away, and ^ee like this people here; whose goodness all they did profess,
was but as a drop of dew before the Sun. Oh then let us labor for
soundness and sincerity in Gods service: Let us labor to find our eyes
opened, our minds illuminated, our hearts softened, and our affections touched,
that so we may have joy and comfort here, and everlasting peace and comfort
in the end.

Thirdly, seeing we are taught here, that many The morning cloud, quickly
scattered, and as The Morning Dew, which is quickly gone when the face of the
Sun does show it self upon it. We are taught hence, not to be offended when
we see some of those that for the time past have seemed to be forward in
Religion, to fall away, and that the life of Gods spirit does decay in them:
for there have been ever such counterfeit Christians, even from the beginning
in the household of Adam, Genesis 4.56.
there was a wicked Cain, and in the family of Abraham there was a scoffing
Ismael; yea, there is no society either in Church or common wealth, but the
Scriptures afford us some example or other, Mat. 27.
that there have been some wicked amongst them: But what of all this, must this
discourage us? No, no: What if all the world will be disobedient, as in the
days of Noah? What if there be but one Elias in all Israel? Oh let us join
with him, Note.
and let us even hereby be wise, and learn to take heed by other men's harms,
to take a faster hold upon Religion, and lay to build upon a sure foundation,
for at one time or other, God will lay some trial or other upon us, that we
shall appear to be either chafe or Wheat: the faithful servants of the
Lord, or the cursed limbs of Satan: and if we have hitherto felt and enjoyed
peaceable times, that the Lord has not yet sifted and winnowed us as Satan
desired to sift Peter: What, shall we be secure therefore? God fotbid: rather
let us in the days of peace prepare for the time of trial, ever looking out
when God will shake his sword against us.

Your goodness is as the morning cloud, etc.
IN that the Lord does compare the repentance or goodness of this people to
the Morning cloud, and to the Morning Dew, because it was neither true nor
sincere, nor durable, not lasting, but quickly gone; and therefore are branded
with this black cole of hypocrites, and such as the Lord threatens to Cut
down, and to slay, even utterly to root out, as in the verse following.
Sincerity of heart and perseverance in godliness, a true note of the child of
God.
that we labor for that which was wanting in them, and which shall approve us
for Christians before God; namely, sincerity of heart, as also that we
persevere in the duties of piety and godliness, even unto the end.

It was the commendations of Enoch and of Noah, that notwithstanding they lived
in sinful times, being ouerrunne with all manner of impieties, yet they walked
with God; Genesis 5.22. Genesis 6.9.
they kept themselves unspotted of the world: they made not the practice of
other men, an example for them; but walked so as ever in Gods presence. This
was Ezechias his comfort when he was summoned to die; Esaias. 38.3.
Remember Lord that I have walked before thee in truth and with an upright
heart. Job. 16.19.
And when Job was censured for an hypocrite (according as the manner of the
world is at this day, to despise and disgrace every one that is more careful
to please God, then themselves:) What was his comfort but this, that he could
say; My witness is in heaven, and my Record is on hie. q. d. My comfort is;
that though you speak your pleasure of me now, yet you shall not be my
Judges, but God that is above, whom I have ever served in spirit and truth,
will justify me one day against you.

And this was the care of godly Paul, Act. 24.16. 2. Cor. 4.2.
To endeavor above all things to keep a clear conscience before God and man:
for this is that which will approve us to be Christians indeed, when as the
vizard of hypocrisy shall be taken from us; and if this be wanting in us,
alas, all our shows be they never so goodly and glorious, shall no way stand
us in stead, but the Lord will rather cast them as dung into our faces: And yet
good Lord, men think they have profited highly in Religion, if they can but
make a glorious show thereof before men: Oh, I would that men could be brought
once to this pass that we might cast out this Devil from them: but of this
before.

Seeing that sincerity of heart is such an infallible note of the child of God,
Seeming, which every man almost has learned in our time. The hypocrite can
come with his Lord, Lord. Mat. 7.21. Job. 31.24. Pro. 30.20.
The covetous man that has made gold his hope, he fears not. The
uncharitable man, Whose torgue is like a Razar, is not abashed. The whorish
woman Wipeth her mouth, and says, I have not committed Iniquity, blusheth not.
Thus every one comes into Gods house, hears Gods word, receives his
blessed Sacrament; and comes unto these duties so maskt, that they pass here
for current coin: we are not able to see into their hearts, it is the Lord
alone, who is The searcher of the heart, that sees them: And thus men if they
may pass with our approbation, they care for no more. Ah poor soul, Ah poor
soul, what of all this? If the Lord do not approve of thee, it is not all thy
shows and shadows, be they never so goodly, nor so glorious, that will stand
thee in stead in the day of Gods searching account, but having acted the part
of an hppocrite here upon the Stage of this World, it shall at the last day be
a just and righteous thing with the righteous God, to give thee the portion of
hypocrites, even everlasting fire: Depart from me ye Hypocrites into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Oh that this might
persuade us to affect sincerity of heart. What a thing were this that we should
live in these days and times wherein we live, wherein knowledge and grace is
even thrust upon us, and yet for all that, we should prove such Iudasses unto
our own poor Souls, thus to betray them into the hands of satan. I cannot
but tax many of you of this parrish of Roxwell with this sin, the Lord lay it
not one day to your charge. At my first coming amongst you, I observed some
forwardnes in you, in sanctifying the Sabbath, and hearing the word diligently;
since which time who does not perceive a decay of zeal, a decay of hearing in
a great many of this congregation, that will scarce now vouchsafe God your
presence in the assembly of his people once a month. The full soul (says
Solomon) loatheth the honey comb. Reu 3.14.
I fear, you are full even of spiritual pride with the Church of Laodicea.
Well, be warned betimes, lest your footings that you have taken so often in your
bowling Allies, surmount your steps into Gods house, and so the Lord lay this
sin of ingratitude to your charge, that he should offer unto you such
gracious oportunities, and ye should so carelessly neglect the same.

Mar. 6.
Herod could not be brought to leave his Incest: Demas made a fair show for a
while, but by and by left all, and fell into love with the world: so, many men
will for a brunt serve God, and seem very forward both to hear the Word,
read, pray, etc. yet the strength of their own corruptions, and the love of
the World steals away their hearts, so as it comes to nothing: but sure it is
that the grace of God when it has taken possession in a man's soul, it will
thoroughly purge the same, though not altogether from sin: for the Flesh will
ever rebel against the Spirit; yet from the power of sin, so as that man
that is truly sanctified, shall not from henceforth become a servant unto
sin; for a purpose to continue in sin, and the grace of God, cannot abide
both in one Soul: but of this before.

And thus much of the Complaint: the Judgment follows.
VERSE. 5. Therefore have I cut down by the Prophets, I have slain them by
the words of my mouth, and thy judgments were as the light that goes forth.
Having heard of their sinue, now we are to speak of their punishment, which
the Lord inflicted upon them for the same; namely, fearful destruction and
utter overthrow.

In speaking of their punishment, we are hence to observe four things.

Parts of the Text.
First, the Author of it, I, that is the Lord himself.

Secondly, the greatness of it, Cut down and slain them.

Thirdly, the Instruments the Lord uses, My Prophets, my word.

Fourthly, the equity of it; namely, that the Lord made his judgments as
clear as the noone day unto them, so as they could not plead ignorance, or
want of knowledge.

Therefore have I cut down.

Therefore, that is, because I have on my part done what I can to reclaim you,
and bring you to some good pass; but you refused, and hardened your hearts, and
contemned my words: for then the cause of Gods judgments is their rebellion
against the means, and their contempt of the Word of God, and preaching of his
Prophets.

Then hence we learn, what a grievous sin it is to contemn the means of
salvation, To contemn the means of salvation is a grievous sin, and never
goes unpunished. Genesis 7.10.11.12.
to contemn the Gospel of Christ Jesus, it never goes unpunished. When Noah
had preached repentance to the people of the old World, for the space of one
hundred and twenty years together, and the people had despised the same; what
followed in the end, but a fearful destruction, even a general Deluge, which
swept them all away? When Lot spoke to his sons in Law which married his
daughters, and warned them to escape out of Sodom, for the judgments of God
were at hand, to be laid upon that City: The Text says, Genesis 19.14
that He seemed to his Sons in Law as though he had mocked: but what
followed, did not they perish with those sinful Sodomites? And Job makes
this one of the marks of a reprobate: They say unto God, Depart from us, Job.
21.14.
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: not that there are any so
desperately wicked as to use such speeches against the Lord: but the meaning
is, that men declare so much by their lives, they live in open contempt of the
gracious means of their salvation, whatsoever they pretended in words, their
deeds declared, that they cared not to be acquainted with Gods will. To the
same purpose is that complaint in the Psalm My people would not hear my
voice, and Israel would none of me. Psalm. 81.11.12
The Lord had often spoken to that people by his servants, the Prophets, but
they regarded them not; much like to our people in these times: but what
followed? the Lord would never put up this great ingratitude at their hands,
but says in the verse following, Ver. 12.1.1
So I gave them up unto the hardness of their own hearts, and they walked in
their own councels. And this is further cleared by that speech of Almighty God
by his Prophet Jeremy, where he says, Ier. 7.13.
I rose up early, and spoke unto you: but when I spoke, ye would not hear
me; neither when I called, would ye answer. Behold here the desperate estate
and condition of this people, that notwithstanding God had dealt so graciously
with them from time to time to offer unto them so many gracious oportunities of
their salvation, following them, as it were, at the heels with the same;
sometimes by his Word, sometimes by his mercies, sometimes by his judgments,
yet they neglected them al, they contemned the^ al. But afterward the Lord made
good the words of his servants, he brought his judgments upon them and their
Temple, Verse. 14.
in the which they seemed so much to trust upon the Lord made it as Shilo, and
as the same Prophet complains in another place, That the ways of Sion
lamented, Lam. 1.4.
because no man came to their solemn feasts: all her gates are desolate, the
Priests sigh, etc. It was not their outward privileges that would now stand
them in stead, that they were the posterity of Abraham, that they had amongst
them the Arc of Gods covenant, the Mercy seat, Psalm. 132.14.
the Temple of the Lord; and that the Lord had appointed that for his rest for
ever. Seeing they contemned his Prophets, Ier. 6.10.
delighted not in Gods voice, but took pleasure in unrighteousness. And this
is that our Savior lays to the charge of the people of Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37.
How often would I have gathered you together, and ye would not: Behold now,
your habitation is loft desolate: Mat. 11.21.
Yea, our Savior Christ tells them of Capernaum, that it shall be easier for
the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, then for them: so then we may safely
conclude this doctrine with that speech of the Apostle, 2. These. 2.10.11.12.
Because they receive not the love of the truth, that they may be saved,
therefore God will send them strong delusions, that they should believe lies,
that all they may be damned that believe not the truth, but take pleasure in
unrighteousness. The Lotd grant us more sanctified hearts, that we may make
better use of his gracious oportunities that he does offer unto us, that for
the time to come, we may make more righter steps to his kingdom

This Doctrine makes,

First, for the just reproof of all Papists, and all such Solomon says, He
that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be
abominable. But oh, the just judgment of God upon them, they have refused to
embrace the love of the truth, and have believed lies, and therefore it is a
righteous thing with God, to give them over to hardness of heart, and
rebrobate minds to be deluded by Satan, and so to perish with him for ever.

Secondly, this Doctrine does nearely concern of the old world, the Sodomites,
the people of the Jews and the like, And yet alas, we see it a sin too too
common, so as men do generally neglect and contemn, if not desperately
despise the means of their salvation, the most glorious Gospel of Jesus
Christ, making no account of it, but trample it under foot, and esteem no more
of the Word preached, then they do of their old shoes, they will not go to the
door to hear it, but rather lie upon their beds, sit by the fire, talk in the
streets, play in their bowling Allies, and to do any base or vain thing then
to come into Gods house to hear his Word, whereby their poor souls might be
saved. Oh horrible impiety! Well I remember that Saul observed David's seat
when he was wanting: much more does the Lord take notice of our empty seats
and solitary Pewes when we are wanting. Will you hear how the Lord has
grievously punished such contempt, yea the neglect of holy means: and has not
the Lord met with us for this sin? yes questionless, as the plague and
pestilence is sent for sin, so I am persuaded no one sin of the land has
been a greater cause to provoke the Lord to anger, and to plague our land so
often with the pestilence, and other grievous judgments of unseasonable
weather, and the like, then our long, our general, and our continual contempt
of his most holy Word, and profaning of his Sabbaths: so as the Lord may say
to us, for this cause have I cut you down, even by hundreds and thousands, for
the contempt of the gracious means I have used to do you good. Oh then I
beseech you in the fear of God, let us lay this to heart: and seeing the Lord
will never suffer the contempt of his Word go unpunished: let us now at last
repent of this sin; let us esteem better of the Word, let us receive it,
believe it, and be more careful to hear it, otherwise if we live in the
open contempt of it, as now we do; I say unto you in the name of the Lord,
and from the warrant of his sacred Word, by the which we shall al be judged
at the last day, Mat. 11.21.
that it shall be easier for the men of Sodom and Gomor then for us: yea, the
time may come when we shall weep and howl, cry out and say, Oh that I were
a Sodomite, Oh that I had been borne one of Gomorah, and envy the felicity
ever of the Sodomites in comparison of our own torments, Heb. 2.3.
If now we neglect so great salvation.

Thirdly and lastly, seeing the Word preached and taught is the ordinary means
of our salvation, and the neglect and contempt thereof does draw down Solomon
his advice, to take heed to our feet when we come into Gods house, and as our
Savior says, Eccl. 4.17. Mat. 13. Luke 8.18.
to take heed how we hear? It is not to be accounted a light matter that we
have this liberty to come into Gods house, that we may hear him speak unto
us in his Word: for if we benefit not by these holy exercises of religion,
and draw nearer unto heaven, we are made by them the more hardened in sin to
our greater confusion at the last: let us not therefore come for fashion sake
or for custom, but for conscience sake before God, and in obedience to his
commadement. And to this end we must learn to prepare our selves before we
come, by hearty prayer to God, both that he would direct the tongue of the
Minister his servant, that he may deliver the Word truly and powerfully, as
also that he would open our hearts as he did the heart of Lydea, that we may
attend unto those things that shall be taught; which godly preparation if it
were carefully observed of our hearers, it could not be after so much and long
teaching, they should remain so ignorant and barren of Gods Work, as
generally they be. Well, to conclude this Doctrine, let this be for our
present instruction, that if we would be free from the accusation of wicked,
graceles and profane persons; let us labor to be willing and well affected
hearers, that we come with hungring and thirsting desires unto the spiritual
food of our souls, that it may be unto us a savor of life unto a better life:
and that the Lord may never be constrained to use the same, as here he did to
this people; namely, as an instrument to Cut down, and a means of our further
condemnation at the last; would we not have been loath to have been in
Sodom, when God rained down fire and brimstone from heaven upon their heads?
Oh Lord, how should we quake and tremble to think of this slaughter, that the
Lord threatens here, namely, To cut down by his Prophets, and to slay by the
words of his mouth.

I have cut down.
The Author of this judgment.
and did inflict this judgment on them for their sins and rebellions: We
learn hence this point of Doctrine:

The Lord is the author of all punishments for sin.
though he use secondary causes, and some outward means; yet he is the
Author of all judgments and punishments upon men and women: Indeed he uses
sometime men to do his will, as his rod to punish his people: for so is Ashur
called the Lords rod, Esaias. 10.5.
to whip his people, and his Staff to beat them. The Lord uses sometimes the
Devils themselves to afflict his people, Job. 1.
as we see in Jobs affliction, yet so, as the Lord was the chief Author
thereof, the Devil but an instrument: Even so, al judgments come from God,
he imposes and inflicts them on his people for their sins. Excellent is
that place of the Prophet Esaias to this purpose; But now, Esaias. 43.1.2.3
thus says the Lord that created thee O Jacob, and he that formed thee O
Israel, fear not for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by name, thou
art mine, when thou passest thorough the waters, I will be with thee, and
thorough the floods, that they shall not ouerflow thee, etc. And again, Shall
there be any evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? This point is
fully declared by Moses, when he says; If ye will not obey me, nor do all
these commandments, Leu. 26.16.17.
I will appoint over you fearfulness, a consumption, and a burning ague, the
sword, famine and pestilence to destroy you, and to make you few in number. Let
this school us if the Lord so deal with us: If the Cross come to us as a
thing judged fit of God: Let us not set him a stint to say, thus much will I
bear, and no more; but leave the same to his own good pleasure, expecting,
and enduring even one upon the neck of another, taking hold of his promise by
a lively faith, that He will never lay more upon us then we shall be able to
bear; but will give us a happy issue unto them all, that we shall gain more
in the Spirit, then we can lose in the flesh, and that the Cross in Gods due
time shall depart to our advantage, to leave a blessing behind it. This
Doctrine have I cleared in the first verse of this Chapter; Let this suffice
for this Text. We come to the uses of it.

Let us all take knowledge of this Doctrine, that Job the faithful servant of
the Lord acknowledges this, when he says The Land gives, the Lord takes
away: yet we know that it was the Devil and wicked men, whom the Lord used as
his instruments to afflict this his holy servant. And let us learn to
acknowledge, that all punishments sent of God come from his hand, and he
imposes and lays them upon us, either as punishments of our sins, Job.
2.10.
as here in this Text, or else for the trial of our faith, patience, and the
like graces. But of this before.

Secondly, this may serve to condemn those foolish

This knowledge and acknowledging that God does inflict his judgments,
punishments, and afflictions upon us for our sins; it is a good means to
bridle us, and to keep us from impatiency, murmuring and muttering against the
Lord. The Lord sent Shemi to curse; 2. Sam. 16.10.
who dare say then, why do thou curse me? so Job, The Lord gives, the Lord
takes away, blessed be the name of the Lord: And the want of this, is the
cause why men be so impatient in sickness and misery, because they do not
consider that it is the hand of the Lord laid upon them for their sins; and
so they never make any use at al of Gods judgments, thinking either that they
come by chance, luck, or fortune; or else look only upon the outward means
and instrument, and not unto the Lord himself. Oh let us learn to be wise,
to lift up our eyes higher, to see that it is the hand of the Lord: I draw my
sword, I kill and make alive, I send the plague and pestilence to consume and
to destroy. And the knowledge of this is a good means to humble us, and to
make us to confess our sins, that the Lord is holy in all his ways, and
righteous in all his works, the which is acknowledged by the Prophet David,
when he says, I know O Lord, Psalm. 119.75.
that thy judgments are right, and that thou have afflicted me justly. And if
we can but once truly apprehend this, that it is the Lord that strikes, it
will make us even to bless God, when he seems to deal with us most hardly,
giving him the praise of equity, as David does, here acknowledging that his
sharpest corrections are not so great as our sins. And these two things will
be great motives to patience in trouble, if we consider that the same
affliction is measured out unto us from the Lord, Who is faithful, and will
lay no more upon us, then we are able to bear. And next, that our stripes are
not according to our sins: for if he should beat us with as many rods as we
have grieved him with sins, he should add yet ten times more unto our
greatest afflictions.

I have cut down and slain them.
THe second point, is the indgement and punishment The judgment it self.
which shows that the same is no small judgment, but a very grievous
punishment, For I have cut down and slain them: as though the Lord should
have said; whereas they would not receive my Doctrine, nor believe my Word,
that they might be brought to repentance, and so be saved. I have now cut
them down and slain their souls by my Word, and wounded them even to death
eternal: for as my Word which I would have made the sweet savor of life unto
life, is now by their rebellion and stubbornness turned unto them to be the
woeful savor of death unto death

Hence we may observe, that of all the judgments Hard heart the greatest
judgment that can be laid upon man.
nor profit by the means of salvation. Oh, it is the heauiest judgment that
God can lay upon man in this life; and it is a sure and certain forerunner of
eternal condemnation in the end: for when the Word of God does light upon a
hard heart, oh, it wounds it and kills it, and gives many a mortal and deadly
wound, though the wretched soul of the sinner see it not, or feel it not. The
Scriptures afford us diverse examples, and all to confirm the truth of this
point unto us. Genesis 4.5.6.
This is clearly to be seen in the example of Cain; how did the Lord deal
with Cain, both before he had murdered his brother, and afterward, and all to
have kept him, if it had been possible, from that most horrible sin of his?
Before how did God deal with him; Cain, why is the countenance of thy face
changed? If thou do well, shall thou not be rewarded? If thou do evil,
sin lies at thy door. Had not this been enough, if Cain had had but the least
spark of grace, to have kept him and stayed him from committing that horrible
sin? but when this prevailed not, but Cain would needs shed the innocent
blood of righteous Abel; How did the Lord deal with Cain afterward? Cain,
where is thy brother Abel? but what now, did Cains heart relent? did he
confess his sin with David, and say, I have sinned. Did he resolve into
tears of repentance with Peter? No, no, but rather despised God to his face,
saying; Am I my Brothers Keeper? Oh fearful and horrible speech! What, was
his conscience so seared, that neither the shame of the world, the innocent
blood of his slain brother, nor the glorious presence of the Lord could any
whit astonish him? Behold here an example indeed of a heart that is hardened;
and let the remembrance of the same ever possess our souls, to make us
watchful over our own hearts, how we ever contemn the means of grace when the
same is offered unto us. This is to be clearly seen in Pharaoh, unto whom the
Lord sent several plagues and judgments upon him and his people, one upon the
neck of another, Exodus 9.
ten in number, yet all would not humble Pharaoh, Exodus 7.23.
but answered stoutly, saying; I know not the Lord, neither will I let the
people of Israel go. This is taught by Job, Job. 18.5. Zeph. 1.17.
when he says, The light of the ungodly shall be darkened, and the wicked
shall become blind, because they have sinned against the Lord. And again,
Their hearts being fat, their eyes heavy, and their ears shut, they shall
hear indeed, but shall not understand, they shall see, and not perceive. And
the Prophet Jeremy does mow lively set out unto us the woeful estate and
condition of such a soul that is thus forsaken of the Lord, and given over to
sin, saying; Ier. 7.16. and 11.14.
Because you have done these things, and I spoke unto you, and you would not
hear, therefore thou shall not pray for this people, nor lift up, cry, nor
entreat me, for I will not hear. Though Noah and Job should entreat me,
though Moses and Samuel should pray unto me, yet will I not hear, neither be
entreated. This is a lamentable estate, this is a fearful judgment, for a man
to be thus left unto himself, given up to Satan, and forsaken of God for
ever; Oh woeful is the estate of such a one: let that exhortation of the
Apostle be precious with us, Heb. 3.12.13
Take heed brethren lest at any time there be in any of you an evil heart, and
unfaithful, to depart away from the living God. And of the Gentiles it is
said, Ephesians. 4.17.
that they lived in the Vanity of their minds, having their cogitations
darkened, strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the hardness of their hearts. So that you see that a hard heart, it
is the most fearefullest judgment of God that can befall a man in this life;
for it is capable of no good, either by the Word preached, promises, or
threatenings, mercies, or judgments. The Word of God it is mighty in operation,
Ier. 23.^9.
it Divides the soul and spirit asunder. This Word of God is called the
Hammer of the Lord; for by it the Lord does break in sunder the hard, stony
and flinty hearts of man. This Hammer of the Lord is not able to break the
heart of a wicked man, but as the bright beams of the Sun do harden clay,
and soften wax; so this most heavenly and eternal Word of God shall never
return in vain, but (by reason of the different disposition in the Subject)
it illuminateth, it melts the righteous, it obdurates, it hardens the wicked.
Now where the Word does not prevail with us, to humble us, there can be no
true repentance, as the Apostle teaches, Romans 2.5.
when he says, But thou after thy hardness, and heart that cannot repent,
heapest unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath. Now where there is no
repentance, there can be no salvation, Luke 13.5
for, so says our Savior; Except ye repent, ye shall all perish. This is a
lamentable estate indeed, this is a judgment with a witness, for a man to be
left thus unto himself, to be given up to Satan, and to be forsaken of God
for ever: Oh this, this is the estate and condition of every hard hearted
sinner: Oh happy then is that man or woman that sins least: next he that
returns home by repentance soonest; but most woeful is the estate of him that
with Jeroboam has sold himself to commit sin; for this man, Romans 1.28. 1.
Tim 4.2 Zach. 1.12.
though he would weep with Esau, and shed even a fountain of teates, yet all
will not help; woe, alas, there is no recovery.

This may serve in the first place to reprove those Malachy his time, The
wicked prosper, and they that work iniquity are set up: Mal. 3.13.14.
They seem to be the only men of the World; they enjoy their pleasures, they
seem not to be troubled for any thing, and who but they; Alas, alas, what of
all this? If the heart be frozen in the dregs of sin, they are of all men
most miserable, and of all men most to be pitied; For thou after thy hardness,
and heart that cannot repent, Romans 2.4.5.
heapest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath. Their damnation
sleeps not all this while, but still they run in score in Gods book, and
when their iniquity is once full, the Lord will then come with his judgments,
and they shall pay full dear for their sweet pleasures, even the loss of
their own souls for ever and ever. No greater judgment can God inflict upon
the sons of men in this life, then such a stony heart; of all Gods
judgments, Oh let my soul be free from this, for To whom will I have respect
unto (says the Lord) but to him that is of a contrite heart, and trembles at
my Word. Esa. 66.2.5.
This Word is to the godly heart that is humbled for sin, the sweet savor of
life unto life; but to the seared heart, the woeful savor of death unto death:
and in this respect the Word is like to the thunderbolt, the thunderbolt is of
that nature, that if it light upon any soft matter, it hurts it not, wounds
it not, nor breaks it not: But if it fall upon any hard matter, as upon a tree,
a stone wall, it breaks it in pieces, and rents it in sunder, it will break
the bones, and hurt not a man's flesh: Even so the Word of God it is of that
nature, that if it fall upon a soft heart and tender heart, it will do it
good, it will comfort it, and instruct it, it will burn up the dross and
filth of sin in that soft heart: But if this thunderbolt of the Word of God
light upon a hard and stony heart, it will wound it, rend it, yea kill it, even
to eternal death, unless they repent: This is the state of a wicked man's
heart, and therefore of al men he is most miserable.

Note this well.
for this be thou sure of, O man whatsoever thou be, that if thou find not
out thy sins now, they will be sure to find out thee hereafter. When the
Lord speaks of a great mercy that he would show unto a people, he says
thus; I will take away their stony hearts, Ezech. 36.26.
and I will give them hearts of flesh. Oh that the Lord would take away our
stony hearts, and give us fleshy and tender hearts, that his Word might not
kill us and slay us to death eternal! But alas, though this hard heart be the
most grievous judgment of God that can befall a man in this life; yet who
thinks so of it; who feels it, who complains of it? No, no, men and women
have no feeling of it; yea, though this hard heart, and heavy judgment of God
reign in most places, and most men be possessed with hardness of heart and
carnal security; and so dead a sleep in sin, that the Lord may thunder from
heaven, and his judgments rattle about our ears; yet by reason of this
deadness and hardness of heart, men are like the Smithes dog, sleep still,
snort still, though the flame and sparckles fly about his ears, and sindge
his hair, and though men can complain, and rore at the pain of the stone in
the Kidney, and seek and send far and near for ease, and say, they are
never able to endure it: yet of this fearful and most heavy judgment, The
stone of the heart, men feel no pain, never cry for help, to be eased of it.
We know, Oh we know every man in his own bosom, the sins, the which we
most secretly foster, and will not let go. But as Saint Paul exhorts the
Jews, even so will I you: To conclude this Doctrine, Take heed, Heb. 3.13.
Ezech. 36.26.
Oh take heed, lest in any of you there be found a false and an evil heart,
to depart from the living God: for of all the judgments that Almighty God can
lay upon the sons of men, this is the greatest: from this estate the Lord of
his endless mercy deliver us. Amen, Amen.

Thirdly, let us mark here how the Lord judges I have cut them down and
saine them; but not with the sword, not with the plague, which are fearful
and terrible, but with my Word, q. d. I have not only taught and instructed
you by my Word, and showed you what I would have you to do, and what to leave
undone: but I have by this plain teaching of you, and by my doctrine
propounded unto you, even pierced your very souls and consciences, so as in
spite of your teeth you must needs acknowledge, though ye be never so
obstinate and rebellious, that you have been wounded, and have felt the force
of my Word, to kill you, to convince your consciences of your sins and
rebellions, and that my judgments are most justly brought upon you.

Hence we see what a fearful judgment of God it is for those which live in
sin, and delight in sin, when as they hear their sins condemned out of
the Word of God; they know that they do evil, they must needs confess, that
the Word of the Lord has convicted their consciences of their sins, and
evil ways, so as they know it, and have felt their souls beaten and wounded,
and even slain by the power of the Word of God. This is a grievous sin
indeed, to sin against conscience, to sin against knowledge, to sin
presumptuously with a high hand, it is a high step to the sin against the Holy
Ghost, when men hearing and acknowledging the Word of God to be true, feel
their consciences to check them for their vile and wicked ways, and yet they
will walk on still against knowledge, and against conscience, and so draw
down Gods judgments upon themselves. Oh then, if we hear the Word of God,
and perceive the Lord to touch our hard hearts, so as we must needs acknowledge
this Doctrine, that the Lord smites thy hard and benumbed heart, as that thou
can say, I am guilty of this sin, I hear God will punish it severely, and
cut me down by his Word, and slay me: I say, Oh then especially take heed,
how thou live in thy sin still, against knowledge, and against conscience:
It is the high way to the sin against the Holy Ghost which cannot be
pardoned: but let us rather leave our sins, and forsake them, and take heed
of going on in the same: for certain it is, it is but the forerunner of some
fearful judgment unto the soul of that man.

I have cut them down by my Prophets, I have slain them by the words of my
mouth.
IN that the Lord does threaten this judgment of al Cut them down, and to
slay them, The Word of God is able to pearce the hardest heart.
and that not by an ordinary means or slaughter, but by his Prophets and Word:
that is, that he would make good his Word in their mouths, and bring to pass
all those terrible and fearful judgments that they had denounced against
them from the Lord.

Hence we see the great power of the Word of God, it is able to pearce the
hardest heart that is. The word of God makes mention of two sorts of swords.
The sword of the mouth, and the material sword, as that place in the Hebrews,
The Word of God is lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then a two edged
sword, Heb. 4.12.
and enters thorough, even unto the dividing asunder of the Soul and the
Spirit, and of the Joints and the Marrow, and is a decerner of the thoughts,
and the intents of the heart. The people of the Jews before that Peter spoke
unto them, were full of hardness of heart: yea, their hearts before were as
hard as steel, nothing could prick or pearce them, Act. 2.37.
they had committed monstrous murder, they shed innocent blood, even the blood
of the son of God, and yet they were never touched in their hearts for that
sin. But when Peter came with his weapon, namely, the Word of God, and told
them that they were those that had crucified the Lord of life: this wounded
them to the quick, as that they cried out in the bitterness of their loules,
O men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? Oh tell us, tell us,
whether there be not some course yet to be taken, that we that have been such
desperate sinners, might yet again obtain Gods favor, and be saved? This
was a blessed battle that was fought with them; behold then in them the
wonderful power of the Word of God, It cuts the throat of sin, and makes men
become dead unto sin, that they might become a live unto God. Ier. 23.29.
Is not the Word of Jehovah like unto fire? It is able to melt and mollify a
heart of steel, it is like a hammer that breaks the hardest stone: even so
this Word of God is able to bruise a stony heart, which is as hard as flint;
Romans 15.16.
I am not ashamed (says the Apostle) of the Gospel of God, because I know
that it is the power of God to salvation to all them that believe. 1. Cor. 1.21.
Yea, it is compared to a sacrificing knife, Ephesians. 2.1.2.
which will kill and cut the throat of sin, and make the most rebellious
heart to break. It will put spirit and life in the dead hearts of dead and
secure sinners, even such as lay dead, and rotting in sin. If it enter not into
thee to the rooting out of sin, and the cutting down of thy uncleanness;
for then it pearceth for thy good to life eternal, It will be sure to wound
and to pearce thy dead and benumbed soul, to the hardening of thee in thy
sins, to death eternal, Esaias. 55.
for it never returns in vain, but is either the savor of life unto life, or
the savor of death unto death.

The Lord sent his word unto Pharaoh again and again by Moses and Aaron, but
he would not be humbled by it, Exodus 9.^7. 1. Reg. 22.8.
therefore he became the more hardened in sin. And Ahab was then the
deadliest enemy to his own soul, Mich. 2.7.
when he hated Michai for not speaking to his fantasy, but warned him
faithfully of the judgment which afterward came upon him. Zach. 7.11.
The Word of God is an adversary to none, but to such as are adversaries to
themselves; Note this well.
neither does it condemn any but such as (without repentance) assuredly shall
one day be condemned of the Lord. And therefore let the wicked wretches of the
world stop their ears never so much from the hearing of the threatenings of
the Word, yet they shall never stop that judgment which the Word has
threatened. There is a cry that will come at Midnight, and will waken the dead:
But, Oh blessed are they, who in time are wakened out of the sleep of their
sins, before that dreadful judgment come.

This serves to commend unto us, the excellency 1. Cor. 1.21. Psalm. 19.
The Law of the Lord is perfect to convert the soul. There is more power in
the plain, rude, and simple preaching of the Word of God to convert a sinner,
then in the most learned and excellentest eloquence in men; nay, Romans 10.14.15.
it is impossible for all the eloquence in the World to save a Soul; it is
peculiar only to the simple preaching of the Gospel, nor all the Writings of
men cannot turn the heart unto God, unless the Lord do bless the preaching
of the Word to do it; and though nothing be so contrary to our Nature as the
Word of God, yet nothing is so powerful to convert, as is this word, by Gods
blessing upon it, being his own ordinance, appointed to that end.

Secondly, seeing the Word of God is of this power, Sword of the Spirit to kill
us and to wound us to death eternal: Ephesians. 6.1.
He will smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and slay the wicked and
rebellious with the breath of his lips; that is, the Lord will make good all
those fearful judgments which his servants have denounced against them in his
name: Esaias. 11.4.
And as the rain that falls, makes the earth more fruitful, or else more
barren: so it fares with the Word, it either cuts down sin to our
amendment, or else leaves most deadly wounds in our souls, even to death
eternal. Now then seeing the Word of God is so powerful: Oh how should this
stir up every man and woman to the hearing of the Word of God, continually to
frequent Sermons, to listen to the Doctrine of God, to believe that they hear,
to yield unto it, and to lay their hearts open and naked, that this Sword of
Gods Spirit way wound them for sin: for though thou be a notorious sinner,
a monstrous blasphemer, a common drunkard, a filthy whoremaster, yet if thou
shall hear this Word, and give credit to it, it is able to wound thy Soul,
and to pearce thy heart; and experience teaches, that the Word of God has
done great things, it has converted most fearful and monstrous sinners, as
David, 2. Sam. 12.1. Act. 9. Romans 1.16.
Saul, Peter, Mary Magdalen. Zacheus, etc. And therefore wait on the means,
attend on the Word, hear Sermons, and thou shall find in the end, that the
Word of God shall be the power of God to save thy Soul, if thou do not
harden thy heart against it. And as for those the which do despise the Word,
and will not go to the door to hear it: truly, such men and women do even
wilfully cast away their own souls, and suffer themselves to be led even
blindfold to hell: but if with care and conscience thou will attend unto it, as
Lydea did, and not cast it up again as those that have queasie stomachs do
wholesome Physic; surely, thou shall find great power in the Word, to save
thy soul.

By my Prophets, and the words of my mouth.
HEre is laid down now the means and the instruments Prophets, The
Instrument.
I have cut down by my Prophets: that is, I have brought upon you those
plagues and judgments which were threatened against you by my faithful
servants the Prophets, even those judgments the which they have denounced
against you in my name, I have inflicted, and brought them upon you to slay,
and to destroy you for your sins.

Seeing the Lord did effect and bring to pass The Word of God in the mouths
of his Ministers shall be accomplished.
and to destroy them: Hence we learn that the Word of the Lord in the mouths
of his Ministers, it shall be accomplished; Look what judgment they pronounce
against sin in the name of the Lord (if men will not repent) they shall
certainly be accomplished, and come to pass: howsoever men regard them not,
and will not believe them. Indeed many times his judgments are deferred, and
his punishments are prolonged, because he is a patient God, and would not the
death of a sinner; Mat. 14.35.
yet he is ever jealous of his Word, that not one jot or tittle of his Word
shall not pass, but shall he fulfilled. This is clearly to be seen by the
examples of Gods judgments in all ages. Genesis 2.17. and. 3.7.
Consider this truth in our first parents; God threatened them, that if they
tasted the forbidden fruit, they should die the death; and did not God
accomplish the same? yea, all their posterity do to this day feel the smart of
the same curse. When all the World were disobedient in the days of Noah that
Preacher of righteousness, 2. Pet 2.5. Genesis 6.3.
God gave them time and space to repent in, even a hundred and twenty years;
and when they repented not, the Lord did not fail to bring his Judgment upon
them. A most clear and lively example of this, we have in the book of
Iosuah: Iosu. 6.26.
The man is cursed there before the Lord that should attempt the rebuilding of
the City Jericho, and this is the curse that should pass upon that man, namely
this, That he should lay the foundation of it in his eldest son, and in his
youngest son shall he set up the gates of it. This was the irreuocable curse
that almighty God had threatened against the man that should attempt the
building of that City. Now afterward when this threatening seemed to be quite
forgotten, God is still mindful of his Word, and time is not able to wear
that out: 1. Reg. 16.34.
for when Hiel the Bethelite did go about to erect the same, God does bring
his former judgment to pass upon him. What shall we say of Ahab and of
Iezabel, unto whom many fearful and terrible judgments were denounced by
Elias the Prophet of the Lord, 2. Reg. 9.37.
That the carkas of Iezabel shall be as dung in the field of Israel. This did
God in his due time bring to pass upon Iezabel, and upon the whole house of
Ahab, according to the Word of the Lord. So that we may safely conclude this
point, Number. 23.19. Sam. 3.19.
and say with Moses that servant of the Lord, God is not as man that he should
lie, or the Son of man that he should repent.

Gods judgments threatened may seem to us as unlikely as the plenty the
Prophet spoke of, seemed to one of the Princes of Samariah: Though the Lord
would make Windows in heaven, could it come so to pass? But what said the
Prophet? Behold, 2. Reg. 7.2. and 19.20.
thou shall see it with thy eyes, but thou shall not eat thereof: and so it
came unto him, for the people trod him in the gate, and he died. Thus did our
Savior foretell the destruction of the City Jerusalem, which came so to pass
accordingly within the space of forty years after our Savior his Ascension.
Mat. 24.
And is not the Word of God as true now in the mouths of his Ministers, yea,
whatsoever judgment they shall proclaim in the name of the Lord, and by
virtue of the Word of God, it shall certainly come to pass: As they have a
long time threatened famine, pestilence, and the like judgments; and has not
the Lord brought these judgments and the like most justly upon us for our
sins? do not we feel the truth of it? yea, this Winter and Summer last, when
the Lord seemed to stop his ears at the prayers of his servants, and would
not a long time be entreated. And therefore let all wicked and ungodly wretches
lay this Doctrine to heart, that are ready to say. Where is the promise of his
coming? and where be those judgments our Preachers have so long spoke of?
Oh, they shall know, even to their eternal shame and confusion at the last,
that the Lord will make good his Word, and bring to pass all those judgments
that have been denounced against them.

And as it is true of Gods judgments against rebellious sinners: so is it true
of the gracious promises of the Gospel to all them that do truly repent:
Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision for the truth of God. Rom 15.8.
Ps. 89.33.
And again, I will not falsify my Truth, my Covenant will I not break, nor
alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. This was that worthy resolution
of the Prophet long before Christ was borne: Thou will perform thy truth to
Jacob, Micha. 7.20
and mercy to Abraham, as thou have sworn to our fathers in old time: Tit.
1.2. Psalm. 102.27.
And as this was accomplished touching the coming of the Messiah, In the
fullness of time: So the same holds true concerning all other the promises of
God made unto his Church and people. And the reason of all is this, because God
is of an unchangeable nature; Mal. 3.6.
I am the Lord I change not: Whatsoever he has said, shall be done, and
whatsoever he has spoken shall be accomplished: For with him is no
variableness, nor shadow of change.

They have denied the Lord and said; It is not he, neither shall the plague
come upon us: Ier. 5.12.13.
neither shall we see sword nor famine: And the Prophets shall be as wind,
and the Word is not in them. Like to them are many of our people amongst us,
they make but a Tush of all those threatenings that Gods Ministers do denounce
against them in the name of the Lord, till they come upon them; and then they
can acknowledge they had a fair warning: Read that place diligently in
Zachariah, and the Lord give us a right judgment in all things, Zacha. 1.4.5.6.
the words are these; Be ye not as your Fathers unto whom the former Prophets
have cried saying, Thus says the Lord of hosts, Turn you now from your evil
ways, and from your wicked works: but they would not hear, nor hearken unto
me, says the Lord: Your Fathers, where are they? and do the Prophets live
for ever? But did not my words and my statutes which I commanded by my servants
the Prophets, take hold of your Fathers? and they confessed, and said, As the
Lord of Hoasts has determined to do unto us, according to our own ways, and
according to our works, so has he done unto us. See here how the Lord sends
these rebellious Jews to former times, even to look upon Gods judgments,
upon their forefathers, q. d. Though your Fathers be dead, yet my judgments
in punishing them ought still to be before your eyes: and though the Prophets
be dead, yet their Doctrine remains for ever: Behold ye then the force of
my Doctrine in punishing your Fathers, and fear ye the threatenings contained
in the same, and declared a fresh unto you by my Prophets. Oh may not this be
a fair warning to us that yet live, to admonish all those that despise the
Word of the Lord in the mouths of his Ministers, to take heed how they
contemn Gods faithful Ministers, which esteem their words but as wind; for
if they speak in the name of the Lord, and have the Word for their varrant, it
shall certainly be accomplished; Shall I spare such a people (says the Lord)
shall I not be avenged on them. Ier. 5.14.
Behold (faith the Lord to his Prophet) I will make my Word as fire in thy
mouth, and this people shall be as wood, and it shall devour them. Even so
shall the Lord use his Word in the mouths of his Ministers, as the sword of
his Spirit to Cut down and slay, and will bring to pass his judgments
proclaimed by them; so as all wicked and ungodly men at the last, shall
confess and say, Oh I had a fair warning. I was told of this long ago, if I
had been wise to believe it: and now I see the Word of God is true in the
mouths of his Ministers. Oh what shall become now of all rebellious and
hard-hearted sinners, who seem to have Made a Covenant with Death, Esaias. 28.15.
and an agreement with the grave: which go on in sin and fear, no danger;
but what follows, Your Covenant with Death shall be disanulled, and your
agreement with hell shall not stand, etc. Their hopes shall fail them in the
end (God will not be mocked) they shall be sure to pay full dear for their
contempt when it shall be too late to amend. Oh let us not then harden our
hearts through the deceitfulness of sin: Esaias. 55.6.
but Let us seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he
is near.

Secondly, we are taught here not to be dismayed when we see the wicked to
prosper and to flourish here, spreading themselves as the green Bay Tree:
their damnation sleeps not, Gods judgments are gone out against them, they
are determined with God, there wants nothing but the execution of them, the
which in Gods due time shall be accomplished, even by an irreuocable decree.
Now, what if in the mean time they rufle it out with great words and shows,
and who but they: Alas, their estates are rather to be pitied, then enuyed,
because Gods Word is against them, and their sinful courses, and by it at
the last they shall be sure to be Cut down.

Psalm. 2.
Pharaoh and the Egyptians may take crafty counsel together against the people
of God; But he that dwells in heaven does laugh them to scorn, And this
Pharaoh which seemed for a while to be so terrible, his end was most
fearful. And what if Ahab and Iezabel plotte together, and abuse their
authority for the winding in of Naboths Vineyard into their own posession, and
Naboth is slain, 1. Reg. 21.
Gods Word went out against him therefore by his Prophet Elias, and it was not
his walled Palace that could keep back Gods judgments. A man that had seen
Lazarus a poor beggar, Luke 16.22.
destitute of all help and comfort, lying at the rich man's gate, his mind
possessed with cares, with his body full of sores, whilst the rich man within
was clad of the finest, and fed of the daintiest; a man I say, that had beheld
these rwo, if he had had no more then natural reason, would easily have
concluded the beggar to be miserable, and the rich man to be happy: But God
sees not as man sees, neither are his thoughts as man's thoughts: for even in
this great misery of this poor beggar, he was a happy and a blessed man; and
notwithstanding the great pomp of the other, in the midst of it all, he was
but wretched and miserable. Then let us not rest in beholding the present face
of outward things, but possess our souls with patience, considering that All
things happen alike to all: Yet in the end it shall go well with the just. And
howsoever the wicked prosper well in the world; Psalm. 73.17.
yet they are set but in slippery places: Gods threatenings in Gods due time
shall be inflicted upon them.

Thirdly, seeing the menaces and threatenings of children, this were injurious
to the Spirit of God so to think. Oh then let us learn to depend upon God, 2.
Cor. 1.20.
and to wait duly upon his gracious promises: Knowing that all his promises
are yea, and Amen, and He is faithful which has promised. Let us learn then
to rest upon him, for the pardon of our sins, the hearing of our prayers, the
resurrection of our dead bodies, and life everlasting: the Lord is just and
true in all his promises. Oh what a comfort is this to poor distressed souls!
Do thou mourn for sin, and desire to fear thy God, and walk in his
ways? well, assure thy soul, that whatsoever gracious promise he has made
unto thee in his Word, it shall be performed: Heaven and Earth shall pass, but
one jot or tittle of my Word shall not pass away: but a^ every judgment and
plague pronounced against sin and sinners, shall be brought upon them to
destruction: even so every gracious promise made to Gods Church and people,
shall be performed to their eternal comfort and salvation: and therefore let
us believe this, and rest upon it, that the Lord will perform his Word in the
mouths of his Prophets and Ministers, Whatsoever ye bind on earth I will bind
in heaven, Mat. 16.19.
and whatsoever ye loose on Earth, I will loose in heaven.

And thy judgments were as the light that goes forth.
The equity of the judgment.
IN these words the Lord shows that they could not pretend ignorance of the
will and Word of God; for the Lord had taught them, and declared unto them
manifestly and apparently what he would have them to do: for by Judgment in
this place is meant the doctrine of God taught unto them by his servants the
the Prophets. q.d. my Doctrine in the mouths of my servants, where I showed
and laid open before your eyes the way to lead holy lives, and to serve me,
it was clear as the light, as the Sunshine at Noone day when there is no
cloud: so as you have now no excuse at all for yourselues, but must needs
acknowledge that my judgments are now justly inflicted upon you, and that you
have of malice with a hie hand and most rebellious heart, sinned against me So
then you see what is here meant by the judgment of the Lord; namely, the
clear and manifest doctrine of God to direct us in the way to life eternal.

Seeing the Lord does here profess unto his people, Judgments, that is, the
Doctrine of God, wherein he would have taught them how to live well and
blessedly, was clear and manifest, God never strikes with his judgments
before he gives warning.
and that they could allege no excuse of ignorance.

Hence we learn, that the Lord does never strike with his judgments, but he
first gives warning; so as if men would be wise to believe his Word, and to
amend their lives, they might avoid his judgments: but if they will be so
rebellious and hard hearted, that they will not amend, they must needs
acknowledge, and confess, that they are most worthy to be plagued and
punished.

This was Gods merciful dealing toward the people of the old world, unto whom
the Lord vouchsafed one hundred and twenty years to repent in, before he
brought his judgments upon them: besides all which time he vouchsafed unto
them Noah that Preacher of righteousness, Gen 6.3. 2. Pet. 2.5.
warning them still of a judgment to com, to this end that they hearing from
Noah what judgment the Lord had intended against them, if they repented not,
their condemnation might be so much the more heavy upon them. Thus dealt the
Lord with those sinful Sodomites, Genesis 19.
unto whom he sent his servant Lot, Exodus 9.
Whose righteous soul was vexed from day to day. Thus dealt he with Pharaoh
and his people, unto whom he sent Moses and Aaron again, and again, and
still again, to admonish him to let the people of Israel go: When this
prevailed not, he sent judgment upon judgment, and all to humble the hard
heart of Pharaoh. What shall we say of Ahab and Iezabel, unto whom the Lord
sent Elias? such is the goodness of God toward the sons of men, that he
will ever warn before he strike, and admonish before he correct: for so did
the Lord deal with this people, as in the former verse, Oh Ephraim what shall
I do unto thee? Hos. 11.8.
Oh Judah, how shall I entreat thee? Meaning thereby, that the Lord had used
many ways and means to humble them if it might be, before he proceeded in
judgment against them. This is most lively set out unto us in the book of the
Proverbs, Pro. 1.20.21.
where Solomon brings in Christ Jesus the wisdom of the Father, sometime by
his Ministers, and sometimes by himself, calling and crying unto us to hear
his voice, and to receive instruction; and if this fair means that the Lord
shall use, will not serve to humble us, the Lord does there threaten, That the
time shall come when we shall cry and call upon him, and he will not hear
us: Yea, he will be then so far from pitying in the time of our distress,
as that he will then Laugh at our destruction, and that because we did not
choose the fear of the Lord. This was the merciful dealing of God toward the
Ninevites, Ion. 3.4.
unto whom he sent his Prophet Jonas to bring them home by repentance; and
thus dealt he with Jerusalem, Mat. 23.38.
using all means possible to humble them before the judgment came forth: For,
if God would reclaim us by his Word, he would never take his Rod. But of
this before.

And the reason of this Doctrine is clear, Act. 14.16.17
when he says, In times past he suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their
own ways: Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he
did good, and gave them rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling their
hearts with joy and gladness. Now, if the giving of them showers of rain, the
dew of Heaven be unto them the Lords witnesses, and the Testimonies of his
power: Oh how much more the^ is the word of God, which is the savor of life
unto those that believe? Surely, this warning that the wicked have here hence,
shall much more leave them without excuse, in the day of the Lord.

Seeing then the Lord is not easily drawn to the Return unto him? I appeal
unto thy conscience, whosoever thou art that read this: Have we not been
told plainly of our sins, that living in that course we do at this present,
we cannot be saved? has he not again warned us of his judgments by his
Ministers? we know, we know every one in the secret of his own bosom, that
the Lord has spoken unto us, warning us of judgment: but when this means
would not serve to bring us home to himself by repentance, nor to return unto
God: Now the Lord has met us with judgment, even this unseasonable weather
that makes the creature to mourn unto us, to teach us to mourn: besides, how
many particular afflictions and chasticements has the Lord laid upon us in our
bodies, goods, and good names, wife, children, cattle and the like? do not
they al summon us to repentance, and cry aloud in our deaf ears, that the
Lord is at hand with his udgements? Oh let us be warned betimes to seek unto
him by repentance, lest the Lord using all these means unto us to bumble us,
and we remain rebellions and hard hearted still, be take occasion, even
therehence, to lay the heavier judgment upon us. Let us then acknowledge the
Lord to be a just God, that gives us such warning; and when his judgments
shall lie heavy upon us, let us not accuse the Lord of any hard dealing, but
rather accuse the hardness of our own hearts, which would not be warned by
his Word and Judgments. Dan. 9.
Daniel confesses, that because the people would not believe the Lords
Prophets and faithful servants, therefore they were justly plagued for their
sins: Let us do the like, and take heed, that we do not neglect the checks
of our own conscience, reproving us of our sinful ways; for the time comes
apace, and we know not how soon, when this conscience of ours the which now
does check us, shall judge us, and this heart of ours, the which now does
reprove us, shall torment us, and that because we have wilfully neglected the
means of our own salvation, when the Lord has offered the same unto us.

us, as sometimes to the people of Israel, Esaias. 5.4.
What could I have done more to my Vineyard that I have not done? so what
should I have done more to the soul of this sinner that I have not done? my
Word, my Judgments, my mercies, the motions of my Spirit, all these have I
used to humble them: So that in all our plagues and judgments, in all our woes
and miseries, whether in this world, or in the world to come; the whole blame
must light upon our selves, whose hearts are so hard that they will not repent
from this fearful judgment or hardness of heart: the Lord keep us all for
his Christ's sake.

VERSE. 6. For I desire mercy and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more
then burnt offerings.
THe Lord having threatened this rebellious people by his judgments, and
manifested his anger for their sins and disobedience; especially because they
would not be reformed of their evil courses, and be humbled by his word: Now
the Lord does prevent an objection, which this people might or did make, The
prevention of an objection.
and takes away all colou^ of excuse: For thus they might say, why should the
Lord be thus angry with us, and thus to chide us, and to cry out upon us, to
threaten us by his Prophets? Do we not serve God, do we not kill our beasts
to offer them in sacrifice to God? Do we not thus and thus? but we can never
please him, he will never be content with us, let us do what we can: though
we offer never so many sacrifices and burnt offerings; yet the Lord is always
chiding, and finding fault with us.

To all this the Lord seems here to answer; I pass not for these outward
Ceremonies, and outward worship unless you ioyn true faith and obedience to
God, and true love and charity unto men: Duties of piety to God, joined with
the true knowledge of God, and true reformation of our hearts and lives,
together with just, honest, and upright dealing with men.

Hence then first of all we may observe, what account Sacrifices and Burnt
offerings, that is, of all the outward service of God, God esteems not of our
outward service, when it is not performed in faith and obedience.
the outward actions and ceremonies belonging to the same, severed from the
knowledge of God, true repentance, and hearty obedience, with love and just
dealing with men; he professes here that he cares not for them; he has no
delight in them, they stink in his eyes, and are abominable unto him, What
have I to do (says the Lord) with the multitude of your sacrifices? Esaias.
1.11.12
I am full of your burnt offerings of Rams, and the far of fed beasts: and I
desire not the blood of Bullocks, nor of Lambs, nor of Goats: When ye come
to appear before me, who required this at your hands to tread in my Courts.
Where we may see, that although Almighty God commanded these sacrifices for a
time, as aids and helps unto this people, for the exercise of their faith:
and to lead them to Christ; yet because they offered them up without faith or
repentance: God detested them and they were abomination unto him. This is
cleared by the same Prophet in another place: Esaias. 66.3.
He that kills a Bullock is as if he slew a man, he that sacrifices a
sheep, as if he cut off a Dogs neck: He that offers oblation, as if he
offered Swines blood: he that remembers incense, as if he blessed an Idol:
yea they have chosen their own ways, and their soul delights in their
abominations.

This people here thought themselves holy by offering of their sacrifices,
though they performed them neither in faith nor repentance; therefore the Lord
shows them in this place, that he does no less detest these Ceremonies,
then he does the Sacrifices of the Heathen, who offered men dogs and swine to
their Idols, which things were expressly forbidden in the Law. Ier. 7 9.
This is taught by the Prophet Jeremy, where he says, Will you steal, murder,
commit adultery, swear falsely, burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other
gods whom ye know not, and come and stand before me in this house? etc.

Pro. 29.8. Ioh 9.31. Psa. 50.17.
The Prayers of the Wicked are an abomination unto the Lord. Again, If I
regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear me: So that what
sacrifice soever wicked men offer up unto God, as prayer, thanksgiving, coming
to the Sacrament, all they do, is abomination to the Lord, when they stand
upon the outward Ceremony of Gods worship, Mich. 6.6.7.8
and leave undone the duties of faith and repentance, Wherewith shall I come
before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God? Shall I come before him
with burnt offerings, and come with Calves of a year old? Will the Lord be
pleased with thousands of Rams? or with ten thousand rivers of oil? shall I
give my first borne for my transgression, even the fruit of my body for the
sin of my soul? He has showed thee O man, what is good, and what the Lord
requires of thee: Surely, to do justly, and to love mercy, and to humble thy
self, and to walk with thy God. Read these places.
Mark here and see the state of an hypocrite, they go so far with the child
of God, as that they ask how to please God, and are content to offer
sacrifice, thinking thereby to avoid Gods anger, Ier. 6.19.20. Micha 6.8. Mat.
5.20. and 6.1.2.3. Amos. 5.21.
but they will not be brought to mortify their sinful affections. And
therefore the Prophet enioyneth them in the eight verse, to the observation of
the second Table, to perform the duties of love, of justice and mercy. In all
which places the Lord shows, that he has no delight nor pleasure in these
outward parts of his service, when men's hearts remain sinful, and they
sever the same from the knowledge and obedience to his Word, and from the
duties of love and equity to men.

The reason of this Doctrine is clear, The Lord will be sanctified in all
that come near unto him: Numb. 16.
He is a holy God, and all that will worship him must be holy, and repent of
their sins, believe in Jesus Christ. Besides this, the Lord has respect to
the manner; as to the matter of our sacrifices; neither is it enough to do a
good thing: as to offer sacrifice, to pray, to receive the Sacraments, to give
to the poor, these be good duties in themselves, but they must be done in a
holy manner, namely, in faith, repentance, and true obedience unto Gods
commandments: for otherwise The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the
Lord Cain and Abel performed both one action, Pro. 15.8.
yet God had no respect to Cain nor his sacrifice, but to Abel he had. Peter
preached the Word, and prayed, so did Judas, but the Lord hated all that Judas
did, both his preaching and his praying. The Scribes and Pharisees gave much to
the poor, the poor Woman gave but a little; she was approved, they
condemned. So that we see, it is not enough to do a good thing or matter, but
we must withal do it in a good manner, and to a good end; namely, Gods glory,
and the good of our neighbor; as also in faith and obedience to Gods
commandments with hearts humbled for sins past, and hating sin for the
time to come.

Seeing the Lord esteems no more of these outward things, as Sacrifices,
oblations, and burnt-offerings, the Word, to pray, etc. but especially, let us
look to our hearts to reform them, that we may do all in faith, good
conscience and obedience, and join with our duties of Piety to God, love to
men, else the Lord cares not for them: Oh let not men then any longer bless
themselves in their fond devotions, as to think when they have been at the
Church, have heard the Word, received the Sacrament, prayed with the
Congregation, that therefore they have pleased God as well as the best: Alas,
all this they may do, and yet as Solomon says, Do but offer the sacrifice of
fools; which is abomination to the Lord. Now, what a lamentable thing were
this, that men should live twenty, thirty, forty or more years in the Church
of God, and yet all this while do nothing to please God? this is the
lamentable estate and condition of many of our civil honest men, as we call
them, who want the knowledge of God, and have not repented of their sins, so
as they might perform these duties in faith, repentance and obedience.

Secondly, this condemns the whole Lump and Mass, Prayer for the dead,
Invocation of Saints, worshipping of Images, and a Thousand the like, al which
as they have no footing nor warrant from the word of God, being the chief part
of their religion; so they shall find, that the Lord will never put up this
Sacrilege at their hands, and that they have in the midst of them all, when
they have been most devout in the performance of these things, been so far
from pleasing God, as that they have rather stirred him up to wrath against them

Thirdly, and lastly, seeing those men that have gone Mat. 25.
and went with their lamps to meet the Bridegroom, wanting the oil of grace
in their hearts: then what will at last be the doom of all those that are not
Virgins, but Adulterers and Adulteresses, even those that have committed
spiritual fornication Iam. 4.4
with sin and Satan, which yet never went out to meet the Bridegroom of
their souls: Certainly, these men's judgments does not sleep, and when it
ouertakes them, woe unto them. Oh then, seeing that hypocrites seem to draw in
the same yoke with the children of God, in respect of the outward Ceremonies
of Gods worship, but want sincerity of heart and life. Let us look to our
selves, that those things may be repaired in us that is wanting in them, that
so the Lord may accept of us and our sacrifices.

Again, in that the Lord says here, I desire mercy condemning the outward
sacrifices of his worship when they proceeded not of faith toward God, and
love toward man.

We learn hence, that lawful things must be done lawfully: Lawful things
must be done lawfully.
for the Lord looks not so much upon the outward face of his worship, as he
does upon the intent of the worshipper. This appears clearly in this people,
they seemed to be humbled for sin, as well as those believing Jews spoken of
in the three first verses of this chapter, they came into the Temple, they made
great shows of humiliation for sin; yea, they were very forward to bring in
their Peace offerings unto God, thinking indeed that they had now done enough
to satisfy Gods anger, and to appease his wrath: but because it was but as the
Morning Dew, neither durable nor lasting, nor sound and sincere, the Lord does
reject both it and them. Genesis 4.5.
This is further cleared by the example of Cain, who offered sacrifice as well
as Abel; but because he performed not the same in a holy manner, in faith,
repentance, and true obedience, the Lord esteemed not of it; but the same
sacrifice of Cain added unto the number of Cains sins. This may be seen in
that indictment which Christ brings against the old world, Mat. 24.38.
They did eat and drink, marry, and gave in marriage: All which were lawful
in themselves; yet because they were not done in faith and repentance, they
added unto the measure of their sins; for they minded only their pleasures,
their hearts were only set upon carnal delights, they eat and drank
without fear, without prayer, and thanksgiving, Jude. 12. 1. Tim. 4.4.5.
as if they were not beholden to the Lord for the same: besides, they abused
the good creatures of the Lord, to surfeiting and drunkenness; these and the
like corruptions in us do turn eating and drinking into sin. And the like
may be said concerning Marriage; Heb. 13.
it is in it self a holy ordinance of God unto those that are holy, and use
the same holily: but for the sons of God to join themselves to the daughters
of men, for beauties sake, riches, honor, Genesis 6.2.
or any such carnal respects, Luk 17.28.
when the same is not found in the way of virtue; this becomes an horrible
sin unto us. And the like is alleged by our Savior against the Sodomites,
They bought, they sold, they builded; things lawful in themselves: but when
they bought and sold with covetous desires, and oppressing their brethren, and
builded not for necessity sake, but to show their pride and vanity: These made
the same become sins unto them. These and the like examples, whereof the
Scriptures are full, all serve to confirm the everlasting truth of this point
of Doctrine unto us, that lawful things must be done by us lawfully, otherwise
the same become sins unto us. Now let us come to the uses.

This serves for the exceeding terror of all wicked God in the day of his
searching account, that have heaped sin upon sin, and one iniquity upon
another; that have not only done good things in an evil manner, but evil
things in a worse manner. Again, how many be there that content themselves
with an outward civil life, that come to Church, hear the Word, and receive
the Sacrament; thinking that all this while they have done God good service,
never looking into the manner of doing them, nor never disquiet themselves for
their hidden corruptions? alas, what of all this, when faith and love is
wanting, Faith toward God, and love and mercy toward our brethren, when
these things are wanting in us?



I will have mercy, and not sacrifice.
THe Lord does not here complain of them for Property of an hypocrite, to
content himself with the outward parts of Gods worship.
but for want of faith toward him, and love toward their brethren.

Hence we may see a lively picture of an hypocrite, and a counterfeit
Christian, namely, such a one that contents himself with the outward parts of
Gods worship, as this people did, who thought themselves religious enough and
forward enough, so long as they offered their sacrifices, brought their beasts
to the altar, prayed in the temple, kept their holy days, and times of prayers
(as our Papists do at this day) and performed the outward ceremonies of the
Law: but as for the knowledge of God, as for faith, repentance, obedience,
reformation of their lives, and just and upright dealing with men, they made no
bones of it, Esaias. 1.12.13
had no regard of those things, and yet thought all was well. When ye come to
appear before me (says the Lord) Who has required this at your hands: Bring
no more oblations in vain, incense is abomination unto me, I cannot suffer
your new Moons, nor Sabbathes, nor solemn days, it is iniquiry, not solemn
assemblies: My soul hates your New Moons, and your appointed Feasts, they
are a burden to me, I am weary to bear them. Thus they came not short in any
Ceremony of the law, they were very strict in the observing of them, but they
looked after no other thing to examine themselves in what manner they came unto
them, Again, Will ye steal, murder, Ier. 7 9.
and commit adultery, swear falsely, burn Incence unto Baal, and walk after
other gods whom ye know not, and yet come and stand before me in my house?
Though they continued in most horrible and grievous sins, Mich. 6.6.
yet so long as they came into Gods house, and performed there the outward
duties of his worship, they thought all was well. And again, the Lord says of
them thus; This people draw near unto me with their lips, Esaias. 29.13.
but their hearts are far from me. They did only profess outwardly in
hypocrisy, and the Lord declares plainly that he regarded them not. Again,
in the Prophet Ieremies time, the people there debate the matter with the
Prophet, and say, Oh we come to the Temple, we pray, we offer sacrifice, what
would ye more? Oh says the Prophet, when ye live in sin, this is but to
make the Lords house a den of thieves. And by the Prophet Esaias the Lord
threatens destruction to them that come unto the service of God in hypocrisy,
and our Savior Christ in diverse places does threaten a woe to the Scribes and
Pharisees because they did all in hypocrisy to be seen of men, and not of
conscience toward God. Well then we see the Doctrine sufficiently cleared,
that it is the property of an hypocrite to content himself with the outward
part of Gods worship, Two sorts of hypocrites.
and never looks after sincerity of heart within. Now there are two sorts of
Hypocrites, the gross Hypocrite, and the close Hypocrite.

The first is, he that outwardly in words professes the name of Christ, and
yet in heart and life utterly denies him, and these men are such as come to
church, hear the Word, receive the Sacrament, and perform all outward actions
of Gods worship and service, as if they were true Christians: but if you look
into their lives, they are most vile and profane. The holy Apostle Saint Paul
describes them thus, They profess they know God, Tit. 1.16.
and yet by their works they deny him, being disobedient, and to every good
work reprobate. For they will so profess Christ and the Gospel, as still they
will live in sin, in lying, stealing, drunkenness, whordome, Three sorts of
gross hypocrites.
swearing, covetousness, pride or ignorance; these be gross hypocrites, which
will cry Lord, Lord, and yet their lives are vile and wicked. And of these
there are three sorts.

First, the Atheist, who professes Christ in Word, Atheists.
and yet in heart contemnes him; these are they which for fear of the Law come
to Church, hear the Word, and receive the Sacrament; and of this sort are the
greatest sort of our Church-Papists, all contemners of the Word, and the like,
professing Christ in show; but yet in heart they deny him, contemn him, make
no account of God nor his Word, but tread it under foot.

Secondly, those which for fear and fashion sake Temporists.
and receive the Sacrament; yet all for fashion and custom, nothing for
conscience sake: and of these we have thousands amongst us, who perform all
these duties for custom and fashion sake. Oh let us take heed, that we do not
profess only in outward show; but look to our hearts, that we may do all
of conscience to please God, and in obedience to his commandments: let us not
make it a matter of custom to come to hear the Word, to receive the
Sacrament, or for fear of the Law, but of conscience toward God; otherwise
these things will turn one day to our greater condemnation.

And the third sort are the Epicures which make Epicures.
and will spend more hours in eating, drinking, sports and pleasures, then in
the service of God, then hearing, reading, praying, singing of Psalms and holy
meditaon, all their profession of Christ is but in hypocrisy from the teeth
outward, the heart is not sound, these me^ may ptofesse Christ long enough,
come to church, hear the Word, and receive the Sacrament; yet so long as their
heart is set so eagerly on the World, on their profits and pleasures, they do
but deceive their own souls. Our Savior teaches us, that men may come with
open mouth, Mat 7.21.
and cry, Lord, Lord, if they lead not holy lives, and have godliness and true
obedience in their hearts they shall perish: 2. These. 1.7.
It is not Lord, Lord, that will serve the turn, but men must labor to know
the Word and will of God; and join to their knowledge christian obedience.

Oh then in what a lamentable estate and condition Moses his time say, Oh, we
will do all; but what says the Lord, Oh, Deu. 5.27.
that there were such an heart in them: showing indeed that they were but
hypocrites, they had Gods word; We will do all. We will come to the Church,
we will hear the Word, receive the Sacrament, and what ye will: Here were
goodly words, golden speeches, glorious promises, but their hearts were naught:
Oh is not this our case, we have goodly words, we can cry, Lord, Lord, with
open mouth; What will ye more? we come to Church, we hear the Sermon, we
receive the Sacrament, etc. But tell me, is thy heart sound, is thy heart set
upon God, do thou hunger after Jesus Christ, do thou love the Word of God
above gold and silver? if thou find not this affection in thee, thy heart is
naught; neither can thou be saved unless thou repent.

The second sort of hypocrites are the close ones, Close hypocrites.
which make a goodly show, and a fair outward profession of Christ; yea, have
sundry good gifts and common graces, and yet are but hypocrites in the sight of
God, though not so discerned by men, because of their gifts and outward shows,
but are here taken for Christians and members of Christ's Church; such men and
women, who make so glorious a show, and so profess Christ in outward manner,
that in the judgment of men, yea many times of themselves they be taken for
Christians and members of the Church of God: but yet in truth are not so. And
of this sort we have thousands that deceive the world, that have the vizard of
Christianity on their faces, and hardly are discerned. Now what gifts and
graces one of these hypocrites may have, and yet be damned, M. Perkins on Mat.
7. v. 21.
a most reverend Divine of our time has most lively discovered, unto whom I
send the Reader. We will now conclude the Doctrine with these uses.

First of all, to apply it to our selves; has this been own hearts, and we
shall find that the most of us be no better then this people; all that we aim
at in Gods service, is it any more then this people did perform? do we go
beyond them? If men come to Church, hear the Word, and receive the Sacrament
now and then for fashion sake, and abstain from gross sins that the world
cries out on, men then think they have done all that God requires of them, he
can desire no more at their hands: is not this the common religion of most men,
and all the profession they make: and thus far they come, and will go no
further, which shows that most men's case is not so good as they take it to be:
Esaias. 1.11. Ier. 7.12.
thus far this people came in this place; yet all this while they be
ignorant souls without the true saving knowledge of God, unjust dealers,
filthy livers, use no conscience in buying and selling, covetous, merciless,
proud, malicious, and given to revenge. Alas, if this be thy case, thou may
come to Church long enough, hear the Word, and receive the Sacrament; but thou
art no better then an Hypocrite. Mar. 6.
Herod went thus far, Saul and Judas might do all this; but let us, if we
would find comfort to our souls in the service and worship of God, give him
our hearts: My Son, give me thy heart: Let us go beyond all the hypocrites
in the World in true repentance, Esaias. 13.29.
hatred of sin, in reformation of our hearts and lives, in an earnest study,
and endeavor to please God, and to walk in his ways, in doing the duties of
the first Table to God, and of the second Table to men,

let us call our selves to a reckoning, suspect our faith, repentance and
obedience, for fear we deceive our selves; yea, as Paul says, 1 Cor. 13.5.
Prove your selves whether ye be in the faith: for an Hypocrite, and one that
shall finally perish, and be danmed, may go far with the child of God in
outward profession, and have many common gifts and graces, Only the doers of
the Word shall be instified: and therefore our Savior opposes these two
sorts, Sayers and Doers: If a man had a servant which showed great dutifulness
to his Master in word, and yet would never do that he bids him, or clean
contrary to his mind, would any man think he were a good servant? Even so
fares it with many amongst us; If God will be content with our fair words and
promises, he shall have ynnow, but deeds he shall have none: Oh let us at last
be warned, and let us labor to be found doers of Gods will, and not to
content ourselves with a bare and naked profession; for this will little avail
us in the day of Gods searching account.

Mark here this wicked people, they grew so secure Wicked men make religion a
cloak for sin.
but withal they would make it a cloak of all their sins, the evils and
corruptions, not only toward men, but toward God: for they thought that so
long as they offered sacrifice to God, and came into the temple, and brought
their beasts, and made some show, that God was beholden unto them, and that he
could not be angry with them. Thus they made the service and worship of God a
cloak of al their evils, and a covert of al their vile and enormous dealing,
as blindness, ignorance, cruelty, oppression, covetousness, pride, malice, etc.
so as if the Prophets of God did reprove them, they were ready to tell them: Oh
Sir, you see I hope we bring our offerings, sacrifices, and oblations, and come
daily to the Temple; and though we be somewhat ignorant, we hope, so long as
we mean well, and do this, we hope, God will bear with us, and we shall
do well enough: Ie. 7.11.12. Mat. 6.
So did the people in the time of the Prophet Jeremy, and the Scribes and
Pharisees in the time of our Savior Christ.

Ier. 7.13.
they think God will not call them to account for their covetousness, pride,
envy, murder, ignorance, drunkenness, unconscionable dealing, etc. And what is
this but to make the house of God a den of thieves, a company of Atheists and
profane beasts? Oh then let us beware of this, and take heed how we abuse our
holy profession, take heed that we make not religion, and the outward service
and worship of God, a cloak of sin to boulster us up in evil, to face out
our impieties and abominations. If a man should get the Kings cloth, or a
Noblemans cloth, and so should under the color of that, rob, defraud and
oppress poor men, and do it under pretense of his masters cloth, how would
his master be angry, turn him out of his service, pluck his cloth over his
ears? Even so will the Lord deal one day with all hypocritical seruers of
God; who, because they be such as make show of Religion and service of God,
think that their profession may be a cloak of all their impieties.

I desire Mercy, and not Sacrifice.
THis is a most worthy sentence, as it does appear in that our Savior Christ
does twice allege it in the Gospel of Matthew, Mat. 9.^3.
when Christ kept company with the poor Publicans and sinners, the Scribes and
Pharisees were angry with him: our Savior bids them go, and learn what this
means; I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Where he shows, that the Lord
will not be served by outward Ceremonies and external shows; but then men
serve God when they can pardon and forgive injuries and wrongs, and one pardon
and forbear another, and are not over cruel and severe one to another. So
when Christ's Disciples plucked the ears of corn upon the Sabbath, Mat. 12.
the Pharisees were presently offended, because they brake the Sabbath; but
Christ tells them this Scripture, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: Where
our Savior Christ shows, that they were over cruel censurers of others;
thinking the keeping of the Sabbath to stand in such Ceremonies, whereas they
did nothing but that they might do without offense.

Now, as we have cleared what it is that we are to understand of Sacrifice and
Burnt offerings; namely, the outward and external worship of God, and all the
ceremonies of the Law: So now we are to come to the two latter words, Mercy
and Knowledge; by which we are to understand the duties of Piety and Mercy,
faith to God, and love and mercy toward man.

And here the Lord compares these two together, and shows that he preferres
faith, piety and godliness in the heart; and merciful and kind dealing
toward men, before the great shows which men make in the outward service of
God: True it is, the Lord will have us perform such parts of his service and
worship, as he commands in his Word, and such ceremonies as he prescribes:
but he prefers faith, obedience, repentance, fear and love of God, and love
and kindness, and merciful dealing unto men; before all such sacrifices and
burnt offerings, and all other shows whatsoever: Yea, all this outward show,
and all our profession of Religion, if it be not joined with the knowledge of
God, that is, with faith, repentance, and obedience, and with the duties of
love unto men, it is but abomination in the sight of God.

I will have mercy and not sacrifice; God does prefer the duties of love and
mercy to men before his own worship.
that is, I desire rather mercy then sacrifice. It does please the Lord better,
to see men perform duties of love, and kindness one toward another, then to
have sacrifices never so many or great, done unto himself.

This is the Doctrine: We see here how the Lord does far prefer love and
kindness to men, before all the outward shows men make of religion whatsoever:
nay, if men profess never so much, make never so great a show in the service
of God, for their hearing, praying, receiving, and the like; yet if they want
love and kindness to their brethren, they cannot please God. And this is the
cause that the faith of many in the Scriptures has grown famous in the world,
even by their conscionable performance of the duties of the second Table, love
and mercy unto men. I remember the Shunamites wife, who called the Prophet of
the Lord into her house to eat bread, and said to her husband, Behold, 2. Reg
4.8.9.
I know now that this is an holy man of God that passes by us continually; let
us make him a little Chamber, with walls, and let us set him there a bed, and
a table, and a stool, and a candlestick, that he may turn in thither when
he comes to us. Genesis 18.
And of Abraham and Lot it is reported, that they entertained strangers into
their houses: Here was religion indeed, when the same goes hand in hand with
good works: Happy Elias that has such an Hostess to give him entertainment
after his travel; and happy, yea twice happy was she by entertayning such a
guest. Deuteronomy. 10.18.
This is that which Moses delivers by precept unto the people of Israel; The
Lord our God is a God of gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, mighty and
terrible, who does right unto the Fatherless and widow, and loves the
stranger, gives him food and raiment: love ye therefore the stranger. Where
we see that Moses urges this duty of mercy and love unto others, even from the
example of God himself, who is ever at hand to help them. Esaias. 58.7.
This is it which the Prophet Esaias commends: Is not this the fasting; that I
have commanded, to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the
poor that wander unto thy house when thou see the naked, that thou cover
him, and hide net thy self from thy own flesh. And this is noted as one part
of the innocence and integrity of godly Job, that he could say, The stranger
did not lodge in the streets, but I opened my doors unto him that went by the
way. Job. 31.32.
It is the straight charge that Christ himself gives: If thou bring thy gift
to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee,
leave there thine offering before the Altar, and go thy way: first, be
reconciled to thy Brother, and thou come and offer thy gift. Where we see, that
men do but lose their labor that come to hear the Word, pray, receive, etc. or
to any part of Gods worship that live in malice, hatred or desire of revenge:
1. Cor. 13.1.
Though I had the gift of Prophecy, and knew all secrets, and all knowledge;
yea, if I had all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and bad not love, I
were nothing. Where we see if men want love, that is mercy and kindness to
men, they can do nothing to please God: so highly the Lord esteems of this
duty of mercy to men, that he says, There are but two Commandments, and this
is one, to love our neighbor as our self: and gives Peter commandment to
forgive his brother, Mat. 22.37. 1. Reg. 17. Act. 16. 2. Tim. 1.
not till seven times, but till seventy seven times. Lydea entreated Paul and
his companions to come into her house, and to abide with her. Onesiphorus
sought out Paul, and refreshed him in time of his necessity: All these
examples, and the like whereof the Scriptures are full, all serve to teach us
the truth of this Doctrine, that the works of love and mercy to our brethren,
serve to commend our faith to God, and are more accepted with him then all
things else we can do in his service and worship, when they are wanting in us.

Now come we to the uses.

If the Lord thus love mercy and brotherly kindness Mat. 5.
to pardon him, to forgive him, to show thy love to him: Be ye merciful as
your heavenly Father is merciful. Some there are who in the outward exercises
of religion are very diligent in repairing to the Congregation, in hearing Gods
Word, and conform themselves indifferently upon the Sabbath day to other
Christian duties: but look on them concerning their duties to men; there you
shall find them exceeding guilty, proud, disdainefull, malicious, cruel
Oppressors, all for themselves, without any respect to others: Oh let us look
unto it, that we separate not those things which God has joined together,
holiness toward God, and righteousness toward men: Art thou a lover of God^
Word, delightest in the public duties of Gods worship and service? thou
do well, it shall be thy comfort in life, thy comfort in death, and thy joy
and rejoicing after death: Well then, look unto this, that thou make
conscience of equity toward men; Do to others as thou would have another
do unto thee, else all thy devotion is but hypocrisy, for God has joined
these two together.

Seeing the Lord compares, yea prefers Mercy I will have Mercy, and not
Sacrifice: I had rather have thee show merciful and kind dealing, then to have
sacrifice and outward Ceremonies: nay, thou may offer thy Sacrifices with
Cain, but if thou have a bloody, Gen 4.5.
a cruel and malicious heart, the Lord cares no more for thee, or for thy
sacrifice, then if thou should kill a man: How can thou hear the Word and
receive the Sacrament? How can thou pray, Forgive me as I forgive my
Brother: Do thou not crave a judgment, yea, a plague from God upon thy own
soul, that as thou will not pardon thy brother, so God should never pardon
thee? Oh then remember what Christ says; If ye love them which love you, Mat.
5.46.
what reward shall ye have? do not the Publicans even the same? Let us go
beyond the Publicans, inlouing even our enemies, and showing mercy unto them,
for this is that which God is well pleased withal.

VERSE. 7. But they like men have transgressed the Covenant; there have they
trespassed against me.
IN this Verse and the rest that follow to the end of the Chapter, The sum of
the rest of the Chapt.
the Lord begins to lay them out in their colors, and to paint out their
rebellions.

And first in this seventh verse, he shows in general, that they had broken
that league and holy Covenant which he had made betwixt him and them: That
holy Covenant which had been so solemnly agreede upon, Genesis 17.7. Exodus 19.5.6.
wherein the Lord had promised he would be their God, and they had promised to
be his people: this Covenant they had wilfully broken, and cast it behind
their back, and shaken off the yoke of their obedience.

In the eight verse, the Lord comes unto them more particularly, and names
Gilead, which was one of the Cities of refuge: Iosu. 20.8.9.
This City has inhabited of the Levites and the Priests, and therefore should
have been a mother City, a Nurse to Religion and Piety. And these Priests and
Levites should have shined as stars, by holy life and pure Doctrine: but the
Lord complains, that even Gilead was a City full of all impiety, full of blood
and cruelty: and if it fared thus with Gilead, what could be hoped for of
other places, but that they did match her, or were far worse then she?

In the ninth verse, the Prophet does not only complain of the common people,
but shows the miserable impiety of the Priests, whom he compares to Murderers
and Robbers, because they were full of cruelty and oppression, covetous, and
given to all manner of vile dealing, The Prophet spares none.
but especially they might be compared to Robbers and Murderers, because they
did murder the poor souls of Men and Women.

And in the two last Verses, he sharply reproues the Idolatry of the people,
which was established hy Jeroboam and his Counselors: so as we see, the
Prophet he spares no estate; he began with the common people, then comes to
the Priests; and now he lays open the vile dealing of the King and his
Nobles, who neglected the true worship of God, and set up Idolatry, and
worshipped Baal.

In this seventh Verse we have three things to be considered of us:

The Text divided.
First, their sin; They have transgressed the Covenant, a great sin to
break Covenant with God.

Secondly, the manner of it; namely, Like men: that is, when I meant in good
earnest to make my covenant with you; and promised that I would be your God,
and gave you my laws; you most unfaithfully and rebelliously have cast often the
yoke of obedience, have broken my covenant, and rejected my laws, and would
not stand to your promise, as I thought ye would.

Thirdly, wherein they sinned; namely, in that they did most glory, and most of
all rely upon, There have they transgressed against me; that is, even in your
very sacrifices, to the which you stick, and think that I am beholden unto
you for them; your sacrifices of Lambs and Beasts are the things I desire,
being done in an holy manner: but you boast your selves of these outward
Ceremonies, as though you were as good worshippers of God as could be: Even in
this I condemn you, because whereas I gave them unto you to help your
blindness and rudeness, and to lead you to Christ the true sacrifice, you
casting aside repentance and duties of faith, and amendment of life, thought
that these outward things, the blood of bulls, and sheep might satisfy my
anger, and purge you from your sins without the blood of Christ, the son of
God. And therefore you have grievously broken my Covenant, broken my laws, and
utterly abused my ordinances.

Thus much of the Sense, now of the Doctrines.
But they like men have broken my Covenant. q. d. Their sin.
and they promised they would be my people: Well, I gave them my laws and
commandments, and my ordinances, which were as a pair of Indentures between
me and them: I set to my Seals, and bound my self unto them, to stand by
them, to keep and defend them from their enemies: And for my part if they had
kept Covenant, I would for ever have been their God, and they should have
been my people; but they have quickly start out of the way, they have forgot
their covenant made with me, broken my laws, and cast aside my commandments,
and have abused my ordinances.

The Covenant what? Genesis 17 7.8. Genesis 18.9 10 Exo. 19.5.6. Romans 4.17.
What this Covenant was, these places show; Moreover I will stablish my Covenant
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in thy generations, for an
everlasting Covenant, to be God unto thee and to thy seed after thee. And I
will give thee and thy seed after thee the land, wherein thou art a stranger,
Even all the land of Canaan for an everlasting possession, And I will be their
God.

The breaking of our covenant with god the cause of al judgments
And in that they had most unthankfully violated the same, the Lord lays here
this great ingratitude of theirs to their charge. So then the first point of
Doctrine which this Text does afford us, is this:

We may here behold what is the cause that God forsakes any people, and
withdraws his merciful protection from them, and lays them open to all
miseries, calamities, judgments and distresses; namely, the breaking of our
Covenant with God: for this does highly offend God, and provoke him to anger,
to see his Covenants so lightly regarded, and so wilfully transgressed, as it
does appear in this people, whose sin was no small sin, but a great and
grievous sin: for in keeping of their Covenant with God, did consist their
everlasting weal and kappinesse: for then the Lord had bound himself, that if
they would keep his commandments and laws, that he would be their God to
defend them from all their enemies, yea, to confound all their adversaries: and
so long as they were mindful of their vow and covenant, and walked in his
ways, none could do them harm; yea, they could want no blessing or mercy of
God, as it does appear by Gods own words: Deuteronomy. 5.29. and Deuteronomy. 28.
Oh that there were such an heart in this people, that they would fear me and
keep my commandments always, that it might go well with them, and with
their children after them for ever: so on the contrary, the breaking of this
covenant, was as much as their lives were worth, for then the Lord was not
bound to be their God, nor to keep them any longer, but they were naked of
Gods protection, and lay open to all miseries and calamities; and were a prey
to their enemies, and then all those curses pronounced against Covenant
breakers, Deuteronomy. 28.15.
must needs fall upon them: If thou will not obey the voice of the Lord thy
God, to keep, and to do all his commandments, and his ordinances which I
command thee this day, then shall these curses come upon thee, and overtake
thee. Cursed shall thou be in the town, and cursed in the field, cursed shall
be thy basket and store, the fruit of thy body, etc. Exodus 32.25.
When the people of God had committed idolatry, and made them gods to go
before them, it is said by Moses, The people were naked, for Aaron had made
them naked to their shame amongst their enemies. It was their sin of
Idolatry that deprived them of Gods protection; for as keeping his Covenant
men are guarded from all dangers; so breaking the same, he naked to all
judgments and calamities.

When Achan had stolen the Babylonish garment, and the wedge of gold, the whole
Host of Israel was punished for the same fault till the sinner was found out;
for because of the sin of Achan, Iosu. 7.24.
the whole host of Israel were before their enemies, but as naked men, utterly
destitute of Gods lpeciall protection: We see this in Salowon, 1. Reg.
11.14.23.
when his heart was turned away from the true God, and his hands were holden up
to strange gods, the Lord was wroth against Solomon: Then the Lord stirred up
one adversary unto Solomon, and afterward another, which did much mischief
and evil against Israel. And this is likewise clear by the example of
Rhehoboam the son of Solomon, who, when he had once forsaken the Lord, and
all Israel with him, the Prophet comes with this message from the Lord, 2.
Cron. 12.5.
Thus says the Lord: Ye have forsaken me, therefore have I left you in the
hands of Shishak.

These examples and the like, whereof the Scriptures are full, all serve to
confirm the Doctrine now delivered, that sin is the cause of all misery,
and the breaking of our Covenant with God, the cause of all calamity. And good
reason it should be so; for it is a just thing for God to depart from them,
that depart from him, and to forsake them that forsake him, whose departure
from us is the cause of all those judgments we suffer here,

Now let us come to the Uses.

Jonas or other is in the ship, some secret sin or other lies lurking in
our souls, that has caused the Lord to be so angry with us, according to that
of the Prophet Jeremy: Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? Man suffers
for his sin. Oh let us search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord,
where we may see the cause of all judgments, our sins. Secondly, the
remedy, To search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord. Oh then let us
ever acknowledge the Lord to be just in all his ways, and righteous in all
his works: yea, let us in the midst of Gods judgments conclude, Lam. 3.39.
and say, It is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, because his
compassions fail not: The Lord might justly take all advantage at our hands;
but his mercy is over all his works, and in the midst of his judgments he
remembers mercy.

Well, let us apply this Doctrine to our selves, and Ye have broken my
Covenant: yea, we have denied our obedience to Christ Jesus, and his Word, and
we have served sin and Satan, and the world Gods deadly enemies, and we
have lived in pleasures, in vanity, in covetousness, and in many other sins
against our promise to God. Oh then in the fear of God, let us take knowledge
of this, that we are vile and miserable covenant breakers: we have failed in
our promise to God, and have not walked in his ways as we have made a solemn
Covenant with him, And now, let it make us ashamed, that we should deal thus
vilely and decitfully with our most gracious God: If it be a matter of shame
to break covenant with an honest man, and we be grieved for the same: how
much more should this grieve us and make us ashamed, that we have dealt thus
faithlesly with our gracious God.

And thirdly, as we must be grieved, that we Covenant with God heretofore:
so now we must be more careful to keep our Covenant with him in time to
come, manfully to fight under his banner against sin, Satan, and the world,
his utter enemies, and yield him obedience in heart and life, to deny all
obedience to the Devil and our own lusts, and say with the Prophet David,
Psalm. 119.10^
I have sworn and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous judgments. Oh
let us take a solemn oath of our selves, and purpose both in heart and life to
keep his righteous judgments, never to sin against our God, as we have
done, but in all things to do his will, and to walk in his ways.

And there is good reason to persuade us hereunto; for if we shall keep our
Covenant made to God in our Baptism, then the Lord will take us for his
people, and will be our gracious God and loving Father, then he will perform
all those gracious promises of pardon of sin, Deu. 28.
and life eternal and every other gracious promise that he has laid down in
his Word for our good, and the further increase of our happiness, it shall
then go well with us in life, in death, and after death. But if we refuse to
hear his voice, and will not regard our vow and covenant made to him in
Baptism, then he will withdraw his mercy and gracious protection from us, he
is no longer tied unto us to do us good, then we shall keep his Covenant,
and then what shall become of us, if the Lord once forsake us? if he leave us,
alas we shall then lie open to all misery, both of soul and body: if God be
angry with us, who can do us good?

Fourthly, and lastly, this may serve to reprove Luke 14.8.
that they will abstain from the hateful house of that sin, and all other
prouocations to the same. The Oppressor is ready to promise more mercy to the
poor, and so of all other sins: Dan. 4.24.
the sinner is ready to enter Covenant with God (when his conscience is upon
the rack) that he will leave his sin, and that for the time to come they
will walk with God in better obedience, so that God would but deliver them,
and set them on foot again. When a man has most vainly and sinfully spent his
time in drunkenness, riotousnesse, idleness, wantonness, envy, hatred,
contempt of Gods Word, etc. If God strike such men with sickness (as I have
known many) that they have feared death, for unto such is the remembrance of
death a terror: Oh how then do they tremble and quake, Note.
then send for Moses and Aaron in haste, send for the Minister (who before this
time of all men they esteemed the most vile) and then good people pray for me;
Oh I have been a great and grievous sinner, I have offended God many ways, I
have been a most beastly drunkard, a most unclean liver, I have dishonored
God many ways by my usury, oppressing of the poor, unjust and unconscionable
dealing with men by fraud and deceit, I have made no conscience at all how I
have spent the Sabbath, but have been at bowls, and Tables, or drinking in
vain company, when I should have been present in the Congregation of Gods
people: Oh, if God will but now forgive me this sin only, I will never
offend in the like again, I will become a new man, for no man's pleasure will I
be brought to dishonor God any more by these sins.

These and the like are the clamours and the crying out of many men when God
does touch them by sickness or some other calamity, and then are they very
forward to enter into Covenant with God, ever to be thankful and obedient
unto him, and then to begin their repentance and amendment of life: But O alas,
is not this the best day that God has of them, and the best service that ever
they perform unto him? It is, it is; for when God does free them, and set them
at liberty, 2. Pet. 2.1.2.
they Turue with the Dog to the vomit, and with the Sow to the mire. Well,
God will never put up this great ingratitude at their hands; but being found to
be Covenant breakers with their God, all those judgments which Almighty God
has threatened against such sinners, shall most surely come upon them, Deu. 28.
and overtake them.

Like Men.
HEre is laid down the manner of their sinning; Like Men. That is, The manner.
when I meant to make my Covenant with them, and promised that I would be your
God; and to this end, gave you my laws to train you up in obedience: you most
unthankfully, and rebelliously have cast off the yoke of obedience, have
broken my Covenant, and would not stand to your promise. So that the Lord does
lay this to their charge, that they were most unconstant and light, yea most
unfaithful: I meant in good earnest to do as I said: but alas, you for your
part, soon went away out of the way, and forgot your Covenant.

In their example we may note what is the nature Man by Nature unconstant in
any holy duty.
very unfaithful, and easily drawn away from obedience to the law of God,
and easily drawn into sin and wickedness; yea, so weak and unconstant are
we of our selves, that if the Lord leave us but a while to our selves, Oh into
what foul sin shall we not easily fall into? This is clearly to be seen
by the example of our first Parents, who, Genesis 3.6.
though they were created in a most excellent estate, yet being left to
themselves, they fell away from God incontinently; yea, weak and small means
are of force sufficient to batter our faith, if God but even a little do
withold his grace: This we may clearelie behold by the examples of Noah and of
Lot, that notwithstanding they had experience of Gods wrath against sin and
sinners by the destruction of the old world, Genesis 8. Genesis 19.
and of Sodom and Gomon; yet both Noah and Lot fell incontinently from God; the
one, in the sin of drunkenness, the other committed incest with his two
daughters. All the strength that is in the best, not being supported by Gods
grace, it is but as smoke which is vanished away with the least blast of wind.
Look on David, a Prophet of the Lord, 2. Sam 12.1.
a man after Gods own heart; yet being left unto himself, fell into those
great and grievous sins of Adultery and Murder; yea, and continued in the
same a long time, till the Lord sent unto him his Prophet Nathan to awaken him.
This the Prophet plentifully teaches by the examples of the Israelites, Psa.
78.40.41
saying, How often did they provoke him in the wilderness, and grieve him in the
Desert? Yea, they turned and tempted God, and limited the Holy one of Israel.
Exo. 9.27 28
This is clear by the example of Pharaoh, who sometimes could cry out, and
say; I have sinned, the Lord is righteous, but I and my people are wicked: Pray
ye to the Lord for me, and I will let you go. These were goodly words and
fair promises, but alas, they were nothing; for what followed? When the Hayle
was gone, and the Thunder ceased, and the judgment was removed, his heart was
hardened, and he continued in his sin. Who could clear David's innocence
more then Saul? 1. Sam. 34.17.
Thou art more righteous then I, for thou have rendered me good, and I have
rendered thee evil, etc. Yet did Saul afterward persecute David: Sometime we
are bold and courageous in a good cause, as Peter was, Though all men deny
thee, yet will not I deny thee: but when the least temptation is laid upon us,
we faint and are quickly discouraged. It fares with us as it did with Peter,
he would needs walk upon the water to go to Christ; but presently he
began to sink, and so had perished, had not Christ reached out his hand and
stayed him: Even so fares it with us, if the Lord reach not out his hand to
stay us, we must needs sink under even the least temptation that Satan
lays against our poor souls. Hereunto comes that Parable propounded by
Christ* A certain man had two sons; Mat. 21.28.
and came to there (...) and said, Son go and work to day in my Vineyard:
but he answered and said I will not; yet afterward he repented himself and
went: Thou came he to the second, and said so likewise; and he answered, I
will sir, yet went not. He seemed forward, ^^t presently he hung back: he
promised much, but performed nothing at all. The like may be seen in the rich
man that came to Christ, and said unto him; Good master, what good thing shall
I do that I may have eternal life? This man (no doubt) had a purpose to be a
Disciple of Christ, he was well persuaded of Christ and his doctrine* Tell me,
Oh tell me (says he) what course I must take to that end I may be s^^ed, and
that eternal life may be my portion? yet when he was tried, Mat. 19.16.
He went away sorrowful: and his good beginnings were but As the Morning Dew,
not durable and lasting. So these places of the Apostle Paul do directly prove
the same, where he says; That many sin again after the receiving and
acknowledgment of the truth, Heb. 6.
acording to the saying of the Wiseman, As the (...) again to his own vomit,
so a fool turns to his foolishness: Pro. 26.11.
So that we see the Doctrine sufficiently proved and confirmed unto us, that
man of himself is exceeding frail mutable, and unconstant, especially in
holy and heavenly businesses, unless we be stayed and sopported by God as
his people here, that though they had entered Covenant, and read a solemn
promise to God, that they would become his people, yet Likemen, frail and
weak, they fell away.

And the reason of this Doctrine is clear, Every good and perfect gift it of
God* It is not of our selves, or in our own power, but it is the proper gift
of God as the Apostle teaches: Romans 12.18.19.
Beast not thy self against the branches, for if thou beast thy self, thou
bear not the root, but the root bears thee: Be not high minded, but
fear. The Apostle in this place takes away all matter of boasting from the
Gentiles, reasoning from their changeable condition, not being firmly
fastened, and deeply grounded, as the root it self, but mutable and
changeable, easily to be broken off, as boughs from a tree: So then it is
God alone that is the Author of constancy and perseverance, Who works in us,
both the will and the deed: And we of our selves without the same help of
God, are unconstant in any holy duty,

If they after they have escaped from the filthiness of the world, 2. Pet.
2.20.
etc. are yet tangled again therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse
with them then the beginning. And this does the Lord most justly bring to
pass upon many, because they contemn grace, quenching the blessed motions of
the spirit of God in them, that when they have some good motions in them, and
godly purposes of heart to cleave unto the Lord, they have not striuen with
the Lord by prayer for the increase thereof, but carelessly have put out that
light that began to shine in their hearts.

Oh let us learn even from their fearful estate and condition, to make much
of the least seed of godliness sown in our hearts, and labor by all godly
means to work the increase of grace in us, If we have tasted how gracious
the Lord is.

Secondly, seeing this is our Nature to be so unconstant, Mat. 26.
Alas we shall then show that we are but weak and frail men. It was Peter's
sin that he presumed too much of his own strength; he thought himself so
strong that he would never have denied Christ; but being left to himself he
fell most foully, and if Christ had not laid to his hand, he had fallen even
into the gulf of hell. It is the Devils policy to make us ouerweene our
selves, and to presume of that, that (God wot) is not in us, and all to bring
us to confusion, for Satan knows well, that man is never nearer to
destruction then when his heart is puffed up with a vain conceit of his own
worth, according to that of Solomon, Pro. 16.18.
Pride goes before destruction, and a high mind before the fall. And hence is
that warning given by the Apostle: Let him that thinks he stands, take
heed least he fall. God has not hired us to labor in his Vineyard for an
hour or two, neither gives us liberty to depart out of his service when we
will, but we must persevere, and hold out even until the Evening of our days,
and we must dedicate to him both soul and body, both our life and death,
both the beginning and end. Oh then let every soul lay hold of this betimes,
and learn hence, that seeing God alone is he that must hold us up and support
us, that we lay hold on the sweet mercy of God in Christ Jesus, and come
boldly before the throne of his grace: aad not rashly presume too much upon our
own strength and worthiness; but rather rely upon him, and seek earnestly
unto him by prayer, that he would support us, and bear us up in his Arms,
that we run not upon ground, and make shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience ere we be aware: for we are very weak, and very unconstant of
our selves, easily drawn away from our obedience to our God, very apt to sin,
if the Lord do but a little leave us to our selves.

Thirdly, seeing we are thus weak by nature, and so easily drawn to sin
against our God, and to break Psalm. 119.8. Psalm. 51.
and with David pray, O stablish me with thy free spirit, that I may not move
through my own weakness, from thee my God.

Even there have ye trespassed against me.
HEre the Lord meets with these hypocrites, telling Wherein they sinned.
their sacrifices and outward worship of God, wherein they did most glory and
boast themselves in, as a thing most like to please God. Even in this they had
failed and transgressed and departed from Gods ordinances: For he did give and
prescribe unto them these Ceremonies and Sacrifices, not as any part of Gods
worship and service that could please him of themselves; but only as helps of
their weakness, and types and figures to lead them to Jesus Christ, the true
propitiatory sacrifice, the only Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the world.

This was the very end of all those Sacrifices that God appointed them to
offer, not that they could please God of themselves, but that they might be the
means to bring them to true repentance: for when they should see their beast
slain, and their blood shed, it might admonish them of their bloody sins,
and that they stood in need of the blood of Christ for the pardon of them. This
was the Lords Covenant, but they broke this, and even in these sacrifices, the
which they so gloried in, Even there have ye trespassed against me, says the
Lord, even there they failed, and abused Gods ordinances; and whereas they
should have been helps to have led them to true repentance, and faith in
Christ Jesus, they now thought nothing less then of repentance, and of Jesus
Christ, but persuaded themselves, that so long as they did offer their beasts,
all was well, and the Lord was pleased with them, they had done enough to
satisfy Gods anger for their sins. Thus they corrupted the true and only use
of sacrifices, which were not to satisfy Gods anger for sin, but only to
bring them to repentance, and to lead them to Christ Jesus.

Now we come to the Doctrine.

That which is most excellent in the sight of an hypocrite is most abominable
in the sight of God.
the same is most abominable in the sight of God. And in that wherein they
think they do most please God, they do greatly sin and offend him: As it is
the nature of Hypocrites and time seruers, to glory in their outward worship
and service of God; they have nothing to boast of, but that they be
Christians, are baptized, hear the Word, and receive the Sacrament. Now mark
what the Lord says, that even herein they Transgressed against him, and sinned
grieuouslie against him; why? namely, because they performing these outward
things, labored not withal to find out the true use and comfort of these
things, as they boasted of their Sacifices; never looking to what end the Lord
did ordain them; namely, as means to lead them to repentance, and so to
Christ Jesus: Even so many as boast of their religion, how they be
Christians, have been baptized: but alas, where is the true use of Baptism all
this while? where is the death of sin? the burying of sin? the crucifying
of sin? which is the main end of Baptism: this is never looked after of the
greatest number: so men hear the Word, and they seem to glory in the same:
but where is the power of the Word in working faith, repentance, obedience,
knowledge, zeal, patience, humility? etc. And so for the Lord Supper; but
where is the right use of this? how do men grow in faith, knowledge,
repentance, hatred of sin, and care to honor God? Alas, these things are
never thought of: so that here the Lord meets with all these carnal Libertines
and loose Professors; and shows them that in that they do most glory in, and
boast of, even there they sin highly, and offend the Majesty of God, so as
he cannot abide even their best actions.

This truth is clearly to be seen in diverse places of the Scripture: No
doubt, but Cain pleased himself with his offering of sacrifice, but even that
was abomination in Gods sight. Genesis 4.3. Pro. 15.8. Esaias. 1.11 13.
The sacrifices of the wicked are abomination to the Lord; but the prayer of
the righteous, is acceptable unto him. Again, the Prophet Esaias does notably
set out the same: What have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices says
the Lord, I am full of the burnt offerings of Rams, and of the fat of fed
beasts, I desire not the blood of Bullocks, of Lambs, nor of Goats. When ye
come to appear before me, who requires this of your hands to tread in my
Courts? Bring no more oblations in vain: incense is abomination unto me, I
cannot suffer your New Moons, nor Sabbaths, my soul hates them.

Behold here in this place, what esteem these outward Ceremonies of Gods
worship and service, were with the Lord; they thought themselves happy men in
the performance of them, and he most happy that offered most of them: but the
Lord he esteems far otherwise of them; namely, being not done in faith, and
true obedience, they were but abomination in his sight, and were so far from
appeasing his wrath against sin, as that they added unto the measure of their
sins. Again, the Lord testifies in another place by the same Prophet,
saying, He that kills a Bullock is as if he slew a man: he that
sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut off a Dogs neeke, etc. Esaias. 66.3. Psa.
66.18. Pro. 29.8. Io 9.31. Ps. 50.17. Micha. 6.6.
If I regard wickedness in my heart (says the Prophet) The Lord will not
hear me. Again, He that turns away his ears from hearing the Law, even
his Prayer shall be abominable. Again, God hears not sinners. These places
and the like, whereof the Scriptures are full, they serve to teach us that what
sacrifice soever the wicked offer, as prayer, thanksgiving, receiving of the
Sacrament, hearing the Word, or the like, the same is abomination to the Lord.
So that we may hence safely conclude, the miserable estate of all wicked and
ungodly men with that saying of the Prophet Hosea, Hos. 12.1.
Ephraim is fed with the wind, and follows after the East wind, he
increases daily lies and destruction. So then, though the wicked say peace,
peace, and think themselves sure, if they perform but the outward part of Gods
worship and service: Psalm. 2.3.
yet He that dwells in Heaven, does laugh them to scorn: for the Lord does
see that their day is coming.

Rome, who think that they sufficiently please God, Ex opere operato, by the
very deed done, though the same be not done to the right end; nor in an holy
manner in faith, repentance and true obedience, as their prayers in a strange
tongue, sacrifice of the Mass, and a thousand the like; all which as they have
no footing in the Word of God; so they shall one day have the reward of them,
even the portion reserved for hypocrites.

Secondly, this may seem to direct us to be wise, our best actions shall be
but sins unto us, if we beelike this people, to think it is enough to be
baptized with water, and not to feel the inward work of the spirit; to hear
the Word, and not to profit by it to faith and repentance, to pray with the
lip, and not with the heart, to receive the outward Sacrament, and not to feel
our souls nourished by the body and blood of Christ. Oh let us not rest upon
such vain things, such deceitful vanity, such lying dreams, for they will
deceive us in the end. And as for all wicked and ungodly men which rest so much
upon them, their trust shall be but as the Spiders web, as Job speaks,
which albeit to day is builded aloft, Job. 8.14.
yet to morrow is swept away. But of this before.

VERSE. 8. Gilead is a City of them that work iniquity, and is polluted with
blood.
THe Prophet having in the former verse accused them to be Covenant breakers
with God, does now prove the same by sundry examples of all estates amongst
them, that as the Prophet says, Esaias. 1.6.
From the top of the head to the soale of the foot: All was out of order, and
full of uncleanness, So was it with this people here, from the Priest to the
Leuite, and so to the common people; yea, even the great men of the land,
Jeroboam and his wicked Counselors here are accused.

Gilead is a City of, etc.

Concerning this City we read not much in the Word of God; but here the
Prophet does note them to be exceeding wicked people that dwelt in this City,
full of sin, deceit, iniquity, full of cruelty, and bloody sins.

This City as we may read, was one of the six Cities of refuge, whither, if a
man had slain a man at unawares, Iosu. 20.8.9
and as we say, by chance medley, then he was to fly thither, and there the
Priests and Levites making inquiry of the fact, if they found that the murder
was of ignorance, and that he hated not his brother in times past, but slew
him against his will, then the murderer was to stay there til the death of the
high Priest, and then he was at liberty again.

Now this City, What City Gilead was.
it was the place where the Priests and Levites did dwell, which were set apart
to teach the people, to instruct them, to offer sacrifice for them, and to pray
for them; for they were to be the light of the world: they must carry the Vrim
and Thummim, light and perfection: And Gilead should have been as a special
Sanctuary for holiness, piety, and true religion, a Nurse, and Mother City to
direct others, and as a fountain from whence pure religion and the knowledge
of God should have been derived into all the land. But alas, the Prophet
complains of Gilead, that it was so far from being a Nurse to Religion, that
it was rather a cruel steppedame to banish Religion and piety; so far from a
holy City and Sanctuary of the Lord, that it was even a den of thieves, a
harbor for all villainy, impiety and profaneness. Now this was a wonderful
thing, that the Priests and Leuits, in whom there ought to have shined great
holiness, that should have bin an example to the common people, that all men
seeing their good example, their holiness and piety, might the rather have
followed them; that they should be even Captains and ringleaders to all
impiety, cruelty and miserable abominations.

Then we see why the Prophet is so sharp to inueigh against Gilead, and to
cry out against this City, namely, because it should have heen a Sanctuary of
the Lord, full of knowledge, piety and godliness: but the same was rather a
den of devils, and an harbor for all manner of sin and impiety.

Thus having seen the meaning of the words; now let us see what Doctrines do
arise from them.

This is a grievous accusation of the Lord, that that City of whom the Lord
might expect most care, most holiness and duties of religion, who should have
been most instructed in the ways of God, having bestowed so many means upon
them, that they should thus degenerate and grow more vile then any other, to be
the harbor of all sin and impiety.

Those that have the greatest means of knowledge should abound most in holy
duties.
If they grow more wicked, and abound more with sin, their judgment is
fearful and very grievous. We see this in Gilead here, how the Lord
complains of it here, that those that should have been even a Nurse to
religion; yea, a Mother City from whence religion should have flowed into the
Country; was notwithstanding a wicked City, full of blood, and full of all
manner of iniquity. Even so, whenever the Lord comes to judgment against a
land, or against a kingdom, those Cities, Towns or Parishes, upon whom the
Lord has bestowed most means, if they profit not by them, but be like unto
Gilead here, full of bloody sins, pride, swearing, lying, drunkenness,
whoredom, covetousness, usury, oppression, and the like; then the Lord does
show his anger and displeasure most against them; as Gilead here, that should
have gone before others in piety and religion, having so many means, seeing
they become so vile, as that they went before others in sin, they went before
others in punishment. And this we shall find to be most true by the course of
the whole Scriptures, that those which have had most means of knowledge and
instruction, and so should go before others in knowledge and Christian piety,
if they have not made a sanctified use of the same, they have ever received a
greater measure of judgment then others.

The Lord in the punishing of Jerusalem, Ezech. 9.7.
bids them begin at his Sanctuary, because they should have heen most holy, and
were found to be most wicked: So again in another place, The enemy has
stretched out his hand upon all her pleasant things: Lam. 1.10.
for she has seen the heathen enter into her Sanctuary. Jerusalem that was
called the beauty of perfection, and the wonder of the World, when she became
full of sin and uncleanness, then the Lord made her a spectacle of his
judgments above others.

This Doctrine is further cleared by the grievous threatenings denounced by our
Savior Christ against those Cities where his Word had been preached and
professed most, and the greatest part of his miracles had been wrought and
showed: Mat. 11.21.22.
Woe be to thee Corazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida, for if the great works
which have been done in you, had been done in Tyrus and Sydon, they had
repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes: Mat. 23.38.
but I say unto you, it shall be easier for them in the day of judgment then
for you. And thou Capernaum which art lifted up to heaven, shall be thrown
down to Hell, for if the great works which have been done in thee, had been
done amongst them of Sodom, they had remained unto this day. But I say unto
you, it shall he easier for them in the land of Sodom in the day of judgment
then for thee.

These Cities of Corazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, they were such places as
Christ had honored above Tyrus, Sydon and Sodom, both in respect of the
preaching of the Word, as also in respect of the miracles that were wrought
amongst them: yet because they made no sanctified use of them, but abounded in
all manner of sin and iniquity, therefore our Savior tells them that their
judgment shall be heavier then those places that never heard the sound of the
Word. And Gilead which before other Cities was honored to be a City of
refuge, a Nursery of the Priests and Levites, by which means the Lord might
have reaped much honor by it. Gilead being found a City of iniquity, must be
made a spectacle of Gods judgment above other Cities.

Again, let us behold and mark where the Those places that have had most
means, shall be most severely punished for the neglect thereof.
where the Prophet of God and the Ministers of the Word have a long time taken
pains to instruct them in the ways of God; there, I say, we may behold the
greatest calamity and distresses, because the Lord cannot abide that Gilead,
that is, any place where he bestows much means, should so degenerate and
grow worse then others; and that such places should abound in sin. This is
the reason, why the Lord taxes Gilead here, even because it was one of those
six Cities of refuge, Mat. 23 38. Luke 19.
because it was the Nursery of the Priests and Levites: This we may see of
Jerusalem, for there had our Savior bestowed his greatest pains, continually
teaching and preaching amongst them in Jerusalem; he wrought there the greatest
part of his wonderful and heavenly miracles there, hither his Prophets and
Apostles were sent to teach and instruct them in the Word of God, and to bring
them home to Jesus Christ: yet for all this, our Savior was constrained to
weep for the woeful misery of this City; yet for all this Jerusalem must be
destroyed, defaced and extinguished, and made a spectacle of his wrath to all
posterities for evermore. This is clearly to be seen by those seven Churches
of Asia, Reu. 2.3.
that sometimes were so famous in the world in the days of Saint John. What is
become of Ephesus, Philippi, Constantinople and Rome? so glorious Churches
sometimes in the world? Are they not gone, and become the Cage of unclean
birds, 2. These. 2.10.
even of Antichrist himself? who preuayleth in them that perish, because they
received not the love of the truth that they might be saved. And therefore God
has sent them strong delusions to believe lies. Surely, God in all ages of the
world has declared the same unto us, now peace, now persecution; peace being
abused, the Lord has not failed to bring his judgments upon the sons of
men. But of this before.

Well, seeing this is the righteous dealing of God Tyrus and Sydon, yea to
Sodom and Gomer; yea, their judgments shall be lighter then ours, as our
Savior says: Mat. 11.20.21 Ezech. 16.46.53.
It shall be easier for Sodom in the day of judgment then for you. And the
Lord by the Prophet Ezechiel threatens thus, that because the iniquities of
the people of Israel were like unto the Sodomites; Therefore will I bring
again their captivity, and the captivity of Sodom and her Daughters: and the
captivity of Samaria, and her daughters, even the captivity of thy Captives in
the midst of them. And surely, if we shall grow worser then other places,
and abound in sin more then other men, how can we but look to reap a
greater measure of punishment the^ other? There is no sin greater then the
contempt of the Gospel, nor no mercy greater then the peaceable enjoying of
the liberty of the same, and therefore no punishment or reward of sin shall
be more horrible then the punishment that shall be infflicted for the neglect
or contempt thereof. Oh take we heed then least we contemn the Gospel, and
so being found guilty of one of the greatest sins, we incur Gods wrath
against us, and cause him to bring upon us his greatest punishments.

Secondly, seeing the Lord does threaten here, Gilead, one of those six
Cities of refuge, and the City that was inhabited with the Priests and
Levites, Religion is not tied to one place.
that even Gilead should be cut off and slain, as in the fifth verse going
before; that is, that God would bring to pass upon Gilead all those
threatenings which his servants the Prophets had denounced in his name. Hence
we see that Religion and the worship of God is not tied to any place, to any
kingdom, town or City, no longer then they do walk in the duties of
Religion, and of the true service and worship of God; yea, if Jerusalem that
holy City, the wonder of the world, that place which God himself had chosen;
fall from God, and begin to forsake his son Christ, and to contemn his son
Christ: Jerusalem then must look for heavy plagues, and grievous judgments:
yea, if Gilead that was so privileged above other Cities and places of the
world, will not walk holily and bear themselves thankefully in the days of
peace, the Lord will not fail to bring, even upon Gilead, many plagues and
grievous judgments against sin. Oh then, if all things that are written, be
written for our learning, then let the judgment of God upon this City, be a
warning to us all: We have by Gods mercy the pure service and worship of God,
his Gospel sincerely preached, and taught amongst us, almost these threescore
years together. Now let us see, whether our case be not like the state of
Gilead: they were grievous sinners, so are we; amongst them were found many
great and grievous sins; a City that abounded with all manner of iniquity,
as swearing, lying, deceit, murder, oppression, uncleanness, etc. and are not
we guilty of the same sins? yes, yes, they were never more plenty in Gilead
then they are in England; and therefore we may well fear, that we that have
been like to Gilead in sin, shall one day be like to them in their
punishment.

The Lord by his Prophet Amos has threatened there a great and a grievous
judgment against the neglect and contempt of his Word, and other the gracious
means that he does vouchsafe unto us for our good: Behold, the days come,
says the Lord, Amos. 8.11.
that I will send a Famine into the Land, not a famine of bread, or thirst of
water, but of hearing the Word of the Lord. Oh it is greatly to be feared,
that we may one day feel the smart of this judgment, the want of the Word,
and glorious Gospel of Christ, that made so light account of the same in the
time of peace: then shall we mourn, then shall we lament, then shall we lie
in the dust, then we shall weep and wayle, and wring our hands, and wish that
we might hear, if it were, but one Sermon, to comfort our distressed Souls:
And in very deed, if we consider Gods dealing toward us, we may see that
these black stormy days are drawing on: Does not the Lord pick out from
amongst us, the most renowned men from Church and common wealth, the pillars of
the Church, and stays of Religion? does not the Lord even by this means give
us a fair warning, that unless we amend and become sincere Christians, and
be zealous in his service and worship, and more highly esteem of his
blessed Word and glorious Gospel, that he will even remove all from us, Shall
we think, that the Lord, who thus severely plagued Gilead and Jerusalem, these
Cities that were so famous in the world, that he will spare us, but that he
will do to us as he has done to them, and remove the Candlestick out of his
place? For the Lord cannot abide or endure to see his most blessed word and
glorious Gospel to be contemned and trodden under foot.

The Earth that drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, Heb. 6.7.
and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives
blessing of Ged. But that which bears Thorns and Briers, is deprived and is
near to cursing, whose end is to be burned. Oh then as we desire a blessing
and to be approved of God, let the fruit of our hearing and profession appear
that we bear not Thorns, for then woe unto us: but that we, Tit. 2.
Deny ungodliness and worldly lusts: and live soberly and justly in this
present world.

And is polluted with blood.
THe meaning is as I take it, they were crafty to cover blood, for when as a
Murderer had slain a man even wilfully and of a set purpose he would then
fly to this City, being a City of refuge, and there the Priests who were put
in trust to examine the matter, how the murder was done, whether wittingly of
purpose, and that upon some old grudge, or whether of ignorance against his
will. These Priests being covetous and greedy of gain, would for a piece of
money, smooth over the matter, they would shelter the wilful murderer, and
craftily hide his sin, which ought to have been punished with death, because
the Law was straight against this sin; He that shedeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed: But they being covetous, and not regarding Gods Law,
would hide his murder, and shelter and shrowde it, and cover it so craftily,
that he should escape unpunished, and never come to his answer. And for this
very cause does Almighty God charge this City with the blood of these men, and
calls it a City polluted with blood.

So then this being the sin of these Priests, for For no worldly respect must
men be drawn to pervert justice.
We may conclude this third point of Doctrine, that for no worldly respect
whatsoever, should men be drawn to pervert justice, to color sin. It was
the sin of this City of the Priests and Levites, those which were put in trust
from God to enquire, and to find out the wilful Murderer, and even to take
Ioab from the ^ornes of the Altar; that they should for money show him favor,
and cover his sin, and let murder escape unpunished. Deu. 16.8.
It was a special precept that Moses gave to the Magistrate, Wrest not thou
the Law, nor respect any person, neither take reward, for reward blind the eyes
of the wise, and peruerteth the words of the just, It was said of Balaam, Number.
2.3.
That he had the reward of Soothsaying in his hands. But Magistrates must not
have the reward of injustice in their hands: for as the Apostle condemns those
that make Merchandise of the Word of God; so those are no less condemned that
make Merchandise of Justice: Woe be unto him that justifies the wicked for
reward, Esaias. 5.
and takes away the righteousness of the righteous from him. The Lord cannot
endure that those whom he has placed in his stead as petty Gods upon earth,
that they should turn the sword of Justice to the hurt of the innocent, and
justifying of the wicked.

We may note hence, that it is a fearful thing when

VERSE 9. And as thieves wait for a man, so the company of Priests murder in
the way by consent: for they work mischief.
HEre the Prophet proceeds to more particular evils, and taxes the Priests who
should have been guides to the people, to instruct and direct them: that they
became even murderers of their poor souls. And after he comes to the people,
and shows that they were full of abominable vices: and no marvel, Like
Priest, like people; If the guides be blind, they must needs rush both into
the ditch: And if the Ringleaders and Captains be so vile, so wicked, and so
profane, alas, what can be expected of the common people, but ignoranee, and
miserable blindness.

Concerning the Priests, the Prophet speaks more sharply, that they were no
better then wilful murderers of the souls of the people, and that they were
like to robbers, who do devise aforehand how they may bring their purposes to
pass: Even so these Priests, they mused how they might by false doctrine
spoil the people of God.

1 Reg. 12.31
When Jeroboam came to be King in the room of Solomon, he banished the
Levites, and made of the basest of the people, and the vilest of them, to be
Priests in the service of God, and who would might be made a Priest of
Jeroboam. And these fellows being set over the people, they were no better
then wilful murdesers: for they did seek to draw the poor people from God to
Idolatry, and so murdered their poor souls.

Object. But why does the Ptophet here compare the Priests to open thieves,
and common robbers?

Answ. First, because as thieves do often pretend favor and friendship, as
though they would direct a man the right way, and yet prey upon them, and kill
them, to get their goods: Even so these Priests they would seem to be as
Fathers, and as guides to this people: but herein they sought only their own
gain, though it were with the blood of the people. Secondly, because as thieves
are cruel and merciless; so these Priests, they were exceeding cruel, and
used great tyranny, not only by poisoning their souls by false doctrine; but
if any did make conscience of the true service of God, they did cry out upon
him as an heretieke, worthy to be punished. That this was the behavior of
these Priests, we may read at large in the Propesie of Amos, Amos 7.12.
where we may see, how Amaziah sent to Jeroboam, and makes a large complaint
of Amos, as though the land were not able to bear his words; and yet he spoke
no more then the Lord bade him, and he is straightly commanded to fly into
Judah and prophecy there: but to come no more at Bethel: For it is the Kings
chapel and the Kings Court.

Hence then let us observe, that seeing the Prophet here compares these Priests
which deceived the people, and did not instruct them, to thieves and Ministers
that teach not at all, or else teach erroneous doctrine, no better then Thieves
and Murderers. Ezech. 3.17. 1. Sam. 9.9. Esaias. 58.1. Pro 9.4. Exech. 47. 2.
Pet. 1.13. 1. Cor. 3. Luke 12.24. Mat. 23.24. 1. Pet. 5.1.
yet either teach them not at all, or else teach them false and erroneous
doctrine. The Spirit of God does call them here Thieves and Murderers. Their
names in the Scripture does teach their duties. They are called Watchmen: And
thou Son of man I have made thee a Watchman. They are called Seers,
Trumpeters, Maidens, and the like.

And their Successors in the New Testament are called not only the Eyes, yea,
The Light of the body; but Remembrancers, Husbandmen, Stewards, Leaders,
Elders, Salt, Stars, Angels, Shepherds, and the like: All which names do
import unto us, that their calling requires labor and industry: for wherefore
are they called Watchmen, but to admonish, and to give warning, it is their
duty so to do: Seers, but to foretell: Trumpeters, but to sound: Maidens, but
to keep pure the Word of God, and the Doctrine of Life: Remembrancers, to put
in mind: Husbandmen, to prepare the ground of men's hearts, and to sow the seed
of Gods Word: Stewards, to distribute to every man his portion in due season:
Leaders, to go before their people in life and Doctrine: Elders, to govern:
Salt, to season, Stars, to shine, and Angels, to declare.

Oh thus their very names does put them in mind of their duty: but when men do
take upon them this holy Calling to Feed the flock of Christ, depending upon
them, and they feed themselves, and not their Flock: The Lord does esteem of
them no better then thieves and murderers. And look what charge Ahab had
concerning Benhadab, the self same has every Minister concerning every Soul
committed unto him: 1. Reg. 20.39. Io. 10.
Keep this man, if he be lost and want, that is, by thy default, Thy Life
shall go for his life. And our Savior speaking of such Hyrelings as regard
nothing but their gain, not the peoples good; he calls them Thieves and
Robbers; all false Prophets, all idle Ministers, all careless Pastors, the
Lord does esteem of them but as Murderers of souls, which is the greatest.
Which being so, then let every Minister stir up his watchfulness and care,
and though the faithful discharge of his duty cannot but purchase him the
malice of many; yet let every faithful Minister be content to make exchange
of such friends for the favor of God, that so he may not be found in the day
of Gods searching account to be a Murderer of their souls.

Peter: 1. Pet. 5.23.
Feed the Flock of God which depends on you, caring for it, not by
constrain, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: not as
though ye were Lords over Gods Heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the
Flock: And when that chief shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive an
incorruptible Crown of glory. If we do not thus labor but loyter in the
Lords Vineyard, we cannot assure our selves to be the Ministers of the Lord,
but with these Priests and Levites here, Robbers and spoilers, nay Murderers
and Manslayers, making a prey of the peoples souls, and expose them as a prey
for Satan: And what, will the Lord put up this sin at the hand of such men?
surely no; for when that great Shepherd shall appear, they shall then bear
the burden, not only of their own sins, but of the sins of the people
that belonged unto their charge, and their blood shall be laid to their
charge.

This should admonish all those which have charge 2. Tim. 4.1.2
to Preach the Word is season and out of season; for, if we be thus diligent,
the greatest labor shall have the greatest reward: Dan. 12.3.
They that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever
and ever. Those the which employed so their Masters goods as that they gained
by the same, were accounted faithful servants, the joy of their Master was
their portion; whereas those that were loyterers, that would do nothing but
bury their Talents, utter darkness was their inheritance.

Oh that all that are called to this holy calling, would lay this to heart, the
greater pains, the greater comfort; and howsoever we may be discouraged in
that we see so little fruit to follow our labors; 1. Cor. 15.
Yet our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord: for the faithfulness of a
godly Minister in the discharge of his place, shall be his comfort in life,
his comfort in death, and his everlasting joy, and rejoicing after death. And
howsoever God does not touch the hearts of our hearers at one time, he may at
another, times and seasons are in his hands: Let us use the means to sow unto
them spiritual things, and commit the success of our labors unto God, seeing
Paul planteth, 1. Cor. 3.6.7.
Apollo waters, but it is God that gives the increase.

Thirdly and lastly, we see what a heavy judgment of God it is to have such
set over a people, as be ravening Wolves and cruel murderers of souls; for
then it may be said, Like Priest, like people: an ignorant, profane, covetous
Minister, a vile, ignorant, and profane people; and therefore in the three
first Chapters of the Revelation, we shall find, that what fault soever the
Lord finds there with the Minister, the people are guilty of the same: If the
Minister be reproved, they are reproved: If the Minister be praised, so be
they: And on the contrary, to have a careful Moses, or a painful Paul to be
set over us, it is counted a singular testimony of Gods love, and a great mercy
of God: for if the Minister be painful and careful to teach in season, and
out of season, it must needs be that the people will be wise, full of
knowledge, zeal, patience, and all heavenly graces: Oh then let us pray unto
the Lord to remove that judgment, if it be on us; and entreat the Lord to
show us that mercy, that we may not have a cruel murdering Priest of Baal, but
a true Prophet of God, that may watch over our souls, as one that must give
account of them at the last day, Io 21. Act. 28.20. Ezech. 34.
that may feed the sheep and Lambs of Christ with the pure and wholesome food
of Gods word, and not with the stinking trash of man's invention.

Baal which were but thieves and murderers in the sight of God, set themselves
to invent cursed council against the Prophets and people of God, Nature of the
wicked to devise all the mischief they can against the godly.
to devise mischief against them, and then to practice it as occasion was
offered: we may from hence observe the nature of false Prophets, whom Christ
calls thieves and murderers. They seek to devise all the mischief they can
against the true Prophets of God, and to the uttermost of their power practice
and effect it. That of Amaziah against Amos does manifest the same, Amos. 7.1^.
and that conspiracy against Jeremy, when no means else could serve; Come, let
us devise some evil against Jeremy, Ier. 18.18.
and smite him with the tongue. So they confess, Dan. 6.5.
they could find no fault against godly Daniel, unless it were the worshipping
of his God: they sought out many things against him, but nothing could they
find, but even his piety and religion; and when all other means failed, that
was matter sufficient to work upon; but their mischief fell upon their own
pate, and they spunne a thread to hang themselves withal. Alike plotte and
practice against the Church, we see in the days of Mordecai and Esther, when
Haman was exalted, Hest. 3.1.6.13.
and his seat set above all the Princes of the Kingdom: he thought it too
little to lay hands on Mordecai, and therefore he laid his plotte to destroy
all the Jews young and old, in one day. And this is plentifully taught us in
the book of the Lamentations, Lam. 5.4.
Our necks are under persecutors, we are weary, and have no rest, etc. These
places teach us, that the enemies of Gods Church (howsoever many times they
cover the depth of their hearts) are full of all unrighteousness, wickedness,
envy, murders, haters of God without natural affection, merciless without
humility and humanity. But of this else where.

Let all such men as be like to Ieroboams Priests, that He that hears you
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me: So that they do but
strive against the stream, and shall in the end draw down the heavy wrath of
God upon them.

And let it admonish all those which do devise evil against Syon, against
Gods truth, and against his holy Servants, and the professors of his name; let
them know, that they do it to the dishonor of God, and he will one day call
them to account for it; Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.
And this their mischievous imagination against the Lord, and his truth, shall
not prosper.

Esaias. 59.5.
Whosoever refrayneth from evil, makes himself a prey. This was the estate
of the Church, even from righteous Abel, whose blood cried for vengeance.
Consider then what manner of Religion it is that we take upon us to profess,
even that the which has the Sun, Moon, and Stars against it: Our Savior
himself tells us what will follow the profession of the Gospel: I came not
to send peace into the earth, Mat. 10.34.
but the sword: For I came to set a man at vaiance with his father, etc. We
must take notice of this aforehand, before we give up our names to Christ:
that this must be our entertainment in the World, and at the hands of wicked
men; that so these crosses which shall happen unto us here, may not any way
daunt us, but that we be still prepared for them.

By Consent.
Councels may err, and Magistrates and Ministers in matters of Faith and
manners.
that had thus sinned against the Lord, but it was the sin of the multitude of
them; they all confederate together, and join in one, both in condemning the
innocent, and justifying of the nocent. From whence we learn, that Rulers and
Ministers of a particular visible Church, may err in matters of faith and
manners, and that councels have been against the Lord, and against his Church.
Which Doctrine is very clear by diverse places in the book of God, as that of
the Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 6.10.
The Watchmen are all blind, they be a sleep, and delight in sleeping. Now in
what state could this people be in, when their Watchmen were blind, those that
were the heads and guides of the people. Again, 2. Chr. 36.14
All the chief of the Priests also, and of the people, trespassed wonderfully,
according to all the abominations of the Heathen, and polluted the house of
the Lord, which he had sanctified in Jerusalem. And this does the Prophet
Jeremy show, when he says; Ier. 3.5.
I will get me to the great men, and will speak unto them, for they have
known the way of the Lord* and the judgment of their God; but these have
altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bones. This is cleared by the
Prophet Hosea, Hos. 7.7.
when he says, They are all hot as an Oven, and have devoured their Judges,
all their Kings are fallen, Mich. 6.16.
there is none amongst them that calls upon me, says the Lord. This is that
which the Apostle confesses in his prayer. Why did the Gentiles rage, and the
people imagine vain things? Ps. 2 1. Act. 4.25.26.27. Mat. 26.66.
The Kings of the earth assembled, and the Rulers came together against the
Lord, and against his Christ: For doubtless, against thy holy Son Jesus,
whom thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and
people of Israel gathered themselves together. In the days of Ahab, did not
all the men of Israel, even the Elders and Governors thereof, the Nobles and
others assembled themselves together, and pronounced death against innocent
Nabaoth, for his Vineyard sake, the which he had before denied unto Ahab?
surely, the Scriptures are full of examples, to confirm the truth of this
point unto us. themselves being evil, can they perform that is good? Surely,
as Saint James says, Out of one fountain cannot come sweet water and bitter.
Besides this, our knowledge is but in part; now ignorance is the mother of
error.

Ahab to that which was contrary to the Will of God? I but says the Jesuit,
they were not assembled by the High Priest, but only by the King: But what say
ye then to that Council that was assembled by the High Priest, and have erred
most foully? In John, we have mention made there of a Council that met
together, Io. 9.22. Mar. 14.64.
and decreed to excommunicate all that professed Christ Jesus. Tell me, did
not they err? And therefore it is but a vain thing of the Papists to say, and
affirm, that the Spirit of God is tied to the Church of Rome, and that she
cannot err; but there was never so famous a Church since the Apostles time,
but have erred in some thing or other in Doctrine of Faith, or Manners; and
therefore Rome has no such a privilege as she pretends to have; but has and
does err most foully; yea, as blind guides, leading poor blind souls, shall
at last (without Repentance) fall into the pit of destruction together.

against the Church; We are taught here our duty, namely, to be solicitors
and remembrancers unto God, in the behalf of his Church; that it would please
him to be merciful to his Church, and to be unto them a Tower of defense.

And surely, now is the time that we are to ply the Lord with prayers, because
we see his enemies to increase daily, the malicious and bloody Papists, whose
Religion, as it is a Religion of blood, so is their practice, the practice of
blood. Ye shall know them by their fruits; a Religion to be abhorred of every
true Christian, being the Nurserie of Treasons, Gunpowder Treason.
and the Mother of all abominations: yet we see how the number of them
increase daily, and we cannot but for ever remember their horrible Treasons
pretended against the Lord, and against his Church, and Gods mercy to us in our
Deliverance. Well, it cannot be, that they will be quiet long, their good
Master the Devil, or his dear Child the Pope, will have some employment for
them; They cannot but go whom the Devil drives.

Oh let it be our wisdom, to entreat the Lord to stand still by his Church,
and to give unto all Christian Princes the Spirit of zeal, and of courage, to
rise up against Antichrist and his followers, that so they may the better
assure themselves of their own peace, both with God and themselves; for sure
it is the more strict a Papist, the more grounded Traitor.

Thirdly, and lastly: we may hence observe the same. Now come to the Child of
God, he has in him indeed wicked thoughts and sinful desires: yet so, as
they do bridle them, curbbe them, and restrain them, and not suffer them to
come into action; they sin not with greediness as the wicked do, who are
never well till they are either devising mischief, or working iniquity. Oh
then let us take heed that we commit not sin with delight and greediness:
for sure it is, this is a note of a graceless heart, and no better indeed then
a brand of a Reprobate.

VERSE. 10. I have seen villainy in the house of Israel: there is the whoredom
of Ephraim: Israel is defiled.
THe Prophet now comes to the common people, and does accuse them of villainy
and vile Idolatry against God: I have seen villainy in the house of Israel:
there is the whoredom of Ephraim; Israel is defiled.

First, for the coherence of this verse with the former: When as the Lord had
accused the Priests before to be wicked, and exceeding bad men: And now comes
to the common people, and lays open their sins to be like unto the Priests,
full of abominable and vile Idolatry:

We learn hence, that if the Priests be naught, Like Priest, like people. As
the Minister is, so is the people.
This is clearly to be seen in this place, the Priests were like to thieves
and murderers, and the people were monstrous blind and abominable Idolaters:
So has it been in all ages: Pro. 29.18.
The words of Solomon are most true, Where vision fails, there the people
decay. It is the Decree of God touching Priest and people, Mal. 2.7.
The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and the people shall hear the
Law at his mouth. Now then, when this Priest is ignorant, blind and vain,
Alas, in what woeful estate must this people needs be in? the Prophet Micha
does declare, Mich. 3.11.12.
saying, The Priests teach for hire: And the Prophets prophecy for money: yet
will they lean upon the Lord, and say; Is not the Lord amongst us? no evil
can come upon us. This was the behavior of the Priests in those days, their
hearts were so set upon Covetousness, that they spoke pleasant things unto the
people, and laid to please them more then God: But what followed, they by this
drew the judgments of God not only upon their own heads, but also upon the
heads of the people: Therefore shall Sion for your sakes be plowed as a Field,
and Jerusalem shall be a heap, and the mountain of the house, as the high
places of the Forest.

The false Prophets did not only procure Gods wrath against themselves, but
the common people were punished for their sakes. It is that which our Savior
himself concludes of, If the blind lead the blind, they both fall into the
ditch: And in the Revelation, Reu. 3.14.
that Church being committed to a wicked man, they were guilty of the same
sins with their Pastor. And in those Epistles sent to the seven Churches in
Asia, where the Pastor is commended for any virtue: so are the people, and when
the Pastor is reproved for any vice, the people also have part in the same
reproof. For such as the Pastors be, such be the people; such as the
Shepherds be, such be the Sheep. In them lies the bad or the good estate of
the Flock. For where the Minister is blind, ignorant and dumb, that neither
can nor will reach: where he is careless and unconscionable, lives solely and
wickedly; how can it choose but the people must needs be ignorant, blind and
unskillful in Gods matters, profane, wicked, and irreligious?

This is proved indeed by woeful experience in the World; Go to any Town or
Parrish in the land, where there lives a careless and unconscionable Minister,
an ignorant sot, a beastly liver, a miserable worldly man, that seldom or
never preaches, and when he does, so cold and so raw, as good never a
whitte, as never the better: You shall find generally sin to reign in that
place, the people like their Pastor, blind, ignorant, rude, so simple, and so
ignorant in Gods matters, that they know nothing of the Scriptures, what Faith,
Sacrament, Repentance, or New birth means; no, not the meaning of one Article
of their Faith, or petition in the Lords prayer.

Seeing the state of a Congregation does depend

The Prophet Esaias cries out against such Pastors, Io. 21. Esaias. 66.
calling them Dumb Dogs that cannot bark: They look to the Fleece, but not
to the Flock.

Secondly, this reproues such as leave the sincere Milk of the Word of God,
and teach their own fantasies, their own dreams, Toys, and Fables, which do
not labor to make the people to understand the sense and doctrine of the
Scriptures; and hence it comes to pass, that though they teach and preach, yet
they find little fruit, few converted, because they teach not Gods Message,
but their own devises.

Thirdly, such as are reproved, as in bringing the Lords Message, and
delivering it to the people, seek not the honor of God, and the credit of
their Master that sent them, but their own credit and honor: Neither do
they desire to preach Jesus Christ plainly in the evidence of the Spirit, but
in the intising Words of man's wisdom: Yea, whereas Saint Paul had rather
speak five words in a known tongue to edify, 1. Cor. 14.
then five thousand in a strange tongue: Some there be who think they never
speak well, unless they speak so as none can understand.

And here also we may note the folly of our common people, who do they
esteem and account of as a good Preacher, but he that speaks eloquently in
a strange tongue? him, whom they understand least, they commend most: And no
marvel, for they learn nothing at such a Sermon; therefore they admire it,
and commend the man, least they should seem to say nothing.

Like Priest, Like People; Wicked Priest, Wicked people; careful Pastor, good
Sheep; for Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, and Obedience. Then we see that a
good Governor, Pastor, and Minister is a singular blessing of God, that not
only can, but is willing to take all possible pains to do good, to teach in
season, and out of season, to be like a Cock, first, to awake himself, by
reading, meditation and prayer: and secondly, the people by his Crowing, like a
Candle that spendes himself to give comfort to others: such a one is a
marvelous blessing of God when he is bestowed upon a people: for when the
Lord would show his love to the people, he says; I will give them Pastors
after my own heart, Such as should watch over their souls, to feed, to
instruct, and to comfort them. Oh how should men with thankful hearts bless
God, when they have such set over them!

But on the contrary part, it is a feareefull judgment of God to live under
such as be blind, ignorant, unconscionable, profane, wicked, and
irreligious: for how can they teach and instruct others that are ignorant
themselves? And how can they seek to convey grace to others, Mat. 18. Ier.
3.^4.
that have not tasted of the work of grace themselves: If the blind lead the
blind they both fall into the ditch together. And by the Prophet Jeremy, the
Lord there threatens this as a grievous plague, to give them naughty Ministers.

It seems the Prophet had no reason to accuse the poor people, and to
complain of them: alas,

Answer. Neither the evil life, saw villainy in the house of Israel: There is
the whoredom of Ephraim, Israel is defiled.

Hence then we learn, that neither the wickedness of the Priests and
Governors, nor yet the good intent and meaning of the people can please God,
or any way excuse themselves, if men live in sin, in impiety; and
profaneness. They are far wide, that think their ignorance will excuse them.

a tanto, but never a toto: Ignorance may lessen faults; but not change their
natures; Ignorance will excuse none if they live in sin.
sin shall still be sin, though a man do the same never so ignorantly: for
as men are commanded to take notice of the Princes Laws, and being found to
trespass against them, their ignorance shall not excuse them: so the Lord has
straightly commanded us to take notice of his Laws, that so we may perform
our obedience unto him. The Commandment of God to this end is very staight:
These words which I command thee this day, Deu. 6.6.7.8.
shall be in thy heart: and thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy
Children, and shall talk of them when thou tarriest in thy house, and as thou
walk by the way: when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, and thou
shall bind them for a sign upon thy hand, etc.

Behold here what a straight charge the Lord has given unto the people of
Israel, and so unto us; all to this end, that no man should be a Stranger unto
the Word: And it is the commandment of our Savior, Io. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, for they are they that testify of me.

Act. 17.
It was the great commendations of the men of Bereah, that they searched the
Scriptures, to see whether those things were so as Paul delivered; they would
not presently entertain that Doctrine of theirs upon the first view, but
brought the same to the Touchstone of Gods Word: neither would they reject it,
though they had not before heard of the like.

2. Cor. 4.3.
What means that place of the Apostle? Try the Spirits whether they be of
God. And again, If the Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that perish, in
whom the God of this world has blinded their minds.

So that it is most clear, that Ignorance of the Word and glorious Gospel of
Christ in such as ought to know it, is a most fearful sin, and a most
certain fore runner of destruction: for if this be life eternal, Ioh. 17.3.
To know thee to be the true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent; Then
on the other part it must needs be the beginning of eternal death in those,
especially in these days that are ignorant of the true God, and Jesus Christ
whom he has sent.

So that we see clearly, that it is not our good intents and meanings that
will go for payment at Gods hands, in that the Lord does require, that all
men should take notice of his Will, revealed in his Word.

This condemns the horrible practice of the I see villainy amongst them,
Idolatry, worshipping stocks and stones, praying to Saints, etc.

This is villainy in Gods account: and then what will their good meaning stand
them in stead? Had not Vzza a good intent to stay the Arc from falling; but
the Lord does not so take it at his hands, for it cost him his life; And
therefore says Samuel unto Saul, To obey, 1. Sam. 15.
is better then Sacrifices; and to hearken, is better then the fatee of Rams.

Oh then remember that thy ignorance will not excuse thee, nor thy good
meanings will not go for payment at Gods hand; to say, though I do this and
this, I mean well as the best of them all: but if the Lord like not of it, nor
approve of it, be thy intent what it will be, all is in vain, the same is an
abomination to the Lord.

This is the condemnation that Light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather then light, Ioh 3.19.
because their deeds were evil.

It must needs be a strange darkness that cannot be driven away by the
bright heames of the glorious Gospel of Christ; And surely God does even now
sit in judgment upon such persons; and by this (their ignorance) especially
in these days, makes known their reprobation and final perdition.

The excuses of men are but vain. I am not book learned, and I hope God will
bear with me; Thus I am taught and instructed by my Teachers: I. but what if
thy Teacher be a blind Guide? wilt not thou try the Spirits whether they be
of God? Surely, such persons conclude their own judgment, and give sentence
against themselves, that they want grace, and are in a most fearful
condition: for now to be ignorant in the clear light of the Gospel, it argues
that Gods wrath and vengeance has taken hold on such persons, as the Apostle
says: 2. Cor. 4.3.
If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that are lost, in whom the God of
this world has blinded their minds, that is of the Infidels, that the light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ which is the Image of God, should not shine unto
them. Oh then seeing it is so fearful a judgment of God, to be ignorant of
his Word and Will, and that it will not excuse when God shall enter into
judgment with us; Let us (I say) seek for knowledge, as for treasures: Let us
search the Scriptures, that in them we may find eternal Life: Let us labor
to have the Word of God dwell plentifully in us, which is able to make us wise
unto salvation: Let us use all holy means both to begette, as also to increase
this Knowledge in us, that so we may not be led aside by blind guides to
commit Idolatry with this people here; but that God may be still our God, and
we his People.

I have seen the villainy of the house of Israel, and the Whoredom of Ephraim.
Idolatry the sin of this people.
THe sin that Almighty God does here accuse them of, it is Idolatry, and that
in most vile manner, ouerspred generally the whole body of this people, even
all the Ten tribes, which sin to show the vileness of it, the Lord calls
Villainy and whoredom, things abominable to the Lord, and such as he loathes.
And he calls it Whoredom, because as an Harlot or an Whore does forsake her
own husband, and commits filthiness with another man: even so Idolaters
forsake God, and marry themselves to Idols. It is called the Whoredom af
Ephraim, because Jeroboam which came of the Tribe of Ephraim had set it up
amongst them, 1. Reg. 12.28.
to worship the Calves in Dan and Bethel.

It is a heavy judgment of God upon a people, when the chief governors be
Idolaters. 2. Sam. 6.1.
when the chief Governors be men void of religion, and given to superstition
and Idolatry. We see this in this present Text, for here the Lord complains of
Ephraim and the ten Tribes, because they were poluted with miserable Idolatry
which was set up by Jeroboam: for as the King is, so will the Subjects be: They
are not only to inform their inferiors, and give direction unto them by
Word, but by their example and practice to go before them. Now then if they be
Idolaters, profane and superstitious, you shall then see the whole Body of the
people to follow them. Again, if they be religious and devout in the service
of God, the whole people that are under them, in show at the least, will be
the same. And as the ointment that was powered on Aarons head, ran down to his
beard, and so to the very border of his garments: Even so the impiety and
wickedness of the Superior runs about through the whole Family; and all that
are under them infecting and corrupting them.

This is clear by diverse examples in the book of God. Luke 23.11.
When Herod begun to offer indignity to Christ, all his train were ready to
do the same. And when wicked Ahab desired to be vpholden in his purpose to
go up against Ramoth Gilead, 2. Reg. 22.8.
all his servants were ready, and at hand to feed him in his humor; for when
the King sent them to call Michaiah, they were ready to tell the Prophet what
he should say to the King, All the other Prophets (say they) declare good to
the King with one accord, let thy words be like theirs: and when the good
Prophet would not flatter, but told the King plainly the truth from the Lord;
Zidkijah the Kings Chaplain smote him on the cheek: So true is that saying of
Solomon: Of a Prince that hearkneth to lies, all his servants are wicked. Pro.
29.12.
Their example is a Law, and by their lewd example they strengthen other men's
hands in sin: so that it is in a common wealth (as one says) as it is in a
Fish; that if the head be once corrupted and putrified, the whole body
certainly is no less. And if a man would know, vhether the body of the Fish be
corrupted or no, he must smell the head: Even so, if the heads of Church and
common wealth be corrupted, the whole body of both must needs be infected.

And therefore what great cause have we to bless God, who has set over us a
Religious King, be a further instrument, utterly to root out all the Relics
of Popery, and deface all the monuments of Idolatry; that Idolaters and those
that have given their names to the Pope, that Antichrist of Rome, may utterly
be rooted out of this Land; that our Kingdom may be disburdened of them,
that we may never see the fornication and Idolatry of the Whore of Rome set up
again, that this Church of England may never be polluted with it any more.

Secondly, this should serve as an instruction to all Princes, Magistrates and
Mighty men, that they endeavor by all means possible, by their godly life, and
good example, to draw on others that are under them to the knowledge and fear
of God: for certain it is, if great men be backward in good things, whole
multitudes are ready to presume by their example. We see in our small
Parishes and little Villages, if there be but one or two that are of the
chiefest in the Parrish, that are negligent and careless in the service of
God, Children of Belial, Idolaters, Drunkards, or the like, what a poison are
they to pester a whole Congregation?

It is too apparent, The Lord lay not this sin to their charge one day, that
should have given better example: for as there is a happy and blessed union in
Religion, and Christian obedience, when Magistrate and Minister go hand in
hand to build up an holy Temple unto God, Note.
and are both of one mind, and of one mouth to seek to set forth the glory of
God: so I have found by my own experience, that though the Minister be never
so laborious in preaching the Word, yet when other Governors, and such as are
the chief of a Parish, have no sap or seasoning of the fear of God in them,
the hands of the wicked wax strong in such a place. Oh that our Magistrates
and great men would lay this to heart, that as their place is eminent in the
commonwealth, that they would give such good example by their godly and
religious walking, their sanctifying of the Lords Sabbath, their countenancing
of godly and painful Ministers, that so they might provoke and stir up
others to godliness.

VERSE. 11. Yea Judah has set a plant for thee, whiles I would return the
Captivity of my people.
IN this last verse the Lord comes to show the vile dealing of Judah; that when
the Lord purposed to bring again the captivity of Israel, then Judah labored
to convey their Idolatry amongst them, and took, as it were, plants of their
Idolatry, and set them up amongst the Tribes of Judah. For at this time, though
Israel was polluted miserably with Idolatry, yet the Lord had preserved Judah
from that abomination: but as soon as the Lord had delivered Israel out of
Captivity, then Judah was infected and polluted with their Superstitions.

Hence we may learn, how apt we be by nature Judah was pure, Men by nature
are apt to suck in Popery and superstition.
but so soon as the Lord brought Israel home again, they began to take
grafts of their idolatry, and to join with them.

So now, though we are by Gods mercy freede from the filthiness of Popery and
superstition; yet if the Lord should return it, and suffer it to be brought
in again amongst us, we are by nature exceeding apt to receive it, to take
plants of it, and to love and like it.

This is clearly to be seen in diverse places of the Scriptures, Judge. 4.7.32.
and 4.1.2.
especially by the example of the Israelites, in the Book of Judges: They
committed evil again and again by Idolatry, they knew what that sin was;
yea, they had experience of the severity of Gods Justice against it, and more
still they confessed it, and cried for mercy: yet the same people, and the
children of the same people, not remembering their former falls, nor admonished
by Gods former judgments, fell a fresh into the same sin, and provoked
again Gods wrath against them. Again, Moses labored much with this people,
Exodus 32.3.
to peswade them to make a Covenant with their God, and to cleave to him in
faithful and constant obedience: Yet when they had been but a while out of
the way, they would needs have a golden Calfe in stead of Moses to go before
them: and therefore they came in all haste to Aaron, urging him to make them
one: Which in carnal policy he sought to stay, calling for their golden
Eare-rings, thinking indeed they would in no hand have parted with them; But
when it was to the erecting of Idolatry, he could no sooner ask for them but
he had them.

This is clearly to be seen by that of our Prophet Hosea; where he shows
how bountiful the people were in bestowing their Corn and Wine, Hos. 2.8.
and Oil, together with their gold and silver upon Baal. They thought nothing
good enough, that was given that way.

Now this is no strange thing, Genesis 6.5.
considering that All the imaginations of the thoughts of our hearts, are
only evil, and that Continually: are about to commit sin, especially to
set up Idolatry: We have the whole stream and current of our hearts and
nature with us: and indeed we are never exercised in things natural unto us,
till we have our hand in some plotte against GOD himself.

Villainy and Whoredom no better; and therefore howsoever the Papists stand upon
their good meaning, and their honest dealing; yet they worship the Devil and
not God, as Moses tells the Israelites, that they offered not to God as they
intended, but unto Devils, even the Idols of Canaan. Even so the Papists though
they brag of their good intents and meanings, the truth is, they offer not to
God, but to the Devil; neither do they worship God, but the Devil: and
therefore we must take heed, that we never take liking to Popery, though the
same seem never so pleasing to flesh and blood. For all men are naturally most
inclinable unto that which is evil: And therefore most men being so prone unto
Popery, what can be concluded but this, but that it is an euiil, and a
damnable Religion?

Oh then let us labor to be rooted and grounded in the truth of God, to be
builded upon the rock Jesus Christ; that we may never put out the hand to
entertain, or to receive any dregs of Popery and Idolatry: but even remember
what Christ says: Reu. 18.4.
Come out of her my people, least ye partake of her plagues. Oh, let us ever
stand out against their abominable Idolatry, as no better then villainy, and
whoredom in Gods sight.

Secondly, seeing we are so apt by Nature, Adams fall, our Nature being
corrupted, we hate GOD, and hate his Truth.

Now touching the Religion of the Papists, there is nothing in it, but that
which Nature it self does desire: Let us instant the same by one thing for
all. What seems more against Nature practiced by them, then their Whippings,
and Scourgings, and that of themselves; This we may think to be against
Nature: But yet if we examine the end of this punishment, as the same is
inflicted upon them, it will appear otherwise, that Nature it self may in
some sort desire the same: for that man that shall be taught and assured, Note.
that when he has committed some great and grievous sin as Adultery, Theft,
Drunkenness, or the like, that after such a punishment inflicted once upon
him, his sin shall be done away, and never after laid to his charge: Who
would not undergo such a punishment? better in reason undergo that for a
time, then the guilt of an accusing conscience: For as Solomon says, A man may
bear his sickness and infirmity, but a wounded conscience who can bear?

And therefore seeing that by Nature we love Popery and Idolatry, and that
there is in the same nothing contrary to Nature, this proves that it is not the
Religion of God, but the device of wicked men: for what can delight our corrupt
nature more then to see a Crucifixe, the picture of Christ on the Cross: To
pray to Saints, Angels, the Virgin Mary, etc. all this is very agreeable to
the corrupt Nature of man, and therefore cannot be good.

Last of all, we may here behold the nature of Sin is very fruitful.
easily scattered and spread abroad, as we see a naughty and a stinking Weed,
it is easily spread, and will run abroad, so will Idolatry: and of all other
sin, that is like unto the Lappewing, it will run as soon as it is hatched;
and as a man that lives in the house with them that have the plague, is in
exceeding danger to be infected: so is it with them that live in Idolatrous
places, all to nothing they will be infected.

The Istaelites when they came into Canaan, the Lord suffering a small remnant
of the Cananites to remain still in the land, for the trial of the Israelites
it is said, Psa. 81.
They were mingled amongst them, and learned their works.

It is the nature of sin to be ever encroaching; give it an ynch, and it
will take an elle: It is like the Gangren or Canker, it fretteth, and eats
further and further as here, Idolatry was only to be found in Israel, and not
in Judah; but it quickly set footing there, and spread it self in a short time
over all Judah. Wheresoever it finds entertainment, it enlarges and
spreads it self: Psalm. 26.4.
Bid sin home to thy house once, and like a bold and shameless Guest,
Psalm. 15.4.^
it will come the second time vninuited.

How careful then ought every man to be, to shun and avoid the company of
Idolaters, and al other wicked men? Pro. 9.6.
It is the grave counsel of Solomon, Forsake the wicked, and you shall live.
Yea, the Apostle laboring to confirm his new Conuerts, amongst many other his
Exhortations, he urges this: Save your selves from this froward Generation.
Act. 1.40.


So then we see how dangerous it is for men and women to be present in places
of Idolatry;

But Oh say some, this is too much niceness, Judah conuersed with Israel, they
were quickly poisoned with their Idolatry.

Then let us take heed how we converse with the wicked, and like of their
Company: for we shall soon be infected with their sins, but rather shun
and avoid their Company, as noisome and hurtful. The Father of all mercy, and
God of all Consolation, strengthen us with his grace, and keep us in his holy
fear, unto the End. Amen.

Gratias tibi Domine Jesus.

FINIS.

