A PATTERN OF TRVE PRAYER.

A LEARNED AND COMFORtable Exposition or Commentary upon the Lords Prayer:
wherein the Doctrine of the substance and circumstances of true invocation is
evidently and fully declared out of the holy Scriptures.

By JOHN SMITH, Minister and Preacher of the Word of God.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Thomas Man, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paternoster row at the sign of the Talbot. 1605.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDMUND LORD SHEFFIELD, LORD LIEUTENANT, AND President
of his Majesty's Council established in the North: Knight of the most noble
Order of the Garter, etc.
IT is neither ambition nor covetousness (Right Honorable) that moves me to
publish this Treatise to the view of all, which not long since I delivered to
the ears of a few, being then Lecturer in the City of Lincoln: but partly
the motion of some friends, partly and chiefly the satisfying of some sinister
spirits have in a manner wrested from me that, whereto otherwise I had little
affection. Credit through writing books, is a thing of such dangerous hazard,
by reason of the variety of censurers, that it is doubtful whether a man
shall win or lose thereby: Gain also is so slender, as that, for a book of
a years pains and study, it will be a very hard matter to attain, if it
were set to sale in Paul's Churchyard, so much money as inck, paper, and light
cost him that penned it: so as except a man should doat, he must have better
grounds of publishing his writings, than either credit or gain: especially
considering the plentiful harvest of books of all sorts, amongst which there
appears variable contention. In some it is questionable, whether wit or
learning gets the victory: in others the strife is betwixt wit and the
truth: some bewray dissentions betwixt conscience and policy: others contend
after other fashions: All declare thus much, that except a man can add
something new of his own, it is vanity to write books: for otherwise a man
shall sooner get mocks than thanks for his pains. Wherefore I do professedlie
renounce all ambitious affection of credit, and covetous desire of gain: and
betake my self to a better refuge, which is the clearing of my self from
unjust imputations and accusations. I have been strangely traduced for the
doctrine I taught out of the Lords Prayer: I have been urged to answer in
defense of the doctrine I delivered touching that subject, before the
Magistrate ecclesiastical: as if so be I called in question the truth thereof.
For the clearing of the truth I am bold to publish this present Treatise:
wherein (I protest before the God of heaven, and before your Lordship) I have
truly set down the substance of all that which I delivered in handling the
Lords Prayer. I must needs confess that it is not word for word the same (for
that were impossible to me) yet to my knowledge it differs not in any
material circumstance: nay I do verily think that if I miss the truth, it
is rather in the writing than in the preaching. Howsoever it be, I most humbly
beseech your Honor to vouchsafe the patronage of this traduced Pamphlet: I
must acknowledge it is presumption in me to impose upon your Honor the
scandal of countenancing so suspicious a writing (for who knows whether it
shall gain the approbation of the godly learned, when it comes to their
censure?) but for that your Lordship had the managing of the cause of
difference betwixt my accusers and me concerning this occasion, and for that
your Honor so wisely and charitably compounded the controversy on both parts
to the contentment of either of us; your Lordship might justly challenge a
greater title herein, than any other whatsoever: wherefore although it prove a
troublesome burden, I beseech your Honor not to refuse it: the rather for
that the honorable interest which your Lordship has in the affections and
judgments of men honestly disposed, will so far prevail, as to clear your
Honor from the least spot of dishonor, which perhaps might accrue through the
patronage of so dangerous a tractate: yet thus much I may be bold to assure
your Lordship, that this Treatise passes with approbation to the press; and
does not shroud it self in tenebris, as if it either shamed or feared the
light: which may be some reason to induce your Honor the rather to receive it
into your Honorable protection: for my self I freely confess, there is in
me no ability to declare my thankfulness to your Lordship, otherwise than by
betaking my self by some such pamphlet to your Honors safe conduct: which if
it shall please your Honor to afford, I shall at all times acknowledge my
thankfulness; and instantly pray for your Lordships continuance and increase in all true honor and happiness.

Your Honors humbly at commandment, JOHN SMITH.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Beloved, marvel not that after so many expositions upon the Lords Prayer,
this Pamphlet steppeth up, as if so be it had some thing to say besides that
which has been already spoken: to confess the truth, I guess it may occasion
the judicious reader to enter into a more inward view of Christ's purpose in
propounding that prayer: perhaps also the manner of handling the several
petitions may give some light: but my intent was none of these, when I intended
to publish the treatise: only the clearing of my self from unjust
accusations, and the satisfying of a few friends moved me thereto: but
whatsoever it be, and howsoever uttered, I pray thee of charity to construe (a
thing indifferently done) to the better part: especially those few questions
resolved in the latter end of the treatise. I do here ingenuously confess
that I am far from the opinion of them which separate from our Church,
concerning the set form of prayer (although from some of them, I received part
of my education in Cambridge) for I do verily assure my self upon such
grounds as I have delivered in the treatise, that a set form of prayer is not
unlawful: yet as Moses wished that all the people of God could prophecy, so
do I wish that all the people of God could conceive prayer: the rather for
that personal wants, blessings, and judgments are not comprised particularly
according to their several circumstances in any form of prayer possibly to be
devised: wherefore I desire that no man mistake me in this treatise: I do
judge that there is no one doctrine or opinion contrary to the doctrine of
this Church in all this tractate: in respect whereof I hope it shall find more
indifferent censure at thy hands. And for that misconceit which some perhaps
have entertained at the hearing of the doctrine when I taught in Lincoln, I
do also as freely and truly protest, that I never durst admit (I bless God
for his mercy) so blasphemous a thought into my mind, as to surmise whether
the prayer, commonly called the Lords prayer, be the prayer which Christ taught
his Disciples, or no: for I do with my soul confess it to be the same prayer
in substance which Christ delivered to his Disciples: therefore I pray thee
gentle reader, whosoever thou art, to accept this treatise, and to blame
necessity rather than me for publishing it: for the phrase and style it is
homely, I confess, and plain; for I do not intend the benefit of the style
to the learned, but to the unlearned for the better understanding of the
matter: the truth and homelines may well sort together, and the truth is not to
be rejected for her plainnes, rather I wish that men in heavenly matters could
frame themselves to the capacity of the meanest, which is the surest way:
seeing that learned men can understand things plainly delivered, but the
unlearned cannot conceive the easiest doctrines, except they be delivered also
after an easy manner, with homely, familiar and easy speeches. Now if any man
attribute this plainnes of mine used in this treatise to ignorance and want of
skill, I will not endeavor to weed that prejudice out of his mind, seeing
that I profess it to be a part of my study to speak plainly: and I see no
reason that seeing speech is the interpreter of the mind, the interpreter
should need of another interpreter or commentary. So craving again thy
charitable censure, I bid thee heartily farewell in the Lord. Pray for us
brethren.

Thine in Christ Jesus, JOHN SMITH.

A PATTERN OF TRVE PRAYER: OR AN EXPOSITION UPON THE LORDS PRAYER.
Mat. 6.9.10.11.12.13. Luke 9.2. After this manner therefore pray ye, etc.


THese words contain two points: the first is a precept, whereby Christ
inioyneth his disciples a duty: and the second is a prayer or platform of
prayer.

The duty which Christ enioyneth his disciples, is in these words: After this
manner pray ye. Wherein we may consider two things.

1 That we must pray, or the necessity of prayer. 2 How we must pray.
First that we must pray, or of the necessity of prayer. The necessity of
prayer may appear unto us, Necessity of prayer.
partly out of these words; for that our Savior Christ therein gives his
disciples a commandment to pray: all Gods commandments bind the
conscience, so long as they are in force: and his moral precepts being
perpetual, therefore bind the conscience to absolute obedience perpetually.
Now this is a part of the moral law that we must pray: therefore we must pray
of necessity: if God should command a man, Genesis 11 and 12
as he did Abraham, either to forsake his own country and fathers house to
go to a strange nation and people, not knowing what might become of him: or to
kill his only son, ^en. 22.^.
he ought of conscience to this commandment of God, presently without
reasoning and disputing with flesh and blood, yield obedience simply: how much
more then ought we simply to obey the commandment of prayer; for neglect
whereof no reasonable excuse can be alleged, as might be for the other of
Abraham? Again, God that commands, is the great lawgiuer that is able to
save and destroy: to save thee, if thou obeyest his command, Iam. 4.12. Romans
10.13.
in calling upon his name: to destroy thee, if thou disobeyest his will, in
neglecting thy duty. If thou will be saved therefore, thou must pray: if thou will not pray, thou shall be destroyed: and this is a very great necessity of
prayer: salvation or destruction. Furthermore, we are to know that Gods will is
the rule of man's will, and the will of the creature must be squared as it were
and framed to the will of the Creator, which is the perfection of the creatures
will: now Gods law is his revealed will, and prayer is a part of his law
commanded in the second commandment. Wherefore that our wills and actions may
be perfect, we must of necessity frame them to the will of God, and therefore
must pray.

Secondly, the necessity of prayer may also appear unto us by other
considerations, as namely of the use of prayer: for prayer is that only means
in thee whereby thou procurest or obtainest from God saving blessings: for Gods
promises are conditional: Ask and it shall be given you: seek and ye shall
find, knock and it shall be opened unto you: If you ask not, Matthew. 7.7.
you shall not receive: you shall receive, but you must first ask, seek,
knock, pray. Now if it be alleged that many men have abundance of Gods
blessings, which never ask them of God, seeing that they cannot pray being
wicked: it may be answered, that they be not saving blessings, and so indeed
they are not true blessings, if we will speak properly: for there is a secret
poison insensibly in heart in all the blessings of God, and in all the
creatures, which we use in the world, by reason of the curse wherewith God
cursed the earth for man's sake: Gen 3.
which poison God never remoueth away till we beg it by prayer of him. Hence it
comes, that seeing wicked men do not, nor cannot pray, therefore though they
have many blessings in show, yet in truth they are not so, but rather curses,
even the very poison and bane of their souls, means to hasten their
damnation, and to drench the deeper in the pit of hell another day: whereas
contrariwise the godly asking blessings of God, he in mercy remoueth this
curse from the righteous man's goods, and makes his blessings saving blessings
unto him. Wherefore if thou will be blessed of God, thou must of necessity
pray: otherwise thy blessings shall be accursed of God.

The third consideration of the necessity of prayer, 1. Pet. 2.22. Ioh. 17.
is the example of Adam, Christ and all the Saints of God that ever have lived;
whose example implies a necessity of imitation.

The first Adam in the state of innocence being free from sin,
notwithstanding had need to pray, and no doubt did pray, for perseverance, and
continuance in grace: for it must needs be granted that during his innocence
he kept the law; and one part of the law is prayer, as was said before:
wherefore if Adam, as yet free from sin, and all the punishments of sin,
did pray, much more we have need to pray, upon whom both sin and Gods curse
have taken such fast hold.

The second Adam, Christ Jesus, who knew no sin, neither was there guile
found in his mouth, did pray and needed to pray, being made under the law for
us: and therefore he sometime continued a whole night in prayer, and prayed
often a little before his apprehension. If Christ did pray, and had need so to
do, lies there not a great and inevitable necessity upon us to pray? Finally
all the Saints of God that ever lived did pray and needed to pray, as David,
Daniel, Paul and the rest, and yet the best of us cannot compare with any of
these: wherefore there is a great necessity lying upon us, whereby we must be
stirred up to perform this duty of prayer unto God, especially considering
that it is a principal part of Gods worship, and the property of a true child
of God: whereas it is the property of a wicked man not to pray. Therefore it is
not a thing indifferent or arbitrarie, left in our choice to pray or not to
pray, but it is a matter of mere necessity, absolutely enjoined every
Christian upon pain of damnation: and yet it is a wonder to see how this duty
is neglected by many, who pass over days and years profanely and
Atheistlike, never calling upon God in prayer, as if either there were no God,
or no necessity of worshipping this God by prayer.

Thus much of the necessity of prayer, or that we must pray. Seeing then this
duty of prayer must be performed, for the practicing thereof these two
circumstances must be considered; The time, and the place of prayer: for every
action must be done in time and place.

First of the time.

The time is threefold.

1 When we must pray. Time of prayer.
2 How often we must pray. 3 How long we must pray.
First circumstance of the time is: When.

When we must pray.
The Apostle says, Pray continually, 1. These. 5.17. Which must not be
understood as some heretics have deemed called Euchitae, that a man must do
nothing but pray; but the meaning of it is, that there must never a day
ouerpasse us, but therein certain times we must pray: more plainly and
distinctly thus: 1. Pray at the enterprising and ending of all thy affairs,
pray upon all occasions. 2. Pray unto thy lives end, never cease praying till
thy soul part from thy body. Now although this be generally true, that a man
must pray upon all occasions, yet it is not needful that a man should upon
every several occasion fall down upon his knees and utter a long prayer to
the spending of time and hindering his affairs; but a man must from his heart
send up prayers to heaven, if it be but a wish or sigh or groan of the spirit,
or such a short prayer as the publicane used, or the thief upon the cross,
upon all our occasions. This we see warranted by the practice of Nehemia: who
before he made his petition to the King for the repayring of Jerusalem, prayed
unto the God of heaven: Nehem. 2.4.
no doubt this was inwardly with a sigh of the spirit unto the Lord who knows
the heart, as may be seen in the text. Furthermore, and specially we are to
understand that the principal occasions and times of prayer are these
following.

1. The time of religious exercises. 2. The time of affliction. 3. The time of
eating and drinking and using physic. 4. The time of sleeping and waking. 5.
The time of working and labor. 6. The time of recreation and sporting.
The truth of all these appears by that which the Apostle writes, 1. Tim.
4.4, 5.
that every creature or appointment of God is sanctified by the word of God,
and prayer, and thanksgiving. Gods word warranteth us the lawful use thereof:
prayer obtains the blessing from God, in the use of it: thanksgiving
returns the praise to God, who gave the blessing.

The second circumstance of time is, How often we must pray.
how often we must pray. Daniel prayed three times a day, Dan. 6.10. David prayed
seven times a day. Psalm. 119.164. even so often as we alter our affairs and
enterprise new business: as hearing or reading the word: working and laboring in
thy special calling, eating and drinking, sleeping, etc. also upon all
extraordinary occasions: as judgments, and blessings: all which are things of
several condition, and the condition of our affairs being changed, our
prayers are to be repeated and renewed.

The false Church of Antichrist has devised certain hours which they call
Canonical; which are in number eight, as Father Robert rehearses them: which
must be observed every day, and cannot be omitted without deadly sin, as he
teaches: but we are to know that Christians must stand fast in that liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free: Galath 5.
and seeing that we are redeemed with a price, we must not be the servants of
men, 1. Cor. 7.
much less of times: only thus much; the Lords day of conscience, being Gods
commandment, must be kept as often as it comes: and seeing the Church for
order and conueniencie has appointed certain hours, when all the Church
publicly may come together to worship God; therefore we cannot break that
holy custom and constitution without confusion, and scandal, and breach of
charity: for private prayer, or private necessities, occasions, and
opportunities may afford a godly heart sufficient instruction, always
remembering that there is no time unfit to worship God in.

How long we must pray.
The third circumstance of time to be considered, is, how long we must pray. Our
Savior Christ gives us this instruction generally by way of parable, that we
ought not to wax faint in prayer: the Apostle wills us to pray with all
perseverance and to watch thereunto: Luke 18.1. Ephesians. 6.18.
as Christ said to his disciples, Watch and pray. This then is the ftrst rule
for the length of our prayers: that we be not weary. The second rule is, that
we are to pray so long as the spirit of God feeds us with matter of prayer:
for otherwise we should stint the spirit of prayer. Christ prayed till
midnight; our infirmity will not bear that: wherefore it is better to cease
praying when the spirit cease to minister matter, than to continue still and
babble: yet notwithstanding here we must know; First, it is our duty to strive
against our corruption: Secondly, it is our duty to strengthen our soul
before prayer with premeditate matter; that so coming to pray, and having our
hearts filled with matter, we may better continue in prayer: for as a man that
has filled his belly with meat, is better able to hold out at his labor
than being fasting; even so he that first replenisheth his soul with
meditations of his own sins and wants, of Gods judgments and blessings upon
himself and others, shall be better furnished to continue longer in hearty and
fervent prayer, than coming suddenly to pray without strengthening himself
aforehand thereunto. To conclude this point, all prayers are either long or
short: a long fervent prayer is best; a short fervent prayer is better than
long babbling; a short prayer, containing all thy grace and matter in thy soul,
is acceptable to God.

The second circumstance to be considered, needful for practice of prayer, is
the place where we must pray. The place wh^re we must pray.
As was said before, there is no time unfit to pray: so there is no place unfit
for prayer. The world, and every place in the world is fit for a Christian to
call upon the name of the Lord. Ioh. 4.20.
Paul wishes men in all places to lift up pure hands, 1. Tim. 2.8.
that is, to pray: Christ prayed upon the mountain, in the garden, in the
wilderness; Peter upon the house top; Paul on the sea shore; Jonas in the Whales
belly in the bottom of the sea: but the superstitious papists will have some
place more holy than others: hence come there pilgrimages, to such a holy
place, hoping thereby sooner to obtain their petitions: therefore also they
think the churchyard holy ground, the Church holyer than the Churchyard, the
Chancell then the Church, and the high altar more holy than the rest of the
chancell. True it is indeed, that when the Church of God is assembled in the
Church, the place is: more holy but not for any inherent holiness in the ground,
but because of Gods presence among his people, and because of holy actions
there performed: in regard whereof it is sacrilege to offer violence to such
places, or any way to profane them; yet God will as soon hear thy prayer at
home in thy closet, as in the Church; though the public prayers are more
effectual than private. Finally, to shut up this point: in regard of place,
prayers are public or private.

The place of public prayer is the assembly of the Saints wheresoever it be,
which sometime in persecution was in private houses, or in caves of the earth,
or the wilderness, or mountains. Act 1.13. Heb. 11 38.


The place of private prayer is the house, or the closet, or some such fit
place in secret: not the market place, nor the corners of the street: though I
doubt not but a man may sigh and groan to the Lord walking in the street and
making his markets; Mat. 6.5.6.
but the outward signs of prayer private must then be concealed from the sight
of men, least we appear to men as hypocrites. Hitherto of the necessity of
prayer, with the time and place of performing that duty.

The second general thing to be considered in the duty which Christ enioyneth
his disciples, is, the manner how we must pray, How we must pray.
which is expressed in these words: After this manner pray ye. The meaning of
which words must needs be one of these things following, that is to say; Pray
either 1. These words only: or 2. This matter only: or 3. In this method
only: or 4. These words and matter: or 5. These words and method: or 6. This
matter in this method: or 7. These words, and this matter, in this method.


Now which of these things our Savior Christ does enjoin, shall appear by
the several consideration of every one of these seven things.

First, Christ does not command us to pray these words only: for then we
should offend if we used any other words; and words without matter is babbling:
and Christ spoke in the Hebrew tongue, the Evangelists wrote in the Greek
tongue: but Christ will not have us speak Greek and Hebrew only when we pray:
therefore it is evident, that Christ commands not to say, and so tyeth us not
precisely to these words only.

Secondly, he does not enjoin us to pray only in this order or method: for
then whosoever uses any other order should sin* and Christ commands us
Matthew. 6. First to seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, Matthew.
6.^3.
before our daily bread: but in this prayer Christ does set the prayer for
daily bread before remission of sins and imputation of Gods righteousness:
wherefore also this is plain that Christ does not command us to use only
this method.

Thirdly, he does not command us to pray this matter in these words only: for
then Paul and Daniel and David should sin that pray this matter in other
word^, ^. Cor. ^^.1^. D^n. 9. Psalm. 119.
and all the Churches that ever have bin which have used other words in prayer,
though they have always kept themselves to this matter: but it were impiety
and blasphemy to say so: therefore Christ here does not bind us to this
matter in these words only.

Fourthly, he does not command these words and method, as has been proved in
the second and third parts.

Fifthly, he commands not this matter in this method, as is proved in the
second and third parts.

Sixthly, he commands not these words matter and method, as may appear by all
the former parts: wherefore in the last place it follows necessarily, this
being a sufficient enumeration of parts, that he commands us to pray only
this matter: as if when Christ said thus: After this manner pray: he should
have said, pray: 1. the matter herein contained, and 2. with the affections
here expressed. This then is the meaning of these words, and here Christ tieth
us to the matter and affections of this prayer. To proceed: Although Christ
commands not these words and matter and method, yet he does not forbid them;
for in the whole Scripture there is no such prohibition: wherefore Christ
leaves it arbitrarie unto us, as a thing indifferent when we pray to say this
prayer, or not to say it, so be that we say it in faith and feeling; or if we
say it not, Whether a s^t form of prayer be lawful.
yet to pray according unto it: and this I suppose no indifferent man will
deny: yet there are some (whom we will account brethren, though they do not so
reckon of us, seeing they have separated from us) which think it unlawful to
use the Lords Prayer as a set prayer, or any other prescribed form of prayer:
but that they are in a manifest error it may appear by these considerations
ensuing.

For if it be lawful to use the salutation of Paul, the Psalms of David, and
the blessing of Moses: then we may lawfully use the Lords Prayer, or any other
prayer in holy Scripture agreeable thereto for a prayer. For Paul himself
used always one manner of salutation; our Savior Christ, as is very probable,
used one of David's Psalms with his Disciples, after the first institution and
celebration of his Supper; Psalm. 92.
and the 92 Psalm was usually in the church of the Jews sung upon the Sabbath
day: and Moses always used one manner of prayer at the removing of the
Tabernacle, Numb. 6.24.25.26. and 10.35.36.
and another at the pitching thereof: which evidently serves for the overthrow
of that opinion which they of late have devised, contrary to the practice of
the ancient Church, and all the reformed Churches in Christendom, who have an
uniform order of public prayer, one and the same almost in the very form of
words: and plainly confirms us in the present truth we hold, that it is
lawful to use the prayers in Scriptures, or any other prayers made by the
Saints of God to our hands consonant to the Scriptures: and yet
notwithstanding, here are some cautions to be remembered.

1. That we labor to insinuate our selves as much as may be into the grace
and affections expressed in the prayers by the makers thereof: that so we may
pray with the same spirit they did indite and use them, having by diligent
consideration and understanding of them as it were made them our own.

2. This using of other men's prayers is rather allowed to young Christians that
want the gift of conceiving and uttering an orderly prayer: or to those that
want audacitie and boldness to speak before others, than to strong and
exercised Christians, unto whom God has vouchsafed the gift of knowledge and
utterance and boldness.

3. It is safer to conceive a prayer, than to read a prayer: for a man may
read a prayer, and neither understand it, nor consider the matter thereof, nor
affect or desire the petitions therein contained, having his mind pestred with
wandering thoughts: but he that conceiueth a prayer, though perhaps he do not
desire the things he conceiueth, yet at the least he must have attention, and
so be free from many wandering thoughts, he must have also memory, and
knowledge and consideration, needful all for the inuenting of matter; and so
there is less fear of babbling in conceiving a prayer, than reading one.

4. An uniform order of public prayer in the service of God is necessary. 2.
Chro. 29.30
Thus the Priests and Levites in the old Testament praised God with the Psalms
of David and Asaph: which Psalms were framed of those holy men and sent to
the Musitions to be sung upon Instruments. Thus all the reformed Churches use:
thus the Church immediately after the Apostles time used: yea thus in the time
of the Apostles used the Church of Corinth: 1. Cor. 14.26.
as may probably be gathered by that which Paul speaks concerning the
bringing of a Psalm into the public assembly of the Church.

5. Lastly, notwithstanding in private prayer when a Christian being alone
calls upon the name of God, it seems most expedient and profitable that he
power out his soul unto God with such a form of words as he can, for there
and then the edification of other is no end of his prayer, as it is of public
prayer: 1. Cor. 14.26.
and the Lord he regards the heart, and he knows the meaning of the
spirit, though thy speeches be never so ragged and broken, though thy
sentences be never so short and imperfect, though thy words be rude and
barbarous: and yet a man ought to labor to glorify God with the best of his
lips also. But here certain objections must be answered which are alleged
against the using of read prayers. chapter of holy Scripture and no more, or
that preaches a sermon which he has premeditate; so also he cannot be said
to quench the spirit that pray th a portion of holy Scripture, as the Lords
Prayer, or the salutation of Paul, or a Psalm of David, or any other prayer
agreeable to the word which he has premeditate before and committed to
memory: for the spirit is not limited, though kept within the bounds of holy
Scripture, as it ought to be. Again, in a prayer which a man reads, though a
man do not speak every thing that the spirit of God puts into his heart,
yet he quenches not the spirit: for to quench the spirit is to oppose against
the voice of the spirit. Neither is it to limit or stint the spirit, if a man
pray it with his soul, though he speak not the words. For example sake: I
say the Lords Prayer: yea when I speak these words; Give us this day our daily
bread, there comes into my soul by the motion of Gods spirit this petition:
Grant me grace to be content with the mediocritie thou have given me. If I pray
this in my heart, though I do not utter these very words, yet I cannot be
said to stint the spirit: for the substance of that petition is comprehended in
that fourth petition of the Lords Prayer. So likewise reading any prayer
agreeable to holy scripture, and having attention to the matter read, though
many motions come into my mind upon consideration of the words of that prayer
which I utter not in particular speeches, yet I utter them in g^nerall, for
they are all comprehended in the matter of that, otherwise they may justly be
termed wandering thoughts, though good prayers at other times. Lastly, public
wants are always known and may be expressed in the public Liturgy: also
private wants and blessings are for the most part known; as at meat, labor,
rest, recreation, Physic, etc. Secret wants and blessing^ may be acknowledged
in secret prayers: if any extraordinary occasions occur, extraordinary
prayers accordingly may be had. They allege also against set prayers, the
speech of the Apostle: Romans 8.
We know not what to pray: but in a set prayer a man knows what to pray:
therefore set prayers are not prayers warrantable. For answer whereof, the
speech of the Apostle in another place must be remembered: 1. Cor. 2.14.15.
the natural man cannot discern spiritual things; but the spiritual man can
discern them: so may we say, the natural man cannot tell what to pray, but
the spiritual man can tell what to pray. Flesh and blood revealed not the
knowledge of Christ unto Peter, but God the Father: Matthew. 16.
so flesh and blood cannot reveal unto us what we ought to pray, but the
spirit of God helps our infirmities; which spirit was in our Savior Christ
that taught the Lords prayer, and in the rest of Gods servants that wrote
prayers: we are not able of our selves to think any good, but God gives us
ability: 2. Cor. 3.
so of our selves we are not able to pray, but God gives us the spirit of
prayer, which teaches us to pray with sighs and groans which cannot be
uttered: when we have this spirit of God, then we know what to pray, and can
teach others also. This may suffice for the answer of their maine objections
against set prayers. To conclude then: Christ has not commanded us to use
these words and no other, neither has he forbidden us to use these words, or
any other holy form of prayer: but he has left it indifferent and arbitrarie
to use them or not to use them, as was said. Hitherto of the precept of prayer
in the two general points thereof: first, that we must pray: secondly, how we
must pray. Now follows the prayer it self.

In handling whereof we will first propound some general considerations: after
descend to the particular exposition of the words thereof.

In the general consideration of the Lords prayer we may observe three
things. Generall^ of the Lords prayer.


1. The abuse of the prayer. 2. The true and holy use thereof. 3. The qualities
and conditions of it.
And first to entreat of the abuse of this prayer, How the Lords prayer is
abused.
and so of any other godly prayer, for this prayer is all prayers in virtue,
and largenes, seeing that all prayers must be framed of the matter and
affections herein expressed: it is abused especially by four sorts of persons.

1. By the ignorant persons that understand it not. 2. By impenitent persons
that practice it not. 3. By Papists that attend not the matter of it. 4. By
witches, wise women or charmers.
How ignorant persons abuse prayer.
The ignorant person abuses it, for that he thinks the very saying of the
words, though he understand not the matter signified in the words, to be a
good and acceptable service of God: which is very absurd.

For first, he that prays must pray in faith, if he will have his prayer
granted: Iam. 1.6.7.
Iam. 1. for that man that wants faith shall not receive any thing of the
Lord: but where there is no knowledge of the maine articles of faith, there can
be no faith: Romans 10.14.15.
for faith comes by hearing, learning, and knowing of the word of God
expounded in the ministry thereof. Seeing then he wants knowledge, he
wants faith, and wanting faith he shall not obtain that he asks, and
obtaining not he prays not aright: and so abuses this prayer, for that he
uses it not in faith and knowledge as is required.

1. Cor. 14.26.
2. It is expressly set down by the Apostle, that a man must pray with the
spirit and with the understanding, that is, so that another may understand him
when he prays: if so as other may understand, then much more must he
understand himself: if a man therefore pray, not understanding the prayer he
says, he abuses it; but ignorant persons pray without understanding:
wherefore they abuse both this and all the rest of their prayers. Therefore it
were better for them to say five words with knowledge, than to say their Pater
noster, or any other prayer ten times as long, without understanding.

Matthew. 15.8. Esaias. 29.
3. Finally, our Savior Christ out of the Prophet Esaias reprooueth the
hypocritical Jews, for that they did draw near with their lips, but their
hearts were a far off, and requires that they draw near both with heart and
lips, when they come to worship God: but a man cannot draw near with his
heart, except the understanding and the mind go before as the leader of the
heart (wherefore the understanding is compared to the wagoner or coachman that
directs and guides the horse with whip and bridle, that is, restrains the
headstrong and untamed affections, and ordreth then aright by reason rightly
ruled: they therefore that want understanding of their prayers, although they
may say they have a good heart and affections, yet it cannot be that the heart
should be right, except the understanding be right, which is by knowledge:
wherefore all is wrong and amiss, and therefore thou abusest thy prayer,
except thou understand what thou prayest. To end this first point, prayer is
the labor of the mind and heart, not of the lips: and all they that make it a
lip-labor only, as all ignorant persons do, abuse this and all other
prayers. For four things are necessary to pray this prayer, or any other
prayer in speech.

1. Thou must understand it, as already has bin said.

2. Thou must affect and desire the prayers.

3. Thou must utter the words.

4. Heart, tongue and mind must accord in every prayer, and every several
matter: wherefore the tongue must not run before our wits, as we say in our
common proverb: but first our hearts must indite good matter, Psalm. 45. 2.
Cor. 4.13.
and then our tongues must be as the pen of a ready writer: we must first
believe, and then we must speak. Thus then is this prayer abused by ignorant
persons.

Secondly, How impenitent persons abuse prayer.
the impenitent person though he have knowledge, and so be freed from that kind
of abuse of this prayer, yet abuses it as bad, if not worse, in another kind:
for

1. God hears not them that live in sin unrepented of: for their prayers
and sacrifices, Psalm. 66.18. Ioh. 9.3^. Prou. 15.8. Esaias. 1.
and all their service of God is abominable, and is no better than iniquity it
self in Gods sight: for though God has commanded prayer, and sacrifice, and
incense, as was accustomed in the old Testament, yet he required that they
should be offered by persons that were meet and fit for that purpose: and so
though God now require that we should pray, and hear the word, and
communicate in the Sacraments, actions answerable to the former of the old
Testament, yet God will not accept these actions performed by any man: but
first a man must leave his sins, and then pray: repent, and then hear the
word, examine himself and find himself worthy before he eat: otherwise his
praying, hearing and eating are turned into sin. If then the prayer of an
unrepentant person be abominable, if God hears it not, if it be iniquity,
surely the wicked man does abuse it and make it so: for God would accept that
of us which he commands us, if we would perform it as he requires.

2. Again, impenitent persons abuse prayer, because they do not practice that
which they pray: for every prayer must be practiced: otherwise there is
hypocrisy and dissimulation. For if a man pray that Gods name may be hallowed,
if he by swearing vainly or falsely profane the name of God, it is double
dealing, for his heart and tongue accord not in one, nay his tongue
contradicts it self: for he asks with the tongue that he may not dishonor
Gods name, and yet with a vain or false oath his tongue does dishonor Gods
name: this his tongue speaks contradictions: or else he never means to
practice that which he prays, and so his heart and tongue are at variance,
which is hypocrisy: an impenitent person then does abuse prayer, for that he
never prays with his heart, though with his tongue he speak it.

3. Furthermore, the man that lives in his sins, which he repents not of,
does curtoll and (as I may so speak) libbe this prayer, and so abuse it: for
if we pray this prayer aright, we must pray every petition thereof: but an
impenitent person cannot pray every prayer therein contained: for a swearer
cannot pray, hallowed be thy name; a persecutor cannot pray, thy kingdom come;
the impatient person cannot pray, thy will be done; the covetous person cannot
pray for his daily bread; and so forth of the rest: for how can they pray
against those sins, wherein they have resolved with themselves as it were to
live and die? And therefore if the minister or any other Christian shall
reprove them of those several sins which they practice, they will hate him
and persecute him for it; which argues plainly that they never pray against
them, for they cannot abide to hear of them.

4 To end this point, they abuse this prayer for that living in sin,
notwithstanding they take this prayer a part of holy scripture, and so Gods
name in vain; for they have nothing to do to meddle with Gods word, Psalm.
50.16.
seeing they hate to be reformed, and cast Gods word behind them. For whereas
they speak this prayer to God they are never a whit bettered thereby, and so
it is in vain to them: also they use it without fear and reverence, as every
part of holy Scripture should be used, and therefore abuse it: Esa. 66.5.
whereby it appears evidently that wicked and hard hearted and impenitent
persons that purpose to continue still in their sins, do abuse this prayer,
though peradventure they understand it, when they utter it in the worship of
God.

Thirdly, the papist also abuses this prayer and that three ways especially:

1. They say it in Latin, a tongue unknown to the common sort of people.

2. They say it in number upon their beads.

3. They say it as satisfactory and meritorious.

1 First they abuse it because they say it in Latin, How papists abuse prayer.
a tongue which for the most part is not understood of them that say it, and
hardly well pronounced by the multitude: but understanding is necessarily
required in prayer, 1. Cor. 14.26.
as was said before: and whereas the Jesuits avouch that God understands
Latin or any language, and prayer is directed to God, and that instruction of
the hearer is no end of prayer but of preaching: we answer that the Apostle
says flatly that all things must be done to edification: therefore prayer
also, which is some thing, nay a chief and principal part of the public
service of God: hence we read that the title of some of the psalms, which are
prayers, is to give instruction: as Psalm. 74. and 89. That therefore is but a
forgerie of man contrary to the word: for prayer is an excellent means of
edification, it being as a whetstone to sharpen the grace of God in us;
especially if it proceed fervently from the heart and lips of the Minister, it
does rouse the drousie spirits of dull Christians: for there is no difference
betwixt preaching and praying but this; that preaching is directed to men from
God, prayer is directed from man to God, both preaching and prayer is the word
of God, or ought to be so. Wherefore as preaching or reading the word are
excellent means of edification and instruction; so likewise conceauing or
reading prayer is a worthy means appointed of God to edify the people of
God, and prayer is a second hammer, or a second stroke with the hammer, to
beat the nail to the head, that is to say, to fasten the holy doctrine,
exhortation, admonition, reproof, consolation, or what else, deeper in the
conscience or understanding: and this is the edification of prayer. Therefore
herein the Jesuits are greatly mistaken that they think instruction and
edification no end of prayer.

2 Secondly our Savior Christ requires, and it is the very sum of the first
table of the law, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Matthew. 22.37. Luke 10.27. Psalm. 103.1.
that we love God with all our heart, our soul, our mind, our thought, our
strength; and all that is within us must praise his holy name. But as was said
before, prayer is commanded in the first table, and is therefore a part of
love we owe to God: hence then it follows as a necessary conclusion, that we
must testify that we love God with our mind and with all our mind in prayer,
when our mind is busied about the understanding and consideration of that holy
matter which we utter to God; but that cannot possibly be, if we understand
not what we spoke, as they do not that speak their prayers in an unknown
language as Latin: they therefore abuse prayer that pray in Latin, not
understanding it.

3 Lastly, as has been said, it is plain babbling to speak any thing with the
lips in the presence of God, which a man understands not, or desires not in
the heart and mind: 1. Cor. 6.20,
for we must glorify God with the body and with the spirit both, for they are
both Gods by creation and redemption: now to pray to God is a principal part
of the glorifying of God; therefore we must pray with the spirit, as well as
with the tongue, which is a part of the body. For whereas the schoolmen teach
that actual attention is not needful in time of prayer, but it suffices to
come with a holy purpose to pray, it is as vain a forgerie as the former of
the Jesuits that held instruction no end of prayer: for whereas they allege
for confirmation of their opinion, that our heart is not in our own power, and
therefore we are not able to keep it from wandering; surely we must needs
grant it to be so, and yet notwithstanding it is sin for us to suffer our
hearts to wander: and who durst go speak to his prince, his mind either not
understanding his matter, or wandering from it, which in effect are all one?
Wherefore if babbling be abusing of prayer, and they babble which understand not
or attend not their prayers: no doubt they that say the Lords prayer in Latin,
not understanding Latin, abuse it. Thus then the papist abuses this prayer by
saying it in Latin, a tongue unknown to the people.

Secondly the papists abuse this prayer especially, by saying it in number, and
numbering it upon their beads: and hence it is that they say a whole beadrole
of prayers; as for example 30. prayers, Pater nosters, aue mary's, creedes etc.
which will be proved to be a manifest abusing of the Lords prayer. For first,
this is to babble: for it cannot be that every man's devotion should last so
long as the number of the prayers lasts: for some weak Christians feruencie
and zeal will not endure longer than the saying of the prayer twice or thrice
over: at which time he must cease saying it; for if he still continue saying it
without feruencie and devotion and attention, in a word without sense and
feeling, his saying is babbling, only a liplabor, which is abominable in the
sight of God.

Matthew. 6.7. Eccles. 5.1.2.
2 Again, our Savior Christ condemns vain repetitions, and the wise
Preacher requires that our words should be few, because God is in heaven and
we are upon the earth: therefore we must not rashly and hastily huddle over ten
or twenty prayers as a post horse runs his post miles; but if in any
action, surely in this holy and reverent action, the calling upon Gods name,
our proverb is true, Have makes waste: for God is in heaven, that is to say, a
heavenly God, most wise, most holy, most just, most mighty, and every way most
glorious, and therefore must be worshipped after the best manner we can
possibly afford: again, we are upon the earth, that is to say, men, dust and
ashes, subject to sin in the best actions, improuident and unwise persons,
especially in our affairs which are done suddenly and hastily: therefore we
are not either with our heart to conceive, or with our tongue to utter a matter
rashly and speedily before God, but we must be well advised before hand, and in
the action use al solemn decency: but to racket over the Lords prayer so many
times as they do, is nothing else but as it were to toss it like a tennise
ball, and to abuse it shamefully. Now our Savior Christ does not condemn al
repetitions, nor the Preacher simply forbid many words: but such repetitions
and multitude of words as are irreverently, and without affection uttered,
rather to perfect the number and hold out the time, than express the
affection: Dan. 9.19.
for repetitions and many words sometimes proceed from an ardent and vehement
desire of obtaining something, which men desiring to have, God does, for
reasons best known to himself, defer to grant, and sometimes to stir up
our feruencie and try our patience and perseverance. Luke 18.1.


3 Again, such repetitions are needles in regard of God, Act. 15.8.
for he knows our wants and requests at our conceiving of them in our hearts,
seeing he knows the heart: or before we think of them, because he knows
our thoughts a far off: Psalm. 139.2.
much more then when we have once uttered them, which God requires not for
that he needs our speech to tell him what we want, but for that we must
worship him with the whole man, body as well as soul, and tongue as well as
any other part of the body: yea the tongue is the principal part in Gods
worship, therefore called the glory of the Prophet, Psalm. 57.8.
as the chief instrument of glorifying God: and as it is needles in regard of
God to repeat so often, so in public prayer it serves not for edification,
seeing it wearieth the auditory; and in private prayer it wearieth him that
uses it. Once therefore in feeling faith and feruencie is better than ten
times in coldness, dulnes, wearines and superstition.

Thirdly, the papists abuse this prayer and that very strangely, because they
say it in opinion of merit and satisfaction: for so the arch Jesuit teaches
that there are three ends of prayer: namely, first obtaining, secondly merit,
thirdly satisfaction: and that prayer does not only obtain but satisfy for
sin, and meritoriously deserve at Gods hands.

1 Now the truth is that as all our good works are stained with sin, so
especially our prayers, which are the weakest service we can perform to God,
and has most corruption in it: as may appear by the manifold wandering
thoughts that haunt our minds in the time of prayer, withdrawing our hearts
from that due attention and reverence we ought to have: wherefore the wise man
for the terror of wicked men says, that the sacrifice, Prou. 15.8.
even the best service of the wicked, is abomination to the Lord: but
contrariewise the prayer, that is the weakest service, of the godly man is
acceptable, which makes very much for the comfort of every distressed
conscience: now if our prayers be stained with so many corruptions, they cannot
merit any thing except it be the punishment, neither can they satisfy the
justice of God, seeing they are not proportionable thereunto, nay they need a
satisfaction to be made for them: wherefore every true humbled Christian
finding the palpable experience hereof in his heart, cries out with the
prophet, Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord, for no flesh shall be
righteous in thy sight: and prays continually, Lord pardon me my good deeds,
that is, the imperfection of my good works.

2 Besides, all our prayers are to be made in Christ's name, Ioh. 16.23.
that is in the merit, mediation and intercession of Christ Jesus: and
therefore the prayers of the Saints must be performed with the smoke of the
odours which are given to the Angel, Apoc. 8.3.4.
before they ascend up before God: for in Christ Jesus God the Father is well
pleased with us, Matthew. 3.17.
and with all our holy actions: but out of Jesus Christ he is displeased with
us: Ioh. 15.5. H^b. 11.6.
for wanting faith whereby we are ingrafted into the true vine, we cannot
please God. Wherefore if our prayers have need of Christ's merit and
satisfaction, how have they any merit or satisfaction in themselves?

3 Lastly, all the arguments that are used against the merits of good works in
general, serve sufficiently to overthrow the merit of prayers: and so to end
this point, seeing the papists use prayer for other ends than it is appointed,
they abuse it; as when a man uses a sword to murder, which is appointed for
justice, he abuses the sword. Thus we see how this prayer is abused by
papists, saying it in Latin, in number, in opinion of merit and satisfaction.

How charmers abuse prayer.
The fourth sort of persons that abuse this prayer and others, are wise women,
as they are termed, or good witches; which are termed good, not for that they
do good by witchcraft and do no harm to their neighbors: these make the
Lords prayer or other good prayers charms: for by saying of prayers they can
cure diseases, drive away the toothach, heal things forespoken, etc. Now that
prayer is abused by them it is plain.

1 God never appointed prayer to be a means to cure diseases or such like,
being applied to the sore or disease or atch: for although it be needful that
we pray to God for the removing of pains and sickness from us and ours; yet it
does not follow thereupon that God appointed prayer for a medicine, which being
applied to diseases shall cure them: for then every man would be a physician to
himself whatsoever disease he had, by his prayers. Prayer does sanctify
physic unto us, it is no physic it self: 1. Tim. 4.
it obtains at Gods hands a blessing upon our medicines that they may cure
us; it self by virtue inherent in it does not cure us: and as our meats and
drink by virtue in them do nourish our bodies, which notwithstanding are
sanctified by prayer for that end: so physic cures our diseases, prayer
sanctifies physic. Wherefore seeing prayer is not Catholicum as the
physicians call some of their medicines, that is an universal medicine for all
diseases, nay no medicine for any one disease, it follows that these wise
women that use it as a means to cure diseases, abuse it.

2 Again, Iam. 5.
this was a miraculous gift in the time of the Apostles, whereunto was added
unction with oil also; which continued in the Church but for a certain
season, so long as the doctrine of the Church had need of extraordinary
confirmation by miracle: now the doctrine of the Gospel being sufficiently
confirmed by witness ordinary and extraordinary, of God and man, this gift
cease as all other miracles. Wherefore they that shall enterprise this
miraculous course of curing sickness, what do they else but challeng this
miraculous gift: and what are they else but imposters and seducers of the
ignorant, 2. These. 2.
or of those that receive not the love of the truth?

3 Besides this, you shall observe these wise women, wizards, and charmers will
with writing the prayer cure the diseases and aches of men. As for example,
they will write it upon a piece of paper: or having written it, cause the
party diseased to wear it about his neck, and so they shall be cured: they
will write it in cheese or upon bread and give it to mad dogs to eat, and
their madness shall depart from them: and other practices of like folly and
impiety: all which plainly argue society and fellowship with the devil, and
the help of the devil: for others cannot do it, but themselves: and why I
pray you cannot others do it? forsooth say they, you do not believe as we
do, no not though you say or write the same prayers that they do. Surely we
believe that to be true which they say: for they have either openly, or at the
least secretly, contracted with the devil, whose they are, whom they serve and
honor; and in whom they believe. No marvel then though others which worship
the true God, cannot do such charming tricks as they can, for indeed good
Christians believe not in the devil as they do. Wherefore seeing they direct
their prayers to the devil, which should be directed to God alone, they do
greatly abuse their prayers.



The holy use of the Lords prayer.
The second point to be handled in the general consideration of the Lords
prayer, is, the true, lawful and holy use thereof, and so of prayer generally:
which may partly be perceived by that which has already been delivered
concerning the abuse; for the knowledge of one contrary arises but of the
knowledge of another, and he that knows wherein the abuse of the Lords prayer
consists, knows also wherein the true and holy use does consist. Yet
notwithstanding it shall not be amiss to entreat briefly of this point;
referring the further understanding thereof, partly to that which has been
already spoken of the abuse, and partly to that which shall be spoken
afterward in the preface; and in the conclusion of the Lords prayer of the
affections and dispositions in the time of prayer, and of the manner of prayer.
To handle this point then of the true and holy use of prayer: it consists
especially in four particulars.

1. Knowledge: for a man must understand what he prays.

2. Faith: which is an assurance of obtaining that we ask.

3. Repentance: which is bewailing our sins and wants, and a practizing of our
prayers.

4. Devotion: which is a due disposition in time of prayer.

For if understanding the matter of our prayers, Knowledge necessary for the
use of prayer.
feeling our sins and wants, bewailing them, purposing to amend them,
earnestly asking pardon and relief, reverently carrying our hearts in Gods
presence, faithfully persuading our selves God will hear us: if I say we thus
ask, we do truly and aright use prayer.

First, for knowledge that it is necessary, shall appear by consideration of
the several parts thereof: for there is a threefold knowledge required.

1. Knowledge of the words uttered.

2. Knowledge of the matter contained in the words.

3. Knowledge of the doctrine comprehended in the matter.

The knowledge of the words is opposed against prayer in an unknown tongue;
which edifieth not, and therefore must be removed out of the congregation: and
in the congregation, the words of the prayer must be understood, 1. Cor. 14.
else the speaker shall be a barbarian to the hearer, and otherwise the hearer
cannot say Amen. Strange languages is a judgment of God upon the world, as may
be seen by the history of the tower of Babell; Genesis 11.
the evidence whereof appears unto this day, in that the pains we bestow
about the learning of the tongues is so hard and tedious, and is a great
impediment to the true knowledge of the Scriptures. If it be: a judgment of
God, why shall we not seek to pray in a known tongue, and so to understand
wh^t we pray, that we may be freed from that judgment? The knowledge of
strange tongues indeed is a blessing, but the strange tongue is undoubtedly a
judgment.

The kno^ledge of the matter is a thing absolutely necessary also: for shall
we utter we know not what to God, or shall we give consent in public prayer to
that we are ignorant of? the prayer perhaps may contain Arrianisme, or
Pelagianisme, it may be heretical, or schismatic, or s^uor of some foul
errors; which cannot please God seeing they are not agreeable to wholesome
doctrine of the word: 1. Ioh. 5.14.
all our prayers must be according to his will, but false doctrine, heresies or
errors, are contrary to his will. Wherefore we must carefully know and search
whether the matter of our prayers contain in them truth or falsehood; and so
the knowledge of the matter is also absolutely necessary, if we will have our
prayers accepted and granted.

The knowledge of the doctrine comprehended in the matter, also is needful,
that a man in some measure know the fundamental points of religion, Ioh. 4.22.
which our Savior Christ requires in the Samaritanes; for they worshipped
they could not tell what, but the Jews knew what they worshipped: Ioh. 17.3.
2. Cor 13.5. 1. Cor. 11.28.
a man therefore must know God and himself, the law and the Gospel in some
tolerable measu e before he can make acceptable prayers to God through Christ
Jesus.

The second thing necessary for the true and holy use of prayer, Faith
nece^sari^ o the ^olie vs^ of p^^^er. (...). 5 14.
is faith or an assurance of obtaining that we ask according to his will:
this faith or assurance is a fruit of justifying faith, which lays hold upon
Christ for pardon of sin, and for all manner of good things for body and
soul: so that whatsoever good thing we ask, H^b. 11.30.
we may certainly resolve our selves we shall obt^ine: for if God the Father
has given unto us Jesus Christ, Romans 8. P^al 34.10.
how shall he not with him give us all things else that are good? If he give us
the greater, he will give v^ the lesser also: for temporal blessings are
additions and dependants of heavenly blessings. Matthew 6.
More shall be said of this point afterward in the conclusion of the prayer,
whither the reader is to be referred.

The third thing requisite for the true and holy use of prayer, is Repentance:
Repentance necessary for the holy use of prayer. Ioh. 9. Psalm. 66. Proverb.
for God hears not sinners that live in sin unrepented of, that regard
wickedness in their hearts, that purpose to live in known sins; al their
prayers are abominable, for that they turn their ears from hearing of the
law, as the Wiseman testifies. Wherefore he that will have his prayer heard,
must in his heart bewail his sins, hate them, renounce them, study and
strive to forsake them, pray against them, and then the Lord will graciously
grant his petitions. Indeed sometime God grants wicked men that which they
ask, or wish to have from God, but that is in wrath and vengeance: for that
which he gives them shall turn to their woe and misery another day. And as
it may be said of a godly man, that God hears him by denying that he asks:
so also may it be said of a wicked man, that God hears him not by granting
that he asks: the godly man is heard by denying the evil he asks, and
granting the good he asks not: the wicked man is not heard by granting the
evil he asked, and withholding the good he asked not: for though none of Gods
creatures are evil in themselves, yet through the abuse of the wicked and Gods
curse, 1. Tim. 4.
they may be evil unto the evil man. Again, though God hear what the wicked
man says when he pray, and grant him that very self same thing he asks;
yet God cannot properly be said to hear his prayer and grant his request: for
the wicked man's prayer is not a means of obtaining, neither does God grant him
any thing by means or through instancie of his prayer: but God is truly said
to hear the prayer and grant the request of the godly, seeing that he
grants that which they ask through the instancie of their prayers, they
being the only means of obtaining.

Devotion necessary for the true use of prayer.
The fourth thing necessary for the holy use of prayer is Devotion, which is
the due regard and religious estimation a man ought to have of Gods Majesty
and his own misery in time of prayer: which devotion has a special
signification in this place, and contains these four things in it
principally.

1. Attention in time of prayer. 2. Reverence in regard of Gods presence. 3.
Feeling of our sins and wants. 4. Desire to obtain that we ask.
Attention a part of devotion.
Attention is opposed against wandering thoughts, which usually in the time of
prayer creep into the minds of men: for expelling and avoiding whereof, it
behooves every careful Christian to watch over his understanding, and
affections, that by-thoughts either rush not into the mind; or if they do,
that then presently they be thrust out again.

This attention is threefold.

1. Attention to the words of prayer. 2. Attention to the matter contained in
the words. 3. Attention to God, to whom prayer is directed.
Attention to the words, is when a man does so watch over his tongue, that no
words unsanctified, or unfit for the holy matter of prayer, do unawares break
out of his mouth.

Attention to the matter, is when a man does so busy his understanding in
conceiving, and affections in pursuing the substance of his petitions, as that
by-matters take not place to disturb the course of his prayers. 1. Cor. 7.


Attention to God, is when a man does so conceive of God as the words of prayer
afford, according to the several names, titles, attributes, properties, and
works wherewithal in time of prayer we entitle God according to his holy
word: as, Father, merciful, just, etc.

Reverence is opposed against either a common or base estimation of Gods
excellency and glorious majesty, Reverence a part of devotion.
before whom we appear when we come to pray. When a man comes to make a
supplication to a Prince, he is stricken with a reverent fear of so excellent a
person as the Prince is: much more ought we so to be affected coming before
the Prince of all the Princes in the world: wherefore the Psalmist counsels
us to fear when we serve God, and to tremble when we give thanks. Psalm. 2.11.
This reverence will be increased, if we consider who God is before whom we
come, and what we are that come before God: God is in heaven, and we are upon
the earth: Eccles 4.1. Genesis 18 27. Psalm 95. Job 42. Dan. 9.
we are dust and ashes, as Abraham sp^ke to God, and God is the Creator and
maker of us all: we are vile, and to be abhorred, to whom appertains shame
and confusion of face: but God is excellent, admirable and glorious. If these
things possess our affections thoroughly, a holy reverence also will enter upon
our souls. Genesis 28.17.
And as it befell Jacob when he slept at Bethel; which is by interpretation,
Gods house, that he was afraid, saying, it was a fearful place, and no other
but the house of God, and the gate of heaven: even so ought we to be affected,
by faith seeing God spiritually present which is a spirit and invisible,
searching the hearts, and knowing the thoughts of all the sons of men.

Feeling of sin is opposed against hardness of heart, Feeling of sin a part of
devotion.
both that general obduration which is contrary to repentance; and a more
special, which the children of God sometime are cumbred with for want of a
continual renouation of repentance, and growing by occasion of lapse into some
sins, whence issue hardness of heart and a careless security and affections
benumbed for the time. This feeling of sin is called by our Savior Christ a
heavy load, Matthew. 11.28.
and wearisome burden. For as a man that has a burden or load upon his
back, does sensibly feel it, and is thereby greatly wearied, oppressed and
compelled to bow and stoop through the weight thereof, his strength being not
sufficient to match and overcome the weight of his load: even so the man that
once feels the heavy burden of sin, which is the wrath of God every way
intolerable and insupportable of man, is thereby so surcharged and oppressed,
Psalm. 40.12.
as that he cannot look up, and then his heart begins to fail as a man in
a swoune: and therefore the Prophet in the Psalm complains and confesses
his sins unto God, Psalm 51.3.
after he had known his iniquity and viewed his sins, Luke 4.18.
being always placed in his sight: and they only are fit to come unto Christ
by faithful prayer that feel this burden of sin upon their backs; that
think themselves vile and abominable sinners: for God resists the proud, as
if he were his special enemy: but he gives grace unto the humble as unto
his beloved friend.

Iam. 4.1.
Desire to obtain that we ask is opposed against cold, lukewarm or faint
affections: Desire to obtain a part of devotion. Iam 5.16. Matthew. 7.7.
when men ask, but care not greatly for obtaining that they ask: true
devotion has feruencie annexed thereto. For as a beggar is very earnest to get
his alms, if he be hungry: so the devout person is full of craving and
begging affections, if he have once felt the spiritual hunger and thirst of a
barren and dry soul void of the grace of God. Matthew. 5.6.
Thus much briefly of the right and holy use of prayer, whereof more shall be
spoken afterward.

The qualities of the Lords prayer.
The third point to be handled in the general consideration of the Lords
prayer, is the qualities and conditions thereof, which are these five following.

1. First, it is a platform of prayer. 2. Secondly, it is most excellent. 3.
Thirdly, it is most perfect and absolute. 4. Fourthly, it is only a general
form of prayer. 5. Fifthly, it is hard to be used aright for a prayer.
The first quality or property of this prayer is, The Lords prayer is a
platf^rme of prayer. Matthew. 6.9.
that as it is a prayer, so also and that more especially it is a direction and
platform of prayer. For as a man going to build an house, will first have a
platform or an idea in his head, according whereunto he will frame his house:
so the Lords prayer is an idea or pattern whereby every true prayer is framed:
and as the holy Scriptures are termed Canonical, for that they are the canon
or rule of faith and manners; so the Lords prayer may be called Canonical,
for that it is the canon or rule of all other prayers: for there is no prayer
in the holy Scripture but it may be referred unto this prayer: and all the
prayers which have been, are, or shall be made, must be measured by this
prayer, and so far forth are they commendable and acceptable as they are
agreeable hereunto. For as a circle contains al figures, a sphere all bodies,
and an infinite line all lines: so the Lords prayer contains all prayers:
resembled to a map which at once to the view offreth the consideration of all the world, so this is the synopsis of all prayers.

The second quality of this prayer is the excellency thereof: for it is Gods
word, a portion of holy Scripture. The excellency of the Lords pra er.
The prayers which we make may be, and ought to be agreeable to the word, but
Gods word they are not: wherefore it is most excellent: for if all the men
living in the world should study all their days to frame a prayer, they were
not able to make a prayer comparable hereunto: Jesus Christ the wisdom of God
framed it, Luke 11 49. and 11.1.
and that purposely teaching how to pray: therefore excellent must that prayer
be which was framed by the excellency of Gods wisdom: and as there is no
proportion between the finite and the infinite; so is there no comparison
between the infinite excellency and capacity of this prayer, and the prayers
of all other men living.

The third property of this prayer is the perfection thereof: other prayers are
imperfect, The perfection of the Lords prayer.
either for that they are stained with manifold wants and corruptions, as all
our prayers are; or for that they contain but some portion of the matter
contained in this prayer: as the prayers of holy men mentioned in the
Scriptures. This prayer contains the whole Scripture: for it is an Epitome or
abridgement of the whole Scripture, a Catechism in form of a prayer,
containing all the virtues of the Law and Gospel, and all the good we can pray
for, all the graces and blessing we can give thanks for, all the evil we can
pray against: and to these heads may the whole Scripture be referred.

The Lords prayer a general prayer only.
The fourth property of this prayer is, that it is only a general prayer or
form of prayer: for all the good things we want are not nominated here, nor
all the evil we pray against; yet they are here included, either simply and
naturally as the special in the general, the part in the whole: or else
figuratively and by proportion, as one part under another. For example sake,
prayer for health, patience, faith, the King, the Counsel, the Minister, the
afflicted, etc. are not here expressly named; yet they may every one of them
be referred to some one petition or more: therefore this general prayer may be
compared to the Commandments, and the Articles of faith: to the Categories and
predicates in Logic, where the heads and generals are propounded only, or the
chief or principal matters: the special and less principal are by
proportion and discourse of reason to be referred thereto, or reduced thence.

The Lords prayer hard to be used aright for a prayer.
The last quality or property of this prayer is, that it is very hard to use
this prayer aright for a prayer. Now it is not denied but that it is a prayer,
and may be used lawfully for a prayer: but to use it aright as it ought to be
used, there is the difficulty. For the words of the prayer being so short as
they are, and the matter contained in the words both so large and diverse; even
as large and ample as all things we stand in need of and can pray for, as all
things we can pray against, as all things we can give thanks for: how is it
possible that a man praying this prayer should in any mediocritie with his
mind conceive, and his affections pursue the thousand part of the things
comprehended in this short form? especially considering the unsearchable depth
of our Savior Christ's conceit, when he uttered this prayer; whereinto we are
in some measure to conueigh our conceits in time of using it for a prayer;
otherwise it will be the abusing of it.

Again, it being a portion of holy Scripture very hard to be understood, and
being diversely by diverse persons expounded; also it being doubtful which is
the true exposition thereof: if we perhaps light upon a false exposition, and
so a false meaning of the words, we do not pray it aright as we ought to pray;
for we must give the same sense unto every petition, which our Savior Christ
gave when he did pray it; if we do otherwise we wrest the prayer and abuse it:
hence therefore appears the difficulty of using it aright for a prayer.

Out of the consideration of this last property of this prayer arises this
consectarie or conclusion: that there is less danger of sin in conceiving a
prayer agreeable to this prayer, than in using this prayer for a prayer; which
may be verified thus: when we conceive a prayer, we know our own meaning
certainly; so do we not certainly know the meaning of every point in the
Lords prayer: again, when we pray we attain the depth of the meaning of our
own words; so can we not possibly attain the depth of the meaning of our
Savior Christ, when he used these words: Finally, our words in prayer
conceived are as large as our matter and affection; but here in the Lords
prayer, the matter being as large as the whole Scripture, the words are scant
the thousand part thereof: wherefore the conclusion and consectarie is
verified. To end this point then, although this be the most excellent and
perfect platform of prayer, and prayer, that ever was devised; yet considering
that it is only a general prayer, and hard to be used aright, as Christ
himself used it, therefore it may seem that a prayer conceived according to
this prayer, is as acceptable, if not more accepted of God, than this prayer:
for though the Lords prayer is better than any other prayer, yet a man may, and
can, and does use his own conceived prayer better than he can use the Lords
prayer: and prayer is accepted or not accepted of God, according as it is
rightly used or abused: and this is profitable for the ignorant people to
think upon, considering their intolerable abusing of the Lords prayer. Thus
much may suffice to have spoken of the general consideration of the Lords
prayer in the foresaid three points, the abuse, the use, and the conditions
thereof.

Specially of the Lords prayer.
Now it follows, that we also consider thereof specially.

This prayer contains three things.

1. The first is the persons to be considered in prayer. 2. The second is the
matter of prayer. 3. The third is the manner of prayer.
The persons to be considered in prayer.
The persons which are to be considered in prayer, are comprehended in that
which is ordinarily termed the preface of the Lords prayer, or the
compellation, contained in these words.

Our father which art in heaven:
or

Our heavenly father.
Now the persons we are to consider in prayer, are four.

1. First, who is to pray. Quis. 2. Secondly, for whom we are to pray. Pro quo.
3. Thirdly, to whom we are to pray. Ad quem. 4. Fourthly, in whose name we are
to pray. Per quem.
All they are to pray that can call God father, or the children of God
brethren: Our Father.

We are to pray for others as well as for our selves, namely for all that are
or may be our brethren. Our.

We are to pray to God only, who is the Father of the creature, and our Father
in Jesus Christ. Father.

We are to pray in his name, who has made God, of an enemy a friend, yea a
father, that is Christ Jesus. Our Father.

The first of those persons that are to be considered in prayer, is who are to
pray, which may be thus distinguished.

First, who must pray: or who is bound to pray.

Secondly, who may pray: or who may lawfully pray.

Thirdly, who can pray: or who can pray aright.

For the first: all men must pray, that is to say, Who must pray.
all men are bound in conscience to pray unto God, for prayer is a moral
precept, which binds all men, as all the commandments of God do: for all
the commandments were written in the heart of Adam, in the state of
innocence; and that not only for himself, but for all his posterity:
wherefore the very gentiles which knew not the law given by Moses, Romans 2.15.
yet show the effect of the law written in their hearts, when their consciences
accuse them, or excuse them. Seeing therefore that prayer is a commandment of
the moral law, and all the commandments of the moral law bind the
conscience of all men to obedience, therefore all men must pray, otherwise they
incur the penalty of the breach of the law, which is the everlasting curse
of God.

Here it may be objected concerning this and all the rest of the
commandments,

To this, answer may be made by a distinction, prayer is not impossible to be
performed of it own nature, for Adam was able to keep it continuing in that
estate of innocence, wherein God had created him, and so all mankind in Adam:
but Adam transgressing, and all mankind in him, Romans 8.3.
by accident and occasion, the commandment of God (and namely that of prayer)
is become impossible unto us: we are not able to pay our debts, for we have
ma^e our selves bankerouts; we cannot see, for we have put out our own eyes.
Wherefore God does not command things impossible by nature, when he requires,
obedience to his law, although now through our own defaults, we are not able
to obey.





Thus we see the first point, who must pray.

Who may pray.
The second follows, which is, who may pray.

Though the commandment of prayer be directed to all men, and therefore all
men are bound to pray: yet notwithstanding there are some men which may not
pray, for if they do, their prayer is turned into sin. Incense is
abomination unto me, says the Lord by the Prophet, Esa. 1.13. Psalm. 141.2.
Pro. 15.8.
it is iniquity: now in the old Testament incense was a type of prayer, and
was commanded by God as a part of his outward worship: so also the sacrifice
of the wicked man is abominable, that is, Pro. 28.9.
all the worship of the wicked (for the part is put for the whole) and yet God
had commanded the sacrifices: he that turns his ear from hearing of the
law, his prayer is abominable; and yet prayer is Gods commandment: whence it
is necessarily collected, that there are some sects of men, who if they pray,
sin in their prayer, and therefore though they must pray, yet notwithstanding
they may not pray: they are bound to pray, yet if they pray, they sin.

These two propositions seem to be contradictorie:

Here we see that which the Apostle speaks in another sense, that sin is
out of measure sinful: Romans 7.
sin peruerteth the whole order of nature, causes contradictorie
propositions to be both true; for certain it is that all men are bound in
conscience to pray, and therefore must pray; and this is certain also, that
all men may not pray; for if they do, they sin and break the law of God.
Now the Lord of his goodness has found out a means to dissolve this
absurdity, and break the contradiction: wherefore he commands to repent
and forsake our sins, and then to pray. And here we may note into what an
intricate labyrinth or maze, sin has brought mankind, consisting of three
bywaies.

First, we must pray that we may keep the second commandment,

Secondly, we living in our sins must not pray, lest we transgress the
third commandment.

Thir^ly, we must repent (and that is a thing altogether impossible to flesh
and blood) before we pray aright. We being thus included in the maze, the Lords
shows us the way out by the power of his spirit in the preaching of his word,
working repentance in the hearts of his children that they may pray aright, and
so all his commandments are made easy unto us, which before were impossible;
and so that sentence of the Father is verified: da quod iubes, and iubes quod
vis: give me power to do thy commandments, and then command what seems
good unto thee.

Thus also the second point is handled, who may pray.

Who can pray.
The third is, who can pray, or who can pray aright? They only can pray aright,
that have the spirit of prayer which teaches us to cry Abba, Romans 8.15.
that is father, which is the spirit of adoption, and sanctification. But for
the further clearing of this point, a distinction is to be admitted between
three things, which the world thinks either to be all one, or very near of
kindred: namely, first saying a prayer, secondly wishing a prayer, thirdly
praying a prayer.

What it is to say a prayer.
For the first, we must remember that all men can say prayers; there is not any
man so ignorant, so impenitent, or so wicked, but he can and does sometime say
his prayers: and this is no better than the prating of a parret in Gods ears.

What it is to wish a prayer.
Secondly, to wish prayers is one thing, and to pray is another: for a wish is a
sudden, earnest, wandering, inordinate desire of having something, which a man
either greatly regards not, or is not persuaded to obtain.

What it is to pray a prayer.
Thirdly, a prayer is a continual, settled, ordered, and fervent desire of
obtaining that which a man both greatly prizeth, and is persuaded in some
measure he shall have.



it were with a whirlewind for the present; yet in spiritual matters, there is
an exceeding great coldness and frost of affection, but a prayer is fervent in
spiritual matters, and moderate else where: yea and in spiritual matters,
there is not that snatching vehemency in prayer, as in wishes, but rather a
sober and moderate equability permanent and increasing.

A wish is wandering and rouing, for a wicked man

A wish is inordinate, for the wicked man he neither will Balaam; he may wish
to have the gifts of the holy Ghost, as Simon Magus, but he would have used or
rather abused them to his own gain, and he would have bought them with money.
But the prayer of the godly man is ordered aright intending Gods glory, the
good of others, his own edification, carefully using the good means which God
has sanctified for that purpose: hence it is that James says that many ask
and receive not, Iam. 4.3.
seeing they ask amiss for the satisfying of their lusts.

A wicked man sometime wishes grace by fits, but he does not greatly ragarde
it: therefore it is with him as with a woman that longs for some unwholesome
thing, as tar, etc. desiring it eagerly for a fit, and afterward abhorring it:
but the godly man he prays and prizeth grace inualuable, for obtaining
whereof he will sell all that he has, and separate himself to seek it,
Matthew. 14.44. Pro. 18.1.
and occupy himself in all wisdom.

I believe, Lord help my unbelief. Thus we see how a wish differs from a
prayer: and that there is a great distance between wishing a prayer, and
praying a prayer; and that they only can pray that are qualified as is
aforesaid. And thus we see who are to pray.

For whom we must pray.
The second sort of persons to be considered in our prayers, are, for whom we
are bound to pray: the sum of the doctrine, that concerns this second sort
of persons, shall be comprehended in certain propositions following, whereof
some are affirmative, some negative: the propositions affirmative are these
six ensuing.



Ioh. 17.
who has gone before us in the practice of them both; though he prayed in
another kind, namely as the only Mediator of redemption and intercession
betwixt God and us: his prayer being satisfactory and meritorius; ours only
dutiful and charitable.

Romans 1.7.
so the Apostle writing to the Romans in his salutation prays for them.

Fourthly, we are to pray for all men, that is, for all sorts 1. Iam. 2.1.
according to the Apostles counsel, Jews and Gentiles, bond and free, rich
and poor, Magistrate and subject, man and woman; and if there be any other
distinction of states and conditions of life.

Fifthly, we are to pray for any one particular person that Steven the first
Martyr. For although we must not pray with them, as being persons out of the
communion of Saints: yet nature binds us to pray for them, they being of our
own flesh; and we know not how God has disposed of them for their final and
futuer estate: and it may be that our prayers shall be means of obtaining at
Gods hands remission of their sins, and their conversion and salvation, as it
is probable Steuens prayer did further Paul's conversion.

Sixthly and lastly, we must pray for our very enemies that Matthew. 5.44. Romans
12.20.21.
according to the precept of Christ and the practice of all the Saints, that so
we may do good for evil, and heap coals of fire upon their heads.

Thus we see ^ffi^mat^uely for whom we are to pray. Now negatiuely we must also
consider who they are for whom we must not pray: For whom we must not pray.
and they are comprised in five propositions following.

First, we are not to pray for all mankind, that is to say, Adam, is against
Gods will. F^^ Christ did not pr y for the world, Ioh. 17.
neither is it Go^s will that all that issue from Adam should be conue^ted and
saved: yet be^^use we know not which man is reprobate, therefore by the
general rule of charity we may pray for any particular man; excepting some,
which afterward shall be excepted.







Samuel for praying for Saul: 1. Sam. 16.1.
howsoever some may think that Samuels prayer was only for enjoying the
kingdom, and not for the pardon of Saul's sin; which has little
probability: hence it is that we pray against the devil by the example of the
Apostle, Romans 16.20.
that God would tread Satan down under our feet: hence it is also that David
in the Psalms by the spirit of prophecy often times prays against his
enemies, whom he knew were reprobates, or irrecouerable from their sins: and
if the Church has the spirit of discerning one that sins the sin against
the holy Ghost, and has adjudged that person so to have sinned, we are not
only not to pray for him, but to pray against him for his utter overthrow and
present damnation, yea though it were Julian himself the Emperor.

Thus negatiuely also we understand for whom we are not to pray: Against whom
we may pray.
only there remains this point near unto the former, against who^ we may
pray, which being shortly handled, this second sort of persons also is limited.

Generally therefore we may pray against all the enemies of our salvation:
absolutely against the devil, the world, the flesh, and all reprobates,
whether sinning the sin against the holy Ghost, or otherwise, if they may
be known. Also we may pray against wicked men, these cautions observed.

First, that our prayer be in concreto, non in abstracto, as the

Secondly, in our prayers we are not to intend the destruction

Thirdly, we must take heed that our own private revenge

Lastly, because we know not what God has decreed

The third person to be considered in prayer, is, through whom, or in whose
name we are to pray: and that is in the name and through the mediation and
interposition (that I may so speak) of Jesus Christ, who does mediate our
cause with the Father. And here two points are to be remembered and handled. The
one is affirmative or positive: we must pray in Christ's name. The other is
exclusive, containing in it a negative: we must pray in Christ's name only, and
not in the name of any other.

First, we are generally to remember that the name of Christ signifies
Christ's merit, mediation, redemption, intercession, obedience, What it is to
pray in Christ's name.
or what else Christ did or suffered for our reconcilement and reuniting unto
God, and that to pray in Christ's name is to desire the Father to grant that
we ask, through and for the dignity and worthiness of Christ's person, and
actions which he undertook and performed in our behalf.

We must pray in Christ's name.
This generally promised of the signification of Christ's name: the first point
to be handled, is, that we must pray in Christ's name: for Christ being the
mean betwixt God and us, he is the fittest to be our Mediator: for therefore
is Christ Mediator, Christ is a mean in diverse respects.
because he is medius: now Christ is medius, the mean betwixt God and us in
diverse respects obseruable.



medius, a mean, in respect of his favor and love: which in regard of God is
passive, and in regard of us is active: for he is beloved of God, as being the
only begotten son of the Father: and we are beloved of him, as being parcels
of his own flesh. In that he is beloved of the Father, he is fit to obtain
things needful for us: in that he is loving to us, we are likely to obtain
good things through him: so that Christ being favored of God, and favorable
to us, is perfect^y qualified for the office of a M^diatour.

Medius, or a mean, in respect of his actions or works, which in his own
person out of his love he has ^^ought for us: his actions are compound, as his
person and his love is: they are works not of a mere man, nor of God alone,
but of a person having the qualification of God, and man that the Godhead might
dignifie, and the manhood might fit the work, that in respect of the Deity
the work might be propitiatory, d^seruing mercy of God; and in regard of the
Manhood applicatorie, fit to be imputed to us, that we being invested
therewith, Gods justice may be satisfied, and we reconciled through the
work. S eing therefore that Christ Jesus is the only Mean person betwixt God
and us, he is the only Mediator betwixt God and us: and therefore in his name
we must pray: so says the Evangelist, Ioh. 16.23. 1. Ioh. 2.1.
Ask in my name, and ye shall receive. And again in another place, He is the
true Advocate with the Father, Matthew. 3 17. Ioh. 11.42.
and in him God is well pleased with us: and the Father does always hear him
whatsoever he asks, as he himself witnesses, because he is so dearly
beloved of his Father. Wherefore for conclusion of this point, as it is
impossible that a thing should move, ab extremo in extremum sine medio, from
one place to another without a mean way; as for example, from earth to heaven,
and not pass through the air: even so cannot our prayers, which are sinful,
come into Gods presence, who is most just* without the means and mediation of
Jesus Christ: and thus the first point is plain that we must pray in the name
of Jesus Christ. The other follows, which is negative and exclusive, We must
pray onl^ (...) Christ's name.
that we must pray in his name only, and in the name of no other: and here are
excluded four sorts of persons who are not to be mediators of interc^ssion.

1. The first sort is the Father and the holy Ghost. 2. The Angels are the
second sort. 3. The third sort are the Saints departed: and living. 4. The
fourth sort is our selves.
For the first: The Father and the h ^y Ghost are not our intercessors.
we are to know that the first and third persons in Trinity are excluded from
the office of intercession: for though each person in Trinity has his
several office in all the works which are termed ad extra, wrought upon the
creature, as creation, redemption, sanctification, etc yet there are some
particular acts and motions in these se^erall works, which are proper to some
one person and incommunicable to the rest, as namely such actions which are
relative between person and person: for example sake, the Father seated and
sent the Son into the world, the Son was sent of the Father: the Father did
not send the holy Ghost to take our nature: neither did the holy Ghost take our
nature, but the Son only. So in the case propounded: the Father does not
make intercession with the Son, but the Son makes intercession with the
Father: so neither does the holy Ghost. For neither the Father nor the holy
Ghost were incarnate, suffered or merited for us, but the Son only. The
Father accepts our prayers: the holy Ghost teaches us to pray, which is
called intercession by the Apostle, Romans 8.26. but in a general signification:
the Son only meriteth and deserves and obtains our prayers, having only
assumed our nature, and therein merited and prayed and obtained. Seeing then of
all the three persons in Trinity the Son only is our intercessor, therefore
in the name of Christ alone we must pray.

The Angels are not our intercessors.
For the second: the Angels are excluded also from this work of intercession, as
being not persons qualified thereto sufficiently; which consideration grows
upon the former: for if the Father and the holy Ghost, then much more the
Angels cannot perform this office: for as has been, so the office of
intercession and propitiation are dependants and conuertible: so as the person
that is to be our intercessor, must also be our sacrifice of propitiation: and
contrarily our propitiator is our intercessor. Hence it is that the Apostle
John has joined them together by way of answering an objection, 1. Ioh. 2.1.
or rendering a reason, which implies this exclusive doctrine: the Apostles
words are following: Though a man sin, yet we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the just, and he is the propitiation for our sins: which
sentence may admit this Resolution: because Christ is our propitiation,
therefore he is our intercessor, and therefore we need not despair of
pardon, if we sin through infirmity: or thus by way of question and answer.

Q. What is the end of preaching the Gospel?

A. That Gods children may be kept from sin.

Q. If we do sin, what comfort is there?

A. We have an Advocate to make intercession for us.

Q. But how may we be assured that he shall obtain?

A. Because he is sufficiently qualified for the purpose, both for that he is
just, having perfectly fulfilled the law: and he is also a propitiation for our
sins, or sustaining the punishment and meriting for us: so that by this
Scripture it is manifest that the person which is fit to make intercession for
us, must also have ability to make satisfaction for our sins: which power,
because it is not incident to the Angels, therefore the Angels are excluded
from this office of intercession.

For the third: the Saints, whether departed this life, Saints departed or
living are not our intercessors.
or living, are excluded from this office of intercession, as it is proper to
Christ, and that by the same reasons before recited: yet nevertheless, neither
the Angels, nor Saints departed, or living, are excluded from all manner of
intercession or prayer for us: for seeing the Angels and Saints have love to
the Church of God militant, themselves being triumphant in heaven, no doubt
they wish and desire and pray earnestly after their manner, for the prosperity
and welfare of the Church upon earth: and the Saints living do in their
prayers continually recommend to God their brethren yet living, and militant
against the common enemies: but there is difference to be made betwixt the one
and the other.

For Christ's intercession is deserving and meritorious:

Christ's intercession is distinct and particular for every

Christ's intercession is in his own name: theirs in Christ's things for the
Church, it is by mean of Christ, and not for their own worthiness. And here in
deep silence without further confutation we will pass by the two opinions of
the Papists: the one blasphemous, That Angels and Saints are mediators of
intercession, as Christ is in the same kind, though not in the same degree:
the other foolish, That by reason of their merits they obtain for us of God:
and therefore the popish crew in their several nec ssities have recourse to
several Saints for reli^fe: wh^reunto a third may be added, That the Angels
and Saints departe^ in God, as in a glass see the s^uerall petitions of their
^liants here in earth; and so are ready to mediate for them in their need:
which is as very a fancy, as the former blasphemy or folly.

We must not pray in our own name.
For the fourth and last sort of persons excluded from the office of
intercession, we must know, that seeing Angels and Saints are disabled to this
work, our selves cannot possibly partake therein, being sinful, needing a
mediator, and an intercessor, and wanting merits of our own; howsoever the
false Church of Antichrist has forged the contrary, thereby dispoyling Christ
of his office, by foysting in their own merits: for Christ will be all or
none, our merits cannot stand with his, they shoulder out one another. Hence
then follows the conclusion; That Christ is only the intercessor; and
therefore in his name only must we pray.

And this is the third person in whose name we must pray.

To whom we must pray.
The fourth person is, To whom we must pray. To God: and to him only: and this
is (...) ^onsectarie of the former matter, for seeing the Angel^ ^n^ Saints are
no intercessors for us to God; therefore there is no reason we should pray to
them: for this is the supposed end of the invocation of Saints and Angels, that
they may obtain of God for us, that which we cannot obtain for our selves;
they being, as it is presumed, more gracious in Gods eyes than we are, and more
familiar with him being in his presence or privy chamber, as Nobles about
their Prince. But here two propositions must be distinguished, as in the former.

First, that we must pray to God: secondly we must pray to him only.

Concerning the first there is little doubt of that in the word, We must pra^
to G d. Dan. 6.7.
saving that we read in the book of Daniel that there was an act made that no
man should pray to any God for the space of thirty days, but to the King
only: this act the Princes made against religious Daniel in policy, through
flattery accomplishing their murtherous designs: but this was only a mouths
atheism. We find it also by most fearful experience, that there are some
Atheists, or Naturalists, who because they would banish the memory of God out
of the world, by blind-folding their own conscience, have denied prayer to
God: but these men rather need our prayers, than our confutations, who are
every day and night confuted, and confounded in their own thoughts.

Leaving this first point, we descend to the second, We must pray to God alone.
That our prayers are to be directed to God alone; which may be confirmed by
two reasons: the first reason is the words of Christ alleged out of Moses:
Matthew. 4.10. Deuteronomy. 6.13.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve: which
sentence affoordeth this argument: that seeing prayer is a principal part of
Gods worship and service, therefore it is due to him only: for to him only we
must pray, whom we must worship and serve: but we must only worship and serve
God; therefore to God only we must pray: now if that thredbare or motheaten
distincttion of Latria, Dulia and hyperdulia be still objected, as though dulia
and hyperdulia might be given to Saints, and the Virgin; but latria only to
God: the answer will euince, that by comparing of Matthew with Moses, latria
and dulia are all one: for the Hebrew word Gnabad, Deuteronomy. 6.13.
which is translated Latreuein by Matthew, does properly signify duleu^in: but
this quircke has bin so sufficiently answered by diverse of our learned
countrymen, that I dare scarce attempt any thing in it.

The second reason, therefore follows which may be collected out of the
Apostles word: Romans 14.
how shall they call upon him on whom they have not believed, which may be
framed thus: To him only we must pray on whom we believe, but we only believe
in God; therefore we must only pray to God: for seeing prayer has two parts,
desire, and faith, if faith be wanting, prayer is imperfect. Now I do suppose
that there is no papist dare say yt we may trust in the Saints or Angels, which
were fl^t idolatry; and cursed is he that puts his trust in an arm of
flesh. Wherefore for conclusion of this fourth point, seeing we are only to
believe in God, and to serve God, therefore we must only pray to God.

Furthermore, this fourth person, to whom we must make our prayers, which is
God, is expressed unto us two ways.

First by a name of relation, in that he is entitled Father.

Secondly, by the place he inhabiteth, Heaven.

Whether Father be a word of nature or person.
For this title, Father, which is here mentioned, it is to be enquired whether
it is Naturae or Personae nomen, that is to say, whether it is to be referred
to the first person in Trinity, or to the whole Trinity: whether we speak to
God the Father of his only begotten son Christ: or to God the Father and
maker of all his creatures: for answer whereof thus much; it seems that
there is no absurdity to take it either way, or both ways rather: if Christ
prayed this prayer (as it is probable he did) then without doubt it was
directed to the first person in Trinity, and it signifies personally; if
Christ prescribed it to his disciples for a form of prayer, then (in all
likelihoode) it signifies the whole Trinity, who is to be called upon by the
creature. Now as I conjecture, for that Christ did both pray it, and prescribed
it to others for a form of prayer, therefore I incline to think that there is
a compound meaning of the word, signifying both the first person in Trinity,
and the whole Trinity; which affords us this instruction: That when we pray
we are so to direct our prayers to the Father, as that we do not exclude the
other persons of Trinity, who with the Father are equally to be worshipped,
being God equal with him. And here it shall not be impertinent to consider,
how we are to conceive of God in prayer, which arises partly out of the title
which is given to God, partly out of the place where he dwells: this point
may be comprehended in five positions, which follow.

First we must not think God like any creature, as the Papists Moses expressly
forbids the Israelits so to do; Ho^ we must conc^iue of God in prayer.
Deuteronomy. 4.15.
and he renders a reason in that place; because they saw nothing when the law
was delivered: and therefore the practice of many now adays is reprouealbe,
who, though they will not paint God, yet they paint two hands giving the two
tables, one to Moses, and another to Aaron: which is false, monstrous, and
idolatrous: false, because the tables were given only to Moses; monstrous,
because there are hands without a body; idolatrous, because there are hands,
whereas God has no shape at all, any way sensible.

Secondly, although in the holy Scripture figuratively there are hands, arms,
feet, face, ears, and other manly parts attributed to God, yet we must not
think that God has any of these parts properly: indeed God has something
answerable to these parts, or rather something whereunto these parts in the
creatures are suitable: for God made man not only according to his image, which
consists in holiness and righteousness, but also according to his similitude
(for the words may aptly be distinguished) so that man is a similitude of God:
Gods arms and hands, and fingers, argue his power and actiuitie; his feet
argue his vbiquitie; his face, eyes, and ears, declare his wisdom and
favor, etc. and proportionable to these attributes of God, there is a
configuration of the lineaments of the body in man, wherein man is like God:
Psalm 115.
wherefore we may say, and so we must conceive of God, contrary to the gods of
the heathen: They have eyes and see not; but God sees, and yet he has no
eyes: they have feet and walk not; but God walks every where, and yet has
no feet: and so of whatsoever other part may be applied to God; which figure
is called Anthropopathia, being a special metaphor.





2. Cor. 13.13.
or to the holy Spirit personally, according to the example of the Apostle, who
blesses the Corinthians from the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; which blessing
is a prayer: Genes. 48.16.
and by the example of Jacob, who prays that the Angel which delivered him
from all evil (which Angel was Christ) would bless the sons of Joseph. We
see then to which person of Trinity our prayers are primarily to be directed;
with the manner how we are to conceive of God in time of prayer.

This may serve for the title, Father. Now follows the place which God
inhabiteth, which is the second argument descriptiue: and that is uttered in
these words (which art in heaven) which also does impart unto us his condition,
that he is heavenly: of which two points a little in order.

How God is in heaven.
First, God is in heaven: not circumscriptiue, as though he were included within
the compass of heaven; for he is infinite, and therefore every where: neither
is he in heaven definitive, as though when he were in heaven, he were no where
else, for he is every where at once; for God is in every place, and yet not
included in any place, he is out of every place, and yet excluded from no
place: but God is in heaven, first because that in heaven he does especially
manifest himself in his mercy, grace, and glory to the elect Angels and
Saints through the humanity of Christ Jesus which is exalted in heaven:
secondly, because that from heaven he does visibly manifest himself to the
creatures in the works of his providence and preservation, and especially to
mankind in manifold blessings and judgments; but most especially to the
Church in the means of salvation: and in these respects God is in heaven.

Secondly, God is also heavenly: that is to say, VV^^ God is (...). Iam 1.17.
free from all corruption, mutation, or alteration whatsoever; whereby he
differs from the creatures, which in time of their own inherent infirmity
corrupt, vanish and p^rish: in which sense the Prophet says, They all wax old
as a garment, and as a vesture they shall be changed: whereas God is always
the same, and his years do not fail. Again, Psalm. 102.26.
also God is heavenly, for that he is most excellent and glorious, full of
incomparable and incomprehensible majesty: not as though God his essence or
substance were of the same nature and condition with the heavens; for they are
created bodies: but for that there is no creature more excellent and glorious
to sense than the heavens, therefore God is compared to them: whereas indeed
the essence of God does as far surpass the heavens, as the Sun shining in
his brightness does the black and palpable darkness of Egypt, or of hell it
self.

Thus much may be sufficient for the fourth person to be considered in the
preface of this prayer, with his title and place of habitation, expressing also
his condition, which is glorious and heavenly.

Furthermore, out of the consideration of these four sorts of persons
signified in the preface of the Lords prayer, arise certain holy affections
and dispositions, The disposition of the ^^art in prayer.
whereby the heart is prepared to prayer, and aright composed in time of
prayer: and they are in number six following.

The first is boldness, Boldness.
in that we direct our prayers to him that is a Father.

The second is charity, that we pray not in particular, C^aritie.
but in common, intituling God our Father.

The third is humility, Humility.
that we direct our prayers to him that in Jesus Christ is made of an enemy a
father.

Reverence.
The fourth is reverence, that we come to him that is an heavenly father, most
mighty and glorious.

Holy meditations. Faith.
The fifth is heavenly meditations: for we direct our prayers to a heavenly
father.

The sixth is faith, that arises from all the former: of each of which
something shall be spoken in the discourse ensuing.

1. Of boldness.
And first of that boldness and confidence which Gods children have, in that they
direct their prayers to him that is a father, Psalm 103.13. Esaias. 49.15.
who pitieth his children more than an earthly father can, yea more than a most
natural and compassionate mother does or can pity the fruit of her womb,
which she purchases with so much sorrow and pain: which boldness is to be
distinguished from presumption and impudency, a thing too common to impenitent
persons, who come into the presence of God, as a bard horse rusheth into the
battle, or as a mad desperate ruffian challenging his enemy into the field,
where they receive their mortal wound through their foolehardines: so these
presumptuous persons either not regarding Gods justice, or loosely persuading
themselves of his mercy, still living in their sins, inconsiderately prease
into Gods presence: who afterward receive the judgment of presumption in
their own consciences, if ever the Lord discover to them their palpable
hypocrisy through true repentance: whereas the children of God approach with
confidence to the throne of grace, Heb. 4.16.
hoping assuredly to obaine mercy, and to find grace to help in time of
need, because that God is our Father full of compassion and mercy, and Jesus
Christ is our high Prist, who has a sympathy and fellow feeling of our
infirmities partaking flesh and blood with us, and so with bowels of pity
yearneth toward us complaining in our misery. Wherefore when we come before
the Lord in prayer, we must learn to distinguish between this filial boldness,
and foolish presumption, least we justly incur the reproof of blind and bold
bayards through our inconsiderate rashness: for it is not lawful for every
ruffling hackster to rush into the Princes presence; but if he do, he shall be
accounted a presumptuous person, and punished deservedly: but it is lawful for
the children of the Prince, who for so doing, pass not under the censure of
rashness or impudency.

Secondly, charity is here inclusiuely suggested unto us, 2. Of Charity.
seeing that Christ teaches us to say, not as in the Creed (I believe)
singularly, but respectively and charitably, Our Father: for every man shall
live by his own faith only, but not by his own prayers only: Pray one for
another, says James: Iam 5.16.
but we do not read it written, believe one for another, 1. Cor. 7.14.
(though one man's faith may be an instrument of conueiance to another of
external sanctification, which is an outward title to and participation of the
means of grace and salvation). Wherefore seeing in our prayers we include our
brethren, yea our enemies also, it is apparent that our prayers must be made in
love and charity; so the Apostle teaches, that wrath and malice must be
abandoned, 1. Tim. 2.8.
when we lift up our hands in prayer to the Lord: so that the practice of many
is reproueable that bring their prayers in one hand, and malice in another,
being compounded as it were of strife and contention, of railing and reuiling,
of slaundering and backbiting, of malice and envy, putting a kind of
felicity in these fretfull and devouring affections; who are to remember the
condition of the fifth petition of the Lords prayer gathered by consequence:
that if we do not forgive others, the Lord himself will not forgive us. Mat.
6.14.


Thirdly, humility or humiliation and contrition is here presupposed, whereas
we come to God as to a father, 3. Of Humility.
who was an enemy sometime, but now through the intercession and propitiation
of our Savior alone is become a father unto us. This therefore puts us in
mind of Christ's merits, and therefore of our sin and misery: which
consideration is available to persuade humiliation: surely that person which
comes before the Lord with a proud heart, Iam. 4.6.
and haughty affections, shall want entertainment from the Lord: because God
resists the proud person that never was humbled: and he sends the rich
away empty: Luke 1.53. Luke 18.14.
and the boasting Pharisie shall depart home unjustified: but he that comes
into Gods presence, repenting in dust and ashes as Job did; Job. 42.6.
with a rope about his neck (and sackcloth about his loins) as the messengers
of the King of Aram: he that in his own eyes is most vile, most wretched, most
miserable, most abominable, is most acceptable to God, who gives grace to the
humble, fills the hungry soul with good things, and justifies the despised
Publican.

4. Of reverence.
Fourthly, reverence also is intimated unto us when we entitle God an heavenly
Father: for children come into their parents presence with reverence: so also
is behooves us religiously to reverence before so great a Majesty as he is;
who though he be a father, yet is also a consuming fire, to fall into whose
hands is a thing most dreadful. This honorable estimation, Heb. 12.29. and
10.31.
and reverent fear, the Lord challenges by ve^tue of his Fatherhood, as the
Prophet Malachie pleading the Lords cause, Mal. 1.6.
reports; which will arise in our hearts upon these grounds, duly prepondered.

5. Of holy med ^^tions. Psalm 95.6. Genes. 18.27.
First, if we consider that God is the Creator of us all, and that it is he
that has made us, and we are his workmanship; then as Abraham confessed, so
shall we: let not the Lord be offended that we are bold to speak unto him,
being but dust and ashes: Job 39.37.
and as Job says, Behold we are vile when we speak unto the Lord, that
makes answer out of the whirlewinde.

Secondly, if we seriously weigh with our selves that God knows the inward
disposition of the soul; that he searches the hearts, Heb. 4.13.
and tries the reins; and that the bowels of the soul are seen of him, and
requires spiritual service of us, Job. 4.24.
himself being a spirit, it will work in us religious fear and reverence with
sincerity, which is opposed to pride, rashness, and dissembling with God.

Thirdly, if we consider with our selves the wonderful attributes of God, as
his heavenly omnipotency, his exquisite justice, his incomprehensible
Majesty, and glory every way infinite; it may cause in us rather astonishment
and horror, than a bare and naked fear.

But of this doctrine arises a reproof of their practice that come into Gods
presence, A reproof of carnal affections and thoughts in time of Prayer.
Eccles. 4.17.
either with common and ordinary affections, or with vile and base
estimations, upon whom the censure of irreligious and profane persons may in
some degree be charged, for that they look not unto their feet when they come
into Gods house: for there are some that come before God, as men that go to
the Thoughts of civil matters reproved.
or it may be with less circumspection: for worldly men for the most part
follow worldly affairs with great diligence, desire, and warines: but we must
be otherwise affected: for seeing prayer is a matter of religion, and directed
to God our heavenly father, for our everlasting good, therefore we must put on
reverence, and religion, in regard both of God, of our selves, and of that holy
action, and doffe off ordinary and common affections, as it were a pair of
foul shoes of our feet with Moses, Exodus 3.5.
when we come to talk with God, who is in the midst of the fire.

Others there are, more vile and base in their estimations, Vile and wicked
thoughts reproved.
or of an harlot: for this is the practice of many, who come to pray as the
thief to steal, the drunkard to the Ale, the leacher to the stews: or as men
that come from stealing, drinking and whoring: for when they have wearied
themselves with these sins, then they drop out of the stews or Alehouse into
the Church to prayer: these men say as the Priests and people said in the
Prophet Malachies time, Mal. 2.7.8.13.
The table of the Lord is not to be regarded: wherefore before we appear
before the Lord, some time must be spent in preparing our hearts to prayer,
Preparitiue before Prayer needful.
that all carnal and fleshly affections may be set apart, and we thoroughly
possessed with an honorable and reverent regard of that holy business:
wherefore the Prophet exhorts the true Jacob or Israelite to lift up the
heads of the everlasting doors, that is, Psa. 24.6.7.
the cogitations and affections of the soul which is eternal, that Christ the
King of glory may come in; for sensual and worldly thoughts and desires do
bar and lock the door against him. And in the next Psalm the Prophet
himself practices his exhortation (like a good Teacher) lifting up his soul
unto the Lord when he speaks unto him in prayer: Psalm. 25.1.
for seeing we pray to God our Father which is in heaven and heavenly,
therefore we must have heavenly affections and meditations in time of prayer.
Christ says, Mat. 6.21.
where our treasure is there will our hearts be: If God be our treasure who is
in heaven, our hearts and minds will be there also: wherefore we must pitch
our affections on things which are above, and not on things which are below:
Collos. 3.2. VVanderings reproved.
so that here falls to the ground all wauing and gadding thoughts and desires
in time of prayer, besides or contrary to the matter uttered in prayer: as
about our dinner, our money, our cattle, our pleasures, our suites and
adversaries, and a thousand of like quality: so that if our prayers were
written as we conceive them, and our by-thoughts as parentheses interlaced,
they would be so ridiculous, as that we might very well be ashamed of them:
and yet alas God must have such prayers of us, or he must have none; for
wanderings will creep into the prayers of the most godly and vigilant, though
in time of prayer they watch their hearts with double diligence: which
inevitable infirmities being disliked and bewailed, shall not be imputed to
Gods children.

And thus the fourth affection, viz. reverence, is requisite, by occasion
whereof the fifth holy disposition also has been handled, which is (as has
been said) heavenly meditations and affections, severed from the world and
worldly matters. Now therefore the sixth and last of these holy dispositions
is Faith, 6. Of Faith.
which is grounded upon the former foundation: for seeing God is our Father,
therefore we may be assured of his love; and seeing he is in heaven or
heavenly, we need not doubt of his power; Four grounds of faith, love, power,
wisdom, truth of God.
and seeing he is so in heaven as that he is every where else (as has been
said) we may be sufficiently persuaded of his presence: add hereto his truth
and fidelity, which will assure us of performing his promises, and we may
have full assurance of faith: which may thus be singled out.

1. First, God is every where, and so knows our wants.

2. Secondly, God is powerful and omnipotent, and so able to do whatsoever he
will.

3. Thirdly, God is loving and merciful, and therefore has will to do for us
what is best.

4. Lastly, God is true, and therefore performs his promises, and keeps his
fidelity for ever. So that if these meditations frequent our minds, our faith
will marueilously be confirmed, which is thus grounded out of this preface.
And these are the persons and affections of prayer.

Having thus discussed the preface, which is the first part of the Lords
prayer: now it follows in like manner to entreat of the petitions, which are
the second part thereof, and may be termed the matter of prayer: The matter of
this prayer.
in handling whereof generally this method shall be observed.

First, because the petitions are propounded by our Savior Christ in due
order, some first, and some last; Rules for expounding the petitions.
therefore the reason of this order shall be searched out.

Secondly, for that the words of some or all the petitions are doubtful,
therefore the sense and meaning of the words in the next place is to be scanned.

Thirdly, seeing the words of every petition are so short, the contents are
also to be observed: for better invention whereof, cerraine rules must be
remembered.

Whereof the first is, that seeing the petitions are as the Commandments,
certain general heads, or places, Rules for the contents of each petition.
whither the specials are to be referred, or else some special put for the
rest, therefore a particular enumeration will be requisite of such matters, as
by Rhetorical discourse may arise: and here the figure Synecdoche and
Metonymia have special use in most of the petitions.

A second rule is, that where good things are prayed for, evil things of the
same kind, as the hindrances and impediments of the good, are prayed against:
and so the petitions contain supplications, and deprecations.

A third rule also is, that seeing this prayer is a perfect platform of prayer
or inuocating of God, therefore of necessity there must place of thankfulness be
had in this prayer: and hereupon it follows, that in each petition, as we
pray for good things, so we give thanks for them: and as we pray against
evil, so we give thanks for immunitie and preservation from evil.

Five things to be considered in every petition. 1. The order. 2. The sense. 3.
Supplication. 4. Deprecation. 5. Thanksgiving.

Hence therefore it follows, that in every petition five things are to be
considered: which are these following.

First, the order of the petitions.

Secondly, the sense and meaning of the words of each petition.

Thirdly, the good things we ask, called supplication.

Fourthly, the evil we pray against, called deprecation.

Fifthly, the good we give thanks for, which is either in blessings conferred,
or evil prevented, called thanksgiving.

Out of which consideration appears also the difficulty of using the words
of the Lords prayer for a prayer: namely, The difficulty of using the Lords
Prayer aright.
for that it is an instrument for several purposes opposed each to other: as
for good and against evil: in asking and praising, and that in every petition:
so that we had need use great leisure in uttering the words, deep meditation
in searching out the contents, and contrary affections in respect of contrary
objects, good and evil, and so forth: or else very likely we shall in no
mediocritie diue into the depth of the matters therein contained: and yet
nevertheless I think it may lawfully be used for a prayer, for ought that I
yet conceive. These things being generally prefixed, as material for the
understanding of each petition, it remains that we descend to a particular
discussing of them: and first they admit this distinction: Some of them respect
God simply and merely: others respect us also: now these prayers which
concern God directly and simply, without any respect of us, are propounded
first of all: the reason whereof is diverse.

First, for that God is the absolute Lord of all the creatures, and he must
absolutely be regarded, all respect of our selves set apart: wherefore, if we
wanting our daily bread, and remission of sins, God thereby might gain
glory, we ought to be content therewith. Hence we see how vehemently Gods
children have bin carried with fiery zeal of Gods glory: Ioh. 2.17. 1. King
19.14. Exodus 33.31. Romans 9.3.
The zeal of Gods house consumed Christ, famished Elias, and urged the Prophet
Moses to reject his own salvation; and caused Paul to wish himself Anathema:
or at least to be content so to be.

Secondly, God in creating the world intended his own glory, which was the
first and chief end; Pro. 16.4.
and all other things, all Gods creatures and ordinances are but means to that
end, as our daily bread, remission of sin, strength against temptation,
Christ himself the Mediator, with all his works and sufferings, the Gospel,
Magistracy, Ministry, the creatures and whatsoever else: that therefore
which was first in Gods intention, must also be first in our intention, if we
be zealous of his glory aright.

Thirdly, Gods glory, kingdom, and will are most dear to himself, he loves
them as he loves himself: wherefore if we will be like God, and approve our
selves to be the sons of our heavenly father, and his faithful servants,
we must love and procure, and further that which God our Father and Master
prizeth so highly.

Fourthly, God will be honored, his kingdom shall be enlarged, and his will
shall be fulfilled, let all the men and devils in the world strive to the
contrary never so long or so much. Wherefore it is better for us voluntarily
to become serviceable to his glory, kingdom, and will, than by resisting to
take the foil, and procure judgment to our selves.

Lastly, Gods glory is the end of the creatures creation, and all the
unreasonable creatures in the world aim at this end: Psalm. 148.
wherefore the Prophet exhorts all the creatures, of all kinds; and mankind
of all ages and sexes, by necessary consequence of an argument from the lesser
to the greater, to laud and praise God. True it is that men and Angels of all
the creatures are only are irregular and degenerate from the end of our
creation, wherein we are inferior to the brute beast that perishes: Psalm.
49.20.
we are the end of the unreasonable creatures, and God is the end of man:
wherefore as the creature is serviceable to us; so ought we also to be to God:
for because we are rebellious to God, the creature proves rebellious to us.

Thus we understand the reason of this order, which the holy Ghost uses in the
petitions, preferring God before our selves, as reason requires; which
instructs us many ways. Frst, to the denial of our selves, which is the
maine doctrine of mortification; the full measure whereof, is the perfection of
Christianity, which consists both in affection, and that is continually to
resolve to part with all, rather than to deny the truth, or to offend God; and
in action, Luke 14.26.
which is the confession of the truth unto death: wherefore Christ in the
Gospel teaches, that he is not worthy to be his Disciple, that does not in
affection at the least, and resolution intend so to do: viz. to forsake father
and mother, wife and children, living and life it self for Christ's sake: Cant.
2.16.
for he must be our best beloved, as we are his, and therefore his honor and
praise must specially be intended and procured; which cannot be, if we love any
thing more than him: wherefore this order insinuates this self-denial, which
is opposed to self-love.

Secondly, this order teaches zeal to Gods glory, for procuring whereof we
are to spend our selves, and all we have. The light account whereof deserves a
very sharp reproof. Apoc. 16.21. Matthew. 24.12.
John the Divine, prophesies of a great hail, which like talents shall fall
from heaven upon men: and Christ he prophesies, that because iniquity shall
abound, the love of men shall wax cold: this cold hail and cold love is
now apparent in the world: it is marvelous to see how furiously the world
flameth with contention about worldly profits and preferments, and yet how
frozen their affections are to the obedience of Gods will, the enlarging of his
kingdom, and the advancement of his glory: whereas indeed the zeal of Gods
glory should so possess us, as that in comparison thereof our care for daily
bread should occupy a very mean place.

Lastly, this order teaches us the end of our daily bread, remission of sin,
and strength in temptation, namely the obedience, kingdom, and glory of God:
for to this purpose does God bestow upon us riches, honor, gifts, and graces,
that we might employ them to the best advantage of God who gave them. The rich
man must so use his wealth, as that thereby God may gain glory: the honorable
personage must account it his chief honor to honor God: the man of learning,
and speech, and counsel in like manner; and so forth of the rest. Exodus 22.29.
Leuit. 27.30. and 32.
Hence it is that in the old Testament, the Lord requires the tenth of all
the increase, whether of the earth, or of cattle, for the maintenance of his
worship; which by proportion must also be enlarged to whatsoever God bestows
upon us; as the tenth of our learning, honor, wit, children, and the rest, if
they were increaseable, and communicable: but being otherwise, the Lord
requires and accepts that which may be had, a careful employment of them
all, to the further enlarging of his praise in the world. This may suffice in
general for the order of the petitions. Now more specially, the petitions
which concern God simply, and merely admit this distribution: for they
respect either the end or the means procuring the end: Gods glory, mentioned
in the first petition, is the end: the kingdom and will of God, mentioned in
the second and third petitions, are the means procuring the end: for God is
glorified when his kingdom is advanced, and his will fulfilled.

The first prayer: Hallowed be thy name.
1 The order of this petition.
The first thing to be observed in this prayer is the order why the end is
before the means, why Gods glory is first prayed for, seeing that the means
are in nature before the end: for it is impossible that God should be
glorified, except his kingdom come, and his will be done: and upon the
advancing of his kingdom, and the obedience of his will, his glory is
purchased. The reason of this order is to be fetched from the Lords
predestination, and the Churches intention: for the Lord in his eternal
counsel first propounded his glory, uttering as it were this everlasting
decree in the first place: viz. I will be glorified by the creature: this being
set down, the Lord in the next place predestinateth the means whereby this
end must be achieved: and thereupo^ he utters this second decree: viz. I
will advance my kingdom, and cause my subjects to obey my will, that by this
means I may be glorified by them. And as this is the order of Gods
predestination, so Gods glory is first in the Churches intention, who in all
their actions and endeavors propound Gods glory, whether it be eating or
drinking etc. they do all to the praise of God. 1. Cor. 10.31.
Which is the instruction that arises from this order; whence this exhortation
is to be deduced to all sorts of persons, whether the public officer of the
commonwealth, or Minister of the Church, or the private man: the Magistrate so
ought to govern, as Gods glory may best be procured: and not to administer
justice for rewards, Esa. 5.23.
or of affection, whereby it sometime falls out that the just and righteous
man has his righteousness taken from him, and the wicked and ungodly are
justified, and so Gods honor is obscured. 1. Cor. 8.1.
The Minister ought so to use his gifts that God thereby may gain glory, and
not to seek himself by ostentation of knowledge, which puffs up, and
edifieth little without love. Every man in his place and calling must so
demean himself, as that he may credit the Gospel, and adorn his profession,
and that no advantage be given to the adversary to blaspheme the name of God:
but we must so shine by our good works, Matthew. 5.16.
that God may be glorified in all things: yea the man of trade and occupation
in the exercising thereof, must seek to honor the Lord, when as his work and
wares are such as may carry the commendation of honesty and truth, yea even in
the judgment of malice, and testimony of envy it self.

Thus much for the order of this petition. 2 Sense of the first petition.
The next is the sense and meaning of the words: they contain two things:
first, the action: secondly, the object where about the action is conversant or
occupied: the action appertains to us; the object of which action is the
Lords; for we must sanctify, and his name must be sanctified: Gods name is any
thing whereby he is known unto man, What Gods name sinifieth.
as one man is known unto another by his name; for in the first institution of
names, whereof mention is made in the history of the creation; every creature
had his name out of his essence or essential properties; Genes. 2.19.20.23.
as is very probable by the imposition of the name to the woman who is so
called in the Hebrew of her matter, as Adam also had his name by God of his
matter: the earth being the matter of the man, the man of the woman. So then
although God is not nor cannot be known of us by his essence, yet he may be
known of us by his properties and actions, which may be conceived and seen of
us in some measure. Now the things whereby God is known, are his works, Gods
works are his name.
and his word; his works manifest unto us diverse things of God, as the Apostle
teaches; namely, Romans 1.20. Gods word is his name. Ioh. 5.39.
his eternal power and Godhead: but his word does fully and sufficiently
discover whatsoever is needful for us to know of God: and that which is darkely
and imperfectly shrouded as it were under a curtain in the creature, the same
clearly and thoroughly is exposed to the view of all those that will search the
Scripture: Gods titles are his name.
now Gods word does describe God generally by titles and attributes. His titles
are such as partly teach what God is not, as infinite, immutable, incorruptible,
invisible, incomprehensible, and such like: partly teach what God is, as God,
Lord, Iah, Jehovah, Elohim. Father, Master, King, Creator, Preserver, Redeemer,
Iustifier, Sanctifier, Savior, etc. Whereof the latter are affirmative,
teaching something of God; the former are negative removing something from God.
These are the Lords titles. Gods attributes are in like manner, Gods attributes
are his name.
his name; as his Power, Wisdom, Mercy, Truth, Goodness, and such like; which
do not import in God any quality or accident; howsoever the resemblance of
them in us are only qualities, in God his wisdom is himself, and so of the
rest. Yet these attributes teach us many things of God: his works are nothing
else but effects of these and other his attributes and titles: Gods works are
his name.
as Election, Creation, Preservation, Redemption, Justification,
Sanctification, Salvation, Reprobation, Occecation Induration, Damnation,
Creatures, Ordinances, blessings, Judgments: all which enlightened by the
word, do wonderfully declare what may be conceived of God. Thus we see what is
the name of God. Further we are to inquire what it is to hallow or sanctify
Gods name. What it is to hallow Gods name.
For further clearing whereof we must know, that Gods name is not profane or
unholy, though here we pray it may be sanctified, and hallowed; for all the
wicked men and Angels in the world are not able any whit to blemish the name of
God in it self, for God and his name are out of their gunshot: but because men
do merueilously profane and dishonor the holy and reverend name of God in
themselves, and before others; it is hence that we pray that Gods name may be
used of us and others, with all holy reverence and honorable estimation, as
beseems the name of so great a Majesty as is the Lord. A pearl or precious
stone, cast into the ditch or mire, is still precious; but being set in gold
or goodly vestiments, shines very beautifully: so though wicked men cast dirt
and mire upon the glorious and precious name of God, by blaspheming, and
cursing, etc. yet Gods name is still most excellent, though it does not so
appear to us: but when Gods children with religious reverence handle Gods
name, as in preaching, and praying, and deposing, being lawfully called, then
Gods glory and majesty, glistereth brightly to the view of all the beholders.
And this is to sanctify or hallow Gods name. Wherefore as the Sun is always
in it self, the fountain of light, and shines most clearly, howsoever
sometime we see it not so, being either eclipsed by the interposition of the
moon, or shrouded under a dark cloud, or covered from our sight by the earth:
in like manner the name of God always is full of excellency and glory;
howsoever the darkness of sin, and the foggie mist of ignorance and error does
obscure the same, and conceal it from our eyes. Summarily therefore, we pray
in this petition, that as Gods works and word are good and holy in themselves,
so by thought, word and deed, we cause them to appear to our selves and
others.

To sanctify Gods name then is, first, to think, 3 The supplication of this
petition or prayer.
secondly to speak of, thirdly to use the works, and word of God reverently.
So that in this prayer we ask these things following principally, which may be
reduced to five heads.

1. First, knowledge. Five things needful to the sanctifying of Gods name.
2. Secondly, acknowledgment of Gods excellency in his word, and in his
works. 3. Thirdly, religious and reverent affections according to the kind of
the work, or part of the word. 4. Fourthly, religious speeches. 5. Fifthly,
religious actions.
First, that knowledge is necessary to the sanctifying of Gods name, will
easily appear, First knowledge.
for that it is a necessary precedent to reverence and high estimation: for to
know the excellency of any thing, is a good preparatiue to a due valuation
thereof: this knowledge is commended unto us as the way to life eternal: which
if a man wants, Ioh. 17.3. 2. Cor. 13.5.
he is but a refuse as yet: herein Adam excelled, who is thought to have known
the essential properties and forms of the creatures: herein Solomon excelled,
1. King. 4.33.
who spoke of all plants, beasts, fowls, creeping things and fishes; which
knowledge of the creatures must needs stir up in them a marvelous admiration
of the Creator, who had printed such excellent impressions of his Majesty in
his works. Psalm. 19 and 8.
Wherefore the Prophet entering into consideration of Gods name in his works
and word, breaks forth into wonderment; as if so be that a man could not
know but he must needs wonder also at the excellency of them.

2 Acknowledgment.
Next unto knowledge follows the acknowledgement of that which we know: which
is a thing as material to the sanctification of Gods name as knowledge: for a
man may know and resist his knowledge, and smoke out the eyes of his
conscience, and set his knowledge and approbation together by the ears; as it
fares with many, who seeing, Esa. 6.9.
do not perceive, and hearing, do not understand. Wherefore though the
Gentiles knew God, yet because they regarded not to acknowledge him as God,
Romans 2.21.28.
they could not glorify him, as the Apostle witnesses. This assent then to
that we know, is merely requisite to the sanctification of Gods name.

3. Religious affections.
In the third place the affections are to be moved according to the quality of
the matter known: for as we must sanctify Gods name in our minds, so also
with our hearts and affections, 1. Pet. 3.15.
and that especially. Hence it is that we read of diverse sanctified affections
in Gods Saints, according to the diversity of the work exhibited: as in a
miracle, admiration, Act. 3.10. Psalm. 116.13. Psa. 119.120. Psalm. 139.17.
as it is apparent in the curing of the creeple: in a blessing, thankfulness;
which is called the praising of God: in a judgment, fear and humiliation, and
trembling: in all the works of God, love: and so forth as Gods works vary,
Esaias. 66.5. Job. 33.25. Psalm. 119.97. Heb. 4.2.
so our affections must move. In like manner we must be stirred with Gods
word, as to fear at the threatenings of the law: to rejoice and be comforted
with the promises of the Gospel, generally to believe, and to love every part
of Gods word: thus if our hearts and affections bow and bend at the works and
word of God, we sanctify the Lord in our hearts, as the Apostle wills us.
For it shall be needless to show how upon occasion of meditation in the
attributes and titles of God, our affections are to move: for every religious
heart can sufficiently instruct it self therein. And thus God is sanctified
within us.

Now in the next place we must consider how the name of God must be sanctified
before others, and the instruments thereof are our speeches and actions.

In the fourth place therefore we are by our speeches also to hallow Gods name:
4. Religious speeches.
which is performed partly in such speeches wherein Gods name is not mentioned,
partly in such wherein God is named: of the first sort are Assertions, and
Asseuerations: of the second sort are, Confessions, Vows, Oaths, Adiurations.
In each of which it shall not be impertinent to insist a little for better
declaration of this point.

Although there be no better words than the names of God, yet all our speeches
are not fit to entertain all good words: if we speak of ordinary and common
matters, ordinary and common words will sort them well enough, Religious
silence.
and then it is good with a reverent silence to honor Gods name. Wherefore the
Jews superstition may justly challenge our prophanenes: they did forbear to
read the name of God in the Scriptures, and we in our trifling talk do not
forbear to usurp the weighty names and titles of the most glorious God: Yea,
yea, or nay, nay, Assertion. Mat. 5.37. Iam. 5.12. Asseueration. Matthew. 25.12.
were enough for our trifling speeches: and if we debated matters of better
importance, verily or certainly, or assuredly, might fit our purpose well
enough: but we offer that dishonor to God, which a Prince would not endure,
that in every toyish and vain sentence we should foyst in his name: for when
we speak to a Prince or of a Prince, we commonly give titles of reverence and
honor to so excellent a personage; but the profane multitude do varnish
their ribald and scurrilous talk with the fearful names of a most jealous
God, who will not bear that indignity at their hands another day. Wherefore
we in reverence of the holy names and titles of God, which are most honorable
and fearful memorials of his excellency, in our ordinary speech must with
sanctified silence forbear the mentioning thereof. Indeed sometimes it
falls out that we either by calling from others, or from our selves, use
Gods names and titles in our speeches lawfully: as when we are called forth by
the enemies of Gods truth to give testimony thereto; Confession. 1. P^ 15.
Matthew. 10.32. Psalm 40.9.10. Oaths. Ie^em. 4.2.
which is a confession to the glory of God before his and our enemies: or when
the Church requires it, or Gods blessings bestowed upon us deserve it: or else
when the Magistrate imposes an oath of God upon us to speak the truth in
matters otherwise vndeterminable, yet of necessary importance: wherein we
glorify God with the witness of truth, and knowledge of secrets: A^iu^ation.
1 Thessalonians. 5.27.
or otherwise when we impose a charge upon another with an imprecation from
God for neglect thereof, adiuring men to their duties, with the consideration
of Gods justice which thereby is glorified: or finally when we either upon
conscience of our own infirmities, whereof we desire mortification, Vows.
Eccles. 5.3.4.
impose upon our selves voluntary penance in abstinence from certain matters,
which pamper the flesh, being in our own power to perform. For strict
observation whereof we bind our selves to the Lord, thereby honoring his
holiness: or else in way of thankfulness to the Lord for blessings desired or
received. Promise unto God, Judge. 11.30.
to the praise of his mercy, matters acceptable unto him, called in the old
Testament freewill offerings. Psalm. 119.
Preaching and praying also are excellent instruments, whereby God is honored
in our speech; but they may generally be comprehended under confession, and
therefore I forbear to speak of them particularly. Thus is God glorified with
the tongue, which the Prophet calls his glory, Psalm. 108.1.
as that principal instrument wherewith God is glorified, the effect being put
for the cause by a Metonymia.

5. Religious actions.
In the fifth and last place we are by our actions also to glorify Gods name:
which are of three sorts, natural, civil, and religious. Natural actions.
Natural actions are such as wherein we communicate with the beasts and plants
of the field, as eating and drinking, sleeping, procreation, and recreation:
which actions are not so to be used of us as brute creatures practice them,
to whom the Lord has given no limitation nor law, and therefore cannot sin
in excess, or the manner of using, they being no causes ^or subiect^ of sin
properly for themselves: but we to whom the Lord has given reason and
religion, as moderators of nature and natural actions, are so to demean our
selves in the exercising thereof, as that we sail not in the proportion
either by excess or defect, nor swerve in the manner of their lawful use, but
that we always hedge our selves within the compass of those bounds which the
Lord has limited to us: 1. Cor. 10.31.
and here expressly the Apostle mentions eating and drinking, being natural
actions, to be done to the glory and praise of God.

Now civil actions are of another condition, viz. Civil actions. Et^^call.
^conomi^a^l. Polit^que.
such as wherein the brute beast partaketh not with us, such as are buying and
selling, borrowing and lending* giving and taking, letting and hiring, and
other affairs of like quality, whether Ethicall appertaining to civil and
mannerly behavior; or oeconomicall respecting the family; or politic in the
Commonwealth: in all which Gods name must be glorified through us. Hence it
is that the Apostle prescribes rules to Masters and servants, Colos. 3.18.19
20.21.22. etc. 1. Tim. 3.
husband and wife. Magistrate and subject, Ministers and all sorts of persons
how to demean themselves, as that the Gospel of Christ, and the name of God
be not blasphemed; but that even they which are without may be won by our
godly conversation even in these our civil affairs: for falsehood, rebellion,
and tyranny, give advantage to the unbeliever and mock-god to contemn true
religion, and to dishonor God; when those that profess the fear of God, deny
the power of godliness in their lives, causing their profession and practice
to contradict each other. Wherefore as the Apostle counsels, Ephesians. 4.1.
we must walk worthy of the vocation whereunto we are called, that we may be
a credit to our Master.

Now religious actions directly aim at Gods glory, Actions merely religiou^.
as being appointed by God to that purpose, and to no other: of which sort are
the exercises of Gods word, and administration of the Sacraments, and all the
parts of Gods worship public or private; of which point because it needs no
proof nor illustration, I forbear of purpose to speak.

Thus it is manifest that both our thoughts and affections which are inward, as
also our words and actions which are outward, are to be instruments of Gods
glory to our selves or others, according as their several conditions may
afford: and so it appears also what things we ask in this first petition or
prayer.

4 The deprecation of this petition or prayer.
Those things which we pray against are in the next place to be considered, and
they are opposite to the things we pray for, and they may be referred to five
heads also: which are these following.

First, ignorance and errors.

Secondly, vanity of mind.

Thirdly, a profane heart.

Fourthly, profane speeches.

Lastly, profane actions: all which are so many means to obscure or deface,
or abolish the glorious name of God out of the world. Of these in order.

Ignorance dishonoreth God.
First, ignorance either of Gods works or word, is the cause of profaning Gods
name: for as pearls cast before swine or dogs; so are ye works and word of God
among ignorant persons: swine or dogs will trample pearls under their feet in
the dirt, but skillful Lapidaries will use them carefully, and set them in gold
and costly garments: so the ignorant people that know not the works or word of
God will contemn and reject, or at least neglect the excellent instructions and
documents of Gods glory therein exhibited, and so profane the name of God:
but they that know them may use them aright, and glorify God in them. The
dunghill Cock, as the fable moralizeth, regards a barley corn, more than a
precious pearl, knowing the profit of the one, but not the price of the other:
so the blind dunghill people of the world, Atheistlike through light
estimation, because of their ignorance, prefer the dirtie commodities of this
life, before the glorious footsteps of Gods Majesty imprinted in his works
and word, thereby marueilously disparaging the Lord himself and dishonouring
his name.

Again, Error dishonoreth God. Matthew. 22. Ioh. 4.
ignorance being the cause of superstition and errors, as Christ teaches:
saying, Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, and ye worship ye know not what:
therefore it must needs be a maine cause of blemishing Gods glorious names
and memorials; for errors and heresies, are so many lies against the truth of
God, charging false and slanderous imputations upon God, making him the author
of that which he abhors and condemns: and as it is blasphemous to make God
the cause of sin, so is it of error: for it is to call God by a false name
and to belie God, which is a great dishonor to God. For as it is a disgrace to
a Prince to be belied, or blasphemed, or backbited: so is it much more
inglorious and dishonorable to God to make him the master and teacher of lies:
for it is customable with false teachers and their followers to father their
doctrines upon Gods word, which God himself inspired to his Church: and so by
necessary consequent, in that they are found liers against the truth of God,
they shamefully dishonor God.

In the second place also we are to mark how vanity of mind prophaneth the
name of God. Vanity of mind prophaneth Gods name. Romans 1.
The Apostle defines this sin to be the withholding of the truth of God in a
lie, that is, to make a false consequent or use from a true doctrine: to know
God, and not to glorify him as God: for example, to know God to be invisible,
and yet to make an image of him; to know God to be incorruptible, and yet to
resemble him to corruptible creatures, as beasts, birds, creeping things, etc.
and thus the Gentiles thinking themselves to be wise, having some truths of
God, became stark fools in deducing foolish consequents from that truth, and
so through their vanity of mind defaced that truth with a lie: and this is a
great indignity offered to Gods truth. For as a subject knowing his Prince,
yet making as though he knew him not, and so using himself irreverently before
him, does disgrace the prince: so they that know God, and his works and word,
yet notwithstanding do not glorify God, but become vain in their
imaginations, and discourses, and conclusions from Gods word, and works,
thereby occasioning and encouraging themselves in licentious living, and by
their lives denying the power of their knowledge, which otherwise might have
been auailable to their salvation; do shamefully abuse their knowledge, and
injuriously dishonor the truth revealed unto them, which they should have
glorified.

A profane heart d shonoreth God.
As blindness and vanity of mind, so prophanenes of heart also, which in the
third place comes to be considered, does greatly dishonor God; which is when
men's affections are not stirred according to the quality of Gods works or
word, his titles or attributes: and that is especially of three sorts.

Atheism dishonoreth God.
The first is an Atheists heart, which is the extinguishing of al affections in
respect of God; for as an Atheist laboreth for a persuasion that there is no
God, so also he desires that the fear of God may be clean taken away; also
that the love of God, the hatred of sin, the love of virtue and of the word
of God may be put out; and that he may live as he list, without any conscience,
or difference of good and evil, which is to bury the memory of God, and to
banish his name out of the world, which is the greatest indignity that may be.

VVorldlines dishonoreth God.
The second is a worldly heart, when a man is so estranged from heavenly
matters, and so wholly possessed with the love and liking of worldly things, as
that he cares not for God, nor any goodness further than he may gain thereby;
which men do greatly dishonor God and his truth, making it a means of
compassing the world; whereas indeed we should make the world a means of
religion: for to this purpose has God created and bestowed the world upon man,
that thereby they might be the better provoked and furthered to the worship and
glory of God; hither are to be referred all covetous persons that mind nothing
but their goods; all proud persons that mind nothing but the trimming of
themselves, gay apparel, and the credit of the world; all wanton persons that
mind nothing but the pleasures of the flesh: generally all such as dishonor
God by presuming any thing in their estimation, and affection before God: for
seeing God is the chiefest good, and the most high, he therefore ought to be
the chiefest and mos^ highly esteemed of us, otherwise we honor the creature
more than the Creator, Romans 1.25.
and dishonor God by communicating his glory to another.

The third is a secure heart, Security dishonoreth God.
when men that have the grace of God in them, notwithstanding do not so
carefully and diligently ^^irre up the grace of God, in the meditation and
application of Go is works and word, as the condition thereof does require;
for sometime it falls out that even Gods children slumber and sleep: Cant.
5.23. 2. Sam. 12.
so we read that the Church in the Canticles complains or excuses her
sluggish disposition: so we read that David slept in security, almost a whole
year; in which time no doubt he used the word of God, and the rest of Gods
worship, though with dulnes and great flatnes of spirit; whereby it came to
pass, that much of Gods honor and glory fell to the ground, unrespected of the
Prophet: but then God is dishonored, when he is not honored in that measure as
the means afford, and our grace may permit.

Having hitherto entreated how Gods name is inwardly profaned in our minds and
hearts, Profane speeches dishonor God.
it follows now in the next place to speak how by our words and actions we
dishonor God: and for our speeches, which is the fourth general head, we must
remember that they are especially of s^xe kinds.

Frst to speak of Gods works or word without reverence and fear, and
attentive respect to the matter: 1 Vnreuerent ^pee^^ of Gods word or works
dishonor God. 1. Cor. 24.13.
whether it be in prayer, or preaching, or conference, or howsoever else; for
Gods word being so reverend and honorable a name of God, must with
proportionable reverence and honor be handled: and therefore the Apostle would
have Preachers so deliver the word, as that the matter and words be of the same
nature; for sanctified matter, must have sanctified words, and spiritual
matter spiritual speeches: otherwise the matter is dishonored by the words:
therefore the Scriptures phrase and rhetoric is to be observed of Preachers,
that their sermons may savor of them as much as is possible. Here also they are
to be reproved that make prayer a lip-labor only, for they speak to God of
his word, and add no attention and reverence, which is to dishonor that grave
and solemn exercise of invocation. Hither also appertain those curious
schoole-disputes, interlaced with philosophical quiddities, whereby Gods word
is miserably stretched, and rackt, and rent in pieces, and disfigured; as Christ
was upon the cross by the soldiers: in sum, whatsoever indecent, homely,
and unmannerly metaphors or comparisons, whatsoever false glozes and
expositions, whatsoever railings and reuilings shall be used in disputations,
sermons, or tractats upon the word; fall within the compass of abusing the
holy word of God: and the Apostles counsel is rejected, who wills, 1. Pet
4.10.
that if any man speak, he should speak as the words of God.

2 Approbation o^ (...) writing dishonoreth God.
Next to vnreuerent speech, are such as give approbation to error or false
worship, whether by word, or writing, as subscription to popery, Mahometisme,
or any other false doctrine or superstition. For if it be alleged that though
they by word or writing, may seem to approve that profession whereto they
subscribe; yet they keep a pure heart, free from any assent or allowance
thereto. The answer is, 1. Cor. 6.20. Ioh. 4.24. 1. Cor. 8.10.11
that God will be glorified with the whole man, and not with the spirit only,
though that be chiefly regarded of him, himself being a spirit as Christ
teaches the Samaritane. The reason which the Apostle uses to dissuade the
Christian Corinthians from presenting their bodies at idolatrous feasts, least
thereby the weak be enboldned to do so likewise, is sufficient to enforce
this conclusion, that no outward approbation must be given to superstition,
least others be deceived thereby, and so Christ be dishonored. For that which
may be alleged of Elish^es approbation to Naaman the Syrian, 2. King. 5.18.
is altogether impertinent, if the place be truly translated: for Naaman does
not desire indulgence from God, for idolatry which he purposes to commit, as
though he spoke in the future tense; but for that idolatry which he had
formerly committed; for indeed the words may as well be translated in the time
past, and so they are directly in the original. So then whatsoever may be
alleged to the contrary, it is manifest that all outward approbation of false
doctrine, or worship by word or deed, is dishonorable and scandalous to our
weak brethren. Let us take heed therefore how we receive the mark of the
beast in our foreheads, Apoc. 13.16.
or our right hands, that is, that we by our gestures or subscription do not
approve the doctrine and superstition of the Pope, or the Turk, Verse. 3.
least by this means we worshipping the beasts, and dishonoring God, our names
be not found in the book of life.

After superstitious subscription, or approbation of false worship, 3 Scoffing
speec^^s about Gods woe d or w^rkes d shonor God.
follow mocking and jesting at or with Gods works or word, a thing very common
now adays; for every witty, or rather indeed witles brain, will be devising
and belching out the scum of their wit, in jesting and scoffing at Gods works,
or with Gods word, or other holy writings agreeable to the word, and
consecrated to the worship of God. These men in truth mock God himself in
that they mock Gods workmanship: for the disgrace of the work tends to the
dishonor of the workman: for the world has Nicknames for euey one that has
either a great head, or wry neck, or long nose, or crooked back, or lame
leg, or that wants a hand, or an eye or so forth: these deformities should
stir up in us humiliation, as being so many prints of Gods wrath in man: and
if we be free from them to acknowledge with thankful memory, the mercy of
God to us that have des^^ued as much: that so we might glorify God in his
justice and mercy: also the world, and especially the stage, which is a little
world of wickedness, is full of Scripture jests; it would cause a man's hair to
stand upright to hear how some please themselves in this kind of Rhetoric,
which the devil devised and suggested into the minds and mouths of
mocke-gods. 2. King. 1.24.
We read how severely God punished young children that mocked the Prophet, for
his infirmity of baldnes, and his ministry of prophecy: and the Apostles
condemns jesting, which notwithstanding the heathen man counted a moral
virtue. Now if it be a fault for one man to mock another; it is likewise a
fault, and much more, for a man to mock with the word of God: it is a great
sin also for us to make our selves merry with the simplicity of a natural
borne fools: in all which Gods works and word, and so God himself is
dishonored.

4 Vain swearing dishonoreth God.
Furthermore vain oaths diminish Gods glory, when men upon no necessity,
having no calling, in vain toys usurp the name of God, or the name of Gods
works, as by this light, fire, salt, bread, or the name of false gods or
worship, as the Mass, our Lady, Saint Anne, etc. In all which God is dishonored
either directly or immediately, Matthew. 5.34.
as in using Gods titles or attributes, or the parts of Christ's body or soul,
Matthew. 23.16.17.18.19 20.21.22. Psalm. 16.4. Exodus 23.13.
idly and fruitlesly, or indirectly and by consequence in calling to witness
the works of God, which are so many memorials and testimonies of God; as
faith, troth, etc. Or lastly in calling to witness false gods, or false worship,
which is to rob God of his honor, and give it to another which is no god; a
matter of most fearful blasphemy.

5 Perjury dishonoreth God.
After vain swearing, as an higher degree of dishonoring God, follows
perjury or false swearing, when we cloak false witness under the Lords skirt:
wherein, as much as in us lies, we make God the voucher of a lie, who is
notwithstanding the God of truth: how great a dishonor is offered to God by
this course, is so apparent as that it need no illustration.

despite or disgrace cannot be offered unto the Lord, Blasphemy dishonoreth
God.
which is to revile and rail upon God, called in the Scripture, cu^sing God; a
sin so great, as that it was dreadful to the holy Penmen of Scripture to use
the word, and therefore they use the contrary word, blessing in stead of
cursing, as the wife of Job said to him, bless, that is, Job. 2.9.
curse God and die: howsoever some expound the place otherwise. The haynousnes
of which sin is so great, as that the Lord has punished one degree thereof,
called blasphemy against the holy Ghost, Matthew. 12.32.
with the most fearful punishment of final impenetencie, in regard whereof
the sin comes to be unpardonable.

Thus also we see how, and how many ways we dishonor God by our profane
speeches; not that there are no more, but these are the principal. Now it
follows in the last place shortly to consider of those profane actions
whereby God is dishonored. Profane actions d^shonor God.
Concerning which it must be known, that all our evil deeds do in some
measure stain Gods glory, either directly or by consequence; but yet some are
more properly said so to do, and they are these ten which shall be handled in
order following.

The first is idolatry, 1 Idolatry dishonoreth God.
which is the making of an image of God: the worshipping of that image made; or
the making and worshipping of an image of a false god: by all which means God
is dishonored in the highest degree: for to resemble God in an image, is to
make the Creator else is the devil: for indeed when we do worship Idols we
worship devils. 1. Cor. 10.

2 Superstition dishonoreth God.
Superstition follows in the second place, which is the worshipping of the
true God after a false manner: as the Turk worshippeth the true God, according
to the tradition of Mahomet: the Papist worshippeth the true God, but with
mixture of much draffe of man's inventions, fearing and making scruple where
there is no cause of fear: and taking liberty to invent and devise means and
ways of worship where they should not: and thus they blemish Gods glory in
taking upon them authority to prescribe and impose such a worship upon the
Lord which his wisdom never determined, thereby controlling Gods wisdom
with their invention and will worship.

Curious arts dishonoreth God.
To Idolatry and superstition may be annexed, as near of kin, all
Witchcraft, Sorcerie, Magic, Charming, Southsaying, Figure-casting,
Palmistrie, Necromancie, and whatsoever other devilish arts the idle brain of
curious Naturalists have devised; al and every whereof contain in them a
secret idolatry and superstition at the least, if they have not openly
contracted with the devil, whom they adore, or pay tithe to of their blood; or
recompense some way or other for his obedience, suggestion and service
performed at their beck: wherefore all those that had used such curious Arts
to the dishonor of God, after their conversion burned their books at Ephesus,
Act. 19.19.
as the Evangelist reports in the Acts: in which story there are diverse
points very worthy observation to this purpose; as that they were learned men
that used these Crafts, and that their learning was out of books, and their
books were worth eight hundredth pounds: which declare plainly that they were
writings of Astrology or Magic, or Southsaying and the like, and not of
witchcraft only, which usually is not committed to writing, but learned by
observation or tradition: further it is to be considered, that they did not
sell but burn their books, as it were preventing the use of them to others,
because they were convicted in their consciences of the dishonor which came to
God thereby.

In the third place, after Idolatry and superstition, 3 Sacrilege dishonoreth
God.
which respect God and his worship, succeed sacrilege and simonie, which
respect the means of Gods worship. Sacrilege is when violence is offered to
holy places, things, persons, or times, etc. as if men should take away
Churches, and Church livings, and so overthrow the callings of Churchmen, and
convert the times appointed to Gods service to Faires and Markets: by which
practices it comes to pass that Gods worship perishes, and prophanenes
prevails, and the Lord is either forgotten, or dishonored. Thus did the King
of Babel commit sacrilege, 2. Chro. 36.
when he destroyed the Temple, and carried away the vessels of the Lords house
to Babylon, and used them to common offices, as in banqueting: thus did Christ
prophecy after Daniel, Matthew. 24.15.
that the abomination of desolation should be set in the holy place: thus did
the people profane the Temple, Ioh. 2.15.
making it a market place in our Savior Christ's time. Diverse other examples
there are in the Scriptures of this kind: but these may suffice, to show that
such sacrilegious practices greatly dishonor God, as being means to abolish
or defile Gods worship.

Simonie also is no small cause of defacing Gods glory, 4 Simony dishonoreth
God.
which is when offices Ecclesiastical are set to sale: whereby it comes to
pass, that unworthy persons by money prepossesse the places of Ministry and
maintenance, which should be conferred upon persons whom God has qualified
competently to such functions. Hereby it comes that ignorant and wicked
Ministers creep into the Church, which are fitter to keep swine, than to feed
the flock of Christ, meeter to be Masters of misrule, than rulers of Gods
heritage: and so the people perish for want of knowledge, or go astray after
their blind guides, and God is greatly dishonored, by people and Pastors:
besides the indignity which the Ministry ecclesiastical sustaineth, that it
should be valued with money, which is the means of conferring the inualuable
gifts of the holy Ghost, Act. 8.18.19.20.
which are not to be bought with all the worlds good.

5 Persecution dishonoreth God.
Having spoken of those sins which respect God and his worship, or the means
whereby God is worshipped: now follows a sin which is committed upon the
persons that worship God: which generally is termed Persecution, and that
either of the Preachers or professors of the truth: which is a manifest
indignity offered even to God himself: for the Ministers are Gods
Ambassadors, and every true professor is a member of Christ: wherefore as the
Prince is then disgraced, when his Ambassador is shamefully entreated; so is
the Lord dishonored in his Ministers and messengers: and as Christ was abused
when his body was crucified upon the cross; so is he also now when the
members of his mystical body are persecuted.

And these are the five grand-sinnes of Gods dishonor in action and practice:
there follow five other of lesser disgrace, whereby notwithstanding God is
blemished in his glorious name.

6 Vnreuerent using Gods word and sacraments dishonoreth God.
In the next place therefore we must consider that God is dishonored, when his
Word and Sacraments etc. are irreverently used, which falls out sundry
ways: sometimes by want of attention our minds and hearts and eyes are in the
corners of the world, about our worldly affairs, so that the matter handled in
the word and Sacraments passes into the air without our attention and
consideration: otherwhiles through the sleepie and sluggish disposition of the
flesh a great drowsines of the soul and body falls upon us, so as either we
hear not at al, or else we hear only as the man in the Gospel saw men walk
like trees: at other times we carpe at the word, and blame the Preacher: some
come to catch and to entrap: none of us all do so hear as that there is no
fault in our hearing: for the best of us neglect some, forget other, dislike
this, or do not apply that doctrine or exhortation, reproof or consolation:
whereby Gods word losing part of that reputation which it ought to have of us,
is in part also disgraced by us.

After the vnreuerent use of Gods word, 7 The vnreuerent use of Gods creatures
and ordinances d shonoureth Go^^ a^ meats and marriage.
follows the vnreuerent use of Gods creatures and ordinances, which he in
mercy permits unto us for the refreshing of our bodies and the inferior
faculties of the soul, wherein we communicate with the brute beast: for
seeing therein God manifests his mercy and love, and goodness to the
creature, we are not to neglect the same, but with due animaduersion observe
all those his attributes, and further take heed that we do not immoderatly
glut our selves with the creatures and ordinances of God, but with a necessary
and pleasurable sobriety, as occasion serves, relieve and comfort nature, 1.
Tim. 4.4.5.
and provoke our hearts to the glory of the Creator, who has made the infinite
variety of the creatures to refresh and delight man.

Amongst the creatures and works of God there are some extraordinary, as
miracles, and wonders: 8 Inconsideration of Gods works d shonouret God: of
wonders and miracles.
others ordinary, whereof some are judgments, some blessings; all which
seeing they teach us excellent things of God, are not to be ouerpassed
inconsideratly: for miracles and wonders being strong impressions of Gods power
and Godhead, ought to smite deeply by extraordinary affections, as admiration
and astonishment into our hard hearts, least God thereby be dishonored: 9 Of
ordinary work of Gods providence.
and even the works of God which ordinarily befall, are so many witnesses of
Gods providence to mankind, which are not slightly to be ouerpassed: for he
that cannot see and acknowledge the glory of God in the heavens, and the
interchangeable course of day and night, Summer, Harvest, Spring, and winter,
etc. is as blind in not seeing Gods providence, as the mote is to the Sun:
and so through his negligent or wilful inconsideration Gods glory is darkened
at noone day: whereas in them all the attributes of God shine most clearly, as
his power, mercy, wisdom, justice: Psalm 104. and 136.
and to this purpose the Prophet has composed whole Psalms.

Amongst Gods ordinances lots obtain a special place, 10 (...) seem^ (...) God.
which as it seems must not be used but in weighty and serious business, for
so the examples of Scripture where lots have been used do certify us: Pro.
16.33. 1. Sam. 14.41.43. Ios. 7.14. 1. Sam. 10.20. Act. 1.16. Number. 26.54. etc.
Mat. 27.35.
as about life and death, election of Ministers, distribution of inheritance,
and matters of like consequence; and the Scripture expressly notes the abuse
of lots in the soldiers that cast lots for Christ's coat without seame: and as
it seems for men to sport and play with lots is to dishonor the immediate
providence and direction of God, where the wit and art of man has no place:
but in this point I do not delight to be long, seeing it is a matter
something controuersall.

Thus we see these profane actions whereby God especially is dishonored: and
so the deprecation of this petition is in some sort opened, to be against
whatsoever wants, thoughts, affections, speeches and actions are any way
dishonorable to the Lord. Now the last thing to be considered in this first
petition is the thanksgiving.

5 The thanksgiving of the first prayer or petition.
We give thanks unto God for these good things which he has bestowed upon us
and others his children: as

1. Knowledge of his word and works.

2. Acknowledgement of the same.

4. Religious affections, speeches and actions.

Also we give thanks for that he has mortified the contrary sins in some
measure both in us and our brethren: as first, ignorance: secondly, error:
thirdly, Vanity of mind: fourthly, prophanenes in affection, speech, and
action: the particulars of all which may easily be collected by the former
tractate in the supplication and deprecation. And this also in brief may
suffice for the thanksgiving.

For a conclusion of this petition let this general rule be remembered, that
whatsoever virtue is commanded in the three first commandments, that is here
desired: whatsoever sins are forbidden in the same, are here also prayed
against: for the virtues appertaining to Gods worship are worthy means of
honoring God, and the contrary vices are so many clouds that hinder the
clear Sunneshine of Gods glory in the world: wherefore whosoever lists more
particularly to search into these matters, let him search the writings of the
learned, expounding the commandments. This is the first petition concerning
Gods glory, which is the end of all: now follow the two petitions which
infer the means of his glory: and first that of the Kingdom of God.

Thy Kingdom come.
This petition in order of nature goes before the third, 1 The order of the
second ^et^tion.
as the cause before the effect: for Gods Kingdom is that only means which
enableth us to obey his will. First, God must erect his Kingdom in our hearts,
and we must be his subjects before we can yield obedience to his laws: from
which order arises this instruction: That a man can never obey Gods will till
he have Gods grace; or a man can never keep Gods laws till he be Gods
subject, and God be his Lord and King, to rule and ouerrule him; Heb. 11. Romans
14. 1. Tim. 1.
or (which is all one in effect) good works proceed from grace; or without
faith (which is the root of grace) it is impossible to please God; or
whatsoever is not of faith is sin: or the end of the commandment is love,
out of a pure heart, and a good conscience and faith unfeigned: and the
necessary consequence of this doctrine is: Pro. 15.8. Esa. 1.13. Matthew. 7.22.
that whatsoever a man does, wanting grace, is sin: whether they be actions
natural, civil, or religious: for some Preachers, and Prophets in the day of
judgment shall be found workers of iniquity.

Here notwithstanding we must remember to distinguish betwixt the action and
the manner of preforming the action: the agent, the ouerseer, Five things in
every action. 1. Actio. 2. Agens. 3. Modus agendi. 4. Res mota. 5. Patiens.
and the matter the action is natural: the manner of performing the action
moral: the agent is terminus a quo, the efficient cause: the object is
terminus ad quem, or the patient upon whom the action falls. Now to all those
must be added the matter or the thing moved. This destinction being remembered,
let us take for examples, preaching and alms.

The uttering of the voice in preaching, is action, How preaching is good or
bad.
good in it one nature; the matter of preaching is good, the holy word of God.
The object whereupon the action is occupied is a godly man, the hearer of the
word: all which make the action so far forth good: but the agent, and the
manner of performing the action may turn it to sin: for if the agent, that is,
the Minister or Preacher be a man out of Christ, wanting faith and grace, being
no member of Christ, nor subject of his Kingdom, he cannot possibly obey his
will, but the fountain being unclean, the stream flowing from the fountain
is unclean also. Again, if the Preacher err in the manner of doing the
action, though he be in Christ, as if he preach Christ of contention or malice,
and so forth, his preaching may prove sin: sin I say, not to the godly and
careful hearer, nor in it self, but only to the Preacher. How alms is good
or bad.
In like manner, the reaching faith of the hand in giving alms, is good in
nature; the money or matter given is Gods creature; the person to whom the
alms is offered, a godly man: but if either the person that gives the alms,
or the manner of distributing be vicious as aforesaid: as if the proud Pharisie
should cause a trumpet to be blown for ostentation and vaineglorie, he being
not qualified with the foundation and form of a good work; all his alms, if
it were all his substance, were abominable in the sight of God, 1. Cor. 13.
as it came from him, and as good as nothing, as the Apostle teaches. This
distinction then being remembered, will clear this doctrine, that the good
deeds of wicked men are sin: from whence the conclusion also will follow,
that the wicked in the day of judgment shall be condemned for their good
deeds. This besides that it thwarteth the doctrine of the Church of Rome,
which teaches good works before grace, and their merit of congruitie: it
teaches us further to labor for two things: 1. Tim. 1.5. 1. Cor. 13.1.2.3.
first, that we have the foundation of a good work, which is faith in Christ,
by and through whom our persons and actions are accepted of God. Secondly, that
in all our good works we have the form and manner of doing, which in
general, the Apostle calls love, not only to God, aiming at his glory,
which excludes vaineglorie and hypocrisy; but also to man, intending the
benefit of him, to whom the good work is extended. And this is the doctrine
and use which arises from the order of this petition before the third.

The sense and meaning, 2 The meaning of the second petion.
which is the second thing to be observed, follows; wherein these two things
are to be considered, as before in the first petition, viz the object, and the
action, that is to say: First, what Gods Kingdom is: Secondly, how Gods
Kingdom is said to come.

Gods Kingdom, which is the first point, What Gods Kingdom ^s.
is the heavenly polity or regiment, which God through Christ exercises in
the hearts of the faithful by his spirit and word in this life, and by glory
and bliss in the life to come: in regard whereof the Kingdom of God is
called the Kingdom of grace, when it is begun in the consciences of the
faithful, and continually cherished and increased by all the holy means of
salvation; and it is called the Kingdom of glory, when it is consummate and
perfectly accomplished, the Saints yielding absolute obedience to the will of
God in heaven; whence issues the glorious happiness of the creature. For better
understanding of this point, what the Kingdom of God is, consider shortly
these twelve points which follow.

Who is the King? Christ Jesus as he is God and man;

Who are the subjects? They are of two sorts: true subjects,

What are the laws? They are the law of nature, which







Ephesians. 6.
namely, faith, hope love, righteousness, the word, prayer.







The first office is teaching, and that officer is called a Doctor.

The second is exhorting, and that officer is called a Pastor.

The third office is ruling, and that officer is called an Elder; in the Church
of England, he is called a Bishop.

The fourth office is distributing, and that officer is called a Deacon.

The fifth office is showing mercy, which officer is called a widow. These are
all set down. Romans 12.7.8.

The questions that are between the reformed Churches concerning these offices
and officers, I of purpose spare to handle, being both unfit to debate them,
and loath to offend; only I wish that such controversies might be ended by
Councels, and that the peace of the Church might be kept.

Who is the Deputy or Vicar of this King? There is no

What are the properties or qualities of this Kingdom?

Thus we see what Gods kingdom is: How Gods Kingdom comes.
now we are further to enquire how Gods Kingdom is said to come, namely.

1. When it is erected or established where before it was not.

2. When it is enlarged and increased where before it was.

3. When it is repaired or restored from some former decays.

4. When it is perfected and accomplished fully: of each something.

First, How Gods Kingdom is erected.
Gods Kingdom is erected and set up generally and specially: generally when it
is entertained by public consent in a country or Kingdom; and that is when
the Magistrate by law does establish the worship of God according to the word:
and execution is done accordingly: and when the Ministers, in their ministry
teach and minister the word and worship of God established. Specially the
Kingdom of God is established or erected, when men by the word of God are
converted to the faith, and outwardly make profession thereof. Thus Gods
Kingdom is set up.

How Gods Kingdom is enlarged.
Secondly, Gods Kingdom is enlarged; both when there are new subjects made,
when as before they were enemies, that is to say, when there are added to the
Church, such as shall be saved, or when they that are ordained to life
everlasting believe: as also when the former subjects are confirmed and
bettered, that is, when such as are within the Church, and do believe, grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

How Gods Kingdom is repaired.
Thirdly, Gods Kingdom is repaired from two great ruins and downefals
especially: the one of doctrine, the other of manners, and they are both of
them universal, and particular; for there are some which depart totally from
the whole doctrine of the says of Christ, as when a Christian becomes a
Turk, and some depart only from some particular doctrines: as they in the
kingdom of Antichrist. Again, there are some which being baptized and
professing Christ, power out themselves afterward to all manner of licentious
wickedness: others fall into some particular sins, as adultery with David. Now
if a man recover again from false doctrine, as from Turcisme, or Papisme, that
repair is dogmaticall: but if a man recover by repentance from lapse into
sin, that repair may be called moral: all which kinds both of Apostacy,
and backsliding, and of repairing and restoration, may sometime befall a whole
kingdom or commonwealth, as well as particular families or persons.

How Gods
Lastly, Gods Kingdom is perfected and fully accomplished at two times:
Kingdom is perfected.
The first time is the day of a man's death: the second time is the last and
general day of judgment.

The day of death is the special perfection of this kingdom in the subject
that dies, for then grace is perfected and consummated.

The day of judgment is the general perfection of this kingdom in all the
subjects thereof, which shall either die, or be changed suruiuing at that day.
The special perfection of this kingdom, is the glory of the soul only in
sanctification and salvation: the general perfection of this kingdom, is the
glory both of body and soul, of the whole man* which then shall perfectly,
according to the measure, be sanctified and glorified. Thus we see how the
kingdom of God comes.

Having now delivered the meaning of this second petition, it follows
according to the order propounded to speak of the contents thereof, in the
supplication, deprecation and thanksgiving: and first of the supplication,
which is the third general.

The things which we ask at Gods hands in this petition, 3 The supplication
of the second petition. 1 Timothy 2.3. 1. Godly Magi^t^ates further Gods kingdom.
are these following: the first concerns the Commonwealth, viz.

1. Godly Magistrates, for whom the Apostle wills to pray: teaching that it
is a thing good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior so to do: and
the Wiseman forbidding to curse the King, and the rich, on the contrary
signifies that we should pray for them and bless them: for the negative
includes the affirmative and contrarily: for Magistracy is an excellent
means to further the kingdom of Christ: Esaias 49.23.
and therefore they are compared to nursing fathers and nursing mothers by the
Prophet: for as parents do both beget and bring up their children; so godly
Magistrates do erect and maintain the faith and true religion by the sword:
hence it is that the Kings and Queens of England are entitled Defenders of
the Faith: which is the most royal part of the title royal.

2 Godly laws (...) f^ther Gods kingdom.
2 We pray in this petition that the godly Magistrates may mak^ godly laws,
and establish the whole truth of the word, and see that both the tables of the
Commadements be obs rued: for the Apostle in the former place to Timothy
express^th the substance of the Magistrates duty, which is to procure that the
subjects may lead a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty; 1.
Tim. 2.2.
where there are three things appertaining to the Magistrate, which he must
endeavor for his subjects: Peace, Godliness, Honesty, which do comprehend the
substance of the whole law of God: such Kings were David, Iehosaphat, Ezechias,
Josias, Nehemiah, Zorobabel, Hester, and Mardochai, with others: whose care was
to establ^sh wholesome laws, to overthrow Idolatry and superstition, and to
procure the peace of the Church and Commonwealth. Dan. 6.26. Nehem. 2.
Such laws did Darius and Artaxerxes procure to be made, for restoring the
worship of God in Jerusalem, although they were Heathen Kings, who in some sort
did help forward the kingdom of God.

The second thing we ask appertains to the Ministry of the Church.

1. Able Ministers further Gods kingdom.
1. Able and faithful Ministers, which both have gifts, and willing minds to
employ their gifts in their Ministry to the glory of God, and the
edification of the body of Christ. Mat. 9.37.38.
This is that which Christ teaches his disciples to pray for, that seeing the
harvest is great, and the laborers few, therefore the Lord of the harvest
would send forth laborers into the harvest: and the Apostle wills the
Thessalonians to pray for him and other the Ministers of the Gospel: 2 Thessalonians.
3.1.
for next unto godly Magistrates are godly Ministers, the one establish Gods
worship, the other teach Gods worship: hence it is that as Magistrates are
called nursing fathers and mothers, so Ministers are called Gods
fellow-workmen, 1. Cor. 3.9.
builders, shepherds and such like: for that they feed the flock, build the
city, and perform the work of the Ministry outwardly as God does inwardly:
yea there are more excellent titles given to the Ministry in the holy
Scripture than to Magistracy, as that they are the light of the world, the
salt of the earth, Christ's Ambassadors: indeed there is one only title given
to Magistrates before Ministers, that they are termed Gods; Psalm 32 6.
which is not so much in regard of their office, as of their superiority and
authority over all persons: whereas the titles of the Ministry are rather
given to the office than the person.

2. We pray also that these Ministers may faithfully, A powerful Minister^
^theret^ Gods kingdom.
powerfully, and zealously exercise their offices ministerial, not only in
preaching, but also in governing the Church: as in teaching the ignorant,
reproouing, suspending, excommunicating the obstinate, comforting the
comfortles, confirming the weak, confuting errors and heresies, and generally
in building up the kingdom of Christ, according to their several functions
delegated unto them by the polity Ecclesiastical. Thus Moses prays for
Leui, that Vrim and Thummim might be with him, Deuteronomy. 33.8.10.
and that he may teach Jacob the law and judgments of God. So the Apostle Paul
wishes the Ephesians to pray for him, Ephe. 6.19.20
that a door of utterance may be given unto him to speak boldly as he
ought: for the powerful Ministry is as it were horsemen and chariots to
overthrow the kingdom of the devil, that so the kingdom of Christ may take
place; 2. Cor. 10.4.5.
it is the spiritual weapons which are mighty through God to cast down the
holds of man's imaginations, and of every high thing that is exalted against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience
of Christ.

3. 3. Preservation of (...) from the ^ersecution (...) d^s^reth Gods kingdom.
We pray also that these godly Ministers may be preserved and kept from the
persecution of tyrants and wicked men, whom the devil enrageth against them
especially, as we see by evident experience that no sort of men is so much
maligned and exposed to the despite of malicious men, as the faithful
Ministers. Yea and the more faithful and powerful they are, the more does the
^iuell in his members outray against them. Deuteronomy. 33 ^
Thus did Moses pray that the Lord would smite through the loins of them that
rose up against Leui to persecute him: so the Apostle wills the Thessalonians
to pray that he might be delivered from absurd and evil men: 2. These. 3 2.
for persecution is a great discouragement to a Minister, and it drives many a
godly man to his dumpes, and interrupteth his Ministry, or at the least his
cheerefulnes in his Ministry, and so by this means the efficacy of his
Ministry being hindered, Christ's kingdom receives hindrance also.

Thus we pray for Magistracy and Ministry, which are the two general and
maine pillars of Gods kingdom. Now follow the fruits and effects of them
both, which are, reformation, and conversion.

Reformation and conversion further Gods kingdom.
In the third place we pray that by godly Magistrates inacting wholesome laws,
and causing due execution of them: and by godly Ministers powerfully exercising
their ministerial actions, men may be reformed from their errors and
misdemeanour, and be truly converted to the faith, and brought to repentance
out of the snare of the devil, or at the least by outward punishment from the
Magistrate and ecclesiastical censures from the Ministry be restrained and
repressed, so as they break not out to open prophanenes: and also that those
which are already converted and reformed, may be further built up in the
spiritual building of Gods temple. The substance of this point is, that God
would vouchsafe to add the operation of his spirit, to the outward means both
of Magistracy and Ministry. This the Apostle calls the kingdom of God:
Romans 14.17.
when he teaches that the kingdom of God stands not in meat and drink (or
any outward means by consequence) but in the effectual operation of the
spirit which works in us righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost:
which three things are principal parts of this kingdom.

1 Righteousness a part of Gods kingdom.
Righteousness is twofold: first imputative, which is the righteousness of Jesus
Christ the Mediator and Redeemer purchased through his doings and sufferings
for the church, and imputed to every believer by the holy Ghost: which
righteousness is apprehended and applied by faith.

The second is righteousness inherent and resident in us, as a quali^ie really
qualifying the subject, which righteousness is an effect of the former
righteousness of Christ imputed, whereby sin daily is crucified and weakened:
and we are enabled to yield obedience to the will and law of God in some
measure acceptable to God through Christ: from which inherent righteousness, as
from the body of the tree, (Christ's righteousness imputed being the root)
spring manifold branches, which bring forth fruits worthy repentance and true
conversion.

After righteousness follows peace, 2 Peace a part of Gods kingdom.
which is peace with God, who of an enemy is made a friend through the
mediation of Jesus Christ: and peace with our own consciences, which before
were either overwhelmed with despair, or puffed up with presumption and
senseless security: and peace with all the creatures, so far forth as that
they shall not hurt us, but become serviceable to us.

After peace follows joy in the holy Ghost, 3 Joy spiritual a part of Gods
kingdom.
arising from righteousness and peace: for being once through faith made
partakers of the righteousness of Christ, and qualified with the manifold
graces of Gods spirit, and being at peace with the Creator and the creatures,
1. Pet. 1. Romans 5.
then we rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious, receiving the end of our
faith, which is the salvation of our souls: whereby also we rejoice in the
afflictions which befall us for Christ's sake.

These are the principal things we pray for in this petition appertaining to
this life: The last iudgem^nt ^there^ Gods kingdom.
some thing also appertaining to the life to come is here desired, namely the
speedy coming of Jesus Christ to judgment, and so the perfecting of the
number of the elect, the resurrection of the body, and the everlasting joys
of heaven: so in the Apocaly^s the Spirit and the Bride say, Come: come Lord
Jesus, Apoc. 21.
come quickly And this may suffice for the supplication.

The things which we pray against follow in the next place to be handled, 4
The depr^cation the (...) of this petition.
which may be gathered out of the supplication, and are to be handled
according to the order there used: and in the first place things concerning
Magistracy.

Anarchie hinders Gods kingd^me. Judge. 19.
1. Anarchie: which is want of M^gistrates, whence issues disorder and
confusion, that every man may do what him lists, a fault taxed in the
Commonwealth of Israel: whereby it comes to pass not only that the second
table of the Commandments concerning justice and equity is transgressed;
example whereof is brought of the Leuite, whose wife was abused unto death: but
that the first table also is violated, which respects the kingdom of God,
Judge. 18.
as the example of Micah and his idolatry teaches. For it is a thing that the
devil would wish principally that Magistracy were abolished, and therefore
he has inspired that devilish doctrine into the confused heads of the
Anabaptists, who take away all rule and authority and all superiority among
men: for if he could compass that, then the fear of punishment being
abandoned, and the hope of rewards taken away, which are the two sinews of the
Commonwealth, he might easily prostitute men, women, and children to all
impious and dishonest behavior: whereby the kingdom of God should be banished
out of the world. Hence it is that the light of nature teaches, that it is
better to have a Tyrant than no King: for nature is not so extinct in any man,
no though he were an Atheist, but he would, if not of love to order and
civility, yet in policy prescribe laws to his subjects, whereby peace may be
maintained and some form of moderation, least the brute beast should control
man, to whom nature has prescribed and limited a compass, as we see labor
in the Pismire, chastity in the Turtle, courtesy in the Elephant, and the like
in other creatures: and although a Tyrant might do and suffer much impiety
and iniquity, yet some good must needs proceed from him, though he were never
so great a monst^^ of men: in regard whereof Tyranny is better than Anarchie;
there being some order in the one, and none in the other.

2. Next unto Anarchie is Tyranny, Evil Magistrates hinder Gods kingdom.
when evil Magistrates are in place, which seek by all means to erect and
set up the kingdom of Satan, in Gentilisme, Mahometisme, Papisme, or Atheism,
or any other superstition and heresy, whereby persecution is ^aised against
the true worshippers of God and true religion: Toleration of strange religion
and worship hinders Gods kingdom.
or else when there is a Toleration of many Religions, whereby the kingdom of
God is shouldered out a doors by the devils kingdom: for without question the
devil is so subtle that he will procure, through the advantage of man's
natural inclination to false doctrine and worship, more by thousands to follow
strange Religions, than the truth of Gods word: wherefore the Magistrates should
cause all men to worship the true God, or else punish them with imprisonment,
confiscation of goods, or death as the quality of the cause requires. Here
notwithstanding a doubt arises: how it is lawful to pray against the evil
Magistrates, 1. Tim. 2.2.
when as the Apostle does wish prayers to be made for Heathen Princes and
Magistrates, which then were persecutors. The answer is very easy, that we
may pray for their salvation and conversion, but against their tyranny and
persecution: for it is not unlawful to pray for the Turk, Pope and Spaniard
that they may be converted and saved: but it is lawful also to pray against
their proceedings against the truth, that God would discomfit them in battle,
bridle their corruption, abate their pride, assuage their malice, Psalm 68.1.2.
and confound their devices. Thus we see the Prophet prays against the
enemies of the Church. Judge. 5.31. Psalm. 83.9.10.
Thus also did Deborah and Barak pray that all the enemies of God might perish
as Sisera perished: and so in another Psalm prays the Prophet.

3. Lastly, Evil laws hinder Gods kingdom. Dan. 6.
we pray against all wicked and irreligious laws and statutes, that God would
hinder the making of them, or at the least the execution of them: such as was
the law made against Daniel, that contained a mouths Atheism, that no man for
thirty days should worship any God but the proud King: such as was that which
Haman procured to be made and ratified against the Jews, Hester. 3.
that all the true worshippers of God should be destroyed and slain: such as
were enacted in the time of the bloody persecutions by Heathen Emperors, that
whosoever said he was a Christian should be put to death: for by such laws
the very foundation of Gods kingdom is shaken, and greatly endangered.

Again, in the second place we pray against certain sins and enormities
incident to the Ministry: which are these.

Ignorant Ministers hinder Christ's kingdom. Malach. 3.7. Hosea. 4.6.
1. Ignorance: for ignorant and unlearned Ministers pine the souls of men,
being not able to teach and instruct the people committed to their charge: the
Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and the law should be required at
their mouths: and the Lord he refuses such Priests as refuse knowledge: for
they are the lights of the world, and therefore they must have light in them
whereby they may give light: they are the salt of the earth, and therefore must
have favor in them to season withal: wherefore by law established in this
land none ought to be admitted into the Ministry, but such as can render a
reason of their faith in Latin, and can teach the Catechism allowed by law
containing the sum of Christian religion, so as the people may understand,
and at their ordination have authority given them to expound the Scriptures
being called thereto. Wherefore seeing there can be no faith without knowledge,
and no knowledge without teaching, and no teaching without learning: therefore
the Ministers that want learning cannot teach, so as the people may know and
believe and be saved: and by this means the people perish for want of
knowledge, Hosea. 4.6.
and Gods kingdom is diminished in the number and quality of good subjects.

False teachers hinder Christ's kingdom.
2. After ignorance follows error, which poysoneth the soul: for heretical
and erroneous teachers broaching erroneous and false doctrine, infuse poison
into the minds of men: for such doctrine fretteth and infecteth like a
Gangrene, as the Apostle teaches: 2. Tim. 2.17.
and therefore he wills that men should avoid such teachers and heretics
after once and twice admonished: for as all men will avoid him that has the
plague, or any other contagious disease; so erroneous and heretical teachers
must be shunned as being such as have the plague of heresy upon them, which
is almost incureable, whereby they infect those that are of sound judgment,
and so pull them from subjection to Christ their King and Prophet.

3. In the next place, The Ministers hinder Gods Kingdom.
idle and unprofitable teachers follow, which eat the milk, and cloth
themselves with the fleece of the flock, but feed not the flock. The sin
of these men is so much the greater, for that they can, and will not teach
their people: and as idle persons in the commonwealth are called thieves by
the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.
not because they violently steal, but for that they are caterpillars and
drones, eating that which they never sweat for: so these men that live idly in
the Church, incur the just rebuke of spiritual feloney and theft; in that
they eat and work not: in that they reap temporal things of the people, and
do not minister their spiritual things to the people. And so it comes to
pass that the people being untaught, and unfed, their souls pine away and are
famished and perish, and the Kingdom of Christ is deprived and robbed of
subjects.

4. After idle Ministers which can teach, and will not, Unskillful Ministers
hinder Gods Kingdom.
follows another sort, which will teach, but cannot: whose service is
therefore refused of God, for that they take upon them that whereto they have
no competent ability. For there are certain bounds and limits wherein
consists a sufficient qualification to the office of the Ministry, whereto
if any man be found defective, although he may be profitable to the furthering
of Christ's Kingdom in another calling, yet therein he does harm, in that he
hinders another, that might do good: these men may be called manglers and
hackers of Gods word, for they cannot divide the word aright, as the Apostle
speaks, neither are they apt to teach. A skillful carpenter can by line and
level square his timber, but a man not brought up to the trade, will hacke and
mangle and mare the timber: so the Apostles compares Ministers to skillful
builders, and not to them that clean and chop wood, rending and cutting it in
pieces, they care not how so it be done. For a Minister must be a master of his
profession and mystery, as well; yea much more than other men. Again, it is
one thing to be learned, and another thing to be apt to teach, the one is
contemplative, the other practical; for a man may have knowledge how and what
to teach: and yet want gifts of speech to utter significantly, and profitably,
as experience teaches. By reason whereof it falls out that some men having
good learning, do not edify others: or having speech and wanting learning, are
no better than sounding brass, and a tinckling cymball.

Vicious Ministers hinder Gods Kingdom.
5. Now further let it be granted that a man have the qualification of
learning, sound judgment, pains, skill, and utterance; yet nevertheless if
his life be vicious, he does not build with both hands, but pulls down as
fast as he builds. Wherefore the Apostle requires that Ministers should be
both apt to teach, 1. Tim. 3. Math. 5.
and unreprovable, and Christ himself wills his disciples to have a double
light in them, both of sound doctrine, and a godly life. Such Ministers may
very well be compared to images, placed in cross ways, which point the way to
the town, but never set foot to go thither: or like to the sermon bell that
calls men to the sermon, which is the means of salvation, but never hears
nor profits by the sermon. And these Ministers greatly hinder the Kingdom of
Christ, for howsoever they preach and may be means of conversion and
edification to those that are converted: yet surely their evil life does
scandalize and offend many, not only that are without, but some weak ones
also within the compass of the Church. For howsoever it be a fault for a man
to stumble at a block wilfully and of purpose, as these men do: yet surely it
is a great fault for to lay the block in his way, which we know will stumble
at it; it is as if we should give a sword to a mad or desperate man, that
would kill himself.

6. A ^lattering Ministry hinders Gods Kingdom.
In the last place those Ministers that seek to please men, that sow pillowes
under every elbow, that say peace, peace, when there is no peace, that daube
with untempered mortar, that out of a policy securing themselves from danger,
refrain wholesome doctrine and application, not daring to say with Nathan to
David, thou art the man: nor with Elias to Ahab, it is thou and thy fathers
house that troubles Israel, nor with John Baptist to Herod, it is not lawful
for thee to commit incest, nor with Christ to the Scribes and Pharsies, woe be
to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, serpents, generation of vipers: these
Ministers, I say, walking fearfully and politikely in their ministry, hinder
the building of Christ's spiritual temple: for they do not hew, and saw the
rough stones, nor plane and polish the knottie timber, but rub them with a
smooth slickstone, and wipe them with a soft fox skin, and so by this means
the rubbish stone, and knottie timber, is unfit for the spiritual edifice:
whereas the Ministers should be such as James and John were, the sons of
thunder, which should with the thunderbolts of Gods judgments pearce the
flint-hard hearts of secure and carnal men, that they might be turned into
soft and fleshie hearts.

Having spoken sufficiently of the faults incident to the magistracy and
ministry, which hinder the Kingdom of Christ, other vices follow which in
this petition we pray against.

First against infidelity, impenitencie, and reigning sins, General sins
hindering Christ's Kingdom.
the subversion whereof is an effect of good Magistracy, and Ministry, and
the nourcing and cherishing whereof necessarily grows from the foresaid vices
in the Magistracy and Ministry. These sins, howsoever they are incident to
some Magistrates and Ministers, yet they are general sins that indifferently
possess the hearts of all men of all estates and callings.

1. Infidelity hinders Gods Kingdom.
Infidelity is one leaf of the iron gate that barreth the Lord Jesus Christ
out of the soul: who being kept out, it is impossible that his Kingdom and
scepter should there be erected. So long as the devil, who is the strong man,
keeps possession, all things are safe: but when says enters into the
soul, Psalm. 24.
then one leaf or head of the everlasting gate is lifted up, and the King of
glory comes in: Matthew. 12.
then that man Jesus Christ, which is stronger than the devil, spoileth him of
his castle and furniture, and takes possession of the spiritual fort, and
aduanceth his scepter and Kingdom, proclaiming himself the King and Lord of
that subject.

2 Impenitencie hinders Gods Kingdom. Luke 3.
Impenitencie is another leaf of that iron gate, which excludes Christ Jesus,
and causes the owner to rebel against his sovereign Lord and King; which
must be opened and lifted up before Christ will enter. Repentance may be termed
the Haruenger of the King, as John the Baptist was of Christ, who taught the
baptism of repentance, for the remission of sins, whereby the Lords way was
prepared, and his paths made straight. This is the doctrine which Christ
himself taught: Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand: for Gods Kingdom
being at hand is admitted into the soul by repentance, and excluded by
impenitencie.

3 Reigning sins hinder Gods Kingdom.
Reigning sins also may be termed the lock upon the gate, or the bar, or
the port-culles, whereby the iron gate is further fortified and strengthened
against an entery. For so long as any one sin reigns in the soul, the Lord
Jesus cannot, nor will not reign there, who will have all the place of the
soul, or none: for Christ can endure no consort or copartner in his Kingdom,
especially his enemy: and no man can serve two contrary masters; or be a good
subject to two Kings, 4 False doctrine and superstition hinder Gods Kingdom.
inioyning contrary laws.

Secondly, we pray against all the Kingdom of darkness, as against Gentilisme,
Mahometisme, Iudaisme, Papisme, and against the proceeding of all those, or any
other false doctrines and superstitions: for by all these false means, the
Kingdom of Antichrist, and of Mahomet, the two eldest sons of the devil, is
advanced; and the Kingdom of Jesus Christ is dejected and cast down.

Lastly, we pray against wicked men and Angels, that God would hasten their
just destruction and damnation: and in the mean space repress and bridle
their malice and rage, that they do not prevail against the truth of God and
professors thereof: Romans 11 9. Psalm. 69.22.
and if we do discern any man to be a reprobate, as namely, one that
commits the sin against the holy Ghost, directly and particularly to pray
for his speedy damnation, and all the means effecting the same. Finally, Romans
16.20.
that God would shortly tread down Satan under our foot.

This is the deprecation. The thanksgiving follows; 5 Thanksgiving of the
second petition.
which how it is to be made, may be gathered by the particulars of the
supplication and deprecation.

This is the first of these two petitions which concern the means of Gods
glory: from whence this may be observed; that one and the self same virtue and
vice may be referred to diverse petitions in diverse respects; which is agreeable
to the rules of reason, which teaches that the respect being changed, the
argument is also changed. To this petition the fourth commandment is to be
referred.

Now follows the second of these petitions, which respects the means of
Gods glory, which is the obedience of his will.

Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven.
This petition follows consequently upon the former, 1 Order of the third
petition.
for when men are subjects of Christ's Kingdom, then they begin to obey his
will, whereas before they were rebels and traitors, and the slaves of sin and
Satan; whence this instruction arises. That obedience to Gods will are the
fruits of Gods Kingdom. Or that good works are the effects and signs of
grace, and the Kingdom of God in us: or that good works justify, that is
declare that we are justified, and that they argue faith, and grace in the
heart. The tree is known by the fruit says Christ: and John Baptist wills
those that came to be baptized, Mat. 12.33. Mat. 3.8.
to bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life; or worthy conversion; as
if it had been said by Christ and John Baptist: Evil fruit argues an evil
tree, and good fruit commends a good tree: so evil works show an evil
heart, and good works show a gracious heart. Repentance or conversion
appears in godliness and righteousness, and not in prophanenes and wickedness.
And therefore if you will approve that you have repentance, which is the inward
baptism; whereof the outward baptism of water is a sign, bring forth such
fruits of a holy and righteous life, which may evidently declare the same: for
the inward disposition of the heart is outwardly engraven in the life: Iam.
2.18.
Show me thy faith by thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works,
for we cannot otherwise judge one of another, but by the outward practice; for
God only is the searcher of the heart.

This doctrine will minister unto us a touchstone whereby we may try a sound
and substantial Christian from a foggie and bumbasted hypocrite: the life of
the one is religious and righteous full of good works, Psalm. 45.2. Ephesians. 4.29.
his lips are full of grace, and rotten communication proceeds not out of his
mouth: whereas the life of the other is either grosely vicious or merely
civil; who though perhaps he do no harm, yet he does no good, especially he
will be dissolute in religious exercises, and worldlines tainteth his life: and
though happily himself will not talk corruptly, yet he can either with
patience or delight, 1. Cor. 4.5.
hear others. Again, although we may not clime up into Gods judgment seat,
to give the definitive sentence of his election, or reprobation upon other men,
for that were to rob God of his honor, yet without breach of charity we may
censure the present estate of other men, leaving the issue to the Lord; neither
ought men thereat to be offended, considering that Christ has left us a most
certain rule of direction, ye shall know them by their fruits: Mat. 7.16
and howsoever a godly man may sometime be censured for a wicked man, he being
in some gross sin a long time, as David in adultery without repentance; yet
though the censure be false, it is charitable, because it is according to the
rule: By their fruits ye shall know them. And contrariwise, though sometime a
wicked man may play the hypocrite so kindly as that he may by the show of good
works, wring from the Church, the charitable censure of a godly man, he being
nothing less; yet that censure also is due being false, and in charity, and
justice he can have no less, for the heart is unknown to man, and we can
know them only by their fruits. And this may serve for the order of the
petition.

For the meaning of this petition, consider three things. 2 The meaning of the
third petition.


1. What is Gods will.

2. What it is to do Gods will.

3. How Gods will must be done.

For the first we are to know that Gods will is partly revealed to the Church
in his word and works, What is Gods will.
partly kept secret to himself in the closet of his own eternal counsel;
which distinction is grounded upon that speech of Moses: The secret things to
the Lord, Deuteronomy 29.29.
the revealed things to us. For example, these are things secret: Which man is
a reprobate amongst us? (if he have not sinned the sin against the holy
Ghost) Where hell is? How the Angels are distinguished? When the day of
judgment is? which things God has concealed from us as impertinent for us to
know: and to search whereunto, were to pass the bounds of a modest and sober
inquisition. Now things revealed are such as are contained in the world, viz.
All that holy doctrine of the law and Gospel contained in the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles: as also whatsoever other things the works of God
ordinary or extraordinary discover unto us. As for example, the hour of this
man's death is unknown till he be dead, then it is known, etc. And thus God
does daily reveal new matters to us, which before were hidden: thus by the
observation and inquisition of wise men the course of heaven and the whole
order of nature was discovered.

What it is to do Gods will.
For the second thing, which is the doing of Gods will, we must consider
thereof according to the distinction of Gods will before set down: and first
for the revealed will of God, that is done two ways: either by obeying the
commandments willingly, or suffering the chastisements patiently: for the
chastisements which befall us are parts of Gods revealed will, of what kind
soever they be: and here are two virtues suggested unto us, when we pray let
thy revealed will be done: Obedience, which is so often urged in Deuteronomie:
Deuteronomy. 6.1.2.3.
and Submission, which is insinuated in the emphasis of the word, Thy will,
containing a negation of our own wills, as Christ said in his prayer, Not my
will, Mat. 26.39.
but thy will be done. Secondly, for the secret will of God we do also in part
pray that it may be done: I say in part: for example sake, we pray that God
would daily more and more reveal unto us Antichrist, which to the Primitive
Church was a secret, and in part is a secret to us. So also we pray, Apoc. 22.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, and yet the second coming of Christ unto
judgment, in regard of the time, is concealed: so we pray for patience to
bear the crosses which God shall inflict; which of what kind they are, and
when they shall befall us, is unknown.

How Gods will must be done.
Thirdly, Gods will must be done in earth, as in heaven: which words are
diversely expounded by Interpreters.

1. Cor. 6.20.
Some say: Let the body, which is earthly, obey Gods will, as the soul and
spirit, which is heavenly: but that is as good as nothing, for the soul is
sinful as well as the body, yea is the author of sin to the body which is
only the instrument.

1. Cor. 15.47.
Others say: Let the earthly minded men be converted and yield obedience, as
the heavenly minded are and do: but this also is as good as never a whit, being
never the better: for the heavenly minded are imperfect, and wanting in the
best of their obedience.

But the better sort of Expositors say thus: Let men upon earth obey the will
of God, as the Angels do in heaven: Psalm. 103.20.
and this seems to be the true exposition of the words: now the Angels obey
Gods will readily and perfectly. Gods will must be done readily. Esaias 6.2. Exodus
36.35. Exodus 25.20.
The willingness and readiness of the Angels does appear by the similitude and
shape which is given them; they are said to have wings by the Prophet Esaias: and
the Cherubims imbroidred upon the veil of the Tabernacle, and the two
Cherubims upon the Mercy seat had wings: yea further, the two Cherubims upon
the Mercy seat did look with their faces to the M^rcie seat ward, which is
by our Savior Christ expounded of their willingness, where he says, that the
Angels always behold the face of my father which is in heaven. Mat. 18.10.
Now it is apparent that the beholding of the face s gnifieth in a servant
readiness to be employed about his masters business, according as it is in the
Psalm, Psalm. 123.2.
The eyes of servants look to the hands of the masters and mistresses: by
which phrase the Prophet signifies not only confident hope and expectation of
deliverance, but in the mean season till deliverance come, patience to bear
contempt, mocking and despightfulnes, and ready obedience to Gods will, yea in
these great extremities, which in that Psalm is insinuated by the Prophets
prayer. The Angels also obey Gods will perfectly, Gods will must be done
perfectly.
who are therefore called holy Angels, for that they have no spot of sin or
disobedience in them: for howsoever the Angels being compared with God have in
them imperfections, in regard whereof Eliphaz speaks in Job, Job 4.18.
that he found no stedfastnes in his servants, and laid folly upon his
Angels: and therefore in Esaias the Seraphims with two wings cover their feet;
Esaias. 6.2.
yet nevertheless if the Angels be compared with Gods law, which is the rule
of their obedience, they are able, and do perfectly even in the strict and
exact measure and manner of obedience yield obedience thereunto, otherwise they
could not continue in that estate of grace and glory wherein they are now, and
so shall abide confirmed for ever. So then the meaning of these words is thus
much: Grant that we may willingly and perfectly obey thy will, as thy holy
Angels do.

But here in opposition to this last property of the Angels obedience it may
be objected, that seeing it is impossible we should perfectly obey Gods will,
therefore we must not in our prayers ask that at Gods hand: for shall it be
thought lawful and reasonable to ask impossibilities? For answer whereto
thus much in brief: Impossibilities are of two sorts, viz. always impossible,
and impossible for a certain time. Now although it be for the present
impossible that Gods children should perfectly obey Gods will, yet it is not so
for ever: for when we shall be perfectly regenerate, then shall we perfectly
obey Gods will: which we are here by way of implication taught to pray for,
Three kinds of perfect obedience. Esaias. 38.3.
and so to long after. Furthermore, perfection is of three sorts: First,
perfection opposed to hypocrisy, and so is Ezechias said to have walked before
the Lord in truth and with a perfect heart, and this may be termed perfectio
qualitatis: when our obedience is perfect in quality, and not dissembled.

Secondly, perfection of number, when obedience is not performed to some only,
but to all the commandments of God, Luke 1.6.
as Zachary and Elizabeth are said to have walked in all the commandments and
ordinances of God without reproof: and this may be called perfectio partium
ac numero, when obedience is complete in all the members thereof* whereto one
kind of imperfection is opposed.

Thirdly, perfection of degree, when obedience in the highest and exactest
measure is exhibited: so Christ only, and Adam in the state of innocence, and
the holy Angels and Saints in heaven do obey Gods will: of this Christ
speaks, Mat. 22.37.
alleging the sentence of the Law: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength, Luke 10.27.
and with all thy thought: this is called perfectio quantitatis ac graduum:
whereto another kind of imperfection is opposite. Of all these kinds of
perfection the Apostle speaks in one place, Phil. 3.12.15.
denying in himself the perfection of degree and contending to it: but
affirming of himself and others the other two kinds of perfection: for
although he was not perfect in the highest and absolutest degree of obedience;
yet he and other of the Philippians were upright in regard of the quality,
Verse 1^.
and complete in respect of the parts of obedience. The distinction being thus
warranted must be applied to the purpose: Although then as yet it is impossible
for us to yield the perfect measure of obedience to Gods commandments with the
Angels; yet we may endeavor and desire to attain unto it with the Apostle,
and in the mean season we must perform, and endeavor to perform, and pray to
perform true and complete obedience with the Angels, which is a thing possible
to be performed by Gods children, as has been declared in the examples of
Ezechias, Zachary and Elizabeth, and the Apostle Paul.

This may suffice for the meaning of this petition, whereby there is a door
opened to the contents thereof, which now follow in order.

The third thing to be considered in this third petition or prayer is the
things which we here ask of God, 3 The supplication of this petition.
Conversion a part of Gods will. 1. These 4.3. Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 5.17. Amos. 4.
which are these.

Conversion, commanded in the Gospel, which is one part of Gods revealed will,
a thing so often urged by the Prophets, and the want thereof so sharply
censured, especially the Prophet Joel, and Amos are vehement in the matter:
Amos spends a whole chapter in vpbraiding the induration of the people. For
having repeated certain grievous punishments inflicted by God upon them justly
for their sins, as famine and pestilence, and an overthrow like the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorah, he ends diverse verses with this foot or
burden: Yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord. Joel. 2.12.
In like manner Joel having threatened famine and the sword against the
rebellious people, diverse times, but especially in the second chapter
vehemently exhorts to conversion, that by this means they may prevent Gods
fierce wrath. Ezechiel also spends an whole chapter to this purpose. Ezech.
18.
This conversion is urged also by John Baptist, and our Savior Christ in their
Ministry as the first lesson: Mat. 3.2. and 4.17. Mark. 1.15.
Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand: and, Repent, and believe the
Gospel. And the signification of the word implies these two things
especially, viz. First, turning from the wrong way wherein a man wandreth.
Secondly, entering into the right way from which a man erred: S^ub. Conuertere.
the word in the Latin and Hebrew being borrowed from travelers in their
journey, and referred to the body and outward act; Metano^in.
but in the Greek applied to the purpose and disposition of the mind, which
in conversion is altered. Conversion in the new Testament in certain differing
respects has diverse appellations; as Renouation, Regeneration, Sanctification,
the first Resurrection, Obedience to the Gospel, and such like: and the parts
of conversion also are diversely entitled: as the first is called
Mortification, crucifying the old man, the cross of Christ; the second,
vivification, newnes of life, new obedience. To conversion appertains diverse
excellent affections and dispositions mentioned in the Scripture, as
Humiiation, sorrow for sin, hatred of sin, love of righteousness,
consolation, fear, joy, and such like: diverse whereof the Apostle mentions
writing to the Corinthians: and others may easily be observed in reading the
Scriptures: 2. Cor. 7.10.11
but to make any tractate of conversion is not the purpose of this tractate,
which only by way of capitulation points out a fit place for every matter.

Obedience a part of Gods will.
Obedience, commanded in the Law, succeeds next in order of nature to the
obedience of the Gospel. For the obedience of the Law issues from the
obedience of the Gospel, 1. Tim. 1.5.
as the Apostle says, Love comes from faith unfeigned: for although the Law
be a schoolmaster to whip us to Christ, yet Christ does send us back again
to the Law for direction, when he has once admitted us into his school by
conversion.

Obedience is either general or special.

General obedience is that which appertains to all Christians.

General obedience respects God or man. Mat. 22.37.


General obedience respecting God is called holiness or godliness, or religion
sometime. Luke 1.75.


General obedience respecting man is called righteousness, one branch whereof
is sobriety. 1. Tim. 2.2.


Special obedience is that which appertains to some sorts of persons.

Special obedience is either of a Special commandment. Special calling.


Obedience of a special commandment is, when the Lord inioyneth something
contrary to the moral law: as Abraham was commanded to sacrifice his son;
Genes. 22.2.
and it is obeyed.

Obedience of a special calling is manifold, as of the Magistrate, the
Minister, etc.

The rules of all these kinds of obedience are these shortly. Rules of
obedience.


Obey God absolutely as the only lawgiver that is able to save and destroy:
but man must not be so obeyed, but conditionally.

Worship God as he has taught, Mat. 15.9.
not as thou think good: for God knows best what is best, and what best
pleases him.

Love thy neighbor as thy self: Matthew. 7.12.
whatsoever thou would that men should do unto thee, even so do thou unto
them.

A special commandment ouerthwarting a general must be obeyed: In Antinomia
lex posterior obligat. Genes. 22.2.


The duties of our special callings must be performed in conscience to Gods
commandments. Ephesians. 6.1.


After active obedience, Submission a part of Gods will.
which consists in doing Gods commandments, follows passive obedience in
suffering his chastisements, which generally may be termed submission, that is,
when the creature is content to resign himhelfe over wholly to the will of the
Creator: and to say as David said, 2. Sam. 15.26.
Behold here am I, let him do to me as seems good in his eyes: this virtue
does especially respect the time to come, and the Lords secret will: that if
the Lord have in his secret counsel determined such and such evils and
afflictions to befall us, we can be content with patience to bear them, how
many and how great soever they be, so be that thereby God may be glorified.

After the kinds of obedience follow the qualities of obedience, viz.
cheerefulnes or willingness; and sincerity or perfection.

Cheerefulnes in obedience a part of Gods will. 2. Cor. 9.7. Iam. 1.5. Ioh.
4.34.
Cheerefulnes or willingness is highly regarded of God, and accordingly endeavored
of the children of God. God loves a cheerful giver, says the Apostle: and
God himself gives freely, and vpbraideth no man, says James: and he likes
that in his children, which himself practices. Christ says that it was meat
and drink to him, to do the will of his heavenly father: yea and in suffering
for our sins, he protests great willingness: for he did willingly lay down
his life, and it was not taken from him against his liking; and therefore David
prophecieth of him, Psalm. 40.8.
that seeing it was written of him in the volume of the book that he should
do Gods will, therefore he was content to do it. And this is that echo which
David's heart gave to Gods voice: Psalm. 27.8.
God said, seek ye my face: David's heart answered: Lord I will seek thy face:
and although it cannot be denied, but that the flesh is very weak, yea
repugnant and refractary, yet the spirit is willing, Romans 7.22.
and the children of God do delight in the law of God according to the inner
man.

Sincerity in obedience a part of Gods will. Psalm. 119.106
Finally, perfection or sincerity also is required as another necessary
qualification of obedience; which consists in a true purpose of the heart,
joined with an earnest endeavor to the utmost of grace, to obey every one, yea
the very least of Gods commandments; making conscience of idle words, 1. Cor.
4.4. Romans 7.24.
and vain thoughts, yea of the stirring of concupisence, and, which is most of
all, of original sin, and Adams transgression imputed. This virtue of
sincerity is much despised and persecuted by the world, when men entitle it by
strange names: as humor, spiced conscience, precisenes, puritanisme: alas that
ever the devil should so prevail! For example, take a man that is very well
content with the state, obeying the Magistrate, civil and ecclesiastical in all the ceremonies of the Church; yet if he do not swear, and drink, and
quarrel and so forth; but reprove the swearer, the dronkard, the hackster, and
the rest: This man is as odious to the multitude, as the veriest disciplinarian
in the land, and he shall partake as well in the foresaid titles of disgrace as
the other.

Now in the fourth place follow the things which in this The deprecation of
this petition. Obstinacy opposed to Gods will. Pro 23.35.
whereof the first is obstinacy, which is a purpose and resolution to continue
in the course of wickedness, wherein a man lives: the sin of the drunkards,
of whom the wise man speaks, which are resolved still to seek after
drunkenness: also the sin of the Shepherds and Watchmen of Israel, of whom
the Prophet Esaias speaks, Who say, Esaias 56.12.
To morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant in wine and strong
drink and covetous oppression. Ierem. 44.16.17.
The extremity of this sin is recorded in the rebellious Jews, by the
Prophet Jeremy, who being admonished of their sins, and of obedience to Gods
commandments, made answer, that they would not hear the word of the Lord
which Jeremy spoke, but they would do what themselves listed. The Apostle
calls this sin a hard and irrepentant heart, Romans 2.4.5.
and the despising of Gods bountifulnes, patience, and long suffering, which is
directly opposite to the obedience of the Gospel.

In the second place follows disobedience, Disobedience opposite to Gods will.
which is every transgression of the moral law, or of any other special
precept. Disobedience has four specialties.

1. Ungodliness, irreligion, or prophanenes, when men regard not Gods worship,
but live as if there were no God, no heaven, no devil, no hell, no conscience:
of such Atheists the world has millions, who make no more account of Gods
Sabbaths, than of the market or fair, no more reckoning of a sermon than of a
fable of Esop, that for gaining a penny swear and forswear, and what not?
those impious wretches are more fearful and damnable sinners than the world
esteems them, seeing they by their practice declare themselves directly to
forget God, who is then especially remembered, Romans 1.18.
when he is worshipped. Against this sin Gods wrath is revealed from heaven.

2. Unrighteousness, or injustice, which is when any violence or wrong is
offered to our neighbors person or gifts, as his dignity, goods, life, or
chastity.

3. Rebellion, when men peremptorily resist Gods will known particularly, and
evidently urged upon their conscience; or perform not obedience to a special
precept. Example hereof we have in Saul, who was commanded by God utterly to
destroy the Amalekites, and all their goods: now he saved Agag the King, and
the fattest of the sheep and oxen, and so flatly rebelled against this
precept: the punishment of this sin was most fearful upon him, which
argues the fearefulnes of the sin. And the Prophet Samuel says, 1. Sam.
15.23.
that it is a sin as great as witchcraft, or idolatry: and although now the
Lord gives no special precepts to men, yet he does particularly urge upon
the conscience of some men general commandments: as when in the Ministry
of the word, the spirit of God cries aloude in the heart of the drunkard to
forsake his drunkenness: and for that sin he is pricked in conscience, and
persuaded to forsake it; the which sin, if he still practice and do not
forsake, then he rebelleth flatly against God, and is obnoxious to a fearful
punishment.

4. Unfaithfulness, when men in their special callings do not seek Gods
glory, 1. Cor. 4.2. 1. Cor. 10.31.
nor the benefit of the Church or commonwealth, or the good of some society,
or when men live idly or negligently. This sin the Apostle taxes in the
Thessalonians, that they lived disorderly; and in the Ephesians, 2. These.
3.6.^. Ephesians 4.28.
whom he terms thieves for that they did not labor.

These are the specialties of disobedience.

In the third place is Self-will, Peeuishnes, Repining, Self-will opposed to
Gods will.
Grudging, Murmuring, Complaining, Coffeehouse, Frowardnes; all which
contain several circumstances of one and the same sin: when men will not
become serviceable to Gods providence, but will choose what they list
themselves, as though they knew what were best for them, thereby controlling
Gods wisdom, and causing it to yield to their wilful corruptions: for this
sin the devil did calumniate Job; but Job proved him a liar, Job. 2 5.10.
being content to receive evil at Gods hands as well as good; howsoever there
appeared in Job (though he be propounded as a pattern of patience to the
Church) a little spice of impatiencie. Iam. 5.11.


In the fourth place follows Backwardnes in obedience, and wearines of well
doing, Backwardnes opposed to Gods will. Mal. 1.13.
the fault which the Prophet Malachy reproved in his time, when men say, it is
a wearines, and suffe at the pains and cost of Gods service; which in those
days was a fault more tolerable than now, by how much Gods service was more
chargeable and painful than it is now, in regard of the outward ceremony,
the yoke of the ceremonial law being intolerable, as the Apostle speaks.
Act. 15 10. Gal. 6.9.
This sin the Apostle preuenteth by admonition in the Galathians, using an
argument for the purpose. In due season we shall reap, if we faint not:
therefore let us not be weary of well-doing.

In the last place follows hypocrisy, Hypocrisy oppos^d to Gods will.
or a false and dishonest heart, when men purposing to live in sin,
nevertheless make show outwardly of godliness and honesty, for advantage sake.
Mat 15. and Esaias. 29.
Christ calls it drawing near with the lips and removing the heart far
off; a sin so odious in Gods sight, as that it seems he has assigned it a
special place in h^ll, because Christ joins the evil, oppressing, Mat.
24.51.
and drunken servant together with the hypocrite and dissembling mocke-God in
the portion of such a punishment where is weeping and gnashing of teeth.

This may suffice for the deprecation.

The thanksgiving of this petition.
5. The thanksgiving, which is the last thing to be considered in this petition,
may easily be collected out of the supplication and deprecation: for we bless
God that he has bestowed upon us and others his servants these graces
following.

First, conversion: Secondly, obedience to the law, in godliness, righteousness,
special obedience and faithfulness in our callings: Thirdly, submission:
Fourthly, cheerefulnes, and fifthly sincerity.

And again, we praise God for that he has prevented and mortified in us and
other his children the contrary sins: as first, obstinacy, or impenitencie,
and infidelity: secondly, disobedience to the law in ungodliness,
unrighteousness, rebellion and unfaithfulness: thirdly, self-will: fourthly,
backwardnes: fifthly, hypocrisy. This shall be sufficient for this petition,
and so for those petitions which directly concern God in his glory, and the
means thereof, his Kingdom and will.

Now follow the prayers which directly concern our selves, both in regard of
matters temporal for the body, and also of matters spiritual for the soul:
from which order used by our Savior Christ, there is offered unto us this
instruction; that our good depends upon, and issues from Gods glory, and is
a necessary consequent thereof; or thus: when men are careful to glorify
Gods name, to advance his Kingdom, and to obey his will, then our daily bread,
and all other good follows thereupon: and contrarily, when men dishonor God,
hinder his Kingdom, and transgress his commandments, thence issues all woe
and misery. This doctrine is the sum of the law; in the promises and the
threatenings annexed to the obedience or disobedience thereof. Deuteronomy. 28. Leuit.
26. Deuteronomy. 27.
The sum of this doctrine is expressed by Moses largely in Deuteronomie:
especially, Cap. 28. And the Lord commands Moses to cause six Tribes to
proclaim the blessing and promises to obedience upon mount Gerizim, and other
six Tribes to stand upon mount Eball to pronounce the curse to the
disobedience of the law: the which two mountains were two strong witnesses (as
it were) to the people of their consent to obey and to receive the promise: or
else disobeying of the curse of God deservedly to befall them: Christ teaches
that the Kingdom of God and his righteousness has all temporal blessings
annexed thereto: Mat. 6.33
and the Apostle Paul says, Godliness has the promise of this life, 1. Tim.
4.8.
and the life to come: and by Christ's speech to the man that was sick of the
palsy, Mark. 2.5.
he does plainly signify that sin is the cause of all sickness, and the
remission of sin the means of removing the curse: which doctrine yields a
profitable use for the time of Gods judgments upon us: that then we are
assured that the cause is sin: and therefore we are carefully to enquire
what sins reign most, and to assure our selves that those sins are the
greatest cause: and that there is no reason we should think that Gods
judgments shall be removed, till those sins be reformed: this especially
concerns the Magistrates, who may with the sword and authority; and the
Ministers, who by the power of their Ministry may work conversion and
reformation, that the curse may cease from the land. And this is the doctrine
and use which grows from the order of the three first petitions concerning
Gods glory, before the three latter respecting our good.

Now these three latter petitions admit this distribution also: for they
respect blessings temporal or spiritual: the petition which is made
concerning temporal blessings, is this.

Give us this day our daily bread.
Concerning the order of this petition for things temporal, before the other
two which intend things spiritual, 1 Order of the fourth petition.
this question may be moved: viz. Whether temporal blessings are first to be
asked in prayer; or else why should Christ prescribe this order of prayer for
things temporal, before spiritual? To which question or doubt, answer may be
made in this manner following.

The order of the fourth petition reprooueth our Corruption.
First, Christ rather signifies unto us our corruption, telling us what we
do, than instructs us in our duty, teaching us what we should do,
although this latter arises from the former (for a reproof of our fault
implies an intimation of our duty.) For first we should seek for the pardon
of our sins, then after and in the second place for daily bread, Mat. 6.33.
so Christ expressly teaches: yet we contrarily do seek earthly things more
a great deal and in the first place; the reason whereof is, for that we live
by sense, and not by faith; whereas we should (as the Apostle says) live by
faith, 2 Cor. 5.7.
and not by sense: and so this order reproves our corruption, and teaches us
our duty, which is not to make worldly things our greatest care.

The order of the fourth petition strengthens our infirmity.
Secondly, some men trusting in God for the pardon of their sins, yet distrust
God for the provision of their bodies; and so Christ in regard of their
infirmity and want does in this order condescend unto them, teaching them
first to pray for that which they most need, viz. grace to depend upon God for
outward matters: a thing wherein Gods children fail mightily. Hence it is that
Christ does so earnestly labor with his disciples to cast away immoderate,
Mat. 6.24.25.26.27. etc.
distrustful, and distracting care for outward provision, sending them to
learn of the fowls of the avre, and of the lillies of the field. And the
manner of the Apostles argument in the Epistle to the Romans does import as
much, Romans 8.32.
saying, If God give us Christ, shall he not give us with Christ all things
else? As if so be that when we had Christ, we doubted whether we should have
other things needful: and indeed so ordinarily we do. For, besides that
Gods children are regenerate to the enduring of the cross, which is an
inseparable concomitant of Christianity, it is true also that they are
straightned in their consciences, being not able to use those indirect and
unlawful means for the supply of outward wants, as the wicked worldlings
can, and do use, without any present sensible disturbance of their peace: and
therefore the godly wanting many means of their daily bread, and being by Gods
predestination called to some scarsitie thereof, no marvel though they bestow
their cogitations and affections more liberally in the provision of outward
needs by lawful means, therein in part bewraying their infirmity, Mat. 6.30.
and little faith in Gods providence for the world: which little faith Christ
in this order partly rebukes, partly confirms by instruction. The same thing
is to be observed by our Savior Christ's mandate and commission delivered to
his disciples when he sent them to teach: Mat. 10.9.17.
never a whit strengthening them in the assurance of the forgiveness of their
sins, but many ways encouraging them against persecution and want of daily
bread, insinuating their infirmity herein.

Thirdly, The order of the fourth ^etition teaches us ^ome means of faith.
Christ by this method does train us up as it were by certain rudiments, and
teaches us to ascend to the great and maine matters, as it were to the top of
the staiers by these lower degrees. For as it is impossible for a man to come
to the upper room but by staiers; so it is impossible for a man to attain
fulness of faith for pardon of sin, but by these inferior exercises of faith,
which are to depend upon God for the lesser matters, as our daily bread. For
howsoever to Gods children, having grace in some small measure, and assurance
of pardon of their sin, the want of outward matters seems the greatest
trouble, and therein they bewray their greatest infirmity: yet indeed and in
truth the pardon of sin, and the assurance thereof when the conscience is
possessed with the feeling of sin and Gods wrath, is the greatest matter, and
at that time the trouble for daily bread is nothing, or not sensible in
comparison of the fear and doubt of the forgiveness of sin.

This threefold reason of the order of this petition for daily bread before
the petition for grace, affoordeth one doctrine, which may be distinguished
into three branches.

First, our greatest care must be for spiritual matters.

Secondly, we must learn to depend upon God for our daily bread, and temporal
matters.

Thirdly, the temporal blessings which God vouchsafes his children, ought of
them to be used as arguments and means of the assurance of remission of sins.

Of each of these doctrines something.

Grace must be first and principally sought.
In the first place seeing (as has been said) this method reprooueth our
corruption in the immoderate care for the world, by consequent it discovers
our duty, which is to busy our selves more in obtaining pardon of sin and
grace than in seeking the world. Psalm. 4.6.
David opposes the worldlings care and his care, saying: Many say, Who will
show us any good? but Gods people say: Lord lif^ the light of thy countenance
upon us: signifying their greater desire of grace than of the worlds good:
seeing that we are risen with Christ (as the Apostle says) let us set our
hearts on heavenly things, Colos. 3.1.2.
and not on earthly things. For the soul being the principal part of the man,
those things which appertain to the soul must be principal also, and so
principally regarded: now in the Scriptures we see often times the soul only
named, 1. Pet. 1.9.
as if that were only to be regarded, for indeed the souls health is the
fountain of the bodies good, and the good of the body is a necessary
dependant of the good of the soul: for when the foul is saved the body
cannot perish. Hence it is that Christ and Steven being ready to die, Luke
23.46. Act. 7.59.
bequethed their souls only into Gods hands: for they knew right well that
he that received the soul, would not reject the body appertaining to the
soul.

The body must be provided for.
In the second place, howsoever we are chiefly to seek the souls good, yet
we are not to cast off all care for the body; because God in giving us a
body gives therewithal a signification that it ought to be provided for:
and in that God has created fruits, and herbs, and flesh, and other parts of
our daily bread, he insinuates the use of them, and a care to be had for
them: and seeing he has inspired into men diverse arts manuarie of preparing
and fitting our daily bread for our use, Exodus 30.23.25. Exodus 35.30.31.
the moderate use whereof is lawful, as of the Cook and Apothecarie, etc.
thereby the Lord does give us to understand that sometime, and therefore some
care may be bestowed to that end. Here two extremities occur: carelesnes,
and that in the defect; and carefulnes in the excess: The one, that is,
immoderate and distrustful care, distracting the mind from the chief care
equallizeth us with the Heathen, Mat. 6.32.30.
and argues little faith: the other, viz. no care, no provision, no foresight
and providence for our daily bread makes us worse than Infidels, 1. Tim. 5.8.
and is a plain argument that we have denied the faith, which establishes the
means of life: for God will have us live ordinarily by bread: Pro. 6.6.
and the Pismire shall teach the sluggard labor and providence, as the Wiseman
morallizeth: wherefore as a moderate care argues faith in Gods providence; so
an immoderate care, or no care, denies faith, and makes men brutish or
heathnish.

In the third place: Temporal blessings must be pledges of spiritual grace.
As we are to seek the good of the body as well, though not as much, as the
good of the soul; so the good things we obtain of God for the body, ought of
us to be applied as arguments of confirming our faith, for the obtaining the
best things for the soul, and we must make them so many pledges and seals of
Gods love and mercy to us in Christ Jesus: for otherwise we partake in Gods
blessings, which respect our daily bread no otherwise than the brute beasts or
the wicked, who have many good things from Gods general bounty and
liberality, but not from his special goodness and mercy. We read that the
land of Canaan was by faith inherited of the Israelites, that by faith they
passed through the red sea, Heb. 11.30.31.
and many other temporal blessings were through faith received by them: which
is thus to be understood, viz. by faith they received these temporal
deliverances and blessings, and used them as seals and pledges of heaven and
heavenly blessings, whereof the former were types only. And this is to rise
from earth to heaven; from the daily bread of the body, to the spiritual
bread of life; to support and underprop our faith in Christ for the remission
of our sins, and the salvation of our souls, with the earthly pillars of
meat, and drink, and apparel, and what other things are the staff and stay
of our bodily life. This doctrine the outward shape of the Sacrament seems to
teach us: for there is bread and wine, the nourishers and comforters of our
life: whereby the Lord does seal up unto us the spiritual nourishment and
comfort of our souls, heavenly matters in earthly creatures. In like manner by
analogy and proportion, though not sacramentally, yet by discourse of reason
and by a work of faith we may allegorize all outward matters. As for example;
God gives us clothes for to cover our nakedness, therefore he will give unto
us the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness to cover our sins: God
gives the light of the Sun for our comfort, therefore he will give us the
light of his countenance in mercy to lighten our darkness and affliction. And
thus we may ascend from things visible, sensible, and palpable, to things
invisible, insensible, and intelligible: and with the Apostle John say, 1. Ioh.
1.1.
that we see, feel, taste, and handle the Lord Jesus Christ: yea and grope
him in these outward matters, Act. 17.27.
as Paul says the Gentiles might have done God. And this may be sufficient
for the three particular branches of that doctrine which rises from the order
here used by our Savior Christ, in preferring the petition for daily bread to
the petition for grace.

2 The meaning of this petition. What bread signifies.
Now follows the second thing to be considered in this petition, which is the
meaning of the words: for the discussing of the particular words we are to
remember this distinction.

This prayer contains, Rem, and rei circumstantias, the subject and the
adjuncts: that which is desired, and the circumstances thereto appertaining.

That which is here desired is generally called Bread.

The circumstances hereto appertaining are five following.

First circumstance is, Modus acquirendi: the manner of obtaining the bread:
which is by free gift (Give.)

Second circumstance is, Persona, the persons for whom we ask this donation
or gift of bread (us) viz. our selves and others.

Third circumstance is, Tempus, for how long time we beg this bread (this
day) for the present.

Fourth circumstance is, Qualitas, the condition of that bread which we ask
(daily bread) for repairing our life.

Fifth circumstance is, Dominus, the owner, or to whom the bread appertains
(ours) to the children of God.

Of all which circumstances, with the subject thereof, something must be
uttered. First therefore of Bread.

Bread, as some of the ancient Fathers interpret, What bread signifies.
signifies Christ Jesus, which is that bread of life, or living bread, that
bread that came down from heaven, or heavenly bread: and so they expound that
other word supersubstantiall, that is, celestial or heavenly: according as
Christ says: I am the living bread which came down from heaven. Ioh. 6.51.
To this exposition some of the new writers incline.

Others, and namely the greater and better part of ancient and new writers (to
whose judgment as it is meet we subscribe in such a matter of doubt not
determined in Scripture) expound the bread here named the corporal bread, the
food of our bodies: yet so as the word contains a Synecdoche, bread being
put for all outward provision: so that bread here must signify three things.

First, bona corporis, the good things of the body: Bona corpo^is a part of
bread.
which may be generally called health, or the due constitution and temperature
of the body: whereto appertains Nourishment, Apparel, Recreation and
Physic.

Secondly, Bona fortune, a part of bread. Eccles 9.11.
Bona fortunae (if the word fortune may be tolerated) namely such outward good
things as do indifferently befall good and bad men: viz.

1. Wealth, 2. Honor, 3. Liberty, 4. Peace, 5. Plenty: whereto appertain,
6. Labor in our callings, 7. Magistracy, 8. Fruitful seasons.

Thirdly, Gods blessing a part of bread.
the blessing of God upon all the former good things, whether inherent in the
body, or adherent thereto. Now that bread may generally signify all these
things, it is (...) is but a mere usurper of all his substance, and therefore
has need to ask this second interest to his goods of God, whose is the earth
and all that therein is, Psalm. 24.1.
and who only gives his creatures through Christ Jesus to the faithful his
friends, and not to the wicked his enemies.

Secondly, it will further be objected, that Gods servants that are rich need
not ask their daily bread of God, seeing they have before men the civil title
to their goods, and before God a religious interest also, they being Gods
friends, and members of Jesus Christ, through whom they are made the heirs of
all things. But for answer of this objection also we must remember to
distinguish betwixt the title to the bread, or the use of the bread, and the
benefit or commodity which is reaped by the bread, or by the use of the bread:
for the children of God often times use bread, and yet have no benefit by the use
thereof: as they use marriage, and want children; they use Physic, and recover
not their health: therefore Gods children are taught to ask a staff to their
bread, Gods powerful word or blessing upon the means, without which man
cannot live: and hence it is that all Gods creatures and ordinances must be
sanctified by prayer, 1. Tim. 4.
as the Apostle teaches. This prayer then includes these four particulars
following.

First, Lord give us a civil title to bread.

Secondly, Lord give us a religious title to bread.

Thirdly, Lord give us leave to use the bread.

Fourthly, Lord give us comfort by the use of the bread.

The first is opposed to poverty: the second to usurpation: the third to the
taking of Gods name in vain: the fourth to the curse or withdrawing the staff
of bread.

For whom we ask bread.
This is the first circumstance; the second follows, which is Persona, the
person for whom we ask bread.

We desire bread for others as well as for our selves: even as in the next
petition we desire forgiveness of sin for other men as well as for our selves:
Envy suppressed.
whence we learn to suppress envy, which Christ calls an evil eye: Mat.
20.15. Romans 12.15.
and as the Apostle says, to rejoice with them that rejoice: and as Christ
teaches, to pray for our enemies, and persecutors: but especially for them
that are in the communion of Saints: Psalm. 37.1.
not to fret our selves at the prosperity of the wicked: nor to malign Gods
gifts or graces in other men, as Joshua for his masters sake did envy the gift
of prophecy in Eldad and Medad. Numb. 11.29.


The third circumstance follows, which is Tempus, When we ask bread: also
for how long: and how often.
the time how long, and so consequently how often we ask this bread: for the
latter grows out of the former, as shall easily be perceived. For seeing we
ask bread but for the day, when the next day comes we are to ask it again,
and so as God renueth the day, or occasion of using bread, we in like manner
renew our prayers for a blessing upon the bread. The word expressing this
circumstance thus distinguished, is (semeron) to day: Matthew. 6. Luke 11.
or (to cath emeran) appertaining to the day; the one being the exposition of
the other: which word or phrase of speech imports two things.

First, that every day we need the use of the bread, Bread is always needful.
because that Christ does teach us every day to ask bread with the sanctified
use thereof, and Gods blessing thereupon.

Secondly, that seeing we ask bread only for the day, Contentment: and
faith. Mat. 6.34.
therefore we must be content with our present estate, and depend upon God for
the time to come, for every day has care enough. And here two questions are to
be discussed, which follow.

First, whether may not a man ask riches at Gods hands? Whether it be lawful
to ask riches.
This question arises necessarily from the circumstance, whereas Christ
teaches us to ask bread only for the day: it may be doubted therefore
whether it be lawful or not to ask bread for the time to come: whereto
answer may be made Negatiuely, that a man must not desire to be rich, and so
must not ask riches at Gods hands: which may be proved by many reasons.

1. Tim. 6.9.10.
1. First, the Apostle says, that a desire to be rich occasioneth temptations
and snares, many dangerous and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition
and destruction: and our Savior Christ in the same sense says, that riches
are snares to entangle men in the devils net: Mat. 13.22.
but we are not to pray for the occasions of sin, seeing that we must avoid
the occasions of sin.

2. Again, a desire to be rich argues coffeehouse: but that is a fault,
for we must be content with that portion of our daily bread which God gives
us, yea though it be but meat and raiment, 1. Tim. 6.8.
as the Apostle says. Now that, whose fountain or cause is evil, cannot be
good: wherefore coffeehouse being an evil cause impulsive of desiring
riches, the desire of riches is a sin also.

3. Further, covetousness is a sin: but a desire to be rich is covetousness:
Pleonexia. Philargyria.
for the two Greek words in their notations differ not in substance and
signification, howsoever they differ in letters and pronunciation: the one
signifies a love of silver, the other a desire of having much.

Pro. 30 8. To pray for a competency lawful.
4. Besides this, in the Proverbs Agur prays only for food convenient for him,
that is, for daily bread, and he does by negation remove from him the desire of
riches: which example being not contradicted by any rule of Divinity, is a
perpetual rule of direction for us: and the Lord himself testifies in granting
Salomons petition, that he was pleased that Solomon asked not riches: 1. King
3.11.
and it seems the Apostles scope in the former place of Timothy affoordeth
thus much; 1. Tim. 6.
that a desire to be rich is sin.

The conclusion then follows, which is the solution of the doubt, that we
must not pray for riches, nor against them: but we must proceed in the
practice of the duties of our callings, intending Gods glory, the benefit of
Societies, and provision for those that appertain to us: and if God bless us
with riches, to be thankful and to bestow them well; if he send poverty, to
bear it patiently and thankfully, as a part of our daily bread, or an adiunct
thereof.

The second question to be handled is: whether a man may lay up any thing in
store for time to come, and so by this means care for the time to come: which
question also rises from this circumstance: for when Christ teaches to ask
bread for the day, it may seem we should not respect the morrow: whereto this
answer may be made: That a man may lay up in store for a time to come, and
therefore may have some providence and respect to the time to come: for God
has given man reason and foresight, which is to be used for the preventing of
evil, and the procuring of our good, not only for the soul, but for the body
also: And Christ himself in the gospel by John wills his Disciples to
gather up the broken meat, Ioh. 6.12. Ioh. 12.6. Ioh. 6.
and in that it is reported that Judas carried the bag and was Christ's
pursebearer, and that at other times they carried loaves and fishes with them,
it is plain that the family of Christ had a regard of the time to come: also
the Apostle Paul signifies this laudable custom of parents treasuring up for
the children. 2. Cor. 12.14.
Hence it is that in the Scripture there are diverse precepts of frugallity,
thrift, or parsimonie: Prou. 27.23. and 31.16.
and all that good huswifery mentioned in the prophecy of Bathsheba
apertayneth to this place: and the Apostle says that this is one end of labor
that we may have something to bestow upon them that need. But here it may be
objected, Ephesians. 4.28. Matthew. 6.19.
that Christ forbids to lay up treasure in store, because the moth and rust
will corrupt, and thieves will break through and steal: but that is easily
answered; for Christ does not speak simply, but comparatively, as if Christ
should have said; Seek not worldly treasures, chiefly, immoderatly, only:
nay, they must not be sought for at all, but treasure them not up so as that
ye neglect the heavenly treasure, viz. inordinately.

Again, it may be objected that Christ expressly forbids the care for the
morrow, Mat. 6.34.
for every day has sorrow enough of it own, and we must not aggrauate it with
future care and sorrow: but the answer thereto also is apparent by the
intendement of Christ: for Christ in that place laboreth to suppress
distrustful, Merimne.
and distracting care which deuideth the mind from God and Gods service: but
Christ forbids not providence, or foresight, or provision for the time to
come, Pronoia.
which the Apostle does directly require in the governor of a family: 1. Tim.
5.8.
yet nevertheless concerning this laying up in store and moderate provident
care, some cautions must be remembered: as first, Ephesians. 4.28.
that our goods which we treasure up, be gotten with our honest labor, or that
we come by them by inheritance or gift, or by some such lawful means; not by
gaming or cosoning.

Psalm. 62.10.
Secondly, that if our riches increase we trust not in them.

Thirdly, that we do not treasure them up when we should spend them in the
needful uses of the Church or commonwealth: for such times are unfit times
for storing up. And in this respect the Apostle commends the Church of the
Macedonians, 2. Cor. 8.1.2.3.
for that they were liberal in their extreme poverty, the necessity of
other Churches requiring it.

Lastly, when we have treasured up riches, we must not keep them niggardly,
but we must bestow to the good of our selves and others, such a portion of our
treasure as shall be requisite, and befitting our estate, wherein sometime we
are to pass the bounds of our ability; in which respect Christ also
commends the widows alms of two mites. Mark. 12.44.


It is apparent then, these cautions observed, that storing up, and provident
care is not unlawful, but very meet: which serves to overthrow that
ouerlashing and swaggering disposition of riotous unthrifts, which like unto
the prodigal son consume all their substance, so as at length they are
brought to a morsel of bread, and charge others with themselves and theirs;
whereas their patrimony being moderately ordered according to their estate,
might have not only been preserved entire with the maintenance and relief of
many poor, but also out of the increase and use thereof much might have been
treasured up, for their posterity. For a conclusion therefore of this
circumstance, covetousness is a sin, and so is prodigality: liberality and
magnificence are virtues, so are also parsimony and frugalitie, which by this
consideration are insinuated unto us.

The fourth circumstance follows, which is qualitas, What use the bread
has. O epi teousia armozon.
the condition or use of the bread. The greek word expressing this
circumstance is translated (daily) epiousion: which the Etymologist expounds,
befitting our substance or being: namely, such a bread as is meet and
convenient for the preservation of our being: and the bread we ask has this
epithet adjoined in two respects.

One is: for that our essence and being is in a continual flux, and, as I may
so say, a natural consumption: for mortality, which is inflicted upon us by
God, Genes. 2.17.
draws us every day to corruption, and we do as naturally incline thereto,
as the fire goes upward: wherefore the Lord in his mercy has provided bread,
which shall stay this declining of our nature in part, and repair the ruin of
our essence; that as the natural lamp of our life, consisting of fire and
oil, Calor natiuus. Humidum radicale. Psalm. 81.16.
spends and wastes; so there may be a new supply made by the fat of wheat,
as the Prophet speaks; till at the length the light of our life be extinct or
suffocated, either by old age, when the wicke is spent, or by disease and
sudden death, when the heat is choked, or wants oil.

Another respect why the bread is so entitled, is, for that this bread can
never be added to our substance for the repair thereof, except the Lord give
a blessing thereto: for as the Prophet says, we may eat and not have enough,
Leuit. 26. Hag. 1.6.
drink and not be satisfied, use marriage, and want children, earne wages and
put it into a bottomless bag: for howsoever the faculties of nourishment does
naturally work in the stomach and other parts, and howsoever the bread has
in it a foyson or juice fit for nourishment, yet the Lord he can suspend the
one and the other, so as they shall neither of them perform their offices: for
he can stay the work of all the secondarie causes: and he can work without
the help of any secundarie cause. Hence therefore we are taught, both to use
the bread, it being the means God has appointed for our preservation: and
also not to trust in the bread, seeing that it cannot help us if God suspend
the virtue thereof: more plainly, two sins are here discovered, and secretly
reproved.

First, tempting of God, which is drawing too near God.

Second is a secret idolatry, withdrawing our selves from God.

All they tempt God which neglecting the bread, which is the ordinary help of
our life, do cast themselves upon the immediate providence of God: as the
devil persuaded our Savior Christ to cast himself down headlong from the
pinnacle of the temple, Mat. 4.6.
when he might come down the stairs: for God will not have us neglect or
despise the means which he has given us.

All they withdraw themselves from God which make idols of the bread, which use
the bread, and never ask a blessing at Gods hands upon the bread, as if God
were tied to give his blessing to the bread necessarily: this is the sin
which is often times reproved by the Prophets: for example, to trust in chariots
and horses: to trust in Princes, to trust in the Physician, generally to trust
in an arm of flesh.

Whose the bread is.
The fifth and last circumstance follows, which is Dominus, whose the bread
is, or the owner of it. Christ calls it our bread, and that in diverse
respects.

1. For that it is so indeed we having gotten it by our labor and industry,
or having it by inheritance or gift of friends: and according to this
construction the Apostle wills the Thessalonians to eat their own bread
which they have earned with the labors of their hands: 2. These. 3.12.
this is the civil title which is called ius adrem.

2. For that it is the childrens bread, according as Christ says to the
Canaanitish woman: Mat. 15.26.
which was through Adams fall lost, but now through Christ's redemption is
restored to us again, as appears plainly by the Prophet in the Psalm. And
this is called ius in re, Psalm. 8.
the religious title.

3. For that we desire no more of the bread than is fit for us, as Agur prays
in his prophecy: Prou. 30.
and the Lord sutably does bestow upon us only, and all that part of the bread
which is good for us: Psalm. 34.10. Romans 8.28.
for we see that diverse of Gods children have several and different portions
of this bread: Abraham he had abundance: Lazarus was scanted; yet each of them
had his bread, even a portion convenient for him. So that this last
circumstance insinuates unto us three virtues.

1. Industry, which is in some honest calling to get our living with the
sweat of our brows: and not to walk inordinately, yea though thou have great
living and possessions of thine own. For although it may seem needles for him
to labor which is wealthy, yet indeed there is an inevitable necessity
thereof. For besides that God has imposed this yoke upon all in Adam to eat
the labors of their hands, and the sweat of their brows, Genes. 3.19. Psalm.
128.2.
and so they which do not labor walk inordinatly, 2. These. 3.10.7.
viz. as a soldier out of his rank; the Apostle also says that he which does
not labor, should not eat: Ephesians. 4.28.
and one end of laboring in a calling is, that we may have the more to bestow
upon them that want: therefore even the King himself, the Judge, and the
Counselor, and the Minister is to sweat for his living, though he dig not
with the spade: which is when the mind laboreth and trauelleth in thought, and
counsel, and care, and providence, and instruction, dropping as it were an
invisible sweat from the brows of the understanding, and the inward parts of
the soul.

2. Thankfulness to the Lord, that he has restored to us that interest which
was lost through Adams fall: that we may freely and with good conscience use
any part of the bread which is our own; not only for our necessity, but even
for our moderate delight and comfort, seeing that God has given wine to
comfort the heart, Psalm. 104.15.
and oil to make the face shine, Psalm. 23.5.
and David had his head anointed with oil.

3. Contentment in our estate whatsoever, seeing that is the best estate, and
that part of the bread is most fit and meet for us: for howsoever perhaps we
do not so think, yet surely if we find in our selves the marks of Gods
election, and if we labor to observe the work of God upon us at that time,
we shall be compelled to say from our own experience, that then God in
wisdom saw such a portion was best for us. Psalm. 119.71.


These are the circumstances annexed to the bread.

3 The supplication of the fourth petition.
Next in order follows the third thing to be observed in the petition, which
is the Supplication: the things therefore which we here ask of God, are these
following.

First, things general, whereof some are causes, some effects: causes are
especially these six.

1. Fruitful seasons, with all the means procuring them: Deuteronomy. 28.12.
as the first and latter rain; frost, and snow, mist, and dew, and whatsoever
other creatures God has appointed for that purpose.

2. The due simpathy of the creatures consenting together, Hosea. 2.21.
as when the heavens hear the earth, the earth hears the corn, wine, and
oil, and they hear Gods people.

3. Wise and provident Magistrates that may enact wholesome laws, 1. Tim. 2.2.
for the peaceable government of the commonwealth, and by lawful and just
war defend the subject and country.

4. Learned and conscionable Judges and Lawyers, that may justly and mercifully
execute judgment, Numb. 16.16.26.
accusing, defending, pleading, and judging according to the aforesaid good
laws.

5. Valiant and Christian Captains and Soldiers, which may resolutely fight
the Lords battles against his enemies, 2. Sam. 23.39.
such as were the thirty seven worthies in David's Kingdom.

6. Conscionable and experienced and learned physicians, for the health of the
body: Exodus 30.25. and 35.30.31.
and generally all good manuary arts and trades with their skillful professors,
which labor for the preparing of meat, apparel and their instruments: and
in making weapons for war, etc.

After the aforesaid causes follow certain effects which we pray for in this
petition.

1. Peace: when every man may quietly sit down under his vine and figtree,
when there is no leading into captivity, Psalm. 144.84.
no complaining in our streets of women that leese their husbands, or of
orphans leesing their parents in war.

2. Plenty: that our sons and daughters may be as the young plants which
come up thick out of the ground; that our garners may be full with corn,
Psalm. 144.13. Deuteronomy. 28.12.
that our sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousand; and that we may
lend and not borow.

3. Health: that there be no feeble person among us, that our oxen also may
be strong to labor, Psalm. 144.12.
that our sons and daughters may be as the polished corners of the temple.

The generals being numbered, the specials follow: which being handled before
in the meaning of the words of the petition, shall only need in this place to
be shortly repeated.

1. The staff of bread, or Gods blessing upon the bread.

2. Humility, seeing God gives us the bread.

3. Contentment with whatsoever estate we be in.

4. Faith in Gods providence for things meet for us.

5. Providence or moderate care for the time to come.

6. Painfulnes and labor in our vocation and calling.

7. Thankfulness that God permits us the use of the bread.

8. Joy of heart at the outward prosperity of others.

9. Frugalitie or parsimonie to spare when we need not spend.

10. Liberality, to bestow of our abundance to supply others wants.

11. Magnificence to bestow bountifully upon Church or Commonwealth, as in
erecting Colleges, Hospitals, making high ways, etc.

These are the principal things we pray for in this petition.

4 The deprecation of the fourth petition.
The things that we pray against may easily be gathered by the contrary: yet for
plainnes sake it shall not be amiss for to number them thus.

1. Unfruitful seasons, as a wet and cold summer, a hot and dry winter: no
rain, no frost, no snow, etc.

2. The Antipathie of the creatures, when the heaven becomes brass, and the
earth iron, etc. Deuteronomy. 28.

3. Foolish, childish, and improuident Magistrates or tyrants, that make
pernicious and hurtful laws, Esaias. 3. Eccles. 10.

4. Unlearned and wicked Judges and Lawyers, Esaias. 3.

5. Unskillful and unconscionable Physicians, as wise women, Witches, or
Wizards, professing Physic and Empiricks, that guess only and want skill.

6. Cowardly Captains, and dastardly soldiers, when as ten fly before one,
and a hundred before ten, etc.

7. War. 8. Scarsitie or famine. 9. Sickness, as the plague or other mortal
diseases epidemiall.

10. Breaking the staff of bread.

11. Pride. 12. Coffeehouse. 13. Immoderate or no care for things needful.

14. Idleness. 15. Unthankfulness.

16. Envy. 17. Covetousness. 18. Prodigality.

19. All unlawful Arts and Trades to get bread.

20. All gaming to get our living by, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.

This also may suffice for the deprecation.

The thanksgiving may easily be collected out of the supplication and
deprecation: The thanksgiving of the fourth petition.
for we are to praise God for the good things upon us, and the evils kept from
us. Wherein we may easily run through all the aforesaid virtues and vices,
good and bad.

For conclusion of this petition therefore, hitherto appertains the fifth
commandment especially. Again, these places of Scripture following, are as it
were Commentaries to this petition, or rather indices thereof.

The whole 28. chapter of Deuteronomy.

The whole 26. chapter of Leuiticus.

The beginning of the third chapter of Esaias.

Psalm the 144. the 12. 13. 14. 15. verses.

The sixth chapter of the first epistle to Timothy.

The sixth chapter of the Gospel by Matthew.

Prou. the 31. the whole chapter, and such like.

Now after the petition for things temporal, follow the petitions for things
spiritual, namely for grace and perseverance in grace. The fifth petition is
for Grace.

Forgive us our debts: as we forgive our debtors.
This petition for grace or remission of sin is in nature before the petition
for perseverance: 1 Order of the fifth petition.
for first a man must have grace before he can persevere in grace: whence
arises this doctrine: A man must be a righteous man, before he can lead the
life and die the death of a righteous man: A man must first have remission of
sin, and the righteousness of Christ justifying and sanctifying him, before
he can resist temptation, fight the spiritual combat against the spiritual
enemy, and be delivered from the evil of sin and the curse. More distinctly
and plainly these particulars do arise from this method.

First, he only that has grace can resist temptation.

Secondly, though a man having grace to resist, be sometime foiled by the
temptation; yet he shall be freed from the evil of the temptation, from the
evil of sin and the curse: but contrariwise therefore by necessary
consequences.

Thirdly, he that wants grace cannot resist temptation, but shall be foiled
by the Tempter.

Fourthly, he that wants grace, being foiled by the temptation, shall fall
into evil.

These particular doctrines shall afterward be handled in the sixth petition,
whither the reader is to be referred.

2 Meaning of the words of the petition.
The second thing to be considered in this petition follows, which is the
meaning of the words. The prayer has two parts: The thing asked. The condition.


The thing asked is (forgiveness of our debts)

The condition whereupon it is asked (our pardoning others.)

For the better understanding of the first part of the petition, these five
things are to be considered.

First, Quid, what we ask (forgive)

Secondly, Cuius, whereof we ask forgiveness (debts.)

Thirdly, Pro quibus, for whom we ask forgiveness (us)

Fourthly, Quorum, of whose debts we ask forgiveness: (ours)

Lastly, Per quem: through whose merits, which consequently does arise from the
word (forgive)

What we ask? forgiveness.
The first point is, what we ask: that is, pardon or forgiveness. Debts or
sins are discharged two ways.

1. When the debtor himself does satisfy in his own person: thus the damned
men and Angels discharge their debt to God, who for that they are never able to
pay the utmost farthing, are therefore kept in prison, and damned everlastingly.

2. When another person does satisfy for the debtor, and the debt is forgiven
the debtor by him that satisfies. Thus the debts of Gods children are
discharged through the satisfaction of Christ, who has paid the utmost
farthing to the creditor, to God his Father for us. This may be called
remission or forgiveness.

Romans 11.6.
1. In respect of us that receive it, we conferring no merit thereto, nor any
way purchasing it.

Psalm. 116.12.
2. In respect of Christ that satisfied the debt for us, we being not able to
gratify him again in any measure.

3. In respect of God the Father, who of his free mercy and mere love to
mankind sent his only begotten son to discharge the debt. Ioh. 3.16. Romans
6.23.


This point then has this use: It teaches us to cast down all pride in our
hearts, and to empty our selves of all opinion of our own merits and
excellency, and to come with ropes about our heads before the King of Israel.
1. King. 20.31. Whereof we ask pardon? of our debts.


The second point follows: whereof we desire forgiveness: namely, of our
debts, that is, of our sins: for sin contains in it a threefold debt:
first, transgression, or disobedience, which is the privation of obedience, by
reason whereof we still are indebted obedience to God: for they that do obey
Gods law, notwithstanding still are indebted obedience, and therefore much more
they which disobey Gods law are indebted obedience through their disobedience.
Romans 13.8.
The Apostle speaks according to this sense concerning the sum of the
second table, calling love a debt which we always owe unto our neighbor; and
so by consequence unto God: wherefore the neglect of love is much more a debt.

Secondly, sin contains in it the punishment, which, by reason of our
transgression, we are indebted to undergo: and according to this our Savior
Christ calls sin a debt, saying, Matthew. 5.26.
that they whom the Sergeant at the commandment of the Judge cast into prison,
shall not come thence till they have paid the utmost farthing, that is,
sustained the due punishment.

Thirdly, sin is a debt in regard of the corruption which accompanies the
transgression: Psalm. 51.6.
for God requires of us purity and sanctimonie, which we are indebted unto
God always; but much more are we indebted holiness when our hearts are full of
impiety, and dishonestie. Briefly then, because all sin is a transgression
of the law, binding the transgressor in guiltines to suffer punishment, and
corrupting the transgressor with uncleanness: thence it follows that the
sinner is so greatly indebted to God.

The use of this point is to stir us up diligently to seek pardon of our
debts, which do so greatly endanger us to Gods justice and wrath: and whereby
we are triple debtors unto the Lord, but we are for the most part like unto
prodigal dingthrifts, we never regard how much we go upon the score, we never
think that the day of reckening or payment will come: Matthew. 5.25.
it were good for us (according as Christ advises us:) to agree with our
adversary quickly, even while we are in the way with him: it is the Lord with
whom we must agree, Antidicos.
who is a fearful adversary, that will prosecute law against us before a
judge that will accept no man's person, that has thine own conscience as good
as a thousand witnesses to prove the debt: yea, it is wisdom to agree
quickelie being in the way with him, whilst he does reason and dispute the
matter friendly in the Ministry of the word, least if death and hell, the
Lords sergeant once lay hold upon us, and arrest us, we be cast into perpetual
imprisonment.

For whom we ask pardon? for our selves and others. Pardon for our selves.
The third point follows, for whom we ask forgiveness, namely for our selves
and others, our friends and our enemies.

1 For our selves, yea though we know we are the children of God, and have
already obtained pardon at Gods hands for our sins: for Christ teaches his
disciples to make this prayer, who no doubt had their sins pardoned before:
but it may be objected, that it is needles to ask that which a man has
already, and will it not be accounted mockery to deal thus with God? This
knot is dissolved two ways: (first) some answer that Christ teaches us to
ask forgiveness, not as it comes from God, which is granted already to Gods
children, but as it comes to us, and as we apprehend and apply the merit of
Christ for forgiveness: as if this should be the meaning; Lord give me grace
more effectually to apply to my soul by faith, the righteousness of Christ
for the pardon of my sin: others, and that more fully, answer (secondly)
thus; that it is in the work of justification or remission of sin, as in the
work of creation: for as when God had created Adam, he was continually present
with him by his providence to support his being, Act. 17.28.
and to stay and preserve his substance and nature, which providence is nothing
else but as it were a continual creation; even so when God has justified a
sinner, and forgiven him his sins, he continually is assistant to the party
justified, upholding his justification: this cannot be termed properly a
second justification, but a continual supporting of justification, no more
than preservation can be termed a second creation. Now further this continual
supporting of justification is performed by the application of the salve to the
sore, Esaias. 53.5.
of Christ's righteousness to the wounded soul of the sinner: which application
is the work of Gods holy spirit principally, and not of faith only
instrumentally. For further declaration of this point we are to know, that when
God justifies a sinner, he gives him whole Christ and all his merits for
ever, so that the party justified cannot possibly leese Christ: yet the Lord
does only apply Christ and his merits, as it were the salve, to those sins
and sores that are already in his soul burst out, for the which he seeks
the salve, and for which he asks pardon and is humbled: afterward as new
sins and sores grow, and he espieth them, feels them, and asks the salve
for them, the Lord applies Christ the salve unto them. Wherefore directly and
fully to answer the objection, Gods children ask at Gods hands that which
they have not: for although in the counsel of God, in the redemption of
Christ, in the donation of Christ to the party justified by the Father, at the
very first moment of justification it may truly be said, that all his sins
are forgiven, past, present, and to come: yet in regard of the particular
application of Christ's stripes to the sores of sin in the soul, it cannot be
said that the godly man's sins are pardoned, or forgiven, or cured, or
covered, till they be committed, till they be espied, till the pardon thereof
be asked. Gods children therefore do not ask a primarie justification, but a
secondarie application: they do not desire to be made righteous of persons
wholly unrighteous, but to be made righteous from some particular
unrighteousness: As a man that is, desires God still to preserve his being by
daily bread; so a man that is justified, desires God still to support his
justification by a continual application of the salve to the sore. Wherefore
to conclude, Gods actions in justification are two: first, the donation and
gift of Christ: secondly, the application of Christ given. As a Surgeon
gives a box of salve to a wounded person, and after applies plasters of the
salve to the wounds as they break out in the body. And sometime the Lord does
defer and suspend the application of the plaster of Christ's blood to the
sores of sin in the soul, that he may provoke us the more earnestly to
consider of the hainousnes of sin, more seriously to bewail sin, more
carefully to avoid future sins, seeing the smart of former sins is so
sharp, more fervently and with greater perseverance to pray unto God for
pardon thereof, and with greater joy and thankfulness to receive the pardon of
sin from our gracious God.

The use of this doctrine then in brief is thus much: to teach us daily to
observe our sins and particular lapses, and accordingly to descend to a
particular confession and penitencie for them, Psalm. 51.
and particularly to desire forgiveness with the application of Christ's
righteousness, according as we do every day desire bread for our nourishment.

Pardon for others.
2 Thus we pray forgiveness for our selves: we pray also pardon and forgiveness
for others, yea even for our enemies, according to the example of Christ,
Stephen, etc. but this point has already been handled in the preface of the
Prayer, to which place the reader is to be referred: only thus much we are
here to learn, pity and compassion to them that pity not themselves, that
seeing it is unknown unto us how the Lord will deal with men that live in
impenitencie and gross sins, we are therefore to hope the best in charity,
and seeing they are of our own flesh to have commiseration of them, it may be
that the Lord will at the instance of a godly man's prayer, Iam. 5.16.
which avails much, have mercy upon them; as it is supposed he had mercy
upon Saul at Stephens prayer, and the Centurion at Christ's.

The fourth point follows, which is, For whose sins we ask pardon? ours.
whose debts and sins they are whereof we ask pardon. They are called ours
in a double respect: first, for that they are ours properly, we having
committed them against the Majesty of God, and for that we cannot lay our
sins upon God, the devil, or other men: for God he does not compel us to
commit sin, neither does he inspire wickedness into us, Iam. 1.13.
seeing he tempts no man to sin: and howsoever the devil or wicked men may
tempt us, yet we willingly and freely yield to the temptation, and take a
delight and pleasure in the committing of sin: and though a wicked man be a
servant and slave to sin and Satan, yet he is so willingly, and he sells
himself for a slave, as it is said of Ahab.

2 Sin is called ours emphatically, Ezech. 18. Gal. 6.4.5.
to signify thus much, that seeing the soul that sins shall die, and that
every one shall bear his own burden, therefore we especially seek for the
pardon of our own sins, howsoever we are not to neglect our dutiful and
charitable prayers for other men.

The last point is, For whose sake we ask pardon? Christ's.
through whose merits we ask forgiveness: which is implied in the word pardon
or forgiveness: for which purpose we must know that God is a just God, and
therefore he will be satisfied wherein his justice is violated, and God can no
more forgive sin without any satisfaction done unto his justice, than he can
cease to be just or cease to be good: wherefore in that Christ teaches us to
ask forgiveness, there is necessarily insinuated some satisfaction to be made
to Gods justice: and therefore some person to make that satisfaction: which
person is Christ Jesus God-man, in whose name we are to pray, and through
whose satisfaction and obedience we obtain forgiveness: and so God continues
just, because he pardons not before he be satisfied, and yet is most
merciful also in providing a means for the discharge of our debt, whereas we
were non soluendo, utter bankerupts, never able to pay our debt: and so the
Prophets speech is fulfilled: Mercy and truth are met: Psalm. 85.10.
righteousness and peace kiss.

The use of which point is to teach us, that when we come to ask discharge of
our debts, we bring our acquittance with us, otherwise we can never be
discharged. And here there is some difference betwixt the paiments of men and
Gods payment: for with men the creditor gives an acquittance to the debtor;
but here the sinner, who is the debtor to God, gives an acquittance to the
creditor, which notwithstanding before the creditor freely gave unto him upon
the discharge made by the surety Christ Jesus: briefly and plainly thus much,
when we crave pardon of our sins we must bring with us faith to apply
Christ's righteousness; which being applied unto us, our debts are discharged in
Christ.

This is the first part of the petition, viz. the thing we ask. The condition
of the petition.
The second follows, the condition whereupon we ask pardon.

As we forgive our debtors. These words are an instrument serving to several
purposes: wherein we may consider both the meaning and use of them. For the
meaning of the words two points must be noted.

1 How other men are our debtors.

2 How we forgive other men their debts.

How other men are our debtors.
First, to know how other men are our debtors, we must consider that sin
contains always an offense to God, sometime also an offense to man. The
offense which is against God is the violating of his holy and righteous law
which is the rule of his justice. The offense which is again: man, is the
injury which is done against the person, honor life, goods, good name or
honesty of any man, whereby any of them is diminished or abolished in our
neighbor: as in murder, the life of a man is diminished; in theft, his goods;
in slander, his good name; in fornication, his honesty, etc. Now the offense
and injury of our neighbor contains the debt which we owe unto him: for
first, in that we have wronged him, we have not loved him, and so we owe love
unto him: secondly, we owe a satisfaction or amends, which in equity must be
made to the party iniuried: thirdly, we owe unto him a certain punishment
also, which in equity may be exacted and inflicted upon the party offending.
And in these respects other men are our debtors.

Secondly, we forgive other men their debts, How we forgive other men.
when we remit, not the transgression of Gods law, for that we cannot, for
none can forgive sin but God: but either the wrong, the satisfaction, or the
punishment: sometime all three, sometime two, sometime one only, namely the
wrong or injury done unto us; which wrong we do here profess our selves
ready to forgive, and thereupon desire God to forgive us.

But for further declaration of this matter we are to remember these things.

First, when man forgiueth the wrong, God does not always forgive the sin:
for there be many persecutors whose sins are never forgiven of God, and yet
Gods children that are persecuted by them forgive them the wrong, which through
their persecutions they sustain: so Christ and Stephen prayed for their
persecutors, some of whom (as is probable) God never pardoned.

Secondly, though man do not forgive the wrong, yet the Lord sometime may and
does forgive the sin: for if there be any man found so cruelly merciless as
that he will not forgive his enemies, his sin is the greater, and his charity
is the less, and he can have little or no comfort that God will pardon him:
but if the party that has done the wrong, do crave pardon at Gods hands, and
satisfy or make restitution according to equity to the party wronged, the
Lord forgiueth the sin and the wrong both to himself and to man: for God can
forgive, and does forgive both, upon performance of the condition of true
repentance, Mat. 5.24.
which contains in it satisfaction or restitution or amends.

Thirdly, though God forgive the sin, and man also forgive the wrong, yet man
may urge the party culpable to satisfaction and punishment according to the
law of God, and of the nation where they live: yea sometime the party wronged
ought so to do necessarily, otherwise he shall sin against God and the
Commonwealth. This we see evidently in the thief upon the cross: Luke
23.40.41.
God forgave him his sin, and yet he confesses he was justly punished: Judge.
7.19.20.
and Achan was punished according to Gods commandment, and yet it is very
probable by his confession of his fault that he repented: and certain it is
that Joshua forgave the wrong: and if Moses had spared any murderer or adulterer
from death, he had offended God, and damnified the common good, seeing that
such sins do defile a nation.

All which has this use, that though a man do prosecute a felon, or a
murderer to death, yet he may forgive him: and therefore the guilty persons
want charity, in reuiling and making outcries against the persecutors of
justice, as if they were blood-suckers, and so forth: for sometime the
quality of the offender is such, as that if he be suffered to live, the
Commonwealth is in danger to sustain much detriment, besides the great
offense done to the righteous law of God, which has awarded death to some sort
of sinners. Again, much more therefore is it lawful for a man to commence
suite of law, and to be the plaintiff in a manifest injury thereby to recover
his right, and to obtain satisfaction, and that without any breach of
charity: for there is a difference to be made betwixt an Enemy and an
Adversary: the one is caused of hatred to the man: Echthros. Antidicos.
the other of a love to justice; and a man may retain love and be another man's
adversary; so can he not and be his enemy: wherefore if a man have a
controversy with another, and retain love and charity with his neighbor,
(as he may very well) notwithstanding the suite, he may worthily partake in
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, though some bogle at it: wherein they bewray
either their malice, ignorance or superstition.

Thus we see the meaning of the condition: now the use thereof is threefold.

1 It is a probation of our charity and love to our brethren, whereby we may
gather comfort of pardon from God, or be terrified and humbled through despair
thereof. This is evidently expounded by our Savior Christ, saying: If you
forgive others, God will forgive you: Mat. 6.15. and. 18.33.
or if you will not forgive others, neither will God forgive you.

2 It serves for a profession of our love and charity to others, yea toward
our enemies by forgiving them: for by this speech publicly uttered in the
assembly of the people we proclaim to all the hearers our inward disposition,
which certainly do possess the hearts of all those, whose sins the Lord
has pardoned.

3 It serves for an argument enforcing the petition for remission of sin: as
if this were the fense: Lord forgive us, for we forgive others: as if this were
the argument: Luke 11.4.
The merciful shall obtain mercy.

But we Lord are merciful in pardoning others:

Therefore Lord be merciful in pardoning us.

And for this latter use we are to know, that none of all the petitions have a
special argument particularly fixed to the side of it but this, as if our
Savior Christ would signify unto us thereby the weakness of our faith in that
matter which most concerns us, viz. the pardon of our sins, and the means
whereby we might best fortify our weakness by forgiving our enemies.

This is the second thing considered in this petition, 3 The supplication of
t^is petition.
the meaning of the words: now follows the third thing, which is the
Supplication.

The things which we ask in this petition are specially three.

1 Humiliation, and that is insinuated by consequent.

2 Justification, and that is expressed in one part, viz. forgiveness.

3 Charity, and that is included in the reason.

Humiliation.
First Humiliation, which necessarily is implied in that we ask pardon: for a
man will never ask that which he needs not, or whereof he feels no want:
he that is sick, and sees and feels his sickness, Mat. 9.12.
will seek and ask the means of health: he that is in health, as he feels
no sickness, so he will seek for no cure: Humiliation contains these
particulars.

Sight of sin.
1 A sight and knowledge of our sins, and of the curse of the law due unto
sin, which is the theoricall or speculatiue knowledge in the brain.

Sense of sin.
2 A sense and feeling of the heinousness of sin, and the intolerable burden
of Gods wrath due unto sin, which is a further impression in the heart and
affection. Now both these befall some of the wicked, Genes. 4.13. Mat. 27.4.
as Caine and Judas, who because they felt their sin, no doubt knew them: and
from these two sometime in the wicked the Lord wringeth,

Confession of sin.
3 A confession of sin with the deserved punishment. This confession arises
from a double fountain and cause: in the wicked it grows from despair and
murmuring, and it is joined with blaspheming and much outrage, as in the former
examples of Judas and Caine, who were compelled to confess their sins
against their liking, for they desired to hide them.

In the godly and penitent and honest heart, this confession arises from hope
of ease and pardon, Prou. 28.13. Psalm. 51.3.4. Job. 31.33.
from hatred and wearines of his sin, and it is joined with Gods glory, and
it is performed willingly, and undertaken voluntarily without compulsion: and
howsoever there be a little strife with the shame of the world which might
perhaps befall him upon the confession of his sin to others, yet he is
content therein also to deny himself that God may be glorified, himself
comforted, Psalm. 51.13.
and others instructed by his example.

4 An earnest and fervent desire to be released of the burden of sin: Desire
of deliverance from sin. Psalm. 51. Romans 7.24. Mat. 5.6. E^ay. 55.1. Apoc
22.17. Psalm. 143.6. Psalm. 84.2. Psalm. 42.1.2.
this was apparent in the Prophet David after his murder and adultery, which
appears by the often gemination of the petition for Mercy: this the Apostle
Paul expresses also in his outcrie after the combat: this is called spiritual
hunger and thirst by our Savior Christ, the Prophet Esaias and the Apostle John
in the Revelation, and by the Prophet David in the Psalm, compared to the
longing of a woman with child, and to the desire that the Heart has to take the
soil being chased with hounds.

This desire of grace as it is the greatest and best degree of humiliation, so
it is a step to justification, which follows.

In the second place after humiliation, Justification.
follows justification, which contains these specialties.

1 The matter of justification, which is Christ, Matter of justification.
and his merits of all sorts, both in doing and suffering; in satisfying for
sin, and his abstinence and freedom from sin; in his obedience passive,
abolishing the curse by his cross; and active, in purchasing grace and glory
by performing the commandment: and habitual in the sanctification and
heavenly qualification of his humane nature, with the graces of Gods Spirit out
of measure.

2 The form of justification, Form of justification. 2. Cor. 5.21. Esaias. 53.5.
which is the translation of our sins from us to Christ, and Christ's
righteousness from himself to us; For the chastisement of our peace was upon
him, and by his stripes we are healed: for, that our punishment might justly
fall upon him, first our sins must of necessity be imputed to him, and then
that we might be delivered from the punishment which we had deserved, his
sufferings must needs be applied unto us. Again, although by the sufferings of
Christ imputed unto us, Romans 10.3.4. Mat. 3.15.
we are freed from sin and the curse: yet except Christ had fulfilled all
righteousness for us in obeying the commandment, we had never been
sanctified by grace, and blessed with glory, for his passion procures our
deliverance, and his obedience purchases our salvation. Justification
therefore contains:

1 The translation of our sins upon Christ.

2 The imputation of Christ's obedience to us.

This imputation is performed partly by the holy Ghost, who bestows Christ
and his merits upon us, partly by faith in our selves, which applies Christ's
righteousness unto us. Here is the proper place of Faith.

Efficient cause of justification.
3 The specialty of justification is ye efficient cause, which is the Mercy of
God, the Grace of God, the Love of God, who of his mere mercy, grace, and
love, sent his Son to do and suffer for us whatsoever his justice required,
and does daily apply unto us the virtue of both.

Charity, or the final cause of justification.
In the fourth and last place follows Charity or Love to our brethren and
enemies, which is the fulfilling of the second table of the Commandments, and
which is the final cause of justification in respect of men: and this is
directly signified unto us in the condition or argument annexed to this
petition: as we forgive our debtors. But because all these particulars, though
to another end, and after another manner, have been already discoursed in this
treatise, here of purpose I omit their further handling.

4 The deprecation of this petition.
And this may suffice for the supplication, comprehending the things we pray for
in this petition: now follows the fourth thing, which is the deprecation,
containing those things which we pray against, and they are these six
following.

Blindness of mind. 2. Cor. 4.4.
1 Blindness of mind, which is when men continue in sin without any
consideration thereof, either banishing the thought of it out of their mind, or
slubbering the matter over with a negligent conceit, as that we are all
sinners, and the best man has his infirmities. Again, unto blindness of mind,
as near of kin, may be added a reprobate mind, Romans 1.28.
when men are bereft of all difference of good and evil, never making bones
(as we say) of sin against nature, which the Apostle calls things not
convenient, or not agreeing with the light of nature.

2 Hardness of heart, which is a fruit of the former, Hardness of heart.
when men are never troubled in their consciences for most fearful sins:
this was that fearful judgment which befell Pharaoh, who had a heart more
hard than the Adamant, Exodus 5 and 6. etc.
never trembling at all that fearful wrath which God executed upon Egypt.
Ezech. 11.19. Act. 2.37.
Contrary to this is a soft and fleshie heart, as the Prophet calls it a
heart pricked with the feeling of sin, a heart that does tremble at Gods word.

Both these sins may be entitled with one general name, the spirit of
slumber or security, Security.
eyes that do not see, ears that do not hear, a heart that does not
understand, as the Prophets prophecy.

3 Opinion of our own righteousness, Opinion of our own justice. Romans 10.3.
a matter very common with the natural man and the ignorant multitude, who
therein iumpe with the Jews in Paul's time, who were taught by the Pharisees
the patrons of that heresy, and with the Papists in our time; Luke 18.21.11.
Mark. 10. Apoc. 3.17.
whereas the Lord Jesus Christ reproves the Angel of the Church of Laodicea
for that very fault, who said he was rich, being indeed poor, and ignorant of
his poverty. These are proud iusticiaries, who as they are blind, so are they
bold in their blindness; saying they can see, and therefore their sin
remains, Ioh. 9.41.
whereas if they would confess themselves to be blind, they should have no
sin, for Christ would take it away.

4 Upon this conceit of our own righteousness, Neglect or contempt of Christ.
Romans 10.3.
follows necessarily either a contempt, or light estimation, or no regard at
all of Christ's righteousness and his merits. Christ says, the whole have no
need of the Physician: that is to say, they that judge themselves to be in good
health, that think they are righteous, will never regard Christ, who is the
Physician of the soul, and the physic also.

After this follows unbelief or infidelity, Unbelief, infidelity,
presumption, despair.
with the opposite pride and presumption, which when they have a long time
wrought upon the heart of a carnal man, if the Lord at length open the eyes of
that wretch to see his sins, Genes. 4.13. Mat. 27.4.
then despair rusheth upon him, which is the next neighbor to unbelief.

Hatred, Malice, Revenge.
6 Hatred, not forgiving others that injury or wrong us: hereto appertains
malice, and a desire of revenge, things too common in the world: some say, I
may forgive, but I will never forget: others, I will pray for him, but I will
never trust him: some malefactors when the rope is about their neck proclaim
their eternal hatred to all the executioners of justice. Hitherto also
appertains the discovering of our neighbors infirmities, 1. Pet. 4.8. Prou.
10.12.
whereas Love covers a multitude of sins, that is, of private infirmities
which thou know in thy neighbor.

5 The thanksgiving of this petition.
This may suffice for the deprecation: the thanksgiving now follows, which
may easily be collected out of the former by induction of particulars before
mentioned.

Thus the petition for grace is handled.

Now follows the last petition, which is for perseverance.

And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
1 Order of the last petition.
The order of this petition after the former is very due and just, for
perseverance follows grace, and is a necessary consequent thereof: here the
doctrines mentioned in the order of the former petition are to be handled.

Grace and perseverance inseparable.
First, that grace and perseverance are inseparable: for no temptation, no
sin, no affliction shall be able to overthrow the grace of God in the man
that is endued therewith, Mat. 7.24.25.
for he has built his house upon the Rock like a wise man, and therefore
though the rain fall, and the floods come, and the winds blow and beat upon
the house, yet the house shall not fall, for it is builded upon the Rock
Christ. And Christ tells Peter that the gates of hell shall not prevail
against the Church that is built upon this Rock: Mat. 16.18.
and certainly if God should once give grace to a man, and after should take
it away, then this absurdity would follow that God should repent, that he
should alter and change, for God truly loves him that has grace, and he
truly hates him that falls away finally and totally from all grace: and so
God should be as man, mutable and changeable; which is blasphemous to Gods
infinite perfection, Iam. 1.17.
with whom there is no variableness nor shadow of changing, for the strength
of Israel will not lie nor repent, for he is not a man that he should
repent. 1. Sam. 15.29.
Again, this would follow as absurd as the former, that it might be said, God
has from eternity Elected and Reprobated the same man: Christ has both
redeemed, and not redeemed the same man: the same man is flesh of Christ's
flesh, and bone of his bone, and a limme of the devil: the same man is a
member of the Catholic Church, and no member of the Catholic Church: which
things because they have no congruitie with themselves, and with the course of
the Scriptures, are therefore to be rejected as gross absurdities, and the
truth remains firm: That grace has perseverance as necessarily annexed to
it, as the Sun has light, or the fire heat.

Secondly, this doctrine arises from the former, He that has grace resists
the temptation.
that he which has grace can in some measure resist temptation, and if so be
that sometime through the violent whirlewinde of a temptation, he take the
foil by the temptor, yet after he recouereth himself and gathers more
strength and courage to the next encounter, and at the length gives his enemy
the overthrow, and triumphs over him; and this power and grace is
communicated unto us from Christ our head, who was therefore tempted, and
overcame the temptor, Mat. 4. Heb. 2.18. Iam. 4.7. Apoc. 3.21.
that when we are tempted we might resist and prevail being succored by him.
Hence it is that the Apostle wills to resist the devil, and he will fly
from us: and Christ promises us a place in his throne if we overcome: all
which do import thus much, that as it is a thing possible to resist the
devil, to put him to flight, to overcome him; so the children of God have this
faculty communicated unto them from Christ that broke the serpents head. 1.
Cor. 10.13.


Now follow two other doctrines collected by contrary: viz. that if
perseverance follow grace, then no grace no perseverance.

A wicked man cannot resist temptation: though he may refrain from sin. Gal.
5.17. Romans 7.
First therefore, he that wants grace cannot resist a temptation, for
although peradventure a wicked man may be solicited to commit some sin
whereto he has an indisposition, yet he cannot properly be said to resist the
temptation, but only to refrain the sin: for in resisting a temptation there
is the spiritual combat betwixt the flesh and the spirit, each of them lusting
against other, which is not in a man destitute of grace, who is all flesh and
no spirit: and so the will of a wicked man and his affections may resist the
motion of his understanding, or his conscience may terrify his will and
affection; but there is not an opposition of grace and sin in one and the
same faculty or affection, Luke 11.12.
for the strong man has the possession of the castle, and he rules there as
it pleases him without contradiction.

The wicked fall into evil.
Secondly, the wicked man wanting grace and perseverance, must of necessity
fall into evil, according to the proverb of the wise man: Prou. 24.16.
A just man falls seven times and rises again, but the wicked fall into
mischief: but this doctrine shall more evidently appear afterward in the
whole discourse of the meaning of this petition, which is the second general
now following.

2 The meaning of this last petition.
We are to understand that there are two great enemies of grace, which
continually lay siege against us.

1 The first is Temptation. 2. The second is Evil.
Against both these our Savior Christ teaches us to pray in this petition.
The first enemy of grace, and impediment of preservation is Temptation, in
these words.

Lead us not into Temptation. Here we are to consider two things.

1 What Temptation signifies. 2 What it is to lead into Temptation.
First, What it is to tempt, and what is temptation. Affliction is temptation.
Iam. 1.2.
temptation in the Scripture has diverse significations: sometime it signifies
affliction: so the Apostle James says, that we should account it all joy to
fall into manifold temptations, meaning afflictions: this is not the
signification of the word in this place, for that is included in the next
clause.

Secondly, To tempt God. Psalm. 95.9.
temptation signifies that trial which man takes of God; so the word
signifies in the Psalm, whereas the Prophet vbraideth the Israelites for
tempting God in the wilderness. Thus the devil persuaded Christ to cast
himself upon the immediate providence of God, Mat. 4.7.
in casting himself down from the temple, which was to tempt God: and this is
not the meaning of the word in this place.

Thirdly, To tempt or entrap a man. Matthew. 22.18.
temptation signifies that trial which man takes of man to entrap him and
bring him into danger of law: so the Pharisees and Herodians tempted Christ,
and thus was Christ tempted diverse times in the Gospel: and this is not the
meaning of the word in this place neither.

Fourthly, To try what is in man.
temptation signifies that trial which God takes of man to manifest to
himself and others what is in him. So God tried Adam in the estate of
innocence: Genes. 3. Genes. 22.1.
so God tried Abraham in commanding him to sacrifice his son: and thus God
daily tries his children for diverse ends. Neither is this the meaning of the
place.

Lastly, To solicit man to sin.
temptation signifies that trial which the devil takes of man to cause him
to commit sin by his entisements, who in this respect is called the tempter:
Mat. 4. How man is provoked to sin by Satan.
and thus the devil tempts man: 1. by prosperity, 2. by adversity, 3. by
example, 4. by suggestion; though for the most part suggestion is the general
affection of all the other three: for that in time of prosperity, and
adversity, and by evil examples the devil infuseth his temptations into our
minds, though sometime he inspireth his temptations suddenly by occasion of no
object at all: as we may sometime have experience by some fearful blasphemies,
which suddenly without any dependence of former cogitations or objects rush
into our minds: and according to this latter signification temptation is taken
in this place.

What it is to lead into tentation.
Further, we are to consider what it is to lead into temptation: for which
point we must know it contains these four particulars.

Desertion or the forsaking of the creature.
1 The leaving of the creature or forsaking the creature, not as though God
ceased to support and sustain the nature or natural powers of the creature,
but for that he cease to supply a second grace to the first, he withdraws
his second grace: this the Prophet David feared, and therefore prays God not
to forsake him ouerlong or overmuch: Psalm. 119.8. Psalm. 51.11.
and to this sense the Prophet entreats the Lord to confirm him with a
strong spirit after his lapse into sin, for preventing of future lapses. This
first part is called Desertion.

Delivering the creature to his own lusts.
2 Delivering over the creature to his own lusts: when God has withdrawn his
second grace, the first grace is not of ability to encounter the lusts of the
flesh, but the lusts of the flesh do fight against the spirit, and ouermaster
it for the present. This phrase of delivering up, the Apostle applies to the
Romans in regard of the repressing or refraining grace: Romans 1.24.26.28.
saying, God gave them over to vile affections, to a reprobate mind, etc. And
after this,

The efficacy of Satan. 1. Chro. 21.1.
3 The creature is in the power and hands of the devil in a certain measure:
so as he may tempt him and prevail over him to the committing of most
fearful sins, as he did prevail with David, and Peter, and others.

Excecation, induration: blindness of mind, hardness of heart. 2. Sam. 10.5. and
12.16.
4 Upon this follows a kind of excecation and induration, when the servant of
God makes little conscience of sin: and does not sensibly feel and
perceive Gods displeasure against sin. This was in David, who continued in
his murder and adultery three quarters of a year, in which time there was a
spiritual mist of carnal security which covered his mind and heart, which
afterward was dispersed: and thus the Lord is said actually to blind and
harden men: as we see in the kingdom of Antichrist, and in the old Jews, and
in Pharaoh the King of Egypt; 2. These. 2.11. Esaias 6.10. Exodus 4.21.
whose eyes the Lord blinded, and whose heart the Lord hardened.

Here a scruple may arise, viz. that seeing God blinds men, and hardens
their hearts, he therefore may be said both to be the author of sin, and to
tempt to sin: both which nevertheless the Scripture peremptorily denies to
be in God; as being contrary to his infinite goodness. Psalm. 5.4. Iam. 1.13.
For answer whereof, we must remember that God may be said to harden and
blind, and tempt, God is not the author of sin.
and yet neither is the author of sin, nor a tempter to sin.

First, God tempts man especially four ways.

1 By afflictions, which are therefore called temptations, Iam. 1.

2 By a commandment special: as that of Abraham, Genes. 22.1.

3 By prosperity and abundance of outward things, Prou. 30.9.

4 By occasioning objects: as Genes. 3. God objected the apple to Adams and
Eues eye: and 2 Thessalonians. 2. God sent upon them strong delusions: which is to be
understood in regard of the object entising and deluding. True it is therefore
that God does tempt, but he does not tempt to sin: the Lords temptation may
more properly be called a probation than temptation: he rather does try what
evil is in us, than move us to evil: rather he proves what we will do, than
stirs us up to do any thing: wherefore we are to distinguish betwixt these
two words; Dokimazein. Peirazein.
temptation and probation: howsoever they may perhaps sometime admit one and
the same signification.

Secondly, and more fully to the purpose: God hardens, Man hardens, and
Satan hardens in diverse considerations.

1 Man hardens his own heart by refusing the grace offered in the means of
salvation: How man hardens his own heart.
and thus Christ complains that when he would have gathered the Jews
together, they would not. And thus in the Psalm the Prophet exhorts the
people not to harden their hearts, Psalm. 95.7.8.
as their fathers did at Massah and Meribah: but to hear the voice of the Lord
to day.

How Satan hardens man's heart. Heb. ^.13.
2 Again, Satan hardens man's heart by persuading and tempting to refuse
grace, to continue in the practice of sin, in impenitencie, and so by
consequent there is such a callion or hardness brought upon a man, through the
daily custom of sin, by the subtlety of Satan, that all the means of grace
rebound back again, as a ball cast against a stone wall.

How God hardens man's heart. Mat. 20.15.
3 Lastly, when a man is come to this pass God has his work also; for he
withholdeth his grace, which he is not bound to give except it please him, he
being the absolute Lord of his own: and having left us to the swinge of our
own corruption, he notwithstanding every day, or very often, smites our hard
hearts with his word, with his judgments, with his blessings, with the motions
of the spirit, or of our own conscience; the which not breaking our stony
hearts to contrition (as the stone is broken by the hammer of the workman)
which is the proper effect of Gods word; Ierem. 23.29.
by accident the heart is hardened, as the stiddie the more strokes lights
upon it, the more it is beaten together, the faster is the substance, and so
the harder: and so in his justice and judgment punishes one sin with
another, casting occasions and objects whereupon the corruption that is in man
works to the committing of most vile abominations: Romans 1. 2. These. 2.
as the Gentiles fell from idolatry to sins against nature, they in the seat
of Antichrist neglecting the love of the truth, were strongly deluded by the
occasion of entising objects to believe lies: as namely, all those lying signs
and fables mentioned in their Legends. And thus God hardens: and in the same
sense he blinds.

Summarily therefore God does thus harden the heart, and blind the mind, and
tempt the creature, and so lead into temptation; but is not the author of
sin, or tempter to sin.

Thus much for temptation, which is the first enemy of grace and impediment of
perseverance: now follows the second, which is evil.

But deliver us from evil. Here also we are to consider two things. What is
good and evil.


1 What is evil. 2 What is to deliver from evil, or how God delivers from
evil.
First therefore to know what evil is, we must know what good is, that by the
opposition of contraries the matter may be more evident. Good is of three
sorts: for there is a natural good, a moral good, and a good instrument: and
so by contrariety: there is a natural evil, a moral evil, and an evil
instrument.

A natural good is whatsoever God has at the first creared: so the Lord says
that all his works were good: A natural good. Genes. 1.21.
which must needs be understood of that natural goodness, that is, of the good
essence and qualities wherewith God endued his creatures: for the beasts, and
the plants, the fowls and fishes, the heavens and meteors, the earth and
metals are only good in respect of their essence and qualities, for they are
not capable of virtue or vice, seeing that God never gave the law moral unto
them.

A moral good is whatsoever quality is in the reasonabe creature agreeable to
the law moral, A moral good Genes. 1.21. Micah. 6.8.
commonly called the ten commandments: as also whatsoever quality is in man
agreeable to the Gospel, the sum whereof is repentance and faith, which are
qualities supernatural infused into man.

A good instrument is whatsoever God in his mercy and love to his children
uses as a means to procure the good of his Church, though it be the devil, A
good instrument.
though it be sin, than which there is not a greater evil; yet it is not
summum malum: Romans 8.28.
for that God uses sin as an instrument of good, and therefore sin is not
absolutely evil, for it has a respect of good. It is every way evil in it
self: but God which is infinitely good turns evil to good, 2. Cor. 4.6.
and brings light out of darkness: yea further whatsoever God uses as an
instrument of his glory in his mercy and justice is instrumentally good: and
so there is no summum malum, though there be summum bonum.

We see the kinds of good: let us see also the kinds of evil.

A natural evil.
A natural evil is whatsoever is opposed to a natural good: and that is
commonly called malum poenae, the evil of punishment: namely, whatsoever
serves for the overthrow and destruction of Gods creature, that which God
created secondarily after the fall: thus the Prophet says directly that God
created evil as well as good, Esaias. 45.7.
that is, punishments and afflictions of all sorts, as poverty, deformity,
sickness, famine, death, damnation: and whatsoever other evil serves for the
execution of Gods justice upon those that violate the justice of God.

A moral evil.
A moral evil is whatsoever is opposed to a moral good, namely sins of all
sorts, whether against the decalogue or the Gospel, commonly called malum
culpae: and this is the fountain of the former evil of punishment: for if
there had been no sin, there had been no judgments, no punishments prepared
for sin.

An evil instrument.
An evil instrument is, whatsoever God in justice and wrath against sin and
sinners turns to the hurt of the sinner: Prou. 1.32.
thus the devil, the world, riches, honor, pleasure, the word and means of
grace, are turned to be instruments of Gods wrath, and so of evil to the
wicked: for as God does turn evil to good to them that fear him, so he does
turn good to evil to them that hate him: for among things created by God, or
devised by the creature, there is nothing absolutely good, or absolutely evil,
but every good may have some relation of evil, and every evil may have some
respect of good. Thus we see what evil is in general, but more specially we
must know that there is furthermore the evil of evil: which although it be
generally suggested in the former distinction of good and evil, yet
nevertheless here must more distinctly be noted. Wherefore we must observe
also that there are four combinations of good and evil, which are these
following.

1. The good of good. 2. The evil of good. 3. The good of evil. 4. The evil
of evil.
The good of good is that fruit or commodity which Gods children reap by all
the gifts of God; The good of good.
as the benefit of health and wealth, peace and liberty, the word and all the
means of grace, whereby the godly man is not only comforted and refreshed in
his body, but furthermore fed and nourished and strengthened in his soul to
conversion and salvation.

The evil of good is that hurt and detriment which the wicked reap by all the
gifts of God aforesaid, The evil of good.
as that not only their life, health, peace, liberty, wealth and prosperity
in the world, but also all the means of grace and salvation becomes the bane
and poison both of soul and body to their everlasting damnation another day:
that although the wicked are nourished by their meat, and cured by their
physic, and instructed and reproved by the word, etc. yet there is a secret
poison therewithal infused into their souls, which shall another day in Gods
appointed time burst out to their utter overthrow.

The good of evil is that good which the Lord as a skillful Physician
gathers from the afflictions and sins of his children, as it were a
purgation out of poison: The good of evil.
for God can and does expel one sin with another, and many sins with
afflictions: as a father, correcting, and amending the faults of his children
by correction.

The evil of evil is that damage which the wicked sustain by falling into
sin, The evil of evil.
and the punishment thereby deserved, which is that thereby their damnation is
increased, for a great measure of wrath is heaped up by their sins, and a
greater number of sins are committed by their afflictions. Thus we see what
evil is: and by contrary what good is.

Now follows the second thing, How God delivers from evil.
which is how God delivers from evil: which in part may be conceived by the
former distinctions. Yet thus much for the present purpose God delivers us
from evil four ways.

First, by preserving us from committing of sin.

Secondly, by freeing us from judgments due to sin.

Thirdly, by freeing us from the ^urt of sin and affliction.

Fourthly, by turning all those sins which we commit, and the afflictions
which we sustain, to our good.

This may suffice for the second general point to be considered in this
petition, viz. the meaning of the words.

Now follows the third general, which should be the supplication: but
because the petition is propounded negatiuely and by way of deprecation, as
none of the rest are, therefore it shall be convenient to alter the order
formerly propounded, and to speak in the third place of the deprecation,
annexing in the fourth place the supplication.

3 The deprecation of the last petition. Again t tentation. 2. Cor. 12.7.8.
The things that we pray against are these following.

1 Temptation, but not absolutely against temptation, but so far forth as it is
a means to draw us away from God to commit sin: and so the Apostle Paul
prays, that the prick of the flesh might be removed from him, which he
terms the Angel of Satan, because that the devil sent it for a devilish
end, howsoever God sent it for his humiliation and humility: by temptation in
this place, understand solicitation to sin.

Against affliction.
2 Affliction, but not absolutely against it neither: only so far forth is it
lawful to pray against afflictions, as they are the punishments of sin, the
curse of God, means to drive us to impatiencie, Prou. 30.9
or to take Gods name in vain: so Agur prays against poverty, which is one
kind of affliction.

Here before we proceed any further, two questions or doubts must be discussed
and resolved and that jointly, each depending of other.

1 Whether it be lawful to pray for a temptation or a cross.

2 How far forth it is lawful to pray for or against temptations and
afflictions.

It may seem at the first sight, Whether it be lawful, and how far forth to
pray for or against tentation and affl^ction.
that seeing the end of temptation is to provoke us to sin, and the end of
afflictions are to destroy the creature, that therefore it is unlawful to pray
for them. Again, it may in like manner be thought, that seeing through
temptations God works much good unto us, and that through afflictions God
teaches us and nurtereth us in his law; therefore it is very lawful to pray
for a temptation and afflictions. There is a triple solution of this doubt:
some say thus.

1 That seeing temptation and affliction are in their own nature the means
and punishments of sin, therefore in no case we are to pray for them, but
against them: for God forbids us to practice any thing that is a means of
sin, and therefore consequently he wills us to pray against all the means
of sin, as temptation is: and seeing afflictions in their own nature and
first institution are Gods plagues upon sinners, we are to avoid them by all
means possible (as we do) and so to pray against them.

2 Others distinguish and answer thus, that we are neither to pray for them
nor against them, but to commit our selves to Gods providence and will, to be
ordered as he thinks best, and if afflictions befall us with temptations, to
sanctify them by prayer for our sanctification.

3 Lastly, others are directly of opinion, that it is lawful, yea needful
sometime to pray for temptations and afflictions, for that they are both a part
of our daily bread, though not of the body, yet of the soul. In this
diversity of opinions it is very hard to find out the truth, by keeping a
mean betwixt them, which must be done, otherwise the doubts cannot be
dissolved: we must know therefore for evidence sake, that we read in the
Scriptures that Gods servants have always prayed against temptation and
affliction; 2. Cor. 12.7.8. Prou 3^.9. Psalm. 11^.71. and 94.12. Iam. 1.2.
so the Apostle prayed against the prick of the flesh, so the wise man prayed
against poverty: we read also on the other side, that the Prophet David
reckeneth affliction good for himself, and the man blessed whom the Lord
corrects: and the Apostle James wills us to account it a matter of all joy
to be tempted and afflicted (and it is probable if that Adam had never fallen
from grace, he might have been assaulted with temptation; and why may not the
devils sometime tempt the good Angels, as well as they tempted Christ?
Especially if temptation be only the propounding of an evil object to the
understanding with a reason to enforce it.) There being then a kind of
repugnancie in these two practices of the holy men in Scripture, some praying
against temptation and affliction, others accounting affliction good for them,
and exhorting to rejoice in temptation; they must be reconciled by the change
of the respect, for howsoever in the Scripture there may be a show of
repugnancie, yet indeed there is none. Therefore in one respect Gods children
prayed against temptation and affliction, in another respect they accounted it
a blessed and joyful thing to be tempted and afflicted.

Gods purpose in temptation. Satan's intent in temptation.
Temptation is to be considered according to Gods purpose, and according to the
devils intendment: God purposes temptation to our good, Satan intends our
hurt. Again, temptation must be considered with the effect that the devil
produces through the temptation, and with the effect which God works
thereby: Satan by the temptation produces sin, the Lord he effects grace
upon sin: therefore we must, and the servants of God did pray against
temptation according to the devils intent and work: and entreat the Lord to
turn the devils effect produced, to our good as God intends and works.

Affliction is a punishment. Affliction is a correction.
Again, affliction is to be considered as God first inflicted it, and as he
afterward corrected it; he inflicted it as a punishment for the destruction of
the creature, but he has since in mercy to his children, altered it for the
correcting and bettering of them: in the former consideration the servants of
God prayed against it, in the latter they rejoiced in it, and accounted
themselves blessed by it. To make answer therefore directly, we may in some
sense pray against affliction and temptation, but in no respect pray for them:
yet when we are exercised by them, finding in our selves the marks of
election, we may rejoice under them: pray God to work his work in us by them,
and so labor to become blessed by means of them; for it will not follow by
good consequence, that because good redoundeth to us by them, that therefore
we must pray for them; for by like proportion it should be concluded, that
seeing through sin God works out our good, we should pray that we might
fall into sin, which is a thing most absurd and irreligious. In brief,
whatsoever is properly the means of our good, we are bound to pray for, but
that which is the means of our good by accident we are not to pray for, but
having reaped good by it through Gods mercy, to bless him for it: and when we
are exercised by it to entreat his blessing by means of it. And thus in some
measure these doubts are cleared, whether it be lawful, and how far forth to
pray for, or against affliction and temptation. Now we are to proceed in the
deprecation.

3 Desertion, Gods forsaking the creature, Against desertion.
is a thing that we especially pray against in this place: that God would not
withdraw second grace from us.

4 Lapse into sin, Against lapse into sin.
which follows upon Gods forsaking of us, for then we being in the hands of
the devil, and our own lusts, they will tyrannise over us.

5 Gods hardening the heart, and blinding the mind, Against Gods blinding the
mind and hardening the heart. Against apostasy. Heb. 3.12. Esaias. 1.5.
which is a spiritual judgment inflicted by God upon them that customably
live in sin.

6 Apostasy or backsliding, which is when a man reuolteth from a former
measure of knowledge or grace, or profession: Apostasy is either partial, or
total.

Partial Apostasy is when a man in some point of doctrine erreth, whereas
before he held the truth, or when a man leeseth some grace, or measure of the
same grace wherewith before he was endued: or when a man falls away from the
profession of the truth to Gentilisme, etc. Hymeneus, and Philetus, and
Alezander, 1. Tim. 1.20. 2. Tim. 2.17.18.
were Apostataes in part, erring concerning the resurrection: David fell from
some measure of grace received, and therefore he prays that God would restore
to him joy and gladness which he had lost. Psalm. 51.8 12.
Dema^ he embraced the present world, and fell from his profession to be a
Gentile again; 2. Tim. 4 10.
thus did diverse in the Primitive Church.

Total Apostasy is, when a man falls away from all the truth, and grace,
and profession of the truth, as Julian the Apostata did: hitherto appertains
the sin against the holy Ghost.

Against punishment of all sorts.
7 Punishments of sin of all sorts, whether temporal and bodily, or
spiritual and eternal, evil conscience, Hell, and so forth.

Against hurt of all sorts.
8 Hurt through iugdements.

9 Hurt through lapse into sin.

10 Hurt through the means of salvation, and prosperity.

Against Satan.
11 Devil, that God would tread Satan under our feet, that he would
restrain and limit his power and malice.

Against the world.
12 World, which is the evil examples of the world: the flattering intisements,
and fearful threats thereof.

Against the f^^sh.
13 Flesh, which is the lust and concupiscence of our heart, which continually
stirs it self up, and fights against the spirit, that God would repress
it, mortify it, and so subdue it, that it prevail not against us.

Whether it be lawful to pray against death. Heb 9.27.
Here a question is to be handled, whether it be lawful to pray against death?
The Apostle answers, It is appointed to all men to die once: and therefore to
pray against death absolutely is unlawful: yet there are certain
circumstances in death, against which it is lawful to pray. As for example: It
is lawful to p^a^ against a cursed death.
Death is of it self a curse of God serving to destroy the creature; so far
forth we pray against it: death is the entrance to hell; so far forth we pray
against death. Again, death sometime befalls a man suddenly, that he can
have no time to set his house in order, to admonish his wife and children and
servants to fear God: if he be a Minister, can have no time to call for the
brethren to exhort them: or if he be a King, can have no time to take order for
weightier matters of ye Church or Commonwealth: in these respects it is lawful
to pray against sudden death; but not simply against death, nor against sudden
death, How it is lawful to pray against sudden death.
nor in all respects against sudden death: for if any person upon presumption
of time to repent at the last hour, still continuing in his sins al his life
long, do pray against sudden death, his prayer is sinful: for every man should
so lead his life, as if God should call for him at a moments warning, he were
in some measure prepared for the Lord.

These are the things that we pray against in this petition. The things that
we pray for follow. 4 The supplication of this petition. Perseuera^ce, or
strength to resist the temptation. Ephesians. 6.


1 Strength to resist temptation, and to persevere and continue. Now because
our enemies are many, and mighty, and subtle, and every way furnished for the
assault, therefore we had need also be furnished with all that spiritual
armor which the Apostle prescribes: the parts whereof are these following.
Some serving for our defense: as namely,

1 Sound doctrine, which is the girdle of Verity.

2 Upright life, which is called the breast plate of righteousness.

3 Patience in affliction, called the shoes of the preparation of the Gospel
of peace.

4 Faith in Christ Jesus, compared to a shield, whose virtue is to quench all
the fiery temptations to despair of Gods mercy.

5 Hope of life everlasting, called a Helmet for the head. Others serving for
offense of the enemy: as namely, 1. The word of God, that is, sentences of
holy Scripture, which directly cut the throat of sin and temptation, like a
sword. 2. Prayer of all sorts, with the properties thereof: watchfulnes and
perseverance, which are so many spiritual darts and spears to put the enemy
to flight, and to abandon the temptation.

2 That God would turn our afflictions to our good: Good through affliction
now that good which we desire to be wrought in us through affliction is
manifold.

1 Humiliation: which is to cast down our selves under the mighty hand of
God, correcting us for our defaults.

2 The denial of the world and the pleasures of sin.

3 The sighing for the inheritance laid up in store for us.

4 Wisdom to prevent the malicious persecutions of the wicked, which through
want of circumspection have befallen us.

5 Trial, purging, and refining our faith.

6 Patience and constancy.

7 Instruction to the obedience of Gods commandments.

8 Preservation from condemnation with the world.

All these fruits, and diverse other particulars the word teaches to be
wrought in us through affliction.

Good through sin.
3 That God would turn our sins to our good: which the Lord performs
diversely, viz.

1 By revealing unto us our wicked and corrupt disposition, that we are ready
to fall into most gross sins, if he do not support us every moment with his
grace.

2 By discovering our own infirmity and disabilitie that we are not able to
resist the least, much less the great assaults of our spiritual enemies: and
so we taking notice by lapse into sin of our own wickedness and weakness, we
may learn,

3 To detest our selves for our sinning nature.

4 To renounce all confidence in our selves, and our strength.

5 To rely our selves wholly upon Gods power and his might in the time of
temptation.

All these particulars are most apparent in the examples of David's and Peter's
falls, compared with their writings.

6 The Lord does discover unto us by lapse into sin the subtilties and
sleights of our spiritual enemy; the Apostle he calls them the methods,
and many ways which he has to circumuent and deceive us: for the devil can
upon a very slender occasion procure a lapse into some gross sin: as Peter
upon the speech of a maid denied Christ.

7 The Lord does afford unto us much experience, both of his mercy and
goodness in pardoning our sins, as also to recover our brethren fallen by like
occasion into sin, and to comfort them.

8 The Lord teaches us the spirit of meeknes and mildnes toward others that
are through infirmity overtaken with sin, that we be not too severe
censurers of them, considering our selves and our manifold lapses into the same
sins.

This and much more good God works out for us by our sins: all which must
teach us everlasting thankfulness.

This may serve for the supplication: 5 The thanksgiving of this petition.
the thanksgiving now follows, which may easily be gathered from the former
parts. Thus also the petitions which respect our good are handled: and so the
second part of this prayer is ended, viz. the matter.

Now follows the third part of the Lords prayer, which is the conclusion or
shutting up of the prayer, in these words:

For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever: Amen. Although
this conclusion be not extant in the Latin copy of the old translator, yet it
is in the Greek: The conclusion of the Lords prayer.
and the Greek being more ancient than the Latin, as being the original,
Whether the conclusion be canonical.
the Latin being only a translation and not canonical, in reason the Greek
is to be preferred before the Latin: and so this clause being in the Greek, we
will take it as part of Canonical Scripture, and so handle it, notwithstanding
that the Jesuit avouches the contrary: for his conjecture is, that it might
be added in the text of the Evangelist, because that the Greeks used to add
it in their Liturgy to the end of the Lords prayer. But this is a very simple
conceit for so learned a man, to avouch that a whole sentence might creep into
the text of Canonical Scripture, who durst be so bold to add it? or who
would be content to receive it for Canonical, if any man durst be bold to
insert it into the text? But let his dream go: and let us consider of it as a
part of the Lords Prayer.

This conclusion contains generally the manner of making our prayers to God,
as also the manner of ending our prayers which we make: for every several
petition must have the matters expressed in this conclusion: or else it is not
made in due and right manner as it ought to be: wherefore this conclusion must
be understood in every petition; as must also the preface.

Feruency is the sum of the conclusion. Iam. 5.16.
The manner of making and ending our prayers, expressed in this conclusion, may
be uttered in one word, Feruencie, as S. James says: The fervent prayer of
the righteous avails: the word which the Apostle uses signifies such a
prayer as is effectual, Energoumene.
operative, working: for the inner man must not be idle in time of prayer.
Feruencie therefore is the inward operation of the soul in the time of prayer:
What feruencie is.
even as a pot boyleth and seetheth by reason of the fire put under; so the
soul of a man, moved through the spirit of God, as it were a hot fire within
his bowels, must conceive inwardly such sighs and groans which cannot be
expressed, Romans 8.26.
which makes a fervent and effectual prayer. This feruencie then is, when all
the faculties of the mind and reasonable soul are occupied about the matter
of the prayer: the understanding conceiueth matter and inditeth, the memory
remembers things needful, the will heartily wishes things necessary, the
affections stirring themselves according to the several matters conceived in
the prayer, sometime rejoicing, sometime mourning, sometime fearing, sometime
hoping, sometime hating, sometime loving, and so forth as the matter varieth:
this in general is feruencie, Parts of feruencie: faith, desire.
which has two parts here expressed. The first is faith and assurance and
confidence, Fiducia. The second is earnest and vehement, and ardent desire,
Votum.

The first is the principal work of the understanding: the second is the
principal work of the will: the other two parts of the soul being the
handmaides of these; for the memory ministers to the understanding, and the
affections are serviceable to the will: the conscience is compounded of them
all.

Faith, the first part of feruencie, Of faith in prayer.
is expressed in the conclusion by certain arguments which shall be handled
afterward: something first in general of faith.

Faith is necessarily required to make a fervent prayer: Faith is necessary in
praye^. Iam 1.6.7.
the Apostle therefore calls it the prayer of faith; and further avouches
that the man that doubts, shall obtain nothing at Gods hands: not as though
any man could pray without some doubting and unbelief; but the Apostles
meaning is of such doubting which reigns in the heart, as may appear by the
text: also our Savior Christ requires faith plainly if we will obtain;
Mark. 11.24.
and we shall obtain if we have faith. Now we must always remember that
faith is grounded upon Gods word, Faith is grounded upon Gods will.
and Gods word is his will, and so our faith must be grounded upon his will:
wherefore if we ask any thing in faith, according to his revealed will, we
shall obtain. 1. Ioh. 5.14.
Now Gods will is in general this, to grant us every thing that is good: if it
be evil, it is not his will nor promise to give it: Psalm. 34.10.
and many things are good for us which seem evil unto us; and many things are
evil for us which seem good unto us: wherefore we must not define good and
evil after our own fancies, but as the truth is: A di^tinction of good and
evil.
God knows best what is good for us, and what is evil for us: herein
therefore we must submit our wills to Gods will; always being faithfully
persuaded that God will grant at our prayers every thing good for us. And
although the new supporters of Popery (the Jesuits I mean) avouch that such
a faith is not needful: yet the word of God, 1. Tim. 2.8.
which is the ground of every sound doctrine, teaches us thus much, and
therefore we ought to build our house thereupon, Mat. 7.
as on a sure and steadfast rock, rather than upon the sandy conceits of
popish teachers. For whereas it is alleged by them that David when he prayed
for the life of his child, ^. Sam. 12.22.
doubted whether God would give him life yea or nay: it may be answered two
ways: Verse. 14.
First, David did not well to pray for the life of the child, seeing it was
expressly signified to him before of Nathan that the child should die: for so
doing his prayer was against Gods will revealed. Secondly, it being a temporal
blessing, David ought to ask it conditionally if it were good; and so his
assurance might be certain to obtain it: but David seeing it not good for
him, presently after the death of the child is comforted, as having obtained
all that he asked. It appears therefore that faith is requisite in prayer,
namely such a faith as does assure a man certainly to obtain every good thing
he asks. Faith to ^btaine our prayers arises from justifying faith. Romans
8.32.
This faith arises from justifying faith, and is a necessary consequent
thereof: for a man believing in Christ Jesus for the pardon of his sin, is
also assured that God will give him all other good things: so the Apostle
reasons; If God give us Christ, how shall he not give us with Christ all
other things that shall be good for us? so Christ promises, that the kingdom
of God and his righteousness shall bring all other things with it as
appurtenances. This may suffice for the general view of faith.

Gods kingdom.
Now more specially, faith is supported by one argument principally, [thine is
kingdom,] which may be framed after this form.

Every good king will provide, not only for the advancement of his kingdom,
for the obedience of his laws, and for his honor and glory; but also for the
good and welfare of his subjects, in soul and body.

But thou Lord, art a good King, for the kingdom is thine.

Thou therefore wilt provide, etc.

This argument does either directly or indirectly confirm our faith for the
obtaining of all the six petitions, as may easily be perceived: directly it
confirms our faith in the second, but indirectly and by consequent in all the
rest.

This kingdom of God, which is the ground of the argument, is amplified by
three arguments: 1 It is a powerful kingdom. [thine is power.] 2 It is a
glorious kingdom. [thine is glory.] 3 It is an everlasting kingdom. [for
ever.]


And so there are three other arguments whereby our faith is supported for
obtaining the petitions.

The second argument therefore which is taken from the power of God is added
necessarily as an answer to an objection, which might be opposed thus: Power
of Gods kingdom.
though God be a king, yet except he have power to subdue his enemies, the
advancement of his kingdom shall be hindered: the answer whereof is, that as
God is a king, so he is omnipotent, able to conquer all his enemies that shall
rebel against him: and so this argument taken from Gods power may thus be
concluded. A king that is of ability will advance his kingdom, cause himself
to be honored, cause his subjects to obey his will, and provide for the
outward prosperity and inward felicity of his subjects:

God he is of ability being a powerful king:

Therefore he will provide for his honor, etc.

The third argument is taken from the glory of Gods kingdom: Glory of Gods
kingdom.


Where first, consider the meaning of the words: Thine is glory: that is, 1.
Thou have made al things for thy glory. 2. The things we ask are means of thy
glory. 3. The things we ask shall by us be referred to thy glory: and so the
conclusion follows: Ergo, grant us these things which we ask in these
petitions.

Secondly, let us also consider the argument framed thus, directly confirming
our faith for the first petition.

That which is most dear to thy self thou will procure:

But thy glory is most dear to thy self:

Therefore glorify thy self by us or in us, or give us grace to glorify thy
name.

Indirectly it confirms our faith in all the other petitions after this
manner.

Thou Lord wilt further all the means of thy glory:

But the enlarging of thy kingdom, the obedience of thy will, our daily bread,
remission of sin, and perseverance in grace are means of thy glory:

Therefore Lord we are persuaded thou will cause, etc.

The eternity of Gods kingdom.
The fourth argument whereby our faith is strengthened, is taken from the
eternity or everlasting continuance of this kingdom, and of the two other
properties thereof, mentioned in the second and third arguments: for the
kingdom, power and glory of God is everlasting, or Gods powerful and glorious
kingdom is eternal, and that in a double respect:

1 In themselves, for that they never have end:

2 In the faithful, who do and will everlastingly remember and magnify the
Lord, the most mighty and glorious king.

This fourth argument is framed after this manner:

If thy kingdom, power, and glory shall everlastingly be remembered and
magnified by us, as it is everlasting in it self: then grant these our prayers
which are means thereof.

But by granting these our petitions, we shall be provoked to procure the
everlasting remembrance of thy kingdom, power and glory, by our selves as long
as we live, by our holy seed after us, and for evermore in thy heavenly
kingdom.

Therefore we are persuaded thou will grant us these our petitions.

Faith is supported: God is not persuaded by arguments.
Thus our faith is supported and strengthened by arguments, which are used not
to persuade God, who is unchangeable and immovable in his purposes; but to
persuade us, who are of little faith, and scarce believe God himself, and
therefore have need to find out in our selves strong arguments, as it were
maine pillars to support our faith, as it were a crasie house ready to fall to
decay continually.

Desire, a part of feruency.
The second part of feruencie is desire, which is expressed in the word, Amen.

As faith is the principal work of the understanding, so desire is the
principal work of the will in regard of that which we want: and as faith may
well be compared to the hand or arm, laying hold upon blessings, so desire may
be compared to the brawne or sinews of the arm or hand, the instruments of
strength, whereby we hold fast that which we apprehend. Mat. 7.7.
This is expressed by Matthew in very significant and forcible metaphors: Ask,
as a beggar does to get an alms: Seek, as one with a candle looks for a
jewel lost upon the ground: Knock, with strength and force to get open the
gate of Mercy. The word whereby desire is expressed is an Hebrew word, and it
signifies, What Amen does signify.
verily, truly, certainly, so be it, let it be so: O Lord I desire it might
be so as I ask. And this may afford an argument for the confirmation of our
faith to obtain, taken from the truth of God framed in this form.

Thou Lord art a God of truth, Amen contains an argument to support our
faith.
thou art true in all thy promises; thy promises are yea and Amen: thou art
Amen, the faithful and true witness: thou keep fidelity for ever:

But thou have promised to grant the petitions of thy servants made in
feruencie of desire and faith:

Therefore grant these our petitions so qualified.

Thus the manner of making our prayers is taught us in the conclusion of this
prayer, which is feruencie in the two parts thereof, faith and desire. Now
contrary to feruencie is coldness in prayer, Coldness in prayer.
whereof something briefly must be spoken, that contraries may be more
perspicuous by their opposition. A cold prayer is either when a man
understands not that which he bableth with his lips, or has no assurance to
obtain that he asks, or regards it not in comparison; or prays living
in sin unrepented of: for all these conditions are as it were cold water
cast into a boiling caldron, which boiling before through heat, now cease.
Iam. 1.6
The Apostle James compares such prayers to waves of the sea, tossed to and fro
with the wind, and at length are consumed into froth, or beaten in pieces upon
the rock: A cold prayer obtains nothing.
for although perhaps a cold prayer may swell in great and eloquent words, and
roar with pitiful complaints and outcries, and be tumbled up and down in the
mouth by repetitions, or in the mind by imagination; yet at the length the
winds of wandering thoughts, faint affections, or gross ignorance drives them
upon the rocks of presumption, doubting, despair and impenitencie, and so
suddenly they are dissolved into froth, and consumed into nothing.

In brief therefore to conclude this conclusion: we must strive and wrestle
with the Lord in time of prayer, as Jacob did with the Angel, Genes. 32.24.
Hosea. 12.4
holding him fast, not letting him go till he bless us, till he change our
names, and call us Israel, men prevailing with God: that so after our prayers
we may find spiritual joy and comfort, and encouragement in all our ways,
which is the fruit of fervent prayer.

Here should be the end of this treatise, but that there are certain
extrauagant questions to be discussed, which could not be referred to any one
proper place of the former method, and yet contain matter very profitable,
though only probable and consisting of uncertainties and conjectures for the
most part. The questions, with their answers, are briefly these following.

Whether Christ prayed the Lords prayer.
1 Whether Christ ever prayed the Lords prayer?

The answer: It is probable that Christ did pray the Lords prayer himself,
for himself and for us: for although the expositors say that the word Father
is Naturae nomen, non personae: that is to say, common to all the three
persons, not proper to the first person: and therefore it would follow, that if
Christ prayed this prayer, he should pray to himself: yet if it be said that
the word Father may be either proper to the father, or common to all the three
persons, or both; there will no absurdity follow, and the objection is
answered. Again, if it be objected further that Christ should pray for the
pardon of sins, he having committed no sin, thereby giving occasion to
think that he had sin: the answer will be very indifferent, that Christ
might use that petition as an instrument of intercession for us, and not as a
petition for pardon of his sin, prescribing it nevertheless unto us for a
prayer of remission who had sinned: or else it might be answered, that Christ
being the surety might entreat God to pardon his sins, not the sins which
he had committed, but the sins which were to him imputed: or the petition
being delivered plurally, (forgive us) it may be Christ prayed for both: and
there was no doubt of misconceit in his Disciples, to whom he privately
expounded doubtful matters: and if the matter bred any misconceit in the other
auditors, it was through their own corruption and ignorance, and therein the
Lords justice might appear in blinding their minds and hardening their
hearts, as himself teaches, who often times spoke obscurely and ambiguously.

2 How often Christ used the Lords prayer? and how? How often Christ used the Lords
prayer, and how.


The answer of this question is partly certain, partly probable. It is
certain that Christ used the Lords prayer twice: first, he used it when he
taught the doctrine of prayer: and so Matthew has propounded it as a part of
the sermon in the mount. Secondly, he used it when he taught his Disciples a
form of prayer, according to the example of John, who taught his Disciples a
pattern of prayer, and this was presently after Christ had ended his prayers in
a certain place, as Luke reports: whence in all probability it may be
collected, that Matthew prescribes this prayer one way, and Luke another: for
in Matthew Christ taught the doctrine of prayer, and so it is dogmaticall in
Matthew: Luke says Christ taught a prayer: for his words are, When ye pray,
say: and so it is practical: so that Christ taught it both for a prayer which
his Disciples might use, and for the doctrine of prayer, which his Disciples
might teach. Again, it is probable that Christ never used this prayer but
twice, although it cannot be demonstratiuely proved; only this conjecture we
have, that whereas Christ makes diverse prayers to his Father in the
Evangelists, this is not mentioned, nor any petition of it in so many words,
and the Evangelists never name it elsewhere by any special name, and the
Apostles in their writings never make mention of it: but when they pray in
their writings use other forms, though still they keep themselves within the
compass of the matter and affections of this prayer (which we call the Lords
prayer, both for that it was composed by Christ and used by him:) hence
therefore it follows probably, that the Apostles never tied themselves to
the words of this prayer, but varied upon occasion. Briefly then, Christ used
this prayer twice: but it cannot certainly be determined whether he used it
oftener: neither can it be proved that the Apostles used it often.

Whether Christ spoke all and only the words of the Lords prayer.
3 Whether Christ spoke all and only the words of the Lords prayer?

The answer is only coniecturall: for it cannot be proved that he used the
very words set down by the Evangelists: the reason is, for that the
Evangelists use to set down, not all and only the words which Christ spoke,
but the sum and substance of them: and if it be granted that the Evangelists
have done it in other places, why may they not do it in this place? especially
seeing the Evangelists do differ in words in reciting many of Christ's
speeches, as namely of the Beatitudes: Mat. 5.3. Luke 6.20.
Matthew makes eight, Luke recites but four: and Luke expresses the
contrary woes, and Matthew does omit them: whence this may in all likelihood be
collected, that Christ used diverse other words by way of exposition to the
Beatitudes, and so by consequent to the petitions of the Lords prayer: and we
see directly that Christ expounds one petition, viz. the fifth: and why might
he not also expound others? seeing that other petitions are as hard to be
understood as that: and this does not any whit call into question the truth of
Canonical Scripture, but does rather commend unto us the spirit of wisdom
and truth wherewith they spoke, in that diverse writers differing in words,
still agree in matter and substance of doctrine. Upon this question and answer
depends another like unto it, viz.

4 How the Evangelists Matthew and Luke differ in rehearsing the Lords prayer?
Matthew. 6. Luke 11. (...) ^nce be^ Matthew and Luke (...), ^at^ng the Lords
prayer.


For answer whereof we are to consider what the Papists say. They make a very
great difference: for in the vulgar Latin translation there are these three
clauses in Matthew, which are wanting in Luke.

First in the preface (which art in heaven) is wanting.

Secondly, the third petition is wholly wanting.

Thirdly, the last petition wants one half (Deliver us from evil.) Yet they
say all these things are included in the other petitions, or else may
necessarily be deduced from them: but let the Popish dreams go: and let us
see the true differences which are three in words, but the substance is all one.

The first difference in words is of the fourth petition: for Matthew says,
semeron: Luke, cath' emeran.

The second difference in words is in the fifth petition: for all the words in
the original differ, except two or three.

The third difference is in the conclusion, which Matthew has, and Luke
wants.

Now by this difference betwixt Matthew and Luke, which is verbal not material,
this consequence arises, either that the Evangelists did not precisely bind
themselves to the words that Christ uttered, or else that Christ uttered the
Lords prayer in diverse words at the two several times when he uttered it.

5 Who prays best, he that says the Lords prayer, Who makes the best
prayer.
or he that says not the Lords prayer?

For answer of this question thus much:

The Lords prayer is the best form of prayer that ever was devised.

The Lords prayer is the best prayer that ever was devised.

He that prays the Lords prayer in words and matter, prays well.

He that prays the Lords prayer in matter only, prays well, though he use
other words, as Christ used other words, John 17.

It is one thing to say the Lords prayer, another thing to pray it.

It is one thing to use the Lords prayer aright, another thing to abuse it: for
a good thing may be absurdly abused.

He that uses a devised form of prayer aright, prays more acceptably to
God, than he that abuses the Lords prayer.

It is likely that he which can say nothing but the Lords prayer when he
prays, cannot pray, but abuses the Lords prayer.

It seems that that man does not sin which never uses the words of the
Lords prayer for a prayer, for that Christ did never intend to bind us to the
form of words, but of matter.

He that in particular has conceived his wants, and accordingly made his
petitions to the Lord in a conceived prayer, may never the less end and
conclude his prayer with the Lords prayer.

Diverse other doubts concerning the use of the Lords prayer may be
propounded; but it is not profitable to make doubts, except that they could
well be dissolved: only thus much for a conclusion of this treatise of prayer:
I had rather speak five words to God in prayer, from understanding, faith and
feeling, than say the Lords prayer over a thousand times ignorantly,
negligently, or superstitiously.

FINIS.

