NOAH'S DOVE, OR, Tidings of Peace to the godly.

A comfortable Sermon preached at a Funeral.

By Samuel Smith Minister of Gods word at Prittlewel in Essex.

PSALM. 34.19. Many are the troubles of the righteous, But the Lord delivers
him out of them all. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, and are to be sold by
Thomas Archer. 1619.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, as it has ever bin the practice of wicked men to make their
prosperity an argument of Gods favor, reasoning after this manner: Is it
likely that I should enjoy so many blessings from God if my conversation were
not pleasing in his sight, etc. Eccl. 9.2.
Not considering that these common gifts are given alike both to the godly man
and to the sinner: And that Esau though he was a man hated of God, yet enjoyed
the fatness of the earth as well as Jacob. Romans 9.2.


So the children of God beholding the outward prosperity of the wicked, and
their own miserable condition here in this life, have hereby been much
troubled; and have been moved to call Gods Judgments into question, how it
could stand with his Justice that wicked men should so abound in wealth that
Rebelliously transgress. Ier. 12 1. Psalm. 37.
This proved a sore temptation unto David, insomuch that he confessed that his
steps had wel-nigh slipped. Psalm. 73.2.
And the same thing perplexed the Prophet Jeremy that he was bold even to
reason the case with God, saying; Ier. 12.1
Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper, and why are they in wealth that
rebelliously transgress? Many of Gods servants are not a little affected
herewith, not understanding the reason, how the Lord will not suffer his
children in this life to go vnchastised for their sins, but thereby brings
them to a greater measure of humiliation: As for the wicked, the Prophet
assigns a reason of their prosperity, namely this, Ier. 12, 3.
That thou may pull them out like beasts for the slaughter, and prepare them
for the day of Destruction. This truth is most clearly set down in the seven
and thirty Psalm, a portion whereof I have handled in the Sermon following, my
desire herein is to comfort Gods people, that notwithstanding their present
condition may seem to be miserable, yet the Lord does ever uphold his in
time of greatest danger, and of this they shall be sure, that their later end
shall be peace. I wish thee comfort by it, and by all other holy helps. And so
remain

Thine in every Christian office, Samuel Smith.
Prittlewel, this 8. of April, 1619.
PSALM. 37.37. Mark the upright man, and behold the just: the latter end of
that man shall be peace.
THe Author of this Scripture, as all other the Scriptures of God, is the
Spirit of God: according to that of the Apostle; All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, 2. Tim. 3.16.
and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for Instruction
in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect in all good works. The
Instrument that the holy Ghost uses for the penning of it. It seems to be the
Prophet David, A princely Prophet of the Lord, and that Sweet singer of Israel.

The argument of the Psalm is an Exhortation unto all Gods people, that are
ready many times to be grieved at the prosperity of the wicked, and at the
afflictions of the godly. For men are but men, and have their infirmities, a
thing not to be wondered at. Job. 4.18.19.
For as Job says, Behold he found no steadfastness in his servants, and laid
folly upon his Angels; How much more in them that dwell in houses of clay. And
amongst many other infirmities that the godly are subject unto here in this
life, this is not the least, that they grudge and repine at the prosperity of
the wicked, whom they find to be free from troubles, and as for outward
prosperity, to flourish like a green Bay tree, which makes the godly to think
that they have cleansed their heart in vain. Now against these assaults and
temptations, Gods spirit does ^ence us and stre^gthen us in this Psalm, giving
us to understand, that howsoever the wicked have here abundance of prosperity
for a time, it is but for a time. For he shows that all evil doers shall
be cut off, and after a short time shall no where be found. How prosperously
soever the wicked may live for a time, he affirms that their felicity is but
vain and transitory: for being in their sins and not in Gods favor, in the
end are sure to be destroyed with the rest of Gods enemies. And on the
contrary part, how miserable soever the estate and condition of the godly
seems to be in this world, yet being in Gods favor, their end shall be peace.

The Psalm diuides it self into three parts.
Parts of the Psalm.
First, an Exhortation to the weak, that they be not grieved, nor disquiet
themselves at the prosperity of the wicked; and the affliction of the godly;
and this is laid down from the first verse to the 7. verse.

Secondly, he shows that how prosperously soever the wicked do live for a
time, yet their present felicity is vain and transitory, and suddenly shall
come to an end. From the seventh verse to the eleventh.

Thirdly, he shows that how miserable soever the godly seem to live in this
world, yet shall still be preserved, and their end shall be peace. To the end
of the Psalm.

The verse we have in hand contains in it matter of exhortation, that we
diligently mark and behold the upright man, the man that is godly religious,
makes conscience of holy duties, and that in all things labors to keep a
clear conscience before God and all men, that howsoever this man be exercised
with sore affliction, undergoes much hardship at the hands of others, be
neglected or little regarded, yet the later end of that man shall be peace.

The verse has in it two parts.
First, the matter of observation, who is it the Holy Ghost would have us to
take such notice of, not the Noble, the Rich, or the Mighty, but the Upright
and Just man.

Secondly, the end wherefore we should so diligently observe him, namely, that
we might be encouraged in well-doing, and not discouraged under our present
afflictions, since he is sure to have peace at last.

In the first of these which is the matter of observation, I observe two things.

First, the note of attention, mark and behold.

Secondly, the person to be observed, the upright and just man.

First, the Holy Ghost seeks to awaken our eyes, which naturally are very
drowsy to behold any thing that is good, and to prepare our hearts, which are
first to be sought up, before we can go about Gods businesses.

Mark and behold, 1. The note of attention.
these words of attention make known unto us that there is some weighty matter
within this Text, which Almighty God would have us well to consider of For so
indeed in the sacred Scripture, these two words mark and behold, are ever used
upon extraordinary occasions.

Now this serves to put us in mind of our own dullness and backwardness to
good duties, what creature soever, still we have Gods Philosophy Lecture read
unto us in the Creature, to teach man his duty toward his Creator.

2. The person.
But amongst all other creatures whatsoever, the Lord sends us to behold man to
this end, that we should mark and consider what is Gods manner of dealing
toward the sons of men, both in his punishing of the wicked, and rewarding
the godly; Mark the upright man.

Gods dealing with men must be observed.
both with the godly and with the wicked, as well those that are recorded in
Gods Book, as those that we have known in our own experience: and that to
this end, that we might be encouraged in the ways of godliness by the
examples of the godly, the Lord highly honoring them with a blessed memory
upon earth, and crown of glory in heaven. As also discouraged in committing of
sin, when we shall consider Gods fearful Judgments inflicted upon sinners:
how the name of the wicked does rot, and how the Lord does pay and repay
Judgment, wrath, and indignation, upon sinners. We must not be senseless of
Gods dealings in the world, but duly to record his works and dealings with
men, not only to see and behold the severity of God toward others, but for
spectacles and examples to us, that we should take heed of such sins which
procure such judgments. And to this end we see in the Scriptures the Lord
has hung up in chains, as it were, diverse wicked men, not for others to gase
upon them, but to be warned by them. For murderers Caine is hung up: Genesis 4.
For all profane persons Esau is made an example: For traitors Judas: For all
Apostates Lots wife: And so the Apostle Jude tells us that Sodom and
Gomorrah, and the Cities about them, which the Lord destroyed for following
strange flesh, were and are set forth for a warning and example to all filthy
and beastly minded men. The like may be said of Ismael, Gehezi, Absalom, Saul,
Achan, and the like.

And as we are to observe the wicked, so especially to mark and behold the
godly, their godly life, their sober conversation, and their care and
conscience to walk with God, in obedience to his commandments, their
admirable faith, wonderful patience, meekness, temperance, etc. These things
must be observed by us, that so we may by their examples be incoraged in the
ways of well doing, and in them may see that our labor shall not be in vain
in the Lord: and to this end the holy Scriptures sets out unto us a Catalogue
of very memorable examples of deeds of Gods worthy servants; you have heard of
the patience of Job says James: Iam. 5. Heb. 11
and in the Epistle to the Hebrews there are diverse remembered unto us, that
were famouzed in their times for their faith, and still remain in a blessed
memory in Gods Church, and so shall remain for ever. And so likewise to take
notice of the graces of God in his servants that remain with us, behold their
lives, and behold their ends, as an encouragement unto us in walking in their
paths. Howsoever the godly are afflicted here for a time, the latter end of
that man shall be peace.

I come to the reasons of the Doctrine.
mark them well, for the manner of their life, and for the manner of their
deaths; because God is not mutable and changeable, but ever the same without
any shadow of change. As the Lord heretofore and daily does bring shame and
confusion upon the heads of wicked men and so makes them examples unto others,
so will the Lord deal with us if we tread in their paths: the same
judgments of God that ouer-tooke other sinners, shall in the end overtake
thee if thou walk in th^er ways. See thou a man that has been a graceless
wretch, a horrible swearer, an unclean person, a profane person or the like:
has the Lord followed such with his Judgments, as their life has been
without grace, so their deaths have been without comfort, behold in them thy
own condition, remember that God is just, the same judgments wait upon the
same sinners.

So especially as my Text says concerning the godly, Mark well the righteous,
and behold the just. Behold their life, and behold their death, if their
lives have been religious, though accompanied with many outward afflictions,
their deaths have never wanted comfort: The end of that man shall be peace.
And let the same encourage thee in well doing, because God is not mutable, Acts
10.
he changes not, In every nation he that fears God and works
righteousness is accepted of him: follow such in their life, and thou shall not
miss of their comfort in thy death, grace in life and peace in death.

therefore mark well these men.

Thirdly, it may be said of the David, that they are men after Gods own heart,
these are they that have learned to deny ungodliness, and worldly lust, and
live soberly and justly in this present world: In a word, these are the best
statesmen, these uphold a kingdom, bring a blessing to the town and country
wherein they live. These God does tender as the apple of his eye, these are as
near to him as the signet of his right hand, whom he daily follows with his
blessings, and will never leave them till they have the full fruition of him in
glory, and therefore mark these men.

I come to the uses of the Doctrine.
First, it serves for matter of reproof unto those that in reading the stories
of Gods judgments upon others in the Book of God, and observing the like
daily in their own experience, make not this use of them to make them beware:
many wonder at them that they had no better grace, but alas they do not
hereby take occasion to fear Gods judgments, to apply them to themselves,
and to say in their hearts, this example is set out to warn me and to teach
me, that if I commit the same sin God is just still, I shall be sure to
partake of the same punishment, and so to break off their sins by
repentance. But alas, though we see and hear daily of never so many fearful
examples of Gods judgments against sin and sinners, where is the man that
says, alas, What have I done? for far are many from marking Gods dealing
with others.

Secondly, this ministers matter mark well the upright: It is the counsel the
Holy Ghost gives unto us here, follow them as they have followed God, be
careful to imitate their virtues, so shall thou be sure to partake of their
praise: Heb. 11.
Our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, He is a plentiful rewarder of
them that seek him. And ever remember that God is unchangeable, true, he that
stood by them and carried them out through all their miseries and afflictions,
will be as strong in thee if thou be careful to walk with him as they have
done.

Mark the upright man, and behold the just.
The next thing we are here to take notice of, is the description of a godly
man, or that man that especially is to be marked, he is an upright man, and a
just man.

These titles we see are frequent and often used in the Scriptures, and the
Lord does honor his servants with them, whence we are taught this instruction.

Gods servants may be called upright men and just here. Job. 1.1. Luke 1. Act.
10. Heb. 11.38
as that they may truly be called upright and just men. Thus does the Lord
commend Job to be an upright and just man: It was the co^mendations of
Zacherie, Cornelius, and diverse others mentioned in the Scripture.

Which Doctrine indeed deserves to be urged and pressed to stop the mouths of
those that are ever disgracing Gods people with their taunts, Oh you are holy,
you are an upright man, you are a just man: but herein they despise not man but
God, who has holiness in his servants, Heb. 4.
without which no man shall see God. But if I should stand upon this point I
should bereave you of some other instruction more fitter for this present
occasion, which I would willingly impart unto you.

And so I come to the second part of the verse.

The later end of that man shall be peace.
These words contain in the^ the reason why we should so dilligently observe
the upright man, The later end of that man shall be peace.

Out of this Reason I observe two things.

First, the special time of refreshing, God will take care of the godly at all
times, yea though the Lord do suffer them to lie under affliction for a time,
he is not then unmindful of them: But their later end shall have a double
reward.

Secondly, I note the blessing it self, which shall be conferred upon them, 2.
Cor. 13.13.
it is peace, the greatest blessing, and that which goes beyond all other
blessings, for it passes all understanding.

The Latter end of that man shall be peace.
The Prophet having before exhorted us to mark and behold the life of the
upright man and just man, comes now to show wherein he is happy above others,
he shall have peace. Peace is promised unto him from God, as a just recompense
of his uprightness and fastness: this he shall be sure of, Satan, the
world, nor his own corruption shall never be able to take it from him, it is
an inseparable companion of grace and virtue, have thou grace, thou shall be
sure of peace. But mark here, it is at their latter end: they are not sure of
it at all times, no, no, Gods servants are here in a warfare, they are to
fight against the Devil, and a world of wicked men, and as our Savior
teaches, Ioh. 16.33.
In the world you must have tribulation, but The latter end shall be peace.

The Doctrine is.
The godly in this life have many troubles.
That good men, yea the dearest of Gods Saints and servants in this life shall
have troubles, and sore affl ctions, which they bear so much the more grievous
when on every side the wicked shall abound in pleasure. This was it that so
troubled David at this time, and before he wondered at the prosperity of the
wicked, and on the contrary part was much cast down to see what a load of
afflictions lay upon the godly: but now he recouers himself with the comfort
of this, that howsoever Gods people suffer much for a time, it is but for a
time, yea a short, they shall be sure to have peace at last. And now he has
learned this lesson, and can teach it others: That look how many will truly
fear the Lord, that carefully will endeavor to walk in Gods commandments to
the end of their days, they shall have crosses and troubles, Act. 14.22.
so true is that of the Apostle, That all that will live godly in Christ Jesus
must suffer persecution. Innumerable troubles (says David) have compassed me
from my youth (may Israel now say) they have oftentimes afflicted me from my
youth, Psalm. 40.12
but they could not prevail against me. I might instance this Doctrine by
infinite examples, Abraham in exile, Job on the dunghill, Joseph, innocent
Joseph in the prison as a malefactor in an high degree, Jeremy in the stocks,
Daniel in the den, the people of Israel, even the Israel of God in miserable
bondage under the Egyptitians: So that I conclude, that look how many of us as
inte^d to be righteous, we must look for afflictions and troubles, yea and
prepare our hearts thereunto, and not to be dismayed at them when they fall
upon us, had though some strange thing had happened unto us, according to that
of the Apostle, 1. Pet. 4.12.13.
Dearly beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is
amongst you to prove you, as though some strange things were come unto you.
But rejoice in as much as ye are pertakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his
glory shall appear, ye may be glad and reiocye. I shall not need I hope in so
evident a truth to search up more Scriptures to prove it: The Reasons that
follow will clear the same unto us.

the general and universal cause of all troubles, for so testifies the
Prophet saying; Lam. 39.3.
Man suffers for his sin, let us search and try our ways and turn unto
the Lord. So then in as much as all have sinned, all are liable to
chastisements and afflictions, the just punishment of sin, and if we break
his Satutes and keep not his Commandments, no marvel though the Lord do
visit our iniquities with his rod, and our sins with scourges.

Secondly, because the godly according to our strength, the Lord does ever
proportion our trials, On Hos. 6.1.
but I have handled this elsewhere.

Solomon teaches, All things happen alike to all. It is the condition of the
godly as well as the wicked, yea, it is more insident to the professors and
profession of the Gospel then to others. Such must not think the worse of
themselves, but the better, only they are to labor to make their calling and
election sure, that having assurance of Gods favor in Jesus Christ, they may
thereby have their afflictions sanctified unto them.

Secondly, this may serve to I shall never be restored. For the Lord takes no
pleasure in afflicting his servants, whenever the Lord chastises his, he
sees there is great necessity of the rod, yet in the midst of judgment the
Lord remembers mercy, and howsoever sorrow may endure for a night, joy comes
in the morning, Their latter end shall be peace.

The latter end of that man shall be peace.
The Second thing we are to take notice of, Peace the greatest blessing of God.
is the blessing it self, which shall be conferred upon them, it is peace,
the greatest blessing.

Ob. But shall not the later end of all men be alike? does not Salomo^ say,
Eccl. 9.1
There is one end to the righteous and the wicked, to the clean and unclean,
to him that sacrifices and to him that sacrifices not, the end is all alike:
why then shall the later end of the upright be marked more the^ other men's?

Ans. I answer that their later end is all alike for the matter of their
death, that is, peace, but as my Text says; Mark the upright man and behold
the just, for the later end of that man shall be peace.

So then the instruction we are to take notice of hence, is,

That the godly only at their peace, Only the godly have peace at last.
so that we have here to consider what is the condition of all men in death:
all die, but all have not peace in their deaths, The later end of the just
shall be peace. But as for the wicked, Esa. 48.22. There is no peace to the
wicked says my God.

I desire briefly to speak of both of these.

And first concerning the godly, the Holy Ghost does here assure them of
peace, and that presently upon their going hence they are happy, Reu. 14.13
Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, from thenceforth they rest from
their labors. This appears in Abraham to whom it was promised that he should
go unto his fathers in peace. Genesis 15.15
And of Isaac his son it is said, Genesis 35.29
That he gave up the ghost and died peaceably, being old and full of days: The
like may be said of Jacob, of Joseph, of Iosuah, Moses, David, and it is true
of all Gods servants, that their latter end is peace. An exellent place of
Scripture we have to this purpose by the Prophet Esaias; Esa. 57.2.
He shall enter into peace, and they shall rest in their beds: Every one that
walks before him in his rightousnes. It was Simeons dying song, Luke 2.29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word. This
we have confirmed by that we read of Lazarus, Luke 16.22
who was carried immediately after his death into Abraham's bosom, in his life
time a man little regarded, at his end the Angels are his servants. Yea the
wicked themselves have confessed and shall acknowledge that the godly are
blessed in their deaths, witness that speech of cursed Balaam, who desired to
die the death of the godly; Number. 23.10.
Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his. That
wretch could not but acknowledge, that the condition of the godly was happy and
blessed, howsoever their lives are full of misery, and they are tossed from
post to pillar, as the Israelites in the wilderness, yet in their deaths they
had peace. I will not spend much time herein, I hope our judgments are
sufficiently convinced concerning the truth of the Doctrine, I will briefly set
down the Reasons.

peace at last, in regard of the accomplishment of Gods promise, who has said
that peace shall come, Esa. 57.2.
that They shall rest in their beds, every one that walks before the Lord,
which promise of his, the Lord has ever made good from time to time, unto all
the faithful, after all their labor and travails giving them rest, and from
their troubles and afflictions, in the end to give them peace, his promise
requires it.

Secondly, the godly have peace with God, with whom they are reconciled by
Christ, which is their peace: This peace the godly have in this life in the
midst of their greatest miseries here, which serves to sweeten the Cross, and
to support them under the burden of their afflictions. And therefore the Lord
giving them the earnest of their inheritance, and the first fruits of the
Spirit here: they must needs have peace with God going out of the world, who
go to enjoy God, who have such peace in the world where they are absent from
the Lord in their bodies.

The uses follow to be considered.
First of all, seeing Gods servants do die in peace, and that this shall be
the portion they shall receive from the Lord after all their labors and
travails peace at last. This may serve to reprove those that flatter their
ow^e souls, and secure themselves that they shall die happily, though they
have neither care nor conscience to live holily, feign would they with Balaam
die the death of the righteous, but they will never yield consent to live the
life of the righteous: they would feign act the part of the godly in their
death, that by no means care for their spirit in life. Oh how is these men's
madness to be mourned for, and their ignorance and obstinacy to be pitied,
poor souls they deceive themselves. This will never be, men cannot live like
sinners and die like Saints, They that sow to the flesh, Gal. 6.6.
shall of the flesh reap corruption. Were it not madness in a man that after
he has sowed cockle and darnell in his field, at Harvest time to think he
shall reap good wheat: eu^^y man would condemn this man of madness and
exterme folly. Oh my brethren let us take heed we prove not such fools one
day, Be not deceived God is not mocked, Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he
reap. Do thou go on in thy sins, in thy profane course of
uncleanness, drunkenness, swearing, Sabaoth-breaking, etc. and yet think
to die in peace, this is altogether impossible. I will say to thee as sometimes
Iehu said to the messengers of Iehoram, 2. Reg. 9.22.
What have thou to do with peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother
Iezabel remain: So what peace can there be at thy death, so long as thy
whoredoms remain, thy drunkenness, usury, oppression remain, it is grace in
life that has the promise of peace in death.

peace at last will make amends for all, and then we shall see and confess
with the Apostle, that these light and momentary afflictions here, are not
worthy of such a recompense of reward. Look still to the end of well-doing,
Iam. 5.7.
peace at last, this shall be thy portion. In the mean time do as the husband
man does, wait for the precious fruit, and have long patience. Thy labor
shall not be in vain in the Lord, after all the boisterous storms in this
life, wrestling against sin, Satan, and thy own corruptions, here is Gods
promise gone out of his lips, that can no more fail, then himself cease to be
true, Thou shall have peace at last.

Thirdly, seeing the Lord has peace unto his servants at last, and that a good
life brings with it ever a good death: Hence we learn what to conceive of the
despairing words of Gods servants in time of some sore assault and temptation,
when the waters enter into their soul, that God has forsaken them, and that
he has forgotten to be gracious, that he has shut his loving kindness in
displeasure, that God has no mercy in store for them, and the like. Namely,
that these are but words of distemper, not of reason and of judgment; for will
God cast away his people? Romans 11.1.
God forbid. Such may be the nature of the disease, that fuming up into the
brain may cause such a distemper for the time present. But man's changeable
tongue can never alter Gods decree, which is unchangeable, he has said it,
Romans 3.3
That the end of the upright and just man shall be peace at last, and who
shall hinder it, shall Satan lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen, when
God does justify any: no, no, we are more then conquerours thorough him that
loved us, and therefore let us learn to judge aright of our brethren in their
deaths, and let not our judgment be weakened, or charity fail, when they
are put to cry out as before; but look we upon their lives if they appear to
have been godly and religious, and that they have made conscience of holy
duties: remember we ever the Lords promise, The latter end of that man shall be
peace.

The last thing we are to take notice of, from the authority of this
Scripture, is, that if peace be promised of the Lord unto the upright and just
man, The end of that man shall be peace.

Then on the contrary, Wicked men can have no peace in death.
there peace to the wicked, whose lives have been graceless, their deaths
have been comfortless, what though the wicked flourish in this world, wax
old and grow in wealth, Job. 21.8.9
what though their houses be peaceable and without fear, and the rod of God is
not upon them: what though they spend their days in pleasure, they shall
suddenly to hell, says Job; There is no peace to the wicked, Esa 48.2^.
says my God. The Doctrine then will be clear.

That wicked men in death can have no peace. Those that in the time of their
life have had no care or conscience to get grace into their souls, when
sickness comes and death approaches, must needs be void of all true comfort.
Solomon has excellent sayings to prove this Doctrine; Pro. 11.7.
When a wicked man dies (says he) his expectation perishes, and the hope of
his power shall perish. And Job has a saying to the same purpose, Job. 27.8.
What hope has the hypocrite though he has heaped up riches, when God takes
away his soul; meaning thereby indeed, that he has no hope left him. What joy
then can be there in a wicked man's prosperity, what comfort can there be in
such a peace, as has ruin and destruction attending upon it. Dan. ^.
What joy had Belshatzar in his banquet, when in the midst of his cups he
beheld the hand writing upon the wall, containing in it the sentence of his
final downfall: His thoughts were troubled (says the Text) his joints were
loosed, and his knees smot one against another: his company could not comfort
him, nor his dainty dishes refresh him, when his conscience is up in arms
against him. Luke ^2.42
The rich man in the Gospel was very joyful and gloried in his plenty,
promised much peace to his soul; but we see how suddenly this glory of his is
damped with this news, This night they will fetch thy soul from thee. No
heavier news could come to him that had his portion in this life, then to tell
him of fetching away his soul. I might lay here before your eyes a multitude
of examples, Had Saul peace, had Ahab peace, had Iesabel peace, had Judas
peace: There is no peace unto the wicked.

Take all the pleasantest delicates that the earth may afford, and offer them
to a condemned wretch going to execution, will he glut himself with them, and
fall to them with an hungry appetite? No, no, he will answer thee, I can take
no delight in these things, for I perceive that present death waits for me.
So, even so is it with a wicked man, and so shall it be with him in the last
days, though his barnes be full, and his presses run over, though he can
number his Oxen by thousands, and his Sheep by ten thousands, these cannot
add one jot of comfort to his heavy heart, when death approaches he shall
then find no pleasure in them: for then there remains for him nothing but a
fearful expectation of judgment. This shall be the woeful estate and
condition of those that put from the^ the evil day, that will not be
acquainted with Gods ways, their lives having been dissolute and sinful,
their deaths shall be wretched and without comfort.

The Reasons.
peace in death, because they want faith in life, for it is faith, even faith
alone that must give us boldness and comfort at that day. For thus runs the
promise, Io. 3.16.
God so loved the world, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have life everlasting. But wicked men believe not in him, the word of God
cannot work upon their hearts, it is but as seed cast upon stony ground, as
appears by the heardnes of their hearts, and therefore being without the
covenant, no marvel though they partake not of the promise.

were but so blessed in their deaths, as they seem prosperous in their life,
then might the godly say that they had cleansed their hearts in vain. But now
in that the hope of the wicked does perish, and in death they begin to partake
of misery, whereas the godly after al their trials and trouble shall then have
peace. Herein stands the difference between them. Pro. 14.32
The wicked shall be cast away for his lewdness: But the Righteous has hope
at his death. For the time of this life we see that commonly wicked men, enjoy
their pleasure and are full, whereas Gods servants are afflicted and suffer
want, and therefore the Justice of God requires that their conditions should
be changed on both sides. The pleasure of the one to be turned into pain;
and the sorrow of the other into comfort, for if there were not a day of
refreshing unto the godly, of al men they were most miserable. And if there
were not a reckoning day reserved for the wicked, of all men they were most
happy.

peace unto his Soul, that seems to have made a league with death, and to be
at an agreement with the grave. Ah poor Souls, there is a day coming when
the Lord will disannul this agreement, and this drunken peace shall be
dissolved, when death shall once lay upon them his arest, what will it avail
thee to cry: Lord, Lord. Thou may cry till thy tongue cleave to the roof
of thy mouth, thou may howl upon thy bed like a wolf, and yet the Lord will
stop his ears that he will not hear thy cry, and that because thou have
despised instruction, Pro. 1.
and when the Lrod sought unto thee, and offered grace unto thee, thou would
not hear him. Therefore his distributive Justice requires, that thou
should cry and call unto the Lord and he shall not answer thee. This is a
most fearful condition thus to be forsaken of the Lord: especially when in
time of distress, the poor soul shall seek for comfort. This is Gods just
judgment for the contempt of grace before offered unto him.

Oh the misery of this poor creature, that is so payned that he cannot live:
so unprepared that he dare not die: that goes to bed but cannot sleep: that
tastes his meat but will not down: that shifts his room but not his pain: and
as for death which has already seized upon him, his conscience tells him he is
altogether unprepared for.

This is the condition, and these will be the outcries of those that will not
in time be warned, to seek to work out their peace betimes in their life
time, before it be too late, and their conscience shall tell them. There is no
peace.

manner of licentious living: this they know, and that they have
presumptuously, even against knowledge and conscience resisted the Lord,
hardening their own hearts against his ordinance: this they know. Yet they
trust, they say at last, to have repentance for all, and so be saved: Their own
conscience tells the^ that their estate is damnable, and (...) if the Lord
should at this instance of time call them to account, they must needs perish,
yet poor Souls they presume of repentance at the last. But poor Souls, how
can such as have spent their days in the service of sin and Satan, think
that death will prove so good unto them. Are Thieves and Robbers and such like
offenders bound over to the Assizes, to the end they may receive honor or
shame? to be put into the Commission and taken up to the bench, or not rather
to receive Judgment and to be executed according to their demerits. Oh take
heed thou deceive not thine own soul herein: Many thousands are now in hell,
and there shall suffer the pains of the damned for ever more, that had these
purposes to have cried God mercy at last. Remember this when I am gone, that it
is grace in this life, that brings peace at last.

I know the Devil will still persuade us to play with our sins, but in the
mean time our sins will not play with us, we run daily into Gods score, and
the greater our debts, the deeper repentance at last.

If Moses had not slain the Egiptian, the poor Ebrewe must have perished.
Saul favored the life of Agag, but it cost him his own life. If those five
wicked Nations had not been destroyed, before the Jews had seated themselves
in the Land of Canaan, where had been their peace? Seeing then that the case
is so dangerous, let Agag be slain, the Cananits cast out, and the Egiptian
put to death. I mean let us kill our sins, and break off our iniquities by
repentance, that so we may procure our peace, doubtless then shall we
possess our souls in peace while we live here, and end our days in peace.
Which the Lord grant unto us all for his Christ's sake. Amen.

FINIS.

