A BRIEF AND LEARNED TREATISE, containing a true description of the
Antichrist, who was foretold by the Prophets and Apostles.

AND AN EVIDENT PROOF that the same agrees unto the Pope.

WRITTEN IN LATIN BY M. George Sohn Doctor of Divinity, and public professor
thereof at Heidelberg, And translated into english.

Printed at Cambridge by JOHN LEGATE.

1592

coat of arms or blazon

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS Lady, Katharine Countess of Huntingdon,
his especial good Lady, Grace and peace in Christ Jesus.
RIght Honorable Lady: whosoever is engraffed into the body of Christ, and
duly considers the manifold stratagems of the old serpent, and his wicked
instruments, must needs be moved with mutual compassion, to pity their
estate, and with all ability received from God, to prevent their subtilties,
and to hinder their malicious proceedings. For if Satan continually do
compass the earth like a roaring lion, seeking to devour: if his children
(having their fathers nature) do compass sea and land, to withdraw from the
faith: if both children and father, with all his angels of darkness, do
transform them selves into Angels of light, to deceive ifit were possible, he
very elect: how much more ought we to regard our brethren, the children of
God, least they become the children of Hell, be devoured of the great aragon,
and be drawn to have pleasure in unrighteousness, and to worship the beast.
Behold how they hazard their goods, their lands, their liberty, and their
lives, and being, as it were, inflamed with the fire of hell, they come amongst
us to set on fire the Temple and city of our God, to burn up the corn, the
olives, and the vineyard of the Lord of hosts; that is to say, more plainly;
these Romish and Rhemish foxes endeavor by all means to poison our youth with
the leaven of popish opinions, to confirm the aged in their old
superstitions, and to withdraw all men as well from the holy service of Christ,
as from their loyal obedience to their gracious sovereign. Therefore it is
full time, that we should all say with the spouse in the Can. Take us the
foxes, not only the greatest, but eue^ the little foxes which destroy our vines:
and further to afford all that little help we can, for the quenching of these
Antichristian firebrands. This moved the author of this treatise, * Doctor
Sohn public professor of Divinity at Heidelberg. The matter of this book.
as diverse other very godly and learned men, to write diverse books for the
benefit of the Church: amongst which, this seems very worthy both his pains
of writing, and our deligence in reading thereof. For here is delivered a
aplain and sound description of Antichrist, and the same so mightily applied
and surely fastened upon the Pope, that he must either change his nature, which
is impossible, or else be enfolded within this conclusion, The Pope is
Antichrist. Here he is most lively painted forth unto you by his name,
qualities, and progeny: by his doctrine, miracles, and authority: by his
life, his habitation, and the time of his revelation, continuance, and utter
destruction: here the doctrine of Christ is opposed to that of Antichrist, and
soundly confirmed, not with the weak reed of humane constitutions, nor with
the sand of man's traditions and authority, but with the sacred rock of Christ,
his Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets: so that though the winds blow, and
the rain fall, and the floods be at, and the gates of hell be opened against
the same, yet it shall not fall: for it is grounded upon this rock, The word
of the Lord endures for ever.

Therefore who soever pleases to see the truth of this great controversy, may
within few hours know (and that out of the word of God) what we ought to
judge concerning the Pope; namely that he is Antichrist. Whereupon it will
follow, that as the Babylon of Antichrist is not the Jerusalem of Christ, nor
the religion of the beast, the worship of the Lamb: so the Popish Church is not
Bethel but Beth-auen, not the Church of Christ but the synagogue of Satan: and
the religion of the Pope, is not the religion of Christ, but the superstitious
homage of the cursed beast. So that it cannot be but a lewd practice of them,
who endeavor to make an union of two religions, No union of the two religions.
which differ in them selves as light and darkness, who do altogether forget
that heavenly voice, Revel. 18. 4. Go out of her my people, that ye be not
partakers in her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

Now that many may be benefited by this learned treatise, being earnestly
entreated and greatly urged by a good friend of mine: I have adventured to
express my authors meaning, after a plain manner in our own language, and to
commit the same to the blessing of God, and the friendly acceptance of the
Christian Reader.

And these my first fruits of this kind, I am bold to dedicate unto your
Honor, most Honorable Lady, beseeching you to accept of this as of a small,
yet a public testimony of my bounden duty, thankful remembrance, and
hearty affection, which I can not any way express, but do entirely bear
toward your Honor, and the rest of your most Honorable name and alliance.
Whose Honorable favor and goodness, (the fruit of true faith, sincere love,
and pure religion) as it has been comfortable to many of Gods children, and
especially vouchfafed to my Father, my self, and other friends, so is it a
work which God him self will regard and reward in mercy, with an immortal
crown of everlasting glory: Who keep, direct, and bless your Honor, with
the right Honorable my good Lord, and all yours in Christ Jesus, that being
furnished with all spiritual graces and temporary benefits, needful for
this life and the life to come, you may continually walk in the ways of
righteousness, and enjoy at the length the incomprehensible joys of the
kingdom of heaven, the end of your hope, the salvation of your souls, through
Christ Jesus.

Amen.
Your Honors most humble bounden in the Lord. N. G.

THE POPE OF Rome is that Antichrist OF WHOM THE Prophets and Apostles have
Prophesied.
Having heretofore discoursed concerning Christ, that is, the person, the
office, and the estate of Christ; we will now entreat concerning Antichrist:
that the glory of Christ may be somewhat the better understood: because, that
(according to the common saying) Things contrary appear more evidently by
their comparison.

Antichrist in general is he, who The definition of Antichrist in general.
does any way oppose him self to the doctrine of Christ, whom in word he
professes to follow: or, who does oppugn Christ, under the name and pretense
of Christ: for thus he is described unto us, 1. Ioh. 2. 18. and v. 22. Chap. 4.
v. 3. and 2. Ioh. 7.

Antichrist is of two kinds: for There be two kinds of Antichrists.
either he is adversary only to one part of the doctrine of Christ, or
else almost to the wholl body thereof.

1
times, and yet continue unto this day: as were Cerinthus, Valentinus,
Marcion, Sabellius, Arius, Nestorius, Eutiches, Pelagius, and the rest: who
have opposed themselves against either the person, or office of Christ: and of
this kind speaks 1. Ioh. 1. 2, 18.

2
notable and principal adversary of Christ, who is called Antichrist, by way
of primacie, superiority, or principality: and unto whom the Antichrists,
which are of the former sort, have only (as it were his forerunners) paued
and prepared the way 2. These. 2. 7. 1. Ioh. 4. 3.

Antichrist is, and who he should be, is now chiefelie to be enquired, because
at this present, the controversy betwixt us and the Papists concerns him:
wherein we will especially declare, what is that which we defend.



The names of Antichrist.
names in the holy scripture: namely, The man of sin, the son of
perdition, the Adversary: Abaddon, Apollyon (...): the king of Locusts: the
beast: the whore: the dragon: the false prophet: the Angel of the deep, and
such like, as ye may find in the 2. Thessalonians and the second chapter: as
also in the Revelation. Furthermore, there have been, as it were, certain
Types or figures of him in the old Testament: The types.
as namely, Antiochus Epiphanes, by whom Daniel describes Antichrist (whose
Prophecy extends even to these last days) and diverse other, who were the
principal and capital enemies of the ancient Church, and people of God,
Zachar. 11. v. 15, 16, 17, etc.

The description of Antichrist in special.
who usurps a kingdom, who professes the name of Christ, but yet opposes
him self unto Christ, and to the doctrine of Christ, who has a double
authority, and both of them supreme: the one spiritual or ecclesiastical,
the other civil or secular, who vaunteth of himself as God, with signs, and
miracles, (though altogether false and deceitful) he is an idolater, an
hypocrite, a blasphemer, he is ambitious, proud, and not under law, he is a
single man, and unmarried, but yet a filthy fornicator: he refraineth from
certain meats, but yet abounds with all excess, riotte, and
deliciousness: he is covetous, crafty, vain, false, and cruel: who after
the ruin and division of the fourth I mean the Roman) Monarchy, by little
and little arising, even out of the rubbish and relics thereof, is to be
situated at Rome, even in the Temple of God (that is, in the Church) by the
power and effectual operation of Satan: finally, he is to be reueiled in the
last times of the world, and at the length to be utterly abolished at the
glorious coming and appearance The declaration of the description.
of Christ Jesus.

he is very expresselie called a man. A man.


A kingdom or state.
men) governs and executes the authority of the kingdom, it appears
plainly in the 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. Dan. 7. 8. Revel. 17. 1. and 18. 3. In which
places in truth, this Antichrist is described, not as any one person or
particular man, and (as the Logitians speak) an Individuum: but as a
corporation of men, and That is, a proper and singular person, as Leo, Pius,
John, Gregory.
as it were, a certain kingdom: wherein yet, there is alwaie some one, who
excels and rules over the rest, who sets his own mark upon them,
Revel. 13. 17. For first Paul mencioneth an Apostacy, that is, a general
departure, and reuolting from the faith, which indeed makes one body or
corporation, and one kingdom: this is a matter which can not be effected
suddenly, but requires many years thereunto. Further he proves very
clearly, that the mystery of iniquity, should be compounded and consist of
many errors, and grow by little and little. Thirdly he affirms, that the
kingdom should continue and endure a long space, to wit, until it should be
utterly abolished, by the coming of the Lord at the end of the world.

This kingdom is signified by the cruel beast and by Babylon, Revel. 13. 11.
and 18 Chapter, as Irenaeus witnesses in his fifth book, and the thirteenth
chapter: and Jerome is of the same mind; and Augustine in his 20 book De
Civitate Dei, and the 19 chapter. Beda also and diverse others did see the same.
Further it is signified by many waters, Revel. 17. 1. And John speaks of the
chief and principal citizens, and subjects of his kingdom, saying after this
manner, There shall be Locusts, having upon their heads crowns like to gold.
Revel. 9. 3, 7. And again, there shall be three unclean spirits proceeding
out of his mouth. Revel. 16. 13. Finally, all both great and small, rich and
poor, bond and free, shall receive the mark of the beast in their right
hands, and in their foreheads, Revel. 13. 16.

that he is adversary to Christ, that he Adversary to Christ.
denies him in deed, whom in word he professes, and that he corrupts
almost all the doctrine of Christ, or at the least defends very stoutly the
reuolting from the doctrine of Christ, (for which very cause he is an
Arch-hereticke, or rather, the Patriarch and prince of heretics) is witnessed
by the Prophet Daniel chap. 7. ver. 25. saying, He shall speak words against
the most High. And by Saint Paul 1 Thessalonians. 2. 3. Where he foretells, that
there should be first are volting before that the Antichrist should come: Adding
further, that Antichrist should sit in the temple of God: that is, in the
Christian Church. For although Antichrist profess himself a friend and
disciple unto Christ, yet shall he set him self against Christ, as it were in
the name of Christ, or under color and pretense of the profession of
Christianity: That is more plainly thus: Though he do not openly oppugn
and resist the doctrine of Christ, but makes profession thereof, reserving
both the titles and names: yet shall he bring impiety into the room of the
doctrine of piety, which he dissembleth, and shall draw men by little and
little, out of the Kings high way of faith, by his ordinations and traditions.
And of this judgment is Hilarie, who thus writes against Auxentius: He
shall be contrary unto Christ, under the show of preaching the Gospel: that
our Lord Jesus Christ may then be denied, when men suppose that he is preached.
And Chrysostom also is of the same mind, in his 49. Homily upon Matthew.

Spiritual Twofold authority.
and Temporal, it appears by the two kinds of his names: as, first that he
is called a king by Daniel, and is reckoned amongst those ten earthly kings
(of whom consists the Roman Monarchy) and must spring up in the midst of
them, arising up from a very low degreee, till at length he subdue all the
other kings unto him self, Dan. 7. 24. and cap. 8. 11. and cap. 11. 36.
Secondly, this is he whom Zachary calls the foolish shepherd, cap 11. 15.
And whom John names a false prophet, Revel. 16. 13. etc. 19. 20. and chap.
20. 10.

miracles, Miracles.
the Apostle Paul is witness, 2. These. 2. 9. and Christ, Mat. 7. 22. and John,
Revel. 13. 13. and 16. 14.

A vaunt as God.
God, it is taught unto us, Dan. 7. 8. The mouth speaking presumptuous words:
etc. 11. 36. He shall advance and extol himself above every God. and 2. Th. 2.
4. He shall exalt himself above all that is called God, or is worshipped. And to
conclude, in Dan. 7. 25. He shall imagine that he is able to change both times
and laws, at his own pleasure.

He shall do worship unto the His Idolatry.
god Maozim, that is, the god of defenses, etc: as also Revel. 17. 2. and 18.
3. 9.

Hypocrisy.
Da^. 7. 8. His eyes are as the eyes of a man: and v. 25. He shall speak words
against the most high: and Revel. 13. 11. He shall have two horns of a lamb,
but shall speak like a dragon: that is, he shall cover a woolfe under a sheeps
skin: and 2. Tim. 3. 5. Having a form or show of godliness, etc.

Pride.
manifest, Dan. 7. 20. He had a mouth speaking presumptuously: and chapter 8. 25.
He shall extol himself, etc. 1. Tim. 3. 2. There shall be men both arrogant
and proud: and 2. Pet. 2. 10. They shall despise government (that is, the
civil magistrate, ordained by God) bold, and presumptuous, and such as stand
in their conceit: in which manner also Jude writes, verse. 8.

Blasphemy.
he should be a blasphemer and anatheist; we see it, Dan. 11. 39. He shall
speak against the God of gods: and Revel. 13. 6. He shall speak blasphemy
against God.

Licentiousnes.
should be above all, lawless, making and breaking laws at his pleasure, is
taught us, 2. These. 2. 4. Dan. 7. 25. He shall suppose that he is able to change
both times and laws: and chap. 11. 3. He shall do even what he list.

Single life.
He shall not regard nor understand the desires of women: where is meant, as
Jerome says, that under pretense of holiness, he should be an enemy unto
marriage: so in the 1. to Tim. 4. 3. He shall forbid to make marriages. As for
his filthy fornication, and licenses to use and follow outrageous and
dissolute lusts, we find it, 2. Pet. 2. 10, 14.

Abstinence.
that also, 1. Tim. 4. 3. They shall command to abstain from meats. Where the
meaning is not simply to be understood of abstistinence from all kind of
meats: (for this would never have been effected, nor yet could possibly be
observed) but only of making some choice and difference of meats. Yet of his
excess and effeminate and dainty life, we are taught, Revel. 18. 3, 9. and
in 2. Pet. 10. and in the Epistle of Jude and the 8. verse.

He shall divide the earth for gain: as also Revel. 18. 3. 2. Covetousness.
Pet. 2. 3. 14.

Deceit shall prosper in his hand, Craft.
and he shall extol him self in his heart: and in the 23. verse of the same,
it is said that he is of a fierce, impudent, and shameless countenance.

I saw that horn make war against Cruelty.
the Saints: and in the 25. verse. He shall grind to powder the Saints of the
most high: and chap. 8. 24. and 11. Revel. 11. 7. etc. and chap. 17. 6. and the
19. 19.

His author.
who has thought of this mystery, and has had it in hand, ever since the
Apostles time, we do learn in the 2. to the These. 2. where it is said, Whose
coming is by the operation and working of Satan: and in the 1. Tim. 41. where
the doctrine of Antichrist is called the doctrine of devils: and in the 13. of
the Revel. 4. where the dragon is called author and cause of the whole state of
Antichrist, which is conveyed into the Roman Empire: and in the 18. where
Babylon, that is, the seat and kingdom of Antichrist, is called the habitation
of devils, the house of foul spirits, and a cage of every unclean and foul
bird, chap. 18. 2. The which the Lord will suffer and permit so to be, till his
wrath be accomplished, Dan. 11. 36. The faithful be tried, and they which are
tried, be made manifest, Dan. 12. 10. and 1. Ioh. 2. 19. and that the contempt
of the earth may thus be punished, according to that of S. Paul, 2. These. 2.
10, 11.

The time of his appeara^ce
Empire should be distracted and dismembered, it is taught, Dan. 7. 8. 24. and
2. These. 2. 7. For both Tertul. and Jerome, and others more, do interpret that
place of Paul of the division and ruin of the Roman Empire: as also Revel.
13. 11. 12. For although the mystery of iniquity began to work, as yet
secretly underhand, and, as it were, by undermining, even from the days of
the Apostles, 2. These. 2. 7. 1. Ioh. 2. 18. yet afterward Antichrist was to
issue and break forth with full stream, and evidently to show himself, as it
were, proceeding out of the ruins of the Roman Empire, 2. These. 2. 7. And
this time John seems to note, Revel. 13. 18. when he faith, that Antichrist
should come 666 years after, to wit, after the birth of Christ: His words are
these, Let him that has wisdom count the number of the years: for it is the
number of a man, and it is 666.

His place.
to spring out of the ruins of the Roman Monarchy, and so should appear in
the Roman Empire; it appears also by Daniel and Paul, as we have touched
heretofore: as also by the 17. of the Reave. 3. where the purple whore, who
deceives the people, is said, to sit upon the beast with ten horns. For that
beast with ten horns signifies the fourth Monarchy, to wit, that of Rome,
Dan. 7.

throne and seat, to wit, that His throne.
he shall sit in the city of Rome: first, Daniel witnesses the same, when as he
places this seat betwixt 2. seas, (for Rome and Italy are situated twixt 2.
seas) Adriaticu^ and Tyrrhenu^. Secondly John, when he makes mention of
Babylon, as Rev. 14. 8. and 16. 19. and 18. 2. By which places the ancient
doctors of the Church (and especially Jerome) do understand Rome, as also by
that place, 1. Pet. 5. 13. and further, when John does call it the city with 7.
hills, and the queen of al, as it is Rev. 17. 9. 18. For Rome was the^ called by
those names, even by profane writers. Finally, when as he says, Rev. 17. 1.
that the whore shall sit upon many waters (that is, above much people and many
nations, as him self in the 15. verse expounds himself) and in the great
city which has the rule over the kings of the earth.

in the temple of He sits in the Church.
God, that is, in the Church, it is taught us, 2. Th. 2. 4. for by this sitti^g
here, is not me^t corporal and bodily placing, but a certain dominion: and by
temple is meant, neither that of Jerusalem (which long ago was ouerthrown and
rased, and which is never again to be repaired, according to that prophecy in
the 9. of Dan. 27.) nor yet any other external building, but only the Church,
which is the temple and house of God. 1. Tim. 3. 15. And therefore herby is
signified, that Antichrist should publicly vsurp the chief jurisdiction and
authority in the Church of God; yet should he not profess any open and flat
denial of Christ, but only he should bring in extreme impiety, under the
pretense of the doctrine of Christ.

His continuance.
the very last end and day of the world, it is taught 7. Dan. 26. and 8. 25.
and 11. 45. and 12. 1, 2. Rev. 19. 21. and 20. 10. In which places so soon as
the end of Antichrist is rehearsed, immediately follows mention of the last
resurrection, and not a word of any other worldly kingdom.

The event or his revelation
that he should be reveled and discovered in the last times of the world, and
that his kingdom is to be battred and thrown down by the preaching of the
Gospel, the Apostle witnesses 2. Th. 2. 3. and John means the same thing,
by the ruin and fall of Babylon, Revel. 14. 8. and 16. 19. and 18. 2. And to
conclude, John prophesied the same of him, Reu. 14. where three Angels, that
is, three Teachers, are appointed to reueile Antichrist, to whom are added
other two in the 18 of the Revelation, as also in the 17. verse. 16. 17. where
he says, The ten horns which thou saw etc. that is, many Princes and
Estates of the Roman Empire, shall revolt from the whore, and shall give her
kingdom unto the beast.

Elias and Enoch: and that the doctrine of Christ should be brought to light,
and Antichrist grievously tormented.

His destruction.
and end, that is, that he should be utterly abolished by Christ himself at
the last day, at his glorious and royal appearance, (who is now indeed
reueiled to be the Antichrist) and be punished eternally, is taught us, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. and may be gathered out of the 7. chap. of Dan. 26. and 8. 25. and
11. 45. and 12. 1. and out of the Reuelat. chap. 19. 20, 21. and 20. 10. as we
also spoke a little before, touching the continuance of the kingdom of
Antichrist.



The Papists description of Antichrist.
far other manner: to wit, that Antichrist is one singular and particular
man, who should arise of the Tribe of Dan, and be circumcised: who (being
accepted of the Jews for the Messiah) should reign and tyrannize at Jerusalem
the space of three years and six months, and whom Christ should at the
length kill in mount Oliuet, whilst he entendeth to ascend up into heaven:
Which definition of theirs will be more examined in our disputations.

That the Pope is Antichrist.



The proof that the Pope is Antichrist.
we prove it. For to whomsoever the definition of Antichrist does agree, it
necessarily follows, that he is Antichrist: but this definition of
Antichrist has agreed fitly to the Pope of Rome, ever since the death of
Gregory the great, and the slaughter of the Emperor Mauritius.

Gregory and Mauricius) is the man, who by continual succession and set
order, has been president The proof of the assumption by view in particular.
1 Aman, 2 Whoruleth a state.
to a certain body or state of men, and has given them his mark: wherein
the Monks and Clergy shauelings, (like unto the crowned locustes) have their
shauing as crowns upon their heads, that they might signify thereby, that
they are kings and priests, and their routes dispersed and spread in all
places of Christendom, and those many waters, upon which the great whore the
mother of the fornications of the earth, seems both to sit and reign, Revel.
18.

3 The Popes profession of Christianity, to which he is indeed an adversary.
saying, that he is the follower and the Vicar of Christ: as do also his
chief servants at this day, who give themselves a new name, Jesuits: he
also retains the Bible, that is, the scriptures written by the Prophets and
Apostles; and the Sacraments also instituted by Christ, and yet he is an
adversary to Christ and to his doctrine.

1 He challenges the offices of Christ.
Church, being always present to govern the same, Ephesians. 1 21, 22. and 4.
15* and 5, 23. Coloss. 1. 8, Though he be also the only spouse of the Church.
2. Cor. 11, 2. Ephesians, 5. 29, Finally, though he be also the only prince, the
chief shephearde, and the high priest unto his Church. 1. Pet. 2. 5. and chap.
5. 4. Heb. 6. 20. and chap. 7. 26. and chapt. 9. 11. Always living to make
intercession for us. Romans 8. 34. Heb. 7. 25. Yet notwithstanding the Pope of
Rome does arrogate this office, and these properties unto himself, and
vaunteth himself, that he is the chief head, high priest, and sacrificer,
and the Oecumenicall and general Bishop, Pastor and doctor of the whole
Church here upon earth. For so says Clement, Pastoralis, de Sentent. and re
Iudic. A pastoral charge is enjoined to us of God over all Nations of
Christendom, etc. C. 1. extravag. de empt, and vend. We being governers of the
universal Church by the Lords appointment etc. etc. reg. extravag. de prebend.
Being called to the government of the universal Church by heavenly
ordinance. andC. 1 de treuga and pace. Being called to the government of the
universal Church by the mercy of God, so disposing it. C. 3. de Elect. The
holy Church of Rome, which (by the Lords appointment, being as it were the
mother and mistress of all the faithful, which belong to Christ) has
obtained of God superiority over the rest. and distinct. 22. Sacrosancta. This
Apostolicallchayre, to wit, Rome, is appointed the head and principal, and as
it were, the Hinge: for as the door is turned and governed upon the hinge; so
all Churches are to be ruled by the authority of this. and Cap. Vnam sanctam,
extravag. de mator. and obed. Therefore there is one body of one and the same
only Church, and one bead, not two, far that were monstrous, to wit, Christ
and the vicar of Christ, Peter and Peter's successor. and Cap. fundament. de
elect. 6. So likewise at this day, the Pope in his bulls challenges
authority over all Churches of every people and nation. So also does he
call the Church his spouse and bride. C. quonia^ de imminut. in 6. saying after
this manner, We being loath to neglect the righteousness of our selves, and
the Church our spouse. In like manner also he speaks, cap. inter corporalia
etc. licet in tantum de translat. Episc.

2. The Pope has corrupted the doctrine of Christ, as appears by the
opposition of these particulars.
of Christ, so that he is not only an heretic, but an Archheretique, the
ringleader, and the Patriarch of heretics: for he has not only maintained
one error only against the foundation, but has heaped up many one upon the
neck of another, and defended them with might and maine, as may be plainly
understood by this comparison and opposition of the doctrine of Christ and the
Pope.

Voluntary worship.
in the scripture teaches, that God is in vain worshipped with the precepts
of men, Matthew. 15. It condemns voluntary service. Col. 2. 2, 3. Further it
declares, that al things necessary to salvation, are committed to writing by
the Apostles, and are to be sought for in theit writings, 2. Tim. 3. 6. and
that he is Anathema, that is, accursed, who teaches or brings any other
doctrine. Gal. 18. But the Pope does urge the traditions of men, brings in a
will worship, and lets not to say, that the scripture is obscure, maimed,
and imperfect: as it is in the counsel of Trident. Sess. 4. 1. and else where.

2. One God.
is but one only God, who knows all things, is almighty. and the governor
of the world, and all things therein, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Mark. 12. 29. 1. Kings 8.
39. 2. Cron. 6. 30. Esa. 40. 13. Romans 16. 27. 1. Tim. 6. 15. and in other
places besides. But the Pope, making as it were, a division of the divine
Majesty, does transfer the same unto certain petie gods, and associates
unto him. For look how many he has canonized for saints, so many has he
erected to be gods, and lords, and rulers of the world. Amongst which, one
is over the rain, another is for fair weather: one for diseases, another for
health: finally, one for this cause, another for that, they having their
taskes and offices assigned severally unto them.

alone is to be called upon, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. 3. Invocation of God.
Math. 4. 10. Act. 10. 25. and 14. 11. Revel. 19. 10. and 22. 9. But the Pope,
he prays unto the dead, and teaches that they are to be prayed unto.

4. Idols.
should abhorte idols, Exodus 20. 4. Deuteronomy. 4. 23. 1. Ioh. 5. 21. Revel. 18. 4.
But the Pope does erect and set up idols every where to be worshipped.

5. One high Priest.
now there is one only high Priest and Sacrificer, to wit, Christ; and that
there is but one only Oblation, Heb. 6. 20. and 9. 26, 28. and chap. 10. 12.
But the Pope has substituted an infinite number in stead of Christ, who do
every day offer to God a real and propitiatory sacrifice, to wit, the body
and blood of Christ in the Mass.

6. One Mediator.
there is one only Mediator and Intercessour betwixt God and man, to wit, the
man Jesus Christ, 1. Tim. 2. 5. 1. Ioh. 2. 1. Romans 8. 34. Heb. 7. 24. and 9.
24. But the Pope has suborned almost an infinite number of dead men, to be
mediators, intercessours, and spokesmen, and especially the Virgin Marie in
stead of Christ, as is in the Council of Trident.

7. Christ's power.
power in heaven and earth is given and granted unto Christ, and that he is
exalted above all principalities, and is appointed Lord of all things, Math.
28. 18. Act. 2. 36. Ephesians. 1. 21. Further, that he is the head of the milita^t
Church here upon earth, as was said before. Whereupon Gregory the great
says, That he is the forerunner of Antichrist, who soever should challenge
unto him self the title of general Bishop: who (that he might leave unto his
successors an example of humility) was the first that called him self the
servant of the servants of God.

And likewise the Council of Carthage, and Pelagius the Pope, were of the
mind, did. 96. can. Nullus. But the Pope, he places Christ (who is now in
heaven exalted unto the right hand of his Father) not only inferior to his
Father (with the Arrians) but also somewhat inferior to his mother, and
wills that she should by her mortherly authority and privilege, to
command her Son, etc. And for him self he stands upon it, that he is the
universal Bishop here upon earth, and the head of the whole Church.

8. Free Will.
man being dead in his sins, is not able so much, as to understand any
thing of him self, that is, has no free will in those matters that be
spiritual, and appertain to salvation, Ephesians. 2. 1. Colos. 2. 13. Roman. 8.
6. 1. Corinthians. 2. 14. 2. Corinthians. 3. 5. 2. Tim. 2. 15. 1. Ioh. 13. But the
Pope, he attributes so much unto free will, that he seems to come very high
to the heresy of Pelagius; as may be gathered out of the 28. chap. of
Augustins book, de Heresibus.

9. Satisfaction.
only has satisfied for our sin. 1. Ioh. 2. Roman. 3. 25. and 5. 8. Ioh. 1.
29. Math. 20. 28. Hebr. 10. 14. But the Pope teaches, that we must by our
ability, merit, satisfy, and answer the justice of God.

we are only justified by faith in Christ, and that freely, unto life
eternal, and that our salvation is to be accounted and esteemed as obtained by
the only mercy of God, Esaias 43. 25. Ioh. 3. 6. Act. 10. Ephesians. 2. 8. Heb. 24.
But the Pope, he teaches that we not only have not our salvation by faith
alone, but that we may merit and deserve everlasting life by our works and
demerits.

Further, that there is in the mass application 10. Justification.
made of all Christ's benefits, ex opere operato, that is, by the deed done,
or for the works sake. Finally, that the mass being applied in the behalf of
others though they be unrighteous persons (so that them selves put no bar,
and be no hinderance of the same) does merit the remission both of the guilt,
and of the punishment thereof.

11. Justifying faith.
faith is a sure confidence reposed in Christ, or else thus, a sure confidence
of the remission of our sins, for Christ's sake, Romans 4. 19. etc. But the
Pope, he teaches that faith is nothing, but a knowledge of the history, and a
doubtfulnes of the remission of sins.

12. Observation of the law.
the regenerate man, whilst he is in this life, can not perfectly observe and
fulfill the Law of God, Roman. 7. Luke 17. 10. Philippian. 3. 12. Act. 15. 10.
But the Pope affirms, that he is able: consenting with the Pelagians.

13. The kingdom of Christ.
the kingdom of Christ is not of this world. Further, that the ministry of
the Apostles and their calling, is not civil and worldly, Ioh. 18. 36. Mark.
20. 25. Luke 22. 25, 27. In like manner the Canons of the Apostles command,
that he should be removed and deposed from his office, who so ever should
bear both civil and ecclesiastical jurisdiction. But the Pope who boasts
that he is the Vicar of Christ, and the Successor of Peter, does arrogate to
him self both civil and ecclesiastical authority, as hereafter we will show
more at large.

15. The two Sacraments.
only two Sacraments of the new Testament, properly so called: Baptism, and
the Supper of the Lord: of which the one is ordained, Math. 28. and Mark. 16.
The other, Math. 26. Mark. 14. Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11. But the Pope holds that
they be seven.

15. The vulgar tongue to be used in the Church.
the vulgar tongue with an evident, significant, a loud and distinct
pronuntiation is to be used in the Church, or the meetings of the godly, that
whatsoever is spoken, might be easily understood, and approved by the people.
1. Cor. 14. 9. And Lustinian does make a decree very agreeable to the
Scripture in this behalf, in Constit. 123. and 146. But the Pope will have all
things read in the latin tongue.

16. Who are to be baptized
are to be baptized for the remission of sins. Mat. 28. 19. not bruit
creatures, and things without life. But the Pope does not only baptize men,
but also wood, and stones, and bells, etc.

17. the bread in the Lords Supper.
Supper. 1. Cor. 10. 16. and 11. 26, etc. But the Pope teaches, that it is
transubstantiated, and changed into the body of Christ.

18. The lords supper is no sacrifice.
bread in the Lords Supper is a token of remembrance, or a sign of the body
of Christ, once offered up as a sacrifice for us, and that the body of Christ
once given for us, and his blood shed, is not offered again upon the alter by
us in the supper, but is eaten and drunken for the confirmation of our faith in
Christ, and for to stir up thanksgiving in us, Hebr. 9. 28. and 10. 12. Make
26. 26. Luke 22. 19. But the Pope conuerteth this Sacrament into a sacrifice,
external, real, and propitiatory: And he daily in his mass offers up
this bread, turned into the body of Christ upon the alter, for the quick and
the dead: and being offered, he shuts it up in a box, and carries it about
and worshippeth it. Cap. peract. did. 2. de Consecrat. and as in the Council
of Trident, and the Jesuits Catechism is to be seen. Further, he offers
this sacrifice, or permits it to be offered for corporal necessities:
Whereupon it is, that there be Masses for them that sail upon the sea, or
travel upon the land, either on foot, or horseback, women with child and
in travel, for them which are barren, or are sick of tertian or quartern
agues, for merchants that they may have prosperous traffic.

19. Christ's body.
of the holy Supper, had and retained, and still has and retains, a true
body of the same substance with ours, Matthew. 26. 26. Luke 24. 39. 1. Cor. 11.
26. But the Pope feigneth, that the body of Christ is invisible, and
insensible, and so altogether diverse and unlike unto ours, and such a one as
may be in many places at one time, that is to say, that a body is present, but
not as a body in deed.

20. All ought to take, eat, and drink.
only the Ministers of the word, but others also which be faithful, ought to
take, eat, and drink, the bread and wine in the Lords Supper, Luke 22. 17.
1. Corinthians. 11. 20. But the Pope will, that only the Priests shall take,
eat, and drink, the rest are only to be spectatours, and to look on; as in
the private Mass.

21 The bread and wine are to be distributed to all.
bread is to be administered and distributed, 1. Cor. 11. 26. But the Pope
barreth the laytie from the use of the Chalice, and of the wine, as in the
Council of Constable. 13.

22 Two places for the souls,
souls of the dead after this life: to wit, heaven for the faithful, hell for
the unbelievers. Mark. 16. 16. Luc. 16. 22. Ioh. 3. 18. and 4. 36. and 5. 24.
etc. But the Pope he feigneth a third place, where the souls of them that
are defiled with venial, that is, with small sins, are to be purged before
they ascend up into heaven: which for this cause he calls the fire of
purgatory. Council. Trident. Sess. 6. cap. 30. and Sess. 22. cap. 2. and cap.
3. and Sess. 25.

23. Marriage honorable for all men.
is not only seemly and honorable for all sorts of men; but also even almost
necessary for the avoiding of fornication. Heb. 13. 4. 1. Cor. 7. 2. and 9.
Again, it would have a Bishop to be the husband of one lawful wife and not
to have concubines. 1. Tim. 3. 2. But the Pope forbids marriage to his
clergy and Nuns, and binds them with an oath unto perpetual single life.

24. Meats are free.
Romans 14. 1. Tim. 4. 3. etc. and that also there is flesh of fishes, 1. Corinthians. 15. 39. But the Pope teaches that the eating flesh upon certain
days is forbidden since the coming of Christ. Did. 35. And that they do not
eat flesh who do eat fish. Further he does (as did Montanus the heretic)
appoint laws concerning certain fasting days, and that without either prayer
or repentance.

Popes have erred.
that Pope Honorius fell into the heresy of the Monothelites. 2. Tom. Con. 8.
Syn. Constant. act. 17. that Gregory the seventh fell from the true faith.
Lib. 1 Alphonsi de Castro Minonta contra Here Is. in the Cronicle of Abbas
Vrbergens. that Pope Liberius was an Arrian. And that Pope Anastasius favored
the Nestorians, and erred from the faith. Lib. 1. Alphonsi de Castro. Minonta
contra Here Is. That John the 22 held and maintained that the souls were
mortal, and died with the bodies, until the day of the resurrection, in
Sermon quodam pascali Ioh. Gerson. For which cause that Pope is called a
devil incarnate. In Council. Constant. Sess. 7. Lastly, that Marcellinus the
Pope sacrificed unto Idols. C. nunc autem. did. 21.

4. The Pope has two swords.
man who vaunteth upon his twofolde supreme authority, spiritual and
temporal, and of both his swords, spiritual and temporal or material: and
does arrogate unto himself both Jurisdictions. As touching them both, thus
they are jointly proved by that which is said. C. vnam sanctam extra vag. de
mayor and obed. We are instructed by the word of the Gospel that there be
two swords, the one spiritual, the other temporal; in this power and
authority of the Pope. Again, therefore both the swords are in the power of
the Church, that is, both the spiritual and the material sword, etc.
Fundament. de elect in 6. The Pope of Rome has the Monarchy or sole
government of both the Jurisdictions spiritual and temporal. Whereof we have
a notable example in Boniface the 8. who in the first year of his Iubile in the
year of our Lord 1300, having upon him both the Emperors robe, and the
Priests attire, and showing himself openly in the Church of Peter and Paul,
and having both a key and a sword, he cried as loud as he could, Behold,
here be two swords. c. vnam sanct. Extravag. de maiorit. and obed. as also in
Julius the second, who was a better soldier then a Priest, and of whom Mantuan
writes thus:

Ensepotens gemino, cuius vestigia adora^t
Caesar, and aurato vestiti muricereges.
which is in English.

He powrefull is by twofold sword,
to him all men do stoop;
Both Emperor and stately kings,
with all their glorious troop.
Concerning his spiritual authority, Spiritual.
are these testimonies, Clement. in Pastoral. desent. and re Iud. etc. Primum
extravag. de empt. and vend. and others, of which we spoke before: and for the
temporal Jurisdictions, these are witnesses Temporal.
sufficient, as Cap. Constan. did. 96. where the ensigns, titles, palace,
city, province, right and power of the Emperors are bestowed upon the Pope of
Rome: that he has the rule of all the West parts. Et cap. 1. in fine
extravag. de matorit. and obed. Where it is said without doubt, whosoever
denies that the temporal sword is in the power of Peter, does give small
heed unto the word of the Lord, which says, Put up thy sword into the sheath.

5. The Popes miracles.
known both by the books and practice of the Papists, but they are lying and
deceitful, as the Apostle speaks, and are wrought to seduce and draw men
into error and superstition: and further they are either mere fables, or
else, iuggling sleights: Fables, as those which are reported of Mary of
Lauritane, as they call her, which a certain Jesuit has declared to be
false and feigned in a certain book, set forth at Lipsia after that he had
denounced Iesuitisme: so also they which are recited in the books of the
Franciscans and Dominicans, and especially in the books which are of the
conformities of the Franciscans. Iuggling sleights; as those which are wrought,
either by the delusion of Satan, or by the close and crafty conueyances of
the Monks: as in the apparitions of souls, which made report of purgatory,
and desired that Masses might be said and celebrated for them, and in the
healing of diseases at the Chapels I or images of saints, and in
coniurations. For Satan (God in his just judgment so permitting it to be)
afflicted men with peculiar diseases, and again ceased to afflict them, when
they were making their vows at the Chapels or images of saints, so that they
were supposed to be cured by the making of their vows, and delivered by the
help of the saints. And thus he, playing with the exorcistes, does
voluntarily yield unto them, though he seem to be cast out by force, and he
cease to torment a man, who is bodily possessed, that by this means (these
errors being confirmed) he may instead of their bodies besiege, win, and
possess their souls.

6. The Pope as God.
whilst that he chalengeth unto him self the name and authority and the
works which are proper unto God.

He chalengeth Gods own name.
name of God, Cap. satisf. did. 96. where he says, It is evident enough that
the Pope neither is as all, neither can be either freed or bound by any
temporal authority, who (as it is very manifest) was caled God by the godly
prince Constantine: Since that it is evident, that God can not be judged of
men. Et cap. quanto. and seq. extr. de translat. Episcopi. For no man but God
does separate them, whom the Pope of Rome does separate, not by humane, but
rather by divine authority. So likewise the Pope is God on earth, according as
Baldus has it, he is a certain divine power, and has, as it were, the
resemblance of a visible God; and what he does, he does it as God, not as man
according to Gomazius: of which there is a more large discourse in the book
which is called Recusatio concilij Trident. published in the name of the
protestant princes and states. Anno 64.

2. Gods power and authority.
he will be both indeed and estimation as he is also accounted of very many,
not only the head of the whole Church as was before said: but also the head
and lord of all kings and Monarchs Head of the Church.
of the world. Extravag. de maiorit. and obed. in the end. Moreover, we
declare to every humane creature, that he is subject to the Pope of Rome:
this we do profess, determine, and pronounce, that it is altogether a matter
necessary to salvation. Cap. super gentes extra. de consuet. The Bishop of
Rome is appointed by the Lord above all nations and kingdoms. Cap. si
Imperatore did. 96. Gods will is, that the powers secular should be subject
unto the Church, or the Priests. Cap. nunquam eadem. did. 96. It is a custom,
that princes should submit their heads unto the Bishops girdle, and not judge
of their lives. Cap. solita. de maiorit. and obed. God made two great lights in
the firmament, the greater light to rule the day, and the less light to rule
the night: both of the^ great, but the one greater. Therefore has God made two
great lights for the firmament of heaven, that is, the universal Church, to
wit, he has appointed two high states or dignities, which are these, the
authority of the Pope, and the power of the king. But that which rules the
day, that is, in matters spiritual, is the greater: that which governs
carnal affairs, that is, the less: That it may appear, that look what
difference there is betwixt the sun and the moon, so great odds there is
betwixt Popes and Kings. C. fundament. de elect. in 6. Papa nulli homini
subest. Finally, the Emperor is bound to take an oath of alegiance and
obedience unto the Pope: the form whereof is extant, cap. 1. de jurejurando.
etc. tibi domino. dest. 63. and clement. vnica. de jurejurando. And so it is
said lib. 1. ceremoniarum Pontificialium. cap. 7. The Pope in the night of the
birth of our Lord does hallowe the sword, which he afterward gives unto some
Prince, in token of the infinite power which is given unto the Pope, according
to that saying, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth: and that
also, He shall rule from seato sea, and from the river to the end of the earth.
So it is also in the Gloss of the Canon law, to wit, that the Pope is al
things, and above all things: that he is the lord of lords, and has the right
of the king of ki^gs over his subjects: that he may turn round into square:
that he is the cause of causes; and therefore no inquiry is to be made into his
authority, because there is no cause of the first cause, that the whole world
is the Popes diocese: that his authority exte^deth unto things in heaven and
earth, and under the earth: that he may command the Angels: that he has so
great power both in Purgatory and also in hell: that he can by his pardons,
deliver as many souls as he will which are in those places, and place them
presently in heaven, and in the seats of them which be blessed: as it is said
in the Bull of Clement the sixth: that he has such power in heaven, that he
may canonize whom he will that is dead for a saint, though all Bishops and
Cardinals were against it. And who can reckon up all his blasphemies? To
conclude, Sixtus quintus, to omit the rest, does at this day thus begin in one
of his Bulls. The authority granted to blessed Peter, and to all his
successors, by the infinite power of the everlasting King, excels the power
of all earthly kings and Princes.

2 The Pope the highest Judge.
can err in making decrees concerning faith, or laws concerning manners:
neither yet ought to be judged of any. And for that he sets up himself
above all even the general councels, and ordains new sacraments, and
transformeth and alters those which Christ did institute. He imposes new
laws upon men's conscienees, as for those which Christ made, he does ratify
and repeal at his pleasure. as Cap. nunc autem. did. 21. The chief seat,
that is, the chair of Rome, is not indeed of any. Can. si Papa. did. 40. If
the Pope should draw by heaps innumerable people with him into hell, no
mortal man presumes or takes upon him to reprehend his faults: for that he
is to judge all men, and himself to be judged of none. Can. cuncta. and seq.
9. q. 3. Every Church in the world knows, that the holy Church of Rome has
authority to judge of all persons, and no man may censure her judgment. Can.
nemini. 17. 4. It is permitted to no man to judge of the Apostolical seat, or
to retract that sentence, because of the primacie of the Church of Rome. cap.
proposuit. de concept. praebend. According to the largenes of our authority, we
may dispense with and above law. cap. significasti. de elect. and elect.
potest. Al councils both are called, and have their strength by the authority
of the Church of Rome: and the authority of the Bishop of Rome is manifestly
excepted in their co^stitutio^s. cap. regula. did. 17. No council is, or shall
ever be established, which shall not be confirmed and supported by the Popes
authority. And so the Gloss says again, that the Popes pleasure is heavenly:
and for this cause, he may change the nature of thigs, by applying those things
which are substantial in one thing, unto another. That he has allaws in the
closet of his breast: that he has the same consistory, which God has, and the
same judgment seat with Christ: that he can make any thing of nothing, and
make that to be a sentence or judgment, which is none: that in what so ever he
pleases, his will is to him in stead of reason, and yet no man may say: Why
do thou thus? that he may dispense beyond law, and make justice of injustice,
by concealing and altering the laws: that he can do all things (sin excepted)
whatsoever God himself ca^ do: that he must be judged of none: that if he
should throw down heaps of souls into the hels, yet none may demand of him,
Why do thou it? that he may dispense against both Apostle, and Apostolical
Canon: that he is above law: that what soever is done of the Pope, is to be
supposed is done of God: that he is all, and above all: that he may do all
things above law, contrary to law, and without law. ad cap. quanto de
translat. Episcopi, and cap. proposuit. de concess. praeb. and else where, etc.

3. He disposes kingdoms.
power and authority, to transfer kingdoms, which is the only work of God
as Clement. vnica de jureiur ando, in priu. The Roman Emperors have the
approbation of the B. of Rome, for the person which is to be preferred unto the
dignity of the Imperial Mie: as also the anointing, co^secratio^, and the
crown of the Empire. Clem. Past. de sent. and re iudic. in fine. The Pope has
superiority over the Empire, and when the Empire is void succee death the
Emperor. C. venerabile^ de elect. The right and authority to choose a king to
be Emperor, appertains unto the Bishop of Rome. and cap. 2. de sent. and re
iudic. in 6. The Pope may depose the Emperor. Can. alius 15. quaest. 6.
Zachary the Pope deposed the French king from his kingdom, and substituted
Papin into his room. So Pope Hadrian says as Arentinus reports, Lib. 6. in
Epist. ad Archiepisc. Trevicens. Mogunt. and Coloniens. From whence has the
Emperor his Empire unless it be from us? therefore he rules by us. Again,
whatsoever the Emp. has, he has it wholly from us. Further, behold, the
Empire is in our power to give it, to who^soeuer we will. Therefore are we
appointed of God, above nations and kingdoms, that we may destroy and pull
down, build and plant. And thus say the Canonists, that the Emp. is the Popes
vassal, and that he has the Empire of him in name of Homage.

The acts of the Bishops of Rome afford us plentiful examples; who have either
proclaimed as deposed and at their Examples.
pleasure tu^bled them from their thrones, or else crowned Emperors, and kings,
and princes. So dealt Innocentius with Otho the 4 Emperor of that name:
Gregory the 7 with Henry the 4. Paschalis the 2 with Henry the fifth: Hadrian
the 4 and Alexander the 3, with Frederick the first: Innocentius the 3 with
Philip the son of Frederick: Gregory the 9 with Frederick the 2: Innocentius
the 4 with Conrad the 4: Alexander the 2 with W. king of England: Boniface the
8 with Philip Pulcher the K. of France: whom they did excommunicate, and either
did depose, or labored to depose them from their Empire and kingdoms. And at
this day Sixtus the 5 does deprive the king of Navar and prince of Condie of
their kingdom, prerogative, and all hope of succession, and absolueth the
subjects from the oath of allegia^ce and obedience, and inciteth the French king
to persecute them with violence, fire, and sword. So Leo the third created
Charles the great Emperor, he anointed him, and sat the diadem upon his
head, and so transferred the Empire unto the Frenchmen from the Grecians, among
who^ it had continued 500 years. John the ninth, made three Emperors one after
another, and gave the Imperial crown unto Carolous, Calons, to Ludovicus
Bulbus his son, and to Charles the third, son to Ludovicus Germanicus. John
the thirteenth, created Otto; and Clement the fifth created Henry Emperor and
called him Augustus. But above all, the act of Gregory is famous, who took
away the Empire from Henricus the Emperor, and gave it to Rodolphus, adding
this verse,

Petra dedit Patro, Petrus diadema Rodolpho.
This diadem the Rock to Peter gave,
And Peter graunts that Rodolph shall it have.
He is an idolatour.
worshipping strange gods, that is, such a thing for God, which is no God.
First, in the bread of the Eucharist: where Innocentius the fourth, was the
first who established transubstantiation, and the worship of that bread.
Honorious the 3, vouchsafed it a peculiar place where it should be set, that
the God of bread might have a Breaden God.
temple and palace. To conclude, least any thing should be wanting unto
idolatry, Vrbanus the fourth, Anno Christ. 1263. appointed a feast unto the
body of Christ, and the carrying about of the Eucharist in procession, and gave
very large indulgences there withal. Secondly, in the calling upon the saints
departed. For he persecuteth the saints whilst they live on earth, and
kills them, whom being dead, he worshippeth in heaven. Wherein he is like
unto hunters, who do therefore hunt that they may kill and eat, and eating do
commend the meat, and are encouraged to follow their game again. And also he
is like to eraftie and close merchants, who whilst they are to buy, dispraise
that which afterward they do commend, when they have bought it, according as it
is said, Prove. 20. 14. It is naught, it is naught, says every buyer. Finally,
he is like to the Scribes and Pharisees of whom mention is made, Mat. 23. 29.
30. Thirdly, in the worship of images and monuments and relikes of Christ, and
the saints, in that which they call holy water: in the hallowed and
consecrated oil, and wax candles: in the sign of the cross: in the
baptizing of belles: in Amulets and Pomanders, and such like. The which
Idolatry is gone so far, that there has not bin greater, no not among the
heathen

His hypocrisy
only in external rites, performed ex opere operato, by the work done, and
instituting new kinds of worship: as in the sacraments, in the sacrifice of the
Mass, in the vigils or saints euens, in Canonical hours, in chaunting in
the Church, in fastes, in choice of meats, single life, religious pilgrimages,
anointing, the order of Monastical life, (whereof there be more kinds (if
they were told) then there are of fowls (which yet also have difference by
their colors, and so great multitudes (if they were mustered together) that
they would seem to be the army of Xerxes) In works of supererrogation, in
alms, in mumbling of prayers, and in the number of them, in their apparel, or
holy habites, in the shauing their hair, their burning tapers, the ornaments
of the Churches, the multitude of feasts, whereof there is neither measure nor
end. But yet he is indeed profane, wicked, and an Atheist, because he gets
this kingdom by magique or Symonie, or else by threats, sedition, and tumult,
and both he himself bears and also suffers others to bear the titles and
names of holy offices, without the thing itself. For if you do take a view
either of the ministry of the word and sacraments, or of the whole government
of the Church, it appears that the bishops and others besides, do not
execute any part of their own function, but are wholly employed about
temporal affairs, contrary to the word of God and the ancient canons.

We have examples hereof in Gregory the 5, who being carried with a deuilish
desire of authority, did first by bribes obtain the Archbishopric of Rhenes,
and afterward got by the devils assistance the Popedom itself: on this
condition, that after his death the devil should wholly have him, as Platina
records. In Gregory the 7, who being a Magitia^, caused that stones fell
down from above when Henry the 3 Emperor was praying in the temple: and when
he was seeking answers from God against the Emp. he cast the sacrament of the
body of the lord into the fire, as Platina does witness. In John the eight,
or rather Ione, a woman, who dissembling her sex, obtained and exercised the
Popedom, until such time, as her tranell did bewray what she was: as again
Platina and very many others do witness. In John the thirteen who gave
himself unto Satan corporally, as it is registered in Fasciculo Temporum. In
Sylvester the second, of whom Johannes Stella the Venetian writes, that he
was appointed Pope by the assistance of the devil, on this condition, that
after his death he might have him wholly, both soul and body, by whose
subtlety he attained to so great promotion. In Benedictus the ninth and
Gregory the sixth: and moreover in Sixtus the fourth (as the said Cardinal
Benno witnesses) who being at Florence in the Church, when (after a watch word
given) the Eucharist was taken away, he would (by his conspiratours) have
killed the two brethren Iulianus and Laurentius Medices: and did indeed slay
the one and wound the other: as Raphael Volateran records in the 5 of his
Geographie. In Leo the tenth, who is reported to have answered unto Peter
Bembus, when he alleged a saying out of the Gospel: What do thou allege
or tell me of that fable?

His blasphemy.
is Gods, does speak against God: namely, when he says, that he is God, and
of equal power with Christ, and the head and spouse of the Church: the which
we have more fully opened before Further, when he affirms that the Scripture
is obscure, and imperfect, and doubtful: and that he may interpret it as he
lists, and may make new articles of faith, and yet he neither erreth herein
nor is to be controlled by any, As also when he boasts, that he can grant
indulgences and pardons, and remission of all sins to whom soever he will.

His ambition.
he, being even sick of an insatiable thirst after honor, and unlawful
desire of lordlinesse, does set up himself above the Church, above councils,
above all magistrates, and accounts all Emperors, kings and princes which
are in Europe, to be but his vassals, his tenauntes, and almost his slaves and
drudges he treads them under his feet. Of which pride and arrogancy of
his, we before brought testimonies even out of the Canon law: but now we
will bring others like unto them, out of the book which is called Liber
ceremoniarum Romanae curiae: Where it is said, that all men of what honor or
pre-eminence soever they be, so soon as they come within the sight of the
Pope, ought to bow their knees thrice, observing equal distance of pace, and
to kiss his feet. Further, when the Pope does get up on horseback, the
greatest prince of them which be present though he be a king or Emperor must
hold the Popes stirrup, and then lead the horse by the bridle a little on the
way. But if that the Pope be not carried on horseback but on his chair,
whether he be king or Emperor that is present it skilleth not, they must carry
the seat it self with the Pope in it, a while upon their shoulders. Again,
that the prince of the city (into which the Pope shall enter) though he be a
king, shall lead the popes horse by the bridle: or if the pope be carried in
his chair, shall (together with the chief of his Nobles) carry the same a
good way: then, when the pope commands him, the king shall take his horse and
ride according unto his place. Further, the Emperor must at the baket hold
water for the pope to wash his hands. And moreover, when the pope has a feast,
the Emperor or else the king of the Romans must carry the first mess or service.
And to conclude, the pope does no reverence at all to any man, only he raises
up himself when the Emperor kisseth him. For examples these are chiefly to be
noted: first of the pope in general, who offreth his feet to be kissed of the
Emperor, kings princes, Cardinals, Examples of his ambition.
bishops, and the rest. Then specially of pope Sylvester of whom it is
reported that (for the honor of S. Peter) Pseudoconstantinus or that feigned
Constantine held his horse bridle in his hand when he took horse and played
the gentleman usher or sergeant before him. Did. 96. Thirdly of pope Hadrian
the fourth, who was very angry with Frederick the Emperor, and did in reproach
object unto him, that when as he would have held his stirrup at his lighting
down from his horse, he came and held not the further stirrup as he should,
but the other. And that he also had set the Emperors name before the popes in
certain letters which were sent unto him. Fourthly of Alexander the third, who
set one foot in the neck of Frederick the Emperor, when he was prostrate
and suppliant at his feet in the Cathedral Church of Venice, that he might
have his excommunication released, and commanding, that the verse of Psalm
should be song of his priests, Thou shult walk upon the Serpent, and the
Basiliske: thou shall tread under foot the Lion and the Dragon. Fifthly, of
Boniface the eight, Anno 1300, who showed himself at Rome in a great assembly
of the people (by reason of a Iubile then solemnized) the first day of the
solemnity with all the ornaments of the Pope, and the next day he came forth
clad with the Emperors robe, or coat armor, and commanded a drawn sword to
be carried before him, himself crying with a loud voice, I am both Pope, and
Emperor, and have authority both in heaven and earth: and within few days
after did proudly reject Albertus, who was created Emp. by the electours of the
Empire, and desired to be confirmed by him: Affirming moreover that no election
could be authentical, which was made without his authority, since that he alone
had the authority of both the swords, which when Albertus Crautzius
superintendent of the church of Hanburgh recites, he makes this exclamation;
O Peter, behold thy successor, and, O Savior Christ, behold thy Vicar:
behold the pride of the feruant of thy servants, unto what height he is now
come.

The Pope is lawless.
laws which Christ has made, and makes new at his own pleasure: and because
he will be judged of no man but aduanceth himself above law, as we showed
heretofore. Whereof we have example in the forbidding of the marriage of
Priests, and certain meats, and of the chalice in the Lords supper, which is
contrary unto the revealed will of God and of Christ our Lord. Further, in
dispensing with degrees contrary to the law of God and nature: as that Pope
Martin the fifth gave dispensation that a man might take his own sister to
wife: And that others have dispensed, that any man might mary two sisters, his
fathers sister, or his mothers, or any woman two brethren, her uncle by her
fathers side or by her mothers, and that (which some also of the schoolmen do
teach upon the 4. sent. did. 34. and Caietan secunda secundae. Thomae. quaest.
154 Art. 9. (to wit that the Pope may dispense with all degrees, excepting the
marriage of the father and the son, with the daughter and the mother.

Siricius the pope. C. plurimos. did. 82. Greg. 7. Calixtus 6. Presbyteris.
did. 27. Leo. did. 32. per totu^. Innocentius c. proposuisti. did. 82. etc.
Sacerdoticus. and seq. did. 31. Leo the tenth and other more. But on the
contrary, he permits concubines, brothel houses, whoredoms, and filthy
lusts, or at least does tolerate them, and fills all Christendom with
whores, with Bastards, with buggerers, and others more of the same stamp, as
it is known full well, and yet further by giving dispensation, he permits
incestuous marriages: and that which is more then all the rest, he makes a
gain and raises a yearly rent of the common stews.

So John 13 being found with a queen was run through of the husband of the
same harlotte. Further, how great was the chastity and honesty of Alexander
the sixth, it appears by this epitaph made for his daughter.

Hic iacet in tumulo Lucretia nomine, sedre
Thais, Alexandri silia, sponsa, nurus.
Here lies entombd Lucretia
by name: but we her saw
Thais in life; Alexanders
child, spouse, daughter in law.
So John Casus Archbishop of Beneventum the popes legate among the Venetians,
has commended and published in print that horrible kind of lust and venerie,
which is not at all to be reported: yea, and that who is called P. John the 8,
was both a woman and an harlot, and as she went to the palace of Laterane, she
traueiled in the third year of the Popedom, and died of that travel in the
same place, whereupon Mantuan in his time writes after this manner:

Jpudor in villas, si non patiantur easdem
and villae vomicas, Roma est iam tota lupanar.
O shame to village pack away
If it may be found dear,
Rome is a stews: now chastity
has no abiding there. His abstine^ce and riot.

de consec. did. 3. de esu carnium. and did. quia. and eadem did. 5. quadr.
and did. 4. c. denique etc. and 13. quaest. 2. animae. And yet he will for
money dispe^se for the self samething.

He is covetous.
Symonie, that is, buying, selling, and making a marchaudise of things
spiritual: he gives nothing, but sells al things, as, the grace of God, the
sacraments, good works, heaven, and life everlasting, and out of all of them he
piketh out gold and silver, and raises his gain for heaven, hell, the earth,
yea time itself, and all creatures whether they have life or be without life,
as wine, bread, oil, linen, milk, butter, cheese, water, salt, fire,
perfumes, the stews, etc. So that, there was never heard of either any
greater, or more abominable merchandise. Whereupon his merchants and brokers,
that is, the Monks, the Bishops, and Cardinals, are not only become rich, but
are even princes upon the earth. So likewise does he make a gain of Masses,
satisfactions, pardons, burials, and Church livings: to wit, by selling of
benefices, annats, or vacations: preuentions, resignations for favor,
commendatus, dispensations for age, for orders, for irregularity, for blemish
of body, for redemptions of the Bishops pall and the Bulls. Further, by
reservation of cases, by marriage causes, by sins and offenses, to wit, when
as license for sins and all kind of mischiefs are bought and sold after a
certain price and rate: and by other cases and causes of the like nature:
which, if we should reckon up one by one, would be very tedious, because they
want both measure and modesty: and there is no great necessity so to do: for
that there is a book extant of these things, which has this title. Taxae
Cancellariae Apostolicae, and Taxae sacrae Poenitentiariae, itidem Apostolicae
cum not abilibus iuxta stylum hodiernum curiae Romanae. In which book thus
there is a sentence worthy the remembrance set down in these words. And mark
this diligently, that such immunities and dispensations are not granted unto
them which be poor: For they, because they be not rich, can not be comforted.
Hereof comes it to pass, that an infinite mass of gold and silver is
brought unto Rome, which afterward the Pope, Cardinals, and the rest of the
same rabble do consume in their stews and brothelhouses, and do riotouslie
spend, as it were in the bottomless gulf of their insatiable gluttony and
sensuality, to the great shame and ignominy of Christianity: So Franciscus
Petrarch has left it in record, that in the treasure house of Pope John the
22, there was found (when he was dead) by his heirs, 25 thousand thousand
crowns, that is, 250 tun of gold. And of Boniface the eight (who was taken
prisoner and spoiled at the commandment of Philippus Pulcher, the French King)
we find it registered, that all the kings of the world were not able to
disburse so much out of their treasury within the compass of one year, as was
taken and carried out of the Popes palace: wherefore there have always been
some at all times, who both detested that in satiable hunger, and discontented
desire, and greedines of riches, and also lotted not to enueigh against the
same: hereupon Mantuan says thus:

-- venalia Romae.
Templa, Sacerdotes, Altario, Sacra, Corona,
Jgni^, thura, preces, Coelum est venale, Deusque.
which is in English thus.

Churches and Priests, Altars and Princes
at Rome are to be sold.
Kingdoms and rites, incense and heaven.
yea, God, Rome is so bold.
And another thus.

Curia Romana non carpit ovem sine lana
Dantes exaudit, no^ dantibus ostia claudit.
which may be thus translated.

The Romish court does make no pay
Of sheep that fleece do want:
No man can speed unless he pray,
Bring gifts and take our grant.
And again another speaks after this manner: The treasure house Apostolical
is like unto the sea, into which all floods do run, and yet it does not
ouerflowe: for even so thousand waightes of gold are brought into this out of
diverse parts of the world, and yet it is not filled.

His craftines and false dealing.
false, and given to lying: crafty he is, for that he blinds truth and
falshoode together: deceitful and a liar he is, in that his feigned service,
to wit, when as he entituleth his lordlinesse with a name of service, (that
is, when he calls himself the servant of servants) under pretense of
humility, according to the example of Gregory the great, who for this end
called himself the servant of the servants of God, that he might give his
successors a pattern of lowliness: and yet in words and deed, he proudely
exalts himself above all kings and princes, desiring to be the lord of
lords, as we declared at large heretofore: in so much, that he indeed
retains the bare name and title, but usurps a stateliness, altogether
disagreeing from the title: so further in the fained donation of Constantine,
as is mentioned in Cap. Constantinus, did. 96. he produces a forged
instrument of Constantine his deed of gift, in which he affirms, that the
city of Rome, with Italy, Sicilie, Sardinia, Spain, Germany, and Britain,
were given unto him by that Emperor.

Again, he is taken in manifest contradictions, in that he sometime
affirms, His lying and contradictio^s The deed of gift for his Jurisdiction
and authority.
that the same deed of gift was made unto Sylvester the Pope by Constantine,
sometime before Sylvester by the same Constantine, sometime by Ludovicus Pius
son to Charles the great, cap. Constantinus. did. 96. and cano. futura 12.
quaest.

In that he says, sometime that Constantine, sometime that Christ, sometime
that Peter, gave unto him that power and authority, as in the same place. cap.
Constant. did. 96. and cap. sacrosancta. did. 22. etc. vnam sanctam. extrav.
de maiorit, and obed.

In that sometime he avouches, that principality is granted unto him by
Primatie.
Constantine, that he should be the head over all Churches and Priests: cap.
Constantinus. did. 96. Sometime he affirms, that no man is to be called the
prince of the Priests, or high priest, or universal bishop. Cap. multi did.
40. and cap. primae sedis, and duobus. ce. seqq. did. 99. In that sometime he
says, that Apostles, and especially Peter and Paul are equal and alike, 2. q.
7. Can. 33. and can. 37. and 24. q. 1. can. 18. Sometime that both he
prefers Peter before the rest of the Apostles, and ascribes the primacie to
him alone, and cap. sacrosancta. did. 22. and else where.

In that he says, that the election Dignity.
of the Pope ought to be made by the consent and approbation of the Emperor,
and that the Pope is in subjection to the Emperors laws and statutes, and
that the Emperor excels him in temporalities, c. 22. and 22. did. 63. etc.
9. and 3. did. 10. and 2. q. 7. can. 1. Nos si incompetenter, and 25. q. 1.
sat agendum, and c. solitae de may orit. and obea. Sometime he subiecteth the
Emperor unto himself, aduanceth himself above him, and above all kings, and
exempteth himself from all judgment of men, as was said before.

In that he sometime denies, that Succession.
succession is ordinary and tied to a certain place, bringing this place out
of Jerome: They are not the sons of the saints, who possess the places of
the saints, but they which do the works of the saints, etc. c. 1, 3, and 4.
did. 40. etc. 2. Sometime he avouches the contrary, as c. 2. did. 40.

In that sometime he wills, that priests and bishops should only be occupied in
matters The matters in which he deals.
spiritual, not temporal. did. 36. and 38. commanding also, that he should be
removed from his function, who bears both civil and Ecclesiastical magistracy,
at one and the same time in Can. Ap. quos approbat, Can. 8. Sometime he
chalengeth both the powers, and both the swords unto himself and to his
Bishops, as was showed heretofore.

In that he grants sometimes, yea commands marriage unto Priests. Marriage
of Priests.
C. si quis docuerit. did. 28. andC. quoniam Did. 31. andC. si quis nuptias.
did. 3 Sometimes he does altogether forbid them marriage, as we showed before.

In that sometime he commands the entire and perfect use of the Sacrament
Use of the sacrament in both kinds.
of the supper of the Lord: excommunicating them also which otherwise shall
do. De Consec. c. comperimus. did. 2. Sometimes he forbids the people to
receive the Cup. In Council. Constant. sess. 13.

In that he wills sometime, that all Communication.
should communicate in the supper of the Lord, that is, should take, eat, and
drink, and does excommunicate them who do otherwise. De consecrat. c. per
Acta did. 2. sometimes he debarreth the Laity, and defends, that this is
only lawful for the priests, vt inprivata Missa.

In that he says, that the Pope is to be judged of no man, unless he be
found The Pope not to be judged.
to err from the faith. c. si papa. did. 40. Sometimes he says, that the
Pope Discorus is excommunicate, though he has not erred in the faith. Quaest.
2. Can. sane profertur. verse. item Romanoru^. Furthermore, in that he makes
his Promise breaking.
promise, but keeps it not: saying, that promise is not to be kept with
heretics, as in council. Constant.

In that he sometime affirms, now Of Pope Joan
denies very impudently by the Jesuits and others, that Pope John the eight
was a woman, and that the chair of inquiry, (by which the Pope created is
Seeds testiculatrix.
pronounced capable or incapable) was used since that time, which is contrary
unto so many evident testimonies of Hystoriographers, (and even of them who
have been Papists) both old and new: as Marianus Scotus, Anno 1080
orthereabout, Sigebert the Monk. anno 1110. Martinus surnamed Polonus, Anno
1278. Martinus Minorit. Anno 1350. Franciscus Petrarch, Anno 1370. Johannes
Bocatius, who lived at the same time. Raphael Volateran. Anno 1490 or there
abouts. Further, of Platina, Sabellicus, Aeneid. 9. Tritem. in hist. Monaster.
Hirsaugiensis. Johan. Stella of Venice, Nauclerus, Albertus, Crantzius, and the
author of Fasciculus Temporum. Baptista, Mantuan, Caelius Rhodignius, and of
others, who do bear witness of this feminine or woman Pope, whose entire
records are not long since put forth into print.

In that he has not only put counterfeits in stead of the right books
(especially in the Monuments of the Fathers) but does also corrupt, cancel,
chop and change them, as may appear both in that he corrupts the Latin
Bible, and obstinately defends the corruptions: which do many times disagree
from the Hebrewe and Greek copies: and in that he now alters and changes
the writings of the fathers, which being thus made imperfect, he sets
forth, and alleges them as they are set forth according to these Editions.
Example whereof (to omit others, which might plentifully be brought in this
place, and have been also alleged by others heretofore) we have afforded unto
us by John Gibbons an English Jesuit doctor of divinity, and professor at
Triens, in disputatione de sanctis. These. 207. alleging a place out of
Augustine, Lib. 8. cap. 27. de civitate Dei. for his own purpose, but as it
seems out of an imperfect and counterfeit copy: in this manner. We appoint
Churches, and orders of Priests, and holy rites, and sacrifices unto the
martyrs, not for that they be good, but because their God is ours, etc. Whereas
other editions are thus. Yet do not we appoint temples, orders of Priests,
holy rites, and sacrifices unto the saints, etc. And the scope and drift of
Augustine will not admit of that sense which the Jesuit would have: but does
necessarily require this which is all in all our Copies.

Further, in that he feigneth many relics of the saints, which neither are
nor possibly can be true, unless we would grant that there be many bodies,
many heads, many arms, of one saint or holy man. For if so be that all the
relics of the Saints were brought together, the bodies of the saints would
not be only very vaste for their quantity of huge bigness, and very
monstrous for the number of the members: but also oftentimes there would be
more bodies then one of one and the same Saint.

In that he counterfaiteth miracles, which neither are, nor have been
wrought, as was showed before.

In that he pretends the name of Christ and the salvation of the Church: But
indeed does seek his own honor and commodity. For he calls them the
Riches of the Church, and Patrimony of Christ. But did Christ possess any
such things? Thou bear the name and title of Bishops, but altogether void
of the substance. Thou hear the name of Patriarchs, Superintendentes,
Abbats: but if thou take away the outward visard and ceremony, what will
remain? Thou hear the names of the Fraternities: and they are schisms or
divisions. Thou hear of the orders and contemplative life: what is it but
confusion and senselessness? Thou hear of continency: and it is nothing but
riotousnesse. Thou hear of the poverty, especially of the Monks, and what
is it but deliciousnes? Thou hear of chastity and single life, and what is
this but filthy lechery? Thou hear of humility, and it is pride and
arrogancy. Finally thou see the sheep skin, but there is a wolf lurking
within it. For he indeed professes humility, but exalts himself above all
others: he voweth chastity, but uses adultery: yea and more is further from
all honesty: no man (as it is full well known unto all men) does more defile
himself with all kind of villainy: he celebrateth a feast, and yet he
plays the glutton in the same.

His cruelty.
he makes against Emperors, kings, and others: as do also his factions, his
wars, his butcherly massacres, with the persecutions and most extreme
torments of the faithful: which are in truth more then I am able to rehearse
in any short space. For how many factions, wars, and massacres has the Pope
of Rome caused among Christian princes, in all parts of Christendom within
these 500 years, for the maintenance and increase of his power? How much blood
has he shed? when as he in the mean season like to a Fencer having set others
together by the ears, is a beholder of these bloody sports: Or as another
Nero, beholding in his turret the city set on fire, which himself had fired,
does feed and please his mind, and delight his eyes with such a hidious and
pitiful spectacle. What mischief did he work in that voyage to Jerusalem, for
the recovery of the sepulcher of the Lord, the city Jerusalem, and the holy
land? which was first begun by Gregory the 8: one, who was more cruel and
abominable then Nero himself: and after prosecuted by Vrbanus, the dear and
most near friend which Gregory had: wherein the West fought against the East
very dangerously, and the Christian soldiers so used the matter by spoiling
and killing Christians, Jews, and others, and by committing other outrages,
that all the wars which were made by the Romans being Gentiles, may (in
comparison of that) be called Christian, godly, and holy.

How madly and furiously have the Counter popes raged together, even that they
might dispatch one another, only to serve their own ambition? To conclude,
how many and how great persecutions has the Pope caused within this 60 years?
what torments has he inflicted upon men faithful, and holy, whom he
proclaimed as heretics, especially in France, and the low Countries. For
because that he is cruel, he does persecute the saints, but he worshippeth
them when they be placed in heaven. For this is the property of a bloody and
cruel man, to injury those which are his equals, or them who are his
inferiors and whom he may hurt: but as for them who are his betters, and whom
he can not hurt, but fears lest himself be hurt by them, these he
reuerenceth.

His appearance.
craft of the devil, which mingleth truth and falsehood together, which is a
cunning cozening and sophistical subtilty. For a lie is weak of it self and
can not stand: therefore these cozening mates do underprop their lies with such
propositions and assertions, as be either true, or else have a show of truth.
Therefore satan by little and little brought in the corruptions of doctrine and
manners, and confirmed them more and more by sophistry and hypocrisy, till at
length this kingdom did fully appear.

He also has bin extant since the division His time.
and overthrow of the Roman Monarchy, and since the expiring and date of
those 666 years: that is since the death of Mauritius the Emperor: when the
Emperor Phocas (who slew his father) made this decree, that the Church of
Rome should be head over all other Churches, and that the Bishop of Rome (who
then was Boniface the third) should be head over all Bishops, and be the
Catholic and general Bishop. And always since, especially since the time of
Charles the great, he has gotten strength and grown greater and greater.

He appeared in the temple of God. that is, in the Churches, and there he still
sits and His place.
rules, feigning that he is the Vicar of Christ and the successor of Peter:
for there was the true Church where the Pope of Rome first appeared as
Antichrist, and afterward there remained the name, the title, and the print of
the Church, there was the bible, that is, the book of the Prophets and
Apostles, there remained the true doctrine concerning God, concerning the
trinity of the divine persons, and concerning the person of Christ, there
remained baptism together with the creed of the Apostles: and though the
Popedom was not then, no more then in truth it is now the Church, yet the
Church was, and did as it were, lie hid in the Papacy.

Tyrrhenum and Adriaticum, for here is the seat of the Pope, wherein
oftentimes, (for sometimes the place is changed) he dwells bodily.

John Hus, secondly by Martin Luther, The discovery of the pope.
and other excellent men, whom God raised up, who having found out Antichrist
even in the time of his merchandise, and as we say, with the manner, have put
him to shame, by showing his impiety and endeavor against Christ, and have
kindled the light of the gospel in all places, especially in Germany though
the Pope and other the Lords of Christendom, being utterly against it, have
threatened banishments, punishments, wars and overthrow: who would not
suffer the religion (which had continued so many ages) to be overthrown, to
the great trouble and destruction of all Europe. For so soon as men which were
not given unto pleasures (as Epicures are) did see but a spark of light shining
unto them, they being very much grieved with that darkness and servitude
(wherewith they had been so many years oppressed) and being intised with the
beauty and sweetness of truth, they joined themselves unto the sincere
teachers of truth, not having regard of other matters whatsoever. By which
means, the purity of doctrine was every where propagated and spread abroad,
the Churches were established and restored unto their former beauty, first in
Germany, Switserland, then in England, Scotland, France, Flanders, Denmark,
and other provinces. And though that unlucky contention concerning the supper
of the Lord, did straightwaie begin, amongst the preachers of the Gospel,
even in the beginning thereof, and continues also unto this day (Satan
endeavoring thereby to hinder and stay the cause of the gospel) yet we are
to think thus: First, that Satan has not now begun, but has practiced long
ago, to set at variance the holy servants of God, as Paul and Barnabas, and
again the same Paul and Peter with others more: secondly, that as concerning
the foundation of the doctrine and religion of Christ, and all things
necessary unto salvation, there has always been and still is, an agreement
betwixt those men, who are the restorers of this gospel which now begins to
take life again. For having consuted merit, and trust reposed in works
wherewith miserable men were bewitched in time of Popery, both parties agreed,
that our whole salvation consists in the merits of Christ: only the
difference is in the supper of the Lord, concerning the corporal presence,
and the bodily eating, and that the same is common unto the godly and the
wicked (as the one part defends) and so not necessary unto salvation.
Thirdly, it is no great marvel, if in the beginning of reformation, and as it
were, in the dawning of the day, all things were not at the first well
considered: for it can scarsely be declared what a deep gulf of ignorance was
in popery, and what an horrible darkness by reason of errors. And
doubtless, it was a very great miracle wrought by God, that those first
doctors of the gospel could arise from thence, in so little and short space.
And although the Jesuits which are lately sprung up, endeavor to heal this
wound of Antichrist, yet shall they never fully cure the same.

The destruction of the Pope.
and shall be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone according unto the
prophecy before declared. In the mean season, we are patiently to bear that
persecution wherewith he oppresses us, and we must not for his tyranie leave or
forsake the profession of the truth.

The conclusion.
Gregory the great, and the murder of Mauritius the Emperor, is that
Antichrist whom we have before described out of the Prophecies of the Prophets
and Apostles. For whether they consider the doctrine or behold the manners and
actions of the Pope, they all agree unto these prophecies: and though
heretofore there were controversy touching primacie, and there were diverse
errors (and they not small) concerning the doctrine: yet afterward, the
desire of bearingsway, did more break forth, Idolatry, and impiety was
increased, and at the length Boniface the third obtained of Phocas the
Emperor, that whosoever should be the Bishop of ancient Rome, should also be
esteemed as universal Bishop, that Rome should be accounted the head of all
Churches, and that this privilege might be traduced to their successors: and
within a while after, others of them challenged both the swords for themselves,
established this by decree, that the Mass was a sacrifice propitiatory for
the living and the dead: and to conclude, they made Rome a sanctuary for Idols.

he is yet to come, least he himself should be thought to be the Antichrist
indeed. Of whose opinion and their reasons we will say more as occasion shall
be offered: for the manner of our positions will not now permit us to speak of
the same.

God the Father grant for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that men may learn
to know and to abhor that Antichrist, the most dangerous enemy of Christ
and the Church: and may likewise learn more and more to love and worship
Christ.

FINIS.

