A Godly and short Treatise of the Sacra^e^^s.

Written by Robert Some.

By one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Grecians,
whether bond or free: and have bin all made to drink into one spirit.

1. Corinthians. chap. 12. verse. 13. Imprinted at London for Geo. Bish.

Anno. 1582.

To the right honorable and his very good Lord and master, the Lord Robert
Dudley Earl of Leicester, Baron of Denbigh, knight of the most noble order of
the gatter, Master of the Queens Majesty's Horses, and one of her highness
most honorable privy Counsel, Robert Some wishes increase of Gods gifts by
Jesus Christ.
IT has pleased God to deal very graciously with your L. your thankfulness
to his Majesty will notably appear, if you go on in doing your best for the
increase of Gods religion. The high way to compass this, is the calling for,
and placing of such in the land, as by gods blessing are able and willing to
profit his Church. When fit men are found out they must have both defense and
maintenance: defense, that for well doing they be not discouraged: maintenance,
that they may attend upon Gods service without distraction of mind. If this
were put in practice, almighty God should be better served then he is, and
our gracious sovereign Queen Elizabeth more heartely obeyed then she is.
How singlie many parts of this realm are furnished with teachers, all the
world does see: the enemy with great joy, the godly with great grief. The
cause of this mischief is either great want of judgment, or great corruption
in the^ which do prefer, and are preferred to ecclesiastical livings. The
first of these is a gross fault, but the latter is intolerable sin, as is
manifestly proved in the next leaf after this epistle. Our Universities both
have and do bread up many excellent me^, and may well be compared to the Apple
tree of Persia, which in good mesure does bud, blosso^, and bear fruit al
times of the year. Before that students do come to excellent pass, their
pains and charges are very great, for without labor and Gods blessing,
learning is not come by, and without expense, study cannot be maintained.

When students are furnished with knowledge, are they provided for? is good
done to the^ for the churches greater good? it is very clear that they are
singly rewarded, and the case of many both in the universities and abroad does
sufficiently prove this. But answer peradventure will be made that these
students must use means for their preferment. If by means we understand
coasting up and down ye country for livings, Judge. chap. 17. verse 8.
it was ye practice of Michahs priest, and is at no hand, to be liked of: if by
means be understood either buying of places right out, or departing with some
part of the commodities, it is a grievous plague, and must be taken head of:
for it infecteth both the taker, and the giver, and some other parts of the
Church of God: the taker, because it makes him think vily of religion, when
he sees and feels ye corruption of a teacher: the giver, for besides the
present shipwreck of a good conscience, he is driven to sell dear because he
bought dear: the church of God, for it pesters it with unfit and corrupt both
teachers and governors, whereby gods honor is greatly defaced, and ye good
subjects of the land, very grievously offended. I may add to this, yt this
mischief, if it not in time meet with, will be the undoing of Cambridge and
Oxford, and consequently bring forth Barbarism. Gene. cha. 47 verse. 22.
The priests of Egypt were carefully provided for in the time of famine, and
shall a number of our learned preachers almost famish in the flourishing estate
of the realm of England? The popish sort are very careful that the Popes
plough go forward, they spare neither cost not labor to increase
superstition. How bountifully their priests are dealt with every man may see,
and their liberality does more hurt Gods religion, then we are aware of. Shall
they provide extraordinarily for theirs, and shall ourgodly and learned
students not have that provision which of right belongs unto them? they which
are seruante to any me^ of trade, are after a time in case to maintain
themselves and theirs, and shall the university divines after many years
study and great expense, be compelied for want of maintenance either to
commend themselves to the staff and waller, or betake themselves to some other
course? many servants in court, for a little and mean service receive great
good of their Lords and masters charge, and what have the students committed
not to have provision of their own, that is to say, of the Churches charge.
Good my L. tender the stude^ts cases, and seeing almighy God has given
commandment for their defense and provision, have good care especially of
such as are furnished by almighty God for the comfort of his Church. If your
Lordship work the good of these (which I do and will pray for) you shall do
God great service, and he will multiply his blessings and favor upon you. As
for them which are guilty of corruption, either by taking or giving money,
because their sin is very great, they must first make restitution of money,
and Church livings, vngraciouslye come by, and then crave pardon humbly as
almighty Gods hands for these gross enormities.

This order which I prescribe is gods order, and therefore with all reverence to
his Majesty must be liked of. If restitution be not made by such as are in
case to do it, their repentance is no repentance, and therefore the pardon
they look for at gods hands will not be granted the^. I beseech almighty God
either to give these men unfeigned repentance of his great mercy for the less
hurt of the church, or to co^fou^d the^ of his justice for the greater good of
his church. Aug. epist. 54. ad Macedomum. Nehem. chap. 5. verse 13.
And as to Nehemias prayer in another case of oppression, the Lords people said
Ame^: so I doubt not but your Lorship and all which fear God both in the
court, and other parts of this land, will say many a hearty Ame^, to this prayer
of mine, against the spoil of both church and universities.

I did present to your L. when I waited on your honor in the court, a latin
Sermon: because it pleased you to take it in good part, I am now bold to offer
to your L. a Treatise of the Sacraments for another testimony of my dutiful
mind. If it shall please you to peruse it, I doubt neither of your profiting by
it, nor of your good accepting of it. The stuff in this treatise is very
sound, and has in it variety enough for the compass of so short a writi^g.
Thus desiring almighty God to increase his good gifts in your L. for the great
good of this noble land, and for your own singular comfort, I take my leave of
your good L. in most humble manner. At Cambridge the 15. of May. 1582.

Your Lordships most humble Chap. Robert Some.

The Church liuinges may not be taken from godly and learned minister, but
must be freely bestowed upon them.
WIll a man spoil his Gods? Malac. chap. 3. ver. 8.9.
yet have ye spoiled me: but ye say, wherein have we spoiled thee? in tithes
and offerings: ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have spoiled me etc. says ye
Lord. If almighty God was robbed of his honor in the time of the law, when
tithes and offerings were not brought into his storehouse for the maintenance of
his service, and for the relief of the priests and poor amongst the^, it is a
necessary co^sequent, that Gods honor is greatly impaired by them, which pull
from the Church any part of that which is given for the upholding of Gods
religion, and therefore that they are accursed.

Let him that is taught in the word make him that has taught him Galath.
chap. 6. ver. 6.
partaker of all his goods. If the ho^ly Ghost command us to give of our own
goods to our teachers, then we may not spoil them of the Churches goods.

Samuel describing the conditions of an usurping king, 1. Sam. chap. 8. ver. 15.
sets down this for one, unto ye Israelites: he will take the tenth of your
seed and of your vineyards, and give it unto his Eunuchs and servants. If
the king might not take the tenthes of seed and vineyards, Nomb. chap. 18.
ver. 21.
because they were dew to the priests by Gods own order and commandment
for the maintenance of Gods service, no man has any privilege to enrich him
self, his child, or servants with the spoil of Church lyuinges, or taking
money or pensions for preferring other to them.

The elders of the Jews desired Christ instantly to heal the Ce^turions
servant: Luke. chap. 7. ver. 5.
their reason was this, he loves our nation and has built us a synagogue. If
the building of a Temple for the Jews godly asse^blies, was an argument of the
Centurions love unto that nation, the pulling away of that from the Church and
Churchemen which would mainteyne godly and Christian assemblies, is a sure
argument that little care is had either of Gods honor, or of his Ministers, or
of Gods people, or of any religion at all.

Ezechias the king of Judah conmaunded that the Priests and Levites should be
thoroughly provided for by the people of Jerusalem, 2. Chro. chap. 31. ver, 4.
that they might be encouraged in the law of the Lord, that is to say, that
they might cheerfully and without distraction of mind attend upon their
calling. If it was equal in Ezechias time that the Ministers of Jerusalem
should have mayntenance at the hands of the nobility and Citizens of
Jerusalem, it is most equal, that none in our time whatsoever should take to
themselves, either the whole or part of such maintenance, as has been
heretofore provided for the Ministers, and is now confirmed to them by the
godly laws of this noble land.

If David refused to drink of the water of Bethlehem because it was gotten
with danger of losing a few temporal lives, 1. Chro. chap. 11. ver.
16.17.18.19.
it is a very great sin by praying upon the church liuinges (as a hawke does
upon partriches) to spoil Christians of ye food of their souls, and so to
bring a plague of famine amongst them. If David deserve commendation for
pouring out the water of Bethlehem to the lord for a sacrifice, what do they
deserve which by pulling from the Church and Churchme^, do spoil almighty God
of his service and ye poor of necessary releif, which are gross sins
against both the tables of the commandments.

If any faithful man or faithful woman have widows, 1. Tim. chap. 5. ver.
16.
let them minister unto them and let not the Church be charged, that there may
be sufficient for them that are widows in deed. If they sin which for the
ease of their own purses suffer the Church to be charged, their sin is
greater which do pull from the Church, or take either money or pensions of the
Church men for preferring of them.

If God do curse, Deuteronomy. chap. 27. ver. 17.
and all good men detest them which remove the boundestone, because by yt fact,
quarrels grow amongst neighbors, and other men's land is sometimes unjustly come
by, they are under a more grievous curse at Gods hands, and under greater
detestatio^ at his peoples hands, which take away either lands or commodities
from ye Church and Churchmen. The removing of the bowndstone hurtes but a few,
and to their little loss. The taking away of the maintenance of the Minister
hurts a great number, and keeps from them learned and godly men, which should
teach and govern them.

If Jesus Christ did cast out of the temple in Jerusalem all them that sold and
bought in the temple, Math. chap. 21. ver. 12.
and did overthrow the tables of the money chaungers, and the seats of them
that sold doves, he will deal more rowndly with buyers and seslers of Clergy
liuinges, because their sin is greater. They which sold doves and were money
changers in Jerusalem had two goodly pretenses for their merchandise: first
that the people which came to sacrifice at Jerusalem needed not to seek far
for doves to sacrifice, or for money to offer in the temple, because they might
have both money and doves at hand for ye service of God in Jerusalem. Secondly,
the exchange of money and sale of doves was not in the sanctuarye but in the
court of the Temple, which court was sometimes termed by the name of the
temple. They which make merchandise of clergy livings have no such color for
their defense, they cannot say that they are money chaungers and dove sellers,
to furnish Gods people with money for offeringes and with doves for sacrifice:
but they take money and gifts of corrupt men, to famish Gods people and to keep
from them the goodlye funneshyne of Gods favor, which the sound preaching of
the Gospel does very lively and comfortably offer unto them. They which sold
doves and changed money in Jerusalem, defiled not the sanctuary but the court
of the temple: they which sell Church liuinges do great hurt to the body of
the Church and commonwealth, therefore their condemnation will be more
greauous because their sin is greater.

The Emperor Constantinus commanded Anilinus, Eusebius. lib. 1^. chap. 5.
to be careful that gardens, howses, or any thing whatsoever belonging to the
right of the churches should with all speed be restored to them. If pulling
from the Churches had been lawful, Constantinus commandment had deserved
neither liking nor performance. Our gracious sovereign Queen Elizabethes both
desire and pleasure is, that worthy men be called for, and have that
maintenance freely which belonges unto them: this has her Majesty delivered in
speech, and it is provided for by her highness laws. All ye fear God do
thank him for, and are glad of this, and do therefore think very hardly of
corrupt me^ which will not be restrained and reformed either by Gods and the
Queens both laws and speech, or by the woorthye example of Constantinus, or
by the testimonye of their own consciences, which cannot but both accuse and
condemn them,

They which present me^ to ecclesiastical livings are called patrons, that is
to say, defenders of ye church: to keep back either all or part of ye church
liuinges is not to be a shield to cover the Church and the Minister, but a
sword to cut them, and therefore they may justly be called the scholars of
Lysimachus the Churchrobber which was slain for his villainies. 2. Machab.
chap. 4. ver. 42.
If a patron prefer a minister for monye and corruption, he must needs
think hardly and vily of that minister, and the minister likewise of that
patron: for who can like a minister when he feels his corruption, and what
minister though he fish with a silver hook, will account of yt patrons
friendship which he pays so dear for: and what good men can like of either
him that preferres or is preferred in this sort: will they not judge them to
be strange market men? Ierohoam made Priests of the lowest of the people
which were not of the sons of Leui, 1. Kings chap 12. ver. 31. and chap. 13.
ver. 33.
but he did it for monye. For the like respect, I fear, many have been
preferred, which cannot be allowed for Prophets because they never were the
sons of the Prophets.

I have handeled these points, I trust for the good of all* that they which
are guilty of this sin may make restitution and leave the practice of it,
and that they which are not guilty of it, may take good heed that they fall
not into that sink of corruption. If any be offended with this I have set
down, it is their fault and not mine: for the seed which I have sown is very
good, but the ground which receives it not, is very bad: but my comfort is
this, that I have pleased almighty God and his servants in this godly labor,
though this certain truth be a shut book and as a sealed letter unto
graceles Cormorantes.

Question.

Whether lands and pensions given for the maintenance of Idolatry, may and
ought to be converted to the service of God?

Answer.

They may and ought: for if me^ should convert them to their private use, it
might be justly thought, that in abolishing superstition private gain is the
mark which is louelled at, and not the promoting of Gods true religion. This
is Augustines judgment in a notable and learned Epistle, Aug. epist. 154* ad
Publicolam.
and deserves to be greatly liked of.

To the Reader.
SInce the printing of the first part of my Catechism, I have bin earnestly
dealt with to write somewhat of the Sacraments. The request was very equal,
and I have yielded to it, as appears by these Treatises. The course I have
taken in them is plain and short: If they shall profit such as have need of
instruction, I will thank God very humbly for it, and hereafier, by Gods
assistance, set down another short Treatise of the Scripture, and the Church
and Confession, for their further benefit. These points are weighty, but
necessary arguments to be handled, yet very breesly: because the memories of
the simple are very short and long discourses are not easily digested by
them. God give us grace to increase in the knowledge of his truth, and to frame
our lives accordingly, to his glory and our comfort, through Jesus Christ.

A Table of such points as are contained in the first part of this Treatise.
1 What a Sacrament is. 2 There are but two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords
supper: the other five which went under the name of Sacraments, are no
Sacraments. 3 It is not in any man's power to make a Sacrament. 4 Whether the
Sacraments of the old and new testament are all one, and how they differ. 5
The Sacraments must not be administered at all adventures to every one. 6 The
sign must not be confounded with the thing fignified in the Sacrament. 7 The
Sacraments are not to be esteemed better for the worthiness of the minister, or
the worse for his unworthiness. 8 The Sacramental signs offer grace unto all,
but do not of their own nature confer grace unto all that do receive them.
9 Why almighty God would have the external signs in the Sacraments, to consist
of very simple and usual things. 10 The Sacraments are not naked and bare
signs. 11 The Sacraments must have the word of God annexed to them. 12 Gods
Church has need of Sacraments, so long as it is in this world. 13 The
Sacraments are highly to be esteemed. 14 The contempt of the Sacraments is
very dangerous. 15 The Sacraments during the time of the action of Baptism
and of the Lords supper are Sacraments, but after the action is ended, they are
no Sacraments. 16 What good we receive by the Sacraments.
A Treatise of the Sacraments.
1 What a Sacrament is.

A Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace.

2 There are but two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper: The other
five which went under the name of Sacraments, that is to say, Matrimony,
Orders, Pennaunce, Extreme unction and Confirmation are no Sacraments.

Saint Paul proving that the Israelites were equal unto the^ of Corinth, 1.
Cor. chap. 10. ver. 2. 3.
and consequently of us in the external signs of Gods favor, names only
Baptism and the Lords Supper: wherein he had dealt very strangely, if of
seven Sacraments he had left out five.

Two things are especially and jointly required unto every necessary Sacrament
of the Church. First a se^sible outward element: Secondly the word of
institution: the element in Baptism is water: the elements in the Lords
Supper are bread and wine: the word of institution in baptism, is that which
is pronounced by the minister: I baptize thee in the name of the Father, of the
Son, Math. chap. 28. ver. 19.
and of the holy Ghost. the word of institution in ye Lords supper, is: 1.
Cor. chap. 11. ver. 23.24.25.
The Lord Jesus the same night that he was betrayed took bread, and when he
had given thanks he brake it and said, take, eat, this is my body which is
broken for you, this do ye in remembrance of me. After the same manner also he
took the cup when he had supped, saying, this cup is the new Testament in my
blood, this do as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me.

Matrimony, orders, and penance have ye word of God but no outward element.
Extreme unction and Confirmation have neither word nor element.

Objection for Matrimony.

For this cause shall a man leave father Ephesians. chap. 5. ver. 31.3^
and mother and shall cleave to his wife and they twain shall be one flesh:
this is a great mystery, yt is to say, Sacrament. as the Church of Rome
translateth it, therefore. Matrunonie is a Sacrament.

Answer.

If by this word (Mystery) we understand a Sacrament, 2. These. chap. 2. ver. 7.
Ephe chap. 5. ver. 32.
iniquity shall be a Sacrament, for ye Apostle makes mention of ye Mystery of
iniquity: Besides, this Mystery pertayneth not to the carnal marriage of man
and wife, but to the spiritual marriage of Christ and the Church: S. Paul's
words do warrant this: this is (says he) a great secret, but I speak
concerning. Christ and the Church.

Objection for Matrimony.

Marriage is a sign of a holy thing, therefore it is a Sacrament.

Answer.

The argument folowes not: for if to be a sign of a holy thing be
sufficient to make a Sacrament, I confess marriage is a Sacrament because it
resembles the conjunction of Christ and his Church: but by this means we are
like to have more then seven sacraments: for then Christ's washing of his
disciples feet, his embracing of young children in his arm, and almost all
his actions, because they are signs of holy things must go for Sacraments.

Objection for extreme unction.

Is any man sick among you: let him call for the Elders of the Church, Iam.
chap. 5. verse 14.15.
and let the^ pray for him and anoint him with oil in the name of the Lord,
and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up.
etc.

The Apostle sets down a commandment in these words (let him call for
the Elders of the Church) and the element in these words (anoint him with oil,
and a promise aunexed to the element in these words (and the Lord shall raise
him up), therefore extreme unction is a Sacrament.

Answer.

I grant there is a commandment, an element, and a promise, but because that
commandment is not given to us nor that promise belongs to us, anointing
with oil which was used in the Primitive Church, must not in that case be used
of us, and therefore neither is nor must be accounted a Sacrament for us.
Circumcision had the word of institution and a sensible outward element, but
because che commandment and promise was given to the Israelites and not to
us, it was a Sacrament to them, but is not so to us. Secondly the Apostle James
speaks of an extraordinary gift of healing by anointing with oil, as the
Evangelist Mark reports: Mark. chap. 6. verse. 13.
which extraordinary gift of healing being ceased many years past, what
extreme folly is it to retain annoynting with oil, which was a sign of that
gift. Thirdly the anointing with oil used in the Primitive Church is very
unlike the extreme vnctio^ of the Popish Church. Saint James would have all
sick folks to be anointed: his words are plain (is any sick etc.) The
Papists do anoint them only which are at deaths door. Saint James promises
recovery of health to the sick which were anointed in the Prinitiue Church,
which promise was accordingly performed: his words are manifest (and the
Lord shall raise him up): the Papists may promise recovery to them who^ they
anoint, but they are not in case to perform it, for they have not the gift of
healing.

If they would answer they have it, they might be justly convinced of great,
both vanity and cruelty: vanity, for vaunting of that which all the world
sees they have not, cruelty, for not curing those sick men and women whom
they see to die presently after their anointing. Lastly, the anointing in S.
James time and curing of the sick extraordinarily by that means and godly
prayers, did make greatly for the confirmation and increase of religion at the
first planting of the Gospel, Acts. chap. 5. verse. 15. Act. chap. 19 verse 12.
as Peter's shadow, and Paul's Napkinnes did. The extreme unction of the
Papists neither cures sick men nor increases religion, but nourishes
superstition and proves gaynefull to the popish priests.

3 It is not in any ma^s power to make a Sacrament.

The Israelites had two Sacraments, Gene. cha. 17 verse. 10.11. Exodus cha. 12
verse 3. Mat. cha. 21 verse 25.
Circumcision and the passover: God himself was the author of them both.

Christ asking the Pharisees whether John's Baptism were from heaven, does give
us very clearly to understand, that it was not to be allowed for a sacrament,
unless it had bin commanded of almighty God.

The Apostle remembering that by one spirit we are all baptized into one body,
1. Cor. cha. 12 verse 13.
does manifestly teach us, that the Sacraments are not the work of any man
but of the spirit of God.

Saint Paul does not take upon him to institute the Lords Supper in the
Church of Corinthe, 1. Cor. cha. 11 verse 23.
but (for the reformation of such abuses as had crept into that holy Sacrament)
delivers that to them which he received of the Lord.

The name of the Lords Supper does teach us that Jesus Christ was the
author of it.

A Sacrament can never be without promise of salvation: all men of the world
can not of them selves promise any thing to us of our salvation: Therefore they
neither can nor ought of them selves to institute or erect any Sacrament.

4 Whether the sacraments of the old and new Testament are all one, and how
they differ.

Circumcision was to the Israelites a Sacrament of regeneration: Baptism is so
to us. By Circumcision, the Israelites were incorporated into gods visible
Church: so are we by Baptism. Circumcision was to them a sign of Gods
covenant: so is Baptism to us.

The Paschall Lamb was to the Israelites a sacrament of yt immaculate Lamb
Christ Jesus, by whose blood their redemption should be wrought: the bread
and wine in the Lords Supper is a Sacrament to us of Christ's body and blood
which is given and shed for us.

The Israelites did eat the same spiritual meat which we do, 1. Cor.
chap. 10. verse 2.
because there was one and the self same substance of their Sacraments and
ours, that is to say, the partaking of Jesus Christ unto life everlasting.

The Sacraments of the Israelites (touching the external signs) do differ
from ours, but theirs and ours are a like if we consider the things signified
by them: For in their Sacraments was expressed the death of Christ which was
then to come: in ours is expressed the death of Christ already past.

The new Sacraments instituted of Christ are plainer and clearer then the
Sacraments under the Law, as the Gospel is playner and clearer then ye Law,
but the things signified in and by their sacraments and ours, are not
contained more in our Sacraments then in theirs.

5 The Sacraments must not be administered at all adventure to every one.

The Passover was one of the Sacraments amongst the Israelites. Exodus chap.
12. verse. 48.
It was not lawefull for any that was uncircumcised, to eat of it.

It is not lawful to give the precious treasure of Gods word to them which do
contemn it, Mat. chap. 7. verse 6.
therefore it is as unlawful to give unto them the Sacraments which are the
seals of the word.

Philip the Emperor offered himself to be partaker of the prayers in a
public assembly: Eusebius. lib. 6. chap. 34.
the governor of that Church refused to admit him, until by confession of his
sins he satisfied the Church, and had joined himself to the penitentiaries
in the face of the congregation. The Emperor according to his duty yielded
his obedience most willingly. If the Emperor was repelled for a time from the
public prayers, it is a clear case that he should not at that time have bin
admitted to the holy Sacrament.

The Emperor Theodosius after yt he had defiled himself with shedding innocent
blood in the city of Thessalonica, Theod. lib. 5. cha. 17. and 18
was not admitted by Ambrose ye Bishop of Mediolanum either to enter into the
Church, or to present him self to the partaking of the holy Sacrament, until
Theodosius by a notable confession of his sin had satisfied and reconciled
himself to the Church of God.

6 The sign must not be confounded with the thing signified in the Sacrifice.

For not eueryone yt receives the sign is partaker of the thing signified:
This is clear in Simon Magus for Baptism, and in the traitor Judas for the
Lords Supper.

The water of Baptism is one thing, the blood of Christ signified by the water
is another thing: The water purges our bodies, Christ's blood purges our
souls: without partaking of Baptism (so that contempt be absent) we may be
saved, without Christ's blood we can never be saved.

The bread of the Sacrament is one thing, the body of Christ is another, the
bread enters only into the bodily mouth, Christ's flesh enters only into
the soul: without eating the bread of the sacrament (so that contempt be
abse^t) we may be saved, without eating of Christ's flesh we can never be saved.

It is a miserable bondage of the soul, Aug. de doct. Christ. lib. 5. cap. 5.
to take the signs (in the Sacraments) for the things signified by them.

I confess that the name of the thing signified is given sometime to the
sign. Gene. cha. 17 verse. 10.
Circumcision is said to be the covenant between God and Abraham, when
notwithstanding it was not the covenant but the sign of Gods covenant. The
Lamb is called the Lords Passover, Exodus cha. 1^ verse 11.
but the Lamb was not the passage it self (of the Israelites out of Egypt)
but remembered unto them the benefit of that great deliverance of theirs out of
Egypt. The bread in the Lords Supper, is called the body of Christ, Aug.
contra Adimant. cap. 12.
but it was only a figure and sign of Christ's body: and yet the worthy
receiver which bringes faith and repentance with him to the Lords Supper, is
partaker as of the bread and the wine, so of the body and blood of the Lord
Jesus.

7 The Sacraments are not to be esteemed better for the worthiness of the
minister, or the worse for his unworthiness.

Jesus Christ him self baptized not, but his disciples, John. chap. 4. verse
2. John chap. 4. ver. 1. and chap. 3. verse 22.
and yet the baptism ministered by the disciples was Christ's Baptism. If that
be Christ's baptism which is ministered by man, whatsoever the minister be,
baptism still remains to be Christ's baptism.

We are baptized in the name not of any creature but of the holy Trinity:
Cypr. de bapt. Christi.
therefore whether Judas or Paul do baptize, Christ does wash and put away
our sins.

As gold is gold of whom soever it be given or received, so is the Sacrament
always a Sacrament whether it be given to us by good or bad ministers.

The Sacraments are Gods ordinance: man's lewdness can not pervert the nature
of Gods ordinance.

The Anabaptists in our time do think that baptism is defiled by the
lewdness of the minister. The Donatistes in Augustins time did esteem of the
worthiness of the Sacrament by the worthiness of the minister. These are
gross and palpable errors.

It is a clear truth in divinity that the Sacraments are neither better nor
worse for the goodness or the badnesse of the ministers, yet unlearned and
lewd ministers must either labor to be better furnished with learning and
honesty for the good of the Church, or else be removed to the less hurt of
the Church.

8 The Sacramental signs offer grace unto all, but do not of their own
nature confer grace unto all that do receive them.

Many have been partakers of the Sacraments, which notwithstanding were very
ungracious. Many of the Jews received Circumcision of the flesh without
Circumcision of the heart. Simon Magus received Baptism but not regeneration:
Audas received the bread of the supper, but not the body of Christ.

The Sacraments do bring to pass that which they do figure, Aug. de bapt.
paruulo.
only in the elect.

We neither do nor may attribute forgiveness of sins to the external element
otherwise then instrumentally. We must by no means say that grace is contained
essentially in the Sacraments, as water in a vessel, or as medicine in a box,
but the Sacraments are said to contain grace, because they besignes of grace.

It is a certain truth that the Sacraments do always retain their nature.
Tit chap. 3. verse 5. 1. Cor. cha. 10 verse 16.
Baptism is a lauer of regeneration. The Lords Supper is the communion of
Christ's body and blood, though no spark of faith remained in the world: but
we receive not the grace which is offered by y^ Sacraments, unless we bring
faith to the partaking of the Sacraments.

If any ask me, why the infantes of the faithful which have not faith are
presented to baptism, I answer that though they have not faith, yet they are
under Gods covenant, whereof Baptism is to us a sure warrant and confirmation.

Objection.

The Church is cleansed by the washing of water through the word, Ephe chap. 2.
verse 26.
therefore Baptism does confer salvation.

Answer.

The Apostle ioynes together the word of life and the washing of water, as if
he should say, by the Gospel the message of our washing and sanctification is
delivered unto us, and by Baptism, the same message is sealed up unto us.

9 Why almighty God would have the external signs in the Sacraments to
consiste of very simple and usual things.

Almighty God would have them consist of most simple and usual things, First
that we should not hang upon or cleave unto these earthly things, but lift up
our hearts unto the Lord: Secondly, least we which incline to much by our
corrupt nature to superstition, should abuse the outward signs. Lastly,
because he would bar none, no not the poorest from being partakers of the
holy Sacraments. This course did the Lord take in the time of ye Iawe: they
which were not able to offer unto him, Leuit. chap. 5. verse. 7.11.
Oxen, Sheep, Lambs, etc. did offer unto him Pigions and turtle Doves. If
their ability served not for these, they offered a little meal.

The outward signs in the Sacraments are very mean and base things if we
look on them with the eyes of our flesh, but they are most precious and
singular Iewelles if we look on them with the eyes of our faith, and do
esteem them according to the Lords institution.

10 The Sacraments are not naked and bare signs.

In Baptism, ye efficacy of Gods spirit, is present to wash and regenerate
those, which appertain unto God.

The Lords Supper is a spiritual banquet, 1. Cor. chap. 10. ver. 3.4.16
wherein Gods children are truly and in deed fed with the body and blood of
Christ. The apostle calls the Sacrament spiritual meat and spiritual
drink, and a little after in the same chapter, he calls the cup of
blessing which we bless, the communion of the blood of Christ, and the bread
which we break, the communion of the body of Christ.

The Sacraments are not bare signs, because we have the Lords institution:
they are seals of righteousness and tokens of grace, they are sure warrantes of
Gods promises, whereby God binds himself unto us and we likewise stand
bound to his Majesty, so that God is our God and we are his people.

11 The Sacraments must have the word of God annexed to them.

For the word of institution is the life of the Sacrament.

The Sacraments are seals of Gods word. Romans chap. 4. verse 11.
Therefore where the word of intution is not, there is no place left to the
Sacraments. There is no use of that seal, and in deed it deserves not the
name of a seal, which is put to an unwritten either paper or parchment.

Take away the word (of institution) and what is the water (of Baptism) but
water. Aug. Tract. 80. in Johan.


The word of institution is added to the element and it becomes a Sacrament.

12 Gods Church has need of Sacraments, so long as it is in the world.

The faith of Gods children is true, that is to say not counterfaite, but their
faith is not perfect in this life. The Sacraments are pillars of our faith.

Saint Paul has these words: as often as ye shall eat this bread and drink
this cup, 1. Cor cha. 11 verse 26.
ye show the Lords death till he come: whereby it is manifest, that until
Christ's second coming, we have both need and use of the Sacraments,
whereof we shall have neither use nor need in the life to come.

13 The Sacraments are higly to be esteemed.

The Sacraments are pillars of our faith: they are glasses wherein we may
behold the riches of Gods grace which he reaches unto us, they are the Lords
couenauntes: therefore they contain promises, whereby our consciences are
lifted up to the hope of eternal life. Gods children receive great benefit by
baptism, Galath. chap. 3. ver. 27. 1. Cor. chap. 10. ver. 16.
for all that are baptized into Christ have put on Christ: and by ye Lords
supper, because ye bread which we break is the communion of the body of
Christ, and the cup of blessing is the communion of the blood of Christ.

If the Sacraments are highly to be esteemed, what shall we think of Pope
John the 23. for baptizing and being godfather to the great bell of Laterane
in Rome, and of the popish sort for giving out yt we have nothing but bare
bread and bare wine in the holy communion.

The Sacraments are highly to be accounted of, and honored as holy
mysteries, but they must not be honored with divine honor.

14 The contempt of the Sacraments is very dangerous.

The contempt of Circumcision which was one of Gods sacraments was grievously
punished. Genesis chap. 17 ver. 14. Exodus chap. 4. ver. 25.
The Angel would have killed Moses, because his son was not circumcised.

Negligence in keeping the passover, Nomb. chap. 9. ver. 13.
was grievously punished.

It is a common and a very sound speech, that not the want, but ye contempt of
haptisme brings condemnation.

The Messalian heretics did condemn, both external signs and Sacraments.

Objection.

The Israelites were not circumcised in the wilderness by ye space of 40.
years. Iosue chap. 5. ver. 7.


Answer.

God commanded the Israelites to go on continually in their journey. If they
had been circumcised, they had not bin able by reason of the sorenes of their
bodies, Iosue. chap. 5. ver. 8.
to do as God commanded them: so that Gods latter commandment, was a
dispensation to the^ for the omitting and deferring of circumcision.

Objection.

The Apostles would not press the Gentiles to be circumcised. Acts. chap. 15
ver. 24.28.


Answer.

Circumcision after Christ's ascensio^ was not a necessary Sacrament, but a
thing indifferent, that is to say, which might for a time either be used or
omitted. If it had been a necessary sacrament in the Primitive Church, Titus
should have been circumcised, Gala. chap. 2. ver. 3.
as Timothy was. Besides, circumcision after Christ's ascension might not be
thrust upon the Gentiles, Acts. chap. 16. ver. 3.
because Moses must give place to Christ Jesus.

15 The Sacraments, during the time of the action of Baptism and of the Lords
Supper, are Sacraments, but after the action is ended, they are no
Sacraments.

The elements in ye sacrament, during the time of the action which they serve
for, are true signs and pledges of the things signified by the^: for in
baptism, Christ's blood is propounded to us as a lauer: with which blood we
being washed, are more and more graft into Christ, and buried together with
Christ: In the Lords supper, Christ's body and blood is given to us, 1. Cor.
chap. 10. ver. 16.
and that by distinct and several signs (I mean the bread and the wine) as
our true meat and true drink unto life everlasting.

When the action of baptism and the Lords supper is ended, the water in the
font is no Sacrament, but simple and common water, and the bread and wine in
the Lords supper, are not the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, but common
bread and common wine: Therefore their fault is great, which (after the action
of the Sacrament is ended) either reserve any part of the elements for
Sacraments, or do think that a mowse, dog, or such like, tasting or eating
of the bread (after the Lords supper is ended) do receive the Sacrament:
whereas it is a certain truth, that if either mowse or dog should eat of
the bread in the Lords Supper, during the time of the holy action, they
neither do receive, nor can be said to receive the Sacrament at any hand.
For, seeing the Sacraments are seals of Gods promises, touching eternal life,
it is certain that no such seal is or can be given unto, or received by the^,
to whom Gods promise of eternal life in no wise does appertain.

16 What good we receive by the Sacraments.

We are put in mind by the Sacraments of Christ's inestimable benefits, which
by the lauer of water purges us in baptism, and by his flesh feeds, and by
his blood refreshes our souls in the Lords supper: Our faith is confirmed
and increased by the Sacraments: we are by them stirred up, to perform great
duty and thankfulness to almighty God: we are severed by the Sacraments (as
by a partition wall) from all such, as are not entered into the profession of
Christianity, and we are by the Sacraments more surely lincked together
amongst our felues.

A table of such points as are contained in the second part of this Treatise.
1 What Baptism is* 2 The Baptism of infants is very lawful. 3 It is not
lawful for women or private men to baptize, for only the minister must do it.
4 All that dye before Baptism are not damned, because we are Christians before
we are baptized. 5 Baptism must not be deferred to^ long. 6 Baptism must not
be iterated, that is to say, they which are once baptized, must not be baptized
again. 7 Whether those children which are known to be base borne, are to be
admitted to Baptism. 8 What time is fit for the administration of Baptism. 9
What is required of them which are already baptized, when they are of years.
A Treatise of Baptism.
1 What Baptism is.

Baptism, is a sacrament of regeneration consisting of water and the spirit
by the word of God, whereby we have forgiveness of sins and everlasting life
according to Christ's promise.

2 The Baptism of Infantes is very lawful.

The Infants of the Israelites were circumcised when they were eight days old:
Genesis chap. 17 ver. 12. and cha. 21. ver. 4
our baptism is come into ye place of their circumcision. I confess that we
are not tied to the eight day for the baptism of our infa^ts as ye Israelites
were for the circu^cising of theirs: neither are women children to be barred
from baptism amongst us, because their women children were not circumcised:
and yet their women children were partakers of Gods promise: for under ye
mankind all were consecrated.

The children of the faithful are holy, 1. Cor. chap. 7. ver. 14. Acts. chap.
2. ver. 39.
they are under Gods covenant (which covenant is contained in these words, I
will be thy God and the God of thy seed) therefore they may not be barred from
baptism which is a seal of Gods covenant.

Objection.

He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved: Mark. chap. 16. ver. 16.
therefore none are to be admitted to baptism before they believe: which
infantes do not.

Answer.

Christ speaks only of those which are capable of his doctrine and which
were before alients from his Church. Such neither were nor may be presented or
admitted to baptism before they believe in Christ Jesus. This is manifest in
the Samaritanes, and the noble man of Ethiopia, Acts. chap. 8. ver. 12.37.38.
and chap. 16. ver. 32.33.
and in the Iayler of Philippos, and in a Jew baptized of late years in
London: all which were taught and believed in Christ, before they were admitted
to baptism: so that Christ's words do no more bar Christian infantes from
baptism, because they believe not, 2. These. chap. 3. ver. 10.
then Paul's do from meat because they cannot labor.

3 It is not lawful for women or private men to Baptize, for only the minister
must do it.

No man may take honor to himself but he which is called as Aaron was: Heb.
chap. 5. ver. 4.
to administer either the word or sacrament, is a singular honor in the
church of God: therefore etc. If answer be made that baptism is necessary,
I grant it to be true, when it may be administered according to the order
which God has appointed. Gods order is that a public minister shall do it.
Saul had great reasons in man's judgment for his sacrificing in Samuels
absence, 1. Sam. chap. 13. ver. 11. 2. Sam. chap. 6. ver. 6.^.
and Vzzah from staying the Arc which was otherwise like to have fallen: but
because they took upon the^ that, whereunto God had not called the^, they
received a just reward of their rashness.

The Sacraments are seals of the word: Math. chap. 28. ver. 19.
our savior Christ joined them together, when he sent forth his Apostles,
and prescribed a form of Baptism in these words, go and teach all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the father and the son and the holy Ghost. The
self same men are authorized by Christ to baptize, which are authorized to
preach, I mean yt Apostles, whom the public minister succeedes in preaching
the word and administering the Sacraments. This difference, is notwithstanding
between the Apostles and us: they were called immediately by Christ himself,
so are not we: they had Gods gifts miraculously powered upon them, so have not
we: they had all the world for their plough land, so have not we: seeing the
Apostleship was long ago at an end. If the Apostleship be ended, what so much
as color of privilege has the Pope for erecting a new Apostleship, and
sending heardes of susperstitious Jesuits and droues of Massing priests into
this realm of England. I will say nothing of the religion delivered by these
new Apostles, because their Apostleship and doctrine have not Christ's but the
Popes hand and seal to confirm them.

The Pharisees did think it unlawful, and that justly, that any one without
calling should administer baptism: their words to John Baptist, are manifest.
John. chap. 1. ver. 25.
If thou art not Christ nor Elias etc. why do thou baptize: as if they
should say unto John, thou art not a public minister, therefore thou may
not baptize. The Pharisees deserve commendation for not allowing a private man
to baptize, but they were fowly deceived in taking John Baptist to be a
private man, for John Baptist was that Elias which the Prophet Malachie and our
Savior Christ spoke of, and therefore no private man as the Pharisees imagined.

The administration of baptism by women, Epiph. lib. 1. cont. haeres. Tertul.
de prescript. aduer. haeret.
is a branch of Marcious heresies, and is condemned by Epiphanius and
Tertullian.

To say that either a midwife or a lay man, as we call him, may administer the
Sacrament, because the minister is not then in place, is as if we should allow
a private man to condemn a murderer. because the magistrate is not then at
hand to do it.

Objection.

Sephora, Exodus chap. 4. ver. 25.
Moses wife did circumcise her son.

Answer.

Sephoraes fact was unorderly and confused, Exodus chap. 4. ver. 25.26.
for she did it, first, in a sudden and angry fit, as appears in the text:
secondly, in the presence of Moses, which is sufficient to improve her doing,
even by the Papists judgment, which think it unlawful for a woman to
baptize, when any man is in place.

4 All that dye before baptism are not damned, because we are Christians
before we are baptized.

Abraham was justified before he was circumcised: Romans chap. 4. ver. 11. Acts.
chap. 2. ver. 38.39.
otherwise circumcision could not have been called by Saint Paul a seal of
the righteousness of faith.

Gods promise belongs to Christian Infa^ts before their baptism (otherwise
baptism which is a seal of this promise should be denied the^): therefore they
are children of the promise and consequently Christians before they are
baptized.

If Infantes dying before baptism are damned, two gross absurdities would
follow: first the salvation of our infants, should rest not upon Gods covenant
which is the ground work of our salvation, but upon ye seal which is put to
the covenant: secondly, the salvation and damnation of infants should consist
in ye diligence and negligence of their parents etc.

Baptism was ministered in Thessalia only on Easter day, Socrat. lib. 5. cap.
22. Tertul. de Baptis.
and in Carthage in Tertullia^s time only at Easter and Whit sontide. If the
infantes of the faithful be not Christians before their baptism, what shall we
say of the infants of Thessalia and Carthage, which dyed before Easter.

The Papists themselves when they baptize one of years, ask these questions
of him before his baptism: do thou believe, do thou ^enounce the Devil?
the party answers, I believe, I renounce the devil: whereby it is clear, yt
he either is indeed, or at the least is esteemed of them to be a Christian
before he is baptized, and so consequently admitted by them to the partaking
of that sacrament.

Plain men of the country, do mark only those sheep for their own, which
they either know or at the least do take to be their own. Baptism is one of
Gods seals: The church does only mark those with this seal, who^ they
either know, or at the least do take before the administration of baptism, to
be Gods la^bes and sheep. If they which are offered to baptism, are Gods
sheep and lambs before their baptism: it is a clear case yt they are
Christians before they are baptized, and consequently, yt baptism is not the
cause but a seake of our conjunction with almighty God.

Objection.

The uncircumcised man child in whose flesh, Genesis chap. 17 ver. 14
the foreskinne is not circumcised, even that person shall be cut off, from
his people, because he has broken my covenant.

Answer.

If any of the Israelites were either principalles or accessaries to the
omitting of their own circumcision, they deserved to be cut off, otherwise not,
unless we will condemn the child for the fault of his Parents, which is
barbarous cruelty. The children of the Hebrews, if they dyed the fifth or
sixth day after their birth, were not under conde^natio^, Genesis chap. 17. ver.
12.
for the eight day was the day of circumcision.

Objection.

Except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, John. chap. 3. ver. 5.
he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

Answer.

If we understand this of baptism, what shall we say of the Emperor
Vale^tinian which went to Ambrose the bishop of Medtolanum to be baptized, and
was slain in his journey before he came to Ambrose: shall we condemn him for
want of baptism, because Christ said to Nichodemus except a man be borne etc?
This dealing were very peremptory. If answer be made, that Valentinians
desire of Baptism is a sufficient defense, I grant it was so: and, if the
Emperors desire keep him out of the compass of condemnation, why may not
Gods promise be sufficient to deliver the infantes of the faithful from
condemnation if they dye unbaptized: for not the want but contempt of Baptism
does condemn us. Besides, our Savior Christ's speech was with Nicodemus,
which was of good years, and might have at his pleasure the use both of water
and a minister for this godly purpose.

Question.

If the Infantes of Christians be under Gods covenant before they be baptized,
their Baptism seems to be superfluous: why are they baptized:

Answer.

Gods commandment must be fulfilled. He commanded both circumcision and
baptism, and punished ye contempt of circu^cisio^ sharply in ye Israelites,
and will punish the contempt of baptism grievously in us. Besides, Gods
promise which pertayneth to our infantes, Acts. chap. 2. ver. 38.39.
must be confirmed with the outward seal of Baptism, ye we may be always
myndfull of Gods promise. Lastly, the godly prayers of the minister and of the^
which offer the child to baptism, do greatly profit the infant, and the
congregation which is then present at the administration of baptism, receives
some instruction touching their salvation.

5 Baptism must not be deferred too long.

Baptism is a Sacrament of our regeneration: by Baptism we enter and are
graft into Gods visible Church: Gods covenant with us and our children is
sealed by Baptism, both in us and our children. Therefore etc.

Baptism contains in it the first profession of Christian religion: If it be
deferred too long, when it may be godly come by, it draws the parents and
friends of the infant into suspicion either of Atheism or Anabaptisme, and
besides, breeds great offense.

Gregory Nazianzene was a Bishops son: Orat. in san^^. baptis.
he was not baptized before he was of good years: it was a gross fault in
that time, and Nazianzene him self inueigheth sharply against the deferring of
Baptism.

Nectarius was appointed Bishop of Sozo^. li. cap. ^
Constantinople before he was baptized. Nectarius was a good man, but this
deferring of baptism commendes neither him nor the Bishops of yt time.

Constantinus deferred his baptism until his dying day. Eusebius. lib. 4. de
vita Constantini.
He was a worthy Emperor, but this fact of his, can not be justified.

Question.

What if by reason of differring of baptism, the infant die unbaptized?

Answer.

It is a gross fault in the childs friends, and must be punished with great
severity: but the infant deserves no condemnation for this at Gods hands,
neither shutting from Christian burial at the Churches hands: for not the
want but contempt of baptism does condemn us.

6 Baptism must not be iterated, that is to say, they which are once baptized
must not be baptized again. 2. Chr. chap. 30. verse 9. and chap. 35. verse 1.


The Israelites which revolted from Gods religion in the reign of Ezechias and
Josias, were not circumcised the second time: only, they testified their
vnfaygned repentance and returning to the Lord by celebration of the Passover.

Baptism is a Sacrament of regeneration, regeneration is the mystery of this
Sacrament: the mystery of this Sacrament cannot be iterated (because they
which are altogether fallen from grace cannot be renewed): Heb. chap. 6. verse
4.5.6.
Therefore the Sacrament of regeneration may not be iterated.

They which are baptized either of popish or other heretics (which in their
baptism do add to the element the word of institution) are not baptized into
the name of any creature but of the holy Trinity: thefore they have received
true baptism (as touching the substance of baptism) and consequently not man's
but Gods baptism: and therefore need not any second baptism. If it were
Gods baptism, it contained in it, promise of forgiveness of sins,
mortification of the flesh, quickening of the spirit, and partaking of Christ.
etc.

Question.

Seeing that we sin daily, and that our sins are done away by Baptism,
why should we not desire, and present our selves to be very often baptized.

Answer.

If the efficacy of Baptism did reach only to the sins committed before
Baptism, as for example, in young children, to origmall sin, and in those wc
are of years, both to their original and actual sins, which went before
their baptism: I could like well of them which for the clear washing away
of their sins either deferred their Baptism unto their dying day, which was
gross ignorance, or of such which in our time for the like reason would
desire to be often Baptized, which is a palpable error. It is a certain
truth in divinity, that our sins committed after Baptism do not abolish
our bap, tisme: For Christ's purity is offered to us in Baptism: which
purity of Christ, because it is always in force, is not rased out by any
sins of ours, but cleanses us from all filthiness whatsoever. The Galathians
revolted from that truth which Paul had taught the^, Gal. 3. 5.6. chap.
and were corrupt in their lives: these were great sins after they had
received Baptism: Paul notwithstanding reuiueth their faith by that Baptism
which, before, they had received. Gal. chap. 3. verse. 27.
Baptism must not be shut up in straighter rome then Christ himself, seeing
that in Baptism we put on Christ: Romans chap. 6. verse. 1.2.3.
and the efficacy of Baptism, is not less then the efficacy of Christ's
death, unto which Baptism has a singular respect.

To be once regenerate and to have once entered into Christ's Church is
sufficient, neither is any of Gods elect cast out at any time: for he that is
once indewed with the spirit of sanctification, is always endewed with the
same spirit of sanctification. My reasons are these.

The gifts and calling of God, Romans chap. 11 verse 29. 1. Pet. chap. 1 verse
23.
are without repentance.

The word of God whereby we are regenerate, is immortal seed, that is to
say, never dies in his children. The shield of faith may be wounded, but it
can not be stricken through.

Whosoever is borne of God sins not, 1. Ioh. chap. 3 verse. 9. and cap. 5.
ver. 18
for his seed remains in him, neither can he sin, because he is borne of
God. The Apostle John means not that sin dwells not in Gods children, but
that it has not dominion over them: and therefore Paul says not, let not
sin dwell, Romans chap. 6. verse 12. 2. Sam chap. 11. verse. 4.15. 24. 2. Sam.
chap. 12. verse. 13.
but let not sin reign in your mortal bodies.

David dealt very strangely with Vrias and with the Lords army: his faith
seemed to be quenched, but he was not clean spoiled of all sparks of grace:
there remained as it were, a quick coal in the ashes: other wise the Prophet
Nathan had not so easily and speedily awaked him.

Christ's resurrection is a notable pillar of our faith, and the very lock and
keep of all religion. John chap. 20. verse. 25.
The Apostle Thomas doubted so much of it, that he uttered these words: except
I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the printe
of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe it. This
sin of Thomas was so gross, that it might he fealt with the fingers, and yet
faith was not clean extinguished in him, John chap. 20 verse 28.
as appears by his answer to Christ, my Lord and my God.

They which think that they are utterly void of Gods spirit in whom the
fruits of the spirit do not always appear, are like unto the^ which think
there is no sire where there is no flame, and that trees are dead in winter,
because they bring forth neither fruit nor leaves in winter.

7 Whether those children which are known to be base borne are to be
admitted to baptism.

The children which are base borne amongst us, are not to be shut from
baptism for the parents sin, if such as fear God present them to baptism,
and promise faithfullye to see them brought up in the fear of God.

Augustine had a base son, but he was baptized, Aug. confess. lib. 9. cap. 6.
and very Christianly brought up.

8 What time is fit for the administration of baptism.

Circumcision was administered the eight day after the child's birth: Gene. cha.
17. verse 12. and chap. 21. verse 4. Luke chap. 1. verse. 59. and cha. 2. ve. 21
at that time Isaac, John Baptist, and Jesus Christ, were circumcised. If the
Sabbath was the eight day after the child's birth, he was circumcised on the
Sabbath day. John chap. 7. verse 23.

That time is fittest for the administration of Baptism, wherein care is had
that the infants die not unbaptized, if it may be done without breach of Gods
order, and yet, that their superstition, which tie salvation to baptism, at no
hand be favored. The Lords day is a very fit day for Baptism, eue^ in the
presence of the congregation.

9 What is required of them which are already baptized when they are of
years.

It is required, first, that they believe aright: secondlye, that they mortify
the body of sin: Lastly, that they walk in newness of life: a principal
branch whereof, is, to be at unity with the godly. One God is father of all,
Ephe. chap. 4 verse 4.5.6.
one Christ has redeemed us all, one holy ghost does sanctify us all, one
faith and one baptism is common to us all, and there is but one hope of our
calling, I mean, everlasting life: therefore it becomes us to be linked
together in the fear of God. Solomon says, that a threefolde cord can not
easily be broken: Eccle. chap. 4 verse. 12.
if this sixefolde and golden chain will not hold us, we break it not by
the power of God, Judge. cha. 16. verse 9.
as Sampson did his cords, but by some other power which is not of God. Many
grapes make one cup of wine, many corns one loaf of bread, we are members
of one body, whereof Christ is the head: therefore we must be at unity with
Christ, by giving great honor to him, and with our fellow members by doing
good unto them.

A table of such points as are contained in the last part of this treatise.
1 WHat the Lords Supper is. 2 Why two elements, that is to say, bread and
wine, are used in the Lords supper and but one eleme^t, that is to say, water,
in the Sacrament of baptism. 3 Why Christ did celebrate the Supper at night. 4
The essential parts of the Lords Supper are not to be omitted, but the
accidental may. 5 None may presume to present themselves to the Lords Supper,
but after dew examination of themselves. 6 The godly are not defiled, if they
receive the holy communion at such time, as wicked men do present them selves,
and are admitted to the Lords table. 7 The Lords Supper must be common to all
the godly, not private to the minister alone. 8 Gods people must not be barred
from the cup in the Lords Supper. 9 What consecration is. 10 The substance of
bread and wine remain in the Lords Supper, after the words of consecration.
11 The wicked do not eat Christ's body in the Sacrament. 12 Christ's body, is
not every where. 13 The bread and wine in the Lords Supper, must not be
reserved for any superstitious use. 14 How gods children must be have
themselves, at and after, the receiving of the holy Supper.
A Treatise of the Lords Supper.
1 What the Lords Supper is.

The Lords Supper is a holy action, wherein according to Christ's institution,
the Sacrament of his body and blood, by a mystical breaking of bread and
blessing of the cup, is distributed by the minister and received by the godly
asse^blie, and wherein the remembrance of Christ's sacrifice on the alter of
the cross, is celebrated with perfourmance of most humble thanks to his
Majesty, and of Christian charity amongst our selves.

2 Why two elements, that is to say, bread and wine are used in the Lords
Supper and but one element, that is to say, water, in the Sacrament of
Baptism.

Christ in baptism is propounded unto us as a lauer, therefore only water is
sufficient. But in the Lords Supper, because Christ (as heavenly food) is
given unto us, and that this life of ours, has need as well of drink as
meat* it pleased our Savior Christ to use in this holy supper, both wine and
bread, that we may be well assured, that our whole life is to be sought by us
in Jesus Christ alone.

The Passover consisted of two elements, meat and drink. Exodus cha. 12 verse
8.
The lamb with the unleavened bread was the meat, the cup of the Testament
wherein there was remembrance of the blood, which was clapped upon the
Israelites door posts, for assurance of their deliverance our of Egypt) was
the drink in the Passover. The Lords supper consists of two parts, meat
and drink. Christ's body offered for us on the cross is the meat: Christ's
blood shed on the cross for our sins, is the drink: Our Savior Christ
instituting a Sacrament of this meat and drink, Matthew. chap. 26. us. 26. 27
uses bread and wine for the external signs in this Sacrament.

8 Why Christ did celebrate the supper at night.

The Passover by Moses law was to be eaten at night: Exodus cha. 12 verse. 8.
Iosu. chap. 5. verse. 10.
Christ did first eat the Paschall lamb, and did presently after, institute
the Sacrament of the Supper in the place of the Passover. We are not tied to
the euentide for the celebration of the Lords Supper, because Christ did so:
for we are not bound to eat any Passover, immediately before the Lords
supper, as Christ was by the law of Moses: and in the forenoone, whilst we
are fasting, we are more earnestly and reverently addicted to the partaking of
the word and Sacrament. He that thinks that the Lords Supper must of force be
ministered at night, because Jesus Christ did so, will, I fear, be moved by a
little persuasion, to defer baptism until the age of thirty years, Eusebius.
lib. 1. cap. 10.
because Christ before that time was not partaker of that holy Sacrament.

4 The essential parts of the Lords Supper are not to be omitted, but the
accidental may.

The essential ceremonies of the Lords supper are these: yt the minister
after a reverent delivery of ye words of Christ's institution, and invocation
of the name of God, breaks the bread: and when it is broken, distributeth it
to the communicants in order, and afterward, likewise the cup. They which
present them selves to the Lords table, are commanded to take and eat the
bread, and to drink of the cup, showing the Lords death, that is to say,
professing their faith in Christ Jesus, with a solemn remembrance of his
passion, and humble thanksgiving to his Majesty, for that inestimable
benefit. These essential ceremonies, may not be either altered or omitted.

The accidental ceremonies of the Lords Supper, are, that it was ministered at
night, and to the disciples, whilst they did sit at table. These accidental
ceremonies, may be altered by the Churches order.

5 None may presume to present themselves to the Lords Supper, but after due
examination of themselves.

None might eat the Passover before he was prepared. 2. Chro. cha. 35. ver. 6.
The Passover was the same to the Israelites, that the holy supper is to us:
but because our sacrament is more excellent then theirs, great care must be had
in preparing our selves.

Saint Paul commands a man to examine himself, 1. Cor. chap. 11. ver. 28.
before the pertaking of the holy Supper. This examination consists in faith
and repentance, faith contains the truth of our belief: repentance
concerns the amendment of our life.

Weakness of faith, ought not to withdraw us from the holy communion: seeing,
it is instituted for the strengthening of our faith.

Uncleanness of life, which is private and not openly known, neither may nor
does bar any from the Lords supper, but such as mean not to amend.

6, The godly are not defiled if they receive the holy communion at such time
as wicked men do present themselves and are admitted to the Lords table.

He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to
himself, 1. Cor. chap. 21. ver. 29.
S. Paul says, to himself not to others.

The Apostle wills a man to examine himself, 1. Cor. chap. 21. ver. 28.
before he present himself to ye Lords supper. He requires not any
co^municant to examine ye rest of that church, which, no doubt, he would have
required, if a godly man were defiled by ye unworthiness of any lewd co^munica^t.

Objection.

It is not lawful for us to eat our own bread with a wicked man: therefore
it is not lawful to eat the Lords bread with him. 1. Cor. chap. 5 ver. 11.


Answer.

It is in our power to practice ye former, but it is not in our power to
abstain from the Lords supper, though east me^ be, at that time partakers with
us.

It is a great sin for a known wicked man, either to minister ye Lords
supper, or to present himself to ye holy communion: and such boldness must be
severely punished by the^ in whose hands it is to redress it. But if this
gross sin be practiced and no medicine used to cure it, the godly must
content themselves with grief for these enormities, and remember that the
sacrament seals up Gods sweet promises to the^, which the wicked sort at no
hand are partakers of.

7 The Lords supper must be common to all the godly, not private to the
minister alone.

When our Savior Christ did institute the holy supper and commend it to his
apostles, Math. chap. 26. ver. 26.27
he did neither eat and drink alone for them, nor commanded that one of them
should eat and drink for the rest: but he said, take ye, eat ye etc.
Likewise, drink ye all of this etc.

1. Cor. chap. 10. ver. 16.
The Apostle calls the cup of blessing etc, the communion of the blood of
Christ, and the bread which we break the communion of the body of Christ: by
which words it is manifest that the holy Supper must be no private banquet.

Saint Paul wills them of Corinth, 1. Cor. chap. 11. ver. 33.
when they come together to eat, to tarry one for another: which words do
evidently condemn all private and alone pertaking of this holy Sacrament. If
any say that Paul's words prove not my purpose, because they are to be
refered to the Corinthian love feasts, my answer is that the Apostles words
do make greatly for my purpose, though it were as they fay: because the feasts
of Corinth were joined with the celebration of the holy communion.

In the time of Justinius Martyr all that were present in the holy assembly did
communicate: Apol* 2 pro Christ.
Private Masses, as yet were neither borne nor conceived etc.

8 Gods people must not be barred from the cup in the Lords Supper.

Christ at the first institution of the holy Supper, said, drink ye al of
this, Math. chap. 26. ver. 27.
etc. If the papists say that Christ spoke unto the Apostles only, my answer
is that they may as well bar Gods people from the bread of the Sacrament,
because only the Apostles were partakers of the bread as well as of the cup,
at the institution of the Supper.

Let a man examine himself, 1. Cor. chap. 11. ver. 28.
and so let him eat of this bread and drink of this cup, etc. Saint Paul
ioynes the bread and cup together: how then dare any man make a divorce
between the bread and the cup? Saint Paul speaks to the whole body of the
Church: how dare any man presume to bar Gods people from the cup, and to
restrain it to the popish priests? The breaking of the bread and distributing
of the cup to the communicants, are essential parts of the holy supper, and
therefore may not be omitted or altered.

In Justinius Martyrs time, after consecration of the bread and cup, Apol. 2.
pro Christ.
both bread and cup were distributed to the communicants.

In Cyprians Ambroses and Chrisostomes time, Cyp. lib. 1. Epist. 2. Theodoritus
lib. 5. cap. 18. Chrysostom. in cap. 8. epist. 2. ad Corinth. Hom. 18.
Gods people were partakers of the cup in the Lords supper.

Innocentius the 3. was the first yt shut Gods people from ye cup in ye Lords
supper. He did this strange fact in ye Laterane council, in the year of our
Lord 1215.

9 What consecration is.

Consecration is a dedicating to the holy use of the supper, of so much bread
and wine, as shall be occupied in the celebration of the holy communion, and
neither more nor less.

Co^secratio^ stands not in ye abolishing of natures, but in the converting
of the natural elements into a godly use. This is clear in both the
sacraments: when the minister has added the word of institution to the water,
it is no more common water, but baptism, which is a Sacrament of our
Regeneration. When he has done the like, to the elements of bread and wine, it
is no more common bread and common wine, but the sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ Jesus: and yet the substance of water is not abolished in
baptism, nor the substance of bread and wine in the Lords supper.

If any say that the meat which is set on the table at dinner and supper, 1.
Tim. chap. 4. ver. 5.
is dedicated to a godly use, when it is sanctified by the word of God and
prayer: I grant it to be so, but there is another signification of yt, then of
this in the sacrament. We obtain by the word of God and prayer ye lawful use
of Gods creatures at our dinners and suppers: yt if any jot of Gods first curse
upon ye earth and fruits thereof remained, it shall not be hurtful to us: but
the elements and signs in the sacraments become more excellent things by many
degrees, for by Gods word and institution they are made signs and mysteries
of our salvation.

10 The substance of bread and wine, remain in the Lords Supper after the
words of Consecration.

The bread which we break in the Lords supper, 1. Cor. chap. 10. ver. 16.
is it not the partaking of the body of Christ? Saint Paul does expressly
call that which is broken, bread, not the Accidents of bread.

I will not hence forth drink of this fruit of the vine etc. by the fruit of
the Mat. cha. 26 ver. 29.
vine our Savior Christ means wine, not the accidents of wine. By Accidents
of bread and wine are understood the color, roundnes, breadth and taste etc.
of bread and wine.

The word (of institution) is added to the Element and it is made a Sacrament.
Tract. 80. in Johan.
Augustine says not, that it takes away, or expels the element.

Tertullian calls that, bread, by which Christ represented his body. Tertul.
lib. 1. cont. Mar.
The same Tertullian (laboring to prove that Christ had not a fantastical
body as the Heretic Marcion imagined but a true body) reasons thus from ye
sacrament. Christ did give bread in the sacrament for a true figure of his
body, lib. 4. cont. Mar.
therefore Christ had not a fantastical but a true body. If no substance of
bread remain in the Lords Supper, which the Papists hold, Tertullians
argument against Marcion were very weak, and Marcions monstrous opinion were
very strong.

If we say that Christ's body is made of the substance of bread, how is it
true that his body was made of the substance of the blessed virgin:

There must be always an Analogy between the sign and the thing fignified
in the sacrament. The Analogy in the holy supper appears in ferding. The
body and blood of Christ does feed our souls, ye bread and wine does feed our
bodies. If ye substance of bread and wine be abolished, what is left to feed
our bodies. If ye popish sort say yt the Accide^ts of bread and wine do feed
us, they teach strange, both, divinity and philosophy: strange divinity,
because they are manifestly confuted by Christ and Paul: strange philosphie,
Math. chap. 26. verse 26. 1. Cor. chap. 10. ver. 17. Arist. cap. 5. de sensu
and sensili.
because they revive an old and gross error of the Pithagoreans confuted
long ago by Aristotle. Besides, the Philosophers teach us that we consist of
the same things, wherewith we are nourished: If we be fedd and nourished with
Accidents, the substance of our bodies must consist of Arcidentes. The popish
sort call us Sacramentaries, that is to say, such as do abolish the force and
use of the Sacrament: If our doctrine did overthrow the Analogy of the
Sacrament is theirs does, we might justly be called Sacramentaries.

Transubsta^tiatio^ was borne in y^ co^cel of Laterane, in ye year of our
Lord, 1215.

Objection.

Christ said at the institution of the holy supper, Math. chap. 26. ver. 26.
This is my body, therefore the substance of the bread is changed into the body
of Christ.

Answer.

This argument hangs together like sa^d etc. If Christ when he reached bread
unto his Apostles, did give his body really and substantially to be eaten of
them, then had Christ many real and substa^tial bodies at and in one and the
self same time and place, which is a gross absurdity: I confess that
Christ's speech, this is my body, when he had given the bread to his Apostles,
is a very true speech: If it be a true speech, it must be true, either
properly and literally, or figuratively. If it be true properly and literally,
then whatsoever may be said of Christ's body, (as that it was borne of ye
blessed virgin, suffered and dyed and rose again etc,) may be applied to the
brend in the Sacrament and whatsoever may be said of the bread (as that it was
sown, reaped, threshed, baked etc,) may be likewise, applied to Christ's
body, which no man that fears God can admit. If Christ's speech be
understood literally, he did command a foul and heinous thing, which is
sufficient to prove it a figurative speech, Leb. 3. cap. 16 de doct. Chri.
according to Augustines rule. If any do ask me, what I take to be the true
meaning of Christ's words, This is my body: My answer is, that they are
notably expounded by S. Paul, when he says: ye bread which we break, 1. Cor.
chap. 10. ver. 16.
is it not the partaking of the body of Christ?

Question.

If Christ be not bodily present in the sacrament, what do Gods children
receive when they are partakers of the holy supper.

Answer.

They receive ye food of life and immortality, they eat life and drink life:
and when ye sacrament is reached unto them, they receive as bread and wine for
the nourishing of their bodies, so ye body and blood of the Lord Jesus for the
most comfortable nourishing of their souls.

If any either drowned in Popery, or inclined to it, shall peruse this which I
have written, I refer him for his further instruction to a notable treatise
of Christ's body, and blood, written by Bertram unto the Emperor Charles the
great. This Bertrame was both a Priest and a Monk, and lived in the year of
our Lord 840.

11 The wicked do not eat Christ's body in the Sacrament.

Christ cannot be separated from his spirit: which spirit of Christ, because
the wicked have not, they cannot be partakers of Christ.

He that eats Christ shall live by Christ, John chap. 6. verse 57. John.
chap. 6. ver. 56. John chap. 15 ver. 5.
ye wicked shall not live by Christ. He that eats my flesh and drinks my
blood, abides in me and I in him. The wicked do not abide in Christ, because
they bring not forth much fruit.

The meat of the soul is not eaten of the^ which have not the mouth of the
foul.

Cyprian writes that the wicked do lick the rock, De coena Domini.
but yt they suck from thence neither honey nor oil, because they are quickened
neither with any sweetness of charity, nor with any moisture of ye holy spirit:
and besides, that they neither judge themselves, nor discern the sacraments.
For further proof of this point, I refer the learned reader to Cyprians
treatise of the holy Supper.

Question.

Whosoever shall eat this bread and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, 1.
Cor. chap. 11. ver. 27.
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. The wicked are guilty of
the body and blood of the Lord, therefore the wicked do eat the body and
drink the blood of the Lord.

Answer.

The argument folowes not: and the wicked are guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord, because they eat and drink unworthily the bread and wine which are
sacraments of the body and blood of the Lord. For the injury done to the
Sacramental signs, reaches to the things which are signified by them. If
the princes cloth of estate be abused, it is a gross fault: and the injury
reaches to the person of the Prince.

Objection.

The wicked man is guilty of the Lords body because he discerns not the
Lords body, 1. Cor. chap. 11. ver. 29.
therefore by eating Christ's body he is guilty.

Answer.

The argument follows not: for not to discern the Lords body, is, to make no
difference between ye sacrament of Christ's body and common meat: and to
abuse it, which is a gross sin, and being committed against the sacrament,
reaches unto Christ's body it self.

12 Christ's body is note uery where.

The Apostle Peter says that heaven must contain Christ until the time that
all things be restored, Act. chap 3. ver. 21.
that is to say, until Christ's second coming.

The Angels say that Christ is taken up into heaven etc. Acts chap. 1. ver. 11.
If he be taken up into heaven (touching his body) which must needs be the
meaning of the Angels words: how is Christ's body in many places at once?

If Christ's body be in many places at once, then Christ's body is infinite: if it
be infinite, then Christ's humanity is either abolished of made infinite by
being turned into the godhead, which are gross heresies and favor the
monstrous opinions of Eutiches and Schwe^kfeldins.

Objection.

The divinity and humanity are united in Christ, therefore where the godhead
is, the ma^hood is likewise: but the godhead is every where, therefore the
manhood is every where.

Answer.

The person of Christ is but one, and yet in does so consist of two natures, yt
the proprieties of each nature does and must remain whole and without
confusion to their several natures. For to deny or confound the proprieties,
Lib. 4. cont. Eutish.
is to confound the natures. Vigilius says that Christ is contained in a
place by the nature of his flesh, and is not contained in a place by the
nature of his godhead. Epist. 57. ad Dardanum.
Augustine is very ple^tifull and flat for this point in one of his epistles.

I confess that the proprieties of Christ's ma^hood may be applied to his
godhead, and contrarimise yt the proprieties of his godhead, may be applied to
his ma^hood, but yet without co^fou^ding the natures: as for example, Christ's
passion does pertain to his flesh according to the propriety of nature, and
if pertaynes to the word, that is to say, Christ's godhead, according to the
person: Vigil. lib. 2. cont. Eutich.
because there is one and the self same person both of the word and the
flesh: so that whole Christ both: God and man suffered according to the unity
of person, but suffered not according to the propretie of nature, that is to
say of his godhead. According to this I have set down, Acts. chap. 20. ver.
28. 1. Cor. chap. 2. ver. 8.
are Saint Paul's words in the Acts and to the Corinthians to be understood.
The council of Constantinople did decree that the blessed Virgin should be
called the mother of GOD. We do allow that decree of the council, and yet we
neither do nor may think that the virgin Mary did hear Christies Godhead in
her womb: but the meaning is, yt he which was horn of the blessed virgin,
was not only man, but (for the conjunction of the word to the flesh) God and
man.

13. The bread and wine in the Lords Supper must not be reserved for any
superstitious use.

It was not lawful to keep any part of the (Paschall) lamb. Exodus cha. 12
verse 10. Exodus cap. 16. verse. 19.20.


It was not lawful to reserve of the Manna: That which was reserved, was full
of worms and did stink.

Our Savior Christ at the institution and administration of the holy Supper,
Mat. chap. 26. verse 26.
commanded his disciples to take and eat, not to take and reserve it.

Cyprian writes that the Sacrament was received, Decoena Domini.
but not shut up and reserved.

I confess that the Sacrament in old time was reserved. De lapsis lib. 6.
chap. 44.
Cyprian writes that a certain woman had it in her chiest. Eusebius says,
out of Dionifius, that a priest had it in his chamber: where he delivered it
to Serapions boy, to carried to Serapion which was then at ye point of death.
But this relerning of the Sacrament, was a strange abuse, and therefore
afterward was justly abolished.

The reserving and hanging up of the Sacrament as the Papists call it in a
Pixe under a Canopie, has no light in Gods book to show it by: and before
the time of Innocentins the fourth, it was neither an article of our faith, nor
any law of the Church, that Christians should worship the bread and wine in
the Sacrament, much less, give divine honor to a wafer cake after that the
action of the Sacrament is ended, if that the Popish Sacrament of the Altar
might be accounted a sacrament.

14 How Gods children must behave themselves, at, and after, the receiving of
the holy Supper.

In the time of the administration of the holy Supper, we must use our ears
and eyes very reverently: our ears, in attending to Gods truth and the holy
institution of the Supper: our eyes in beholding the holy mysteries set upon
the Lords table. When the Sacrament is reached unto us, we are weightely to
consider, that as the bread and wine is broken and powered out in the holy
supper for our use: so Christ's body and blood, which was given and shed on the
cross for perfiting the precious work of our redemption, is given unto us to
be the food of our souls: and for this inestimable benefit, we must confess
our selves, to be greatly and deeply bouns to our merciful Savior, and by his
grace give up our selves wholly to his praise and service.

After that our souls are fedd at the Lords table, and that we are graft
into Christ as into a flourishing vine, and joined to the faithful as to
goodly branches of this vine, we must live Christianly not a day or two, but
al our life time: first, in beating down our pride and vanity: secondly, in
doing good to our brethren: Lastly, in keeping the unity of the spirit in the
bond of pear.

These graces if we doearnestly pray for, to almighty God: he will give them
unto us in mercy for his greater glory, and our singular comfort, through
Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vinttee, by Thomas Dawson, for
George Bishop. 1582.

(...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
