SIR Thomas Smithes VOYAGE and Entertainment in Rushia.

With the tragical ends of two EMPERORS, and one Empress, within one Month
during his being there: And the miraculous preservation of the now reigning
EMPEROR, esteemed dead for 18. years.

Si quid nouisti rectius istis Candidus impertie si non, His vtere mecum.
Printed at London for Nathanyell Butter. 1605.

To the Reader.
REader, the discourses of this voyage (at the coming home of the Gentleman
that was chief in it and his company into England) affoorded such pleasure to
the hearers, by reason the accidents were strange and Novel, that many
waylaid the Nevves, and were glad to make any booty of it to delight
themselves, by which means, that which of it self being knit together was
beautiful, could not choose but show vilde, being so torn in pieces. So that
the itching fingers of gain laid hold upon it, and had like to have sent it
into the world lame, and dismembered. Some that pick up the crumbs of such
feasts, had scrapt together many percels of this Rushian commodity, so that
their heads being gotten with child of a Bastard, there was no remedy but they
must be delivered in Paul's Churchyard. But I taking the truth from the mouths
of diverse gentlemen that went in the Journey, and having some good notes
bestovved upon me in vvriting, wrought them into this body, because neither
thou should be abused with false reports, nor the Voyage receive slander. I
have done this without consent either of Sir Tho. himself, or of those
gentlemen my friends that delivered it unto me: So that if I offend, it is
Error Amoris to my Country, not Amor erroris to do any man wrong. Read and
like, for much is in it worthy observation. Farevvell.

Sir Thomas Smiths Voyage into Rushia.
TRaffike is the golden chain concatenation, that ties kingdoms together in
mutual Amity: It is the very Cement that conioynes the hearts, the hands, yea
the souls of Nations different in shapes, disagreeing in manners, in speech,
in religion, with Neves not to be broken. The tongue of which harmony sounding
sweetest in the ears of those Princes, who love the Palm and Olive tree
ensigns of Peace, better than the knotted Oak, (Emblem of War.) Allude the
Majesty of England (our Royal Sovereign King James) to allow all those ports
and Havens to stand still open, which (in the days of his dear late deceased
sister) nourished intercourse and negotiation between this kingdom and the
Rushian. For his princely confirmation whereof, congratulations formerly
interchangably passing betwixt his majesty and the Emperor of Rushia, through
the hands of Master John Mericke now agent there, Sir Tho. Smith knight, (a
religious and discreet Gentleman) was thought fit to be chosen and commanded by
his Majesty, to go upon an Embassy thither: which (according to duty) he
entertained: making such speedy preparation for the journey, as the shortness
of time squred out unto him, could minister.

All things therefore being ripe for his departure, sir Tho. accompanied with
sir Thomas Challenor, and S. William Wray knights, diverse Gent. and his own
attendants, repaired to the Court upon the tenth of June 1604. then lying at
Greenwich, where (by the right Hon. the Earl of Salsbury) he was brought to
his Majesty's presence: who in very gracious language demanded of sir Thomas
the length of the voyage, the time of his return, the nature of the Climate,
with some other questions touching the country: unto all which sir Thomas
answered accordingly. But the king wondering that the detention there would be
so long, (for Sir Thomas said it would be full xv. months, by reason of the
winters cruelty, whose Frosts were so extreme, that the seas were not at those
times Nauigable) pleasantly said, It seems then that Sir Thomas goes from the
Sun: upon which the right Hon. the Earl of Northampton standing by replied, He
must needs go from the Sun departing from his resplendant Ma. At which the
king smiled, giving sir Thomas his hand to kiss, and bestowing the like grace
upon all the Gentlem. that were for the voyage.

The next day S. Thomas with some of his followers, took his leave of the
Prince: and then being fully furnished with his Commission, and all other
instructions from the Ea. of Salsbury at White Hall, the day following, being
the 12. of June, about ten a clock, the wind sitting fair, all the ships fell
down to Graues-end, whether S. Tho. came, accompanied with sir Valentine
Knightly, sir Fran. Cherry, many merchants, etc. staying there til next
morning. Then after conference with the Gent. Mer. and masters of ships about
his departure: sir Thomas calling all his followers about him, thus spoke.

GEntlemen, and the rest who have resolved to acompany and attend me in this
Embassage from his Excellent Majesty to the Emperor of Rushia, etc. I have
conferred with the Merchants, masters of ships and others, upon the stay or
speed of our voyage, finding the wind favorable, all our company as I think
here, and no importune business to stay us, have resolved to go on board this
present night, and so deliver our selves as alvvaies into the protection of the
Almighty: so now to his mercy in the merciless Seas, where we shall
(especially the unexperienced, vvherof I presume to have many) meet with a
number of crosses the difference betvveen Land and Sea as of two contrary
elements: So that being of a contrary nature, I must give you my knowledge
herein, and the rather considering you are of several prefermentes unto me,
and consequently unknown to one another. I desire you like christians and
fellovv Brethren to love and delight each in other, and express your loves in
helping and cherishing in time of distress, sickness, or distemperature: so as
if God please to lay some sick and others health: the strong to help the
vveak, as fearing daily he may fall into the like need. As often as it shall
please God to send us vveather that we may visit one another, I shall be glad
to see you aboard my Ship, where happily you may be entertained with
something your selves desire, and I will easily afford. I shall take it an
argument of your loves, your daily (if daily might be your visitations) as he
that shall esteem you the best guess that I can long expect. For the
preservation of your own healths, beware of drinking: for your profit, of
Gaming: for your ease, of quarrelling: and for Gods glory of swearing. All
which, oft-times Sea-company makes men subject unto. Surely there is no such
remedy against these, as daily, according to the Ship-custome, to serve God:
presuming I have none in my company otherwise minded or brought up. Thus
armed, let us in his name, who in his secret wisdom has ordained us to this
voyage, begin with honest and just minds that our success may be prosperous,
and our end glorious: protesting, I shall be best served when God is most
honored, desiring nothing of any, but what befits my place, and his duty. Thus
in the name of God let us go on Board. The Ambas. led the way himself, going
aborde the John and Francis Admyrall, after him al his followers: having every
man aboard, himself with some others went again on shore, there taking little
rest, for the time was spent in very special businesses with the Merchants,
who stayed still about two in the morn. Then after a warning piece shot, and
some little stay for the long boat, which was not come down, we hoysted our
sails with the rest of the ships (in number four) and having a gallant
gale, we easily sternd the tide, having taken leave of the small rudder, and
now trusting to the hopeful helm (which God be thanked well guided us,
having for two days and one night a good gale and fair: But the 15. day of
June, beyond Newcastle, that night the wind seized, so as we must bend our
course Easterlie. In the night, we left behind us one of our ships, named the
Minion, which with a side wind could not hold course with us. Whereupon our
Master came to the Ambassador to know his pleasure, whether he would stay or
no, alleging withal, it was their custom to prick forwardest, and with every
wind to make the best advantage of their ships: But the Ambassador commanded
him to tacke about, and stay til the Minion were come up, which he obeyed: And
surely the Ambas: herin showed his great care and love to the Gent. with the
rest: for me thinks it a great comfort on the Sea, to behold neighbor-ships,
yea (and if occasion should require) it would prove wisdom and good discretion,
when either the want of one ship, or that one ship might unhappily for his
fellows, be diversely lost or cast away, as is too often found to be true.

But for Sea accidents, it is not my purpose to make particular relation,
being neither pertinent to my course, nor to any a matter of much validity:
but as if our Ambas. were again in the Tovver of London, as he is in the ship:
now tossed, then becaulmed: in fear and hope within one moment, where sometime
God Neptune like a Prince, will have his subjects know his force, and feel his
rigor: where when Fogges and mists appear (like stratagems and policies) to
make men imprisoned tremble, man then can see that he otherwise cannot see,
danger in present deliverance, deliverance and help in present danger. For
ordinary policies are like Mount Lybanus fogges, then most palpable, when least
discerned: but as God brought him out with much honor and praise, only by the
benefit of patience, clothed in Innocence, so shall I by the help of God,
deliver our selves safely at our Port and hanen, by the gaining of time
out-running misery: for the Sea is a miserable commonwealth to live in, (If
without much patience) where men's eyes must ever be open to al dangers: and
this is there a preservation against all dangers, where men rest most in
unquietness and stand safest, when the wind like Hu-an-cry, drives them forward
for fear of worsse weather, but to them that love the Sea, I wish health, and
my self ever to stand well on dry ground: to behold one of the 3. gallant
spectacles in the world, A Ship under sail, loming (as they term it) indeed
like a Lion pawing with his forfeet, heauing and setting, like a Musco Bear
bayted with excellent English dogs. But the coming on board of some Gent. and
others to my L. ship, (we being becalmed) invites me to turn my best wit to
bid them welcome. Who are so honorably entertained by the Ambas. as having of
his particular friends much, of his own more, of the company of marchaunts
most, and very bountifuly of either, enough for any; did therewith feast them
were invited at Graues-end, to be welcome about Shotland; It shall be honor
sufficient to the Ambas. and comfort enough to his folowers, that they never
came, but they found him like a good hous-keeper at home, and like a bountiful
sir, command them the best cheer. In a word, the Ambas. own and ordinary
praise shall ease me of more labor in proving it, al must confess
necessarily, which was this: That all the provisions whatsoever (yea his purse
likewise) was every ones and no one, no not himself for all. But the wind
rises, and they refreshed with wine and vvind, are abord their own ships.
Thus they that came (who as often as they could did com) needed not depart til
the weather whistled them thence: and surely on the sea, a fair gale is better
than feasting, as where a man's mind is as great as his stomach: nor can a man
on the seas be always so courageous (though many heroycal spirits seem to
breath there) but the wind will cool him (especially in danger) if it blow on
the right side. Now being far entered the Northren Seas, I could here feed you:
yea, make you a feast royal with little cost: and after that disport you
excellent strangely, with Water-Tylts and Barryers: bringing in the Leuyathan
with his Oystershel-armed shield, like green, wild and sauadge men, castinge
out smoke to terifie the behoulders, observing their time and measure, like the
M. of a daunsing school, indeed like a right Lo. roming and raunging without
fear, to fear. The gallant Sea Fight betwixt the huge Whale, the Sword-fish,
and the Thresher: Two against one, Rapyer and dagger against your
two-hand-sworde: Or I might speak very much to little purpose of the
STVRGEON, whose Rows makes the Italians delightful Caviare, of which this
Nation makes the most and best of any. The Porpus, Belluga, Sharke, Seal,
Grampas, Salmon, etc. But I fear too many whilst they have gazed after them,
have been made giddie, and others presuming to have made profit of them, have
fed them: then, were it not vnkindlye and unnatural to feed you, with those
creatures, that rather are satisfied with men, whereby it would prove a hard
disgestion. Besides, I might discourse the Witchcraft of the Seas (as I may
term it) when one Ship shall be becalmed, and Diverse have excellent gales or
undergo the description of the Capes, Sands, Shel^es, Islands, Rocks,
Whirlepooles, etc.

But these are for a strange language, wherein men may not blushe but Poetise:
who in our Country are not so well (so ill are our affections) esteemed of, as
Beasts, much less as Lordely Fishes, who swim and play above the Water, where
and when they please: only herein they are like them, they have the world like
a Sea, to wade and sport themselves in, and yet unlike fishes, are often
themselves drowned in their own Ellements. But I am very willingly drawn out
of this fury of Makers, who yet certainly deserve much, especially remembering
the curse the most worthy Knight of the Muses wishes those do not honor
them, (as out of the vyolence of the salt Seas at any time) principally now,
after almost 40. days tossing, and tumbling, being with a sweet dream after a
golden slumber, entered upon the fair and pleasant River of Dwnia, from which
I suddenly awaked with the unknown language of a Pilate, sent from the
Emperor to conduct my Lord upon the River: which is, (or at least they think)
to us it is a dangerous passage: which Pilate excused his no sooner coming for
want of knowledge of the Ambassadors being so nie.

But now come (when to our Iourneys sickly certain end we are so near come)
how think you, must he not be welcome? I assure you fresh Water is a more
excellent companion then your salt humoryst: and I shall love fresh
water-Souldiers for my Travail on the Seas, while I live: wishinge, when ever
I fight, to have fresh water on my side to comfort me, which wanting I shall be
more wo-be-don, then being in a wood, (though in Rusland, or Leisland.

The 22. of July being come within a mile of Tharch-angell, we ankerd, whether
came at 11. of the clock in the night, a Gentleman (Captain of 500. gunners,
named Maxim Vrin: a man of good complement, and of indifferent stature and
presence,) aboard the Ambassadors ship, being met with two Gentlemen and
others, he was brought into his Lordships Cabin, where after rehearsing the
Emperors and Princes Title (which is ever their custom,) he declared to the
Ambassador, that his L. and Master and the young Prince, had sent him, to
know of his Majesty's health of England, the Q. and Princes, which the
Ambassador answered unto: then demanded of his own, and the Gent.

The Ambassador, somewhat woondering what this Gent. should be (considering
former Ambassadors Entertainment) presently was by him resolved with this,
prosecuting his former speech: That whereas the Emperor understanding of the
Ambassadors coming, to show his great love to his Majesty of England, the
desire of peace and Amity, (as with his dear and loving Sister Elizabeth of
happy memory late Queen of England) contrary to any custom of his Majesty's
heretofore, who never took knowledge thereafter, had sent him to be his
Prestaue, to provide the Ambassadors house, and victuals, and to guard him
from the Injuries of a strange nation: desiring that his service therein might
express his thankefulnes to his Ma. for so great an honor, and likewise be
pleasing to the Ambassador. Both which to deserve, he would endeavor the best
lay in his power.

The Ambassador (though somewhat be-woondered or graciously prevented) very
kindly and thankfully accepted of this truly honorable favor: saying, It
behooued two such great Princes to use the best means for Amity and
friendship. So the Prestaue banquetted as befitting his place, was dismissed
that night, but yet before he went, came aboorde, the Ambassadors Ship, the
Agent Master John Mericke, diverse Merchants, and other English men to see his
Lordship, as to welcome him to that Port of his desire: who after some hours
discourse, privately betwixt the Ambassador and the Agent, tasting of his wine
and Beer, with half a score good pieces they were sent away.

Truly herein, the extraordinary beginning was hope of a prosperous
conclusion: for this was a favor never manifested to any heretofore, who after
their arrival at the Castle, staide and that very untowardly) till a post
were dispatched, from the Gentleman or Governor of the Town to the Musco,
(which is 1000. Miles,) and his return with the Emperors further pleasure for
his direction and warrant.

The 23. of July the Prestaue, the English Agent, Merchants and other, being
come to bring the Ambassador with honor into his lodging, he withal the Gent.
before him, and his Liueries before them, two and two together, accompanied as
is aforesaid, landed at the Castle: in the road whereof, then being many
English, French, and Dutch Ships, they discharged a mighty peale, (or rather
many peales of Ordinance.) Thus the Ambassador came safely to his first lodging
in Rushia. The Prestaue taking a solemn leave, went to see the Provisions
which were laid in before, to be good, as also to provide necessary
lodginges, for diverse which were to be lodged abroad, and others not as yet
Landed, for it was 4. days before all our Ships came up.

Here the Ambassador lay some fourteen days, or less, where in the mean
time, there was demanded a particular note of the names of all the Ambassadors
train, first of the Kings Gentlemen, (which name not only the Emperor, but
the Great Turk, Persian and Moroco Princes do highly account of) as indeed
soothing their own greatness therewith, and we who were his servants, and highly
graced by kissing the Princely hand of our royal K. meeting herein with any
others, travailing in the same kind: as also by our particular births, not
being less (so unexpectedly required of us) did undergo the name, as which
we could not without dishonor to the Ambassador, and disadvantage to our Being
refuse, it being given by an Emperor, who should be in that kingdom so great
as not to allow it, though he would (which none could) disprove? Secondly, of
the Ambassadors Gent, and thirdly, of all the rest that attended, which
forthwith was delivered to the Prestaue, and sent up by him to the Emperor: the
reasons hereof are, as may be gathered, to esteem the state and honor of the
Ambassador thereafter: also, to provide accordingly for houses, horses, and
other provisions, and perhaps to learn thereby what names of great houses
are among the kings Gent.: as particularly now they did inquire after. Here,
it pleased the English agent M. John Mericke, (truly a wise, honest and kind
Gent.) to inuit all the Gentlemen to their house to dinner: whether he would
have willingly invited the Ambas. if he might have presumed thereupon, and of
the fitnes, considering that as yet letters were not secondarilie come from the
Emperor, for the gent. farther proceeding: whereby he would happily have made
a question there of; as also for the Ambass. greatness, (the town then so
ouercharged with many Nations) it could not be performed according to the
respect ambassadors are used with there, nor perhaps would it be well agreeing
to their more private fashion, who hold it greatest glory for greatest men,
rather to be reported of, then seen, etc.

But we were very bountifully feasted and as kindly and heartily welcome, as an
honest mind (rather indeed with virtue then formality) might express, the
Ambassador having many daintye dishes, sent home to his own house. Now the
whole company of Ships safely arrived, and all the Ambas. followers landed some
days before: it came forthwith into the care and love of the Ambas. (being by
the Agent well informed of diverse vices, customs, and Observations, fit either
to be followed or avoided) who was ever desirous to keep an honorable opinion
to himself, and an honest name in his followers, as in his going up to the
Court, so, ever after also to ingraue within their memories, their happy
deliverance from the Sea, before his departing the Archangel, very honorably
thus to advise and counsel them.

SInce it has pleased the Almightye of his great mercy, safely to protect us
in our dangerous travail upon the Sea, and to bring us on Land, even all of
us, without any the least misfortune, let us think it a very great blessing,
and the remembrance of the dangers, and perils past, let them be ever before
us, as before those, that not only vvil live accordingly, but which must
assure themselves; are to return the same way again: knovving, that God does
oftentimes use his creatures (and none oftener then the Sea) to execute his
Judgments: let us then be heartily thankful for our deliverance, and show our
obedience thereafter in our lives, especially in a strange Country, where he is
not rightly known: a people and Nation very subtle and crafty, likewise
inquisitiue after every strangers actions, and this place the Port where al
nations do come to: where many understand our language, let us be wise and
very circumspect what we speak, of what, and to whom, for much cause of
speech will be given us, because the people as well as their manners, customs,
and salutations, are not only strange, (as with modesty I may speak somewhat
rediculous) and the rather since we bring the message of pe^ce and Amity, Let
us show toward them love and courtesy.

To be courteous, as it is a virtue beyond Envy, so is it an advantage without
loss. I am likewise to require you, and that earnestly, to avoid Dicing and
carding: which games, besides that they are among the better sort here,
accounted very base and odious, to me it shall be offensive, and in the end to
your selus great discommodity: as when some will carry that in his purse, his
fellow should have clothed his back with: especially, if you vvithall do but
remember the cold Climate you are to live in Drukennes is rather here a
custom, then a vice: yet themselves hate it in other. Be then conquerors, if
in this, in any thing, and make your wisdom, out of their vile beastliness
herein, that you can refrain that, I hope you were never acquainted with all.

Also Whoring in this Country is so common a sin, as their eyes, can soon
observe it in strangers: for the peace of your own Consciences, the
strength of your own bodies, abhor it as the most unnatural wickedness:
and rather, in respest they are not only herein monstrous impudent, but
impudence it self. Be it ever loathsome the thought thereof unto you all.
Thus if your carriage be, it will be an honor unto our God, and he will honor
you. It will be a glory unto your Country, add reputation to me, and
quietness to your own Consciences, and I shall be glad to revvard them are
careful herein, as ready to punish the offenders. But I hope my speech shall
only serve to testify my desire, and not be the letter, to punish any
hereafter vvithall: yet, let not any one presume upon my leanity or gentleness,
for I assure them I will ever prefer my protestations in the seruiee of God,
if it lie within my power as these things now do.

The Prestaue Maxim Vrin having a new commission from the Emperor, accordingly
provided five Loddies, two with Cherdecks and all other necessaries. The Ambas.
took his leave of the Castle the sixth of Aug. and with some 30. men to a
Boat, we were towed against the stream, when the wind was contrary: and thus
changing our permiearies every 10. verse, we came to Colimgro, where the Am. lay
at the English house, two days, and went forward upon the fair and pleasant
river of Dvvyna, tell within some 30. verse of Oysticke. My Lord was met upon
the river with one other Prestaue, named Constantine Petrovvich Artishoue, a
man of far much better esteem then the former. A grave, honest, and
peaceable gentleman, a happiness to any Ambassador, and as necessary in this
Country as may be, the contrary whereof other Ambassadors and the last that
honorable and renowned Genesis Sir Richard Lea, found his greatest cross, for
pride, opinion, and self will, is inherent to any Russe put in place of honor.

This Gentle. being come within a quarter of a Mile, sent to the Ambas. to give
him notice, that the Emperor had sent him as his Prestaue, and he desired to
see his Lordship, as well to know of him concerning his health, his usage, and
his provision, as to let him understand the Emperors especial favor toward
him, in sending him presently upon News of his arriual, with a larger
commission, and that at all Yames and Towns of quality, he had delivered
letters for his receiving of horses and prouission of diet, and what he would
desire. So two of the K. Genesis fetched him on board the Ambassadors Doshonicke,
where he was honouraly entertained, and indeed he was a kind Gentleman, as who
knows this Country people might easily acknowledge, whence after half an
hours drinking and eating he departed: presently after his departing, the
Ambas. sent six of his Liueries, and his Enterpreter or Tolmatch to his boat,
with a banquet, which he very kindly and thankefully accepted: so we passed
along on our Journey, which was as pleasant and delightful, wheather you
consider the admirable straight pine, tall Cedar, or fyrre woods; Alablaster
Rocks, or the pleasantnes of walks, in sweet Meadows, and fair pastures,
than which, for 1000. verse cannot be more welcome in the whole world, which we
fully Towed and sailed in the Dvvina, Soocana, and Vollagda. I must leave many
fair towns, and great Presents, where we lay and rested, because it will be
rather an Hyperbole, than a received truth: and I desire to escape those small
rubbes, that others may the easier fall upon them, being safely come within
five verse of Vollagda, the sixth of Septem. and unwilling to forsake so pleasant
a passage, we the 7. day, acompanied with many Du. and Gentlemen, and for the
Am: a fair horse from the great Bish. there. As for the Kings Gent. and some
others, we rode to a very fair and large house provided for the Ambas. where
they left him, not as then willing to take or taste of his goodness (as the
Russe terms it) partly, it is to be supposed for that the many are never in
sudden accidents of one resolution, and partly, for that it was to be thought,
the Ambas. was not so well provided for them, as afterward being settled he
would be. In this great town we easily found the Emperors command, for our
better diet, and liberty to ride, was withal willingness performed, where the
Ambassador first, (as in euere place after) was more graciously entertained.

The 12. of Septem. the Ambas. accompanied with diverse Gentlemen, took his
travel by Land, himself riding in his own Coatch, with a spare horse led by
at his pleasure, with 150. horses, with the carriages. So by easy Iourneyes,
we passed a pleasant and fair travel, as is or can be for so many verse, in
the whole world, without any rainy days, or foul ways, resting every
Sabbath day, as the Ambas. had by water before done, not indeed missinge two
Sermons at any time, no (hardlye at the Sea though our Preacher were the
sickest man.) Such was his care and zeal, and truly he was an honest quiet
man, and a sufficient Scholar, named Master Samuel Sotheby.

Thus we passed from Yam, to Yam, upon excellent Posthorses, till we came
thorogh many well situated, and pleasant towns, unto the City of
Yerri-slaue, which we came unto, the 19. of Sept. where we were received with a
multitude of people. After we had rowed in a very great Barge, over the famous
River of Volga, (whereunto adjoining this city on a hill is scittuated) a rich
and pleasant City where the Ambassador was lodged in the house of Gregory
Euannovvich Micolin, late Ambassador, to her Majesty of England.

It might be fitting for me to speak somewhat of this famous River, as is I
think for length, and breadth, any (one) excepted in the world, but so many
excellent writers, as in the worthy labors of Master Richard Hacklyute, have
made particular mention thereof, as it induseth me, to leave the description of
this River and town, to those that have largely and painfuly wrote of such
things: especially to M. Doct. Fletchers true relation, sometime Ambas. to this
Emperor. The 21. of September, we went from Yeri-slaue being well accompanied
from the City, passing through Shepetscoy, (where we lay) and dwells an
English gentleman named Georg Garland, sometime servant to that Noble but
unfortunate E. of Essex, of whom many through the world, do make in diverse
kinds, but (as that learned and heroycall Poet Sir Phil. Sidney speaks of
Prince Plangus) never any can make but honorable mention.

The next day we came to Rostoue, an ancient, but a great ruinous town, whereof
is one of their Metropollitanes named. Here in a fair house the Ambassa. lay
2. days: in which time the Emperors Mate. wrote to our Prestaue, that the
Ambas. and the Kings gentlemen should have ambling horses from the Monasteries,
and that we should take as easy Iourneyes as we pleased: with command, to
give content to every ones desire. And certainly, had not the Emperor as then
bin taking a Prograce to the Monastery of Troiets, (which four times a year
for Religious causes he does) we had received more especial favors. Yet he
that has but travailed to know what Monasteries are, and how provided of al
things, may easily esteem it, a great ease, and especial honor to have there
horses. The 25. day we came to Perri-slaue, a long decayed town, where in a
rich merchants house, new builded, the Ambas. lodged. Here (in regard of the
Emperors and Princes being at Troytes, which was but of our easy travel two
days iourny) we lodged 3. days, and then departed through Doobna to Troites,
that fair and rich Monastery, so to Bratte-sheene, and Rostouekin, 5. verse from
the great city of Musco: where in a Churchmans house, the Ambass. that n^ght
lodged, and the rest in very good houses, for so small a Dereuena.

This night the Agent having bin with the chancellor came to visit his
Lordshipp, and let him understand, that the next morning about nine of clock,
he should be honorably brought into the Musco, whereupon every man prepared
accordingly.

The next morrow, being the 4. of October, the Prestaue came and declared to his
Lordsh. it was the Emperors pleasure, he should come into the Mosco that
forenoone: presently after came M. I. Mericke Agent, with some twenty horses to
attend his Lord ship, and informed him his understanding, in his coming into
the Mosco, and that he should presently be sent for, which forth-vvith was
performed. Then we did ride, till we came within a little mile of the many
1000. of Noblemen and Gentl. on both sides the way, attended on horseback to
receive his Lordsh. Where the Ambassador alighted from his Coatch, and mounted
on his footcloth horse, and so rode on with his trumpets sounding. A quarter of
a mile farther, met him a proper and gallant gentleman a foot of the Emperors
stable, who with cap in hand, declared to the Ambassador, that the Emperor, the
young Prince, and the master of the horse, had so far favored him, as to send
him a Iennet, very gorgeously trapped with gold, Pearl, and precious stone*
and particularly, a great chain of plated gold about his neck, to ride upon.
Whereupon the Ambassador alighted, embraced the gentleman, returned humble
thanks to them all, and presently mounted. Then he declared that they likewise
had sent horses for the kings Gentlem. which likewise were very richly
adorned, then for all his followers: which ceremony or state performed, and all
being horssed, he departed, we riding orderlye forward, till we were met by
three great Noblmen, severed from the rest of the multitude, and the Emperors
Tolmache or interpreter with them. Of which state the Ambassador it may seem,
had for-knowledge, (it being in this Country a custom used) but with more or
less Noblemen, as is the Emperors favor and grace.

Likewise understanding of the strange Ceremony of first allighting from their
horses, (as who either has read sir Jerome Bows his formality and observance
hereof, or sir Richard Leaes painful standing upon the priority herein) may
think the Emperors command is very strait thereunto, and as they think much
honor is lost to dismount first: but they being within speech, thus began
that Oration they could never well conclude: Which was, That from their Lord
and Master the mighty Emperor of Rushia, etc. they had a message to deliver
his lordship. The Ambassador then thinking they would be tedious and
troublesome with their usual Ceremonies; prevented their farther speech with
this (to them a Spell) That it was unfitting for subjects to hold discourse in
that kind of complement, of two such mighty and renowned Potentates on
horsbacke. They hereby not only put by their ceremonious saddle-sitting, but
out of their paper instructions for the state thereof ashamed (as was proud
Artexius, stepping aside in the dangerous fight with Zealmene) they allighted
suddenly, as men fearing they were half unhorsed, and the Ambassador presently
after them, coming very courteously all three, saluting the Ambass. and the
kings gentlemen, taking them by the hands. Thus like a scholar, too old to
learn by rote (the Duke named K. Volladamur Evanywich Mavvsolskoy) with his
Lesson before him, declared his message, which was, that he with the other twoe
Noblemen, were sent from the Great Lord, Emperor and great Duke Borys
Phedorvvich, selfe-upholder, great L. Emperor, and great Duke of all Rushia,
Volademer, Moskoe and Novogorode, king of Casan and Astracan, Lord of Vobskoe,
great Duke of Smolenskoe, Tuer, Huder, Vghory, Perme, Viatsky, Bolgory, etc.
Lord and great duke of Novogorod in the Lovv-countries, of Chernigo, Rezan,
Polotskey, Rostoue, Geraslaue, Bealozera, Leifland, Oudorskey, Obdorskey,
Condingskey. King of all Syberia and the North coasts. Commander of the
contreys of Iversky, Grysinsky, and Emperor of Kabardivsky, of Chirkasky, and
of the whole country of Garskey, and of many other countries and Kingdoms
lord and Emp. to know of his Ma. health of England, the Qu. and Princes. The
second, being a capt. of gunners (the Emperors guard) named Kazarine
Davydovvich Beaheetchoue, pronouncing the Emp. and princes title, said he was
sent from them to know his Lordsh. health and usage, with the kings Gent. The
third, was one of the Secretaries, named Pheodor Boulteene, observing the
former order, did deliver what he had in command from the Emp. prince and
Empress, to inform the Ambassador of their much favor toward him and the
kings Gent, in providing for his honorable intertain and ease, a fair large
house to lodge in: Also, that they three were sent from the Emp. Prince, and
Empress, to be his Prestaues, to supply the Emperors goodness toward him, to
provide his necessaries, and deliver any suit it pleased the Ambassador to
make to the Emperor. To all which the Ambassador very wisely gave answer (as
they made report unto the Emp.)

So we all presently mounted again, the Prestaues on either hand of the Amb.
his horse and footcloth being led by his Page, some small distance, his cotch
behind that, and some 6000. Gallants after behind all: who at the Ambas. riding
thorough the guard, that was made for him, very courteously bowed him self.
Thus was he followed by thousands, and with in the three wales of the City,
many hundreds of young Noblemen, Gentlemen, and rich merchants well mounted,
begirt the ways of every side: diverse on foot also, even to the gate of the
house where the Ambassador was to be lodged, which was some two miles. Whether
being come, he was brought into his bedchamber by the Noblemen his Prestaues,
where with many thanks for their honorable pains; they were dismissed, betaking
themselves to their further affairs. The next morn came three other Prestaues
with the former, to know of his Lordships health, and how he had rested
the night past: vvithall, that if his Lordshippe wanted any thing, they all, or
any one of them, were as commanded, so ready to obey therein. These, with the
Enterpreter and six Gent. were most within the walls, lodged in a house over
the gate, besides we had fifty Gunners to attend, and guard us in our going
abroad.

The 8. of October. being the 4. day after our coming to Musco, the Prestaues
came to his Lordship to let him understand, they heard he should go up the
next day: wherefore they desired his speech and Embassage to the Emperor: and
the rather, that the Enterpreter might (as they pretended) translate it. To
this purpose, very earnestly at several times they made demand. The Ambassador
answered, that he was sent from a mighty Prince, to be his Ambassa. to their
Emperor, having with no small danger passed the Sea, and a second water
travail, with a long land Journey, and still was comforted, with hope to see
his Majesty's clear eyes, that for a welcome was the tidings thereof unto him?
Especially, to have audience within so short a space as he might not less do
then ackcowledging the Emperors great favor toward him: and being sent to
their master, he deemed it, not only a dishonor to him, but a weakness in
them, to require that at his hands, (which besides that he would never do) he
could not, being to speak that in the delivery was according as it pleased god,
to give him time, occasion, memory, and courage, being to come before a
strange and mighty Prince, where what he said, was to be interpreted as pleased
their Tolmatch.

This, peremtorely, and finally was his answer. Yet, whenever he did go, as
he was both willing and ready at all hours, ^e desired to have certain horse
and other things, which without them, he could not be so well provided of. So,
after banqueting departed away rather discontented, then satisfied. Surely it
is a custom (not so wise as ancient) for the^ to fall out into bad language,
if they cannot have their wills, which to many would be, as simple a demand,
as it were folly in the Ambassador to grant: Especially, if men knew how
indiscreet a man they would think him to be, would please their humors
herein. For it is but a Stratigem they use to undermine withal, that they may
report the magnanimity or pusillanimity of the Ambas. unto the Emperor.

The 10. of October, his Prestaues brought word as from the Lord Chaunsellor*
that he thought, (for they will never tell any thing to come for certainty) his
Lordsh. should go before the Emperor the next morrow, therefore prayed him to
provide: also, that he should have the Em. horses to ride on, and of his guard
to help carry up his present, of which they had (after dem^unde) a particular.

The 11. of October his Lordship being sent for by his Prestaues there waiting,
having excelent Iennets for himself, the Kings Gentlemen, and good horses for
the rest^. as likewise two gallant white Palfreis to carry or draw a rich
Chariot, one parcel of the great present, with his followers and the Emperors
guard, carrying the rest At his gate many gallants attending for his receipt,
rode to the Court, accompanied on each hand with his Prestaues, and some others
following him, with many Gentlemen behind them. Thus we rode a short verse
beheld with thousand of eyes: on each side the streets standing the Emperors
guarde with pieces in their hands well apparrelled, to the number of two
thousand by esteem, many messengers posting betwixt the Court and our
Prestaues. Thus with much state, softly riding, tell we came unto the utmost
gate of the court, (having passed thorogh the great Castle before) there his
Lordsh. dismounted. Then met him a great Duke (named Knase Andriay Metowich
Soomederoue) with certain Ge. to bring him up. So in order as we rode, we
assended the stairs and a stone gallery. where on each side stood many Nobles,
and Courtiers, in fair coats of Persian stuff, velvet, Damask etc. At the
entry to the great chamb. two Counselors incountred the Ambassa. to conduct
him thorogh that room, round about which sat many grave and richly
apparrelled personages. Then we entered the Presents, whether being come, and
making obeisance, we staide to hear, but not understand, a very gallant
Nobleman, named Peter Bas-man, deliver the Emperors title: Then the particular
of the Presents, and some other ceremonies: which performed, the Ambassa.
having liberty, delivered so much of his Embassage, as the time and occasion
then affoorded: After which the Emperor arising from his throne, demanded of
the King of Englands health, the Princes, and Queens: then of the Ambassadors
and the Kings Gentlemen, and how they had been used since they entered within
his dominions: to al which with obeisance we answered as was meet. Then the
young Prince demanded the very same.

The Ambassador having taken the Kings Letter of his Gentleman Usher, went up
after his obeisance to deliver it, which the Lord Chansellor would have
intercepted. But the Ambass. gave it to the Emperors own hands, and his
Majesty afterward deliueit to the Lord Chaunsellor: who took it, and showing
the superscription to the Emperor and Prince, held it in his hand openly with
the seal toward them. Then the Emperor called the Ambassador to kiss his
hand, which he did, as likewise the Princes, and with his face toward them
returned. Then did he call for the Kings Gentlemen, to kiss his hand, and the
Princes, which they after obeisance made, did accordingly. Afterward, his
May. invited his Lordsh. the K. Gent. and the rest to dine with him, as
likewise M. I. Mericke Agent by name, who gave his attendance there on the
Ambas. and was now (as diverse times) very graciously used of the Empe. and
Prince: no stranger (that I ever heard of) like him in all respects. Then we
departed the presents, accompanied with diverse Noblemen, and passed on into the
Councel-chamber where we vvil leave them.

Being entered the Presence, we might behold the excelle^^ Majesty of a mighty
Emperor, seated in a chair of gold, richly embrodered with Persyan stuff: in
his right hand he held a golden, Scepter, a Crown of pure Gold upon his
head, a collar of rich stones and Pearls about his neck, his outward
garments of Crimson-veluet, Embrodered very fair, with Pearls precious stones,
and Gold: On his right side, (on equal hight to his throne) standing a very
fair globe of beaten gold, on a Pyramedis, with a fair cross upon it, unto
which before he spoke, he turned a little and croste himself. Nigh that,
stood a fair basin and Ewer, which the Emperor often uses daily.

Close by him in another throne sat the Prince, in an outward garment like his
Fathers, but not so rich, a high black Fox cap on his head, worth in those
Countries five hundred pound, a Golden staff like a Friars, with the likeness
of a cross at the top. On the right hand of the Emperor, stood two gallant
Noblemen in cloth of Silver garments, high black Fox cappes, great and long
chains of Gold, hanging to their feet with pollaxes on their shoulders of
gold. And on the left hand of the Prince two other such, but with Silver
pollaxes. Round about the Benches, sat the Counsel, and Nobility, in Golden
and Persyan coats, and high black Fox caps, to the number of two hundred. The
ground being covered with cloth of Arrasse, or Tapistrie. The presents
standing all the while in the Room, within little distance of his Majesty,
where he and the Prince often viewed them. The Emperors favor, complexion,
and disposition with the Princes, I shall defer (tell unhappily before our
departing I decla^e the manner of his death.) Being now by our Prestaues and
others come for to dinner, who led us through much press and many Chambers to
one very fair and rich room, where was infinite store of massy plate of all
sorts. Toward the other end stood the Emperors uncle, named Stephean
Vaselewich Godonoue, Lord high Steward, being attended with many Noblemen and
Gentlemen. Unto whom my Lord in his passage saluted, which with an extra
ordinary countenance of aged Joy, he received, making one of their honorable
Noddes. Thambassador entered the dining room, where we again viewed the
Emperor and Prince, Seated under two chaires of State, ready to dine, each
having a scul of pearl on their bare heads, but the Princes was but a
Corronet. Also their vestments were changed.

The former Duke, that for that day was Thambassadors Prestaue, came, as
commanded from the Emperor, and placed the Ambassador at a Table, on the Bench
side some twenty foot from the Emperor. Then the Kings Gentlemen, Master
Mericke, Master Edward Cherry, and all the rest were placed, so that our eyes
were half opposite to the Emperor. Over against the Ambassador sat his
Prestaues vpermost, also in this large place sat the Pri^y Counsel, to the
number of 200. Nobles at several tables. In the midst of this hall might seem
to stand a great Pillar, round about which, a great height stood wonderful
great pieces of plate, very curiously wroght with all manner of Beasts, Fishes
and fowls, besides some other ordinarye pieces of serviceable plate.

Being thus set (some quarter of an hour as it were, feeding our eyes with
that fair Pillar of plate) we beheld the Emperors table served by two hund.
Noblemen, all in coats of cloth of gold. The Princes table served with one
hun. young Dukes and princes of Cassan, Astrican, Syberia, Tartaria, Chercasses,
and Russes, none above twenty years old.

Then the Emperor sent from his table by his noble seruitors, to my lord and
the kings Gent. 30. dishes of meat, and to each a loaf of extraordinary fine
bread. Then followed a great number of strange and rare dishes, some in
Silver, but most of massy gold: with boiled, baked and roasted, being piled up
on one another by half dozens. To make you a particular relation, I should do
the entertainment wrong, consisting almost of innumerable dishes: Also, I
should ouercharge my memory, as then I did mine eyes and stomache, little
delighting the Reader, because Garlic and Onions, must besauce many of my
words, as then it did the most part of their dishes.

For our drinks, they consisted of many excellent kinds of Meandes, besides
all sorts of Wine, and Beer. I assure you I had rather drink to you a daily
health in them, then make you long after their pleasantness, considering the
cold and sower voyage you must undertake, before you taste of their vigor and
sweetness.

Diverse times by name, the Emperor sent us dishes, but in the midst of dinner
he called the Ambass. up to him, and drank our kings health, where the Emperor
held some discourse of our king and state. But at one time (striking his hand
advisedly on his breast) Oh, said he, my dear Sister Queen Elizab. whom I
loved as mine own heart, expressing this his great affection almost in a weeping
passion. The Ambassador receiving the cup from his Princelye hand, returned
again to his own place, where all of us standing, drank the same health out of
the same cup, being of fair Crystal, as the Emperor had commanded, the wine
(as far as my judgment gave leave) being Alligant.

Thus passing some four hours in banqueting, and refreshing our selves too
plentifully, all being taken away, we did arise. The Ambassador and the kings
gentlemen being called by name to receive from his Imperial hands, a cup (or
rather as they call it a Yendover) of excellent read Meande, a favor among
them never observed before, which cups for they were great and the Meand very
strong, we often sipped at, but without hu^ting our memories, we could not say
Amen unto: which the Emper. perceiving, commanded them to be taken away, saying:
He was best pleased with what was most for our healthes.

Thus after our low courtesies performed, we departed from his presence,
riding home with the same former guarde and attendance to our lodgings, where
our Prestaues as for that instant left us, but shortly after they came again,
to accompany a great and gallant Duke, one of them that held the Emper. golden
Polaxes, named Knes Romana Phedorovvich Troya Narove (who was sent from his
majesty, to make the Ambassador, and the kings Gentlemen merry: likewise
having instructions to drink their Emperors, our King, and both the Princes
healths, and diverse Princes else, which he did himself very freelye and some
of us, as many of them as we could with our own healths, there being such
plenty of Meandes and other drinks, as might well have made forty Russes have
stumbled to sleep. Thus lightheaded, and well laded, especialy if you take
knoledge of y^ 30. yards of cloth of gold, and the two standing cups with
couers, which the Ambassador rewarded him withal, before he departed. And
surely a wise Duke shall he ever be, that couers his back with his belly, and
by taking a cup or two extraordinary can swallow down a hundredth Marks in
silver and gold, to recover his P^pemeli^, as they call it: I say his wits
withal, but he had it given him with a very good will, and with a better
mind, then he had that did so lightly carry it away.

Now there was after our first being at the Court, much inquiry made whether
the Ambassador would go home by the Narue and so over land, but upon what
reasons I know not, only I understood his Lo. should have had a second audience
forthwith, after he had delivered by writing to the Em. those things he did not
speak before, being sent unto for them the next day, perhaps the heads whereof
he did send to the Emper. that his council might advise upon them. But
unwelcome news within four days after our audience so vnhappilye came, as not
only our affairs but any else, except counsel against present danger, was
not regarded. For this was held for current, that one who named himself
Demetre Evanowich Beola, as the son of their late Emperor, Evan Vasillovvich,
he that in the reign of Pheodor Evannovvich his brother (at what time Boris
Pheodorvvich now Emperor, then Protector) was in his infancy (as was thought)
murdered at Ougleets, is now revived again, and up in Arms for his right and
inheritance: so did he distract the Emp. and kingdom, such a world of tales
troubled the commons that the Ambass. must necessarily be in some fear,
because the Emp. and State were in all, and thought he would be persuaded it
was but deceit, yet the butchering of him, or at least the intent, much
ter^ified his soul and conscience: whereupon presently was sent an army of
200000. soldiers, either to take or sley him. But he was so strengthened
with Poles, Cassackes, etc that a number of Russes yealded to his obedience.
Insomuch as he has been the author of more bloodshed, then has been there of
many years (although these Emperors have continual wars with diverse
Nations.) Notwithstanding the Emperors favor was much, and greater every day
then other to the Ambassador and the kin, Gentlemen. For we had liberty to ride
at our pleasure, and to this end had the Emperors sleades or horses upon
demand, with one of our Prestaues, and other gent. to accompany and guard us.

So as upon the 21. of November, (...) Prince of an ancient custom goi^g to a
Church within Musco, the Kings Gent. upon knowledge thereof, ( Th^mbas. being
unwilling to be seen public, as also for that the Emp. himself did not go as
he was accustomed) went and attended where his excellency might see them, and
they safely behold him, who rode in a very fair and rich slead, having a
gallant Palfrey led by two grooms to draw it, many hundreds running before to
sweep the snow away where he should pass, and were said to be slaves, which I
verily believe, because certainly they were his subjects. Then came the Prince
richly apparrelled with two tartar Princes standing before one his slead and
two young Dukes behind, with 200. sleds following him, who when he came against
the place, the Kings Gentlemen gave their attendance, made a stand, graciously
questioning them of the Ambas. health and their own, which with low courtesy
they made answer unto: so his Majesty departed, and they expected his return,
which would be within one hour, then came before the Lord Chaunsellor, and
wished them to stay, very honorably and kindly bespeaking them, and Master
John Merick (who attended there with them) so the Prince returning made a
second stay: then giving knowledge he would send them home a present, willing
his commendations to be remembered to the Ambas. and so passed in. Within 4.
hours after came a Gent. one of the Emp. chief Butlers, named Bactayer from
the Prince, unto the Kings Gent. with a great present.

After their entertainment to the Gentlemen, and drinking of our Princes
healths, they brought him into the Ambassadors bedchamber, who gave great
thanks to the Prince, on the Kings Gentlemen's behalf, they giving him at the
Ambassadors appointment, a piece of silver and gilte plate worth twenty marks,
and very thankfully returning their service to the Prince for his royal
present, and to himself much thanks for his pains.

The Ambassador kept here a great Christmas having a good company, not without
some sports befitting his state, and the present time.

Upon New-yeeres day, he was very honorably presented with New yeers-gifts,
from master Doct. Christopher Writtinger, the Emperors chief Physicians some
of the Kings Gentlemen, Master John Mericke and his wife, and many other
English Marchaunts: wherein they expressed their good will, and love, as to him,
not only had or would deserve it, but accounted it a virtue, not to be
unthankful or unmindful of any kindness bestowed on him.

The 8. of February the Emperor sent us sleds to ride abroad, and this day the
rather, that we might behold a reported victory, against the reputed Rebel
Demeatry etc, So we the Kings Gentlemen did behold three hundred poor
prisoners, seventeen Ensigns, and eleven drums, brought in, with more
glory, then victory.

About this time returned Peter Basman, one of the generals, who had performed
very honorable service, and certainly, he was the man of greatest hope and
expectation in the whole Empire, who was brought into the Musco, with all the
Counsel, Nobles, Gentlemen, and Merchants, a grace never performed before to
any Subject. But not without suspicion of some extraordinary secret herein, and
besides particular favors, bountiful rewards, and a promise he should never go
again until the Emperor himself went, he was being but a young man, made a
Privy Counselor, forthwith one thing I will you shall observe the Emperors
favor, and his then Noble spirit, he making diverse times suit (as was thought)
because they were in great danger to go again to the wars once prostrated
himself, to obtain his desire, but falling down too humbly, he could not
easily rise again, whereby the Emperor vnd^rstanding of his many and great
wounds, was said to weep, rising himself up to raise and help him up, but
extraordinary causes, have the like effects, as hereafter you shall understand.

Among other times of our taking the air, we be^ing lodged in that large
house builded for the Entertainment of 2000. Poles, with as many horse,
attending the great Chaunsellor of Letto: The first Ambassador of (but of a
strange) peace, concluded about the time, Sir Richard Lea, was Ambassador
there, for her late May. of England: the same house the young Prince John of
Denmark, Brother to that King, and our now Queen of England did lodge in, who
would have married the young Princes Oucksinia, the Emperors only Daughter,
but that he unhappily there died of a surfeit, as I was creadible Informed of
one of the Em. Doctors.

The Ambassad. as Played lying in the same house, but not in any those lodgings:
for it is a custom there, that where a Prince dies (especially a stranger)
not of long time after to let any other lodge there: yet we savv, and after
walked in those lodge. though they were for the most part barred up and kept
close: which often seeing of the chamb. where he departed, being brother to our
Noble and virtuous Quee. wroght a desire in us to see his toomb. The kings
gentlemen and some others, having the Emp. horses and sleads, rode to their
Sloboda, as we call it Suberbes, where in the Chancell of the dutch Church he
was interred, with a great and Princely obsequy: the Emp himself and Prince,
attending the corpse to the first g^te, but all his Counselors, Nobles,
gentlemen, etc, following to the Church where they stayed till the Sermon was
ended. He had a large toombe covered with black velvet, many banners and
Scutcheons hanging about the body of the Church and chancel, with his Arms and
Creast, and considring the country, very princely.

Now the Ambassador understanding of the conuenience of his passage down by
slead way, also fearing (as wise men had cause) what the issue of these wars
would be, knowing the state here used in any suits, bethought himself
advisedly that it was hie time being the midst of February, to desire a second
audience for his sooner dispatch, which he forthwith requested, and wrote a
letter to that purpose, unto the L. Chancellor, whom he knew must necessarily
show it unto the Emp. but within twoe days, the Chancellor was himself to go
unto the camp, upon business of great importance, so as it would consequently
be upon his return, before he could have audience: for that none would nor
could^, so well and willingly supply that office, of dispatch for Ambassadors,
as Ofod Nasse. His return accordingly, the Ambassad. by his Prestaues, put him
in mind of his dispatch, which he said directly should forthwith be performed:
so as within ten days a^^^r, the Amb. had his second audience very graciously
and honorably as thus: Having notice given of the day, he was accordingly sent
for with the Emp. own slead for his own person, and horses for the kings Gent.
and the rest, as was desired by them.

Upon the 10. of March, the Ambas. with the kin. gentlemen all richly
apparailed, and all his followers decently attending, very honorably (as
before) and with the like recourse of beholders, and guard of Gunners, (but
that they were said to be Citizens by reason of their wars, put in like
apparel) was attended to the Court, being received with the former grace, or
more, he ascended the Presence: the Emp. and Prince holding their wonted state,
only changing their vestments with the season, but for the riches nothing
inferior.

So soon as the Ambass. and the kings gent. were come opposite to his throne,
he commanded seats that they might sit down: then with a Maiest^cke
countenance, representing rather constraint, then former cheerfulnes, he
declared, that he, his son, and Council, had considered his Majesty's letter,
the Majesty of king James of Eng. as also on whatsoever else was desired, and
in token of his joyful received amity with the renowned king of England, as
with his predecessor, he had wrote his Princely letters to that purpose.
Herwith the Chancel from the Emp. delivered the Amb. his Highness letters to
his excellent Ma. Withal understanding by the Chan. he had some farther matter
to entreat of, then in his brief to his may. was remembered: therefore he had
appointed four principal Counselors to consult with him of his requests,
which was done. After, the Ambas. ye^lding courteous thanks for his May
favor, his Lordsh. attended by many Nobles, proceeded to the Council chamber,
whether presently after came fou^ Councelors, and the Em. Tolmach: who after
salutations, we withdrew to the next chamber, where we passed away an hour in
discourse, among many young Nobles, having the Ambass. enterpreter. In the end,
after three or four goings and returns of the Chancellor from the Em. we went
again before him (where after he had commanded us to sit down as before) by
the mouth of the Chauncel^our was openly delivered a brief of the whole
Embassy (and that d^yes particular desire according to the Ambassadors request
confirmed) Also in good and pleasing language, was declared the great desire
that the Emperor had, for the continu^nce of p^ace and amiti^ with the
renowned Iam^s king of Eng. as with the la^e Q. Eliz. with all that in due time
(all accidents well ended,) he would send an honorable Ambas. for further
affairs, as likewise to congratulate with our King of his happiness in so
applausable coming to his right and inheritance: Farther, that of al demands,
their graunts, or reasons why not granted he would send the Ambas. a role.
Also of the grant of 600. robles, which for the love of the King of England,
and at the Ambas. earnest request, he commanded should be paid back again.
Likewise, a grant of a new Privilege for the company, which he said should
be under the golden seal etc.

Which ceremonius speech ended, the Emp. called for the Ambas. and the Kings
Gent. to kiss his hand, and the Princes: which done, with the Empe. Nod or
bowing to us, as likewise the Princes, desiring the remembrance of his and the
Princes commendations to his Majesty, the Prince, and Queen of England, we
were dismissed, but not before the Emp. said he would send home to us. Thus we
took our last leave of the Emperors Court, being more graciously, and
especially entertained then before, or then ever any would take knowledge
Ambas. were used withal. At which I do not a little wonder, considering the
heaviness of times, and the bad succ^sse of his new entertained wars, and no
doubt the secret trouble, and grief of his conscience: but he that was from
his Infancy, (then being a subject) esteemed and accounted subtle and
ingea^ious, now being an Emp. experienced with many strange plots and
stratigems, to his number of years and imploiments, could he less be, or
less seem th^n a wise politician? But we are honorably attended home, and a
Duke of great account named Knas Euan Euannowich Courletev, calls me at this
time (from Princes proceedings) to attend him, that was attended with many of
the Emp. servants within our gates: following him a dinner, sent from the Emp.
by some 200. persons, consisting of 300. several dishes of Fish, (for it was
now Lent) of such strangenes, greatness, and goodness, (for their number) as it
were not to be believed by any report, but by a man's own eyesight, with
infinite store of Meandes, and beer, in Massy plate.

The Duke sat at the tables end by the Ambas. having every dish delivered him
by the name, which was enterpreted to the Ambas where having long sat, and
well feasted, we rose, and observing their Countries fashion, after the room
was deasentlie beseene, the Ambas. drank the Emperors health in a small gilte
cup covered: then our Kings and the two Princes, all which the Duke pledged
willinglye, although his cups held four times the Ambassa: besides, the drink
was as different, the one being beer or Meand, the others alligant, Sack and
Muskadell. After them, the Prestaues, the Kings Gent. and others of the Emp.
servantes being there did the like. Thus some four or five hours was soon
stolen away, night before diner having sent his borrowd torches to light us,
when the Duke having received a worthy present of the Ambas. was lightly
(whether you consider the torches, his drinking, or the Ambassa. bounty) sent
away, and so this feastiuall daies-night was concluded.

The 17. of march, the Ambas. being before often invited by this Agent, now
after so honorable a dispatch, was willing to see the English house: having the
Emp. sleds and horses, one of the Prestaues, the Tolmatch, and some
Simboyarskes or Gentl. we rode thither: where his Lordship had a bountiful
feast, a hearty welcome, and as good company. After diner, the Ambas. his
Prestaus, and the Tolmatch, went forth of the dining room to see Mistress
Merick, (for their fashion will not admit any women at tabl^) who had provided
an excel^ent banquet of English stuff, and was much rejoiced to see the Amba.
(whom she knew before) at her house in so far a Country. There the honest and
kind Agent (by the fair hands of his virtuous wife) after the banquet,
presented his Lord ship with a fair standing gilt cup and cover, worth thirty
pound, likewise his Prestaue and Enterpreter, very bountifully, so returning to
the comp. for that time we left. One observation I there made, of the great
desire and often offer of the Prestaue when he saw Mistress Mericke, to be
gone: saying, it befitted him not to behold such creatures. But the Enterpreter
(being a Dutchman) borne to our English fashions, and acquainted with the
Agent, persuaded him to Patience, both to his profit, pleasure, and belly
delight. Thence (after a like bountiful supp^r) about 10. in the night we
departed. One honorable kindness of the Chaunsellor I must not forget, who
imagining the Kings Gentlemen would that day ^ide abroad, sent to us to make
offer of his Horse and sleds at our command, but we not minding to leave the
Ambassador for our pleasures, returned humble thanks to his Lordsh* for his
honorable kindness, not resolving as that day to take more then sufficient.

The 18. of march, the Empe. sent by Vassilly Gregorewich Telepnoue, the role
wherein was the demands of the Ambas. and the particulers of the whole
negotiation, as there at large appears.

The 19. his Majesty sent by Mensboy Buldec^ue, under Treasoror, a royal
present to the Ambas. of many perticulars, also to each of the Kings Gent.
being rewarded, he departed.

The 20. of march, being honorably accompanied with thousands of gallants of
each side the streets al along as we passed, the Ambas. departed from the City
of Musco.

Surely a great and (according to their wooden building a fair City) with
the whole numbers of horsemen still becking us, till we came a short Mile on
this side the City where we made a stand, and after some complement between
the Ambassa. and his kind and honorable Prestaue, the Duke Vollag demor, with
almost weeping on his part, the Ambassa. went from the Emp. fled, to his coatch
set upon a sled, and we alighted from the Emp. horses, and beto^ke our selves
to our easy and pleasant passage in sleds, such a passage as this part of the
world would wonder at, in which a man though he go a Hackney pace, may as
easilye read, as sleep: Having according to the Amb. request, one of our
sonnet Prestaues, named Constantine Petrowich Arteshove, then whom the Emperor
could not afford a more humble or dilligent Gent. with him a Dyack, named
Patricke Nasonove, and three of our former Sunboy arskeis, with their servants.

Thus accompanied with Master John Mericke, M. William Russell, sometimes Agent
for the Dutch, and many other merchants, we easily rode that night to
Bratteshin, 30. miles from the Musco. The next morrow taking leave of them all,
we continued our iourny 50. and 60. verse a day easily. Our Prestaue had in
command to let our Ambas. see any Monasterye or place he desired, in his
travail: also to lodge in what houses it pleased him, in any Cittye or
Town: and where the English Merchants had houses, that the Ambas. might have
them, which indeed he desired, as well in respect they were the fairest and
most at his command: as also to understand their courses, dealings, and
behavior of the servants that kept them, and other special things, which but
by personally there being, he should never truly have understood. And for the
general good of the company, I know he did that Service, that while it stands
and he lives, they need not fall into any unadvised courses, if by him they
will but be councelled, being furnished every way with a full understanding and
judgment to that honorable intent. Especially, meeting here with so honest and
discreet an Agent, so well beloved of the Emp. Prince and Nobility, so approved
of by the merchants, in as good esteem of al other, so thoroughly experienced
in affairs, as well concerning their trade, as their customs, and demeanure,
having a mind and ability, I am persuaded for the good and benefit of the whole
company, as never had nor will succeed a fitter man.

The 23. of march we came to Yery-slaue being satterday, and there rested our
Saboth, where the company has a very fair and tight house, which we lay in,
and surely an honest discreet servant then kept it. From hence we took our
Journey the 25. because we feated the breaking up of the way, we made great but
very pleasant iourneys, so as the 29. we came to Vollagde, where the Ambas. lay
at the English house, within the walls whereof it has a great many of rooms,
as chambers, worke-houses and the like, but the house it self is very old, and
stands with an humble body as though it vvoulde shortly kiss the earth, at our
being here the company had many ser. and the Amb. took a course they should
thrive by his there lodging, allowing them for their beer for himself and the
Kings Gent. their whole diet: being desirous to ^o the company good and their
servants no hurt. After Easter week was passed, the Prestaue came to desire
that the Ambas. would appoint some to go and make choice of boats which then
lay upon the River, that they might be fitted for his Lordship. which
accordingly very carefully was performed, the Governor of the town having a
Letter from the Emperor to give the Ambassa. full content, as indeed without
detraction we had, to the wonderment of the common people. Within few days
after we heard News certainly of the Emp. sudden and untimely death: which
considering, neither the Prestaue, the governor, or Bishop, had not or would
not of ten da^es after take knowledge, we might in the mean time have doubted
of, but that his Lordship had it from Master John Mericke by letter
particularly. which news as indeed there was great cause was very il welcome to
the Ambas. much troubling him for diverse respects, wherefore upon mature
deliberation, as whose thoughts then only were intended that way, he resolved
forthwith to send up to the Musco, to this end: therefore early bestirring the
next morn he sent for his Prestaues, who came willingly and cheerfully to
hear that with great heaviness and sorrow, which yet they were so wise as not
to believe though the day and hour of his death, with the manner of his
enterring, were to them by the Am. own mouth delivered: but he believed it, and
therefore gave them to understand he would send up post, and write to the
Prince, their expected Emp. and others concerning affairs of importance. To
that end he demanded post horses and convoy accordinglye: which demand, though
yet for the suddainnes and heaviness did somewhat distract their heads, have
sildome easy resolutions but to sleeping: yet after desiring an hours
liberty, and therein consulting with the Bish. and Gent. of the town, it was
effected. So then his Lordsh. requested M. Edw. Cherry (though he was best to be
commanded) as being used to ride poast, having the language, knowing the
factions of the Country, and an easy command in every town because of his
bountifulnes, himself no doubt well pondring the waighte of his message, with
the care and speed therein to be used, indeed as the only he, whether you
consider the intrest the Amb. had in him, or his serviceable mind, often
manifesting his duty to his Lordship: even from his first going from the
Arch-angell to this present. Thus having al things meet and fit for their
speedy journey, and weighty business he with one of the Emperors Gentlemen
underwent this dangerous and hard travail.

Here it might be befitting this my relation, to declare somewhat at large the
Emp. death, the cause or disease, his nature, stature, complexion, and
stratigems. The Princes succeeding, the Nobles mourning, and the commons
censuring, each of which I could with little labor perform, but I know that man
is made to undergo much envy, does undertake to write of Princes persons or
policies: which whosoever hereof writes truly must necessarily incur, it
being as a fit subject for another Plato to write of: so for a free born spirit
to vvade in, my self protesting rather a will to be reputed timorus, then a
desire to have the least detraction, only because I vvil not be thought dumb
in such a speaking age, (the time so falling out at my being there) nor to want
intelligence sufficient to tell the truth, I shall say something, as accounting
him a fool, upon a just occasion sp^ake^ nothing. His death was very
sudden, and as it was in it self, very strange: for within some two hours
after dinner having (as he usually had) his Doctors with him, who left him
in their Judgments in health, as the good meal he made could witness, for he
dined well, and fed plentifully, though presently after as may be thought,
feeding over much, he felt himself not only heavy, but also pained in his
stomach: presently went into his chamber, laid himself upon his bed, sent
for his Doctors (which always speeded) yet before they came, he was past,
being speechles and soon after dying. Before his death (as speedy as it was)
he would be shorn, and new christened, what the cause was otherwise then the
grief, inward sorrow, with diverse distractions about the wars, and their badde
success, fearing the worste on his part, only God knows: yet who, so
remembers Gods judgments, or Princes policies for kingdoms, with man's
inherent sinfulnes: and considers the one with the other, may be satisfied,
if not contented. It is reported, and I am to the truth thereof rightly
persuaded, that being, in this present not being, some of his Counselors and
Nobility demanded, if he would not swear them a new to the Prince, and
whether he should not be their Em. his answer (with much trembling) was, as it
pleased God, and the Commons thereby, presuming of the sufficiency, of their
former oaths, but dispairing of the commons, if not with^l fearing gods
judgments. For the Princes succeeding I must defer that to hereafter, but for
the mourning, who does consider the fodaine loss in that time^ ^f rebellion,
of their best, chief, and wisest heads, whose first election was from their own
applause, the youth, with the inocency of the Prince, herewithal remembering
many strange plots long time used by the house of the Godonoves, and flattring
themselves in their good success, and now the general opinion in the right of
Demetre, whereby all their hopes ended, may think there was moorning, sorrow
and fear, as in those whose consciences are compacted all of fear. For this
many headed-beastes of the multitude, none caring how nor what he spoke,
being naturally ever suspicious of the best, how could they digest this,
which of all other was the vvorst? The rumor of the Emperors poisoning, with
his reviving, Demetres Crowning, the Princes imprisoning, the Nobles fighting,
most of the counselors reuolting, and the Merchants flying: with the variety,
the likelihood, the necessitye, the desire, the hope, the fear, being all as
nothing to them, living under that government, which least needs to care who
govern them so they be ouer-ruled in any other more civil Nation. A subject
might have lost his tongue to have spoken al: his ears to have herd al, and
his life to have believed and defended al.

For the Em. person, he was tall and well bodyed, teaching out of his authority
obedience, of an excellent presence, black and thin haired, well faced, round
and close shaued, strong limbed, A Prince framed between thought and
resolution (more fit for a kingdom then a king) as being ever in labor, but
never till death deliue^ed: never acting (though ever plotting) but in his
closet or council chamb. One rather obeyed than loved, being feared where he
was not served, protected by the mighty, rather than any particular, perhaps
under pretense of continual wars, to oppress his poor subjects, couching
tyranny under policy, as one whom long experience (in opposite actions, had
made as fit to rule thereby, as by cquity and conscience) But gaining that
Crown with much cunning, that he had no right unto, held it great wisdom
accordinglye to maintain the same: esteeming it less blame, so to win a
kingdom, then any other means to lose it: doubtless upholding a true
Majesty and government in every part, but in his own mind: that it is a
question, whether he were more kind to strangers, or severe and just to his
Subjects, or most hateful and terrible to his enemies. In his entertainments,
making royalty and state, give place to fashion and custom.

A father and a Prince, whose words, councels, obseruacions, policies,
resolutions, and experiments, were but the life of his dear son, never
aduising, entertaining, no not praying without him: In all Ambassies and
negotiations, remembering his sons name with his own, loving him (being lovely)
for that himself would be loved, unwilling to spare his presence, desirous to
have him at all occasions before his eyes. I shall not do amiss, to give a
taste of the fruit sprung from so stately a tree. Being by a learned and well
travailed gent. diverse times partic^larly advised, to let the Prince take some
mo^e (then no recreation) by which means he might as well prolong his life, as
instruct his judgment and delight his mind. Oh, would the Empe. answer, one son
is no son: nay I am persuaded, three sons to me is but half a son. But had I
six sons, then I might safely say I had one, how then should I part with
that at any time, I know not to be mine for any tim. This may give satisfaction
to any understanding both of his fears and gelousies: his great love, and
much care. Another saying of the Emperor was this, and then let any judge what
I have writ, and why. It was a usual speech with the Emp. upon good reason: to
say he was the Lord and father of his son, yet withal, That he was not only
his servant, but his very slave. And thus he proved it That he might command
him, and that he begat him. For the second, that all his actions were only for
his service though not commanded by him, yet in his own nature and affection
urged thereunto. For his chief good he was his addopted Prince, and that he
knew it was his duty, he remembered ever more he was his father as his
Sovereign able, and as his father obliged. For the third that he was his
Slave, he would allege for him in many kinds, he knew that he had done
that, could not but from a Tyrant, be required of his vassals, and the greater
was his subjection herein, that he was forced to commit that no Potentate
could exact ( I say neither by law nor Conscienc^) from his Slaves, neither any
could thereunto be commanded.

This being spoken from him, who best knew his own secrets, may be every way
held enough for any to understand sufficiently by: yet that he is to be
registered among none of the worst Princes, that could with such ease attain so
great an Empire, having no just Title thereunto: but on the contrary, to be
recorded among the famous (I leave to say wherefore.) upon what ground of
reason was his greatness in the late Emp. days, especially in the sons
government, being Protector. The policy of that time when he aimed at the
kingdom, his election by general consent, after the death of Pheodor
Euaniwich, and the resignation of the Empress his sist. Irenia Pheodurna. His
many refusals to be Emperor, with the general and particular desire that he
must take it: the necessity that one must speedily be chosen: his conditions in
taking it, with entytling his son after him: the form of their Oaths to them
both so soon as he was established: his wife-seeming and applausible Reign,
till the late demand made by Demetre, when he had governed 8. years, and
thereupon his sudden death and other occurrents, who wisely scans, must
acknovvledge him (but only in his final and fatal judgment) a prudent and
pollitik Prince, as any times make mention of, and that if his latter end
ansvvered not the expectation of so happy a beginning, with a like prosperous
continuance, It is in the like case to be demanded, why Acbitophel murdered
himself, because ( in but one th^^^) his council was not followed: the true
echo returns, ( because his council was not followed) and why Judas would
hang himself when he had betrayed his master: the reason was ( He had
betrayed his Master.)

Of this Emperor it is reported by Sir Ierom Horsey, in his writings in M.
Hacklayts works, that the aforesaid Emperor when he was a Subject, had 12000.
li. yearly, besides his places of Honor; as being Protector, Governor of
the Kingdoms of Cozan and Astracan, etc. Unto which, Doctor Fletchers report
agrees; whereof 3500. Marks was given him by Pheodor Euanch at one time in one
Sheire: And howsoever toward his end, he grew very miserable and covetous;
which was not the least cause of his overthrow: insomuch as it was obserud,
himself would often take notice of the passage to his Seller and Buttery. Not
much unlike (in that kind) one writes of the French King:

Il* feit d'argent auec ses dens,
That he made Money with his teeth.
Yet when he aspired to the Empire, note his greatness, with his bounty;
first to Sir Ierom Bows when he was there Ambassador: then to Sir Ierom
Horsey, when he was there Messenger, (recorded by themselves) yea even to her
late Majesty of blessed memory: the particulers are set down in the
forementioned Book of Voyages: notwithstanding what the lord of Pibrac
observes in his Quadrones, is fulfilled in this Emperor* viz. Petite Source
ont les grosses Riuieres: etc.

Even as from smallest Springs the greatest Rivers rise:
So those that rore aloud, and proud at first,
Run seldom far; for soon their glory dies
In some near Bogg, by their selfe-furie burst.
Two pollecies of the said Emperor, I shall willingly acquaint you with, for
diverse reasons. One was, when he caused fire to be kindled in four parts of
Moskoe; whereat himself was noted to be very diligent, with all his Nobles and
Courtiers: and after it was quenched, he sent his Bounty to them all, that
builded anew their Houses, and repayde all their losses: And this was but to
stopp the Rumor then was so common, of his strange gayning the Empire: by
which Stratagem of his, when his people were ready to Mutanie, they were
created anew, good Subjects; yet did admire his not only Care, but goodness
toward them all.

A second, was at that time the Land was visited with a mighty Famine, and as
great a Plague (some four years since) whereof a third of the whole Nation is
rate^ to have dyed: and the murmuring multitu^e said the cause was, their
el^cting of a Murder^r to the Empire; wherefore God did thus visit them:
Wher^vpon, he caused G^lleries to be bui^ded round about the utmost wall of the
great city of Moskoe, and there appointed d^yly to be given to the poor,
twenty thousand pounds sterling: which was accordingly performed for one
Month; Whereupon the Common peoples mouths and bellies were well stopped. Yet
notwithstanding he dyed, and that v^timely; as a Noble man of France well
says: Men seldom see Tyrants or usurpers, live long or temperatly; or die
well and naturally.

Now if I can be thought blame worthy, which I conf^ss^, no not of them m^st
partial; yet the most that Nation can (if they would) say any thing to me,
reueren^i^g an^ approouing their own proverbs, is this: ( As the Dog does
bark, the Wind carries it away): In answer whereof, I say; it is the true
nature and quality of a Dog to bark, yet he seldom hurtes that so barks:
for our ancient Proverb is, The barking Dog bites least, as the curstest
Cow has the Shortest Horns.

Here we lodged till the 6. of May, being wearied with the inconstancy and
ill-come news of flying reports, whereupon the time of the year req^iring,
the Ambassador re^olued to pass down the River to Colmigro, as well that he
might the sooner have news from England, as happily to be out of fear of any
disaster, the rumors being so innumerable and uncertain, as they were
doudtfull, and fearful; and indeed the extraordinary care for the
Ambassadors provision, especially the large and well builded Boats, never the
like i^ memory before, wrought in the peoples opinions many contrarieties, as
obsurde as untrue: One, that the young Prince necessarily, and personally, must
be, and was in English apparel, within the Ambassadors lodging: Else, that
it was vnpo^sible, that Great men should so willingly obey, and so earnestly
command, for the full content ^f all, in all things: Likewise else, where it
was reported, that the Prince would come down, and go over into England with
the Ambassador: Also, far of from us, it was said, that the Prince and the
Ambassador, were in Cheines to be sent up to the Moskoe: But it repents me
of relating thus much; only you may observe hereby, their willingness to
rebel: also the wilfulness of the Commons, to be as great as their
ignorance; if not as senseless as their Intelligence: But we are on the fair
and pleasant River, within five fair and convenient Boats, with two great
Loddyackes for provisions, rowing with wind and stream, from the ouerflowing
Tide of these reports; and within twelve days are safely arrived at Colmigro,
where we lodged at the Comp house; surely the largest, tytest, and fairest in
all the Country; and of Warehouses, Ambarres, and Workhouses as well
accommodated.

For our being at Colmigro, it was not much unlike (for the strangenes of
reports, troublesomnes of the State, and mutable events of time) to that one,
and the only unhappy day of the unfortunate (too sudden rising) Earl of
Essex; wherein most men's minds: for as many days as we weeks, wear
bewondred as much, with the not well directed beginning, as the unhallowed
sucsesse, or the bemoaned, (Oh be it ever lamentable, such conclusions: but as
far different is the rarenes, as the goodness between them) ill-aduised
well-intended, euer-good-resolutions in the one: ill-intended worse-enacted,
neuer-good-conclusions in the other: One, as the unhappy time-falling of a
great Noble, with some others; But by the goodness of God, and the gratiousnes
of our renowned King, within short and memorable time, restored in his
posterity, and theires. The other, the fatal^ and final overthrow of a
mighty Emperor, and his all posterity and famelie, never till the
Resurrection, to be raised: and then, Oh then, it is to be feared, to a
terrible Judgment for their high-offending, Heauen-crying-sinnes.

Now I shall tell you of a 18. year esteemed dead Princes reviving of an other
Princes (that twice 18. years might have lived) poisoning, like (and indeed
not unfit for the same) Stage crowners, within one day dying and reviving; as
it were to make Time a liar, who is the Son and Heir of Truth.

Of the Almighties providence, by the benefit of Patience, Innocence of
past-yeares, Right of Inheritance, and his just Judgment upon the contrary;
and to the eternal happiness of this never yet civil Nation, in effecting his
exceeding mercy (that Ages wonderment) this last year: But it will be a
Laborinth to me, as it were to ravish my selfewith, if not a Dylemma wherein I
may (not having the Art of Logic or Rhetoric) needless, if at any time (to
my time and discourse, though incident to the general) rather confound my
self, then satisfy the Readers expectation, or every particular propriety,
it not only being very tragical and comicall in the event: But as all such
State-pollicies are beyond ordinary intellig^nce, or a writers honest patience;
but what Truth has been servant, and my Ea^es subject unto, I will without
either flattery to the living, or envy to the dead, c^mpendiously diliuer.

Aft^r the suspicious death of the old Emperor Boris Pheodoricke, etc. by the
appointment of the Prince (then their exp^cted Emperou^) and the Counsel,
Peter Basma^ (that noble Spark) was speedely dispatched and sent a General
unto their ill ^ucceeding Wars, as their last hope, (in deed he proved so
in a contrary sense) and the only refuge to the Commons: Whither being come,
(bemeeting as you may imagine) he insenced the Counsel, A loving and belou^d
Prince, of such heroyicall spirit, so worthy selfe-acting and politiq^e a
Soldier, so generally good a Scholar, as being rep^rted to be both well
Letterd, well traueld; as great a Linguest as he was Statist; feared, as being
aleyed; he for special grace and favor, who^e bount^e and courtesy, sent
Defiance to Pride and Extortion; in whom Industry and Labor were twins,
Innocensie and Freedom brothers; that held Wisdom as his rest, True Valor
as his Servant, Flattery as his Enemy, and Envy as his Slave; not being
himself s^bi^ct to any greater Potentate. but Princely poue^tie; He (I say)
reuiewing the Majesty of his person, and compari^g the age of his Youth with
the gray heads of his Honor: not in all, but in eue^y particular her^of, not
less to this Nation then a Phoenix; was resolved, he could not less be than
(being a Prince of so many Virtues) the Heir of the Kingdom, his Emperor,
Lord and Master: whereupon he speeded with the wings of Hope, Honor, and
Confidence, to deliver himself in such an infected and pestiferous a time, to
the hands of him either whose Enemy being, he was without being; or whose
Subject and Patient received, he might well fall away; but neither from his
right Sovereign, nor Loyalty: Also he prostrate^, or presented most of his
Command, as many as freely would offer themselves: Under which, were all the
English, Scots, French, Dutch and Flemings, whatsoever: and with him, or rather
before him (as lea^t suspected) Ries Vasili Euanch Goleeche, the other General
a man of great birth, and in the prioritie of place, to be received before P.
Basman.

All which, the now well known newly opinionated Emperor very graciously
received, happily not without some iealowsie of many particulers; as of the
Generals, the world surmizing a former correspondence to be hel^ ever since a
Parle ha^, at what time he was besiedged, and is aforesaid to perform very
honorable service; and for the same had so applausable a receiving by the old
Emperors appointment into the Moskoe.

After this General, from the Prince and Counsel was forthwith sent many
thousand Rolls or Marks, they ever having the discretion of wi^e and
politic States to account it as the Nerves and Sinews; but now were
persuaded it would prove the Soul and Heart of the Wars: but the general
received, he could not accept it and his General, being offered it by the
faithful treasorers, would not, but gave them this answer.

He would, they that sent that (though in-directly to him) should know, He
who had the Patience to forbear a Tyrant usurper, sitting upon his Throne so
long; And hitherto of himself (by his stranger Friends) had thus happily and
far, entered into his Right, could not now want that should encourage those
noble Spirits, fought with him in so just a quarrel: neither did he hold it
Princelike, to receive, from his Enemy in that kind, especially by their
hands could not show their face without blushing to their commanding Lord: Yet
when he came to receive the Crown and Kingdom, (which he assured himself
and them, would be very shortly) he doubted not this monegs would be then
infinitely increased, as should be his honor, and their affection. So he let
them have safe conduct to depart.

This falling away of them, the State so greatly blinded upon (especially Peter
Basman, whom I neither dare commend, nor will condemn, because I am not
studious in his arguments: and the answer from the Emperor) with the many
continually doubts of the issue, hastied the last breath of the once hoped-for
Prince, as from him that (though an Fmperour, was much hoodwinck^ by his
politic kinsmen great counselors) now might easily discern those times to
outrun his, and must notoriously know (though happily his youth and innocence
shadowed the reflection) that his Son was setting or beclouded at
noone-dayes, and that the right heir was (and would be when he was not)
apparent: that his fathers Empire and Government, was but as the Poetical
Fury in a Stage-action, complete yet with horrid and woeful Tragedies: a
first, but no second to any Hamlet; and that now Revenge, just Revenge was
coming with his Sword drawn against him, his royal Mother, and dearest
Sister, to fill up those Murdering Scenes; the Embryon whereof was long since
Modeld, yea digested (but unlawfully and too-too viue-ly) by his dead
selfe-murdering Father: such and so many being their fears and terrors; the
Devil aduising, Despair counselling, Hell itself instructing; yea,
wide-hart-opening to receive a King now, rather than a Kingdom; as L. Bartas
deuinely says: They who expect not Heaven, find a Hell every where.

These wicked instruments, the whole family of the Godonoues, their adherents
and factors, making a second (but no divine) damned Jury; these dejected and
abiected, as not knowing how to trust any, they so distrusted themselves, like
men between murdering others, and being massacred them selves; holding this
their only happiness, that they were then only miserable (Nobleness yet
esteeming any preferment felicity, but Honorable employment): As those whose
unmerciful greatness gained a pitiful commiseration, accounting Security
neither safety, nor reward; Indeed they were like Beasts, that have st^ength,
but not power.

Oh for some excellent penman to deplore their state: but he which would
lively, naturally, or indeed poetically delyneare or enumerate these
occurrents, shall either lead you thereunto by apoeticall spirit, as could
well, if well he might the dead living, life-giuing Sydney Prince of Poesy; or
deifie you with the Lord Salustius deuinity, or in an Farth-deploring,
Sententious, high rapt Tragedy with the noble Foulk-Greuill, not only give
you the Idea, but the soul of the acting Idea; as well could, if so we would,
the elaborate English Horace that gives number, weight, and measure to every
word, to teach the reader by his industries, even our Lawreat worthy Beniamen,
whose Muze approues him with (our mother) the Ebrew signification to be, The
elder Son, and happily to have been the Child of Sorrow: It were worthy so
excellent rare wit: for my self I am neither Apollo nor Appelles, no nor any
heir to the Muses: yet happily a younger brother, though I have as little
bequeathed me, as many elder Brothers, and right borne Heirs gain by them:
but Hic labor, Hoc opus est.

I am with the late English quick-spirited, cleare-sighted Ovid: It is to be
feared Dreaming, and think I see many strange and cruel actions, but say my
self nothing all this while: Be it so that I am very drowsy, (the heat of
the Clymate, and of the State) will excuse me; for great happiness to this
mighty Empire is it, or would it have been, if the more part of their State
aff^yres had been but Dreams, as they prove phantasmaes for our years.

But imagine (as truth is in the imagination) the new received Emperor has
written twice or thrice to the Old and new Emperors, (if so be I may ^ow call
them) and their privy Counsel, (which Letters you must know are intercepted
by the Godonoues, and their Secreataries) wherein he demands his Right and
Inheritance; and proves himself Heir very directly, with their resolution
herein; and that he was thereunto not only unanswered, but his Messengers
retained, tortured; and some executed: whereupon (much troubled) he con^ulted
with his Nobles, and many great Associates new come unto him, and yet resolves
once more to send unto their supposed Emperor, and many the great Boyeryres
privy Counselors perticulerly: for so he did, and writ his Princely Letters
to them, sending them by men of courage, birth, and wisdom; also giving them
authority thereafter, who being dispatched, are come into their Slobada or
Suburbs, where the multitude of the Commons (retired long before within the
first Gate) came flocking unto them without Authority, demanding what they
were: (For you must understand this was as a City besiedged within it self,
and at wars within her own walls: her Engine (if so he could be that is
now their Emperor) being 200. verse from them: also, they required what their
Message was: ( Ignorance now not being the Mother of Devotion, but the Father
of Peace) and to whom they were sent, and (out of order) from whom?

It was answered, that they were sent from their right and lawful Emperor D.
E. Vandh. etc. to the Usurpers Son, and many of the Privy Counsel; and that
if in obedience to their lawful Prince, they would guarde them into the
City, and safe conduct them to a chief Street therein, they would not only
satisfy them in reading those letters so nearly conscerning them all, but
they should be then most happy, when they understood how vildly and slauishly
that had been used by the Godonoues; and how by the Almighties power, their
right K. was living, and required their obedience herein: and he that late
governed them, to be an Usurper, and his Son but as heir thereunto.

Thus the Commons, who ever are desirous of change and novelties; and knew full
illy, well they could not have a more Tyrant: also, seeing them to be resolute
and confident (as any wise man, considering their being) must confess, and
also known men of great birth; and also of the late Boris his Enemies: indeed
thereunto ledd by the Spirit of God, as they were strengthed with his
all-sufficient power, (if I might so speak) they in infinite numbers, brought
them safe into the spacious Plain before the Castle gate: within which, as
daily they did use, so now were all the Counselors in consultation; but
happily not in a secret Counsel; also wherein was the Imperial Court.

There these Boyeryns made demand for many of the Counselors, especially for
the Godonoues, to come to hear their right K. D. E. speaking unto them by
Letters* Who yet after refusal (and I cannot condemn all) many came; the
Commons being resolved, else to fetch them out; all alleging, their guiltines
to be so great, and to be so ashamed as they were astonished, with the long
deluding and mocking the common and their new trial of all their treasons.

But one, by the mouth of the golden tonged Chaunsellor or Secretary (he
thereunto commanded by the P. and Nobility then in counsel) indeed the only
Orator and Populer man among them, was required the reason of that strange
assembly, tending to little less (indeed too much more) then a Mutiny: also
the Boyeryns countenauncing them herein; alleging they needed not so to
assemble themselves undutifully and disobediently, that by petition might have
any request answered, as having so merciful, mild, and humble-harted a
Prince; As when the time mourning for his dear Father was performed, (which is
6. weeks) and his Coronation, with his former Princes magnificense and state
obs^rued, they all should conf^sse him to be, till ^hen their Country L^wes
did not a^mit of public or private suites in ^xtra^rdinary persons or
particulers, etc. but in such Language this was delivered, as he might well
supply the Tongues office: But the affection of the heart powered not out this
Oration. Then, by the Boyeryers aloude was read the Emperors Letters, to this
effect.

That he much woondred at that time, wherein expedition was to be accounted
safest policy, having s^nt many Letters and Messengers to them, concerning
their approouing him to be their lawful Prince, as being the Son of Euan
Vasulrach their late Emperor, and the only brother of Pheodor Euanchers
selfe-vpholder, of happy memory, both with invincible arguments and direct
reasons to the manifesting thereof, they (notwithstanding his long patience and
gracious remisness^) were not only so proud as not to answer his Princely
Letters, but so presumptuous as to retain his Messengers, whereby they made
themselves apparently to be no less Vipers to the State in obscuring him, then
Traitors to himself the true and right Emperor, by defrauding them: yet
giving him a strong Argument by their Silence, of their guiltiness; also
allowing thereby, time and opportunity (if he had not been their true-borne
Emperor, and with the natural Mother, tendered the life of her dear
Children) to have conquered and destroyed the whole Nation; a^ding thereunto,
the love of the many and daily falling to his side of the Mighty; whilst they
like either unworthy, or unwise Counselors (blinded with Honor and
partialities) securely slept in their particular strength, ignorant of this
Principle, That where the Members are disioynted and broke, the Head and Heart
suffer of necessity.

All which notwithstanding, he (being confident in his own conscience, of
his just Title, made the Prince of patience and humility from his former many
great myseries and dangers) had in his princely wisdom and clemency again
wrote these (but certainly his last Peace-requiring, and Grace-offering
Letters: yea, was content to desire them he might,) and doubted not shortly
but he should command, only aiming at the good of the Commonwealth and
State in general; as he that without much shedding of his Subjects blood,
desired the Kingdom.

Also to this end he had sent ^en of great birth, viz. Rues Pheodor, Euanrich
Methithsosky, and Rues Demetre, Euanrich Suskey; and given them Commission to
displace his Enemies, and prestaue the Godonoues, and others, till his further
pleasure were known, consuming those monstrous blood-suckers and Traitors,
with return of the Commons answer thereunto: Likewise to demand his
Messengers, and they to be brought before the Commons, whom he had reason to
believe, were ill entreated, if not murdered; withal, that if they did submit
themselves now to him, as to their lawful Prince and Sovereign, (which he was
truly resolved their Consciences were guilty of) that yet they should find
him a gracious and merciful Lord; if otherwise, a seu^ere and just Revenger of
them, and their many misdeeds toward him, as he that had his Sword ever
unsheathed to execute his vengeance on them all: and was easily persuaded they
were not ignorant of the many Victories he had obtained, formerly against
them, when they would seem able and willing to fight with his Soldiers: and
how afflicted and troubled herewith they all were: But that now, he had their
chief and strongest heads and arms in his own hand, the whole world might
not betroth him they durst once speak openly against him, as assured all
(excepting a very few, and they of the worst) in heart, were his loyal
Subjects.

Of all these premises, he wished them from the highest to the lowest,
seriously and considerately to advise and reinforme their judgments, for that
he was forthwith determined, and that peremptorily of a course, as greatly to
their terrifiyng and horror, as verily not agreeable to his nature and
Princely disposition: and how vehemently and earnestly he desired of God, to
regaine his Inheritance, and to be Inthroned in his Fathers and Mothers Empire
without blood; he only was the witness to his Conscience, should be the
Judge of his Innocence, if it did so come to pass withal, that he had
humbly beseeched of the Almighty, that as he had miraculously and wonderfully
preserved him from many dangers, sorrows, and myseries, to this happy time;
so that it would please him to grant him wisdom, patience, and
mercifuln^sse, to si^t in his Fathers and Mothers Throne without shedding of
innocent blood, if possible to the shedding of one drop. etc.

But before this Princely Letter was half read, the hearts and hands of the
multitu^e were strangly combinde together, not one speaking, but all confusedly
like letterde and chayned Horses stamping; being indeed without any fear, but
of not doing mischief enough, all (as one) running violently into the Castle
(where meeting two of the pitifully tormented Messengers) they paused to hear
them as sufficiently as their insufficiency would permit them deliver the
vil^e manner of their torturing whipping and rosting, which was in deed a
Whippe and Spur to drive them without wit or humanity, as if they had been
fyred like Gunpowder with the very spa^kes of heat: Such barbarous cruelty,
beastly actions, and inhumane spectacles, as without the great Devil had been
there general, no particular could have enacted; laying violent hands on all
they met: but not killing (the great mercy of God!) any man of account.

Thus the whole City was in an vproare, all the Couns^ll^rs Houses Sellers,
and Studies, ransacked, begi^ning with the Godonoues; spoiling, r^nting, and
s^ealing all they met with; but carrying little away but drink, that they
could not carry away; for beginning to stagger in the Sellers, they left their
Wits in the Butteries, and laid down their eyes in the Kitchens; so as the
^ext day, by reason of the many were madd and dead druncke, this day well-nigh
^oo* persons ran into forgetfulness, being past life by their former less of
understanding.

The Commons (no doubt) would have made this day little infe^iour to the
Mass^cre of Paris, so violent and devilish were their sudden resolutions; but
that the Nobles (b^st beloved and obeyed) intreat^d, where none could command:
others persuading; all wishing an end to this most miserable and never
exampled mischief. But the multitu^e did what they would and could; especially
on the greatest, which certainly were the worst: So as the Empress flying to
a safer Lodging, had her Col^er of Pearl plucked from her neck, and yet a
happy creature that she so escaped; which she not easily did: but the young P.
in^eed ha^ no greater punishment or disgrace (too much for a P. to bear)
proffered him, than to be pitied by such Slaves, that had not the sense of
E^uie of the Nobles: many lost Peards and Havre, as if the French Disease had
possessed them; surely it was no inferior Evil that did work this.

Few men's houses, as the Stranger Doctors, or Merchants with their own,
escaped ransacking: yea, such was their miserable poverty, they stripped many to
their very skin, that a man might have seen an Army of Adams covering, (and
in their transgressing Gardens) their Nakedness, with Leaves, as ashamed not
only for their poor being, but their inhumane suffering; Parents entreating,
Children we^ping, Wives raging, the Richer punished, whilst the pitiful poor
ouerruled: And though the Nobles kept many places, and made strong the
chiefest, they could not resist the multitude there, thought such a drunken
kind their only heaven, living many years without the use and effect thereof:
But weeried and woried with their own long devotion in God Bacchus Temples,
many slept, the more sufferd, whilst the most least repented their bringing
this strange Judgment to a happy unhappy conclusion.

Then the Prince, Emperor, and Princ^sse, were prestaued (a second Command
being come from the Camp) with the Godonoues, and many others that were
suspected most: The Nobles joining in one Counsel for the present ordering of
these sudden accidents, and for answer to the P. Them. Euanich, who suddenly
was by general consent concluded (by the particular knowledge of Bodan Belskey
a great Counselor, that was pri^ie to his departure, and some others) to be
their right and lawful Emperor, only a few excepted, that could be true
subjects to none, because unfaithful to themselves, such were imprisoned
forthwith. Thus began the greatness of Demetre; and his right became apparent:
but as it happens for the more part in such unusual and rare accidents (as the
deposing of Princes and Statesmen) Tragical eue^tes fail one in the neck of
another so n^cessarily here* for now whilst the good were in consulting for the
well ordering of this yet perplexed state, the evil were plotting more
mischief by new stratagems and policies: for the very soul of Envy was
crased in this body, that the twins of Tirannie and Cruelty, strove for
prioritie of birth. And not more ingenious and industrious were some in
devising for the raising of the old Emperor and his posterity in times past,
than (to be accounted constant) now the same villainous Statesmen were
laborious and wickedly wilful to overthrow them: having no reason but a
selfe-norishing pity, to be accompanied to the place of of Repentance and
Punishment. So as the young Prince was by many (but particulerly by his mother
Iezabell) counseled to leave the Kingdom utterly, before it forsook him; to
follow his Fathers good example in murdering himself, and herein his Mother
(that Mapp of Miseries, that Cradle of Cruelty) and his only dear Sister,
would associate him.

Letters were devised, and Messengers framed to effect this desperate
Treachery on his innocent life; so as in very few days (for Mischief has
the wings of Thought and Resolution, they three did consent (an unhappy
conjunction) to destroy themselves; and rather to lay violent hands upon
their hate-full lives, then make an Enemy seem cruel in executing Justice on
them: which yet certainly this Emperor never dreamt of, but determined the
Prince should be within himself, not less then Absolute, and in a very great
Dukedom: Yet behold, nor Hope, nor Pity, nor Greatness once comforted them;
but as if selfe-Crueltie had been equiti^ of Conscience, the Mother omitting
the tender affection of her Children, the Son neglecting the natural love to
his Mother, the Sister condemning her self in either: Man forgetting (besides
the 4. cardenall virtues) his principal virtue, Patience: Women despising
Modesty and Bashfulnesse, would give the wanton world a president to run
Death out of countenance without selfe-blushing: They would (Oh unspeakable
myserie that they did) poison themselves. The Princely mother began the health
of Death to her noble Son, who pledgd her with a hearty draught, therein so
much strength did he add to his vild wicked obedience, that he proved a
Banquerour presently: Yes hand in hand (as heart in heart) embracing each other,
they fell, and dyed as one, the Mother counselling and acting, whilst the child
bethought and suffered: Yet see Providence and Commisseration, Constancy and
Obedienc^; the Princess drank, but like a Virgin temperatly: so as (the want
of modesty (which was the death of the Moth^r) now proved the life of the
daughter.

Presently after this Tragedy came into the Chamber, many great men where they
were saluted with a dol^fall welcome, the Emperor that might have been, and
his Mother (that was) embracing each other even in the kind arms of death,
^ast all hope: but the young, Princess only groueling, and assured of breath
therein, to be a motherlesse and brotherlesse Virgin, from whom was learnd ^he
manner of their behavior; which is said to be very resolute in the Empress,
pitiful in the Emperor, lamentable in both. Certainly a wicked Tree was it
to bear such fair but untimely Fruit.

Upon the ground was a sealed Letter from the dead Emperor to the living (some
report it was sent before his poisoning, not answered before he poisoned, it
being forthwith; but it matters little the time or circumstance, only the
truth is necessary): and to this purport it was written by his own
industrious hands.

Though the vain world may innocently condemn us of pusilla^ymitie, that
being the true Son and Heir to so great and mighty an Emperor (as our
late Father of happy and sweet remembrance Boris Pheodorich, of all Rushia
Emperor and selfe-vpholder was), he being there unto elected by so general a
consent, and the like importunity and beseech of the Bishops, Counselors,
Nobles, and Commons of their Empire, undertaking the government thereof merely
of pity, without the least motion of pride or popularitie, only to sati^fie
them all in general, rather then in any p^rticular to please himself, but in
happying and blessing them withal his Princely and contionerie conditions
thereafter: that we his only Son so beloved of the mighty and many, so
reuerensed of the good and religious, will f^r many princely arguments approved
of by our self and our grauer Counsel (notwithstanding a double oath of the
most to our Imperial dignity, lawful succession and inheritance) in person
come into the field with an invincible Army to make good our cause against
thee: yet does it not befit such a mighty Prince as thou either art, or
would be thought, so cruelly and unjustly to determine of our self, our
royal Moth^r, and no less dear and princely Sister; of which we are
informed, thou thy self of us art resolved.

Thou should wisely and thankefully have remembered thy ow^e hard fortunes,
and as myraculous a prese^uing, with our inn^censie and youth: and that we
b^th were or have thought our selves (if so to be we are yet worthy) great
Princes Sons, and Christians: yea, and more happynes and glory would it have
been to thee, sitting on thy dear Fathers Throne to rule his people with
equity and justice, then to have been accounted his Son in tyrranie and
blood.

Little cause shall this Nation have to hope of a merciful and just Prince,
that begins thus to terrify and condemn the Innocent. What ^ it were
granted? We have no right; yet our Father was el^cted? Do we resist thee?
Do thou not (or will not blood-thirstie greatn^ss let thee) understand what
an Innocent in years and Counsel we then were, and yet have been? What if
we were persuaded thou art the right, yet there are many, many, that never
will be? and the greater are their arguments, as thy cruelties and policies.
But that thou shall perceive we never did resolve to keep thee from thy
Inheritance (if of thy Justice and true Title thereunto we were but
reasonably le^) notwithstanding our Princely and safe Intelligence, behold for
thee our only Enemy we sacrifize our self: behold how Innocence and Youth,
like the Twins of affection, are ma^e guilty in themselves, and we are an
Usurper to our self only: Yet be not thou hardened here with, nor yet rejoice
herein, least neither bemeetes thy dignity: but be thou rather (if not at
least) the true heir to Virtue, yet like a King in Pity: and assure thy
self, we die not for fear of thee, but for love to our self: not desparing
of thy mercy, but for our preventing thy justice, as he that thinks hopeless
benefit a comfort, then presumption; for we die but to conteyne our own
burden: yet with a much better resolution, then eythe^ sel^e-co^ceite, or
inthrald cowardice can be witness of, as he that had much rather be condemn^d,
than by accusing En^mies spared to be ius^ified inde^d only for thy expected
Servants, our beloved and loving Subictes, who we know dearly would purchase
our life and liberty, for them we do thus lay violent hands on our p^ttied,
but not hateful l^fe, as he that esteems it more worth to die an innocent,
then live, it but deemed death worthy: for greater sorrow should we sustain
to suffer without desert, then thus to die without compassion.

Shall not the Earth say, Thou weart the cause? yes, yes. All Princes words
are Laws, or should be; yet often times unlawful or unmerciful be their
entents and actions. May the world report we were our own murderer? If they
can, yet let them remember only if our self justice, but of our innocent
self: and better were it for any one Innocent, then many Innocents should
perish: for so thy friends shall be more and thy love greater when, we that
are thy Ryuall are departed: yet imagine with what joy or sorrow we embrace
death, that breath our last in that bosom we first received our being; and
be persuaded our self, our dear Mother and sweet Sister, drink only for
thee this Cupp of Lyres; So be thou a King, and thy posterity Princes, as
thou have right to our late Empire, and art just to thy Enemies, loving to thy
Subjects, merciful to the poor; and so be thou ever p^osperous: Thus thou
may be assured of us. Lo thus we dearly go to Heaven.

These Funeral speeches being afterward delivered to the Emperor, h^e fell
into tears upon reading them, mixing much gracious language of the young
Prince, amongst his bemoninges of his fortunes: And hearing some speak
irreverently of his Father, he checked them in these words.

It ill beseems any, much less his Subjects, and those who had elected him,
to wound his Honor (now he lies dead) whom living they kneeled to, as their
lawful Emperor, if not as right Heir, but as approved by the general voices
of the States. Then he gave commandment, that all those who had the keeping
of the young Prince, should be imprisoned till his further pleasure were known;
and that the Mother and Son, should be basely and obscurely huried: which
accordingly was done. The old Emperor Borris his body being likewise taken
from the royal Monument where it first was laid, to be buried with theirs in
a mean Church within the Mosco.

Before we carry you any further, it shall not be amiss to place before your
eye the picture of the young Prince: who was in countenance effeminate, in
tongue fair and quick: his speech (like his body) high and great: charitable
to the poor (which his Father was not) bountiful to the mighty; an
indifferent rewarder both of the Virtuous and Valorous.

The living thus having made the dead serve as Stayres to lift him up into a
Throane, each one held ^t safest insudome to fly (with the foremost) into ^he
Camp, there to make their peace: by which means they flocked in troops;
being driven thereunto either through fear of present dangers, or of
tempests to come.

But their rightful Emperor (casting behind him all thoughts of precedent
actions) only ^pplyed himself to the present receiving those that came unto
him, with princely, and kind embracementes, esteeming himself then to be an
absolute Prince; when he could so subdue his own affections, as to forgive
his Enemies; yea those that were accounted Arch-traytors and Bloody-tyrantes.

Besides, he held it a good part of wisdom, not to detain any by force (as
his predecessors did) within the Country, not suffering any to enter; but
rather made it known, that all his Dominions should be free for every Subject
to go forth, and every Stranger to come in: by which means (besides the
honor of being styled the First Emperor that made the State Free) he should
(through commerce with other nations) enrich his own, and propagate the fame
and greatness of his name and Empire.

Thus suddenly he became of a Poor and il-attended Prince, a mighty Emperor:
his Command reaching and swaying almost as much as a third part part of Europe
comes to; colleaguing himself to many potent Princes, especially the mighty
Polacke, (heretofore the most mortal Enemy to the Russie) and even from his
Camp (now his royal Court) he wrote his Princely Letters to all Cities,
Towns, and Villages, appoynting Noblemen to take their Oaths to his Majesty:
which in all places was willingly performed. In the number of all which
Letters, taking knowledge of an English Ambassadors residence in the Country
(tho 2000. miles from his Camp) and calling to mind the peace and amity held
between the Princes of England and his predecessors, he wrote unto the English
Agent; who was departed from the Mosco toward the Sea side: but by good
fortune (upon some special occasion) returned back again, and received this
gracious Letter, presenting himself at that time, before the Counsel: Which
being translated out of the original, is here set down.

Demetrie Euaniwich Emp. and great Duke of all Rushia, selfe-vpholder, etc. to
John Merick Agent for the English Merchants. etc.
Whereas by the mighty hand, infinite mercy, and almighty providence of God,
we are happily, and with the full consent of all our loving Subi^ctes, not
without admiration to the world, received and betrothed to our Right and
dignity, even the Throne and Communion table of our Regal Father Euan
Valsiliwich, and our noble Brother Pheodor Euanriuch, both of happy and famous
memory, selfe-vpholders: We, remembering the Amity and friendship first
concluded in the reign of our dear Father Euan Vasiliwich, famous with all
Christian Princes, especlally with the noble Princes of England are resolved of
our Princely disposition, to be in greater league and amity now with this
renowned King James, then any our predecessors have been with all Princes: And
to that purpose resolve to favor his Servants and Marchantes more then any
our predecessors; and forthwith after our personal Coronation, are determined
to send our Ambassadors to his excellent Maistie to that purpose. Further,
that thou John the Son of W. after the receipt of these our Princely Letters,
and the dispatch of thy Marchant-affaires, at our Castle of the Ark-Angell,
then to return to our greart and famous City of Mosco, there to behold our
clear and Princely Eyes: And to this purpose we have given order for
Post-horse for thee, as also for thy appearaunce before our Chancellor
Offonasse Euanouch Naseueo.

Written at our Royal Camp at Tode. 8. June. 7103.



The Agent (upon receipt of these Letters) with M. Russell (sometimes Agent for
the Dutch, and his now Brother in law) prepared to meet the Emperor before he
should come to the Mosco; before whom being brought by the Chancellor, the Agent
(in name of his Brethren) delivered unto him a worthy Present; which he
graciously accepted, and withal, uttering thus much in effect.

That whereas it had pleased God so miraculously to preserve him, and so
gloriously to establish him in the Throne of his Ancestors: It would please
him, to look upon the English Merchauntes, with the same eyes as they have
done: In doing which, he should not only merit their loves, but no Nation
would be more thankful unto him. etc.

The Emperor returned many gracious words, much to the effect of his former
Letters, but more amply; and then invited them to dinner in his royal Tent
(being set up of purpose to entertain a King of the Tartares, that was his
Subject.

So after a bounteous Feast, many noble speeches, and a Princely welcome, they
were dismissed for that time: but within few days after, the Agent delivered
(in the name of the Ambassador) so much as he had Commission and instructions
for, of him: which Message was most acceptable, and received with protestations
of desired Peace and Amity with the King of England; for which purpose, he
had already appointed one of his Courtiers speedily to poast unto the English
Ambassador.

Upon our departure from Colmogra, to the Ark-Angell, the Agent came to the
Ambassador from the Emperor, with order for his free Post-horse and Men to
conducte him; and that no Custom should be demanded of any Englishman,
appertayning to the Ambassador. And that the Courtier (who was to be sent)
should follow him very speedily: for the English Ships had been at the Castle
fourteen days before: whereupon, the Ambassador rowed down the River, and
the next day following, came to the Ark-Angell; where we were met with many
Shipmaisters and Muskets to the number of an hundred: The Ships (as well
English as Dutch) discharged their Pieces lyberally: But this Triumph was
altered in a moment into Sadness. For upon our landing, a fair new Ship
(called the Globe) the Master, Master and his Father, being owners of her,
was utterly lost in our sight, by means of a Mynion bursting in the Gun-roome;
where four Barrels of Powder standing by, one of them being not well covered,
the rest took fire, blew up all the Stern, slew the Gunner and his Mate; hurt
the Master, his Mate, and some six others, whilst the Ship splitting in
sunder, suncke presently; to the exceeding sorrow of all the beholders.

Hither (within few days after) came from the Emperor a Courtier, named
Gauarello Samollorich Sallmanoue, that had been Ambassador to the K. of
Denmark: (a Gentleman of great birth, and well in years) to signify to the
Ambassador the Emperors desire to enter into Bonds of peace and amity with
the King of England: And this was an extraordinary grace of the Emperor done
to the Ambassador, if we consider the Person that was sent, the Message, and
the Miles he so poasted over, for fear the Ambassador should be gone.

The Message which he brought was much to the purp^s^ of tha^ Conference held
with the Emperor and the Ag^nt; the che^fest branch of all, being a re^ouation
o^ ^h^^ League now between ^ot^ the Ki^g^^mes of Englan^ and Rushia, which was
b^twee^^ the late Q Elizabeth (his dear and ki^d Sister) and his Father: and
with a protestation to be in greater amity and correspondence with the King of
England, then ever any of his predecessors had been with other Kings thereof;
for better manifestation of which, all the said K. James his Subi^cts shall
have surer liberty then ever they had before. Adding further, that his
personal Coronation being performed, Ambassadors should be sent to salute and
congratulate his loving Brother of England. etc.

The Ambassador hereupon, not only sent thos^ Letters which he had received
from the late Emperor Borris, but also (by twenty Liueries) a Present worth
100. Marks: And within one week aft^r this Courtiers departure, we hastened
our own, because the season of the year so require^.

The day before our departure, by reason of some wrong done to an English
Saylor by a Russe, a great tumult arose: in which the Common people (with
stones and billets) behaved themselves so furiously, that the English-house
gates were broken open, their chambers in peril to be rifled, their windows
thrown down, and their warehouses violently entered upon, yea some aged
Merchantes very euilly entreated: Insomuch that the Ambassador himself stood
not free from the danger: to revenge which, both English and Dutch manned out
their boats, to have gone on shore with some shot, but by entreaty they were
staide, and all was pacified, not without some hurt on both sides, but most of
the Russes.

The next day (being the sixth of July) the Ambassador being accompanied with
master John Mericke, diverse Merchantes and others, passed (in his Cherdeck)
the River of Dvyna, the ships then lying at the Barr-foote for a Wind, which
not having, we went on board upon the twenty eight of Iulye, being compelled
notwithstanding to stay here seven days, both for wind and Water to carry
us away, which the Country (having had our company of many months
together) seemed to deny us, as unwilling to license our departure. Yet on the
8. day following, we went over the Bar, not without some danger of the Sands,
which by the providence of God, and the care and cuning of master William Wye,
(our pilot and master) we happily escaped, and very joyfully arrived upon
the sweet shores of our own native Country England, etc.

The state of Rushia when Borris Pheodorvvich came to be Emperor.
Our Voyage is ended, yet must I now entreat your immaginations to be carried
back again into Rushia, where you shall receive so much and such perfect
News, as will make up the precedent matter into a pleasing History.

Understand therefore, that the old Emperor Euan Vassiliwich, dying, left two
Sons behind him, ( Viz) Pheodor Euannowich the eldest, (who succeeded the
father in his Empire) and Demetrie the youngest (an infant.) Pheador being given
to devotion, and neglecting the State and dignity due to a Prince, was held but
simple, insomuch that by the secret workings of Bodan Belskey, (who was chief
Minion to the old Emperor Euan Vassiliwich) in hope of honors and
preferment, procured Boris (who was brother to the then Empress) to be created
Protector over Pheador, who upon his present^ coming to the Crown, sent his
mother in Law, with her father and mother (defending of the house of the
Nagayes) and his young brother Demetre, to a place called Ouglets, where he was
to be Nursed. Pheadors reign being expired, and his brother unfit to rule
(being but an infant) Boris set up such ladders, that from a protector he was
aduanct to be Emper. Bodan Belskey before named, Andrea Shulcan, and Andrea
Clyskenine, being his there instruments that wrought for him. But Boris growing
weary of their presence, by whom he was mounted so hie, and thinking that he
must ever hold himself bound unto them, laid plots in his brains how to be
rid of such creditors, which he did, by throwing discontents upon one of them
and a slightly-regarding of the other.

Whereupon Bodan Belskey left the Court. But the other two prying into Borris
his actions, signified from time to time, all matters to Bodan, who (knowing
the ambitious thirst of Borris to extirpate the race of Euan Vassiliwich
himself now but an Usurper) took deliberation with the old Empress (mother to
Demetre) for the preservation of the child. And seeing a far off, arrows
aimed at his life, which could very hardly be kept off, it was devised to
exchange Demetre for the child of a churchman (in years and proportion
somewhat resembling him) whilst the other (by this means) might live safe,
though obsure.

This counterfeit Churchmans son being then taken for the lawful Prince, was
attended on and associated according to his State: with whom one day, another
child, (that was appointed to be his play-fellow) disporting themselves,
finding fault that the collor which the supposed Demetre wore about his neck
(as the fashion of the Country is) stood awry, preparing to mende it, with a
sharp knif (provided as seems of purpose) cut his throat.

The report of this arrived presently at court: the Usurper makes show of much
lamentation, yet to satisfiy the people and seat himself faster in his throne,
the dead body was openly shown three days, to the eyes of all men. Many
arguments were drawn to make the world believe, that Boris son sought the
death, of this his brother in laws child, and to weane the peoples loves and
hopes they had from him, as first to have it spread abrod, that Demetre was like
to prove like his father, that's to say, a Tyrant because, even in his
childhood, he took delighte to see Hens and Chickens kilde, and to bath his
hands in the blood: add unto this, the poisoning of his Nurse: besides, it was
forbidden to have him prayed for, as the rest of the Emperors children were
because he should be utterly forgotten. To conclude an old ouer-worne law
buried long in forgetfulness was now again freshly revived, and that was, That
the child of a sixth wife was not to inherit. (yet the murder being acted)
Boris the usurper, to blind the eyes of the world, and to wear a cunning mask
over his own, Sent a noble man with diverse others to take strict examination
of each particular circumstance, and to imprison all those that had the
guardiaunce of him, yea to put some of them to tortures and to death, which was
done accordingly. But heaven protected the lawful, to be an instrument for the
Usurpers confusion. Obscurely liude this wronged Prince, the changing of him
being made private to none but his own mother (Sister as is said before to
Boris) who is now living, and to Bodan Belskey: but upon what wheel his
various fortunes have bin turned, (which of necessitye must needs be strange)
came not within the rech of our knowledge being there.

Only thus much was received as current, that the king of Poland sent word to
the Usurper, that such a Prince of Rushia was abiding in his court, describing
him by name and other particular notes to be son to their old Emperor:
upon receipte of which News (which went but coldly to the heart of Borris) an
Ambassador was presently dispatched into Poland, one that had been Godfather
unto Demetre, because he should bring certain knowledge of the truth: who at
his coming was presented with a Counterfeit (Princely attyred) but afterward
with true Demetrius, whom (by the aid of the Polack) the Rushians within short
time after received for their Emperor, and now reigns over them.

FINJS.
Errors escaped in the Printing, thus to be corrected.
IN the first page, for Chain Concatenation, read chain and Concatenation: for
Neves, read Nerves: for allude read Allurde: for squred, read Squared.

In the eight page, for Dronia, read Dwyna. In the xv. page, for Coli^gro, read
Colmagro. In the 31. page: for Meands, read Meades, and so in any other place
where that word is found. In the 56. p. for Comp. house, read companies house.
In the 66. p. read Boycrins. In the 67. page read Knees Pheodor, and Knees,
etc.
Reader, thou shall understand that the Godonoues is the name of the Royal
family. A Prestave is a chief Officer about the Emperor, who has continual
access, and does command provision and lodging for any Ambassador, etc. A
Verst, signifies a Mile. A Derevena, is a little village. These words because
thou may doubt of them, I thought good to explain.


