David's Repentance: OR, A Plain and Familiar Exposition of the 51. Psalm,
first Preached, and now published for the benefit of Gods Church.

Wherein every faithful Christian may see before his eyes the pattern of
unfeigned Repentance, whereby we may take heed of the falling into sin again.

The second Edition profitably amplified by the Author SAMVEL SMITH, Minister
of Roxwell in Essex.

LVKE 13.5. Except ye repent ye shall all perish.

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, SIR RICHARD WESTON, KNIGHT, ONE of his Majesty's
Justices of Peace in the County of Essex, SIR EDWARD PYNCHON Knight, Grace,
Mercy and Peace from JESUS CHRIST.
WHEREAS (Right Worshipful) but a small and short remnant of days is allotted
unto every one of us, to try the hazard and adventure of this world in Christ's
holy Merchandise: I being subject to this common case, and most certain
uncertainty of our life; neither knowing if, perhaps, at this present, my
staff stands next the door; have been, and am desirous in this behalf, so
to bestow all my possiblle endeavors, and labors, in this my Lord and Masters
Traffic; as that neither I may return unto him with a Talent in a Napkin,
but may leave behind me some poor token and testimony of my love and duty
toward his blessed Spouse. This has caused me to take in hand this short
Comment upon the 51. Psalm, or, The Repentance of David, an elect and chosen
vessel, pronounced by the mouth of the Lord, to be, A Man after his own
heart. Where we may see the great weakness and frailty of Gods Children, Job.
9.3. Psalm. 130.3 Psa. 143.2.
when the Lord shall but a little leave them unto themselves. Our frailty
appears in this, that we cannot perceive the things that are of God: if we
cannot perceive the good, much less can we do it; yea, so that if the Lord
should look straightly what is done amiss, who should be able to stand? If
the Lord should enter into judgment with us, none could in his sight be
justified. If Moses, the faithful, fell into infidelity; David, the holiest,
became profane; Solomon, the wisest, committed so great follies; and Peter the
louingest, denied his Master: If the Saints, and dear friends of God have
fallen before our eyes, let us lay aside trust in our own strength, not taking
their falls to be our standing: but rather by them to measure our selves, and
the guilt of our sins; gathering, as it were, the whole Lion by the paw. Let us
rise with them by repentance, let us sorrow with them for our sins; and that
because Christ all perish. Luke 13.5.
And that we may, with David, repent and turn unto the Lord. Romans 2.
Consider his Mercies in forgiving, Genesis 39.9 Romans 2.5. Esaias. 26.9 Luke 3.14
Psalm. 90.12.
his Benefits in giving, his Patience in forbearing, his Judgments in
punishing, the Word preached, Sins committed, and that Few shall be saved:
the shortness and uncertainty of life, and the certainty of death. Pray we
cannot, unless we repent; and perish we shall, unless we repent: but blessed
shall we be if we repent. Now because this Psalm is a most blessed Psalm of
true and unfeigned repentance, I made choice of it to treat of in my Cure,
never intending that these weak exercises should come to the public view of
the world: But being at last overcome by the earnest requests of diverse godly
and well-disposed Christians, to yield my consent to the publishing of this
work: And considering that in this writing Age of ours, amongst the number of
books without number, no man has wholly traveled herein in our tongue, that
ever came to my hands; for then I should have denied my Pen this honor: and
withal, how many a desperate sinner, and ignorant soul has been imboldened
to sin by David's example, never looking into his repentance, How he watered
his couch with tears, and how he sat well-a-daying his grief of heart, and
cried again and again, and still again, for mercy and pardon at Gods hands,
ere he could be assured of the pardon of them. These considerations striving
and struggling so long within me, until they had gotten the conquest of such
shamefast and fearful motions wherewith men are well acquainted, who are at
all acquainted with their own infirmities; I was thereby at length drawn to
this bold and hardy resolution, as to commit it to the Press; and so to the
eyes of them whose great and sharp censures I have ever, with trembling,
thought of heretofore; and even now would shun them with all willingness. And
here I present unto your Worships this poor Talent of mine, as to whom of
right it does belong: for, Precedens beneficium, sequatur officium: Which may
it please you to accept at my hands, as at one that wishes all happiness to
you and yours in the Lord, your worships acceptance shall be my sole
satisfaction. The bond of my duty has this only bound of my hope, humbly
craving that your favorable wisdoms would supply the wants of this thing; and
that this so simple a gift may be accepted of you rather for my good meaning,
and the end wherefore I do it, then for the value of the thing it self; having
an eye to the matter, and not to the manner: for my desire is not to be seen
in the high and intricate questions of man's wisdom: but in the baseness and
simplicity of the Gospel, that it may appear in the power thereof. Thus, as
God has joined you both in the nearest societies, so pardon me this boldness,
who have joined you together in this Dedication. The God of Heaven give you
both that blessing of blessings, which (if Jerome say true) few men have, that
you may, transire a delicijs ad delicias, go on from grace to grace, and be a
long time happy in this life, and for ever happy in the life to come. Roxwell
this 26 of November.

Your Worships much bound, and in all Christian duties to be commanded, SAMVEL
SMITH.

To the Christian Reader Grace and Peace.
CHristian Reader, seeing the burden of the Ministry is this, To pluck Men out
of the Kingdom of Satan, and to bring them to the living God: surely then it
is the duty of all those that have taken upon them this holy calling to help
forward this worthy work. And to this end I entertained my spare hours in the
time of my long sickness (when I was not able to perform my duty in the
Congregation of my charge) in publishing this short exposition of the 51
Psalm, to the view of the world: not for vainglory, or for any good conceit
or opinion that I have of the same, or of my self, as he knows that knows
all things; but chiefly for the honor of God, that if it please the Lord to
give a blessing, sinners, even such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of
death, might be moved to repentance. It is an opinion of carnal men, who
remain under Satan and his dominion (as all men do by nature) that when sin
is committed, done and past, they shall never be called to account for the
same. But (alas) no length of time can we are sin away, if it be not taken
away by true and unfeigned Repentance. Yea the sins of our youth, which many
years ago we have committed (if now in time we do not repent, and stop the
mouth of the same) shall stand up as new and fresh against us, as the first
hour we committed them. Oh that we could be wise to think upon these things!
Our selves wax old, our bodies are declining to the grave: and will we take no
pains to wear away our sins, but to let them stand in their strength
against us? This wear a great folly. Let men therefore think of this betimes:
there is no going to Heaven with dry eyes, or beds of down. Now if this poor
work of mine may find entertainment with thee (I shall so much the more be
encouraged to take pains in this kind, upon other places of Scripture, as
upon the first Psalm, which thou may shortly expect.) And withal may help
thee forward to this necessary duty of Repentance, I have the^ my desire: give
the praise to him from whom all good comes, who works in us both the will
and the deed, to whom be praise and honor for ever and ever. AMEN.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, SAMVEL SMITH.

The Table of the principal Doctrines briefly handled in this Book.
Out of the Title of the Psalm. Page 1. 2. 3.
Doct. 1. Singing of Psalms an ancient practice in the Church of God. page 6.
Doct. 2. A Child of God may fall after he is effectually called. Page 16.
Doct. 3. The word preached, the ordinary means to beget Faith and Repentance.
page 21. Doct. 4. A fearful thing to live in sin without repentance. page 25.
Doct. 5. Ministers must reprove the greatest personages. page 30. Doct. 6. Men
must be charged with their special sins. page 38. Doct. 7. Chaste speech
taught of God. page 42. Doct. 8. The godly respect more the glory of God then
their own credit. page 44. Doct. 9. The strongest may fall. page 46.
VERSE. I.
Doct. 1. Sight of sin the first step to repentance. page 52. Doct. 2. Sorrow
for sin, note of a godly man. page 58. Doct. 3. Mercy is chiefly to be
sought for. page 61. Doct. 4. God alone is to be prayed unto. page 66. Doct. 5.
Experience of former favor assures of future. page 71 Doct. 6. The mercy of
God emboldens sinners to come unto him. Page 74. Doct. 7. Gods mercy man's
merit. page 79. Doct. 8. The nature of sin. p. 83 Doct. 9. God, a God of
mercy. Page 85. Doct. 10. The Lord keeps a book of all our sins. page 89.
VERSE. 2.
Doct. 1. A wounded conscience can find no rest but only in Christ. page 98
Doct. 2. Difference betwixt the sorrow of the godly and the wicked. page 102
Doct. 3. Sin defiles a Man. page 106 Doct. 4. Hard matter to be cleansed from
the pollution of sin. p. 110 Doct. 5. Blood of Christ alone does wash away
sin. page 114.
VEERS. 3.
Doct. 1. Confession ever goes before remission. page 120 Doct. 2. An accusing
conscience the means to bring men to repentance. page 141 Doct. 3. Necessary
duty to call our sins to account. page 139. Doct. 4. Sin once known, does
ever accuse till it be pardoned. page 145 Doct. 5. Sin never goes alone. page
149
VERSE. 4.
Doct. 1. A man's sins are open before God. page 155 Doct. 2. What sorrow it is
that accompanies repentance. page 160 Doct. 3. Note of a penitent person not to
excuse his sin. page 166 Doct. 4. God alone can forgive sins. page 171 Doct.
5. Acknowledgement of partitular sins required in true repentance. page 180
Doct. 6. Men sin before God. p. 187 Doct. 7. The Lord makes good use of our
consciences, page 191 Doct. 8. God is ever just in his judgments. page 195.
and 202
VERSE. 5.
Doct. 1. A man does never truly repent till he come to know his own nature.
page 210 Doct. 2. No man is borne by nature the child of God. page 211 Doct. 3.
Godly parents beget sinful children. page 217
VERSE. 6.
Doct. 1. True knowledge of God works true humility. page 224 Doct. 2. A
sanctified heart the greatest blessing of God. p. 231 Doct. 3. Sin is but a
lying vanity. page 233 Doct. 4. A fearful thing to sin against knowledge.
page 237 Doct. 5. Heavenly wisdom the gift of Gods spirit. page 244
VERSE. 7.
Doct. 1. Pardon of sin the greatest mercy. page 249 Doct. 2. Sin is
infectious. page 253 Doct. 3. The ceremonies under the law were but to lead us
to Christ. page 255 Doct 4. Christ's blood alone does purge our sins. page 256
Doct. 5. Situation to be sought for only in Christ. page 260 Doct. 6. Sin
defiles a man. p. 265 Doct. 7. Natural men their estate Described. page 269
VERSE. 8.
Doct. 1. Assurance of the pardon of sins may be attained. page 282 Doct. 2.
Man's testimony of the remission of sins is nothing without the testimony of
Gods spirit. page 285 Doct. 3. Ministry of the word, means whereby God
conueyes comfort to his children. page 290 Doct. 4. Where sin is not pardoned
there can be no true joy. page 295 Doct. 5. No sorrow in the godly like the
sorrow for sin. page 300 Doct. 6. There is no respect of persons with God. page
303 Doct. 7. Pardon of sin brings true joy. page 304
VERSE. 9.
Doct. 1. Gods anger most fearful to the godly. page 310 Doct. 2. Manner of
Gods pardoning sin. page 317 Doct. 3. All our sins are known to God. page
321
VERSE. 10.
Doct. 1. Justification and Sanctification go together. page 326 Doct.
Repentance a new creation. page 329 Doct. 3. True sanctification is never in
part. page 333 Doct. 4. God is the Author of sanctification. page 338 Doct. 5.
Sin hinders the work of sanctification. page 341 Doct. 6. Child of God not
always at one stay. page 348 Doct. 7. A purpose not to sin, mark of a
sanctified heart. page 351 Doct. 8. Sin quenches grace as water fire. page
355
VERSE. 11.
Doct. 1. The pleasures of sin are dear bought. page 262 Doct. The
Judgments of God upon other, cause the godly to fear. page 378 Doct. 3. Sin
takes away the fecling of Gods favor for a time. page 379
VERSE. 12.
Doct. 1. Fruit of sin described. page 390 Doct. 2. Favor of God is a
Christians chiefest joy. page 393 Doct. 3. State of Gods children not always
alike. page 398 Doct. 4. Pardon of sin the soundest joy. page 401 Doct. 5.
Man weak being left to himself. page 406.
VERSE. 13.
Doct. 1. The goodness of God toward our selves must be made known. page
411 Doct. 2. Thankfulness a necessary duty. page 414 Doct. 3. Fruit of faith to
seek the good of others. page 417 Doct. 4. What Doctrine Ministers must teach.
page 420 Doct. 5. Ignorant are to be taught the ways of God. page 423 Doct. 6.
Conversion of a sinner is Gods work. page 426
VERSE. 14.
Doct. 1. Murder a heinous sin. page 431 Doct. 2. God has mercy for such as
seek mercy. page 436 Doct. 3. Punishment of sin should keep us from sinning.
page 438 Doct. 4. Note of a true penitent to aggrauate sin. page 443 Doct. 5.
Faith required in prayer. page 444 Doct. 6. Praise of our salvation properly
belongs to God. p. 446 Doct. 7. Gods mercies must vn-tye our tongues to praise
him. p. 459 Doct. 8. God should not be righteous if he should not pardon sin.
page 461
VERSE 15.
Doct. 1. Sin takes away the use of the tongue, that Man cannot speak as he
should. page 464 Doct. 2. No ability in man to perform any good. page 468
Doct. 3. Thanksgiving a necessary duty. page 470
VERSE. 16
Doct. 1. A man's person must first be approved before his sacrifice accepted.
page 480 Doct. 2. A man may perform a good duty, and yet sin in the manner
of doing it. page 482 Doct. 3. Popish Sacrifices abominable. page 484 Doct. 4.
Christ an end of all other Sacrifices. page 486
VERSE. 17.
Doct. 1. Broken heart most rare thing to be found. page 490 Doct. 2 God does
highly esteem of a broken heart. page 495
VERSE 18.
Doct. 1. Prayer the chiefest refuge in time of danger. page 499 Doct. 2.
Prayer for the Church a necessary duty. page 504 Doct. 3. Liberty of preaching
one of Gods favors. page 508 Doct. 4. Faith must not rest upon the merits of
another. page 512 Doct. 5. Sins of the Magistrate provoke Gods anger highly.
page 515 Doct. 6. Penitent will seek to build up that which before he had
pulled down. page 517 Doct. 7. A man cannot pray until he repent. page 518
VERSE. 19.
Doct. 1. What be those Sacrifices that God does accept of. p. 523 Doct. 2.
Solemn vows a Christian duty. page 527 Doct. 3. Public thanksgiving after
deliverance required. p. 531
The Contents.
PSALM 51. To him that excels. A Psalm of David, when the Prophet Nathan
came unto him, after he had gone in to Bershaba.
1 HAVE mercy upon me O God, according to thy loving kindness, according to
the multitude of thy compassions, put away my iniquities.

2 Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin.

3 For I know my iniquities, and my sin is ever before me.

4 Against thee, Against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight
that thou may be just when thou speak, and pure when thou iudgest.

5. Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me.

6 Behold thou love truth in the inward affection: therefore have thou taught
me wisdom secretly.

7 Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter
then snow.

8 Make me to hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.

9 Hide thy face from my sins, and put away all my iniquities.

10 Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me.

11 Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

12 Restore me to the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free
Spirit.

13 Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be
converted unto thee.

14 Deliver me from blood, O God, which art the God of my salvation, and my
tongue shall sing joyfully of thy righteousness.

15 Open thou my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

16 For thou desire no sacrifice, though I would give it: thou delightest not
in burnt-offerings.

17 The Sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: a contrite and a broken heart,
O God, thou will not despise.

18 Be favorable unto Zyon for thy good pleasure: build up the walls of
Jerusalem.

19 Then shall thou accept the sacrifices of righteousness, even the
burnt-offering and oblation: Then shall they offer Calves upon thine Altar.

A plain and familiar Exposition upon the 51. Psalm; First preached, and now
published for the benefit of Gods Church.
Psalm 51. THE TEXT. To him that excels, a Psalm of David, when the
Prophet Nathan came unto him, after he had gone in to Bershaba.
COncerning the Book of the Psalms, it is an Epitome of the whole Scriptures,
teaching us what we are to believe and do, both to God and man; In which as in
a glass we may clearly behold the nature of GOD, his wisdom, goodness, and
mercy toward his Church and Children: As also most notable spectacles of his
fearful wrath and vengeance against the wicked and ungodly.

If men would pray unto God, and crave for any mercy and blessing at his hands,
here be excellent platformes of true, hearty, and earnest prayers. If men
would give thanks for blessings received, for judgments escaped, or for
Deliverance from wicked and ungodly men, here be worthy examples and
directions: If men would find comfort in temptations, troubles, and
afflictions, and learn with patience to bear them; There is no part of the
Bible more sweet and comfortable: And therefore it should be our delight and
study, and we ought to spend the more time in reading, and in the meditation
of so excellent and worthy a Book; according to that of our Savior, Ioh.
5.39. Search the Scriptures; Because that will bring a man to true happiness
in the end, namely, to know God to be his God, to know Jesus Christ, to know
himself, and to direct him in that narrow Path that shall lead unto life.

I thought good to speak of this Psalm, because it contains in it a most
worthy example of true and unfeigned repentance, without which there is not, nor
can be any pardon of sin; Except ye repent, Luke 13.5. The argument of the
Psalm.
ye shall all perish.

Now it contains a famous and most worthy example of repentance if you either
regard the Person, who was a renowned and glorious King of Israel, a holy
Prophet of God, yea a man after Gods own heart.

Again, in the matter of the psalm and of his repentance, you shall see a
spectacle of many most great and grievous sins committed by David: wherein we
may see the great frailetie and weakness of Gods children: which may teach us
to pray unto the Lord, for the spirit of corroboration; on, for if David fell,
whither shall we fall, if God do but a little leave us to our selves: And
howsoever by the special mercy of God toward David, this sin of his
prevailed not to his eternal condemnation; yet we see what terror of
conscience and grief of heart he sustained, before he could be assured of
his former comfort. And this shall all flesh find, that the pleasures of sin,
for a season here, will bring with them sorrow in the end.

As for the repentance of David, we shall see it is most excellent and
admirable, for he does freely and frankly confess his sins, and is not
ashamed to Chronicle them even in the word of God, for all posterities to beg
the pardon of them. And lastly, we shall see the endless love and mercy of GOD
toward poor and miserable sinners, when they shall truly repent, and seek
for mercy.

The whole Psalm contains two parts: Division of the Psalm.
first, the preface of the psalm, showing the occasion of it, and by whom it
was penned: and secondly, the Psalm it self, which contains in it nothing
else but a most earnest prayer of David, as a poor prisoner arraigned and
condemned at GODS Bar: And the Petitions of the Psalm are twofold: First,
there be some concerning David himself, to the eighteenth verse: And secondly,
some as concerning the good of the whole Church in general: Because his sin
had endangered, not only his own estate, but even the good and flourishing
estate of the whole Church of God.

In the Preface or Title of the Psalm.

First, mark to whom this excellent Psalm was committed; To him that
excels, or to the excellent Musition.

Secondly, by whom it was penned: A Psalm of David.

Thirdly, the circumstance of time, when it was penned: When Nathan the Prophet
came unto him.

Fourthly, the occasion of it, namely, Nathans message from the Lord, sharply
reproouing David's sins, adultery and murder.

Ieduthu^.
To him that excels, or to the excellent Musition.

First, to whom this Psalm was committed.
The Prophet David, when he had penned any Psalm for the comfort and benefit
of the Church of GOD, was wont, as it seems, to commit them to those men, who
were appoyneted Masters of the Music, wherein they did sing in the Temple to
Gods glory: 1. Chr. 25.1. 1. Chron. 15.16. 1. Chr. 9.33
as Heman, Asaph, Corah, Ieduthum, etc. And whereas David and Sal^mon were
commanded of God to appoint some companies of Musitions to sing unto GOD,
these were the Masters of the Music to set the tunes, and dispose of them.

David did commit this Psalm and the rest, to the Masters of Music, to be
sung in the Church of God to his glory: we learn that singing of Psalms in
the Assemblies, Singing of Psalms an ancient practice.
and Congregation of Gods people, is not only an ancient custom of the Church
of God, but very lawful and commendable: used, as we see here in the days of
David and Salomo, and commanded them of God: so it was the usual practice of
Christ and his Apostles to sing Psalms after they had eaten: And it is said of
Peter, that being in prison, Act. 16.25
even there he sang Psalms to GOD: And in the days of the Apostles it was
used, as Paul shows, commanding the Colossians and all Christians to use this
holy exercise; Admonish your selves in Psalms, Hymns, Col. 3.16. 1. Cor.
14.15.
and spiritual Songs, singing with a grace to the Lord in your hearts.

singing of Psalms unto God.

But some may say, I could never receive any such spiritual joy in singing of
Psalms. It may be so, and thine estate so much the more to be feared: As the
Prodigal son in the fifteenth chapter of Saint Lukes Gospel, did know it,
and enjoy it: So the Elder son asked what manner of joy it is? And so may
worldlings ask, Quale gaudium? We answer, That which is known by taste,
cannot by speech: So taste, what joy it is, and then as Christ said, I have
bread to eat, and ye know not of it: So may the Christian say, I have joy,
and ye know not of it.

But because most men and women think it an excellent and comfortable
practice, I will show you how we ought to be qualified, lest if we take more
delight in the sweetness of the Music, then in the comfort of the Psalm,
we do but make a noise, and loose the benefit of singing, yea, take the holy
name of God in vain.

First then, that we may sing to Gods glory, and to our comfort, we must sing
with the heart, and with the understanding: So Saint Paul in the third chapter
and sixeteenth verse of the Colossians says; I will pray and sing with the
spirit and understanding; that is, How to ^ing aright
with knowledge and understanding of that I sing: and not as the Papists use to
roar in their Masses in latin, so as none that hear the^ understand what is
said, or what is do^.

Secondly, for the matter of our singing, it must be Psalms and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, not vile and filthy songs, which are the devils music, in
the mouths of profane persons: wherefore, let us put away all vile and filthy
Songs. And let us cheer up our spirits, and make our selves merry with David's
music. As the Spirit of God has given him the name of the Sweet Singer, so
let his music be sweet in our ears, let us often sing this Psalm, and other
his mournful Songs, that we may be filled with the joy of the Spirit as he
was: And pass from hence into those eternal joys whither he is entered, that
so jointly they may sing together.

Thirdly, we must not sing to spend the time, or to satisfy our ears with
noise or tune, but in singing we must seek to express our thank efulnesse to
God, to redeem the time, be not like the tinckling Cimballs, nor the music
of children. And therefore we must even labor our selves to be affected, in
singing with cheerefulnes unto God.

Fourthly, in singing, seeing it is a part of prayer we must look to do it
with all reverence as unto GOD himself; and as we would show all seemly and
decent behavior when we thank our superior for a good turn; so should we
to GOD: These things being duly considered, singing, it both procures dignity
and grace to the holy actions, and much avails to stir up the mind to true
affection, and feruentnes of praying: But we must diligently beware that our
ears be not more heedfully bent to the Note, then our minds to the spiritual
sense of the words.

The second point in the Title of the Psalm, By whom it was peuned. 1. Sa.
16.18 2. Sa. 13.1.
is the Penne-man of this Psalm, howsoever it was endited by the Holy Ghost,
yet you see it was penned by David, a worthy and renowned King of Israel, a
holy Prophet of GOD, a man after GODS own heart, endued with excellent and
singular gifts and graces of Gods Spirit.

Gods own heart. Now the person that wrote this Psalm should move us very
much to the liking of the matter contained in this Psalm; Ahab said of Micha,
he never prophesied good; So David the sweet-singer of Israel always good, The
mercy of the Lord endures for ever: he was loved of God, the Annoyntment
spiritual and te nporall does verefie it: Applauded of al, both men and women,
David has killed his ten thousands. A man justified of his enemies, Thou art
more righteous then I. Esteemed of his subjects, Thou art worth ien thousands
of us. A man more learned then his teachers, he was a Compound of virtues, a
man after Gods own heart; yet no way caring for the vain applause of man:
confesses here his sin, casts his Crown at the Lambs feet with the 24.
elders, contented to give glory to God, so that he might find peace upon earth.
Oh! what an excellent thing were this, if Kings, Nobles and great men, would
imitate David in this, to call themselves to account, and to set down their
lives, that so they might have matter to praise God for his blessings, and to
acknowledge their sins with David.

David then was the author and writer of this Psalm, yet David reports the
fault in himself, as if some stranger had committed it: He forgets as it were
his own people, and his Fathers house, setting all affection aside, makes a
plain declaration of his own transgression; A wise man (says Solomon) will
accuse himself, Pro. 18. So does David, not shrowding his head, nor running
into a bush, as Adam did, but writing his fault in his brow: and pointing with
his finger at the transgressor under his own name, faith A Psalm of David,
being reproved by Nathan, etc.

Penners of the scriptures set forth first their own imperfection.
And indeed this does make greatly for the authority of the word of God, in
that the Penners of it do not stick to set forth their own fraileties and
imperfectio^s, that God might have the honor, and man bear the deserved
blame: contratie to the manner of the Writers of this world, that howsoever
against enemies they speak all, and more then all, or extol their friends to
the highest, yet in them we find few examples of laying open the errors of
themselves, especially when in any sort it may be concealed.

This course we may behold in the whole Scriptures, 2. Sam. 11.
David he records his adultery and murder, as here in this Psalm his
repentance of the^, Jonas his disobedience, Jonas 1.3. Job 3.1. 1. Reg. 11.
Number. 11. Note.
Job his impatience; the idolatry of Solomon; the discontentednesse of Moses;
the fretting of Jeremy, and the like: Here we may see the wisdom of the Word
of life, here we may admire their spirits, who to give God the glory do
rejoice in their infirmities, and proclaim their own follies; and if we
would compare these Writers, inspired of the Holy Ghost, with the Works and
Writings of other men, we must either shut our eyes, or else acknowledge a
great difference.

The third circumstance is the time when this excellent Psalm was penned, and
that is expressed, The time when this Psalm was penned.
When Nathan the Prophet came unto him: Concerning the sense of these Words
some men differ, some think that David being fallen, lay in his sins a whole
year, without any touch of conscience, and sound repentance for them: But it
is not like, as others think, that so worthy a man as David was, after Gods
own heart, could lie so long in sin without all remorce and touch of
Conscience. For my part, I take it, that though David could not be so stony and
so steely-hearted, or so benumbed, but must needs have some griping and sting
of conscience, and no doubt his heart must needs smite him, unless he had
been more vile, then the vilest sinner: So for all that he was not so humbled
for his great and grievous sins, as he ought to have been, till such time as
Nathan the Lords Prophet came to rowze him up by the alarm of Gods Judgment
denounced against him: Wherein we may see; 2. Sa. 12.1.
First, that a child of God may both fall fowly, and lie in sin a long time
without repentance: And secondly, that the Ministry of Nathan is needful to
reclaim us, else we shall not only sin, but lie and rot in them: And
indeed not so much the falling into sin, as the lying in sin, wounds the
conscience, and procures Gods judgments.

The child of GOD may fall after he is called.


David, a man after Gods own heart, that the true child of God, after he is
truly and effectually called and sanctified, may very dangerously fall and
sin against God, even as David did: Genesis 37.
So Joseph's brethren, how did they conspire against him, to sell him, yea to
kill him: and lay a long time, yea almost twenty years in that sin before
they were truly humbled for it? How fowly did Peter fall though he did not
lie long in sin. Mat. 26.70.
Yea, as Job says, Job 15. What is man that he should be clean: and he that
is borne of a woman that he should be just: Behold, he found no stedfastnes in
his Saints etc. And, Pro. 20.9. Who can say I have made my heart clean. All
which testimonies of scriptures serve to confirm the truth of this Doctrine,
that the best of Gods Saints in this life, are oftentimes overtaken by the
policy of Satan, and the frailetie of their own flesh, to commit great and
grievous sins. Yea, the dearest of Gods children, sometimes are asleep,
Matthew. 25. The wise and foolish Virgins both slept, but yet here is the
difference; the wise awakened, arise out of their security: the foolish
prolong the time. Oh then! if Christ Jesus have looked upon us, as he did upon
Peter, let us look on our selves: If his Nathan be come, let us sleep no more.

David, much less to lie in sin without repentance: yet if we find that such
has been our security and exceeding carelesnes, that GOD leaving us in his
just Judgment, we have sinned, and lain in sin a long time, a year, or
two, or ten, yet if we can repent, and truly turn to God, as David did, we
need not doubt but he will show us mercy as to David, At what time soever: The
Lord limits no time, if men do repent truly: yet if men shall defer their
repentance in hope of this, that they may repent hereafter, then let them take
heed lest the Lord cut them off, ere they be aware, or else leave them to
hardness of heart and impenitency: And there is a great difference between
this, when a man has lain in sin and the time is past: and when a man commits
sin, and deferres, in hope of time to come.

Noah, Abraham, Lot, David, Peter, etc. we may easily see shame in glory,
darkness in light, folly in wifedome, infidelity in faith.

But when CHRIST shall appear, and we likewise appear with him in glory, we
shall be made like unto him. Here we cease not to provoke God, by reason of our
sins, which continually we do fall into, which should be unto us as bitter
as gall or wormwood: But when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption,
and this mortal shall put on immortality, and Death shall be swallowed up
into victory; then we shall cease to sin, and shall be as the blessed Angels
in heaven.

Repentance is not in man's power.
but it is the special gift of God; for if the Lord had not sent Nathan to
him, to awake his benumbed conscience: alas he had run on still in sin; he
had lain and rotted in his sins: but the Lord sends his servant Nathan to
admonish him, and to awake him: And so the people of God acknowledge in many
places of the word: Convert thou us, O Lord, and we shall be converted: Iere
31.18 2, Tim. 2. 25.
Again, Instruct them with meekenes, proouing if God will at any time give
them repentance, that they may be saved. Oh then! seeing repentance is not in
man's power, but it is the special gift of God, neither could David turn of
himself, though he turned himself from God of himself: What, madness then is
it for men and women to defer all till the last gasp? Saying, If they may
have but three hours before death, they do care for no more, as though they
had repentance at command: Man sins by nature, ^ut ca^ not ^ise without grace
But O thou vain man! see David, he fell by his own power, but could not rise
by his own power; and art thou better then David? No, no; unless the Lord
give thee repentance, thou can never repent: Oh then seek at Gods hands, and
repent while the Lord calls and offers thee the means.

The word preached the means to beget faith and repentance
Seeing that David repented not till he was waked, and rouzed up by Nathan the
Lords Prophet and Minister: hence I gather, that the word of God preached, is
the means both to beget Faith and Repentance, and to increase and revive the
same, for how had David gone on still in sin, if Nathan had not humbled him by
the word of God: it is able to break a stony heart, it is able to wound a heart
of steel, for what heart could be more obstinate, rebellious, stubborn,
stony, and steely, then was the hearts of the cruel Jews? yet by Peter's
Sermon, Acts 2.37.
they were pricked, and thoroughly wounded, and humbled; Ier. 23.29.
Is not the word JEHOVAH like unto fire, and like a hammer that breaks the
stone? It is able to break a stony heart which is as hard as flint: I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of God, because I know it is the power of God to
salvation to all that believe: ^om. 1.16.
It is compared to a sharp two-edged sword: It is mighty in operation, Hebr.
4.12.
and sharper then a two-edged sword: Ephesians. 2.1, 2.
It is able to give life to those that are dead in trespasses and sins.

So then we must acknowledge a perpetual necessity of the Word, to beget, as
also to increase in us the graces of Faith and Sanctification, which without
the use of the Word preached, are subject, if not to dying, yet to decreasing;
if not to perishing, yet to diminishing. And from hence it is that the Lord
says of his Vineyard his Church, Esaias the twenty seven chapter, and third
verse. I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment lest any assail
it, I will keep it night and day.

We see by daily experience, that after our repentance, and the renewing of our
minds, we are subject to stumble and to fall into sin, and ready to lie long
in it, as men cast into a deep and long sleep, if we be not awaked with the
Lords Trumpet, as we may see by this present example of David, who was by the
subtilty of Satan surprised and drawn to commit two horrible sins, Adultery
and Murder, and lay a long space securely in them, until he was by the
Prophet Nathan rowzed up and recovered, 2. Sam. 12.

Wherefore as there is a continual use and exercise of repentance, so is there
a continual use of the preaching of the word, that we should not stand at a
stay, but increase more and more, till we come to the fullness of the perfect
age of Christ Jesus.

which is both able to kill sinners, and to make them alive again, Gods word
only conuerts.
and puts a manifest difference between the word of man, and the word of God:
all the Wisdom, Learning, Eloquence, and wit of man is not able to save a
soul, to convert a sinner, only the word of God can do it, even the plain
and simple preaching of the word can do it: 1. Cor. 1.21 Psalm. 19.7. Romans 10.14
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul: Though nothing be more
contrary to our nature then the word of God, yet it does by Gods blessing
convert us.

Nathan is the messenger, Despisers of the word must needs perish.
and the means that God uses to reclaim David thus sleeping, and snorting in
sin, whereas the Lord could have converted him, without Nathans help: we see
then, that those men who do despise Nathan, and the Lords Prophets and
Ministers, must needs die in sin, without repentance, who cannot endure
themselves to be admonished and reproved: even as a man having a long festered
soar, that is even rotten and putrified, Note.
he can not abide the Surgeon should touch it or lance it: alas, it will be
his bane in the end: So, if thy soul be sick, full of rottennes and
corruption, and yet thou continuest in sin, and lie in sin: and wilt not
suffer the Lords Surgeons, thou can not endure Nathan to be so busy with
thy sins, what will follow but the utter ruin of thy soul, and the bane of
it? And therefore let all men be content to have their hearts searched with the
tents of the Law, to be ripped up and launced til the blood follow, for that is
the next way to be cured.

A fearful thing to live in sin without repentance Note.
In David observe what a fearful thing it is, to lie in sin without
repentance, it is that which makes a grievous wound in the conscience, draws
down many and grievous judgments of God, as in David he felt the smart of
this sin a long time; yea he carried the skarre of it to his grave, it was a
heart-smart unto sin, in denying his Lord and Master; yet he lying not in
sin repented presently, went out, and wept bitterly, and so had pardon: but
lying in sin, is that which wounds the conscience, and draws down Gods
Judgments, both in soul and body, weakens our faith, makes us cold in prayer
and in holy duties. Yea, the wrath of GOD does follow such as make no
conscience of sin, giving them over into a reprobate sense, to a slumbering
spirit, and to hardness of heart, that they prove in the end to be past feeling,
Romans 1.28. and surely it is just with GOD, that he should forsake them by
his grace, who have forsaken him by their sins: This is that which the Prophet
declares concerning the secret Judgment of God upon sinners, that do make
shipwarcke of faith and a good conscience, Psalm. 81.11, 12. My people would not
hear my voice, and Israel would none of me: So I gave them up unto the
hardness of their heart, and they have walked in their own Councels. Whence
he shows, that seeing they would not be reclaimed and reformed, he suffered
them to run their whole swinge into all wickedness.

Cain, he was reproved of God, checked for his hatred against his brother, and
admonished to repent, Genesis 4 8. But he hearkened not to the voice of the Lord,
but hardened his heart, and shead innocent blood, even the blood of his brother.
This appears in Judas, he entertained covetousness in his heart, from
covetousness he fell to plot with the Pharisees, Mat. 26.15.
from plotting he proceeded to practicing, and in the end he brake out to
treson against his Lord and Master.

The like we may say of Saul, That as he fell away from God step by step; So
did the Spirit of God forsake him. For as amongst all the blessings that God
does bestow upon the sons of men in this world: a soft and tender heart is
one of the greatest, which is soon made to bleed, and brought to repentance
and amendment of life Ezech. 11.19. So there can be no greater curse laid upon
man then to have a stony heart, which eueyr day does heap up wrath against the
day of wrath, Exodus 9.

Continuance in sin most dangerous.
and rest in sin: Indeed I confess, the Lord might justly condemn us, for
the least sin we do commit: but yet he does not so much dislike us for
sinning, as for lying in sin without repentance; whenas we sin and lie in
sin, then we wound our conscience, then all grace will decay; let a man try
himself. When David had done this evil, committed adultery and murder, and
lay without repentance, how was his zeal quenched? how was his prayers
weakened? how was his heart cooled? Note.
how was his conscience wounded? Even so, do but try thy heart, if thou have
committed some evil, either by adultery, whoredom, lying, stealing, etc. When
thou have done this, how untoward and dull shall thou be in holy duties, in
prayer and praising of GOD? and thou shall find even a hell in thy conscience
for the present.

Luke 15.
Father, I have sinned against heaven, and against thee: And with Peter, let us
hastily go out and weep bitterly, and then we shall not so deeply wound our
conscience, nor draw down Gods judgments, as when we lie and snort in sin
securely without repentance.

The fourth Circumstance in the Title of the Psalm, is the occasion wherefore
this worthy Psalm was penned, The occasion wherefore this Psalm was penned.
which was this, Nathans reproving of David for going into Bershaba, of which
story read the second of Samuel, the eleventh and twefth chapters, and you
shall see both David's sin, and his repentance, being reproved: whence I pray
you mark two things, David's patience, and Nathans holdnes.

David was a mighty King, a famous warrior, yet when the Lords Prophet comes
unto him, to reprove him, he takes it patiently, and most meekly endures it:
One would have thought, that David should have checked him, and bid him hold
his peace, and bid him meddle with his equals. But you see here, though he were
reproved by Nathan, a poor Prophet of God, and that of a foul sin, he most
patiently endures it.

Nathan and David, Ministers must reprove the greatest personag^s.
that the Prophets of GOD must not be afraid to reprove the greatest
Personages: but they must lay open their sins, and Gods judgments against
them; 1 Reg. 21.
Elias reprooues Ahab; Moses Pharaoh; Paul Foelix; John Baptist Herod; etc. And
so, Mark 6.
whatsoever thou art, if thou were as great a King as David, if the Lord send
his Prophet to tell thee of thy sins, thou art to take it as the Message of
the Lord, and not to storm against it. And it is the thing which the children
of God desire, to have their sins laid open and reproved: Psalm. 141.5
Let the righteous smite me friendly, and reprove me: for such smiting shall
be good for me: and nothing is more dangerous for Kings and great personages,
then to have claw-backes, and flatterers, who can wincke at their sins: O!
how had it been with David, if the Lord had not sent Nathan to reprove him?

John chap. 6. verse 68. which are the power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16.
and therefore are near unto destruction. It was a fearful curse when God
said to the Apostles, Mat. 10.5. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into
the City of the Samaritans see that ye enter not.

And to the same purpose the prophet Amos speaks in his 8. chapter 11, 12,
13. verses; Behold, the days come says the Lord God, that I will send a
famine into the land, not a famine of bread, nor thirst of water, but of
hearing the word of the Lord: And they shall wander from Sea to Sea, from the
North even unto the East, shall they run to and fro to seek the word of the
Lord, but shall not find it.

O that we could consider of these things! and lay before our eyes what danger
it is to want the preaching of the word, that thereby we might learn to be
thankful for GODS mercy toward us, to be moved to pity the desolations of
so many of our poor brethren: as also to fear the taking of it away from our
selves for our unthankfulness. Great are the plagues, and horrible are the
ruins of the Church in many places: Oh that we had hearts to mourn for it! and
to pray the Lord of the harvest to thrust forth Laborers into his harvest.

Nathan* by whom we may see what is amiss in us.

We can give such a man thanks that will tell us of some spot in our faces,
or blemish in our garments: And shall we envy or malign him that will
discover unto us the spots and blemishes of our souls, which do more soil
us, and defile us then all the blemishes of the body? The Prophet David when as
he had now found the benefit of a godly reproof, being reproved by Nathan
the Lords Prophet, says, Psalm 141.5. Let the righteous smite me, for that
is a benefire, and let him reprove me, and it shall be a precious oil that
shall not break mine head. And to this end speaks Solomon, Proverbs 9.8.
Rebuke not a scorner, lest he hate thee, But rebuke a wise man, and he will
love thee. The correction of a friend is as the Rod of a Father, the end is not
to destory, but to save; not to overthrow, but to deliver from death.

Nathan do tell them of their sins, of their excessive pride, idleness,
vanities, uncleanness, and the like: Oh these hot fellows are not for their
humor, they cannot away with them: even as Herod in Marks gospel 6.20. though
otherwise he did reverence John, yet when he came to tell him of his incest,
and filthy life, then he must loose his head for it; And as Achab said of
Micheas, I hate him, for he never prophesies good unto me: He is always
threatening me, and tells me of my sins, and Gods judgments: So in these
days, Nathan is the odious man of the world, men can not brook this, to have
Nathan so busy to meddle with men's sins: but men would feign be foothed, and
dawbed with untempered mortar: But if the Lord love thee, he will fend Nathan
to thee, to reprove thee for thy sins: and if thou can not find thy heart
willing to hear Nathans reproof, as David did, it is because thy heart is
naught; and it is a sign that God will reject thee and destroy thee.

Moses must not be murmured at when he speaks freely and roughly: And if
Micha resolve of faithfulness, saying, 1. Reg. 22. As the Lord lives,
whatsoever the Lord says, be it good or evil, that will I speak: Why should
he be hated, and fed with the bread and water of aff^iction? Is it not a
reasonable plea and full of pacification in civil messages? I pray you be not
angry with me, I am but a servant: yet when Jeremy the prophet shall say, Of a
truth the Lord has sent me, Ierem. 26.15. his feet shall nevertheless be
fastened in the stocks. Nay, this consideration should not only bind men to
peace, from touching and doing the Lords Prophets harm: but also urge them to
have them in exceeding honor, at least for the works sake, which is the
Lords, who does acknowledge them co-workers with himself, 1. Cor. 3.9.

Last of all, this may serve to reprove those that bear the office of Nathan,
yet have the word in respect of persons, who dare not do their duties, but
are afraid of men's faces. They would be counted the Ambassadors of GOD, but
they are afraid to do their Masters message: Let such learn here of Nathan,
who feared not the majesty of a King, but was faith full in his office. Let
such learn of John the Baptist, who did not shrink back, but was bold to
tell Herod, that it was not lawful for him to take his brothers wife. We must
not be dastards and faint-hearted soldiers to fight the Lords battle, but
first, be sure we have a good warrant out of the word, and then go boldly into
the field, and fear not to look the enemy in the face.

We are not our own messengers, to do our own Embassage, but the Ambassadors
of the eternal GOD, when he has once put his word into our mouths, we must
go to those that he has sent us; And whatsoever he commands us, that must
we speak, Ier. 1.7, 8. When God sent forth Jeremy to preach, he armeth him
thus; Be not afraid of their faces, for I am with thee to deliver thee says
the Lord. Thus he armeth Ezechiel, Ezec. 3.8, 9. I have made thy face strong
against their faces; And thy forehead hard against their foreheads: I have made
thy forehead as the Adamant, and harder then flint: fear them not therefore,
neither be afraid of their looks, for they are a rebellious house.

Men must becharged with their special sins.
is to charge them with their special sins, whereof they be guilty, not in
general to reprove sin, but to rippe up men's consciences, to come to
particulars, to tell men of their particular sins and impieties: as Nathan
did to David in the Parable of the Sheep; 2. Sam. 12.
Thou art the man that have done this thing: Even so the woman of Samaria did
but dally with Christ, until he came to tell her of her especial sins, John
4.9.
namely, that she was a vile, lewd, and wicked woman; no better then a whore,
or a harlot, and then she was tamed, and began to listen to CHRIST'S
doctrine: So here David was asleep in sin, all Nathan ^ame to him, and told
him; Thou art the man that have commi^ted adultery and murder: and then
began David to repent and to beg pardon: So Judah could pass sentence
against Thamar, Genes 38.
to be burned for adultery, but never thought that his sin had been known;
but when he saw the Seal, the Cloak, and the Staff, then he can say: She is
more righteous then I, when he was thus brought to light, and his sin laid
to his charge.

Thou art the man: 2. Sam. 12. Note.
For unless men be thus dealt withal, we see that self-love will make men to
put off to an other: That is a good lesson for such a man, I would he had heard
it, and so clear themselves. For as it was with David and Judah, Genes. 38.
and the woman of Samaria, till men see their particular sins, they will not be
humbled and confess them: and therefore it is the duty of the minister to
press men's consciences with their sins in particular, swearing, lying, whore
dome, drunkenness, ignorance, profaneness, etc.

Nathan tell thee, Thou art the man: that John should tell thee of thy incest
and uncleanness, not to storm against it, not to kick against the Word: For
this know, that if the word of God, be not an edged sword to kill sin, and cut
the throat of it, it will cut t^^ throat of thy soul; It will not the turn
in vain: Oh then! would you be saved by the word? Then let the Word pierce
your hearts, and wound your souls: a man that is dangerous sick, will open
his arm, uncover it, let the Surgeon let him blood upon a vein, thank
him, and pay him for his pains: Well, our souls be dangerously sick with
sin, though we know it not, and we have many a deadly wound, though we feel
i^ not; let us then lay them naked, and suffer the Lords Surgeons with the
sacrificing knife of the word of GOD, to cut and launch them, if ever we look
to be cured: Take heed you be not like unto Ahab, 1, Reg 22.8 Mark 6. Psalm.
141.5
or Herod, but rather, acknowledge i^ the endless mercy of GOD, which sends
some Nathan to reprove you, and to smite you: alas! men will not endure this
to be said: Thou art the man; to be told of their sins: but it is the only
way to save men's souls.

And therefore let us all, young and old, rich and poor, noble and simple be
content to hear of our sins, and Gods judgments against them: for, til that
message be listened unto, there is no Message from God of any pardon to be
given, or mercy to be showed. Though it were to a King, yet we see Nathan
being sent from the Lord, does first his message of reproof, and heard that
listened to, before he utter any word of pardon.

When David had gone into Bershaba, That is, after David had committed that
foul and filthy sin of adultery with Bershaba.

Chaste speech taught of God.
who speaking of a foul and filthy fact, uses a reverent and chaste speech,
very honest and decent; and therefore we learn that as the Spirit of God
speaks, so must we inure and acquaint our selves to speak: yea, when we are
to speak of things that are not comely to be spoken, to moderate our speech,
and to speak in an honest and a chaste manner: So the holy Ghost exhorts us,
that our words should be gracious, and powdered with salt, Colos. 4.6.
and such as may minister grace unto the hearers: But as for filthy
communication, or foolishiesting, Ephe. 4.29
which is not comely, let it not be once named amongst you.

And this teaches us, that we must all diligently study and practice the
government of the Tongue, to order it aright in due manner, which is a worthy
study, according to that of the Prophet, Psalm 34.12, 13. What man is he that
desires life, and loves to see good days, keep thy tongue from evil, and
thy lips that they speak no guile: And to this purpose does the Prophet
David speak in another psalm, Psalm. thirty nine and the first verse; I
thought I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue, I will
keep my mouth brideled while the wicked is in my sight. The holy use of the
tongue is the language of Canaan, Esaias chapter 19 verse 18. which we must
account to speak, that it may be ordered according to the will and word of God.

so common, as must needs make a chaste mind to blush at them: And how could
they do this, but that they hear it of their elders, parents, and others? I
beseech you remember Paul's words; Ephesians. 4.29.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths. It is lamentable to
hear, that I have heard of your children, most miserable and cursed oaths, and
filthy speeches, even of those (which is strange) that can hardly speak: I
pray you for Gods sake look unto it; for if you suffer them, and give them
liberty, they will be the cause of your woe in the end.

David, a glorious and renowned King of Israel is content to shame himself for
ever, The godly do respect more the gl^ry of God then their own cr^dite.
to record his sins to his own shame, so that he may procure Gods glory, and
the good of his Church. For this he knew, that this example of his, of his
grievous fall, being recorded in Gods Book, would turn by GODS blessing to
the endless comfort and good of his Church: For what a singular comfort is
this to Gods children, when they shall remember that the falls and slippes of
such worthy men, are recorded in Gods Book? And if this were not, our faith
would fail, and we should even utterly despair.

And as it was with David, so it is with all the godly, if ever they felt the
terror of an accusing conscience for sin; if ever they were displeased at
themselves for offending a good and gracious GOD, they will not then stick to
manifest their own shame, and proclaim their own folly with grief of heart,
with the Leper in the Law, Leuiticus, chapter 13. and 45. verse: I am
unclean, I am unclean, that so they may procure their former peace from GOD,
and give him glory by their repentance, as they dishonored him by their
sins; So that where the Lord does awaken the conscience, all excuses are set
aside, and man is glad to disburden himself by confessing his sin unto the
Lord.

David's example, not to be unwilling to do that which may be for GODS glory,
and the good of his church, though it should be our utter disgrace in the
world; Yea, even to shame our selves for ever, so as God may have his honor by
us: alas! We are so charie of our own credit, and so loath to shame our
selves, that we will not acknowledge our sins and infirmities, though it might
turn much to Gods glory: but this let us know, that it is our duty to seek
Gods glory, and the good of his Church, though we should even for ever shame
our selves to the world: it is a shame to sin, no shame to repent: yea shame is
the best fruit of sin; Romans 6.
neither is our shame increased by confessing our sins, but rather
diminished, and taken away: and yet so nice are we, that we are loath to
acknowledge our sins, without which there is no pardon of sin.

The strongest may fall.
namely, David and Bershaba: David an excellent King, and Prophet of God; yea a
man after Gods own heart: And Bershaba no common sinner, but a woman of great
name, yea, a religious woman, as it appears, wise, Prou. 31.
and discreet: By this we may see into how great sins the children of God may
fall, if the Lord leave them but a little to themselves, as we may see in
Noah, Lot, David, Peter, and the like.

Pro. 4.23.
O then countergard thy heart, etc. keep it with watch and ward, and look
unto the casements of thy soul, thy ears, and thy e^es, by them was David
overcome: what folly is it then in them, who dare come into any company, Note.
that dare look and pry into the beauty of women, as though they were so
strong, that they were out of all danger to sin? But art thou stronger then
David? If not, thou may fall.

Bershaba, a worthy woman, and let them fear to give any entertainment to
lust and uncleanness, for they may be sooner ouer-taken, then they be aware;
look unto thy eyes, and to thy company, lest thou be poisoned by the company
of unchaste persons: Yea, it may admonish all men and women, though never so
sanctified, chaste, and religious, to fear themselves, and to cut off all
occasions to uncleanness, as pride in apparel, dalliance, evil company,
idleness, and the like, which be forerunners of this sin.

David, nor Bershabaes sins, Note.
a means to embolden them, or bolster them in uncleanness; for if thou
sin, because such sinned, thou may perish in them: this is not the end why
their sins be noted in the Book of GOD, for to bolster us in sin: But
rather, to admonish us of our weakness, to make us watch, lest we fall,
seeing such excellent ones have fallen: Oh then let us imitate their
repentance, not their falls!

Psalm 51. VERSE 1. Have mercy on me O God, according to thy loving kindness,
according to the multitude of thy compassions, put away mine iniquities.
Now follows the psalm it self, and it is a most excellent psalm to be
learned of every christian man and woman: and often times to be used for our
comfort; for it contains a most earnest prayer of David, that worthy servant
of God, and renowned king (...), a Prophet of GOD, and a man after his own
heart.

Wherein he humbly does acknowledge his sins unto the Lord, earnestly
entreating for grace and favor at Gods hands, for the true pardon of them all,
and to be comforted again by the gracious promises of God.

This Psalm may be divided into 2. parts: in the first part David prays for
himself, unto the eighteenth verse: in the second part he prays for the
church of God; that the Lord would be favorable unto Syon his Church, and
build up Jerusalem.

The maine thing which David so earnest, and so often prays for, is mercy and
favor at Gods hands for the pardon of his sins: and this Petition is
repeated again, and again joined with great affection, and earnest desire of
mercy: confessing his sins unfeignedly, and abhorring them.

Secondly, David prays unto God, for the work of sanctification, that the
Lord would purge him, and sanctify him by his holy Spirit, and renew his heart.

Thirdly, be promises to preach forth this mercy of God unto others, that his
example shall be a means, by GODS blessing to convert them, to make them afraid
of sin, and to comfort them that be fallen.

Fourthly, he shows the great abuse of outward Sacrifices, and the outward
worship and service of GOD, that if it be done by impure and impenitent
sinners; alas, Esaias 1.11.
the Lord takes no pleasure in it, but hates and abhorres it.

In the first verse we are to consider, First, what is the thing David begs,
namely Mercy: Secondly, the person of whom he begges it, and that is of God;
Have mercy on me O God: Thirdly, the manner and greatness of this mercy; much
mercy, and great mercy, because of his great misery: and the doubling of the
petition, shows he prayed with feeling and great affection.

[Haue mercy on me O God:] As if he should have said; O my God, I am a most
vile and miserable sinner, I have committed very great and grievous sins: I
stand in great need of thy mercy, and therefore have mercy on me in the pardon
of my sin.

Sight of sins the first st^p to repentance.
and beg the pardon of his sins, he must have the sight of them, he must see
the danger of them, and find himself to stand in extreme need of Gods
mercy: David he had lain a long time in his filthy sins, and never sought
unto God for mercy, but being awaked by the reprehension of Nathan, now he
cries for mercy: The Prodigal son, a true pattern for all sinners, he never
seeks to his Father, till he was in extreme misery, and then he says, I will
go to my Father: Luke 15.
so the proud Pharise never begges for mercy, for he felt no want of it: And
the Church of Laodicea, Knew not that she was miserable, poor, Reu. 3.10.
blind, and naked: For how can a man repent of that he is ignorant of? Sins
committed can not be repented of, till men see them and know them: nay, not
barely to know them, but to know the heinousness of them, and the curse of God
due unto them; so as a man may take it to heart, and be troubled for his sins.
David, though a Prophet of the Lord, yea a man after GODS own heart, yet lay a
long time in sin without repentance; because he did not weigh and consider
with himself what he had done. And therefore in the word of God the Lord
oftentimes calls upon men to consider their ways, to know their sins, and
the curse of God due unto them. Ier. 3.13. Know thy sins, O Jerusalem! Zeph.
2.1, 2. Fan your selves: Lam. 3.40. O let us search and try our ways, and
turn unto the Lord.

They either cannot or do not search themselves Lam. 3.40. they never call
their hearts to account: Now then, going on in security, seeing and fearing no
danger: Alas! how should they repent, how should they turn to God? For if thou
could see the misery of thy soul, and thy woeful estate by reason of sin,
if thou could see the number and greatness of thy sins: Oh thou would
even tremble for fear, and wonder at thy woeful estate! But alas! most men are
like a man that travels in the night over a narrow bridge, which is very
dangerous, and under it runs a bottomless gulf; so as if he fall, he
cannot escape, but must needs perish. And therefore in the dark night seeing
not the danger, he fears it not: But let him go that way in the morning, he
will wonder that ever he was so mad and desperate to go that way, and will
never venture that way again. So many poor blind ignorant souls, when they
have run headlong in sin al their days, and passed their uncertain life
in ignorance, profaneness, and manifold sins, posting to Hell and
damnation, not seeing the curse of GOD that does hang over their heads, they
fear nothing, but run on headlong into all sins: But if it please the Lord
to open their eyes to see their sins, and the Judgments of God due unto
them; Oh they do wonder at their own extreme folly, and Gods infinite
goodness and patience, and would not be in that case again for all the world.

Well then, mark this Doctrine, do not lightly pass it over, but esteem it
as a blessed truth of GOD. Christ says, Lake 13.5. Except ye repent, ye shall
allperish, And for a man to see his sins, the greatness and grieuousnesse of
them, it is the first step unto repentance. So that we see here who they are
that do repent, and shall be saved, even such as see their sins, their
woeful misery, and the wretched estate wherein they are, and which do most
earnestly hunger and thirst after mercy in Christ Jesus.

Well then, let me ask thee this Question, or rather, demand it of thine
own soul; Did thou ever see thy woeful misery, the wretched estate wherein
thou art by reason of sin, what a miserable sinner thou art by nature, out
of the favor of God, in the state of damnation, in extreme danger, for ever to
be damned, and to loose thy own Soul? Did thou ever find thy self to stand
in need of Gods mercy for the pardon of thy sins, and extreme want of
Christ's blood to save thy Soul? Have thou felt thy heart wounded and bruised
for thy sins, that thy soul is even sick with sin? Did thou ever thirst
after GODS mercy in Christ above all the world; so as thou have with sighs
and groans, yea with tears begged Gods mercy on thy knees, as for life and
death, Io. 7.37. Esaias 55.1, 2. Esaias 66.2. If thou have not found and felt these
things in thee in some measure, thy case is dangerous and fearful; thou never
yet did truly repent: the mercy of God belongs not unto thee.

David, if the Lord had no^ rowzed him out of his dead sin wherein he lay a
long time, he might have died, and perished in it: And therefore this should
teach us all to pray to God, that he would in mercy open our eyes, that we
might see our sins, and feel our miseries, and that we may see we stand in
extreme need of Gods mercy; and the contrary is a fearful plague and
judgment of God, for men to lie and snort in sin, without remorce of
conscience, without the sense and feeling of sin, or want of mercy: this
David now knew by woeful experience, that if he had died without repentance,
he had perished: of all diseases they be most dangerous which be least felt,
as a l^thargy, or dead palsy, or the like: so it is a most fearful estate
for any man to lie in sin, without the feeling of it; for then the heart is
hardened, and he makes no account of Gods mercy: A man that thinks he is well
enough, will scorn the Physician; so those blind sinners that think they are
well enough, and feel no want of mercy, of all men they are to be pitied, they
be in a most dangerous state and condition: And therefore we see it a great
blessing of God, to be told of our sins, to be reproved for them, that so
seeing them, and the danger of them, we may seek to GOD for mercy.

S^^^^ (...) of (...) man.
and the beginning of true repentance is this; for a man to be grieved for his
sins, to be wounded in conscience for them, for till a man see his sins, and
feel the burden of them, and fear the curse of GOD due unto them: he will
never repent and seek the pardon of them. 2. Cor. 7.10. Matthew. 26. Luke 18.13
This is that godly sorrow, that leads to tepentance, never to be repented of

Note.
Well then, apply this to your selves, did thou ever in all thy life find thy
heart pricked for sin? Did the sacrificing knife of the Word, never wound thy
conscience, nor fetch one tear from thine eyes for thy sins? Did thou
never find thy heart to mourn, and to be cast down with remorce of
conscience? Certainly thy case is fearful and dangerous, thou art not yet
gone one step to heaven, nor moved one finger to eternal life: no, no, thou
art yet in thy sins, in extreme danger to be damned: James 2.19
Oh then let the word come home to you, harden not your hearts against it,
never be at quiet, till you can say, I have felt my soul touched and wounded
with the word of God.

of this, that we have sinned a against a merciful Father: This godly sorrow
ever goes with true repentance, not as Caine, Indas, 1. Cor. 7.10.
etc. who despaired of Gods mercy with a desperate sorrow because of the
punishment, but when we are wounded with sin, to mcurne for it, because it
offends God, a loving Father.

David's prayer, The first thing David craves is mercy.
and first petition, mark what it is he so carnestly craves, not a kingdom,
nor gold, or silver, not the life of his enemies, but mercy, mercy alone, he
craved for nothing but mercy: and therefore in his person, we learn what is
that which we should most desire above all things in the world, namely, the
favor and mercy of God in Christ Jesus; so that if it should be asked, what we
would desire in all the world, we should answer, Mercy, and the favor of God in
Jesus Christ; he is a blessed man that has mercy, Psalm. 32.1, 2 Psalm. 4.6. Lu.
18.13.
let other men desire worldly wealth, riches, honor, gold, silver: but Lord I
crave nothing but mercy, thy favor and loving countenance: The poor Publican
coming to God, he knockes on his breast, and cries for mercy; God be
merciful to me a sinner.

For there is nothing in the whole world, that is able to appease the troble of
a wounded conscience, save only the mercy of God in CHRIST JESUS. David, no
doubt, had tossed many thoughts within himself when he came to utter this
which here is penned, he had a true sight, no doubt of the misery and
wretched estate wherein he stood, by reason of his sin. An^ ^^d there been
any other way in the world to have gotten out of that ^^ate, he would have
found it. But ^^rke, he casts his eye only upon ^he ^^rcie of God, making that
his sur^s^ resuge, in this his greatest necessity: Even so, howsoever the
opinions of men as touching happiness, be diverse, poor men thinking riches,
the prisoner liberty, the sick man health: Although these desire all these,
yet the sinner ever desires mercy. This Mercy of God, David, This sweet
Singer of Israel, had often times singed; now he desires it. And this is the
difference betwixt, the godly and the wicked; Honor me (says Saul) before my
People. Have mercy on me (says David.)

shall seek to smother the accusation of conscience, to blunt the edge of it,
it will after rebound again, and give a deadly wound to desperation.

Nothing can pacify a wounded conscience but God.
so as thou can find no comfort nor rest unto thy Soul? There is no other
way in the world to pacify thy conscience, and to have peace, then to entreat
and beg for mercy at Gods hands; To. 14.17.
The kingdom of God stand^ not in meat and drink, but in righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the Holie-Ghost: So that although a wicked man enjoy all the
world, yet if he have not mercy, and the pardon of sins, alas he shall have
no sound peace of Conscience, no joy in his soul, nor any drop of true
comfort: And therefore let us all seek reconciliation with God, entreat for
favor and mercy, and never give any rest unto our souls, till we can feel and
find our Souls assured of GODS mercy in Christ, and the pardon of our sins:
if any say, O that I could feel this in my soul, I have an acusing
conscicence, I feel it terrify me: I am afraid I shall be condemned: I can
find no comfort, What shall I do? Even as David did here, beg hard, seek
earnestly, for so the Lord promises; If we seek we shall find: And
therefore let us pray, and continue in prayer, and know that the Lord will in
the end hear and grant our requests.

The second point is the Party to whom the Prophet directs his Prayer, To whom
and seeks for comfort: not to any Saint or Angel, not to the Virgin Marie,
but he goes to God, prays to him, Have mercy on me O God; and he directs
his prayer to the whole Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; to God the
Father, as the Author of all mercy, to JESUS CHRIST, by whom, and in whose
name we obtain mercy; and to the Holy Ghost, because he does teach us to
pray, and does convey and derive all saving comfort to us.

must direct al our prayers, namely, to God alone, God alone is to be prayed
to. Romans 10.14 Dan. 6. Psalm. 2.7. Leui. 19.31 Esaias 8.19. Esaias 59. Dan. 9.17.
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, because we must pray to him alone, on whom we
must believe. Secondly, God alone, can, and will, pardon the sins of those
that seek unto him for mercy. Thirdly, it is GODS commandment, that we
should pray to him, and to no other creature. Fourthly, we have promises, that
if we pray unto him, he will hear us. Fifthly, we have the examples of all
GODS children, who in all their troubles sought to GOD alone, and to no other
creature in the world, and he prevailed.

How available were the prayers of Abraham, being made unto God in faith,
Genesis chap. 18. That if ten righteous persons had been found in Sodom, GOD
had spared those Cities for their sakes. How was the Sun and Moon stayed by
the prayer of Iosh^ah, till he was revenged on his enemies, Joshua chap. 10.
How did Elias, by his prayer, obtain rain, which had been withheld from the
earth 3 years, and 6 months, 1. Reg. 17. Iam. 5. Acts 12.1.2. John 5.14, Dan.
9.17. John 11.4l.

Mary, to stocks and stones, and I know not what; whereas the Lord says
plainly, He will gine his glory to no creature: Esaias 41.8. Esaias 63.16
Now, that we may not pray unto them it is manifest; first, we have no
commandment: secondly, no promise: thirdly, no examples of Gods children:
fourthly, we may not believe in them.

Nay, would we not take him to be a foolish Suppliant, that when the Kings
Son offers to speak for him to his Father, would refuse to use his
mediation, and go to one of his scruants to entreat for him. Is it not meet
that such a one should be said nay? Even so, inasmuch as the Father sends us
unto his Son; and the Son calls us unto himself, what madness is it
then to run as well from the one as from the other, to go from the Son to
the Saints, from him that can hear, to them that cannot help; depriving the
Father of his honor, the Son of his office, and disgracing the Saints. Away
therefore with the mediation of Saints and Angels, who know not our hearts,
nor hear our prayers, There is one Mediator betwixs God and Man, the man
Christ Jesus. And, 1. John 5.14. This assurance have we in him, that if we ask
any thing, according to his will, he hears us. Let us tread in the steps of
David, and Moses, and the rest of the Servants of God, who have ever, in their
greatest troubles, called upon the name of the Lord. And howsoever Papists or
Idolaters will be ready to pretend humility, that they will not be so bold to
come to GOD themselves, but they will use the mediation of such as are about
him: yet let us know, that David, when he came to GOD, he was as humble as
they, and far beyond them; yet his humility did no whit hinder his holy
boldness, as to come into GODS presence. For our humility does not appear
in shrowding our selves under the Saints wings, but by humble and hearty
confession of our sins unto God.

Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean: Matthew, 8.2
And therefore that we may pray in faith and assurance, let us be persuaded
of these two: First, that GOD is almighty, and is able to pardon all our
sins, though never so great: Secondly^, that he i^ most ready, and willing,
for Christ's sake, (in whose name we come unto him) to pardon all our sins:
for if we doubt of either of these, we cannot pray in faith, and so shall not
obtain that we desire.

David prays for pardon of sin, and craves it only at GODS hands, we see
that that is a cursed, and blasphemous Doctrine of the Papists, who hold that
their head the Pope can pardon sin: The Pope can not forgive sins.
yea not only give a man pardon for his sins past, but (for money) can pardon
and seal him a pardon for sins many years to come: a most blasphemous
doctrine, and that which opens a gap to all sin, when a man shall have
promise of pardon for sins to come. But we see here, that the word of God
speaks clean contrary, namely, that GOD alone can pardon sins: For who can
forgive sins save God only? Luke 5.21
And where did we ever find that GOD did pardon a man's sins for time to come:
but rather threatens sinners with Judgment, to make them beware of sin: so
that we see the Pope is Antichrist, who sets himself in the seat of God,
and exalts himself above God: 2. These. 2.4.
in that he takes upon him that God never did, to give a man pardon of his
sins, before they be committed.

After thy loving kindness.
David being dismayed and cast down, in the sense of his misery, does look up
to Gods mercy, and is emboldened thereby to draw nearer unto him, and with some
comfort to call upon him for mercy.

Experience of former favor assures of future favor.
that the experience of Almighty Gods former favor casts off fear and
causes affiance in God, and is one of the chiefest causes to move us still to
trust in him, as Psalm 4. Hear me when I call O God of my righteousness:
For thou have set me at liberty when I was in trouble: have mercy therefore
upon me, and hearken to my prayer. Where the Prophet reasons from the time
past to the time to come, and entreats God to hear him now, because he had
already showed mercy on him. The like we may see, Psalm. 22. Thou did
draws me out of the womb, etc. Out of which words we gather, that the Prophet,
for benefits past, assures himself of deliverance from dangers present. The
like of the Lion and the Bear, 1. Sam. 17.34. Psalm. 3.4, 7.

but now the for mer mercies of God, are Arguments of further mercies, to
assure us that he will add mercy to mercy: whereby he may see how fruitful
the loving kindness of the Lord is always producing more, as one grain of corn
increases an hundred fold.

loving kindness toward me a wretched sinner? Yea, God does hear thee and
respect thee, and will show mercy upon thee, if thou seek unto him in faith;
yea the oftener we ask, the better we are accepted of God: the more we desire,
the more we obtain. He charge us, Psalm. 50.15. To call on him in the day of
trouble, and assures us of our deliverance, James 1.5, 6.

The mercy of God embolde^s sinners to come unto him.
thrown down for sin, wounded, and melting for sin, and almost in the
gulf of desperation (as David was) that gives them courage and emboldens them
to come into the prefence of God; to stand before their Judge: namely this, the
endless love and mercy of God in Jesus Christ, even the consideration of GODS
mercy, that he is most ready to pardon, and forgive poor sinners, to receive
the^ to mercy: for so long as the conscience accuses for sin, and terrifies a
poor sinner, he does nothing but fly from God, run from him, dares not look
unto him, nor call upon him, till he conceive of Gods mercy in Christ, Psalm,
103.8.
that he is most willing to pardon those which do truly repent.

Now, that God is merciful and ready to pardon poor sinners, and to receive
them to mercy, it does appear by that his loving inuitation, Math. chap. 11.
verse 28. Come unto me all ye that travail and are heavy laden, and I will
case you. Likewise he embraces the poor and simple, as lovingly and
cheerfully, as the rich and wise of the world. Publicans and Sinners are
accepted of him, who were contemned of the Jews. The woman taken in Adultery,
is exhorted by him to repentance; the blind man restored to his fight, and
cast out of the Synagogue, is sought out by Christ, and taught to beleede, John
9.35. The penitent Thief is by him converted to the faith, Luke 23. according
to that Math. 18.14. It is not the will of God, that one of these little ones
should perish. The like we may say of Mary Magdalen, who was infamous in life,
out of whom Christ cast seven devils. Of the Cananitish woman whom he heard and
helped. Of the cripple that lay at the poole, who^ when Jesus found in the
temple, Io. 5. he exhorted to sin no more, according to that of the
Evangelist, Ma^^, 11. That by the power and love of Christ, the ^linde had
their fight restored, the lepers were cleansed, th^^ dead were raised, the halt
walked, the sick were healed, and the poor received the Gospel.

as we must needs behold him as a just god, and righteous to punish sin: so
we must labor to be persuaded of his mercy, that he is most ready to pardon,
full of compassion, that so by Jesus Christ, we may have access unto the
throne of grace, and entrance with boldness into his presence: And because
that CHRIST JESUS is the Way, Truth, and Life; Ephesians. 3.12
let us never go without him, but take him in the arms of our faith, and in
his name beg for mercy, 1. John 2.1
for without him we can find no mercy by judgment.

Cause of man's despair.
and so to cast away their own souls; namely, because they can not conceive
that God has any mercy for them: they can not be persuaded of Gods endless
mercy in Christ Jesus: but when their consciences do accuse them of their
sins, they presently see that God is angry with them, that he is a righteous
Judge, an angry and terrible God against sinners: and thus seeing his justice
and anger against sin, they dare not appear in his presence, but fly from him,
as Adam did in the garden, and could wish that they might never come into his
presence: they cannot for their lives behold the mercy of God in Christ:
impenitent sinners can not call God Father, they can not endure Gods angry
countenance, but rather wish they were out of the world, and might never come
before his face: for this is certain, that unless a poor sinner, and
distressed soul, can, together with the sense of sin, and Gods anger against
sin, behold and acknowledge the endless mercy of God to pardon them, he will
never dare to appear in his presence, but Gods anger will ouerwhelme him: Well
then let us with David so behold and feel the anger of GOD for our sins to
humble us, that we never despair of Gods mercy, but still know and believe,
that God is no less infinitely merciful, if we can repent, to pardon and
forgive us, then he is infinitely just to punish, if we will notr^ pent.

David, Gods mercy man's merit.
a man after Gods own heart, entreats the Lord, to pardon his sins for his
mercies sake: therefore we learn that there is no other cause to move the Lord
to pity and pardon us our sins, but only his most free and undeserved mercy:
there is no work, no goodness, or virtue, in any man, to move the Lord to
pity and pardon us, but all is of his mere bounty, goodness, and mercy;
without all merits of ours: as what could the Lord see in Saul, in Rahab, in
Mary Magdalen, Acts 9. Luke 7.
out of whom went seven devils, to move him to mercy, but his mere mercy
alone: Even so, all the gifts and graces of Gods spirit bestowed upon his
servants, either concerning this life, or the life to come. They all proceed
from the free grace and mercy of God in Jesus Christ, according to that of the
Apostle, Romans 6.23. Eternal life is the free gift of God. This is confirmed by
the practice of godly Daniel, Dan. 9.7, 8, 9. O Lord, righteousness belongs
unto thee, But unto us shame, because we have sinned against thee: whereby we
gather, that though our prayers be not without effect, yet they prevail not
with God by virtue of any excellency that is in them, but because God has
promised to be found of them that seek him in the means he has appointed.
And so for the rest of GODS ordinances, Word, Sacraments, etc. The Lord does
accept them, and is well pleased in them; howbeit not thorough our worthiness
that perform them, but for his goodness sake that does command them: for
these properties are to be found in works that are meritorious.

First, they must be done of a man's own self, and from himself; but we have
nothing of our own to give unto God: For what have thou that thou have not
received? 1. Cor. 4.7. without him we can do nothing: it is he that must work
in us, the will, and the deed.

Secondly, they must be such works as are not due unto him, they must not be
due debt, but proceed from our own free will, even such as God cannot justly
challenge at our hands: but whatsoever we do, we do of debt and duty; yea
Luke 17.10. When ye have done all those things that are commanded you, say we
are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do.

Thirdly, the works we do must be done for the profit of him, from whom we
look for a reward: But Psalm 16. All our goodness can not reach unto the
Lord; we may benefit men, but we can not benefit our Maker; therefore it is
plain we can not merit.

Fourthly, the work and the reward must be in proportion equal: for if the
reward be more then the work, it is not a reward of desert, but a gift of
good will: But, Romans 8. The afflictions of the present time, are not worthy of
the glory that shall be showed unto us. So then they are not deserved of us,
but are bestowed on us.

This condemns the doctrine of the church of Rome, who teach, that God does
show mercy on some men, because they be worthy of it, for their good works,
and honest life: and therefore they can dispose themselves by virtue of their
fre-will, to move the Lord to have mercy upon them. Ephesians. 2.8.
But we ascribe all to Grace and mere mercy: and therefore seeing pardon of
sins comes from the mere mercy and love of GOD in Christ, we must ascribe
all the praise of it to God alone, pardon of sins, grace to repent, life
eternal, all these come from the mere mercy and love of GOD in Christ Jesus:
And therefore let us ascribe nothing unto our own goodness, or virtue, to our
own wit, or reason: but give all the glory to God.

According to the multitude of thy compassions, put away mine iniquities.
AS if David should have said, Oh Lord! my sins are many, and great, and
therefore I stand in need of thy mercy for my misery, and of the multitude of
thy compassions for pardon of all.

David prays for a multitude of mercies, The nature of sin.
for the pardon of his sins: we learn hence, what an heinous and horrible
thing sin is in Gods sight, that it can not be pardoned without a multitude
of mercies: sin being committed against an infinite God, deserves infinite
and endless punishment of soul and body, and before it can be pardoned, must
have infinite mercy.

Sin is odious in it self, and makes us vile and abominable in the sight
of God, Ierem. 5.25. Esaias 59.1, 2, 3. Keeping all good things from us, and
pulling down all evil upon us, and that the wages thereof is death, being
able to press us down even to the botome of hell. It is sin that makes us
execrable to the Lord, and abominable in his sight, yea nothing does more
deforme us, and make us cursed and detestable in the sight of God, then sin,
Iosu. 7.12, 13. the pardon whereof must have infinite mercy.

David having sinned, begs for multitude of mercies, and so we shall find,
that if we truly repent of sin, that we stand in need of a Sea of mercy,
and of every drop of Christ's blood.

need of GODS mercy, they think that Lord have mercy on me will serve: But if
we will judge of sin as we ought, we shall find that we stand in need of a
Sea of mercy in regard of the multitude of our sins.

God, a God of mercy. Psalm. 119.
and his mercies are over al his works: And indeed his mercies are great:
First, because they come from an infinite GOD, to men who are infinitely evil,
and deserve no mercy, but judgment: Secondly, because for time, they last for
ever, and never have end: Thirdly, because the mercy of God concerns great
things, salvation, life eternal, etc.

And this is that which the Lord himself proclaims from Heaven, Exodus 34.6.
The Lord is strong, merciful slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and
truth; reserving mercy for thousands, and forgiving iniquity, transgression,
and sinme. Again, Michah 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee that take away
iniquity, and passest by transgression? He retains not wrath for ever, because
mercy pleases him, he will turn again and have compassion vpou us; He will
subdue all our iniquities, and cast all our sins into the bottom of the Sea.
Esaias 55.8, 9. Ezech. 33.11. Though therefore our sin be great, yet great is
the mercy of God in pardoning it, Romans 5.20. Where sin does abound, there
grace does superabound: Wherefore let not sin so dismay us, to cast us down to
despair, as this cheer us, that God is so gracious.

Lament. 3
His compassions fail not. Hence is matter of great comfort to all true
penitent sinners: for thy sins cannot be so many, nor so great, but if thou
have grace to repent, God is able and willing to pardon them all.

If thou say, Oh! my sins are great, grievous, monstrous, unspeakable; well,
the mercy of God is greater, as may appear in the pardon of Lots sins,
Genes. 19.2. Sam. 12. Acts 9. Joshua 2.
David's, Peter's, Paul's, Rahabs, etc. If thou can repent, and truly turn to
God: If thou say, O! they are more then the stars in number, remember that
Gods mercy is as a botomlesse sea, he has a multitude of Compassions, and can
pardon them though never so many and grievous: If thou say, Oh! I have lived a
long time in them, twenty, thirty, forty years, look on Gods mercy showed
to Rahab, Paul, and others, that had lived long in sin: so that if a man have
grace to repent, neither the greatness nor the multitude, nor the continuance
of his sins, none of all these can hinder Gods mercy: but here is all, that
men must repent: otherwise, if men do not repent, the least sin is damnable:
and if men repent, no sin is so great, but is pardonable.

The mercies of god belong not to all.
Yet notwithstanding, men must take heed that they take not occasision to live
in sin, because God is merciful, for these things are noted as a comfort for
those that sigh and groan under the burden of their sins, to comfort them,
and to keep them from despair; that if they be truly humbled for their
sins, there is yet with the Lord mercy in store whereby they may be saved.

multitude of mercies for poor penitent sinners, that sue to him for mercy.
We learn above all things in the world to desire mercy, and the pardon of our
sins. This we see in the Prophet David, Psalm. 6.6.
My soul is sore trouble. But Lord, how long will thou delay? Psalm. 63.3,
Return (O Lord) deliver my Soul, Save me for thy mercies sake: this is
likewise practiced by the Church; It is the Lords mercies that we are not
consumed, Lament. 3.
because his compassions fail not. Thus the godly, when they desire any
blessing, they ask it of favor: If they crave to have any judgment removed,
they crave it of mercy, esteeming his mercy above all the world, or aught
else they can desire: labor therefore above all things in the world for the
mercy of GOD in Jesus Christ: use all good means to obtain it, employ thy
self diligently to keep it, and to continue it toward thee, that in thy
life it may be with thee, and in death it may not depart from thee.

Lastly, where the Prophet David says, According to the multitude of thy
compassions, blot out mine offenses.

Mark that the word (blot out) it is a metaphore taken from Writing-tables,
when a man shall wipe out with a sponge all that is written: or from crossing
of books of Records, and Books of Debts.

And it is all one as if David should have said; O Lord, I have run far in
thy score: I have even filled thy Book, nor with small, but great sums of
Debt* pay I am not able, no not one farthing. Now Lord, I beseech thee therefore
deface, cross, and blot out altogether the Debt of my sins.

The Lord keeps a Book of our sins
that all our sins are recorded in the Lords Book: he keeps a Bill of
Account, all our very thoughts, words, and deeds are known unto him, he
keeps them in mind and memory, and has them written down: And unless we
repent of them, and they be blotted out with the blood of Christ, laid hold on
by faith, the Lord will call them all to account at the day of judgment; Reu.
20.12.
The Books shall then be opened; and every sin, old, new, secret, open,
against God and men shall be brought to light, for they be rocorded in Gods
Book.

Now by these Books we may not conceive material books, in which men write
down such things as they would have remembered, for God can not be said to
stand in need of any such helps: But because all things are as certain and
manifest to him, as if he had his Registers in Heaven to keep account
thereof, Psalm 139.16. Dan. 7.10. Philip. 4.3.

So then we may see, that the Lord does keep a note of all our sins, and
chalkes them as it were upon a score, until payment come. It is not with God
as it is with Princes, who are ignorant of the Treasons plotted against them;
but all things both past, present, and to come, are known to him, as well our
rebellious thoghts, as sin f^ll acts committed. And although we do forget
and carelessly mind what we have done, yet God forgets nothing; every part and
parcel of our debt being noted exactly in his Book of Remembrance.

2. Cor. 5.10
and notes it in his Book, and unless he blot them out, they shall all come
to account.

A wicked man and an unchaste woman, how many thousand vile and filthy thoughts
have they in their minds, night and day their hearts burn in lust and
uncleanness, and these they pass over, regarding the^ not, making little or
no account of them: But (alas) the Lord has them all written in the Book of
his Remembrance, and if thou repent not of them, and leave them, O woe to thy
soul when this Book comes to be opened, and read over, and when thou shall
receive According to thy works. Job says, Thou have sealed up our sins in a
bag. To seal up a thing does note an exact kind of keeping it: So then, the
bag and bundle of our sins being sealed up, and that by God himself; let
us not imagine that any one can drop out, but all shall come to Judgment.

wipe them out again; nay, we can never of our selves, pay one farthing, or
satisfy the least of our debts we owe unto him. It is God that has written
down, that must freely forgive and cancel, as himself tells us, Esaias 43,
25. I, even I am he says the Lord that puts way thine iniquities. Now,
that they may be blotted out, and this Book may be cancelled, we must;

How to have the Books cancelled.
First, truly repent of them all, bewail them, be grieved for them, that by
them we have grieved God.

Secondly, we must beg hard, even as for life and death, for pardon of them, as
David did here, again and again, ask mercy: If a man should run into debt
a thousand pounds, and know not how to pay his creditor, his best way were to
seek and make friends unto him to forgive it: We are debtors unto God,
thousand Thousands sins: pay we can not, then let us confess the debt,
entreat him to blot his book, and take that handwriting, and band of
obligation on against us, and nail it to Christ's Cross: And this is an
excellent property of the child of God, that he desires (after a sort) to
come out of Gods debt. A true child of GOD cannot abide to have any thing
standing on Gods score, for he knows Hebr. 10.31. That it is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living GOD: so long to defer, till God warn to
his Bar: Oh he seeks betimes and gives the Lord no rest till the debt be
pardoned.

Thirdly, that our sins may be clean blotted out, we must have faith in
Christ Jesus; for nothing can blot out sin, but his blood alone: nothing in
heaven and earth can satisfy Gods anger, wash away sin, blot out our
offenses, but only the blood of Jesus Christ; and therefore let us labor
continually to be assured of it by faith, to sprinckle our sinful hearts with
the blood of Jesus Christ. 1. John 1.7 Revel. 1.6


David does acknowledge, that this Debt was more then he was able to pay, and
therefore disclayming his own sufficiency, appeals only to GODS mercy in
Christ for the pardon of the same. We learn that that Doctrine of Merits, yea
and Supererogation, now taught in the Church of Rome, is most false and
erroneous; teaching poor people to lean unto man's satisfactions, which they
must make unto God, either here, or in Purgatory; whereas the Justice of God
is infinite. And when we have done all that we can here in this life, we are
unprofitable servants: nay, there is not that man in the whole world, that if
God should lay aside his mercy, and deal in justice, were able to satisfy
the Justice of GOD, for the least Debt that he does owe unto GOD. And unless
the Lord take pity on us, and forgive the Debt, there remains nothing for
us, but to lie in prison, and that for ever. Matthew. 28.27. But of this before.

VERSE. 2. 2. Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my
sins.
IN this Verse the Prophet David proceeds with his former petition unto GOD
for grace and favor, for pardon of his sins: yet so, as he does it more
effectual, and more earnestly, because his foul was now exceeding grieved,
seeing his woeful misery that he was in, how foul and filthily he was stained
with sin, most hainously: And though some put a difference between these two
speeches, and understand the former of the washing of Justification, and pardon
of his sins, not imputing them unto his charge: And the second of the washing
of Sanctification, and the covering of our sins, yea by little and little
washing and purging them away, and more and more renewing newing of us in soul
and body by the work of Sanctification: yet me thinks the words do both imply
one thing, namely, to be thoroughly purged from the filth and stain of sin,
and to be received again into the favor of God, by the means of Christ.

It may seem strange what should move David to confess his sin, and to
entreat for pardon in this manner. There was no Court of Inquisition concerning
his fact; There was no Magistrate to examine him, nor Judge to condemn him, he
being King: Nay, no doubt the devil might set some on work which might back
him, and seem to lessenhis fault: what then should cause David, without any
regard of his credit, to come forth in this manner, and thus publicly to
confess his pollution, and to be so earnest unto GOD with his Have mercy,
Blot out, Wash me, etc. Surely it was his own conscience, and that extorted
and wroong from him this Confession, and made him so earnest unto God in prayer.

David, A wounded conscience can find no rest, but only in Christ.
repeating his request to GOD so often: Have mercy, Blot out, Wash me, etc. we
learn that a wounded conscience, that is truly touched for sin, can find no
rest or comfort, but only in the feeling of Gods mercy in Christ, for the
pardon of sin: and therefore David, to show how he was truly humbled and
wounded for sin, he never can content himself to pray and beg for mercy and
pardon: for after a man sees his sins, and the filthiness of them, and
beholdes the wrath of God against sin, his conscience still accuses him,
neither can he find any rest till he do feel the mercy of God in Christ,
for the pardon of them: Being justified by faith we have peace with God: Romans
5.1.
Again, the Kingdom of GOD stands not in meat and drink, Romans 14.17
but in righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost: that is in pardon
of sins, and feeling of Gods love, for sin once known will never cease to
accuse until it be pardoned.

And this is confirmed unto us by the example of Caine, Genes. 4. who having
slain his own brother and shead innocent blood, which cried in the ears of
the Lord for vengeance, how did the Lord strike him with an accusing
conscience, that he feared the sight of every creature, when he had once
attained the sight of his sin: and whereas he thought to build him a City
to yield him comfort and safety, even there did the Justice of God overtake
him, and he was driven from that enterprise: The like we may see in
Belieshazzer Dan. 5.56. when there appeared fingers of a man's hand upon the
wall, his thoughts were troubled, and his knees smote one against the other.
According tothat punishment the Lord foretold, Leuit. 26. I will send even a
faintness into their hearts; And the sound of a leaf shaken shall chasten
them; And they shall fly as from a sword though none pursue them. So that if
it were possible to escape all apprehension and accusation in the world; yet a
man's own conscience would arrest him, and hale him unto Judgment.

David did here, pray again and again, for mercy, and favor, and
reconciliation with God, and never leave the Lord till we obtain mercy and
favor, and till we have got some comfortable persuasion of GODS love in
Christ for the pardon of our sins: for till we do so, we shall never have
peace, nor quietness of conscience: we shall never have sound comfort and joy
in Gods Spirit, but ever anguish, and dolor, sorrow, and heaviness: yea either
we shall grow blockish and senseless, Note.
or else in the end come to extreme desperation. And therefore let us labor
with the Lord, ply him with prayers and tears for pardon, and never let him
have rest til we get one drop of mercy, for the pardon of our sins.

Eccles. 23. who sees me? I am compassed about with darkness; the walls
hide me, no body sees me; whom need I fear? And indeed there is scarce
one of a thousand that makes any conscience of sin, so that the world do not
take notice of it to condemn him; But let us not deceive our selves: though we
think our selves never so secret, committing adultery under a Canopy, or in
the dark: Yet our own conscience will reply; I see thee, and I will accuse
thee: And then what is a man the better for having no body privy to his
sins, when he has a conscience within him, which dogs him up and down in
every corner, giving him no rest.

men, when they feel the burden of sin pressing them, and their consciences
accusing them: what do they? run to God, and seek him, no, no, they run to
their sports and pastime, to Cards and Tables, to the Tavern, and Alehouse,
and merry company: And thus they think to put off the sense of sin, and to
smoother and stop the mouth of their accusing conscience.

David's spirit, Difference between the sorrow of the god lie and the wicked.
and vexed his mind: namely, his sins, and impieties, his filthy sins,
whereby he had grieved his good God, and loving Father, he did not so much fear
punishment as this, to offend his merciful and gracious God.

Twofold sorrow.
Hence then mark the difference of Gods children, and the wicked, in
repentance: the child of God is sorry for sin, because it is sin, because it
offends God, displeases him, and not so much properly for the punishment, yea
though there were none, yet he would fear to offend, and be grieved for
sin, because it is sin, and breaks Gods commandments: This we may behold in
David, when he had committed those great sins of Adultery and Murder, and was
reproved for the^ by Nathan the Lords Prophet, 2. Sam. 12, 13. He confesses
with grief and anguish of heart in this Psalm, verse 4. I have sinned against
thee, even against thee. All the Judgments which Nathan threatened against him
from the Lord, did not so much wound him, as this, that he had dishonored his
GOD. And when he had numbered his people, 2. Sam. 24.10. his heart smote him,
and he cried out; I have sinned exceedingly in that I have done. The
pestilence did not so much trouble him as his pride against GOD. And the
Apostle Peter. Matthew. 26.75. seeing how grievously he had sinned, in denying
his Master, Went out, and wept bitterly. If there had been neither heaven nor
hell, neither reward nor punishment; yet this unthankfulness of his, toward
so kind a Master, would have caused Peter to have sorrowed so much as he did.
And when this godly sorrow is once wrought in man's heart, then he begins to
repent, and never before; The like we may behold in Abraham, in Job, in Joseph,
etc. Genesis 18.30. Genesis 39.9.

But wicked men they are grieved for sin, not because it is sin, and the
breach of GODS Law: but for fear of punishment: Exo. 10.17
Pharaoh prays Moses to pray for him, that the judgment might be removed,
but still he loved his sins: so Saul prays Samuel to pray for him, 1. Sa. 15,
30.
and to honor him, but still he would go on in sin: Matt. 27.3.
So Judas repented and sorrowed for his sin, because he saw now he should be
condemned, and so for punishment he was grieved: Acts 8.24.
Simon Magus prays Peter to pray for him, but how? That none of the Judgment
threatened might fall upon him.

Caine mourned exceedingly, and cried out, saying, Genes. 4. My sin is
greater then can be for given me: but it was not for his hypocrisy in Gods
service, nor for the cruel murdering of his own brother, nor the sheading of
innocent blood, but because of the punishment that God had inflicted upon him.
Ahab also humbled himself, and put on sacke-cloth, as though he had been
very penitent; but Elias wrung it out from him, denouncing Gods Judgment
against him, 2. Reg. 2^.27.

Only godly sorrow causes true repentance.
Seeing this is the difference between the godly sorrow of the faithful, and
the worldly sorrow of the wicked; one sorrows for sin, because it is sin;
the other because of the punishment only: let us hereby prove our sorrow: Art
thou grieved for sin, because it is sin, because it offends God? And art
thou more grieved for sin, because it grieves a merciful God, then for fear
of punishment? Yea, would thou be grieved for sin, though there were no hell
nor devil to torment thee: only for this very cause, because it offends thy
merciful GOD, then it is a certain token of thy true repentance, and godly
sorrow: But if thou find thy heart only to be lumpish and heavy, Note.
in regard of the punishment of sin, in regard of hell and damnation, and if
it were not for that, thou could be content to live and go on in sin,
surely then, it is but a carnal sorrow, it is not a godly sorrow, that is only
for fear of punishment: and this deceiues many a man, who thinks he repents,
because he is grieved for sin, in regard of the punishment: But the vilest
Atheist, and reprobate in the world, may be grieved for sin, in regard of the
punishment, as hell fire, and condemnation, as Judas, Caine, etc. But the
child of God is grieved for sin, because it is sin, and offends God, though
there were no hell to punish.

David prays that the Lord would wash him, Sin defiles a man.
therefore sin defiles, and he was made foul and filthy by his sin: And to
wash him much, and to rinse and bathe him, to show that sin had exceedingly
defiled him, and stained him both in soul and body, and made him loathsome:
and therefore he desires to be washed and cleansed, and purged from the
pollution of sin. Sin defiles the whole man.
Hence we may learn what a vile, filthy, and miserable thing sin is in the
sight of GOD, it staineth a man's body, it stains a man's soul, it makes him
more vile then the vilest creature that lives: no toad is so vile and loathsome
in the sight of man, as a sinner stained and defiled with sin, is in the sight
of GOD, till he be cleansed and washed from them in the blood of Christ:
Leuit. 13.
The Leprousie was a wonderful disease, it did infect the body, yea the
clothes on a man's back, the walls of the house, and the very stones: but this
leprosy of sin, does more defile a man, it defiles the soul and conscience,
Yea the creature.
yea even the very heavens and earth are stained with the contagion thereof,
and are made (by reason of sin) subject to vanity and corruption, Romans 8.20.
Oh then see how vile a thing sin is in the fight of God, that the infection
thereof should seize upon the Creature, and make them that they dare not abide
the glorious presence of God their Creator, Reu. 20.12.



But alas, alas, poor plinde souls! they who are most afraid of the bodily
plague and infection, fear not this woeful plague of sin, make no bones of
horrible and grievous sins, of adultery, drunkenness, lying, stealing, etc.
yea, as Solomon says; Foolish men, and poor blind souls, Wicked men add
sin unto sin, and pay one debt with another.
do make a sport of sin, and put on them the name of Virtue: Swearing is a
sign of a brave Gentleman-like mind: drunkenness good fellowship,
covetousness good husbandry; fornication a trick of youth; pride,
cleanliness: these men be clean contrary to David; he thought nothing more
vile, filthy, and unclean then sin: they judge nothing more sweet and
pleasant then sin: But if we could see the loathsome filthiness of sin,
how odious it is in the sight of God, how it stains and defiles both soul and
body, then we should hate it, and loathe it more then a toad or a serpent, and
shun it above all things in the world: but alas! men sin, and yet see not
that they do sin: they see and feel no danger, they are secure; no man says,
Ierem. 6.
Alas what have I done?

We be wary tauoyd temporal danger.
If a man should say to any of us, touch not that garment, it is infected; or,
taste not that drink, it is poisoned: how ready would we be to shun it,
and avoid it? we would not touch nor come near it: but yet though we tell
men of sin, bid them take heed of it, it will infect soul and body, and
unless men do presently repent, it will bring both to hell; yet men, even mad
men, desperately rush into it wilfully, casting away their own souls.

Hard matter to be cleansed from the pollution of sin.
whereas David prays to be washed, yea to be washed thoroughly, or much, and
often, and more then that, to be cleansed, and rinsed from his sins: we
learn hence, that it is not so easy a matter for a man to repent, and to get
the pardon of his sins, to be washed and cleansed from them, as most men
think it is: David desires the Lord to wash, yea to wash him often, again
and again, and to bathe and rinse him from his sins, showing, that it is a
hard thing to have the spots of sin to be washed out: a hard thing to
obtain the pardon of our sins, to be cleansed from the stains and blemishes
of them, it will cost much sorrow, many a tear, many a sigh, and groan, even
a great measure of grief, for look how grievously we have sinned, so greatly
should we bewail our sins: And hence it is, that the Lord calling the
people to sorrow for their sins, does not require a light sorrow, or some
small measure of grief, but such a sorrow as should even rent their very
hearts, Joel 2.13. And the Prophet David says in the seventeenth verse of this
Psalm, that a man's heart must be contrite and broken, even as it were rent
asunder with godly sorrow: or else his repentance will never be accepted of
God. David says, Psalm 6.6. That he watered his cowch with tears. Again he
says, Psalm 42. His tears were his meat day and night. And indeed it must
not be a small measure of sorrow that we must show for our sins. For if we
had an hundred eyes, and should weep them all out: And if we had a thousand
hearts, and they should all break asunder with remorce and sorrow, all were too
little; yea although we shead even tears of blood for our sins.

Folly of natural men described.
they do think it the easiest thing in the world to repent, to get the pardon
of their sins: they do think that Lord have mercy on me will serve: Oh,
God is merciful, God is merciful: and so make Gods mercy a packe-horse, of
all their filthy sins: but let no man deceive himself, it is an other manner
of thing to repent then we take it for: it will cost thee many a tear, and
many a prayer, before thou can have pardon, it will cost thee many a sob and
sigh, and many a oh, oh, ere thou can be assured ofthe pardon of them.

How then do men deceive their own souls, thinking every little glimpse of
their sins sufficient; no, no, every sorrow brings not with it repentance:
Ahab had sorrow, 1. Reg. 21. He rent his clothes, and put on sackecloth, and
fasted: but this sorrow was as the morning dew, it did quietly vanish away. The
like may be said of Felix, Acts 24. of Herod, of Pharaoh, and the like; all
which have had in them a kind of sorrow, but it was but carnal, the end
whereof is death: It must then be a godly sorrow, arising from the sight of our
sins, that we have offended a good and gracious God, and loving Father in
Jesus Christ; and this must even wound our very souls as the people of the
Jews, Acts 2.37. that we know not which way to turn us for comfort.

David, let us cry again and again unto the Lord for mercy, Psalm. 32.1.
let us beg hard for the pardon of our sins, it is the greatest mercy in the
world: Pardon of sin the greatest mercy.
good things are not easily gotten, heaven, life eternal, are hardly come by:
and therefore let us not imagine, that it is so easy a matter to get the
pardon of our sins: no, no, we must fill Heaven and Earth with cryings and
prayers: even as a poor thief condemned at the bar, he will cry with tears
for mercy: and as a poor beggar vnlappeth his legs, shows his wounds, and
all to move them that pass by to pity him, Note.
so must we cry as for life and death, for the pardon of our sins, lay open
our soars and griefs unto the Lord, and give him no rest until we have mercy.

Lastly, it may be demanded, what washing David speaks of here: he speaks
not here of the Legal washing, which was ysed in the time of the Law: but he
speaks here of that washing which is performed only by the blood of Jesus
Christ, being laid hold on by faith: John 1.29 1. John 1.7. Reave. 1.6. Zach.
13.1
for no water whatsoever can wash away the least spot of sin, but only the
blood of Jesus Christ.

Blood of Christ alone does wash awa^ sin. 1 John 1.7 Hebr. 9.9.
that can purge us from sin, and the uncleanness of the soul, but only the
blood of Jesus Christ the Lamb of God, being applied unto us by the hand of
faith: he alone is our Savior, saving perfectly all that are saved, Hebr.
7.25. He is able to save perfectly all that come unto him. Hebr. 1.3. And by
him he has purged our sin. So that we are to acknowledge him to be our
only and alone Savior, without partner, according to that, Acts 2. There is
no other name under heaven given to save us, but the n^me of Christ, Acts
15.9.1. Corinth. 6.11.

This shows the folly of the Church of Rome, who bear men in hand, that
their holy water, as they call it, and coniured stuff is able to wash away
sin: no, no, it can not do it, only the blood of CHRIST can do it, and no
other creature in heaven or earth. And therefore howsoever in word they honor
Christ, yet in deed they deny him, in joining to ^he all-sufficient
Satisfaction of CHRIST, other satisfactions: as their Sacrifices in the Mass
to help CHRIST'S Sacrifice on the Cross: and the Intercession of the virgin
Mary, Saints and Angels, etc. to his meritorious intercession, robbing God of
his honor, and CHRIST of his all-sufficient merit; running from Christ the
pure fountain, to the filthy puddle and mire of their own merits and
satisfaction, and thus poor Catholic creatures, they think themselves trimly
washed: whereas (alas) they are not purged from their filthiness, but are as
beastly as swine.

John 13.8.
as Peter says, Head, and hands and all, both soul and body; For that answer
given by Christ unto Peter, may serve for a warning to us all; If I wash thee
not, thou shall have no part with me. Which if we did well consider, as well
our own pollution, as also the necessity of Christ's washing, we would answer
again with Peter, O Lord, not my feet only, but my hands and my head.

David's estate and condition, that he was so filthy and unclean (having lain
but a short time in sin) that he cries out amain unto the Lord, to wash
him, to purge him, and to cleanse him. Oh then, what shall we think of those,
that not once, but often, not a year with David, but all the days of their
life have lived in the common custom and practice of sin, that have drunk
down iniquity as a man drinks down water, their damnation does not sleep:
And yet poor souls, they think, that if they can besprinckle themselves with
a few words in the end, as to say, Lord have mercy on me, that they shall be
clean. But, if it did cost David so many sighs, and groans, and tears, as in
the sixth Psalm, which lay but a short time in comparison of others; They much
deceive themselves that do think it is so easy a matter, to be washed and
cleansed from the pollution of sin that have lain therein a long time.

Godly sorrow will send us to, Christ.
And before we can be washed and cleansed from our sins in the blood of Christ,
we must have a godly sorrow, which will send us to Christ Jesus, we must see
our filthiness and uncleanness, how we stand in need to be washed: and we
must desire it with David, and beg it, O Lord, wash me, rinse me, bathe me
in the blood of Christ: Secondly, we must have the hand of faith, by which we
must lay hold on Christ's blood, and besprinckle our souls with it: Even as a
man does wash his face with his hand: so faith is the hand of the soul, to lay
hold and apply Christ's blood, and the merit of it, to cleanse us and wash us
from all our sins.

But alas (poor souls) you shall see many a man and woman that are very
curious and careful to wash their bodies, and to wash their clothes: They
will not suffer the least spot in them, but look to have them washed, yet they
can go from year to year, with most vile and filthy souls, that even
stincke with sin, and never desire to be washed and rinsed; yea many of
those, who seem to be very gay and fair outward, carry filthy and unclean
hearts within: And if a man could but see into their hearts, and see the filthy
spots of sin, he would even stop his nose, and not endure the stench of
them.

VERSE. 3. 3. For I acknowledge mine iniquities, and my sin is ever before
mine eyes.
David's reason from his former petition.
THe Prophet David having entreated for savor and grace at Gods hands, for the
pardon of his great and grievous sins, he does heeve labor to move the Lord
to pity him, and to take compassion upon him: because he does now most
frankely and freely confess his sins, is truly touched and grieved for
them: yea, his poor conscience is now upon the rack, wounded, and distressed,
and exceedingly afflicted, and therefore he entreats the Lord to pity him:
For I acknowledge and confess my sins against God, in thy sight, before thy
Prophets, and before all thy people, yea the whole Church of God: by leaving
this Psalm as a testimony of my true repentance and sorrow for them.

Confession ever goes before remission.
Hence mark, that there is no place for mercy, nor any favor to be looked for
at Gods hands, nor any pardon of sin, before a sinner truly humbled, do
freely and frankely confess the same, and humbly acknowledge, with grief of
heart, his sins unto the Lord* where we are to observe two things; First, the
person to whom we must confess our sins; Secondly, the manner how we must
confess them.

Person to whom.
For the person to whom we must confess, it is GOD, as this example of David
does teach us, verse 4. Against thee, against thee only have I sinned. Again,
Psalm. 32.5. I said, I will confess my sins unto the Lord, and so thou
forgauest the wickedness of my sin. It is true indeed, we may by our
sins wrong men, as David did Vrias. But being sin, the chiefest wrong is
unto the Lord; The Scribes and Pharisees, though they were corrupt in many
things else, yet they held this for a truth, that none could forgive sin but
God only Mark 2.7. And this does the Lord testify of himself, Esaias 43.25.
I, even I am he that puts away thine iniquities for my own sake. 1. John
1.9. If we confess our sins God is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins. Besides these Precepts in the word of God there is recorded the
repentance of Gods children, who have humbly acknowledged their sins unto
GOD, as Manasses, 2. Chronic. 33. David, 2. Sam. 12. The Prodigal Son, Luke
15. So true is that saying, Prouer. 28.13. He that hides his sins shall not
prosper: but he that confesses them shall have mercy. And this did David
prove by his own experience, that so long as he held his peace, Psalm 32.5.
and did not acknowledge his sins unto the Lord, but concealed, smothered, and
hid them, so long his poor conscience was upon the rack, his soul was
troubled and greatly disquieted; but after he had confessed them, and repented
of them, the Lord for gave them, and showed him mercy.

Secondly, we must confess our sins also unto men, and that both privately
and publicly, as the quality of the sin requires. For howsoever we condemn
Auricular confession, as having in it nothing but policy, and a rack to the
conscience: yet we do not only allow, but call and cry for that voluntary
confession, which every Christian ought to make to their godly patron of such
sins as disquiet the conscience, and no doubt, great blessings, and comfort,
follow them that use this godly practice: And therefore, Joshua 7.10. When
Joshua labored to bring Achan to a sight of his sin, he says, My son, I
beseech thee, give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto
him, and show me now what thou have done. Again, Confession must be made unto
men, and that in respect of the Church, that the Congregation that has been
offended, may be satisfied, as also that others may be terrified from falling
into the same sins, 1. Timot, 5.20. Them that sin, rebuke openly, that the
rest may fear. And last of all, in respect of the sinner himself, that there
by he may be the more humbled, as that incestuous person, 2. Corinthians. 2.7. That
was delivered up to Satan for his sin, which brought him to humiliation,
whereas otherwise if the punishment were laid only on their purse, few or
none would regard it.

But withal we must know, that a man is not bound to confess his sins to
the Minister only, and to none else, (as Papists would have men do it to a
Friar:) But he may make choice of any other Christian friend, according to
that of Saint James, James 5.16. Acknowledge your faults one to another, and
pray one for an other, that ye may be healed.

no other suck. Adam our first Parent has taught it us, Genes. 3.12. When he
was examined, he posted off the matter from himself unto his wife; The woman
that thou gave me, she gave me of the fruit, and I did eat: And Eve
quickly cleared herself, posting off the matter to the Serpent; The Serpent
beguiled me, and I did eat. And so it is with us all, we are loath to make any
confession of our sins unto God. Men's sins break forth every day, lying,
swearing, drunkenness, malice, etc. But, where is that man to be found that
has any care to satisfaction. This while men do not confess them, they can
have no pardon of them, Luke 13.5. Unless ye repent ye shall perish. Now
confession is a special part of true repentance.

way to get the pardon of them at his hands: indeed in the Court of man, to
confess our sins, is the next way to bring shame and punishment: but in the
Court of God it is not so, but the next way to have them covered, is to uncover
them, and to lay them open unto the Lord: I have sinned, says David, 2. Samuel
12. The Lord has taken away thy sin, thou shall not die, says the Prophet:
When we confess them, then he will cover them; If we judge our selves, we
shall not be judged of the Lord: 1. cor. 11.31
Oh then set us not fear to confess our sins, and lay them open unto the
Lord with grief and sorrow, yea, let us deal as a poor prisoner condemned at
the Bar, or as a poor Lazar and cripple, show our soars, and lay open our
wounds, and by that means we shall move the Lord to pity and compassion.

The manner how we must confess our sins.
Secondly, that we may so confess our sins, and make such an acknowledgement
of them, as may be a true Confession, and to bring with it true and unfeigned
repentance.

We must first take heed that we do know our sins, the number of them, the
greatness of them, the danger of them, how they make us most vile in the sight
of GOD, and most loathsome: we must know that we deserve hellfire, and
eternal condemnation for them: for till a man know his sin, and his
conscience be convicted for it, and withal see the danger of his sin, he
will never humbly and heartily confess the same.

I know (says David) mine iniquities:] So did Peter, although, for a time, he
did he knew not what, as a man in a Trance (for sin may well be called
madness) yet afterward he bethought himself, and considered what he had done,
and lamented his folly with tears; And this is required of us all, Lament.
3.40. O let us search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord. And the Lord
complains, Jeremy 8.6. That he did hearken, to see if there were any man
that would repent and turn unto the Lord, but there was no man said, what have
I done?

And surely, this Complaint may be taken up against the people of this Land,
That notwithstanding GOD has cried and called unto v^ so often from Heaven, by
his powerful voice in his word, by his mercies and by his judgments, so
sensible, that if the Magicians in Aegipt were amongst us, they could do no
less then acknowledge it the finger of God; yet where is the man almost to be
found that looks back unto his own ways, to ask this question of his own
heart to say; Alas, what have I done? Or with David here; I know mine
iniquities.

Now there is a two-folde knowledge of sin: First, General. Secondly,
Special. General knowledge never works any reformation; for this is found
(for the most part) in all men, which can say they are sinners. But there is a
special knowledge of sin, which God will once discover unto us either in
mercy to our good and salvation, as here to David, to Peter, to Marie
Magdalen, etc. or else in wrath as he did unto Judas, Caine, Achitophel, etc.
to their final condemnation; which may teach us all to pray unto the Lord, so
to give us the sight of our sins, as that we never despair of his mercy,
that our sins may never rise up against us to our confusion.

Secondly, our confession of our sins must proceed from sorrow of heart for
them, with a hatred of them, so as nothing do more grieve us, then our sins.

And this our Savior Christ insinuates, Matthew. 11.28. When he calls only
such unto him, as are weary and laden, even ready to faint under the burden of
their sins. And this does David himself confess, Psalm 38. My sins (says
he) are as a weighty burden, too heavy for me to bear: For when men can
run away with their sins, as though they were as light as a feather; it is
an evident token they were never thoroughly humbled for them.

Thirdly, it must be frank and free, not wrung out by compulsion, as sometimes
a wicked man, sometimes under the rod may confess his sins, as Pharaoh, Judas*
and the like: Exo. 10.17 Matt. 26.
But this Confession was only by compulsion wrung out of them; it came not
from any sorrow or hatred of sin: but for fear of judgment and punishment.

But we must be as forward and as ready to confess them, to the glory of
GOD, as we were to commit them to his dishonor. Thus did David confess his
sin, Psalm 32.5. I acknowledge my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I
not hid. It must be without all excuse or lessening of our sins, we may not
mince them or excuse them: but lay them open in their colors, rather
aggravating them then lessening them.

Fourthly, we must confess our sins, with a purpose to forsake them.
According to that of the Prophet, Esaias 55. verse. 7. Let the wicked for sake his
ways; And the ungodly man his own imaginations, and return unto the Lord.
There must be in us a desire to forsake all our sins, and every wicked way,
else there is no true repentance: For one sin is a sufficient hold for
Satan, and a sufficient Bar to keep out Christ Jesus: as we may see by the
example of Herod, Mark 6. of Judas, etc.

God be merciful unto us, we are all sinners: yet in particular they see it
not; no, they think they keep the Commandments of GOD: a man can very hardly
persuade them that they break any of the Commandments in particular, although
in general, and in a confused manner they confess themselves to be sinners,
yet in particular they do not so: Nay, they are so far from aggravating
their sins, That they rather extenuate them by all means possible; I am not
alone, nor, I am not the first, nor, I hope I shall not be the last: as for any
grief or sorrow for sin, it is far from them, and they are far from it.

Psalm. 32.5.
and wounded souls, confess our sins, with the greatest hatred of them as
possible we can: so, as often as we speak of them, it should make our hearts
to erne, and tears to stand in our eyes.

going in the way to the gallows, should then brag of his robberies, and
villainies, and be proud of his halter, what a desperate thing were that? And
yet, such filthy beasts there be in the world, who are not ashamed to boast
out their own shame and filthiness, to talk, yea to brag of their own
uncleanness, and of their filthy drunkenness, how they have druncke so many
dozens: how they have made so many drunk: O wretched men! it is a wonder the
house falls not on them, or that God raineth not fire and brimstone from
heaven to consume them.

[And my sin it ever before my eyes.]
David having showed, how that he had freely confessed and acknowledged his
sins unto the Lord, here he shows the cause which moved him so humbly to
acknowledge the same; namely, Cause that moved David to confess his sin.
because they were ever in his sight, and before his eyes: As if he should have
said, howsoever I have a long time lain snorting in sins, and did not feel
and see the danger of them; yet now being told of them by the Prophet, I see
them, and so behold them, that my conscience accuses me for them, and I can
have no rest, but my wounded Conscience does urge me and compel me to
confess my sins unto thee.

Where first of all we may behold the cursed nature of sin, when the Devil
tempts a man unto it, he does ever hide the misery of sin; The curse of GOD
due to sin, the torments of hell, and the damnation of both body and soul in
hell for evermore: These things the devil does labor to keep from men's eyes;
buzzing only in their cares, the profit of sin, gain, commodity, pleasure,
delight and sweetness of sin, that so, showing them only the golden bait
of sin, and hiding the poisoned hook, he might move men to run headlong
into all sin: But when Satan gets his purpose, and men be in his snare, and
fallen into sin: Oh how will he then press their poor consciences! then he
will load them, and set out their sins to the full, in a most ugly manner;
nothing then but hell fire, damnation, and the curse of God; that so (if it be
possible) he may draw them into the gulf of despair.

O that men could consider this in time! how sin will one day change her
countenance, howsoever it comes at first in a flattering manner, pretending
nothing but friendship: but in the end, will leave a sting behind it, even a
guilty conscience, terror of mind, and anguish of spirit. Wherefore let us
fly from sin, as from the biting of a Serpent, that we be not stung therewith
unto eternal death; Knowing that the wages of sin is death, Romans An accusing
conscience the means to bring me to repentance.
6.23.

David's sins being always before him, did urge him to confess them, yea to
repent, and beg the pardon of them, we learn that the remembrance of our
sins, and the calling them to mind, together with conscience accusing for
them, is the way and means to come to true repentance, to make a man confess
them, and beg the pardon of them: whereas if they slip out of our minds,
or we know them not, nor we find not our Consciences to accuse us of them:
Alas! we can neither confess them, nor truly be humbled, and beg the pardon
of them: And therefore David confesses here, that by reason his sins were
ever before him, he was continually vexed, and tormented with the horror of
them, his conscience still accused and annoied him, and therefore he is
constrained and urged humbly to confess them, and to beg the pardon of them
at Gods hands.

Whereas the wrath of God does ever follow such as have sleepie and drowsy
consciences, giving them over to a reprobate sense, to a slumbering spirit, and
to hardness of the heart, that they fall to be past feeling and can not
repent, Romans 1.28. Such as regarded not to know God, he gave them up to their
hearts lusts, unto all uncleanness, and punished one sin with another. And
surely it is just with God, that he should forsake us with his grace, that
have forsaken him by our sins: According to that of the Prophet, Psalm
81.11. My people would not hear my voice: And, Israel would none of me: So I
gave them up unto the hardness of their heart, and they have walked in their
own Councels.

Sight of sin first step to repentance.
So then hence we learn that a man will never repent truly of his sins,
seek to God for pardon, neither is there any other way or means to be
reconciled to God, but this, to feel the weight and burden of his sins, and
feeling his conscience to accuse him, to vex and to wound him till he find
God to be merciful, and reconciled unto him, for the pardon of them, and the
appeasing and quieting of his conscience.

be wounded for sin, and vexed and tormented with it, a man will never seek
for pardon: Then we learn hence, that no man can taste of the sweetness of
GODS mercy in CHRIST for his salvation, till he have tasted of the bitter
fruit of sin, and of a wounded and distressed conscience: Look on David, on
the Jews, Psalm. 6.32.77. Acts 2.37
and as for those that would taste of GODS mercy, and yet are loathe to feel
the smart of sin, they deceive themselves: we see that ere the body be
purged, men must taste of bitter pills, of bitter potions: Such may suspect
their repentance, who feel nor sin to wound their consciences.
And as for those who never felt any such grief nor wound of Conscience, no
such astonishment for their sins, they may justly fear their repentance is not
sound, that they have not, as yet, been truly humbled, for it is certain,
that before we can truly repent and be reconciled to GOD, we must have the
feeling of the smart of sin, and find our hearts troubled, and our
consciences wounded.



Dead conscience heavy Judgment.
a benumbed conscience: a sleepy and slumbering conscience: a seared and frozen
conscience, for if a man's conscience do daily bring his sins to his mind,
so that he sees them before his eyes, then he will be grieved for them, he
will confess them and beg the pardon of them; but when a man has a
slumbering conscience that is benumbed, then he goes on in sin from day to
day, never feels any smart of it, nor ever desires the pardon of it; as the
poor Jews, who seeing their fearful estate, cry out, Acts 2.37
What must we do? so do all wounded consciences, seeing their fearful
sins and damnable estate cry out for mercy, and seek for pardon.

Oh it is a fearful Judgment of GOD to have a sleepie or a drowsy
Conscience, It is like a wild beast, which so long as it lies asleep, seems
very tame and gentle, but when he is rowzed, flies into a man's face: Even so,
howsoever a man's conscience may seem, for a time, to be quiet; and men may
think they have a good conscience indeed, yet being awaked by the hand of
GOD, it will rent out even the very throat of their soul.

David does acknowledge here that his sins being ever before him, awaked
him, Necessary duty to call our sins to account.
and urged him instantly and earnestly to seek for pardon: We learn that it
is a good thing for us to call our sins to account, to have them often in
mind, to set them before our eyes, the greatness, number, and heinousness of
them.

First, it is a good means to prepare us to true repentance and humiliation
for them. Lam. 3.40.


Secondly, it is a special means to make us to hate and dislike them, seeing
the danger of them, how loathsome they be in Gods sight.

Thirdly, the remembrance of our sins makes us wary that we fall not into
them again, but our former falls makes us take heed of falling in time to come.

Fourthly, the remembrance of our sins make us pity other men: because,
though they fall dangerously, yet we know we have fallen as well as they,
therefore we hope well God will give them repentance.

Fifthly, the continual remembrance of our own sins, put us in mind of GODS
mercy in the pardon of them: And when men easily suffer their old sins to
pass away and slip out of their minds, they will easily fall into new, and
easily forget the mercy of God; and how much they be bound unto him. Paul he
gives us an excellent example, who remembering how he had persecuted the
Church, 2. Timot. 1.
says: Notwithstanding God was merciful unto me: So that the continual
remembrance of our sins puts us in mind of Gods merciful dealing with us,
and must stir us up to thankfulness.

For if we forget them, the Lord will remember them; and if we remember them,
the Lord will forget them: This then should make every man beware how he
forgets his sins, and casts them carelessly behind his back; for this is
a sign that GOD remembers them, and will call thy man to account for them.

Note of a wicked man.
to smother the checks of their consciences, by sports and pastimes, by merry
company, or by some other means to keep themselves from the sight of their
sins, they can not abide to hear of them by others, or to think of them
themselves, but put away the remembrance of them by all means possible: how
should these ever repent and be humbled for them, how should they confess them
with tears, and beg the pardon of them.

Psalm 25
open and secret, even the sins of our youth to humble us, and to cause us to
keep in mind the endless mercy of God in pardon of them: and therefore we
should do well to set some time apart to call our life to account; Psalm. 4.5.
Tremble and sin not: commune with your heart upon your bed, and be still:
Where David calls upon Saul's Courtiers, to fear Gods judgments and
threatenings: it is a special means to humble us, and to move us to repentance,
to keep a note of all our sins, and slippes, and falls, that we may ever
have matter to humble our hard and stony hearts.

Cause why so few do repent.
and beg the pardon of them; namely, because their sins be ever out of
their fight, though they pry into and epsy the sins of other men, and have
them in their fight, yet do they cast their own behind them: and by that
means never setting their sins in sight, they forget them, never be humbled
for them: but the Lord threatens all such, that if they will not set their
sins before them, then will he take the pains to set them all in order
before them, one by one, Psalm 50. I will reprove thee, and set before thee
the things that thou have dope. O consider this ye that forget God, lest he
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

David says in the confessing of his sins, Sin once known does ever accuse
till it be pardoned.
that they were ever in his sight; first they all this while grieve and vex
him, wound his soul and conscience, we learn that finne once known and felt,
does so accuse and wound the conscience of a poor sinner, that there can be
no rest and quietness until it be pardoned: for it was ever in his sight, and
before his eyes, troubling and vexing his mind, and wounding his conscience.
And as it was with David, so it fares with every poor sinner; after the Lord
in mercy opens our eyes, to come to the knowledge of sins and our misery by
them, so as our conscience does accuse us, and we feel the weight of Gods
anger pressing down our souls; there can be nothing but hell and anguish for
the present time: nothing but extreme sorrow and vexation of spirit, till we
find some comfortable answer from GOD for the pardon of them; Note.
as we see a poor prisoner, arraigned, convicted, and condemned to death:
there is nothing but sorrow and grief, no joy in wife, child, friends, lands,
livings, gold, or filuer, meat or music: only the gracious pardon of the
King can revive him, and make him a glad man. So it is with a poor sinner
arraigned in his own conscience for sin, convicted and condemned in his own
soul, before the bar of GODS Judgment: nothing can now comfort him and
cheer him up, and revive his wounded conscience, but the gracious pardon of
GOD, the general pardon of GODS mercy, fealed with the blood of the Lamb of
GOD that takes away the sins of the world.

world, who lie in sin, rot in sin, Indirect course that world lings take.
and never seek for pardon, never seek for mercy at the hands of God: and if
they find and feel their sins, then they run to this vanity and that
pastime, to smother the checkes of their consciences, and by merry company,
eating, and drinking, carding, dicing, etc. seek to stop the mouth of their
conscicnces, and to smother it: But alas, we see this is cold music for a
wounded conscience: Saul thought to have prevailed by this, at what time he
called David to play and make music before him: but by and by his wound was
greater: for these men that seek by such devices to stop the mouth of their
consciences, they do as a man that is in the fit of a burning agew: he is
hot, and to cool his heat, he drinks a draught of cold water, that indeed
(for the present) will somewhat alay the heat of his stomach, yet by and by
his fit is increased, and made the worse.

our souls, till we have gotten the assured persuasion of the pardon of all
our sins: for so long as the conscience does accuse for sin, so long we shall
find no rest nor quietness, no, Romans 5.1.
there is no peace till we be reconciled to God by true repentance, and till
the conscience leave accusing, let us never leave repenting and humbling our
selves for the pardon of our sins.

David in the confession of his sin says, I acknowledge my sins: not
speaking of his great fin of Adultery alone, but of many sins wrapped up
together: for he did not only commit adultery with Bethshaba the wife of
Vrias, but shead his guiltless and innocent blood: yea with him caused, as it
is like, many of his good subjects and loyal soldiers to be slain: he
sought to cover his sin closely and cunningly, by bidding Vrias to go home to
his wife, that so the child might be thought to be his: And to all these he
added this, that he laid the whole Church of GOD open to the enemy, to the
anger of God.

Sin never goes alone
Hence then note for our instruction, that David confessing that one sin will
never go alone, but sin goes by couples, by heaps, one in the neck of an
other: as he that takes a chain by the end, and pulls but one lincke, all
the rest do follow: so, if a man let liberty to one sin, that sin will not go
alone, but draw another: adultery will often bring murder with it; swearing
lying with it: so drunkenness whooredome, etc. The Apostle bids us, Romans
13.13
Not to walk as children of darkness, in surfeiting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying: showing unto us that
sins go by couples, and one draws on an other, and will hardly go alone.

It is like the Gangrene or Canker, it fretteth and eats further and further;
the hand infecteth the arm, and the foot the leg, and so one member an
other, till it has diffused it self over the whole body, if the part that is
infected be not cut off at the beginning. This does the Apostle teach, 2. Tim.
2.16. Stay profane and vain bablings, for they increase unto more
ungodliness, And their word will frette as a Canker. Saint James also shows
the fruitfulness of sin, saying; When lust has conceived, it brings forth
sin, and sin when it is finished it brings forth death. And as sin does
increase, so do GODS judgments, Leuiticus 26.22, 23. If ye walk stubbornely
against me, and will not obey me, I will then bring seven times more plagues
upon you, according to your si^^es: yet if by these ye will not be reformed by
me, but walk stubbornely against me, then will I also walk stubbornely
against you, And I will yet smite you seven times for your sins. And thus we
see again how God will keep a proportion betwixt our sins and his punishments.

stands us all in hand to take heed we give liberty to no sin, live in
none, delight in none: for if we do, we shall find that one sin will never go
alone: but let us abhor all, hate every sin, and strive against all: we see
this common in the world, that if a man shall yield to one sin, by and by it
will draw him to an other: Note.
and often (as it was in David) whoredom will bring murder with it, sometimes
of the husband, sometimes of the child, sometimes of two or three: And
therefore let us be careful to shun and avoid every sin, live in none:
for though one sin be enough to carry a man to the gulf of hell: yet one
will never go alone.

We see this in the example of Caine, Genes. 4.8. he was reproved of God for
his malice conceived against his brother; But he hear kened not to the voice
of the Lord, but hardened his heart, and shead innocent blood, even the blood of
his brother. This appears in Judas, Math. 26. having once entertained
Covetousness in his heart, fell from Covetousness to Treason, and at last
became a very devil incarnate. The like we may behold in Saul 1. Samuel
16.1. who fell away from GOD step by step, until the Spirit of GOD had
utterly forsaken him, and he brake out in open rebellion against Almighty GOD:
For as amongst all the blessings which the Lord does bestow upon the sons of
men in this world; a soft and tender heart is one of the greatest, which is
checked and controuled, and soon made bleed: so there can be no greater
curse laid upon man, then to have a rebellous heart, which hoordeth up every
day vengeance against it self.

VERSE. 4. 4 Against thee* against thee only have I sinned, and done this
evil in thy sight, That thou may be just when thou speak, and pure when
thou iudgest.
In this verse David knowledgeth his special sins.
IN this verse, and the two that follow, David proceeds in the humble
acknowledgement and confession of his sins: first his actual sins:
secondly, from them he comes to the fountain and beginning of all sin,
namely, his natural corruption wherein he was conceived and borne: and this
original sin he speaks of in the next verse following.

Two parts
This fourth Verse contains in it two parts: first, a free acknowledgement of
his particular, special and actual sins: in the second, he does clear the
Lord of all cruelty and injustice, that howsoever the Lord had not only
sharply reproved him by the ministry of Nathan: but also punished him and
grievously afflicted him for his sins, in taking away the child that was
borne in Adultery: yet he does acknowledge the Lord to be just and righteous
in all his ways.

In the first part of the Verse, Two parts
consider first, the party to whom he confesses, Against thee: Against thee
only, where he shows the great dolor and extreme grief of his mind for
his sin against GOD, in that he doubleth the words, Against thee, Against
thee: secondly, we are to observe how he does acknowledge his special and
particular sinner, namely, adultery, murder, and sheding of innocent blood, I
have sinned and done this evil in thy sight.

[Against thee] These words are expounded diversely: First, that it is as much
as if David should have said, O Lord, howsoever I have grievously murder: yet
I have so hid my sin from man, that there is none that knew it but thou
alone: so that he acknowledges all the sin was against GOD, because no
mortal man was privy to his sins.

David had offended against man, yet he was especially wounded and grieved, for
that he had broken the Law of God: So that though it be true that he had done
great wrong to his faithful servant, and most loy-all subject Vrias, yet here
was that that killed his heart, and wounded him to the quick, namely, because
he had offended his most merciful and loving God; as if he should have said, O
Lord my God: although the whole world should clear me, and no man living
should accuse me yet it grieueth me at the heart, because I have offended thee
my most merciful God.

A man's sins are open before God.
yet it is impossible to hide it from the al-seeing eyes of the Almighty. David
had committed adultery closly, he had labored to hide it, and cover it, by
marrying Bethshaba the wise of Vrias: but yet alas, all his shifts and cunning
fetches could not hide it from GOD: he saw it, and observed it, and now David
confesses the same; Against thee, Against thee: The like we shall see in
Joseph's brethren, when they sold him into Egypt; Genes. 37.1. Reg. 21. Reu.
2.18. Psalm. 139. Be as thou seem,
so in Iesabel in putting Nahaoth to death: so in these days men be cunning to
commit adultery closly in the twilight, in the dark corner, in close and
secret manner; to lie, steal, deceive, commit adultery, fornication, and all
uncleanness: But poor souls, they do deceive themselves, Or seem as thou
art
for thou can not hide thy sins from GODS all-seeing eyes, night and day is
all one to him: Yea the Lord does search the very heart and reins
Understanding our very thoughts long before: 1. Reg. 8.39. The Lord sercheth al
bearts, and understands every work of the mind. Again, Psalm 139.2. Thou
know my sitting down, and my rising up, Thou understand my thoughts long
before. There is not a word in my tongue but thou (O Lord) know it
altogether. And surely when this persuasion takes place, that the Lord is
present every where, and sees all things: there does religion, conscience, and
obedience begin in that man: for he that has the Lord always before him,
will not greatly fall, Psalm 16.8. Hebr. 4.13. For the Lord will find out
every transgression, though never so secretly concealed, which may teach us in
all things to keep faith and a good conscience, for although we may delude
men, yet we cannot deceive the Almighty.

Folly of sinners described.
who if they can hide their sins from men, they care for no more: And therefore
do they labor to commit them closely and cunningly, but use all thy skill,
cunning, and policy, yet thou can by no means hide thy sins from the clear
sight of God.

Thou may lie, Note.
dissemble and deceive so closely, that no Man nor Angel can detect thee: thou
may commit Adultery in the dark, and under a Canopie, so as no man living
shall be privy to it: thou may steal when none can see thee; but all this
while, Hebr. 4.13.
remember that thou stand naked before GOD: he sees thee, his all-seeing
eyes, like a flame of fire, pierces into thy heart and intrailes: many men
like Gehezi when they have sinned, can wipe their mouths smoothely, and
demurely say, Thy servant went no whither: But let them remember ever, that it
is impossible to hide their sins from God, though they may cover them from
men. But of this heere-after.

the presence of the Almighty, he sees them and beholdes them, even in the
darkest night, and in the secretest corner, his eyes are like to a flame of
fire, Reuelat. 2.18. And although men may bleare the eyes of men, yet they
cannot bleare the eyes of the Almighty.

It would be an excellent means to bridle them, and to keep them from many
horrible sins, which otherwise they would commit. For the Lord looks
narrowly upon us, and searches very strictly into us, we can not have the
least unclean thought within us, but he which is most pure does see and
behold us: he could discover Judas his hypocrisy, and therefore called him a
devil. He sees again Nathanael his sincerity, and therefore pronounces him
a true Israelite, in whom there was no guile: So that they that commit sin in
secret, he that sees in secret, will one day reward them openly. When Cain
Genesis 4.5. brought unto GOD an Oblation of the fruit of the ground, he had no
regard to him, nor to his offering, because that the Lord saw the secret
hypocrisy of his heart. And this is the reason that David uses to persuade
Solomon his son, to have a care to learn, and to practice the will of God,
1. Chron. 28.8. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy Fathers,
and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind, for the Lord
searches all hearts.

David repeateth the words, What sorrow it is that acco^panies repentance. The
person whom he had offended.
Against thee, Against thee: here mark the extreme sorrow and grief of
David's heart, that he had sinned against his merciful God, what was it that so
grieved his soul? The shame of his sin could not: for that was not known
but to GOD only; neither fear of punishment, for what man durst be so bold
as to call him to account, but that he had been so vile and wretched, to
sin against his most loving God, David's sin aggrauated.
this was the thing that made his heart to bleed: which must teach us all this
lesson, that whenever we fall into any sin, this consideration above all
other should sink deepest into our hearts; namely, the consideration of the
person whom we have offended; and that not simply against man, but against GOD
himself.

And this sin of David is aggrauated in diverse respects.

First, Nathan tells him, that Almighty GOD had given him that Kingdom, 2.
Sam. 12.
and the Wives of his Lord, and if that had been too little, he would have
given more, 2. Sam. 12.

Secondly, that David man whom God had so honored, that had taken him from a
sheepe-folde, and gave him a Scepter, which by his mighty power made him
escape the hands of all his enemies, and had graced him with the gift of his
Spirit: Who had made so great proceedings in Religion, and the worship of GOD:
it could not but cut him and wound him at the very heart that he should so
fowly fall.

Thirdly, in that his example should bring a great slander to the Church of
God, and open the mouths of the uncircumcised Philistims, to reproach them and
revile them, as we see in Shemei.

Fourthly, in that he had by his sins laid open the Church and people of GOD to
his judgments, to plague and punish them.

True note or ^pen^ance
Now from this practice of David, we learn that which I taught before; namely,
that the children of God are grieved for sin, because it offends and
displeases their merciful GOD: David needed not to have been so much troubled
for his sin, either for shame, for it was not known but to God alone; or
punishment, for none could call him to account: but that ^ee had offended his
merciful God and loving Father, it did torment and vex his conscience
exceedingly; so every child of God that truly repents of sin he is more
grieved for sin, because it offends God, then for fear of shame or
punishment. As we see in David, Psalm 119. I have hid thy word within my
heart, that I might not sin against thee. The like we may see in Joseph.
Genesis 39. when he was tempted to lewdness by his adultresse Mistress, his
answer is worthy to be remembered of us; How can I do this great wickedness
and sin against God? The wrong that he should have done unto his Master,
did not so much prevail with him, as that he knew he should sin against GOD;
And the like may be said of Peter, Matthew. 26. Who remembering how kind and
loving CHRIST had been to him, even to pray to his Father for him, when Satan
desired to buffet him: That told him, Matthew. 16. That the gates of hell should
never prevail against him. The looking back of this his Master wounded him
to the heart, that he should sin against him, so cowardly to deny him.

and remorce of conscience for sin, that the child of God is grieved for
sin; because it displeases GOD his most loving and merciful Father, as in
Joseph, David the Prodigal son, etc. let us labor to sinde our hearts thus
affected, that we can mourn for sin, because it is sin, and offends GOD
our loving Father; though none knew of it, nor could accuse for it, nay
although there were no hell, nor Judgment to condemn us, yet that we sinde
our hearts wounded for our secret sins, for our close sins and hidden
corruptions; because we know they offend our most gracious God and loving
Father.

Let it be far from us to say with Pharaoh, Exodus 5. Who is the Lord? that I
should be afraid to sin? Oh! know (O man) whosoever thou art that exaltest
thy self in this manner, to sin with a high hand against the Lord, That the
Lord is as a consuming fire: It is he that drowned Pharaoh for all his pride,
Exodus 14. It is he that made Jerusalem a heap of stones, Matthew. 29. It is
he that sent lice upon Herod, Acts 12. and fire upon Sodom, Genes 19. Learn
therefore to know God aright; And it will make thee quake and tremble to sin
against him.

Potiphars wise tempted Joseph continually to sin and vncleanensse; Genes. 39.
alas she thought not, that GOD should see or behold it: But whatsoever thou
art, unless thou find thine heart humbled for thy close and hidden sin,
and secret corruption, I tell thee thou art not truly humbled: the veriest
beast and Atheist that ever lived may confess his known sins, and in regard
of the shame and punishment be sorry for them, Exo. 20.17 1. Sam. 15. Matt 27.3
Acts 8.25
as Pharaoh, Judas, Saul; Simon Magus, etc. but here is godly sorrow which
brings repentance never to be repented of, to be grieved for sin, though we
should have neither shame nor punishment, seeing it offends a gracious and
merciful God, A simile.
as we see two children, one is a natural, loving and duetifull child; and
he is loath to offend his father, though he never corrects him, because he
sees his father kind unto him: An other that is of a froward nature, he is
loath to sin before his father, for fear of the whip, and therefore out of
his fathers fight he will play his prankes.

David thus lays open his sin, A penitent person never excuses his sin.
though it was secret, and does aggrauate it: we learn that he that truly
repents of his sin, will not excuse it, mince, hide, and cloak it, and
seek starting holes to conceal it: But he will truly and humbly acknowledge
it, lay it open and make it manifest unto God: he does not blame the folly of
the woman: nor by any means seeks to hide his sin, but lays it open before
the Lord, Against thee have I sinned: so it is the manner of GODS children that
do truly repent to lay open their sins in the worst and vilest manner, to
make them greater, not lesser.

Note of a wicked man
neither yet have truly repented that do seek starting holes for sin: I am
not alone, if I go to hell, I shall have more company: It is but the fashion,
and if I do no worse then swear by faith, troth, etc. the Lord, I hope, will
pardon me: This excusing and cloaking of sin, is a sign of a naughty and
dissembling heart: that that man or woman is nor truly humbled as they should:
we see this in Saul, he was so far from aggravating and increasing his sin,
that he found out many excuses, 1. Sam. 15. Matthew. 15.
The people did it, and it was to offer Sacrifice: So the wicked at the day of
Judgment are so far from confessing their sins, that they excuse them: so
that it is a note of a wicked and graceless heart to excuse sin: to hide it,
and cover it, Pro. 28.23
and he that ^o^n so, shall never find mercy.

Against thee: Against thee only have I sinned.
IT may here be demanded how David could say that he had only sinned against
God? Did he not sin against Vrias, his faithful servant, and loving subject;
first, in committing adultery with his wife, and then in causing his innocent
blood to be shed? How then could David say here, Against thee only have I
sinned?

I answer: First, David had sinned indeed against Vriah, and that two manner of
ways; first, in his wise, not in his goods, for then perhaps he might have
made amends, but taking his wise out of his bosom (as Nathan tells him) he
could never make a recompense: when Abimelech a heathen King Genes. 20. did
ignorantly take Abraham's wise into his house, when he knew the same (although
he defiled her not) gave Abraham a large gift for satisfaction. What
satisfaction then might David give, being not a heathen man, but a Prophet of
the Lord, who wit^ingly takes the wife of Vriah, and defiled her?

Secondly, besides his wife, he takes away his life also: The Devil could
say, Job 2.4. Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his
life: yet as precious as a man's life is unto him, David adds this injury to
the former, taking away his life also.

Again, David sinned, not only against the husband, but against the Wife
also, corrupting her chaste mind, and alluring her unto folly.

And unto this sin committed against Vriah and his wife, I might add the
sin against the child begotten in bastardie; the innocent blood of all those
of his loyal Subjects that were slain with Vriah, his sin against his own
house and family: As also his sin against the whole Church and people of GOD,
laying them open to GODS judgments for his sake. But yet all these sins
against men, how great or grievous soever they were, he accounts them as
nothing in comparison of his sin against GOD, and therefore says, Against
thee only have I sinned.

Secondly, I answer; that all sins of what sort soever they be, they be
great sins, because they be against the Law of God: And were it not for the
Law of GOD, forbidding sin, and commanding virtue, there should be no
sin; for what is sin but the transgression of the Law of GOD? And
therefore David acknowledged his sins were against GOD, he had rebelled and
transgressed his Law and Commandment: he had not now to do with Vriah or
any mortal man: But with the just and most righteous GOD, whose holy Law he
had most rebelliously broken and violated: for if the Lord had not forbidden
men to commit Adultery, it should be no sin: and if the Lord had not said,
Thou shall not kill: it were then no more sin to kill a man, than to kill a
dog: But seeing the Law of GOD forbids it, Romans 6.23.
therefore it is sin, and deserves eternal damnation. Hitherto of the sense
of these words.

God alone can forgive sins.
whether it be immediately as the sins of the first Table, or mediately, when
in sinning against our brother, we do sin against GOD: It follows that God
alone can pardon and forgive sin; for it belongs to him alone to pardon the
fault against whom it is committed: but all sin is against GODS Law:
therefore, he alone can pardon and forgive it: And this is affirmed by the
Pharisees, Who can forgive sin but God only? Luke 5.21.

No creature has this power, for he that can forgive sins, must be able to
take away the punishment of sin, which is death, hell, and damnation. Now
then to say that a man can properly forgive sin, is in effect to say, that a
man has power over death and hell, which can not be.

Rome, who do hold and teach, Pope Antichrist.
that the Pope can as truly and as properly forgive sins, as God himself.
This one point of doctrine taught and held by the church of Rome, does prove
their Pope to be Antichrist, even that man of sin the Apostle speaks of, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
who makes himself equal to God: and as Almighty God can pardon sins, so
will his holiness pardon sin: and whereas God never gave any sinner pardon
of sin, before they were committed and repented; Horrible impiety.
yet the Pope can, and does give out his pardons for a piece of money, for
sins past, present, yea for twenty years to come: for treason, for murder,
adultery, yea any sin: then which, what can be more blasphemous and dangerous
to give men license to sin, and open a gappe to all manner of villainy? For
who will be afraid to sin, if he may have a pardon for sin before it be
committed.

David confesses that he had sinned against GOD alone, he does acknowledge,
though all men should pardon his sins, and wincke at it: yea should seek to
flatter him being a King, yet he could not be so satisfied, because the sin
was against Gods Laws and Commandments: and therefore he seeks to God for
pardon: God offended when our brother is injured.
so when we sin against men, offend our neighbor and brother by lying,
adultery, murder, etc. yet let us know we have to do with God, and though all
men should pardon me, and wink at my sin; yet, unless the Lord seal my
pardon, it is not worth a button: when great men sin by adultery and
murder, Notes.
by oppression and cruelty, they have their claw-backes and flatters, who will
smoothe and flatter them, lessen and excuse their sins; yea, say all is well
done: but alas! when the Law of God is broken, unless he pardon, all the
flattering and soothing of men, is nothing worth.

Vengeance is mine, says the Lord; and I will repay. Romans 12.19
Where the Apostle shows, that all punishing and revenging of sin belongs
to the Lord alone, because that GOD alone is the person which is wronged and
injured, and not man, to speak properly; seeing not man's law, but GODS law is
violated and broken: And if his Law were not broken, no man, nor any other
creature should have any cause to complain, and therefore all punishing and
vengeance for sin belongs properly to God, and unto such whom he shall
appoint to be his Lieutenants on earth, and ministers to stand in his stead to
punish, sin.

And therefore first this shows, that those men do much offend, who when the
Law of God is broken by wicked and ungodly men can wink at their sins, and
will not vnsheathe the Sword put in their hands to the eud to smite the same.
But can suffer many great and horrible sins to be committed, that the Lord
himself many times is feign, by the sword, plague, pestilence, or other ways
to execute Judgment on ungodly men, sweeping them away by heaps.

David condemns the common practice of the world: if men do sin, and do
some evil that is known to the world, what do they then? They seek to
pacify the party offended, to stay his displeasure, either by money, or by
friends, or by some other means: but alas! they regard not the anger of God,
whose Majesty is offended and Law transgressed: But David heeere confesses
that he had not to do with man, but with God, whose most holy and righteous
Law he had broken; and although all men would willingly have pardoned the
fault, yet that could not content him till he had got the pardon of GOD sealed
in the blood of Christ Jesus: So let us, though we must, and may, labor to be
reconciled to men, yet let us look up higher to the hand of GOD: to be
reconciled unto him, to beg pardon at his hands, and to be at one with him:
alas! what shall it boot us to get the Kings pardon, Note.
for murder, adultery, theft, etc. if the King of heaven pardon not, and do
not forgive the same? what if we can appease the anger of man, and be in
danger of the just and severe anger of the eternal GOD? And therefore let us
go to GOD, fly to him, labor for reconciliation with him.

fold, we must be reconciled to our brother, and seek to right wrongs done
unto him: Thus much of the person to whom David confesses, not to any
mass priest, but to GOD alone, who alone was offended, and who alone could
pardon his fault.

Now in the second place we are to come unto the thing confessed: namely, his
particular sins and impieties, And done this evil in thy sight: In the
former words I have sinned, he spoke more general: in these words he points
out his particular and special sin, And done this evil (adultery and
murder) in thy sight.

David's conscience and troubles his mind: not so much fear of shame and
reproach in the world: nor yet fear of punishment: but his sin, his vile
sin is it that wounds him, that galls him, that does kill his heart, and
grieves his poor soul, Against thee, Against thee have I sinned: as if he
should have said: O my God, it grieves me exceedingly, and wounds my heart,
that ever I should be so vile to sin against thee my gracious and merciful
God: I care not for the shame of the world, or fear of punishment, but my
sin, my sin is that which does wound me, and gripeth me at the heart.

So that our lesson is this, that the child of God that truly repents,
nothing more grieueth him then sin, because it is sin, and breaks the Law
off; he is more grieved for sin then either for shame or punishment.

punishment and shame of sin, many times are nothing at all grieved for
sin, in regard of God, whose most holy Law is broken: And therefore their
repentance is not sound.

David does not only in general acknowledge his sin; Acknowledgeme^t of
particular sins required.
but he points out his particular evil, and special sin of close adultery
and murder; I have done this evil (this grievous sin) in thy sight:
Howsoever I labored to smother and hide it, yet thou wast an eyewitness and
very privy unto it: So then hence we may learn, that in true repentance,
there must be acknowledgement and confession of our particular sins and
offenses, that we may say, I have sinned, and done this evil in thy sight:
lying, stealing, drunkenness, whooredome, murder, etc. We must come to
particular and special sins: David he acknowledges his particular sins, of
numbering the people, and of matching with the uncircumcised nations. 1. Chr.
21.8 Ezza 9.


And thus do the people of Israel deal in their conversion, 1. Sam. 12.19.
Pray for thy servants to the Lord, that we die not, for we have sinned in
asking us a King, Besides all our other sins. So the Apostle Paul 1..Tim.
1.13. declares there, that many things troubled him; yet this especially, that
he had been a blasphemer, a persecuter, and an oppressor, not worthy to be
called an Apostle. This appears likewise by the example of the Jews, Acts
2. As also in the conversion of Zacheus, Luke 19. who having been a griper and
anoppressor, offered to make full restitution; So that we see it is a certain
note of true repentance, to be touched with the feeling of a man's particular
sins committed against God.

David and all the servants of God, when they have been truly humbled, have
repented and confessed their particular sins, unto the Lord, this shows most
men and women have not true repentance, but only the shadow of it: Alas! the
vilest Atheist in the world, a reprobate, and one that shall never be saved,
may confess this in a general and confused manner: we are all sinners: but if
we will truly repent indeed, we must look to confess our particular
sins, to find them out one by one: and to acknowledge them unto the Lord
with grief, and sorrow and hatred of them: but alas most men and women content
them selves, in general terms, to confess they be all sinners, although
they know not in particular wherein they have offended, yea if they be examined
in particular, they think they do keep all the commandments of God.

But we must uncase our selves, and uncover our particular sins, if we would
have God to cover them with the bright robes of Christ's righteousness; If a
sick man come to the Physician, and only tell him he is sick, and never
show him his particular grief and disease that troubles him, and the manner
thereof, with all the circumstances belonging to the same, he can never look
to be cured: So likewise if we come to God the Physician of our souls, and say
only, We have sinned, we can not assure our selves of pardon. Our unknown
sins we must therefore confess generally, but our known sins we must
confess particularly, as the Prophet David here, does, And done this evil; So
in the first book of the Chronicles 21. I have sinned greatly, Because I have
done this thing, that is, numbering of the people. So that we see it stands
us greatly in hand, even with grief of heart to confess our particular sins,
and to give Sentence against our selves, and to pray as for life and death for
the pardon of them, otherwise our repentance is as it were but in show and for
fashion sake, which is never acceptable with Almighty God.

we see that it stands us in hand to be thoroughly acquainted with the Law of
God: for by the knowledge of the Law comes the knowledge of sin; and that man
that has the best insight into the Law of GOD, has the greatest sight of his
sin, and of his misery, and is most humbled and most stirred up, to seek to
God for mercy: And they which have least knowledge of the Law, know least of
their sins and misery, and are most proud and least humbled, neither can
they truly repent.

For as a sick man is then most dangerously sick, when he has no feeling of
his sickness; so a sinner is then in greatest misery, when he thinks
himself to be no sinner: Such a one is far off from mourning and sorrowing
for sin, from turning from them, and returning to God; Seeing he takes
himself to be in good case, and to stand in need of no repentance: And such
were the Pharisees in the days of CHRIST, whom he reproved, Matthew. 9.12. The
whole need not the Physician, but those that are sick: I came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance.

[And done this evil in thy sight.]






to come; and seeing it infects heaven and earth with the poison of it, how
should we hate and abhor sin, quake at it, be afraid to commit that which is
the cause of all other euilles: But alas! though sin be a fearful evil; yea
the cause of all evil, yet we see men are not affaid of sin; they quake not at
it, they shun it not: yea, they which do fear fire and water, the plague and
pestilence, yet dare be doing and tampering with sin, as if there were no
evil nor danger in it: but if we be wise, let us fly sin above all other
evils whatsoever: and in so doing, if we fly this evil of sin, we shall
prevent many other judgments and evils, which are the fruits of sin.

In thy sight, or, before thine eyes: As if David should have said, O Lord, my
God, though I did commit adultery never so closely, and caused Vrias secretly
to be slain; yet alas, I see all I did, was manifest before thine eyes, and
could not be hidden from thy sight.

Men sin before God
Howsoever men and women sin never so closely and secretly, yet they sin before
the face of the Lord, even in his eyes, and under his nose, the Lord standing
by, and looking on them: neither distance of place, nor secret corner, neither
darkness of the night, nor any device and shift of man whatsoever is able to
cover our sins from Gods eyes: Psalm. 139. Hebr. 4.13.
there is no creature which is not manifest in his sight, but all things are
naked and open before his eyes with whom we have to do: It is true indeed, it
is an casie matter to bleare the eyes of man, to sin so closely and cunningly,
that no man shall know it, in some secret corner, in some dark night, to
steal, lie, commit adultery, but although all men and Angels be ignorant: yet
our most secret euilles and sins are all naked unto the Lords eyes.

the Lord sees us, his fiery eyes behold us, and the Lord even then stands at
our elbowes, and looks upon us: How would this be a blessed means to bridle
men, and to restrain them from many secret and hidden sins? What man durst
be so bold and desperate to cut a purse, when he sees the Judges eye set on
him and beholds him? And what man is so desperate, that durst steal, lie,
commit adultery, if he knew that the all-seeing and piercing eyes of Almighty
GOD did behold him and look on him? This does the Lord GOD tell the seven
Churches of Asia, in every Epistle, Philip. 4. Revel 3.
I know thy works: O then let the remembrance of this make us watchful and
wary to look unto all our ways, to live as ever in Gods presence.

all-seeing eyes: so likewise all our good deeds and virtues are known and
seen of God, I know thy works: all thou do, both good and bad, I know all:
Now then, if the Lord do take knowledge of all our works, and sees them: yea,
there is nothing we do, but it is manifest in his eyes, we know he is a
bountiful God, and plentifully rewards all that love and fear him: yea he
will not leave a cup of cold water without a reward: O then let us proceed
and abound in good works, in knowledge, faith, repentance, patience,
obedience, humility, zeal, love, etc. for the Lord knows and sees all, and
will not let any one good work go unrewarded.

Now follows the second part of the Verse, containing a reason why the Prophet
David did thus acknowledge and confess his sins, and humbled himself for
them; namely, that by this means he might clear the Lord of all injustice
and hard dealing in word or deed: as if he should have said: O Lord! I
confess, that seeing I have so grievously sinned against thee, and so fowly
committed evil in thy sight: there is no cause why I should so much as accuse
thee of the least cruelty, injustice, or hard dealing with me, either in thy
terrible threatenings by thy servant Nathan, or thy righteous judgment in
taking away the child conceived in adultery; for I acknowledge, that I have
deserved far more grievous plagues and punishments for this my vile and
grievous sin: And therefore by this my confession, I do clear thee (O Lord)
of all injustice and cruel dealing, and condemn my self to be worthy of
far more grievous judgments and punishments for my sins, so as all the world
may see and know that thou art most just in all thy threatenings denounced
against sin: and most pure and righteous in all thy judgments and fatherly
chasticements.

[That thou may be iust]
That is, that thou may be known just in thy works, and all the world may
see and know that there is great and just cause of thy threatenings against sin
and sinners: Now what these speeches were, and the judgments threatened against
David; look in the second of Samuel, chapter 12. verse 10. First, that the
Sword should never depart from his house, but one son should kill an other:
Secondly, that the child conceived in adultery, should die: thirdly, hat his
own sons should rebel against him: and lastly, that his wives should be abused
as he had abused an other man's.

The Lord maks good use of our conscience.
it shall be the Accuser, Witness, and Judge, to accuse and condemn it self;
But shall clear the Lord of all injustice or hard dealing, making way unto the
Lords righteous judgment: This we may clearly behold in Judas, Matthew. 27.
who reads his own Sentence of condemnation against himself, saying; I have
sinned in betraying innocent blood. And for this purpose the Lord has put into
the Soul of every man, not only a knowledge whereby we can discern betwixt
that which is lawful and good, from that which is evil, so far as shall
leave all men without excuse: But also, that conscience can make application of
that knowledge in all the actions of a man's life, approouing that which is
good, and therein concerning matter of joy and comfort; or else condemning him
for that which is evil, which will cause a fearful horror in Soul, as we
see in Caine, Genes. 4. Trembling in body, as in Felix, Acts 24.26. or else
fearful Dreams and Visions, as in Baltezar, Dan. 5. And this we may here
clearly behold in David, The force of whose conscience was such, as that it
sought no starting holes to hide it self: but says Against thee, Against thee
have I sinned, etc. And withal, does clear the Lord of injustice and hard
dealing toward him. If he should bring upon him and his house, all those
fearful Judgments, which by Nathan the Lords Prophet he had threatened
against him, 2. Sam. 12.

Paul dispute of Justice, temperance, and judgment to come: but Felix
trembled, Acts 24. No sooner had Cain slain his righteous brother Abel, but
his guilty conscience made his countenance to fall, Genes. 4. What marvel is
it then if the wicked would stifle and choke the noise of their consciences?
being so fearful and terrible, but this they cannot do. Which being so, Oh!
in the fear of God, let every one take heed of sin, for the motions thereof
may well be compared to those locusts of the bottomless p^t, Revel. 9. having
faces like men, and their hair like the hair of women, but a tail like a
Scorpion which stingeth to death: Oh! full little does many a poor soul
think, that that sin which now seems to be as light as a feather, should
lie so heavy upon their souls in the end.



Again, in that the Prophet does acknowledge, that if the Lord should bring
upon him, all those judgments which he before had threatened by the Prophet
Nathan, namely, 2. Sam. 12. That the Sword should never de part from his house,
that the child conceived in adultery should die, That his sons should
defloure his wives, etc. yet for all that, that God were most just in his
judgments, we learn a second point of Doctrine, that howsoever the Lord
reprooueth us for sin, God is ever just in his judgments.
and seems to threaten and thunder out his judgments as he did against
David, yet we are to confess that God is just and righteous in his
threatenings, that he does not deal more severely with us then our sins
deserve. Thus David did, though he was a King, yet having sinned and committed
evil in Gods sight, when Nathan came and took him up roundly for his sins,
he acknowledged God dealt justly with him, though he rebuked him sharply and
severely: so must we know it is our duty, that when we are reproved for our
sins, we judge and think it is no more then we have deserved. Old Ely, when
Samuel tells him that GOD would destroy his sons, and take the high Priests
office from him, because he did not rule and govern his children, and correct
them: he answered; It is the Lord, let him do as it seems good in his own
eyes, 1. Sam. 3.18.

In like sort, Matthew. 15. the Cananitish woman, though she were called a Dog
by our Savior, yet she justifies him in his saying, Truth Lord, I am as thou
have said; but yet admit I be a dog, then give me that which dogs
oftentimes have, even a crumme, of thy mercy. Thus did Hezechiah 2. Reg. 20.
when the Prophet had threatened him because of his pride, in showing his
treasures, he confesses that God was just, and might have dealt yet more
rigorously with him, saying; The word of the Lord is good: These examples do
show what is the nature of true penitents; namely, to acknowledge that which
from GODS word is most sharply spoken, to be most just and true.

Whereas on the contrary we shall see hypocrites ready to censure God to deal
too severely with them, as we may see Luke 13. how that the wicked at the last
will seem to plead their case with GOD, saying; Lord, have thou not preached
in our streets, and have we not eat and druncke in thy company? seeming
thereby to have such an interest into Christ, as that he should deal unjustly
with them, to condemn them. The like we may see in Catne, Genes. 4. My sin
(says he) that is, my punishment is greater then I can bear: So that we see,
that as the godly man acknowledges GOD to be just in all things, so the
wicked man dare charge GOD to his face, that he is iniust if he punish sin
severely.

hot, and too earnest, too sharp and severe, they would be more mildely dealt
withal, they cannot abide these hot fellows, that be all of the spirit, they
would be handled nicely and gently. But we see David, a king, acknowledges
God to be just, and to deal justly with him: But these men are like unto Ahab,
he hated Michaiah, and why? 1. Reg. 22.8
because he never prophesies good unto him, but ever told him of Gods
judgments, and therefore he could not away with ^im: but let us know that it
is a bad property, and a sign of a most lewd and graceless heart, Psalm. 50
Thou hate to be reformed: The vilest Atheist in the world may be content to
hear the gospel, but let us know that we must be content to hear of Gods
judgments: Herod could be content to hear John Baptist gladly, Esaias 58.1 Mar.
6.20. Psalm. 141.5
until he came to touch his beloved sin, which was a sign he had a
naughty heart. But David could wish the righteous might smite him friendly,
and reprove him, for such smiting should be good for him, Psalm 141. verse 5.

David's example quietly and patiently to hear of our sins, and to hear GODS
judgments, denounced against them: Faithful Ministers token of Gods love
and let us deem it a singular favor of God, if the Lord send some godly
Nathan to tell us of our sins, and to thunder out GODS judgments against
them: it is a sign the Lord loves us, and would not have us to perish: And
therefore let us be so far from murmuring or disliking the Lords Ministers,
for telling us of our sins, that we should rather love them and like them; yea
David loved Nathan above all other men, because that hoe was a means to
reclaim him, and bring him home again by true repentance: And so it is with
all Gods children, that those faithful Ministers of the Word, which have been
the means to humble them and cast them down for their sins, Psalm. 141.5
of all other they love them, and make much of them.

Nathan reproved David, he acknowledges it to be the Lords rebuking of him,
it must admonish all men to listen unto the word of God in the mouth of his
ministers; Ghd'speaketh by his Ministera.
as though the Lord himself should speak unto them: for they stand in his
stead, and whatsoever they speak in the name of the Lord, it is as much as if
the Lord should speak from heaven, and therefore CHRIST says, Luke 10.16
He that hears you, hears me, And he that despises you despises me: and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me. And therefore let us take
to heart the judgments of GOD threatened by his Ministers: let us make a good
use of them; and let us assure our selves that unless we do repent, they will
seize upon us: and therefore let all ungodly men take heed how they revile
Gods ministers, when they deal soundly and roundly, sincerely and sharply for
sin, for thou striuest not with man, but with God.

[And pure when thou iudgest.]
THAT is, that thou may be known to be pure and free from all cruelty and
injustice, in thy judgments when thou do chasten man for sin: we must
needs acknowledge that thou art just, and do never deal so hardly with us
as we deserve.

For himself he confesses, that GOD is most just; That howsoever the Lord
might bring upon him all those Judgments, which he had threatened by his
Prophet against hin, viz. That evil should be raised against him out of his
own house: That the Sword should be sent against it: That his wives should be
openly defiled: That the child borne in adultery, should die: yet though all
those things should come upon him and his house, the Lord should still free
from cruelty and injustice.

David we learn to free the Lord from all cruel, God is ever just in his
judgments.
hard, and unjust dealing: that although the Lord bring upon us many and
grievous judgments, sickness, poverty, imprisonment, plague, famine, sword,
pestilence, etc. yet let us take it so to heart, that ever we do acknowledge
GOD is free from all cruel and unjust dealing: Dan. 9, 5, 6, 7.
a most lively example of this we have in the people of the Jews whom the Lord
had grievously afflicted for the contempt of his word, and despising his
Prophets, sent them into great captivity: now, being there, they do not
complain of any unjust dealing of God toward them: but confess rather, Lam.
3.22.
That it was his endless mercy that we were not consumed: Because his
compassions fail not: the like example we have in Job, Job 1.22.
who never charged God of any unjust dealing. And to the same purpose speaks
the Church, Micah 7.9. I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him.

cross or judgment the Lord shall lay upon us, to undergo the same without
murmuring or repining against GOD; for in all these things God is most
righteous, and lays nothing on us, which we have not deserved. Let us
therefore learn with David to be dombe and silent under the hand of God,
whatsoever we suffer, because God has done it, and we have deserved it. But
alas! how far is this from those men, who when they are crossed, are ready to
break into cursing, and swearing, etc. or at the least, fret and repine
against God, as if he had done them wrong in punishing them.

Jobs case in his extreamitie, he forgate himself, and spoke soolishly: nay
rather let us with David confess and acknowledge that it is the just hand of
GOD, and that he does us no wrong although he send many and long afflictions
upon us let us confess it is his mercy that he sends no more, yea let us
acknowledge that we are worthy ten thousand times to perish for our sins,
and to be damned eternally: And if the Lord should for ever condemn us, Job
13.15. Dan. 9.
yet he should be just.

Paul in the eleventh chapter to the Romans says, What art thou (O man) that
dare dispute with God? Yea, it is therefore most just, because GOD wills
it: for his will is the rule of justice: And therefore any thing is just,
because he wills it: and therefore let us not only in our own Note.
Particular crosses and calamities acknowledge God to be just, but also in the
matter of Reprobation and Reiection, let us acknowledge Almighty GOD to be
most just and righteous, let God be true, and every man a liar.

Be ye holy as he is holy: Just, righteous, pure, as he is pure: for if we
shall be either unjust, unrighteous, impure, given to cruelty, hard and
merciless dealing, we shall be most unlike to GOD, and most like the Devil,
who is a liar, and the father of lies, a murderer and cruel bloudshedder from
the beginning.

VERSE. 5. 5. Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother
conceived me.
David confesses his original sin, as the fountain of all sins.
IN this Verse, and the next that follows, the Prophet amplifieth the
confession of his sins. First, from the original and fountain of the same,
namely, his natural sin wherein he was conceived and borne: Secondly, from the
most holy and pure nature, in which God had created him: against which he sets
his own corrupt and defiled nature. Thirdly, by that knowledge wherewith the
Lord had endued him, because God had powered into his heart, and made known
unto him his will, by his Word, more then to many others: and made him capable
of the heavenly and saving knowledge of his will.

[Beholde]
The meaning of the words.
THis word does not always note some strange thing, but sometimes points out
some special thing worthy to be marked, and that ought to be learned of all
men.

[I was borne in iniquity,]
AS if he should have said; O Lord I confess, that I was not only defiled
with, sin, when I committed that foul sin of Adultery, but even so soon
as ever I came into the world, and saw the light of the Sun, I was polluted
with sin, from the top to the toe.

[And in sin has my mother conceived me.]
THat is, not only when I first came into the world, but even so soon as I
was enclosed and conceived in my mothers womb, even then was I stained in
soul and body with sin: So that the Prophet David speaks here of that
original sin wherein he was both bred and borne, and wherein he was defiled
both in soul and body: and this original sin, it was the root and spawne
of his other sins.

[Behold]
The necessity of this doctrine of original sin.
THis word shows that this doctrine of original sin is a point necessary to
be known and learned of all men, and such a point as none should be ignorant
of: because a man can never thoroughly know his misery, till he come to know
even his original sin wherein he was both bred and borne; to know that by
nature even so soon as we are borne, yea conceived in the womb we be but a
lump and mass of sin, Ephesians. 2.2.
and by nature the children of wrath.

And this is true of all (without exception) high and low, rich and poor,
noble or simple; for thus does David confess of himself; I was borne in
iniquititie, and in sin has my mother conceived me. If in sin, then in
Gods wrath and in danger of eternal condemnation. If any ask how can this be?
I answer, Every man is guilty of Adams great sin, and also tainted
originally with all corruption with a pronenesse unto all sin: therefore it
follows in equity and justice, that every man is borne under the wrath and
curse of God.

And yet (alas) how few know this point of Doctrine, concerning original
sin, not one of a hundred Oh then let us labor to know in what a blessed
estate we were at first created: and withal, Genesis 8.12. Job 14.4. John 3.6,
how we be defiled and stained by the fall of Adam, and now by nature are but
a very mass of sin and all uncleanness, that so we may labor to recover
that former estate again.

David repenting of his actual sin of Adultery and Murder, what great
need we have to look into our nature.
does come to find out the root and spawne of it, his original sin, and
corruption of nature: we learn that a man does never truly repent of any one
sin, unless withal he come to find out other sins whereof he is guilty,
yea till he can descend to the very fountain and mother sin, Ephesians. 2. John
3.6.
namely corruption of nature and original sin: that is, that pollution of
soul and body, wherein we are bred and borne: For here David does not speak
of some one or two sins, but he confesses now that he is even a mass of
sin, and a lump of all uncleanness, and from top to toe is defiled with
sin: Even so no man does truly repent till he can acknowledge that he is
borne in sin, yea as it were a lump and mass of all uncleanness, and
every particular sin we fall into, should put us in mind of this natural
pollution, that we are nothing else but a very mass of sin, and that by
nature there is in us nothing that good is, but sin and corruption.

And as it was in David when he repented of his Adultery, he comes to other
sins, even to the root and spawne of all: So it is in every true repentant
sinner; he that is wounded for one sin, and repents of that truly, he repents
of all, he is humbled for all his sins, and in the end comes, with David, to
see that he is but a lump of sin, and mass of all pollution.

David does confess here, By nature no man is borne the child of God.
that he was even conceived in sin, that is so soon as ever he was enclosed
in his mothers womb he was polluted with sin and natural corruption: we
see that no man by nature is borne the child of God, but by nature we are all
the children of wrath, yea we are by nature a lump of sin, a mass of all
uncleanness and corruption: our minds full of blindness, Ep. 1.1, 2, 3
Gene. 8.21 John 3.6. John 14. Genes. 5.3
our wills of disobedience, our affections full of naughtiness and
untowardness, yea by original sin we are guilty of the wrath of GOD, and
in danger of hell and damnation, and worthy to perish for ever.

Yea by nature there is no differrence between the Elect and the Reprobate,
neither in inward or outward disposition, till GOD make it by grace. Paul as
bloody a persecuter as ever was Domitian or Julian: Zacheus as unconscionable
and covetous a worldling as was that rich Glutton damned in hell, Luke 16. Luke
19. Yea, all men are alike by Nature, before Grace make a difference.

Except a man be borne anew, John 3. Luke 13.5.
he can not see the kingdom of GOD: Again, Except ye repent, ye shall all
perish; And therefore so long as we continue in the state of nature, being
conceived and borne in sin, we are in a most miserable and damnable estate.

For the poison of our nature is the same in us, that is in the wicked: And by
nature we are prone to all manner of sin; and howsoever by the special
mercy of God we have escaped many horrible and grievous sins, which we
find that the wicked of God have fallen into: It is not for that we are of a
purer Nature then they (for it is alike with the Reprobate) but because the
poisoned corruption thereof has not yet discovered it self in us, which we
have just cause every day to fear.

Oh then let us labor to get out of this cursed state of nature, and get into
the state of grace, to be borne a new, to become new creatures in Christ Jesus,
to repent, to seek to Jesus Christ for mercy: for if we live and die in the
state of nature, it is impossible we should be saved; And therefore the state
of all carnal men and women, which are merely natural, howsoever civil
honest, is a fearful state and condition; for all this while they do nothing
but sin, all the actions of a natural man be so many sins unto him, as
prayer, hearing the Word receiving the Sacraments, Genesis 4.
and the like, for before any of these sacrifices can be accepted of God,
their persons must first be approved.

The natural man perceives not the things that are of God. Again, 1. Cor, 1,
10 1. Cor. 1.21 Romans 8.8. Gen, 8.21.
When as the world could not know God in the wisdom of God, it pleases God
by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe. and therefore let
us renounce our selves, our natural wisdom, strength and goodness, and
become fools in our selves, that we may be wise in God, abhor our selves and
our own goodness, and labor to be found righteous in Christ's righteousness:
Paul confesses, Romans 7.18.
That in me there dwells no good thing: we cannot think a good thought,
much less do any good till we be illuminated by the word and spirit
enlightened and sanctified.

and corruption. Man has no free will in anything that is good, and leads to
life eternal; but all to evil.

[And in sin has my mother conceived me.]
Hereby we may note the greatness of Adams fall; And the sin of our first
Parents, who did not only bring the curse of GOD upon themselves, but upon all
their posterity, and did not only defile themselves, but all that should come
of them, for Adam did not fall as a private man, but as the maine root and
stock of all mankind, and we all fell in him, because we were all in his
loins: and therefore seeing such is the greatness of Adams fall, we ought to
be humbled for it, and daily to bewail it: because if he had not sinned, then
we should not have been conceived in sin, nor lost the Image of GOD wherein
we were at first created in holiness and righteousness: and withal, we
must labor to be renewed daily, and to have the Image of Almighty God
restored, by dying to sin and living to righteousness; that we may be
holy, as GOD is holy, and righteous as GOD is righteous.

Godly parents beget sinful children.
though they be holy, and such as believe, yet they beget children in sin
and uncleanness: and do convey original sin unto their children, they warm
them with unclean blood; and so by that means do make them children of
wrath, and heirs of Gods anger, and in state of damnation, for believing
parents beget not believing children, but children like unto themselves, as
they be sinful men and women; Adam begat a child in his own likeness:
that is, Genes. 5.3
a sinful man like himself.

Now we know that Gods Image was defaced in Adam, he begat a son therefore
corrupt, according to his own corrupt Image, as Job speaks, Job 14.4, Who
can bring a clean thing out of that which is unclean? And this is the reason,
Genesis 4.3. That the corrupt nature of Cain led him to that for the which he had
no example: And so this is true of all men else, though they might never see
any thing that were evil, yet of themselves, of their own disposition they
would do evil, being by nature men haled thereunto.

Adam, Parents duty.
get sinful children, and they be bred and borne in sin, and they be
means to beget them, and to bring them into the world, and to convey original
sin unto them, and make them in a fearful and damnable estate: oh how
should Parents labor to bring them out of the state of Nature and Damnation,
into Grace and Salvation! if thou should do any thing to bring thy child
into danger of death, Note this well.
how would it grieve thee, that thou by thy folly should bring thy child to
untimely death: how much more bringing them in danger of eternal death: And
therefore pity thy poor child, seek to make him the child of God, use all
good means to have him made the child of God: repent thy self, pray for him,
admonish him, bring him to the Word and public means, call upon him to
repent, to beg the pardon of his sin, to fear God, give him good example,
lest for want of this, thou do thrust his poor soul into hell: Oh how can
parents be too careful for their children, seeing they have been the means
to bring them into so woeful estate!

David does acknowledge his natural corruption, to this end, even to aggrauate
the grieuousnesse of his sin, and not to lessen it, or to excuse himself:
but rather to confess, that he was nothing else but a mass of sin, and all
pollution: this shows of what spirit those profane beasts be, who being told
of their filthy sins of adultery, whooredome, and uncleanness: by and by
they answer, Why what should we do, we are but flesh and blood, and we see
it is our nature to sin? and so think by one sin to excuse an other, and
by one debt to pay an other: tell men of their unbridled and unruly affection,
covetousness, anger, etc. and what is their answer? It is their nature to do
so, which is all one as to go about to pay one debt with another: and thus
they go about to hide their sins: We see David sought no such starting
holes, but rather confesses he is a mass of sin, and that he is every way
worthy to perish for his sin, and in danger to be damned: And therefore let
us take heed that we do not so confess our natural corruption, as to make
it a boulster to uphold us in our sins: but rather be humbled for it, that
our nature is so miserably polluted, and labor to have it reformed and renewed.

as though they were not made of common moulde, but even from the consideration
of the greatness of their parentage, bear themselves aloof, thinking none to
be their equalles, as though true Nobility stood on this, that man descends
of man. But let not such stand so much upon the honor of their birth or
greatness of their Ancestors, as though in these things alone they were happy.
But let them labor withal, to be the sons of God by regeneration; This is
indeed the ornament of their blood, and the finest flower in their Garland. And
though a man be never so noble or great in estate, yet if he be not a
repentant sinner, and such a one as is truly humble before God, he is base and
vile, and his nobility stinks in the nosthrils of God.

VERSE. 6. 6. Behold, thou love truth in the inward affections, therefore
have thou thou taught me wisdom in the secret of my heart.
IN the formet verse David had set out the grieuousnes of his sin, by that,
that he was even conceived in sin, and so was nothing else but a lump of sin,
and even from the cradle was worthy to perish, and to be damned.

In this fixed Verse the Prophet David proceeds to set out the grieuousnes of
his sin, by an other Argument, taken from the most pure nature of Almighty
GOD, who being most just and holy, and most pure, can delight in nothing but
in that which is pure and holy: But he confesses that by his sins he had
defiled himself both in soul and body, so as he was not worthy to appear in
the presence of Almighty God.

[Behold, thou louest]
The meaning of the words
AS if he should have said, O Lord my God, thou art a most holy God, and can
abide no unclean thing. But I, even David, once a man after thy own heart,
sanctified by thy holy spirit, have marred all, and with filthy uncleanness and
adultery, as also murder and shedding of innocent blood, have defiled and
stained my self both body and scule, so as I am now clean out of order, and
so foul that I am not worthy to come into thy presence, so as instead of that
inward purity and sincerity, and that uprightness both in soul and body, I
have brought out most ugly and cursed fruits of sin and uncleanness. Thus
be does still lay open his misery, and aggrauateth his sin before the Lord.

David does aggrauate his sin by weighing the most pure and holy nature of
GOD that can abide no impuritie or uncleanness. True knowledge of God works
true humility.
Hence we learn, that a man or woman shall never sufficiently enough know
themselves and their own misery, till such time as they look up unto the most
holy and pure nature of GOD: all the while we measure our selves by our
selves, look upon our own goodness, wisdom, knowledge, vprightnes, we think
highly of ourselves; but if we once lift up our eyes to the most holy and pure
nature of GOD; and withal, consider how we are swarued from it, and be defiled
with sin; O then we begin to pull down our peacockes feathers, and to humble
our selves in the sight of GOD, Job he had a long time stood upon his own
goodness and virtue, but after the Lord opened his eyes to see the most pure and
holy nature of GOD, and his own vileness, he cries out; O Lord, thou I know
can do all things, Job 43.1, 2 etc.
no thought is hid from thee, I have spoken things I knew not; I have heard of
thee by the hearing of the ear, but now wine eye sees thee. Therefore I
abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. Paul says of himself: Before
the Commandment came, I was alive: Romans 7. A jolly fellow thought well of
himself, but when the Commandment came, and he had got the knowledge of
God; namely, that he was a holy and just God, then was he dead. The people of
Israel thought it an easy matter to serve the Lord, and were forward; but
Joshua advises them to take heed; for says he, The Lord is a holy God, a
jealous God, Ios. 24.19
and will not pardon your sins and iniquities: So that by all these it
appears, that the knowledge of GOD, as he is a holy, pure, and righteous
GOD, is a special means to humble us, and to make us know our selves, and our
misery, and therefore does the Prophet David prefixe before it this note of
attention; Behold, mark, consider it well.

worthiness, when they come into Gods presence, Lu. 18.14.
like the proud Pharisie? Because they do not consider with whom they have to
deal: with God who is most pure, and loves purity, and can abide no impurity.
Oh if men would look up unto the holy and most pure nature of GOD, it would be
a special means to humble them, and to pluck down their pride: then they
should see and acknowledge, that they are but dust and ashes, Genes. 17.
as Abraham pleading with GOD confesses, and humbles himself: then they would
come with more reverence and fe^re, and confess themselves vile and miserable
creatures. Oh then let us think upon this with David, Job, Abraham, when we
come into Gods presence, to humble us, that we may come with great
preparation, and look unto our feet and affections, that we may remember we
come not into the presence of an earthly king, but of the everliving GOD, as
that we thereby be not brought to conceive too well of our selves, as many men
do.

[Thou love truth in the inward affection.]
Nathanael; John 1.47.
Behold a true Israelite, in whom is no guile: This true Israelite, this
upright heart, the Lord loves it, Luke 8.15
and the Lord delights in it; And the good ground are those which with an
honest and good heart hear the word, and bring forth fruit with patience.

of Sodom: the Lord shows his dislike of these naughty and dissembling
hearts, Esaias 19, 13
This people come near me with their lippe^, and honor me with their
mouths, but their hearts are far from me. So the Lord tells the Jews;
Iere. 42.20.
They did but dissemble with him in their hearts, when you sent me unto the
Lord to pray for you, and that you would do his will and hit word, but now you
will do nothing but the clean contrary even after your own lusts. And
amongst us in these days, there are many hypocrites and dissemblers, painted
toombs, gay without, making fair shows, and goodly colors, but their hearts
are rotten at the kore, they are but counterfeit Christians, and GOD abhors
them, and has no liking of them: for as he loves truth, and soundness of
the heart, so he hates and abhors all hypocrisy. Let all such look upon
the fearful hand of God on Ananias and Saphyra, Acts 5.
who because they would seem to be religious, and somewhat forward to sell
their land, and give to the poor; because their heart was not sound and
upright, but they dissembled; therefore the Lord smote them both dead. And to
show how the Lord hates al hypocrites and dissemblers, CHRIST in the four and
twenti^h chapter of the Gospel of Saint Matthew and the one and fifty verse
says, All vile sinners shall have their portions with hypocrites, because of
all men, hypocrites shall have the greatest measure of torment and condemnation.

Now this vprightnes and soundnes of the heart will appear, as by many other
things, so by this, when a man i^ careful to please God, and to shun sin
in private as in public, in secret as abroad: and making conscience of sin,
although no man nor Angel could accuse him of it: then is it a sign his heart
is sound and upright. But if thou find that in secret thou daiest commit those
sins which thou would be loath to commit abroad in the sight and view of
others, it is a sign thy heart is not upright with God. Oh then let us labor
to get this honest and good heart, this soundnes and sincerity of our
affections, this truth in the inward affections, Acts 15.9
which will bring peace unto our souls, and make all we do acceptable, when
our heart is purified by faith. When the Lord describes a blessed man, he
shows who it is; Even in whose spirit there is no guile. Psalm. 32.2.
And whatsoever a man does, though never so excellent and glorious in the eyes
of man, though a man could ^peake with the tongue of Men and Angels, could
pray never so excellent for words or matter: yet if the heart be not sound,
but hollow, and full of hypocrisy, all is not worth a button: whereas if the
heart be sincere and sound, purified by faith in CHRIST, though men have many
wants and weaknesses, the Lord GOD regards the truth of the heart.

A sanctified sanctified heart the greatest blessing of god
observe hence what a singular favor and grace of GOD it is, when we have
sound and sanctified hearts, sincere and upright with God, void of hypocrisy
and dissimulation. It is that the Lord so highly esteems of, that he wishes
most earnestly for it, Deuteronomy 5.29. O that there were this heart in them!
And the Prophet David says here, that the Lord does love Truth in the inward
affection. And again, Prouer. 11.20. They that be of a froward heart, are
abomination to the Lord; but they that be upright in heart are his delight.
This upright heart is in none but those that be truly regenerate, which have
truly repented of their sins and believe in Christ Jesus, Acts 15.9. Because
faith alone does purify the heart: and therefore those that do not believe
and repent, can not have this pure heart: And it is such an heart as has no
purpose to live in any known sin whatsoever, but a desire and careful
endeavor to perform obedience to every one of the Commandments.

John 1.48. It is no small commendations that Christ gives of Nathanael, that
he was a true Israelite in whom was no guile: And nothing indeed does more
distinguish a true Christian from a counterfeit: But this truth and sincerity
of heart, Esau Genes. 27. can mourn like Ezechias: And Ahab can put on
sackecloth, 1. Reg. 21. And Saul as well as David can say, I have sinned, but
their hearts were full of Hypocrisy: far from sincerity before God.

Sin is but a lying vanity.
we learn where truth does not reign, sin does reign, which is but a
lying vanity. And all those that have been in love with it, in the end have
found the same too true. Achan through hi^ covetous desire thought to enrich
himself by the wedge of gold, Joshua 7.25
and the Babylonish garment which he had purloyned contrary to the
Commandemenr of God; but it fell our to his own destruction. Ahab rose up and
took possession of Nabaoth* Vineyard, but withal, 1. Reg. 21.
he purchased the wrath of GOD, the destruction of himself, and the ruin of
his whole house. The like may be said of Judas, who through his covetous desite
was led to betray his Master, but how he digested the same in the end, Mat.
26.27
the Evangelist declares: when he saw that Christ was condemned, he brought
again the thirty pieces of silver to the high Priests and Elders, saying, I
have sinned betraying the innocent blood. And this shall all men one day be
sure to find, that the perishing pleasures of sin shall have sorrow in the
end: that if they have not truth in the inward affections of the heart, there
must needs reign sin, and sin is but a lying vanity and will deceive them
in the end.

Indeed all sin to a natural man is delightful and pleasant, he finds it
sweet to his taste, but it is as sweet meat that has poison mingled with it:
Hebr. 3.3.
That howsoever it is sweet in the taste, yet in the end brings death; So is
it with sin, it does delight in the committing thereof, but in the end it
turns to the destruction of the whole man.

Abner said in an other case; 2. Sa. 2.26.
Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? This we may
see in Cain, in Esau, in Ahab, in Judas, etc. That having tasted of the bread
of deceit, have had their mouths filled with the gravel in the end. For the
Motions of sin are like those locusts of the bottomless pit, having faces
like men, Revel. 9.
and their hair like the hair of women, but a tail like a Scorpion which
stingeth to death.

to be a true Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile. This is that which Solomon
teaches, He that walks vprigh^ly walks boldly, but he that peruerteth his
ways shall be known. Oh it is a gracious thing for a m^n, Prou. 10.9
in all things to labor to keep faith and a good conscience: such a man may
assure himself that the Lord loves him; For he loves truth in the inward
affections. But such as commit wickedness without care or conscience, shall be
sure to feel the smart in the end.

[Therefore have thou taught me wisdom in the secret of my heart.]
David's sin heino^s, why?
IN this last place the Prophet David aggrauateth his sin by that knowledge
which God in mercy had bestowed upon him; namely, that God had taught him
heavenly wisdom by the Law of God, whereby he knew very well what God
required at his hands, and how he ought to serve and worship GOD: nay, that
he had taught him wisdom, not after a common manner, but even by his holy
Spirit had taught him wisdom in the secret of his heart in a special manner,
Because God had taught him wisdom secretly.
revealing his will unto him: and therefore he confesses that his sin was
the more heinous and grievous: for if he had never been sanctified, nor
truly called, if he had been ignorant and blind in the word of God, though
it could not excuse him, yet his sin had not been so great, but seeing he, who
had made so good proceeding in the service and worship of GOD, who had taught
others, who was so insighted by the Spirit, and been taught in a special
manner, against knowledge, against conscience, and so foully sinned against God;
this highly increases and aggrauateth his sin.

A fearful thing to sin against knowledge.
and Law of GOD, against knowledge and conscience, when as we have not only
known the will and word of GOD, but believed it, been enlightened by the
Spirit, and being taught of GOD in our inward affections, then against all
these means to sin and to commit iniquity against knowledge and conscience,
it is a most dangerous thing: this may here appear in David, who was
grievously wounded for this sin above all other, and felt the smart of it to
humble him all the days of his life. So Peter's denial of Christ Luke 23.
chapter, though it was of fear, yet being against knowledge and also
conscience; oh! it caused him to weep bitterly: and indeed sins of
knowledge and against conscience are done with some presumption against God.
And therefore if ever a man be touched for them, they will wound deep, and
cause tears to follow.

conscience, because thereby we do what lies in us to quench the Spirit, to
wound our consciences, and it is a great step unto the sin against the holy
Ghost; Oh then let us in the fear of GOD take heed we never give that
liberty to our own lusts and liking, as to sin against knowledge and
conscience. If the Devil tempt thee to any sin which thou know is
condemned in the word of God, as swearing, lying, stealing, Note.
murder, adultery, etc. and thy conscience tells thee of it, and checks thee
for it, do not commit it though thou might gain a kingdom by it: for that
which follows will be a far greater loss; for thou shall lose peace of
conscience, and joy in the Spirit, feeling of GODS love, comfort in affliction:
and if GOD be not mercfull unto thee, thou shall run on from sin to sin to a
reprobate sense. It is true, ignorance shall excuse no man; yet sins of
ignorance are far less then sins of knowledge and against conscience: 1.
Tim. 1.13.
Paul persecuted the Church of God, but it was by ignorance, and therefore GOD
showed him mercy: but if thou of spite and malice shall persecute, and against
knowledge, and the check of thy conscience, hurt and injury the servants of
GOD and members of Christ, how can thou ever look to find mercy? Thou
know that GOD forbids and condemns lying, swearing, stealing, murder,
adultery, drunkenness, etc. And if thou shall wittingly and willingly rush
into them, though thou know they be forbidden, thou may look for some
fearful judgment of God upon thee: And therefore if thou be ^empted, answer;
I will not yield: It is written I may not steal, lie, commit adultery, Matthew.
4.2
etc. as Christ answered the devil.

David, Abraham, Peter, etc. for of our selves we have no power to resist the
subtle temptations and assaults of the Devil: but even as a staff stands so
long as it is stayed, but when it is left alone presently it falls with the
least puff of wind, so do we: And therefore let us not rely too much upon
our own power, as Peter did, and fell: but fear our weakness, and suspect
our selves, and pray the Lord to hold us, and not to leave us to our selves,
for then there is no sin so foul into which we will not easily plunge our
selves.

And yet if the Lord leave us to fall into some great sin against knowledge
and conscience, let us not despair, or think we have sinned against the holy
Ghost: as it is the devils usual temptation to persuade a Christian that he
has sinned against knowledge and conscience, and therefore against the holy
ghost, and that God has no mercy for him, and to that purpose he abuses one
especial place, Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6. For it is impossible that they which were
once lightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of
the holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and of the power of
the world to come, if they fall away should be renewed again by repentance. By
this place and such like the cunning Devil labors to bring the children of
God to despair if they commit sin after they be called and enlightened,
because they sin against knowledge and conscience.

But that the children of God may sin, and commit some great sin and evil
against knowledge and conscience after they be enlightened and effectually
called and sanctified appears in Abraham, Sara, David, Peter, etc. and daily
experience proves it: and therefore all sins of knowledge and against
conscience are not sins against the holy Ghost: but in that place he speaks
of such as of desperate, malice and set purpose sin against the holy Ghost,
and wholly fall away, and abandon all Religion, and renounce Christ and his
Gospel: and therefore the holy Ghost says not only if they fall, but if they
fall away, that is, even cut themselves clean off from Christ: Again, that
they sin wilfully even desperately persecuting Christ in his members, and
crucify the Lord of glory, and make a mock of him, trample under foot the
son of God, and account the blood of the New Testament as an unholy thing,
and dispite the Spirit of God, now none of all these did befall David, Peter,
or any elect child of God: who though they sin of knowledge against conscience,
yet do they mourn and are grieved for it: and it is for fear, or by the
continual instigation of the devil and strength of his temptation: or in
haste and of weakness: but afterward they do grieve for it, and desire
nothing more then to repent, and to be reconciled to GOD: which they cannot do
that sin against the holy Ghost.

works on the heart, Heavenly wisdom is the proper gift of Gods spirit.
and conuerteth the soul, is the proper work and gift of God alone by his
Spirit: Thou (O Lord) have by thy Spirit taught me wisdom in the secret of my
heart; enlightening and giving me a heart to know thee: All the elect shall be
taught of ^od. Again the Lord promises, To make all her children the Scholars
of God. John 6.45. Esaias. 54.13
And he will be their Master and Teacher: so that it is manifest that God
alone is the Schoolemaister who does teach by his Spirit true and heavenly
wisdom, saving and sound knowledge in the heart.

God teaches his wisdom two ways.
And this teaching of God contains two parts. First, the enlightening of the
mind. Secondly, the bowing of the heart.

First, the Lord does by his Spirit, which is the eye-salue, Reave. 3.9. 1. Cor.
2.10.
annoint our eyes, and clear our minds and makes us able to understand his
will in his word; by nature (alas) we cannot know his will: for The natural
man perceiues not the things that are of God: for they be foolishness unto
him: and even as the clear Sun is unto a blind man, so is the word to us,
by nature we understand nothing to our good.

Secondly, the Lord teaches wisdom in the secret of the heart, when he bows
the heart to obedience of his will, so the Lord opened the heart of Lydias to
attend unto the preaching of Paul. Acts 16.14


David, Psalm 119. in many verses has it, Teach me thy word, O Lord, and I
will keep it even unto the end: and as for such as scorn to have GOD for
their Schoolmaster, to come to his School, to be taught of God: all their
wisdom, if it were as great as the wisdom of Solomon or Achitophel, it is
but folly with God.

keep his Commandments; for it thy heart run after sin, and thou art not
purged, nor bettered, nor reformed in heart and life (alas) thy knowledge is
but carnal and will never save thy soul.

And this serves to cut the combs of many vain hypocrites and dissemblers, who
because they can talk and discourse of matters of religion, and commend the
Preacher, they do think themselves jolly fellows and good Christians. But I
say, unless the Spirit of God teach thee wisdom in the secret of thy heart
by bowing it to obedience and reformation, all thy knowledge it is but a
carnal and fleshly knowledge which may befall a reprobate: Paul shows us how
we may undoubtedly know, whether we be taught of God, or not; If any man love
God he is taught of God: 1. Cor. 8.3.
so that by our unfeigned love of God, which will appear in keeping his
commandments and doing his will, we shall know whether we be truly taught of
God: And he that has not the love of God, nor care to keep his Commandments,
that man, let his knowledge be never so great, certainly he was never yet
truly taught of God.

VERSE. 7. 7. Purge me with hissope, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I
shall be whiter then snow.
David renewes his former request. v. 2.
David having made his request unto GOD for mercy, for the pardon of his sins:
and used a reason from the free confession and acknowledgement of them to move
the Lord to pity him; does here again renew his suit and humble request unto
God: and he prays here unto God for two great benefits: First,
Justification in the free pardon of his sins, and imputation of CHRIST'S
righteousness verse 7. And secondly, for Sanctification and Reformation of the
whole man, verse 10.

And first, verse 7. he intreates the Lord for the free pardon of his sins,
that GOD would cleanse and wash him from them in the blood of Christ the Lamb
of GOD: and secondly, he prays for the blessed fruit of Justification,
namely peace of conscience, and joy in the spirit, verse 8. for till the
conscience have a Certificate from GOD, and a blessed pardon sealed and applied
by faith, it cannot be at quiet.

First, seeing David had prayed before vnro God for mercy and pardon of his
sins: and here does again renew the same Petition, and in other words puts
up his request unto God for the same: Hence we learn that the pardon of our
sins is a singular favor and mercy of GOD bestowed upon us for CHRIST'S sake:
which appears in that David so often in a Psalm prays for it, Pardon of
sin the greatest mercy.
therefore it is a great and inestimable mercy, and hardly come by: not so
easily as most men think. David shows how great a blessing it is, in that
he preferred it before a Kingdom, and though he was a King, yet he
pronounces him blessed, not that is a King, as in the 32. Psalm 1, 2. verses,
But whose sin is pardoned. God has sent his Son Jesus Christ to bless
you, in turning every one of you from your evil ways, a blessing of all
blessings.

Mat. 16.26.
and therefore we should desire and seek this blessing above all other: if
thou be as poor as Job, and have this, thou art a rich and a happy man.

David uses so many prayers unto GOD, and uses such reasons to move the Lord
to pity him, and to pardon his sins: Hence we see that those are much
deceived, who think it is the easiest matter in the world to get the pardon of
their sins: and if they can but say, Lord have mercy on me, all is well: no,
no, Lord have mercy on me, will not serve the turn: good things are hardly
come by without great travel, labor, and study, how much more is it hard to
get the pardon of our sins, the salvation of our souls, and life eternal: And
therefore let us know, that to get the pardon of our sins, we must take great
pains, labor, and diligence, we must shed many a tear in bewailing them,
they will cost us many a sobbe, and many a sigh, many a prayer and request unto
God upon our knees: and then if we get it, oh it is a wonderful favor and
mercy of GOD, it will make us happy and blessed for evermore.

Parts of the verse.
David makes two requests unto God: and withal shows a twofold fruit and
effect of his requests. First, he intreates the Lord to Purge him with
hissope, and then it will come to pass, He shall be clean. Secondly, he
desires the Lord to wash him, and then it will follow, That he shall be
whiter then snow.

For the first Petition, Purge me with hissope: In these words he alludeth to
the Legal Ceremonies and manner of purging, used in the time of the Law, in the
purifying of the Leaper, and of any person polluted; they were to dippe the
bunch of hissope in blood or in water, and so sprinckle it on the person to be
purified, Leu. 14.6, 7 Number, 19.18
which ceremony was a Type and figure of the blood of JESUS CHRIST, who is that
alone sacrifice and Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world.

Now then, seeing that by this sprinkling with hyssope in the blood of beasts
is meant the sprinckling with the blood of Jesus Christ, when he says, O Lord
purge me with hyssope, etc. it is all one as if he should have said: O Lord, I
am exceedingly polluted and stained with sin and uncleanness, and no Leaper
was ever more vile and loathsome then I am now in thy sight, neither is there
any water to wash and purge me, but I beseech thee of thy mercy to wash me, and
to besprinkle my soul with the blood of JESUS CHRIST, that can alone take away
my sins, and so I shall be made clean and pure again.

Sin is a leprousie.
no leprosy did ever so defile the body of a man in the time of the Jews, as
sin does stain, and defile both soul and body, no dunghill nor stinking
carrion is so loathsome in the eyes of man, as an unclean sinner is in the
sight of God till he be washed and purged in the blood of Christ.

This is the reason which the Lord used, Joshua 7.12. why Israel fell before
their enemies, and he went not forth with their Armies when they fell before
the men of Ai, Therefore the children of Israel can not stand before their
enemies; but have turned their backs before their enemies, because they are
execrable: we see then the nature of sin, how it makes a man abominable and
detestable in the sight of God.



David to be washed and purged from our filthiness, let us repent of all our
sins, bewail our uncleanness: let us by faith as a bunch of hyssope
besprinckle our souls with the blood of Jesus Christ.

The ceremonies under the Law were but to lead us unto Christ.
Seeing David desires to be purged with hyssope: We learn hence that the Lord
would not that men should despise such ceremonies and types of Christ, as he
himself commanded in the time of the Law: and though it might seem a vain
and needless thing to besprinckle them with a bunch of hyssope, dipped in the
blood of a beast, yet seeing it was the^ commandment of God, they did not
despise this ceremony, being a type of the blood of Christ, when they could not
see with bodily eyes the blood of Christ, it pleased god by such ceremonies and
types to help their faith, by sprinckling the blood of a beast, to show to
them that they must be so sprinkled in their souls with the blood of Jesus
Christ.

Obedience required to GODS ordinances.
Hence we learn by the example of David, and all the holy Fathers and Servants
of God in the time of the Law, to use all such sacraments and ceremonies as
God commands in his word for the helping of our faith, we cannot see the blood
of Christ, nor touch it with our outward senses; yet the Lord has appointed
the Sacrament of Baptism; and the Supper of the Lord, that in them we might
see, feel, touch, and taste as it were the body and blood of IEVS CHRIST: And
therefore all those which despise these Sacraments making little or no account
of them, show that they despise the ordinance of God, and so make light of that
which is ordained for the good of their souls.

Christ's blood alone does purge our sins. Hebr. 9.9. 1. Ioh. 1.7. Rev. 1.5.
John 1.29. 1. Pet. 1.2.
when that David prays the Lord to purge him with hyssope, the word signifies
to purge by sacrifice; even the sacrifice of the Son of GOD, and by his death
and bloud-sheding to purge his sins away, so as he confesses there is nothing
in heaven or earth, that is of force to purge him from his sins and
uncleanness, but the blood of Christ alone. It is not the blood of bullockes,
lambs, and goats that can wash away the least spot of sin, but only the
blood of the immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus, and to him all the Sacrifices had
relation and shadowed out Jesus Christ the true Pascall Lamb unto us. The use
of the ceremonies under the Law.


And this was the reason why David makes mention of hyssope that God would
purge him with hissope, because God in the time of the Law ordained this
ceremony for a confirmation of their faith and to help the people of the Jews
to the better sight and knowledge of the promised Messiah; for seeing CHRIST
was not yet come into the world, and they could not see the work of redemption
as yet performed: the Lord would lead them by these ceremonies unto Jesus
Christ the promised Messiah, that they might see him as it were before their
eyes: for when they saw a beast slain, and the blood spilt, Note.
then they took a bunch of hyssope, dipped it in the blood of the beast, and
besprinckled them that offered the same with the blood: they were thereby
taught, that even so must Jesus Christ the Son of GOD and promised Messiah be
slain and put to death, his blood shed for their sins, and they must by
faith as a bunch of hyssope besprinckle their souls with the blood of Christ
for the pardon of their sins.

It is true indeed, that the Lord has eased us in the time of the Gospel of
all those old and ancient ceremonies; neither is it the ^ill of God that we
should be clogged with the dead and needless, Galat. 4.
and beggarly rudiments and ceremonies of men which become not the simplicity
of the Gospel. But yet he has in mercy appointed certain helps and means
to lead us unto Christ Jesus, as the two Sacraments to help our faith, for we
being as yet carnal (alas) we can not behold no more then we see: And
therefore the Lord has appointed them as helps to lead us to Christ, to set
him before our eyes in the Water in Baptism, and Bread and Wine in the Lords
Supper, that so our faith should be confirmed thereby, and we might even see
Christ Jesus before our eyes: And therefore as David did carefully use such
helps and ceremonies as GOD commanded, for the strengthening of their Faith:
so let us be as careful, to use the helps that God has left us under the
Gospel, for the strengthening of our weak faith.

[Purge me with hyssope]
The meaning of the word^.
THe meaning is this, accept of that most perfect and everlasting sacrifice of
Jesus Christ for the punishment due to my sins: As if he should have said, O
Lord, I confess I have sinned exceedingly, I have bin borne in sin, and have
by murder and adultery deserved to be condemned eternally, and to have the
curse and punishment due to my sin to be cast upon me: but I beseech thee in
mercy to accept of the death and bloudshedding of thy Son my Savior Jesus
Christ for the satisfaction due to my sins.

And whereas the Justification of a sinner in the sight of God stands on two
parts: first, remission and pardon of sin: secondly, the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, me thinks, the Prophet requires and begs both these at the hands
of God; first to be purged, or as the word signifies, to purge (not by washing)
but by sacrificing, to appease the wrath and anger of God by the blood of
Christ: secondly, when he prays to be washed, he desires to be made pure and
righteous, not in his own righteousness, but only in the righteousness and
obedience of JESUS CHRIST imputed to him, and laid hold upon by faith.

David intreates the Lord that he would Purge him: Salvation is to be sought
for only in Christ.
that is, accept of the most perfect Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, for the
punishment due to his sins: we learn that there is no Name given under Heaven,
whereby a man shall be saved, but only in the name of Jesus Christ; 1. John
1.7 1. Pet. 1.18 Reu. 1.5
it is not the blood of Bullocks, Lambs, and Goats, that can wash away the
least spot of sin, but only the blood of the immaculate Lamb Christ IeIesus;
but of this before.

John. 3.16. Romans 8.32.
which made Saint John to admire it: And if God has not failed us in this, but
could rather be content to see his only Son put to death and hang on the
Cross, then we should perish, how should be deny any smaller and lighter
matter^ unto us?

heaven or earth, but only by the blood of Jesus Christ alone: if all Men and
Angels should have died and been cast for ever into hell fire, they could not
satisfy the infinite wrath of God for one sin, but the heart blood of Jesus
Christ must be shed, else we can have no pardon.



Romans 6. Gal. 3.
every sin deserves death and the curse of GOD: Now there is no way but this,
to believe in Jesus Christ, to embrace him by faith, that so God the Father may
for his sake pardon our sins, accept of his death and passion for the
punishment of them all.

And that we may be purged from our sins, both the fault and punishment, by the
blood and sacrifice of Christ, we must first repent of them, with David be
grieved for them, bewail them, amend our lives, and become new creatures in
Christ Jesus, we must beg for pardon of them at the hands of God.

Secondly, besides we must be sprinkled with hyssope, that is, as in the
time of the Law, they dipped the hyssope into the blood of the beast, and so
besprinckled the person to be cleansed, even so must we by faith as it were
with a bunch of hyssop apply the blood of Christ, and by says besprinckle our
defiled consciences, it will purge us from sin, and appease the anger of GOD
for the punishment.

But if men either do not repent of them and leave their sins, or do not
come with Faith, to apply the blood of CHRIST, they can not have pardon: As if
there were a sovereign plaster to cure any sore; if a man do not apply it to
his wound, but let it lie in a box, it will do him no good: so unless we
apply the blood of Christ to our wounds and sores by faith (alas) it cannot
help us: And as the woman with the bloody issue touched Christ's garment, and
was healed; so if we can by faith touch the blood of Christ, and apply it to
our selves, it will heal all the bleeding wounds of sin.

The second request is that GOD would wash him and make him pure, not imputing
his sins unto him: but covering them in the death and obedience of his Son
Jesus Christ. And therefore in the second part of this verse he prays for the
imputation of Christ's righteousness: namely, that God would not only remit the
punishment due to his sin, but look upon him as he is in CHRIST, covered
with his rightousnesse, and that God would account him just for Christ's
obedience, holiness, satisfaction and righteousness: for when God beholds a
poor sinner covered with the righteousness, holiness and obedience of his
Son Christ, Ps. 32.1.2.
then he accounts him as no sinner, but just and righteous: Even as a man
beholding any thing through a red glass it appears red or of the same color:
so if the Lord look on us in Christ we appear holy and righteous before him.

David intreates the Lord to wash him, he shows that he was defiled with sin
and stained with uncleanness: and so stood in great need of Gods mercy to
cleanse his filthy soul and defiled conscience now polluted with most vile
Adultery, and filthy uncleanness: Sin defiles a man.
that his soul was now besprinkled with the innocent blood of that faithful
servant and loyal Subject Vrias the Hittite: And as it was with David, sin
infected him, made him vile and loathsome, filthy and abominable in the sight
of God: Even so it does begrime the faces of the best of Gods children, it
stains and pollutes them both in soul and body: yea, no carrion is more
loathsome and odious then a sinner defiled and polluted with sin is in the
sight of God.

The leprosy was a loathsome disease, it infected the body, and the very
garments, yea the stones and timber: But this spiritual leprosy sin infects
the whole man, body and soul: yea it infects heaven and earth, and all other
creatures in the world, and there is nothing that can take away the spots and
blemishes of sin but only the precious blood of Jesus Christ, laid hold on
by true faith.

David was, in soul and body, let us desire to be washed: let us bewail
them, loath and hate them, entreat the Lord that he would not impute our
sins unto us, but cover them under the robe of Christ's righteousness: And
that we should abhor every sin f^^ this cause, because it defiles us, it
pollutes us, and makes unworthy to appear in Gods presence.

David, though an holy Prophet of God, a man after Gods own heart; yet desires
the Lord to w^sh him from his sins and to cover them in the obedience of
CHRIST JESUS appplied by faith: we see that no man is able to stand before the
face of God in his own righteousness, in his own works, or wothinesse: for
if any might, who might better have done it then David* a man truly sanctified,
a holy Prophet, a man after Gods own heart, yea the Prophet Esaias says, that
all our righteousness is no better then a stained clout full of blood and all
pollution: Esaias. 64 6.
And Paul desires that he may not be found in his own righteousness, and
worthiness, Phil. 3.9. 1. Cor. 1 30
at the day of Judgment but in the righteousness of Christ laid hold on by
faith. And therefore let us renounce all our own goodness, or worthiness,
and account all but dung in respect of CHRIST and his righteousness: And as
for the Church of Rome we may see their intolerable pride, that they do so
much rest and rely upon their own goodness, and worthiness, merits, and
righteousness, to stand upon it and appear in it for remission of sins, and
life eternal: But (alas) if Paul, David and all the Saints of God abhor
themselves in dust and ashes; desire to be purged and washed and covered in the
obedience and righteousness of Jesus Christ, yea count all their own
righteousness but as dung, and dare not appear in it before the seat of Gods
Judgment, but in the righteousness of Christ. shall any Papist of them dare
to stand before Gods Judgment in his own righteousness, and worthiness: no,
no; he shall tremble, and quake, and not abide so great and glorious a
presence.

[I shall be clean: I shall be whiter then snow.]
IN these words the Prophet shows the event and issue of this, when a man does
truly repent, is reconciled to God in Jesus Christ, and is washed from his
sins by faith in Christ's blood; then he is made of a most vile and loathsome
sinner a most blessed and holy child of God: of a filthy unclean lim of the
devil, a blessed member of Jesus Christ: beautiful and glorious in the eyes
of God being covered in Christ's righteousness.

David says, The woeful estate of al natural men.
when God shall pardon him his sins on his true repentance, and be reconciled
unto him covering his sins in the merits and obedience of Christ, Then he
shall be clean: Then before a man repent, be reconciled to God by Jesus
Christ, and be purged from his sins: he is most unclean and filthy, vile,
loathsome and abominable in the sight of God: and indeed so he is; no carrion
worse, no Toad so ugly, nor Serpent so full of poison as a filthy sinner
polluted with sin till he repent, get pardon of them and be reconciled to
God by Christ: I pray you take knowledge of this Doctrine, whatsoever thou art,
high, low, rich, poor, young, old, Prince, or Noble: till thou repent, till
thou turn to God, till thou get the pardon of thy sins and be washed by
faith in the blood of JESUS CHRIST, thou art most vile and miserable, thou art
most unclean and filthy, thou art more ugly then the venomous Toad, more
loathsome then the Serpent, more filthy and stinking ^hen the Carrion: yea no
creature is so loathsome before God as a filthy sinner that lives in sin
without repentance, that is not washed and purged from them in the blood of
Christ.

one, with speed, to tepent, to turn to God, to seek to be reconciled to God
by Jesus Christ, to desire pardon of his sins, to be washed and cleansed
from them all, in and by the blood and merits of Christ; for this know, I say,
till thou art reconciled to God, do repent, art washed and cleansed, thy case
is fearful, thou were better be a Toad then a man without this: thou may
go in Silk and Velvet, in gay and golden apparel, thou may have a fair
body, perfume thee with sweet smells, etc. but till thou repent, thou art
filthy and loathsome in GODS sight.

Oh! how should this serve to pluck down the pride of many impenitent sinners?
Men and women think highly of themselves, ruffle it out in silk and velvet,
starching and washing; but all this while they know not that their poor souls
are loathsome in Gods sight, that God hates them, and cannot abide them. Oh
then be washed, be cleansed in the blood of Christ, which alone can wash away
sin.

O that men would remember that saying of Christ: Thou art poor, blind,
miserable, and naked. Then they would say with Job: Esaias 1.16. Reu. 3.14. Job.
42.6.
I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes: Then they would never give
any rest to their souls till they have repented, got pardon, be reconciled,
and washed from their filthy sins.

David acknowledges, that when he shall repent, get pardon of his sins, be
reconciled to God, be washed from the filthiness of sin: then he shall be
clean and white, yea most white, even as snow,

Hence we learn, that as a filthy sinner, that lives and goes on still in
sin without repentance, there is no creature more vile, black, and unclean:
So the child of God that does repent, that is washed in the blood of Christ,
reconciled to God, he is a blessed and glorious creature, most beautiful and
fair in the sight of God: not by any goodness, or worthiness of his own, but
by the mercy of GOD so accounting us; Cant. 1.7. and 4.1. Ezekiel. 16.9 10.11.12,
etc. Reu. 3.18 1. Cor. 6.10.11.
and by the merits and worthiness of Jesus Christ, in whose righteousness we be
righteous, and by whose merits and worthiness we are covered. The Saints of GOD
go in long white roabes, which are made white in the blood of the Lamb.

beggary, it is but like rotten rags, and beggars clouts, taken off the
dunghill: He that is wise shall shine as the firmament, Dan. 12.
and he that conuerts many to righteousness shall shine as the Sun in the
firmament: oh! then again, and again, let us repent, let us be reconciled to
God, get this wedding garment, which will make us beautiful before God.

now what is that which may comfort the hearts of Gods children? surely this,
that though they seem vile, base, and miserable in the blind eyes of sinful
men: yet they be most white, beautiful, and glorious, in the eyes of GOD our
heavenly Father: though the world hate us, contemn us, be a weary of us, loath
and abhor us: let us remember the Lord loves us, takes delight in us, we are
most fair and beautiful in his sight. They do not see what we be, 1. Ioh.
3.2.
they cannot know that we are little Princes, sons, and great heirs of the
kingdom of heaven, the sons and daughters of the great God: and therefore
this may teach us patience, seeing we know that God loves us, and that we are
dear unto him, though the world hate us, so it was with many Prophets of God,
and true believers, Heb. 11.
whom the world (...) not worthy of.

grievous sins, that if they will unfeignedly repent and turn to GOD,
embrace, and lay hold on CHRIST, God will make them of the cursed firebrarnds
of Hell, heirs of the kingdom of Heaven: of the limb of the Devil, the
members of Jesus Christ: of adulterers and filthy sinners, such as David was,
chaste and pure, and the holy servants of God: And this the Lord promises men,
that if they will repent, turn to God, and forsake their sinful ways,
Esaias. 1.18.19.
Then though your sins were as red as searlet. I will make them as white as
snow: Though they were as crimson, yet I will make them clean as wool: That
is, though men be guilty of bloody finnes, notorious evils, as David of
murder, uncleanness, whooredome, adultery, covetousness, swearing, contempt of
the word of God, etc. Yet if thou have the grace to repent, certainly the Lord
will most thoroughly purge and wash away all thy sins, he will seal thee a
general pardon of them all, if thou will only repent and lay hold upon
Christ.

Oh! then let me speak unto you in the name of God: have thou been a vile
blasphemer? have thou been a contemner of the Word? a persecuter of Gods
children? have thou been a cruel murderer, oppressor, usurer? have thou been
an adulterer, a filthy liver? Well, if thou will now repent, turn to God,
bewail thy sins, beg pardon of the^, if thou will renounce, leave and forsake
them, become a new creature in Christ Jesus, and amend thy si^full life: lo,
God does this day offer mercy unto thee, he will embrace thee as he did the
Prodigal child: he will wash thee in the blood of his own Son: Luke 15.
he will cover thee in his righteousness: he will pardon all thy sins, and
never lay them to thy charge: he will make of thee that art a vile and
miserable sinner, a very firebrand of hell, a blessed member of Jesus Christ.
And therefore let not the number or greatness of thy sins hinder thee; for
if thou can repent, God wi^^ pardon them all, and receive thee to mercy: Oh
then, if thou will not for all this repent and turn to God, leave and forsake
thy sins and impieties, become a new creature in Christ Jesus, but lie in thy
sins, and wallow in the filth of them still, and harden thy heart against all
the sweet and gracious offers of mercy: How art thou worthy to perish, 2. Cor.
5.18.
if thou shall despise so great salvation?

VERSE. 8. 8 Make me to hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou
have broken may rejoice.
David hear entreats for peace of conscience.
DAVID having in the former verse craved mercy at the hands of God, for the
pardon of his sins which were both many and great, he does in this verse beg
at the hands of God, the blessed fruit of the same, namely the blessed and
comfortable persuasion of Gods mercy, and assurance of his love, for the pardon
of his sins, that God would even testify unto his poor soul and wounded
conscience, by his spirit inwardly, Sin had taken away his inward joy.
that he was appeased and pacified with him, and in Jesus Christ reconciled
unto him, that so being thus assured of Gods love, of reconciliation with God,
and the pardon of his sins, his wounded conscience might be comforted, his
wounded soul and heavy heart might be refreshed, and his exceeding grief
might be mittigated and assuaged.

Parts of his verse.
In this verse note two special points. David so instantly craves of God,
namely that he would cause him to hear comfortable and blessed news o^ Gods
mercy and assurance of the pardon of his sins. Make me t^ hear of, etc.

so begs and requests for this, namely, that his broken heart and bleeding
conscience might be comforted, and his unspeakable grief by the feeling of
Gods love might be ended. That the bones which thou have broken may rejoice.

[Make me to hear.]


And that which David does hear confess of himself, all the children of God
shall one day be sure to find by experience, that sin does spoil them of
their inward peace and joy. Oh then if we could remember how sweet the joy and
peace is which by sin we loose, for the vain and transitory pleasures of sin
which are but for a season, we would never make so bad exchange.

The maine point is, what is it that David so earnestly craves of GOD: namely,
that GOD would assure him of the blessed pardon of his sins: but some may say,
this seems needless, did not the Lord send Nathan to him (who after David had
confessed his sin told him) The Lord has pardoned thy sin, thou shall not
die: 2. Sam. 12.13.
How then comes it to pass that here he prays the Lord to cause him to hear
and feel this, the pardon of his sins: I answer, First, it is true that
Nathan the Prophet of God did assure him of the pardon of his sins upon his
true repentance: but yet David's heart being wounded with sin, could not so
fully feel and find the assurance of Gods love and pardon of his sins, and
therefore entreats the Lord to certify his conscience inwardly by his spirit,
and fully to assure him of the same: Secondly, I answer, that though David
heard Nathan tell him that the Lord would pardon his sin, yet he judged the
outward testimony of all men and Angels as nothing unless the inward
certificate and testimony of the Holy Ghost go with it: inwardly to certify,
assure, and persuade ^he poor wounded conscience of Gods love and favor.

David prays to be assured of GODS love, and the pardon of his sins; so
every true child of God that believes and repents of all his sins may know
and be assured in his conscience of Gods love and favor, Every child of God
may be assure^ of the pardon of hi^ sins.
and the pardon of them all: And in the Article of our faith, we do profess,
we believe the remission of our sins, and life everlasting, and seeing we
pray for this, that GOD would forgive our sins and trespasses; therefore we
believe it, else we sin in praying for it: so that every one that truly
repents and embraces Jesus Christ, is a new creature, hates vile ways,
endeavors in heart and life to please GOD: 2. Pet. 1.
he may know and be assured that he is reconciled to God, and his sins be
pardoned.

Romans 8.38. Job 13.15, 19, 25. Psalm. 125.1.
but how did Paul doubt when he says, I am fully persuaded etc. Alas how dares
a vile sinner, not justified, nor assured of GODS love, and the pardon of his
sins, how dares he come to call on God and make his prayer unto him? dares a
traitor come to his King, speak unto him, not having his pardon? Well, this
Doctrine of doubting, it is a rack for wounded consciences, and torments
afflicted souls when they can not tell whether God loves or hates them, nor
know not that their sins be pardoned.

them accursed, who ^old that a man may be ass^red of salvation: we accurse it
as a Doctrine enemy to faith and salvation. And indeed it is strange to see,
that whereas they teach a man is able to fulfill the whole law of GOD, and by
his works to merit eternal life; yet they accurse him if he say he is sure
to be saved: so directly does one point of their false Doctrine impugn
another. Indeed it is no maru^ll though their religion can yield no comfort
for certainety of salvation, seeing they draw men from off the foundation
Christ Jesus, in whom only it is promised, that we shall find rest for our
souls.

Seeing David prays for this assurance of Gods love to be assured of the
pardon of his sins, by his spirit, and that upon his true repentance. This
shows that the confidence that most men have, is a fond presumption and
security: They would not doubt of GODS love for all the world; they believed
ever since they were borne, and thus they brag of their strong faith, but they
deceive themselves: for till a man do repent, turn to GOD, believe in Christ,
be a new creature, he can have no assurance of Gods love or pardon of his
sins.

Let all true Christians examine themselves, whether they feel and find this
blessed assurance and persuasion of Gods love, and the pardon of their sins:
if thou have it, make much of it, loose it not: If thou want it, use all
means, give all diligence, to get it, repent, turn to God, beg mercy, and
pardon for thy sins, embrace Jesus Christ, believe in him, that thou may
be assured, and never be at rest till thou can say, I am persuaded of Gods
love in Christ Jesus, I know my Redeemer lives: I am persuaded I am the child
of God, else a man can have no joy, peace, nor comfort.

Nathan had told him his sins were forgiven, Man's testimony of the remission of
sins is nothing without the testimony of Gods spirit.
yet David could not be assured till he felt the inward assurance and
certificate of Gods spirit to persuade and witness the love of GOD unto him for
the pardon of his sins.

Hence we learn, that it is not the testimony of all men and Angels, that can
assure us in our souls of Gods love, and pardon of our sins, without the
inward special certificate and persuasion of Gods Spirit, who is called the
Spirit of Adoption, To. 8.15.16.
because he does reveal, yea persuade and assure our souls that we be
adopted. If Peter, Paul, Nathan, yea all the world; nay if an Angel from heaven
should tell me I am the child of God, Note.
yet unless God do farther certify my conscience inwardly by his Spirit, I
should not be assured, but doubt still, even as David did in this place,
although. Nathan had said; Thy sins are for given. yet David could not be
assured until he had the inward and comfortable persuasion of Gods holy
Spirit. Men cannot know the secret council of God, they may deceive, and be
deceived; but the Spirit of Gods knows all things, and the Apostle says, 1.
Cor. 1.10 To. 8.15, 16
Ye have not received the Spirit of bondage to fear again: But ye have
received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby ye cry Abba Father. The same Spirit
bears witness to our spirit, that we are the children of God. Galat. 4.6. 2.
Cor. 1.22
And because ye are sons, therefore GOD has sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into your hearts, whereby we cry Abba Father. Again, God the Father has
sealed us, and put into our hearts the earnest of his Spirit. So that you see
it is the proper work of the Spirit to assure our hearts and consciences of
Gods love, and the pardon of our sins, and without this inward certificate
and assurance of the Spirit, all the testimonies of men and Angels can not
assure our consciences.

by the holy Ghost of the pardon of our sins, and the love of GOD in Christ, 2.
Cor. 13.5.
Prove your selves whether ye be in the faith. And because men are deceived
generally with a fond presumption, and foolish opinion, that they be the
children of God, and shall be saved: and this carnal presumption is more common
then true saving faith: Marks of Gods Spirit.
I will show how we may know this testimony and certificate of Gods Spirit,
when it is in our consciences.

That Man repents of his sins.
but such as be humbled for them, repent of them, leave and forsake them,
become new creatures, and walk in newness of life: and therefore if thou live
in sin, be not humbled for them, nor bewail them, have a purpose to live
still in thy sins, ignorance, lying, swearing, covetousness, uncleanness, etc.
Thou can have no assurance of Gods love; and this persuasion of thine, if
thou have any, it is mere presumption; for where men do not repent, and turn
unto God, and amend their lives, there is no faith, neither is the Spirit of
God in them; and therefore they can not be assured of GODS love and mercy.

Is persuaded of the Spirit.
the spirit of Adoption does not only tell a man that he is the child of God,
but does by sundry arguments and reasons persuade the child of God that he is
elect, that God loves him, and that his sins be pardoned: but wicked men have
no such persuasion in their hearts; only they have a fond opinion and conceit,
which is no good ground, neither did the Spirit of GOD ever persuade their
hearts thereunto.

The effects will appear.
that it is sure and sound by the fruits and effects of it: for if the Spirit
of God do truly testify the love of God for the pardon of our sins, and life
eternal: then it will follow, that we shall hate our sins, loathe and abhor
them, because they grieve our most gracions God and loving father: yea, we
shall desire in all things to honor God, to do his will, to please and serve
him: so that if we find and feel these things, a true hatred and dislike of
sin, because it dishonours our God, a desire to live in holiness and
righteousness before him all our days: it is a certain sign that the Spirit
of God does assure us of our reconciliation with God: But if men find not this,
no hatred of sin, no love to obey his will and keep his commandments, but
ignorance, rebellion, profaneness, and the like; let them brag what they
will of their strong faith, feeling of Gods love, and I know not what, yet it
is certain, they have not the testimony of Gods spirit, which David prays
for here, but a sond and foolish opinion proceeding of self-love, carnal
security and devilish presumption, which in the end will deceive them.

Make me to hear of joy and gladness: God conuaies confort unto us by the
ministry of his holy word.
In these words note a third point of doctrine: namely, whence, and where David
looked for comfort: namely, from the word of God, and hearing the same opened
and preached unto him: So that in his example we learn that all true comfort
and spiritual consolation is to be learned and fetched out of the word of
God, that is, the storehouse of heavenly comfort. And therefore our Savior
Christ bids us search there for comfort, John 5.39
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life. Again,
it is called Spirit and Life, John 6.63
because God uses the preaching and ministry of the Gospel to beget
spiritual life. It is called, The word of truth, even the Gospel of our
salvation, Ephesians 1.13.

The Lord might have illuminated the mind of the Eunuch, Acts 8. by the
mediate working of his own Spirit, and have made him understand that scripture
which he was reading, without any Interpreter, but it pleased the Lord to do
it by the Ministry of Philip; he might have likewise communicated his Spirit
to Cornelius, Acts 10. But the Lord would not do it but by the ministry of
Peter. According to that of the Apostle, 1. Corin. 1.21. It has pleased the
Lord by the foolishness of preaching to save so many as believe: and so many
shall believe as are ordained to eternal life. If then thou be desirous with
David to hear of joy and gladness: and to have assurance of the pardon of thy
sins, then reverence the ministry of the word by which the Lord
communicates his Spirit to such as he will save. And surely this must needs
be an exceeding comfort to all the children of GOD, that GOD does not only
freely forgive them their sins, but also tells them of the forgiveness of
the same, sealing up in their hearts the testimony thereof by his holy Spirit.

search the word of God, there is comfort to be found, many heavenly and sweet
promises of the gospel to quicken and revive our poor distressed souls; Psa.
119.50 Psa. 84.1, 2 Psalm 43 Psalm 4. Reu. 22.2.
and this the Prophet David knew by good experience, that there is more found
comfort in the feeling of Gods love, then in all the world besides. It may well
be compared to the tree Saint John speaks of, which bears twelve manner of
fruit, and the leaves of the tree serve to cure and help diseased and wounded
souls, and the fruit of this tree of the word of God is most sweet and
pleasant, and therefore let us, if we desire to desire true comfort indeed,
seek it in the means: namely, in the word and ministry of the holy gospel.

in the ministry of the Word: let men seek it elsewhere, and they shall
find none. Men may seek delight and joy in their gold and silver, in merry
company, in this or that, as men use to do: but (alas) they can not find it
there; yea, experience shows, that distressed souls, full of woe and
misery, could never find true comfort in any thing else save in the
ministry of the Word of GOD, and there they have found endless comfort, by
the hearing of the blessed and saving promises of the Gospel: and therefore it
men shall neglect or despise the word preached, how can they ever find joy or
gladness, or any dram of saving comfort?

David craves of GOD, that he would cause him to hear of joy and gladness, that
is, that his sins were all pardoned, and be reconciled to God in CHRIST, that
so he might have some good matter of joy and gladness.

We learn hence, that there is no sound joy nor comfort to any man or woman,
Where sin is not pardond there can be no true joy.
but only in the pardon of sin, and feeling of Gods love in CHRIST, and all
other joy which men do frame and devise unto themselves, alas, it is but from
the teeth outward, it is not sound nor durable, it is but carnal and earthly,
and will easily be lost, Thus says the Lord, Iere. 9.23.
let not the wiseman rejoice in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his
strength, nor the rich man in his riches: But let him that glories, glory in
this, that he knows me to be she Lord: And without this there can be no sound
joy, as we see in David, and so in all distressed sinners till they feel the
assurance of Gods love for the pardon of their sin.

Gods love, no assurance of salvation, and then how can they have any true joy,
for this proceeds from the assurance of Gods love, and the pardon of sin;
The kingdom of God stands not in meat and drink, To. 14.17.
but in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost: Esa. 57.21
but unto the wicked there is no peace.

Object. But, do we not see that wicked men, that live in sin, that be
notorious sinners, swearers, blasphemers, drunkards, etc. that these live in
mirth, and iollity, in eating, drinking, in ease and idleness, and the
children of GOD have much forrow and heaviness, grief and wrong.

Answ. Yes it is true, that wicked men that live in sin, pass their days in
eating, drinking, sport, and passetime, no sorrow nor heaviness, but spend
their days in pleasure, Job 21.13 Psalm. 73.
But suddenly they go down to hell.

Now, who will call this a true joy? nay, it is a swinish and brutish joy,
carnal and fleshly, for if they knew all, and saw their misery, that they be
in danger of Gods eternal vengeance, of hell and damnation: oh! then they
would mourn, and turn all their mirth into tears. If a traitor be
apprehended, arraigned, convicted and condemned to be hanged, drawn, and
quartered, and looks for nothing but present death and execution, and yet
should give himself to eating and drinking, to carding and dicing, to riot and
reuelling: Would not all men say he was a mad man, and out of his wits?
surely this is the case of all wicked and unregenerate men, they be arraigned
and already condemned, they want nothing but execution, and they be every
moment in danger of hel-fire: alas! what cause have they to be merry? yea, how
have they cause to howl, and cry, and mourn for grief, and therefore their
mirth is but madness. Iam. 4.9.


till we have the feeling of Gods love, and assurance of the pardon of our
sins, let us never give any rest to our souls, till we have repented and got
some blessed persuasion of Gods love in Christ; and some warrant from the
Spirit, that our sins are done away: Romans 14.17.
For the kingdom of God stands not in any outward thing, but in
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Alas! if any of us were
condemned to death, lay in prison looking for nothing but present execution,
What could do us good? There were then no joy in wife nor children, lands nor
livings, meat, nor music, no, no: unless were have the Kings pardon we
cannot be merry, but would contemn all these things: Even so when a poor
sinner is arraigned and condemned in his own conscience for sin; has no
feeling of Gods love and mercy for pardon of it, how is it possible that he
should have one dram of joy till the Lord in mercy seal unto his poor soul
a general pardon by his spirit, dipped in the blood of Christ Jesus. Well
then, let us never be at peace, nor give any rest unto our souls till we have
got some comfortable persuasion of Gods mercy for the pardon of our sins.

[That the bones which thou have broken may rejoice.]
THese words contain in them the second part of this verse, 2 Part of the
verse.
and it is as much, as if the Prophet should have said: O Lord I entreat thee
for Christ Jesus sake to for give me my sins, and give me the blessed
assurance of the same in my soul and conscience, that so feeling and finding
that thou art reconciled, and have pardoned my sins; my soul so wounded and
overwhelmed with grief and sorrow, as my very bones and most strong parts are
wasted and consumed, and my strength decayed, may be restored, cheered up and
gladded.

By this speech he would show his ^xtreame grief and sorrow for his sins,
Pro. 8.14 Psa. 32.3.4.
which was so extreme, that it wasted and consumed his strength, dried up his
bones, spent his marrow.

No sorrow in the godly like the sorrow for sin.
and offends our most gracious God and merciful Father. Great is the grief of
an husband that loses a kind and virtuous wife; and who can express the
sorrow of a father or mother for the death of their dear and only child? But
yet all the sorrow in the world is not like that sorrow and grief of heart for
sin: this will wound the conscience, cause weeping and wailing, and great
heaviness, it will even weaken the body, and strength of nature; and if it be
of any continuance, it will waste the bones, and consume the flesh. When I held
my tongue, my bones consumed. Lam. 1.2.5.2.11. Psalm. 32. Psalm.


And the reason is this, because a poor sinner being wounded in conscience for
sin, and not feeling the love and mercy of God for pardon, he sees nothing
but hell, nothing but damnation and the wrath of God, which is a fearful
thing: for this causes torments, and fears, and terrors, and makes
judgments what is more terrible and fearful then to feel the heavy weight
and burden of Gods anger, which is insupportable? For as Solomon says: Pro.
18.14.
A man may bear his sickness and infirmitis, but a wounded Conscience who can
bear? Again, Heb. 10.31
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living GOD.

so as if they will needs sin and rebel against God, they must feel the
woeful smart of it. And therefore let us above all things shun it, avoid it,
nor dare to commit it: Oh! it will cost thee dear, it will make thy heart to
ache, it will breed thee much woe and misery in soul and body.

If he be angry (says David) blessed is the man that trusts in him. Psalm. 2.


us labor to be humbled more deeply for our sins, seeing by them we offend
a most merciful God: yea, if it were possible, to shed even tears of blood
for our sins, for all were little enough to express that grief for sin
we ought to have.

[Which thou have broken.]
THat is, which thou, O Lord, my God, in justice have inflicted upon me for
these my great and heinous sins.

There is no respect of persons with God.
Hence behold, that God is most righteous and just in punishing and correcting
the sins of men, he cannot wink at sins of men, he cannot wink at sin
in any man, no not in them that be dear and near unto him, in his most holy
servant David, 2. Sam. 24. Esaias 39. Math. 23.
a man after his own heart, a holy Prophet of the Lord, yet if he rebel and
play the wanton, he is sure to be whipped for it, as here in this place: so when
he numbered the people, so Hezehiah, Jerusalem the holy City: yea, if the Son
of God which had no sin, take but our sins upon him, he must be punished,
the Justice of GOD will ceize upon him. And the reason of this is manifest,
because God does so hate sin, that he cannot wink at it in any man.

If to the green Tree, what to the dry? 1. Pet. 4.17 Ier. 25.29.
If Judgment begin at the house of God, Oh! then what shall be the end of
those that obey not the Gospel of God? If God do so severely handle his own
people, then much more the wicked.

[May rejoice.]
Pardon of sin brings true joy.
HEnce we learn that there is wonderful joy and gladness in the hearts of
those who have the pardon of their sins, it is matter of endless comfort to
feel the love of God in a man's soul: to know God to be my gracious Father,
Jesus Christ to be my Redeemer, and the Holy Ghost to be my Comforter, it is
matter of endless comfort. Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered.
Again, Romans 14.17.
The kingdom of God stands not in meat and drink, but in righteousness,
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

Esaias 48. There is no peace to the wicked: God does even wage war, and enter
into a combat against all impenitent sinners: This the Prophet speaks Psalm.
7. God does whet his sword, bend his bow, and make it ready against the wicked:
And therefore if we want this, and have not the feeling of Gods love, and
assurance of his mercy for the pardon of our sins, Oh then let us labor for
it, use all means to attain unto it, pray for it, beg for mercy, and give
no rest unto thy soul till thou have it; and if thou have it, Oh then make
much of it, loose it not though thou might gain a Kingdom: for all the
world will not afford one dram of joy and comfort without it, and take heed of
sin, which will drive it away, dim it, and damp it, and deprive us of the
feeling of it.

feels Gods love in his soul, Romans 8.1.
is a member of JESUS CHRIST, and to whom there is no fear of condemnation.

It is true indeed, in regard of our sins and evils, we have cause to mourn
and lament: yea to weep, if it were possible, tears of blood: but in regard
of Gods mercy, in that we be reconciled to God, delivered from Death, Hell,
and Damnation, by the death and merits of JESUS CHRIST, in whom we believe, we
can be merry: yea, rejoice in all estates, in sickness as well as in health,
in poverty as plenty, in prison as in liberty. Look on Peter in prison, Paul
in his chains; whereas wicked men have only a carnal and worldly joy in
their friends, riches, honors, pleasures, and delights, if these be gone and
lost, all their joy lies in the dust, then they be dumpish, heavy, and sad; no
joy then, no rejoicing, but a knife, an halter, a pond.

So that by this we see a clear and notable difference between the joy of
wicked men, and the joy of Gods children: the joy of wicked men it is carnal,
and worldly, and earthly: the joy of Gods children is spiritual, inward, and
heavenly: theirs is only in time of prosperity, but the joy of Gods children
is durable, permanent, lasting for ever in life and death; whereas the joy of
wicked men ends in death, if not before.

VERSE. 9. 9 Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.
David can no way have peace till his sins be pardoned.
IN these words David does the third time renew his former petition and suite
unto God for the pardon of his sins, as one wonderfully amazed and cast down
in the sense and feeling of Gods anger for his sins.

Parts of the verse.
And the request has two parts.



When as David prays to GOD that he would turn away his face: that is that he
would not call his sins to mind to punish them, Gods anger most fearful to
the godly.
but forget and forgive them: and as it were cast them behind his back as men
use to do with things they will not remember. Hence we learn that there is
nothing so fearful to a poor distressed sinner as is the terrible anger and
frowning countenance of the most righteous God, 1. Cor. 10.5. Psalm. 5.5. Psalm.
45.7.
which if a man beholds, and sees the Lord to frown upon him, it is
impossible that all the creatures in heaven and earth should give him any
comfort: no, David, a King, being in danger of his just anger for sin could
have no joy nor comfort till he was reconciled to GOD and did behold his
loving countenance turned toward him in and by the means of JESUS CHRIST.

And no marvel though the Prophet entreat the Lord to turn away his angry
face: for the anger of God is most terrible, yea more heavy then if a M^lstone,
yea heaven and earth should be laid upon a man's soul, for as Paul says, Romans
8.31. Heb. 10.30 Math. 5.
if God be with us, who can be against us, so if he be against us who can be
with us. It is a fearful thing to fall into his hands. And if the wrath of
the King be as the roaring of a Lion, how much more is the wrath of GOD to be
feared, who can cast both body and soul into hell.

Yea so long as the children of God enjoy his favor, see his loving
countenance, they are able to suffer much, though men torment them, persecute
them, rail on them, they can endure much misery: but if once they loose the
feeling of Gods love, and see his angry face and frowning countenance turned
toward them oh then nothing can comfort them* till they obtain his favor
again: how many things did Job suffer without impatiency, yea the loss of all
he had, so long as he felt the loving countenance of God toward him: but when
he sees the Lord to arm himself like an enemy and like an angry Job. 13:
God then he was no longer able to endure, Ps. 6.1.2.3.
and what can be more terrible to a poor sinner then to wrestle with the anger
of God then which nothing is more fearful, and this can every child of God
testify in his own conscience by experience, feeling the heavy weight of Gods
anger.

Seeing it is so terrible and fearful a thing for men to provoke the Lord to
anger, Alas what have I done? Ier. 8.6.
though they lie smoking under the heavy wrath of God to be destroyed for their
sins. Men fear the anger and frowning face of great Men, especially of the
Prince: but hard-hearted sinners fear not the anger of the eternal God: well,
let all rebellious and stif-necked sinners remember what Christ says: Fear
not him that ^an kill the body and can do no more, but I will tell you whom you
shall sear, fear him that can kill both body and soul, and can cast them
both into hell fire, fear him.

Because nothing moves the Lord to anger, Esaias 59.2.
your sins have made aseperation. O then take heed of sin: and if thou will
sin, be sure thou shall find and feel the anger of God, and if thou would
escape the anger, which is so terrible, take heed of sin. We see men be too-too
careful to shun such things as offend great persons and procure their
displeasure, for fear if they take a pinch against them, they turn them out of
their farms, rack their rents etc. O then fear to offend GOD, who will
reject and cast thee off for ever and increase thy judgment.

If we have sinned, as David did, and feel his displeasure and see his
frowning countenance: Oh then let us give no rest to our souls til we be
reconciled unto him, till we obtain mercy and favor at his hands: for so
long as we see his anger and his frowning countenance: alas! we can have no
peace nor comfort in the world. If a man should have the favor of all men,
great and small, Nobles, Lords, etc. yet if the King hate him, and cannot abide
to hear of him, what can all this do him good? So, if a man had the favor of
all men and Angels, yea if it were possible, all the things on earth should
seek to uphold a man, yet if God be angry and displeased with him, his anger
would crush him in pieces: well then, when we sin against God, and so
provoke him to anger, let us use all means to obtain his favor, let us repent
of our sins, be humbled for them, acknowledge and confess them, let us pray
for pardon, and entreat the Lord to turn away his face and angry countenance.
And as we see if a man offend a great person, he will ride and run night and
day, send gifts, make friends, and all to obtain his favor again. Even so
must we seek for the favor of God; and as Absalom having sinned against his
father, s^nt Ioab and the woman of Tekoah to get his pardon, and to appease his
fathers anger; so must we seek to Jesus Christ to be our Mediator to turn
his fathers anger from us. 2. Sam. 14.


Lastly,

[Hide thy face from my sin.]
That is, pardon them, and do not call me to account to punish me for them;
Psalm. 60.8.
Moses says thou have set our misdeedes before thee, and our secret sins in
the sight of thy countenance; that is, the Lord beheld their sins, that so he
might punish them for them, so when the Lord hides his face from our sins, it
is all one as to pardon them: when a man casts a thing behind his back or
turns his face from it, it is a sign he would forget it, and not remember
it; I will put away your sins and scatter them like a myste: and we know that
mists that appear a little time, are by and by scattered and gone: Esa. 38.17
Hezechiah confesses, That God did cast all his sins behind his back.
Alluding to men, who when they purpose to forget, Mich. 7.19
or not to remember a thing, turn their backs on it. Again, I will cast all
their sins into the bottom of the sea. Alluding to Pharaoh that wicked man
whom God drowned in the bottom of the red sea: and thus we have the meaning of
the words.

Here we see how, Note how God pardons sin.
and after what mauer the Lords pardons our sins, namely, when he does for
give and forget them, turn his face from them, has no purpose to remember
them, or to punish us for them, and in a word, when he does upon our true
repentance, for the merits of Christ esteem sin as no sin, or though it
had never been committed, Ps. 32.1, 2.
when he couers them or imputes them not unto us.

Seeing the Lord forgiueth sin after this manner, Job and David, Psalm 25
who were troubled for the sins of their youth, yet I say, though thou
should remember them, God will never remember them any more to Judgment, or
condemnation, to plague or to punish thee for them: he casts them clean out
of his mind, and turns his face from them, and therefore if he once pardon
sin, he pardons it for ever; For the decree and council of God is
unchangeable, To. 11.29.
he alters not, and therefore if once he give pardon for sin, he never
reuokes it, but loves to the end: The gifts of God are without repentance.

Seeing the Lord in pardoning of sin does turn his face from them, many
ungodly men and women, if men do them any harm, they will forgive them, but
they will never forget them: and accordingly so they deal, though for a time
they can show a smooth countenance and give fair words, yet if ever they get
them in their danger, they will fetch them over, they will show their spleen
and malice, and power our all their poison: But let all such take heed; for how
can they say, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us? and yet do not forgive and forget wrongs: if the Lord should deal
thus with us, he should confound us: for God is provoked of us every moment,
and we are indebted unto him ten thousand talents, yet he is entreated of us,
and he is reconciled unto us: ought not we therefore to forgive one another
after his examle; this is the reason used by the Apostle Paul, Coloss. 3.12,
13. Now therefore as the Elect of God, holy and beloved put on the bowels of
mercy, kindness, humbleness of mande, meckenesse, long suffering, forbearing
one an other: and for giving one another: if any man have a quarrel to
another, even as Christ forgave even so do ye. It were woeful with us, if God
were not ready to forgive: for we find our selves ready to offend, and our
sin unpardoned is sufficient to make us condemned.

The second branch of the Petition is in the end of the verse in these words,

[And blot out all mine iniquities.]
2 Part of the verse.
THat is, blot them out of thy Book of Accounts: and that Bill and Debt-booke
wherein they seem to be written, for so much the speech imports: the Prophet
alluding to men that keep Books of Account, wherein they write all their
debts: even so the Lord has, as it were, his Book of Account, wherein are
registered all the sins of men and women, when, and where, and howsoever,
committed.

Then hence we learn that all our sins are known to God: All our sins
known to God.
he has them all, as it were, written down in a Book of Account, and unless
they be blotted out in this life, they shall all one day be called over, even
at the day of Judgment, Revel. 20.
The books shall be opened, and every man's conscience shall be as a Bill of
Indictment to accuse and condemn him.

This is that which is told by the Prophet Jeremy chapt. 17. The sin of Judah
is written with a pen of iron, and the point of a Diamond. And Job has it,
Thou have sealed up our sins in a bag. By all which places it appears,
that all our sins are known to God, as perfectly as if they were noted in a
Book, and unless we repent, they shall all one day be called over and laid
to our charge, when our Books shall be opened.

Seeing all our sins are well known to GOD, down in a Book, and this Book
shall one day be opened: and if our sins be not blotted our before Death come,
and this debt be not cancelled, then they shall be brought to light, and we
shall be cast into prison till we have paid the uttermost farthing. Then we see
it stands us all in hand, while we live, to labor to have this Book
cancelled, that our sins may be put out, and all our debts crossed: for if they
be found uncancelled at death, and the day of Judgment, if they be found then
upon Records, surely then it is too late to look for mercy, and therefore it
is a matter of endless moment, which we are all most carefully to think
upon, that this Book may be cross and our sins cancelled, that so we be
not in the great day of the General Judgment called to an account for them.

But how might we do that we might have our sins blotted out? we are not
able to pay the debt: We owe the Lord ^enne thousand tallents, and cannot pay
one penny: what shall we do to have the debt paid?

To this I answer, The Lord is like a merciful Creditour, if his Debtour be
not able to pay, let him confess the debt, and he will as ke him no more, but
will willingly pardon all: So the Lord GOD, seeing we are by no means able,
of our selves, to pay the debt, yet if we confess it, and desire pardon, he
will forgive it: And yet, because he is just, as he is merciful, therefore
his Justice should be satisfied, and that is done by the means of Jesus
CHRIST, he is become our surety, he is content to take our debt on him, to
become play master, and so when nothing else could do it he was content to
suffer death, even the cursed death of the Cross, and to blot out our sins
by his own heart blood.

So then we see the means how our sins are blotted out, namely, when we
do repent of them, bewail them, be humbled for them, leave and forsake them,
lay hold on Jesus Christ, and apply unto us his death and passion, then by the
blood of Christ all our sins are done away.

VERSE. 10: 10. Create in me a clean heart, O GOD, and renew a right spirit
within me.
David's new Petition.
DAVID having hitherto creaued at the hands of God pardon of his sins, does
here put up a new petition to God; namely, for regeneration, or the new birth,
that God would cast him in a new mould, and make him a new man: And that God
would in mercy go forward with that blessed work of Sanctification begun
by his spirit, and now interrupted by his sins.

Our reconciliation with GOD stands in two parts. Namely, pardon of sin and
regeneration: And David having in the former Verse prayed for grace and mercy,
that God would have mercy upon him, pardon all his sins and wash them all
away in the blood of his Son. Now he does beg for regeneration and
increase of the blessed work of sanctification, which is begun and continued
by the holy Spirit of God: for though the Lord shall pardon sins past, yet
if he give not power against sin in time to come, we shall mar all
quickly, and commit either the same again, or else some greater sin, there
fore he craves power against sin in time to come that he may not fall into the
like again.

Parts of this verse two.
In this tenth verse there be two things to be confidered: first, he craves a
sanctified heart, because till the heart be pure, no good motion can proceed
from thence, no more then sweet Water from a bitter Fountain; secondly, he
prays for the renewing of the work of grace, or new birth, and
sanctification, which he had by his sins hindered, yea greatly interrupted,
that so his soul and filthy heart being renewed and sanctified, thence might
proceed good affections, and holy actions, with continual and constant
obedience.

Justification and Sanctification go together.
that these two graces of Gods spirit, Justification, pardon of sin, and
sanctification, a godly life and conversation, are so knit and united together,
that they can not be separated; so as no man is truly justified by faith in the
blood of Christ, but he is also sanctified by the Holy Ghost; no man can have
the pardon of his sins, but he must become a new creature in Jesus Christ. And
this appears plainly by the Apostle S. Paul, Romans 5. treating of
Justification, and Chap. 6. verse. 4, 5. entreating of Sanctification, he shows
that these two go ever together: so as he that is not sanctified, is not
justified; and he that is not regenerate and borne anew by faith in Jesus
Christ, and the work of the Spirit, cannot have the pardon of his sins.

Seeing Justification, God is merciful, and they hope all their sins are
pardoned in the blood of Christ. But unless thou be truly sanctified, unless
thou be a new creature in Christ Jesus, thou can have no assurance of thy
Justification and pardon of thy sins: and therefore if thou live in sin, delight
in sin; no change, no new birth, no reformation of thy heart and life, certainly
thou have no pardon of thy sins as yet, and thy hope is but a foolish and
vain fancy of thine own brain.

Hence to try the assurance of our salvation, Timoth. chap. 2.19. the Apostle
shows there, that the foundation of the Lord stands sure, so that the Lord
knows who are his. He shows also how we shall know that we are the Lords;
even this, Every one for his own assurance must depart from iniquity: and this
is confirmed by that of S. John Ioh. 1.6, 7. If we say we have fellowship
with him and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. O then! as we
glory in the name of Christians, and would be accounted Christ's, let us be
careful to bring forth the fruits of Christians, and to lead a sanctified
life, for God has joined these two together, so that not all the wit and
policy of men whatsoever, is able to separate them.

[Create in me a new heart.]
TO create, is to make a thing of nothing, as God created the world: Genesis 1.1.
that is, he made all things of nothing. Hence then learn, that it is as great
a work to create a new heart, Repentance is a new creation.
and so to save a sinner, as to create the whole world of nothing; yea in some
respects it seems harder: for in the creation of the world, the Lord but spoke
the word, and all was made, there was no hinderance, no resistance or
opposition: but in the creation of the heart a new, there are many lets and
hindrances. First within a man, every man is an enemy to his own salvation,
and the flesh resists this work: again, the devil does labor to hinder by
all means possible, so blessed a work.

Yea and besides that, it is a great work to create in a man a new heart: It is
also a work of great difficulty, not accomplished without great labor and
pain, and therefore is it called a Birth, a Death, a Circumcision; so then,
even as no birth, no death, no cutting off of the flesh can be without pain
and sorrow: So the conversion of a sinner is not wrought without pain and
sorrow: The Infant is not delivered out of it mothers womb without pain; and
do thou think (o man) to part with sin which is in thee, was conceived
with thee, and which since thy birth day, unto this present, thou have
nourished with such delight, and not to taste of pain in thy new birth? no
^ssuredly it will not be, but it will cost thee much sorrow, many a sigh yea
and tears themselves before thou have the same effectually wrought in thee.

Seeing it is so hard a thing to have a new and sanctified heart, appointed:
namely, Ioh. 17.17. Acts 15 9.
the word preached, the Sacraments, prayer, meditation in the law of God, and
to cry unto GOD for the same continually.

We see that there is nothing in man of himself that is pleasing unto God,
David prays to have a new heart created in him; and therefore there is no will
no motion in any man of himself to please God, all must be new, yea till the
heart be created a new, and sanctified, it is a sink of sin and all
uncleanness, full of poisoned lusts and concupisence, and therefore no
freedom of will to any thing that is good til God create this new heart.

Seeing David prays to God to create a clean heart within him, filthy lusts
and desires. And as our Savior says: Mat. 15.19.
Out of the heart comes evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, thefts, false
testimonies, slander^: these are the things which defile the man. Oh! then let
us look unto our hearts, and labor for sanctified hearts, entreat the Lord to
create them in us, and to take away our stony and corrupt hearts, Luke 8.
and give us good and honest hearts, sanctified by his Spirit; for look how
our hearts be, so will our thoughts, words, and works be: a good heart will
have good words, and good deeds; but a stinking and corrupt heart will send
forth vile and filthy words and works.

Quest. Does David desire no more but a clean heart? has he no care of his
words and his actions, of his outward life and conversation?

Ans. Yes verily, David though he names but the heart, yet understands the
whole man, both outward and inward: but because that is the fountain of all,
therefore he names that: and if the heart be pure, it will make the whole man
good: for the heart of man is like the great wheel of a clock, it is the
first mouer either to good or ill.

Hence mark, True Sanctification is never in part.
where the work is truly wrought, it is not only outward in word and deed,
but it is inward, and of the whole man, both body and soul, heart, will,
judgment, affection, conscience, words, and works, The God of peace sanctify
you throughout: 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
So that the mind, which by nature is full of blindness and ignorance, is
enlightened with the true knowledge of God, revealed in his Word the will
flies evil, and imbraceth that is good, the affections are purged from
rebellion: yea, every part and faculty, both of body and soul is sanctified:
So that as we have given up our members servants of unrighteousness to work
sin: Romans 6.19.
Now they become servants of righteousness to holiness. Yea the body is now a
fit Temple of the Holy Ghost, fit to perform all duties to GODS glory, and the
edifying of our brethren. And therefore this must be remembered, that he he
which is truly sanctified, is wholly sanctified throughout in soul and body.

Herod, Mark. 6.2.
they nourish in their bosoms many sinful and rebellious lusts and desires.
Note this well.
Well, if thy tongue be not sanctified to cease from ill words, and to speak
well, if thy hands, or eyes, or ears, James 1.
etc. if thou be not sanctified throughout, in every part, there is no true
work of grace, no sound sanctification, for where it is truly wrought, there
will be a change in all parts and powers of soul and body.

reason, conscience, tongues, hands, feet, that we deny any service to sin and
Satan, and do willingly consecrate all to God: for if we keep one part, and
neglect another, it will not boot us no more then to set a strong defense at
one place of a Castle, and to neglect the rest, or to shut one gate, and let
the rest stand open.

Notes to know whether this change is wrought in us or no.
Now that we may the better descerne our estate, whether the sound work of
grace be wrought in us, or no, and whether God has sanctified our hearts truly
or not, we shall know it by these three fruits of sanctification, which are ever
found in all them that be truly sanctified.

I delight in the Law of ^^d in the inward man, Romans 7.22.
though we fall by the infirmity of our own flesh.



strive and struggle to prevail against our spiritual enemies, and to
overcome them: then there is wonderful peace of conscience, and joy in the
Holy Ghost.

and fruits of Sanctification, but be they wanting, thou can not be assured
thou art truly sanctified, or have any true work of grace, as yet, wrought in
thy heart.

[O GOD.]
HEnce we learn who is the Author of this work of Sanctification: God the
Author of Sanctification.
namely, it is the proper work of the third person in Trinity, the holy Ghost,
he does sanctify the Elect: 1. These. 5.23.
The very God of peace sanctify you throughout. The faithful are begotten,
John. 1.13.
Not of flesh and blood, nor of the will of man, but of God.

This work of Sanctification cannot flow from our parents: For who can bring a
clean thing out of filthiness: S. Ioh. 13. The new birth is not of blood, nor
of the will of the flesh, nor of man, but of Christ, who 1. Cor. 1.30 It made
unto us sanctification. Col. 1.19. In him are hid all the treasures of it: Of
whose fullness we receive grace for grace. 1. Ioh. 16.

Again it is said: Eze. 36.26
A new heart will I give them, and a new spirit will I put into them: And I
will take away their stony hearts, and give them hearts of flesh. God the
Father sanctifies in giving his Sou Christ unto us: so Christ sanctifies in
washing us from our sins in his blood: And the Holy Ghost in applying CHRIST
JESUS his death and resurrection to us. And thus the work of Regeneration, or
Sanctification is by GOD alone wrought i^ the Elect.



Part of this verse.
And renew a right Spirit within me: Wherein David craves grace from GOD to
become a new creature, and withal that God would enable him by his spirit to be
faithful and constant in time to come, and therefore requires of God a stable
Spirit, a firm Spirit: that is, not only a constant purpose to walk
uprightly with GOD, but power and strength from his Spirit to become faithful
and constant, as fearing his own weakness, if the Lord should leave him to
himself: For as GOD gives grace to obey, so he must give grace to persevere. As
if he should have said: O Lord thou have begun this blessed work of
regeneration and new Birth by thy holy Spirit: But I like a sinful wretch by
sin and rebellion have hindered the same, and broken off the gracious work of
thy holy Spirit: Now I beseech thee O Lord, lay to thy hand again, and a fresh
begin to renew the work of thy Spirit, even the blessed work of new Birth; and
withal grant that in time to come I may be strengthened in the inner man by thy
holy Spirit, and may be made thereby firm and constant to continue: yea, to
grow and hold out to the end in holy obedience.

David acknowledges he had broken off the work of God his Spirit in him, Man
by sinning breaks of the worker of Sanctification.
and interrupted the same, and hindered the work of Sanctification by his
sins, and disobedience. And therefore we learn that after God has touched
a man's heart to repent, and sanctified him by his Spirit, if he sin and
rebel against God, he does what lies in him to cut off the work of grace, to
hinder the work of his salvation, and break off the gracious work of
Sanctification and new Birth; and if the Lord should leave him, he should fall
clean away from grace: for the Spirit of God is glad and joyful when as we
are careful to avoid all those ways which offend God, and wound our souls,
when we seek to keep good hearts, faith unfeigned, and a good conscience; then
the Spirit of God does daily proceed with the work of new Birth and
Sanctification: but after we shall rebel against God, and comm^^ sin, we
g^^eue the holy Spirit of GOD, and vex him that he is compelled by our
lewdness, to leave off the work in the midst, because we suffer not our
selves to be wrought upon; Ephesians. 4.30.
but we will follow our own lusts and liking, and when the spirit of GOD
cease to renew us and to beget our hearts to God, then there rises blindness
of mind, so as we cannot conceive and feel the love of God, as in David: And
then this gracious work of the spirit being interrupted, there arises grief
and sorrow of soul and conscience.

against his Majesty, and that he would not leave us to blindness of mind and
hardness of heart; but that he would rather continue his love, and mercy unto
us, and that his holy spirit would daily proceed with the blessed work of
Sanctification and renewing of our souls unto holiness and true righteousness.



David intreates the Lord that he would renew a constant and stable spirit in
him, Good to fear our weakness.
he shows that he was greatly afraid of his own weak nesse, and therefore
desires strength from God to hold out and persevere in obedience even unto the
end: that God would by his Spirit give him a constant purpose and continual
endeavor both in heart and life to do his will: and therefore we learn from
him to suspect our selves, to fear our own weakness and infirmity, if the
Lord should leave us to our selves: Blessed is the man that fears always,
Pro. 28.14
but he that hardens his heart shall run into all evil ways: For such is
our weakness that we are ready to fall into the self fame sin from the which
we are escaped of the Lord do but a little leave us to our selves: This does
the Prophet teach: Psalm 78. How often d^d they provoke him in the wilderness,
and grieve him in the desert: Thus did Pharaoh, Exodus 9. Chap. 27. I have
sinned, and the LORD is righteous, but I and my people are sinful: But when
the Judgment was removed, his heart was hardened again, and he continued in
his sin: We see this in the example of the Israelites: Judges the third
Chapter. They commiteed evil again and again, they fell into idolatry, they
knew it was a sin, yea, and they had experience of Gods severity against it:
for all that they fell again into the same sin, and so provoked the Lord to
punish them. So Hebr. 6. Many sin again after the receiving and
acknowledgement of the truth. So that except the Lord uphold and hold men
back, they will fall into the same sins they before committed, and so provoke
the Lord afresh to punish them.

O then let us fear our weakness! If David, a holy Prophet, a man after GODS
heart, prays thus, that GOD would stablish him with his free Spirit, that is,
give him a constant purpose and endeavor to continue in obedience; how much
more have we need to do the same, knowing how weak we are, how many
inticements we have to sin, how cunning the Devil is, and uses the world
and the flesh as so many enemies to fight against us: well, let us fear the
worst, and doubt our weakness, and it will make us more careful to shun
sin, and the occasions of sin, for seldom shall a man fall into that sin
which he does truly fear to commit.

Paul prays for, That God would strengthen us by his spirit in the inner man:
that we might not only begin well, but continue by constant perseverance
in obedience all our days: for if the Lord leave us, alas! we shall easily fall
flat to the ground: even as a staff in a man's hand, so long as it is stayed,
it stands, but if it be left alone, it falls to the ground: so it is with us,
and therefore let us not presume of our own strength or power, but suspect it,
and pray to God to renew his constant and stable spirit in us.

that he tells them that the children of God fall not into the same sin
again after their repentance; if they do, he then tells them, that there is
no place for a second repentance: but this is false, for the promises of God
are without limitation of times, or consideration of sins, or respect of
persons: he will receive to mercy all repentant sinners, whether their sins
be committed before or after repentance, whether once or often; so that they
renew their repentance, according as they have sinned anew. This pardon Christ
himself publishes, Matthew chap. 11. Come unto me all ye that are weary,
and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Yea the Lord enjoyneth us
sinful men, Luke 17. To forgive our brother seventy times seven times, if
he turn again, and say, it repents me: So that we see this is a marvelous
comfort to all such as groan under the burden of sin, that have fallen
through infirmity into one sin often; let not such be discouraged, but assure
themselves, That albeit with Peter they fall often, yet if with him they repent
truly, and weep bitterly for their sins, the Lord ^s merciful to forgive
them their sins. Not that we should live prowdly, presumptously, stubbornely,
and obstinately against him: but if we fall through frailty; for Psalm 103.
The Lord knows whereof we be made: he remembers that we are but dust.

David prays to be renewed and to recover his former feeling and comfort.
Child of God not always at one stay.
Hence we learn that the child of GOD is not always at one stay, but there
is an intercourse in the estate of a Christian man or woman, sometimes full of
comfort, joy, and peace of conscience, and sometimes again heavy and sad, yea
full of sorrow and perplexity, even as a man in an ague, sometimes sick, and
sometimes well: and as it is with trees, sometimes winter, and sometimes summer:
this is the state of all Gods children, as David, Joseph, Hezekias, Job, etc.
and continual experience proves this, that the estate of GODS children ebbes
and flows, has their change: when as they walk directly and uprightly with
God, then they have peace and comfort, but when they start aside and commit
some sin, then they find torments of conscience and grief of mind.

his great joy and comfort.

much; let us bewail our former sloth, and make more upright steps in time to
come, to GODS Kingdom.

A purpose not to sin, the mark of a sanctified heart.
and of the mind renewed to have a right Spirit, that is, a purpose not to
sin, but in all things to please GOD, and to do his will, to walk with GOD in
all his commandments: whereas of the contrary, when a man has a purpose to
live in any known sin; Psa. 50.17 Mark 6.2
it is a fearful and manifest sign of a naughty and wicked heart: for when
the heart is truly sanctified, then will be wrought this right spirit not to
sin in any thing: I do not say, that the man sanctified and regenerate, does
not sin at all; but he has not purpose to sin, no delight in sin, but
bears a constant purpose in all things to please God: when he can say with
David, I have refrained my feet from every evil way: Genesis 17.1. Psa. 18.23 1.
Ioh. 3.9 Genesis 39.9
Again, He that is borne of God sins not, that is, with full purpose of
heart, with delight in sin, and as they purpose, so they endeavor it, they
are afraid and suspect themselves, shun the occasions of sin, strive against
their corruptions and Satan's temptations.

against thy God wittingly and willingly, have thou a resolute purpose, by the
grace of God, to walk before him all thy days? This is a sign of an upright
heart, and that it is sanctified: but do thou find no such resolution, no
such purpose, but rather contrary a purpose to run on in thy old sins, thou will continue in them, let God and men say and do what they can, in lying,
stealing, drunkenness, whordome, ignorance, contempt of the word, etc. say what
thou will, profess what thou will, it is a clear case thy heart is naught, it
is filthy, not sanctified: for it is impossible that a man should have true
repentance, and an heart truly sanctified, and to keep a purpose to live in
his known sins. And therefore it conuinceth all such to be impenitent sinners
and notorious hypocrites: yea if they leave many sins, and yet purpose to live
in one, it argues the heart is not sanctified: Mark 6. Matthew. 28.
Herod left many, yet lived in covetousness.

James, In many things we sin all, and the just man falls seven times; but if
thou can truly say, it is against my purpose, I hate the sin I commit; I
condemn it; I had no purpose to do it, my desire was to please GOD, then thou
may have comfort, thy heart is sound; God will not condemn thee for it, Mal.
3.17.
The Lord will spare his children as a father his only son. A child is going
to School, and his purpose is so to do; in the way he falls into some company,
and stays there too long, and plays the truant, but it is against his
purpose: even so the child of God purposes to serve God, and to please him in
all things, has no purpose to sin, but by some temptation of the Devil, or
allurement of the world, he is overtaken, I do the evil I would not, Romans 7.
I cannot do the good I would, but I delight in the Law of God concerning the
inner man: This is Paul's comfort, and this is the comfort of all Gods children,
if they can truly say, I do the evil I would not, I delight in the law of
God, that GOD will accept the will for the deed.

[Renue or refresh a right spirit in me.]
AS if the should have said, O Lord I have (by my sins) dimmed thy graces in
me, yea even quenched and extinguished them, and almost put them clean out;
but Lord I beseech thee renew thy graces in me: Refresh them. Even as we see a
lamp when all the oil is spent, it winkes, and is almost extinguished till it
be renewed and refreshed with oil, then it burns again and gives light.

Sin quenches grace as water does fire.
and the great power of it; namely, it is as a poole of water cast on the fire,
which if it do not quench, and extinguish, and put out all, yet it greatly
allayes the heat of it: Even so the graces of GODS spirit in his children, alas
they be but weak and small: but sin is as a poole of cold water, to quench
the heat and comfort of them. David, was wont to delight in Gods service, to be
forward thereunto: but sin did so cool him, that he could have little joy in
it now: Demas was forward a while, but the world choked him so that he left
Christ, and Christ biddes the Church of Sardy to be awake, and to strengthen
the things that are ready to die in them; and the Laodiceans grew neither hot
nor cold, by reason of their pride and carnal security: Revel. 3.3 Revel. 2.
so is the church of Ephesus reproved, for that she had lost her first love:
So the Apostle S. James resembles and compares sin to Childe-bearing for the
fruitefulnesse of it, James 1.15. Lust when it has conceived, it brings
forth sin, and sin when it is finished, it brings foarth death. 1. Cor.
5.6. Likewise it is compared to leaven that leaueneth the whole lump, and
therefore no marvel though it proceed by little and little from one degree to
an other.



blindes our eyes, that we cannot see what is good and evil, it hardens the
heart, that a man can not relent and mourn for his sins, and be moved with
Gods judgments, it brings a decay and eclipse of Gods graces: men are afraid
to do any thing that might hinder their health or wealth, how much more the
health and happiness of their souls! Let us therefore always keep a diligent
watch over our souls; let us seek to cut off all occasions to evil, and
endeavor to stop the first beginning: for the more sin grows to an head, the
more the spirit of God is quenched, the work of grace is diminished, and the
assurance of our comfort is weakened and lessened.

Revel. 2.1 2. Tim. 1.5
Do thy first works again, awake and strengthen the things ready to die.
Stir up even as a spark of fire in ashes, blow it up; so must we use all
means whereby we may have the work of grace renewed in us.

Means for the increase of grace*
1 We must attend upon the word of God preached, for as that is the means to
beget faith, so it is to increase it and renew it.

2 We must read and meditate much, call our lives to account, and be sorry for
our decays, and labor to repair them even as a ship when it leakes! or a
City when the walls be battered.

3 We must with David pray often and earnest unto God to renew a right spirit
in us.

VERSE. 11. 11. Cast me not from thy presence, O Lord, and take not thy holy
Spirit from me.
IN the former Verse David has put up sundry requests and petitions unto God
for grace and mercy for the pardon of his sins.

The meaning of the words.
Now this eleventh Verse contains in it an earnest Deprecation: wherein the
Prophet entreats the Lord to turn from him two fearful judgments and
grievous punishments which he had deserved for his sins: for first, what
greater misery can befall the child of God then to be cast out of Gods
presence, love and favor? Secondly, what greater plague to a distressed soul
then to be deprived of Gods blessed spirit, whereby alone we we are guided and
comforted: and without whom we can have no comfort, nor ever do any good
thing, but shall be carried of our own lusts headlong into all sin and
wickedness.

David alludeth to the judgment of God upon Saul.
Now against both these David prays unto the Lord in this verse, and herein he
alludeth to the judgment of God upon Saul, who was his next predecessor and
King over Israel: whom the Lord cast off, and did utterly reject from being
King over his people, 1. Sam. 15.26.
because he did reject the Lord and cast off the commandment of GOD, and
would not obey his voice, and therefore the Lord took his Spirit from Saul,
and gave him an evil spirit to vex and torment him: and both these David
here prays against, that God would show him mercy, and not deal with him as
he did with Saul, though he had sinned grieuiously, yet that he would rather
humble him by some other means, and not in his just judgment to cast him off
and reject him, nor take his holy Spirit from him.

[Cast me not away.]
AS if he should have said, o Lord, howsoever I have sinned grievously, yet I
pray thee deal not with me as thou did deal with Saul that wicked man, to
cast me off and reject me from being King and Ruler of thy people: Nor take
thy holy Spirit from me, whereby I am enabled to do thy will.

By the presence or face of God is meant the love and favor of God, and
therefore David entreats the Lord that he would not thrust him clean out of
favor, and deprive him of his love.

The pleasures of sin are dear bought.
so as he shall show no favor to us; but his disfavor and heavy
countenance, it is a very heavy and doleful case: It is said of Cain, that God
cast him out of his presence, and that was the height of Caines misery, Genesis 4.
so the Lord cast off Saul from being King over Israel. As the favor of God is
life, so his disfavor is present death; and as in the presence of God is
fullness of joy and pleasure for evermore, so in the want of his presence is
there nothing but woe and misery: yea it is a step to eternal death: Neither
is there any misery which the child of God does fear more then this, to be
forsaken of the Lord and to be cast out of his favor.

Their madness discovered that make light of Gods favor.
Oh what mad men be they that make so light of Gods love and favor! that will
for the gaining of a penny or the inioying of an hours pleasure loose the love
and the favor of God, Mat. 16.26.
and for ever deprive themselves of his glorious presence, and plunge
themselves into everlasting woe and vengeance with the devil and his Angels.

In thy presence is fullness of joy, and in thy light we shall see light. And
because sin thrusts men out of Gods favor, and separates between God and
men, above all things take heed of sin, avoid it, and shun it, as the bane and
poison of our souls.

For the better opening and understanding of this verse, we must discuss two
great and weighty questions, which being well considered, will make much for
the clearing of this text.

Two objections.
The former is this, when David intreates the Lord not to cast him out of his
presence, that is, his love and favor, whether a man elected, and in the
favor of GOD, as David justified, and sanctified, may loose the love of GOD
and fall away, to become a reprobate and castaway, and so finally to perish.

The other question is, seeing David prays the Lord not to take his holy
Spirit from him, whether the sanctified gifts and graces of Gods holy Spirit
may finally and totally be lost and taken away? These questions both be
defended and affirmed by the Papists and their followers, who hold that a man
truly elected, called, justified, and sanctified, and in the favor of GOD,
may fall away and perish. We hold the contrary, that a man once in the favor
of God, elect, called, justified, and sanctified, cannot finally perish not
clean be bereft of the saving graces of the holy Spirit.

Now because these two questions be points of great moment, and on which all
our happiness and comfort does hang and depend: therefore I will stand a
little to prove them by testimonies of Scripture, with reasons and arguments
drawn from the written word of GOD, and remove some objections of the Papists
against the certainety of our perseverance in faith to the end.

Jeremy, where the Lord comforts his Elect and chosen people, is most pregnant
for this purpose: Ier. 31.3.
Yea (says the Lord) with an everlasting love have I loved thee, and therefore
in mercy have I drawn thee: So that it is manifest hence, whom God loves once
in Christ, he loves for ever, and there is not time when he can be said not to
love them; For as much as he loved his own, Ioh. 13.1.
that were in the world, unto the end he loved them. Where our Savior CHRIST,
to comfort his Disciples, tells them that God the father loves them that be
members of JESUS CHRIST, even unto the end, and his love shall never fail
them: The gifts and calling of God are without repentance: Romans 11.
Now then, unless a man will say, that GOD does repent of his calling and
electing men to eternal life, it must needs follow that they cannot perish
whom God calls and means to save: and our Savior CHRIST says plainly, that
it is impossible, Mat. 24 24
that any man elected should perish. False Christ's should deceive the very
elect, Math. 18. Romans 8.30.
if it were possible, but that is impossible: And the gates of hell: that is,
all the power and malice of the devil shall not prevail against the least of
GODS children, to hinder their everlasting salvation.

Again this is proved, Math. 16.16. Where Christ promises Peter and in him
the whole Church, That the gates of hell should never prevail against him:
where Christ shows that indeed the devil through his temptations might show
very much strength; but they should comfort themselves in this, that they
should never prevail or finally get the victory. Again, Mat. 24. They shall
deceive (if it were possible) even the very Elect: Out of which words of our
Savior we may gather, that the Elect of God should not be seduced, and so
fall away finally: Again John 10.28. Christ says his sheep shall never
perish, adding this withal: No man shall take them out of my hands: And
again, Romans 8.30. Whom God Predestinateth he Calls, Justifies,
Sanctifies, and Glorifieth: Therefore not fall away finally, for he that
falls away finally shall never be glorified.

But admit, as the Papists would have it, that a man might fall away fily, then
he must be clean cut off from Christ: for he must be clean cut off from
Christ and have no conjunction with him before he fall away finally; then at
his second reuniting he must be Baptized, for Baptism is the Sacrament of
Incysion or ingrafting into Christ: But that is absurd that Baptism should be
any more then once adminstred, therefore fore a man is but once united or once
ingrafted, and cannot be reunited and never fall: And therefore frivolous is
that distinction of venial and mortal sins with the Papists, for if any
sin of the Elect should be mortal: Then there must needs be a second
renewing in the Elect unto Christ, which is most absurd to think, Men must puta
difference betwixt that they feel and that they have.
for the Lord works this but once: And David though at this time he lay
languishing under the heat of the Lords wrath for those horrible sins of his
adultery and murder, yet in this verse he prays not to have it taken from
him, which does argue that he had it even at this time of his greatest
extremity, though he felt it not with the same measure of comfort he had done
many times before.

Secondly, besides these plain testimonies of Scripture, let us consider a
word or two to prove, that in regard of God the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, that the elect cannot perish and fin ally fall away.

First, if a man elected of God to eternal life, called, justified, and
sanctified, may fall away, and finally perish, then it is either because God
wants love or power to save him: but to say that God is unwilling, or unable,
is mere blasphemy: therefore all those whom he elects, must needs be saved,
seeing God does both will it, and show that he is able to effect it. First, if
God be willing, and would have them saved, Romans 11. Romans 8.
who has resisted his will? If God be with us, who can be against us? but that
he is most willing and able to save the elect, it is manifest. For his will,
Ioh. 3.16.
his will, God so loved them, that he sent his Son to dye for them. Now this
is a great trial, and proof of his love and willingness, that he had rather
see his only begotten son, that was near and dear unto him, to be hanged on
the tree, to dye the cursed death on the cross, to shed his precious blood,
and to bear the curse of God, and hellish torments, then to see any one of his
elect to perish. Ioh. 6.39.40.
And this is the Fathers will that has sent me that of all which he has given
me, I should loose nothing, but raise it up at the last day.

Secondly, for his power, that he is able to save all those whom he will save,
Esaias. 63.1.
it is manifest, God is omnipotent, and most righteous, and mighty to save, and
the Lord does what he will. None can take them out of my Fathers hands which
is greater then all. Ioh. 10.27.28.
And therefore seeing God is willing, and desires that all the elect should be
saved, and not only decreed it, but sent his Son to save them.

Father keep them that thou have given me, that they may be one me, Luke
22.23. Ioh. 17.
as thou art one in me. Now then if Christ's prayer be of force, and can
prevail, and do any thing with the Father, as he confesses, that the Father
has, does, and will hear him in all things, then certainly no true believer
can perish, and finally fall away.



Romans 8.16.
the seal of our election, and does testify Gods love in Christ, for our
salvation. Now then unless we will say that the Spirit of God, who is the
spirit of Wisdom, being of the very Council of God, and the spirit of truth
that cannot lie, that he testifies untruths, that the believer that repents and
believes in Christ shall be saved, and yet he shall not, which is blasphemy,
we must needs confess it is impossible, 1. Ioh. 3.9.
He that is borne of God cannot sin (with full consent to death) because the
seed of the Spirit remains in him. And therefore I conclude that the child
of God, elected, called, justified and sanctified, cannot perish, and for ever
fall away; cannot become a Reprobate, and limb of the Devil, but shall
continue to the end, and God will finish the good work of grace in them,
Papists doctrine against the nature of faith. till the coming of Christ Jesus.

hold that a man truly elected, may become a reprobate, though to day a child
of God and highly in his favor, yet to morrow by thy sins, thou may become
a limb of the devil, out of Gods favor, in his displeasure, damned for ever:
though to day a member of Christ Jesus, called, justified, and sanctified, yet
to morrow loose all, and be damned for ever, which indeed is the breake-necke
of all comfort, if a man know not whether he shall be saved or not.

Comfort to Gods children that grace cannot be lost.
true faith, repentance, and newness of life, assure thy self it cannot ever
be lost, God will finish that he begins; yea the estate of Gods children now
is better then the estate of Adam in Paradise before his fall; for then Adam
stood by his own power, therefore might fall and did fall: 1. Pet. 1.5.
But we be kept by the power of God unto eternal life: secondly, the estate
of Gal. 2.20.
Adam was mut^ble by reason he had freedom of will, to stand or fall: but the
state of Gods elect is certain and sure, in regard of Gods eternal decree in
Christ his death and passion, and the bond of the spirit which cannot be
broken.

Three Objections.
But there be three objections against this doctrine, that faith can never be
lost, or an Elect child of God become a Reprobate: First, that God is said to
be angry with his children, and show them his disfavor: Secondly, that they by
their sins may cut themselves off from Gods favor, and so loose eternal
life and be damned: And thirdly, other testimonies of Scripture, which may
seem to prove the same.

Esaias 64.5
Behold thou art angry, for we have sinned against thee: so that it seems that
a man in the favor of GOD to day may fall out of it, and loose it, and procure
his disfavor, anger, and displeasure.

Re^p First, that God is not angry, to speak properly, with his children, but
seems so to be by correcting and punishing them, by judgments, and
afflictions; so as a child thinks his father is angry because he corrects
him, so do GODS children; and inded such affections do not agree to Gods
nature, to be like an earthly man.

Secondly I answer, that this anger of God is not an effect of his displeasure
or dis-fauour, but rather of his love: and he corrects his children not to
destroy them, but to correct them, that he might save them: as a father his
son, whom he loves dearly.

Object. 2. Where it is said, that Gods children may by their sins, break
off GODS love, yea thrust themselves out of favor, Romans 8.1.
and be for ever damned.

Answer, It is false, for they be kept from damnable sins, and God lets
their sins turn to their good, for God does ever give them hearts to repent:
the sins of the godly i^ themselves deserve the everlasting curse of God, and
eternal death: If so that Jesus Christ had not by his death and bloud-shedding
satisfied his Fathers anger for them.

Object. 3. Psalm. 69.18.
David prays that God would blot them out of the book of life, therefore it
seems a man elected may perish and be damned, for that book is meant Gods
Council.

I answer, that David does not read that ever the wicked had their names
written indeed in the book of life; or were elected indeed: but only because
they lived in the Church, were taken for Christians, and esteemed as written in
the book of life, and therefore he prays the Lord to blot them out, that is,
to make it known, that they were never written in it.

Well then, certain it is, that no one elect child of God can perish or be
damned, but shall come to life eternal and be saved, because the Council of
God stands sure, and cannot be altered.

Instruct. Seeing this is so, that none that is the elect child of God can
perish, what a sweet comfort is this, to all the children of GOD, for if ever
thou did repent and feltst the love of God truly in thy soul, and art
justified and sanctified, thou needst not fear, for surely thou shall be
saved: and this must be a sure stay to uphold our poor souls, in all danger
and temptation: We are as strangeTrauellers over the sea, there be great
storms and tempests, great rocks and dangers; the Sea is the world, the ship
is the Church, heaven the haven, the Devil raises up many boisterous storms
and temptations, to sincke our poor souls in desperation: Now then by faith
we cast Anchor upon the foundation of GODS election, which cannot be moved.

But in this place, by Favor, Face, and Countenance of God is meant, that
favor and mercy of God, whereby GOD gave David the Kingdom in the stead of
Saul, advancing him to be king of Israel, and Gods Lieutenant on earth, that
God would defend him and keep him, to govern his people Israel.

David observed Gods dealing with Saul a wicked king, The godly fear when the
remembe God his iudgeme^t^ on others
and how God plagued and punished Saul for his disobedience against the word of
God: and thereby is warned to take heed of the same judgment oi God, left they
fall on him: we learn that it is the duty of every man and woman, to observe
and mark GODS dealings with others, and his just judgment upon ungodly
sinners, that thereby we may learn to fear the like judgments on our selves,
and it is a great point of wisdom to learn to be wise by other men's harms;
and for this end the Lord does plague wicked and ungodly men, that his children
might learn to fear, even as we see notorious malefactors are hanged on a
gibbet, that others seeing their shameful ends might beware. The Lord having
punished sundry Nations about his people, says; He thought they would have
learned to fear God by their example.

David here calls to mind Saul, how he for his rebellion and disobedience was
cast off of God; so let us call to mind the spectacle of GODS judgments on
wicked men, and take heed of their sins, lest we taste of their plagues and
punishment.

Sin takes away the feeling of Gods favor for a time.
that for sin the Lord does deprive his children of his favor, and as it
were, cast them out of his presence for the time: thus we shall see GOD has
spoiled men of great riches and honor for their sins, and brought them to
extreme shame and misery:look on Ely and his two sons, look on Saul that
wicked king, 1. Sam. 3. 1. Sam. 15. Dan. 4.26. Ester 3. Use.
look on that persecuting tyrant Nebuchadnezzar, Haman, Achitophel. etc.

This should admonish all men to take heed of sin and rebellion against God,
for certainly the Lord will abase all such as be proud against the Lord, he
will cast them out of his presence, make their names to rotte and stink in the
sight of men; those that honor me I will honor: 1. Sam. 2.3
But those that dishonor me I will dishonor them: and therefore if you would
not be dishonored in the world, and provoke the Lord to cast you out of his
presence and favor, O then beware how you sin and rebel against God! for if
thou be as dear to God as Ely, which was Gods high Priest, yet he will bring
shame upon thy head.

Folly of worldlings described.
who desiring to enjoy their honors, riches, and dignities, profits, and
preferrements, they take a most preposterous, and very wrong course, for how
do men seek for preferment, honor, and promotion, lands, and livings? namely by
oppression, bribery, usury, extortion, and the like: now alas we see that is a
vain course, and the next way to strip a man naked of all these things, and to
bring him to shame, and reproach, misery and poverty, for sin brings all these
things upon them.

But if you would come to honor and dignity, riches, preferment, then seek to
keep the favor of God, serve him, worship him, honor him, and he will honor
them that do so: and if thou seek these things by wicked and unlawful
means, certainly the Lord will cast dung in thy face.

Secondly, when David prays, that God would not take his holy Spirit from him,
he means not the essence of the three Persons, but his gifts and graces, the
virtues of GODS Spirit sanctifying his heart and renewing of him: so then we
understand these words, we must consider this objection.

Quest. Whether that the gifts and graces of the holy Spirit wrought in the
heart of Gods children can be totally and finally lost as David's words seem to
imply.

Graces of God double.
For the clear answer of this question, we must know that the gifts of GODS
Spirit be first temporary for this life; or else spiritual for the life to
come: now of the former there is no question but the temporary gifts of the
Spirit may be lost utterly.

Again, the spiritual gifts and virtues of the spirit be of two sorts, some
common to the elect and reprobate, some proper and peculiar to Gods Elect and
chosen children: now concerning the common gifts of Gods Spirit which be
common to the wicked, as well as the godly, to hear the word, to preach the
word, and to do such like things they may be lost.

Thirdly, the gifts of GODS spirit are such as either are essential to faith,
and without which, faith cannot be, or else the effects and fruits of faith,
which are not of the essence of faith, such gifts of the Spirit as be not of
the essence of faith nor absolute necessary to eternal life, the Lord does
sometimes take away for a time, as namely the purity of a good conscience, that
that inward peace which does company it, the sense and feeling of Gods love in
Christ, and his especial favor, cheerefulnes of spirit in prayer, hearing,
and such holy duties, joy in the Holy Ghost, patience the gift of prayer, and
such like, because the love of GOD and the salvation of the faithful may stand
without these for a time.

But to speak of the saving graces of Gods sanctified spirit, as faith in Gods
promises, hope of eternal life, affiance in Gods mercy in Jesus Christ, love
of G OD his word and children, these graces can never be lost wholely: true it
is they may be weakened and lessened, and somtime^ seem to be lost for the
time: but yet certain it is they can not be wholly and finally lost, they may
be as the Sun under a cloud, and as fire raked up in the ashes, or as the trees
in winter, but they can not be extinguished, lost, and taken clean away: but
as the Sun shines clear, the clouds being scattered: and the fire gives
light and heat being stirred: so faith, hope, affiance, joy, comfort, peace of
conscience, and feeling of GODS love, are renewed and show themselves clear
again.

Comfort to the godly that grace can not be lost
this is matter of endless comfort to every true child of God in the time of
temptation and grievous trial: for if ever thou foundest and feltest in thy
heart true faith in JESUS CHRIST, sound repentance, hope of eternal life, love
of God: howsoever these may be much weakened, and for a time in thy sense and
feeling seem be lost, yet they can never be taken away: yea, if thou do
carefully attend the means, as namely, the sincere preaching of the word,
administration of the Sacraments, continual, humble and earnest prayer, the
Lord will revive them and renew them again.

mouth is out of temper, but when he comes to health he judges otherwise:
even so these poor distressed souls in their trouble and affliction they
speak they know not what, not as their estate is in truth, but as they think
it to be, according to their present sense and feeling.

Hebr. 6. A man may be enlightened, tasted of the heavenly gift, were partakers
of the holy Ghost, tasted of the word of God, and of the powers of the world to
come: such men notwithstanding may fall away, and that finally.

I answer, that there is nothing spoken there of the true work of grace and
sanctification, of saving faith, sound repentance, hearty obedience, and a new
life: but only of such common gifts as may befall a reprobate, and therefore
Saint John shows the cause why they fall away; namely, they were never true
and lively members of the Church, or of Jesus Christ: never truly engraffed
into his mystical body, Ioh. 2.19.
they had knowledge, and were enlightened, tasted of the heavenly gifts, and
graces of Gods Spirit, and had some glimmering of the ioys of the life to come,
which the child of GOD inioyes: but the sound work of grace, a renewed heart,
faith, repentance, obedience, and a sanctified life was ever wanting, they were
but hypocrites, They went out from us, but they were not of us: Mat. 7.21, 22.
for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us.

And therefore it behooves us all to take heed that we content not our selves
with the common gifts and graces of the holy Ghost: which a reprobate may
have, for it is certain most excellent gifts will not avail a man to
salvation, unless there be the true work of grace, saving faith, sound
repentance, and hearty obedience.

VERSE. 12.13. 12. Restore me to the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me
with thy free Spirit. 13. Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and the
sinners shall be converted unto thee.
Parts of the verses
THese words contain in themselves and earnest prayer of David unto GOD for the
renewing Of GODS mercy, and feeling of his love again, in the 12. verse: In the
13. verse he uses a reason to move the Lord thereunto: namely, that if the Lord
shall receive him into favor again, and testify his love unto him, in the
pardon of his sins, then he will not be unmindful of Gods dealing with him, but
become a Preacher and proclaimer of Gods mercy unto others, to draw them to
GOD, in showing what GOD has done for his soul: and so that by the example of
Gods mercy to him, others should be won.

In the 12. verse he makes a twofold petition unto God: First, for the former
feeling and assurance of Gods love and mercy for the pardon of his sins.
Secondly, that God would uphold him with his free spirit, so as now being
delivered out of the cursed thraldom and slavery of sin, he might frankely
and freely serve the Lord, and run the way of his Commandments.

[Restore me to the joy of thy salvation.]
No joy can comfort man's soul, but the joy of Gods salvation.
AS if he should have said, O Lord my GOD, I acknowledge and confess, that all
the while I served thee, and lived in thy fear, led a holy and godly life,
and kept an upright heart, that I found wonderful and exceeding joy in the
assurance of thy love and mercy in Christ for my salvation: but since I
rebelled against thee, and wilfully brake thy holy Commandments, I have
deprived my soul of that heavenly comfort and consolation, and felt errors
and grief, fears and cares, and exceeding vexation. Now merciful GOD, I
humbly entreat thee to restore me again to that joy and comfort, to assure me
of thy love and favor, that thou art graciously reconciled unto me, that I may
receive my former comfort: And not only that, but because I see how weak I
am, and have no power to stand without thy help and grace, I humbly entreat
thee to stay and strengthen me, to stablish thy grace in me, and so to uphold
me in thy obedience, that I may freely and heartily obey thee all my days.

Fruit of sin described. Note.
and sanctified by GOD spirit, if he once fall against GOD, and provoke him to
anger by wilful disobedience, does feel exceeding grief and sorrow of heart,
great grief and trouble of mind, fears and cares lest the Lord should reject
him: so that there is an hell in his poor soul and wounded conscience till
he be again reconciled to GOD by faith and true repentance. So long as David
walked with God in uprightness of his heart, he had exceeding joy and comfort
in the Lord his GOD, was assured of his love for pardon of his sins, and
eternal salvation: but when he fell to adultery and murder, and so rebelled
against God, it is wonderful to see into what a gulf of misery he plunged
himself, what fears and cares, what doubts and troubles did vex his soul,
and wounded conscience. Even so it is with all the godly, while they live in
the fear of God, serve and please him, and keep an upright heart before the
Lord, lead a godly and christian life, they feel and find in themselves
exceeding joy and wonderful comfort, with assurance of Gods love in Christ for
their salvation: but if as any time they break out to sin, and rebel
against God by wilful disobedience, then they shall find an hell in their
consciences: troubles, fears, and cares for the time. Who can tell what fears
and cares Peter felt? Luke 23.
in what grief and sorrow of heart he was in, when cowardly he denied his
Lord and Master? It cost him many a bitter tear. The reason of this doctrine
is, because all peace and comfort to a poor soul, springs from the sense and
comfortable feeling of Gods love in CHRIST JESUS for the pardon of sin and
eternal salvation: and therefore when that is lost, alas! what peace or
comfort can they have? Secondly, they do by such wilful sin and disobedience
grieve the spirit, and make the Holy Ghost sad within them: and so do what
they can to expel the Spirit of God in them. Now where the Spirit of God is
made sad and grieved, how can there be any true joy?

while we walk with GOD, and serve and please him in spirit and truth: and
when men sin and rebel against God, they pull down upon their heads such
woeful misery, troubles, and cares, how should this make every man exceeding
careful of sin, which brings such woeful miseries and judgments unto our
own souls, such torments fears and cares?

[To the joy of thy salvation.]
AS if he should have said, o Lord my God, when thou did assure me of thy
love and favor for the pardon of my sins, and eternal salvation, I had
exceeding joy therein. Now I do humbly entreat thee to restore it to me
again.

Favor of God is a Christians chiefest joy.
Hence mark what is the thing the child of God does most desire and crave at
Gods hands, and wherein they do most rejoice: namely, in the favor of GOD, and
assurance of Gods love in Christ Jesus, that they know that God is graciously
reconciled unto them, that they be in his favor, and shall never perish, but
shall everlastingly be saved. David was a King and wanted no temporal
commodity, comfort, or delight whatsoever, wherein worldly men rejoice, but
David now conceived no kind of joy at all in these things to be out of Gods
favor: And therefore prays unto God for the feeling of the true joy, and that
is of His Salvation, and that will minister unto him matter of true rejoicing
indeed; But alas most men being carnal, desire riches, honor, pleasure, Psalm.
4.6.7.
But Lord let me see thy loving countenance, thy favor and grace, and that
shall do me more good and comfort then all the things in the world. The poor
Publican begges for this; Lord be merciful to me a sinner. So Paul professes
of himself, Luke 8. Phil. 3.7.8.
that he esteemed all things but dung in comparison of CHRIST JESUS, and the
favor of God in him: And the reason is plain, because if a man had all the
world, and wanted the love and favor of GOD, was in his displeasure, Mat. 16.26
and under the curse of God, what good could it do him? Even as if a Subject
should have ten thousand pounds, and yet the King cannot abide him, but seek
his death. And therefore the child of God if he were asked what is the thing
he desires most in all the world, would answer, Mercy, and the love of GOD in
JESUS CHRIST: he would despise honors, lands, Psalm. 32.1.2
livings, gold, silver, pleasures, and delights, and prefer one dram of
mercy, and the least drop of Christ's blood for salvation, before all the world.

and love, desire not reconcliation, but say: Who will show us any good? Well,
did thou never feel the want of GODS mercy, no hungring and thirsting
after JESUS CHRIST and his righteousness, it is manifest thou do not belong
to GOD, thou waste never yet truly humbled.

with Paul to esteem all things but dung in comparison of that. And till this
be in us in some measure, we can never find true comfort to our souls, and
be assured that we have true sauing-faith in Christ: For this is a certain
fruit and note of an humble and believing heart, to hunger and thirst after
Gods mercy in Christ, and to esteem more highly of the least drop of Christ
his precious Blood for our salvation, then of all the world if it were offered
unto us.

Knock, Seek, Ask; Math. 7.7. Acts 13.20.
And let us do as the men of Tyrus and Sydon, when Herod took a pitch against
them, and intended to war against them, they came all with one accord, and
besought Blastus, the Kings Chamberlain to have peace. So let us go unto JESUS
CHRIST the Peacemaker, desire him to speak to GOD the Father for us, that
there may be an everlasting peace.

David prays that God would restore unto him, State of Gods children not
always alike.
The joy of his Salvation, and those sweet comforts he was wont to feel and
find in Gods mercy, and feeling of his love in Christ, we learn that the
state of Gods children is not always alike, full of joy, comfort, and
gladness, but sometimes full of grief, misery, cares, and trouble: For the
dearest children of God, who are replenished with the greatest measure of joy
and comfort in the feeling and assurance of Gods love in Christ; when as the
Lord leaves them to fall into some sin against knowledge and conscience, they
shall find, not only a great decay, but an utter loss of joy and comfort for
the time. Thus it was with David, who though he was a man after Gods own heart,
enriched with great blessings, and spiritual mercies, most dearly beloved of
God, sanctified in great measure; yet now having fallen into these two filthy
sins of Adultery and Murder, see how he if perplexed, in great distress, and
trouble of mind: and now the feeling of Gods mercy, and joy in Gods Spirit,
seemed to be clean lost. So it was in Peter, Luke 23.
and so it is in every child of God. Did thou ever sin against knowledge
and conscience, since thou wast converted? thou shall find then a wonderful
deadness of heart, trouble of mind, and feeling of Gods anger, with the loss
of comfort for a time.

and conscience; and labor in all things, in all places, and at all times, to
live and walk so upright with GOD, that thou never wound thy conscience,
though thou might get the greatest gain, honor, or pleasure: yet if it be
sin, and that against knowledge and conscience abhor it, and commit it not,
if thou love thy own soul: for if sins of ignorance shall not escape
punishment, unless men repent, much more sins against knowledge and
conscience: for these provoke the Lord exceedingly to turn away his favor
from us, draw down his judgments upon us: wound the conscience, deprive us of
the feeling of Gods love and favor sins against knowledge and conscience,
they wound especially and deprive us of peace of conscience.



David this holy servant of GOD did rejoice, Pardon of sin the soundest joy.
not in gold or silver, not pleasures and carnal delights, not in lands, and
livings, not in a Kingdom: but in the salvation of GOD, in his love, in pardon
of his sins, and salvation of his soul: So as hence we learn that there is
no true joy in any other thing in the world, but only in the mercy of God, and
the salvation of our souls. Phil. 3.8. Luke 10.20


And indeed what other joy can there be, for though the Lord should give us
all things which he has made, abundance of the things of this life; yea,
though with David we might command a kingdom, yet unless with all we have
this comfort that we are at peace with God, and have our sins pardoned,
(alas) they would all prove unto us as Jobs friends; Miserable Comforters: But
poor souls many know no other joy but such as arises from temporal things,
gold, silver, etc. wherein they differ not from beasts, which have their
delight, as well as they, in those things which are agreeable to their nature.

David places all his joy and spiritual rejoicing in the salvation of God,
that is in the pardon of his sins, in feeling of GODS love, and in the
salvation of his soul, therefore it shows, that there is no other cause of
sound joy but in this alone; so that if we have this, we have cause to rejoice
and be glad; but if this be wanting, either we had never the feeling of GODS
love, nor assurance of salvation, or else have lost it, and therefore should
use all blessed means to attain unto it again, for we cannot have one dram
of saving comfort and true joy, but only in the favor of God, and the
assurance of his love for our salvation.

what joy can they have? it is madness rather then joy and mirth* David says,
that wicked men joy in their Corn, Wine, and Oil, Psalm. 4.7.
outward and worldly things: but he desires the loving countenance of the Lord
his favor and grace, which shall make him to joy more then all they in their
vanities: and then he will lie down in rest, and peace, and safety: whereas
the joy of wicked men, it is gone in a moment, utterly lost and past recovery
for ever.

[And stablish me with thy free Spirit.]
Part of the varse.
namely, the blessed grace of corroboration; to be strengthened in grace and
obedience and kept from sin by the grace and spirit of God in time to come: As
if he should have said, O Lord my God I do not only the pardon of my sins
past, which are many and great: but I do humbly entreat thy Majesty to give
me power, and to strengthen me against the like evils in time to come, for I
know my weakness and the wickedness of my heart to be prone to all sin by
nature: Note.
and if thou should pardon my sins past, and not keep me from sin in
time to come, I should easily mar all, and run headlong into all sin,
and therefore I beseech thy Majesty stablish and strengthen me with grace from
thy spirit, that I may serve and please thee all my days, with a willing and
ready heart.

[Stablish me:]
THe word signifies properly, to underprop and shore up something that is
weak, declining, and ready to fall.

of Gods children, that have the greatest graces, Man weak being left to
himself.
and be strengthened in faith, yet if they be left unto themselves, alas! they
be as weak as water, they be not able to stand against the least assault and
temptation of the devil. This David felt and found in himself, Ex. 15 24.
Ier. 13.23. Psalm. 78.40. Exodus 9.27. Judge. 3.12. Mat. 12.45 Heb. 6.
and confesses his weakness, and desires the Lord to establish and uphold
him, to shore him up by the grace of his holy Spirit. Peter who seemed to be a
valiant champion, and defied his enemies, and vowed he would rather die then
deny his Lord and Master CHRIST JESUS, yet being left to himself, how foully
did he fall, and cowardly deny him three times in one hour at the voice of a
little girl; so all the false and infirmities of Gods children, though never
so, wise as Solomon, strong as Sampson, righteous as Lot, holy as David, does
prove this to be true: And Paul though he was a blessed vessel of mercy,
greatly enlightened and sanctified, cries out: O wretched man that I am; Romans
7.24.
and fears the great corruptions of his heart: The child of GOD may be
compared to a staff in a man's hand, so long as thou do stay it and hold it,
it will stand upright, but pull away your hand and down it will of it self:
Even so do we stand, while the Lord do stay us and uphold us, but if he take
away his hand and leave us, down we go: we be like a little infant that is
in the nurses hand, so long as she holds it, it will go, and move, and stand,
but if she pull away her hand it falls, and takes a knock: As GOD alone is the
Author of all grace, and first Fountain of all mercy, he alone can turn the
heart, work faith, repentance, and obedience, for it is GOD alone that must
give the second grace, namely corroboration, continuance in grace, or grace to
continue in faith and obedience.

ex condigno, give him grace to continue, and that a man being once just can
make himself more just, but David does hear confess that all is of GOD.

Psalm. 30.6.
but of all men these be in greatest danger that least fear danger; 1. Cor.
10.12.
look on Peter he was never more weak then when he thought himself most
strong: I said I shall never be moved: But thou turned^t away thy f^ce and I
was sore troubled. Pride goes before the fall.

Blessed is the man that fears always, but he that burdeneth his heart shall
fall into destruction or evil, where Solomon shows that that man that does
fear himself and his own weakness is happy: but he that is secure and
trusts in himself, shall certainly fall into evil: the secure sinner that
fears no danger is the greatest sinner. And therefore knowing our own
weakness, how unable we are to stand of our s^lues, it must make us r^lie
upon the Lord, pray unto him, that he would uphold us in integrity, faith,
obedience, and true rep^ntance; for if David, Peter, etc. did fall, whither
shall we fall, if the Lord do but a little leave us to our selves?

VERSE 13. 13 Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be
converted unto thee.
David to his petitions ioyns promises.
IN this Verse David does profess unto the Lord that if he shall deal thus
graciously with him to pardon and remit his great and grievous sins, and to
receive him again into his love and favor, that he will not be unmindful and
unthankful for so great a mercy; but he will become a Preacher and proclaimer
of Gods mercy to others, and labor to turn many to God by true repentance.

Parts of the verse.
In this verse we have two parts: First, that promise which David makes unto
the Lord, and the duty be vows unto him; namely, I will teach thy ways unto
the wicked. Secondly, the issue and blessed effect; namely this, that by his
example many poor sinners shall repent, and come to God for mercy.

[Then shall I teach]
THat is, Sense.
after I shall find, and feel thy mercy bestowed upon me, I will like a
vessel of mercy, draw it out to the good of others. I will, that is, I that
have fallen, and sinned so grievously, and transgressed thy commandments, will
teach and publish how merciful, good and gracious thou have been to me, and to
my soul, and will speak out of the sense and feeling of mine own conscience.

[Thy ways,]
BY the ways of GOD here is meant that course and manner of dealing which the
Lord takes with sinners when they do truly repent; namely, that he is most
ready and willing to embrace them, and show mercy unto them, when they shall
acknowledge and confess their sins, bewail them, beg the pardon of them,
and seek to him for mercy.

The goodness of God toward our selves must be made known.
Seeing David does here profess, that if God shall deal thus graciously with
him, that when he will be a proclaimer of the same mercy to others: We learn
that it is the duty of every one to show unto others what GOD has done for
his soul, when God is good and gracious unto us, we must be still ready to
acknowledge the same unto others, thereby to draw them on likewise to a liking
of the truth, and to seek for the same favor and grace at Gods hands, Matthew.
5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good works,
may glorify your Father whch is in Heaven. Thus the Spirit of GOD in the
Scriptures remembers the righteousness of Noah, the faith and obedience of
Abraham, the patience of Job, the chastity of Joseph, the meekness of Moses.
And Christ himself does testify of the graces of God that shined in John
Baptist, That he was a burning and a shining light, John 5. Thus the Apostle
Peter teaches 1. Pet. 2. Have your conversation honest amongst the Gentiles,
that they which speak evil of you as of evil doers, may by your good works
which they shall see, glorify GOD in the day of visitation, 1. Corinthians
chapter 9. verse. 11, 12. 2. Corinthians 8.1.2. Romans 4.22.23.

Matthew. 10.27. he commanded his Apostles to speak that in the light, which
he had told them in darkness: And to preach that in the house tops, which
he had told them in the ear; for now would CHRIST have himself published
abroad: and thus we see how to behave our selves in respect of Gods gifts, we
must not be ashamed to confess them, but deface them.

David here profess unto the Lord, Thankefulnes required.
that he will not be unmindful and unthankful for his mercy showed unto him,
but will, to the uttermost of his power, praise God for it, and show his
thankfulness, in drawing others to God. Hence we learn, that it is the
duty of all the children of God, that they should labor with their own
souls, to be thankful unto God for every blessing he bestows upon them, to
be mindful of it, to praise God for it, and to show it in doing good to
others: It is all the Lord looks for at our hands, to acknowledge his love and
kindness, to be thankful for it; and when we shall be truly thankful for a
benefit received, it is an excellent means to move the Lord to bestow a new
blessing upon us: as we see, if a poor man shall receive a small favor at our
hands, and shall be thankful for it, Phil. 4.4. Exo. 18.10
we will say he is worthy to have a good turn, it is well bestowed, Psa.
126.1. Genesis 14 19 Psa. 32.21. Psalm. 33.1.
I see he is thankful for it: So when the Lord bestows a benefit upon a
man, and sees he is thankful for it, and speaks of it to the honor of God,
the Lord is moved thereby to bestow an other: but he that is unthankful for
the old, is not worthy to receive a new.

Rejoice ye righteous in the Lord, for it becomes upright men to be
thankful. Psalm. 33.1.
It is a comely and most fit thing; and David calls upon his soul oft-times to
perform this duty; Praise thou the Lord, O my soul, Psa. 103.2.
and all that is within me praise his holy name: praise thou the Lord, O my
soul, and forget not all his benefits.

And above all other mercies, let us bless God for his love in Christ, for the
pardon of our sins, as David does here, and Psalm 103. Forget not all his
benefits, who gave thee pardon of thy sins: and forgave thee all t^in^
iniqui^ies: And therefore let us remember this duty, and think more
seriously of GODS blessings and benefits bestowed upon us: the greatness of
them, and number, and continuance of them; and so labor in some measure, to be
thankful unto GOD: and especially for the pardon of our sins in Christ
Jesus, and withal, let us show it in doing what good we can unto others.

David call on our souls not to forget his benefits.

It is a note of an unthankful heart to obtain a benefit, and not to
acknowledge it; praise is comely, and well becomes the Saints of God: The
want whereof takes away the comfort and sweet fruit of GODS blessing from us.
It is a great offense to be unthankful unto men, but far greater to God, in
whom we live, move, and have our being. And therefore let us learn, that
whenever we have obtained any favor or blessing at GODS hands, be it
concerning this life, or the life to come. Let us return the calves of our
lips unto him; and let us never show our selves more ready to ask, Then we
are willing to praise the Lord when he has granted the requests of our lips.

Fruit of Faith to seek the good of others.
to convey grace unto others, to show what God has done for our souls, and to
draw out the blessings which God has bestowed upon us, to the good and benefit
of others. The Prophet David calls all men unto him, and makes his speech;
Come (says he) I will show you what God has done for my Soul: Psa. 66.16
and the Elect are called vessels of Mercy, because they being themselves
filled with the mercy of GOD, they should draw out the same, as good liquor,
for the comfort of others. Psalm. 116. Galat. 3. 2. Cor. 1.4. Esa. 38.19 Luke
22.23
Saint Paul says; God had mercy on him, that he might show mercy unto
others. The child of God is not like unto churlish Nabal, to say; Every man for
himself, and keep all for themselves; but they be pitiful and bountiful;
yea, and (to their power) helpefull unto others.

to exhort them, to admonish them, to comfort them, and in all things to have
sought their good. O what a wonderful consolation and comfort shall this be
unto us when we leave this world, and go the way of all flesh, to remember
we have sought the good of others, Daniel 13. ve. 3: They that turn many to
righteousness shall shine as the Stars in the firmament, Luke 12.43. Blessed
is that servant when his Master comes shall find so doing: We shall find
more comfort of heart, and joy of conscience, when we depart this life, that
we have been faithful in that little committed to our trust, and made others
partakers of it, then if we had great abundance of earthly blessings.

others, like a covetous and foolish Nabal, part not with a bitte to David: so
these keep all for themselves, by no means seek to draw out the graces of
God for the good of others: but it is impossible for any Christian man or
woman, who has tasted truly of the mercy of GOD for his comfort, and the
work of grace; but he must communicate the same to the good of others; and
indeed they are never so profitable as then: as we see spices, though never so
sweet, are not profitable until they be rubbed and chafed: and therefore let
us remember to practice this duty to help others, and to teach them, and
communicate our knowledge, Esa 38.19.
comfort, experience, and judgment to the good of others.

David says he will teach, What doctrines Ministers ought to teach.
not his own ways, but Gods ways; namely, how the Lord deals with penitent
sinners, we learn what is that the Ministers of the Word ought especially
teach to poor sinners; namely, The ways of GOD, that is, how God deals with
poor sinners; namely, that he is most willing to embrace them, and to pardon
their sins, if they will unfeignedly repent. Christ was exceeding plentiful
in this kind of teaching, Matt. 11.28
howsoever he did sometimes pronounce judgments to impenitent sinners, yet it
was his usual course to preach Gods infinite mercy to all such as would
repent, Romans 12.1 2. Corint. 5.18.19.
to inuit them, and allure them to turn to God.

grace in men's hearts, Revel. 3. Luke 15.
when they shall hear of Gods abundant mercy in Christ, that the Lord
stands at the door and knock, that the Lord is like the Father of the
Prodigal child, will meet us in the midway. It must needs, if there be not
a heart of steel, make our bowels erne, and for shame to seek unto the Lord.

And it was Paul's manner to entreat men that they would be reconciled to
God, to beseech them in his name, with love and kindness, with tears and
prayers, to pray them, to entreat them, to beseech his hearers: and we shall
find, that churlish, rough, and harsh dealing, great words, and thundering
speeches, be not always the best to win men's Souls: But when we shall with a
mild and loving spirit entreat men, and beseech them to repent and turn to
God, it must needs affect them.

and listening to the word of GOD: For a man can not know the ways of God by
nature: No, by nature we conceive of GOD as a terrible Judge, and angry GOD,
and fly from him, as Adam did: and therefore we had need to have the word of
GOD taught unto us, and be instructed in the ways of God, how the Lord God
has showed mercy unto great sinners, and will to us, if we can repent, and
seek unto him: For the Lord must draw us by his mercy, else we can not come
at him.

[To the wicked: and sinners shall be converted unto thee.]
ignorant are to be taught the ways of God.
that live in sin, without repentance. Hence mark who had need to be taught
in the ways of GOD: namely, poor sinners, that live and lie in sin, even the
lost sheep of the house of Israel; Math. 1^.
such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, such as never heard of
GOD, of faith, repentance, etc. such poor Souls had need to be taught the
ways of God.

Paul says, To. 10.14. Pro. 29.18 Mark 14.
How shall they call on him, on whom they have not believed? How shall they
believe on him, of whom they have not heard? How shall they hear without a
Preacher? And, where prophesying fails, the people perish. And it is said of
our Savior CHRIST, that when he saw the people, as poor sheep, having no
sheepeheard, he had compassion on them, and his bowels erned toward them. Oh
that the bowels of all such as have charge to look unto it, might erne for the
poor souls of the land, to provide for them the bread of life.

be so vile, wicked, and unclean, is, because they be not taught the word
and ways of GOD, it could not be if they were taught and instructed, that
they should be so vile and wicked, so ignorant, profane, irreligious, and
superstitious: but where visions fails, the people must needs perish.

And therefore those that seek to take away Teaching and Preaching of the Word
of GOD, of what Spirits are they? David he thinks it the only way to bring
men to God, to conuer poor sinners: and therefore to take it away, to root
out the Ministry of the Word, and means of salvation, what is it else but to
cast away the souls of the people? to famish them, to pine them, and to starve
them. And therefore let us pray to GOD with CHRIST, that the Lord of the
harvest would send forth Laborers into his Harvest. Math. 9.


Part of the verse.
that David will perform: namely, that hereby, by his doctrine, and by his
example, many a poor sinner shall be converted unto God.

Conversion of a sinner is Gods work.
a means to bring others to God. Hence we may learn a gracious comfort for
all godly Ministers of the word, who labor both by life and doctrine to win
others; that if they shall be painful in teaching, and careful to live a
godly life, they shall certainly find the blessing of God upon their labors,
to the converting of sinners, and saving of souls. If I had sent these
Prophets, and if they had stood in my counsel, and declared my ways unto my
people, Ier. 23.22
then they should have turned them from their evil ways and from the
wickedness of their inventions.

Where the Lord shows that all such as be the true Prophets of God, stand in
his steed, teach his ways, they shall see the blessing of GOD upon their
labors: And the cause why men convert not souls, is, because they were never
sent of GOD, and do not teach Gods ways, and stand not in his steed; or else
because, though they teach the truth, yet their lives be vile and wicked; they
pluck down with one hand, that they build with the other, and destroy that in
life, which they teach in doctrine.

and simplicity, and live according to their teaching, the Lord does bless
their labors for the conversion of sinners, and saving of poor souls.

When thou art converted strengthen thy brethren; Luke 22.
And let no such careless Ministers wonder that GOD gives no blessing to their
labors, seeing they fail either in teaching GODS ways truly and plainly,
or else in life they live wickedly and offensive.

VERSE. 14. 14 Deliver me from blood o God, the God of my salvation, and my
tongue shall sing joyfully of thy righteousness.
David cannot satisfy himself in seeking mercy for his sins.
IN this verse, yet once again, David returns to entreat for mercy and favor
at the hands of God, that he would pardon his great and grievous sins, yea his
bloody sin: and that God would in mercy deliver him from that punishment
which was due unto him for the same, for he entreats the Lord to deliver him
from blood, that is, his heinous and capital sin of murder, and shedding
that innocent blood of Vrias his faithful servant, 2. Sam. 11.
and many others with him, so also the punishment due unto it.

Parts of the verse.
This verse contains two parts, first, a request with great earnestness to God
for deliverance from his grievous sin, Deliver me from blood: secondly, a
reason to move the Lord thereunto; namely, taken from the glory of GOD, which
he will show forth: And my tongue shall sing joyfully of thy rightenesse.

In the petition, first mark what is the request; namely, that GOD would
deliver him from blood: that is, a most cruel and bloody sin of shedding the
inocent blood of many of his Subjects: Secondly, the manner of his request. O
God thou that art the God of my salvation, That he prays to God now with
faith, assuting himself, that upon his repentance God was now reconciled unto
him: and though he had sinned grievously yet not clean fallen from grace: but
so, as still he could call GOD, his GOD, and the GOD of his salvation.

[Deliuer me from blood.]
THat is, from the punishment which is due unto me, for shedding the innocent
blood of Vrias and the rest, which were slain with him.

David prayed often and earnestly unto God for the pardon of his sins, The
heynousnesse of the sin of murder.
he could not at one or two petitions obtain it, but is feign to pray again,
and again for pardon: Hence we learn that murder and shedding of innocent
blood is a most horrible sin; and he that is guilty of blood it will wound
his conscience, it will make him to quake and tremble at GODS vengeance, which
pursues him unless he repent, as in Cain, Genesis 4.
after he had slain his brother, and the Lord had brought him to a sight of
his cruel murder, he cries out, that his sin is greater then could be
forgiven, and that every one that meets him would kill ^im, such is the
conscience guilty of murder, it can find no rest, no ease, in company, or
alone, in any thing, but torment of conscience till GOD give grace to repent.

Neither may we think that this guilt and terror of conscience comes
through the guiltiness of the Law, shame of the world, or fear of punishment;
for let a sinner have security given him from all Law, and freedom from all
punishment, yet a Murderer should never be quiet, his conscience would ever
trouble and torment him, yea and follow him up and down in all places and open
his own mouth to bewray himself: Thus is GODS judgment upon them that should
fear all things, who will not fear him that made all things: If a man had all
the pleasures that heart could desire, yet can they give no true comfort and
contentment when the conscience is guilty of horrible sins: And albeit for a
time the conscience of carnal men that never truly repented of their sins,
seems to be at rest, yet it is as a wild and savage beast, which lying a
sleep seems tame and gentle, but being raised and roused up flies in a man's
face. Genesis 42.21.

Genesis 9.6.
Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man his blood shall be shed for in the Image
of God may he him: And this was one special thing which moved David to
entreat the Lord, not only to pardon his bloody sin of killing Vrias, but
also that he would not punish him, and bring his vengeance upon him and his
children after him, for shedding of his blood. Well then abhor this fearful
sin of murder, for blood will have blood, and will cry for vengeance to
heaven: And here we are to bewail our sinful times, that shedding of
blood is not punished more severely; wilful murder is winked at, and made but
a money matter; Yea (says the Lord) because of oaths the land shall Mourn;
Ier. 23.10. Hos. 4.
so for murder it shall mourn: well, let us beware of this foul sin of
murder, and shun all occasions that tend to it, as hatred, desire of revenge,
quarrelling, fighting, etc.

Ezech. 3.
that sheddes the blood not of one, but of many a poor soul? And such be all
those, which either teach not the word of GOD at all, or teach it negligently,
they be soule-murderers, and shall give a fearful account for it one day.

David was a great King, a man that was above all men's laws, yet the
conscience of his sin accused him, and he could have no rest till he had got
the pardon of it: so as we see the great force of man's conscience, Esaias 6.6.24.
Mark. 9.44 Psalm. 29.3.4.5.7.
though he could escape all the judgments of men, yet conscience will accuse
till God do clear him, and this we may see in many men, who being guilty of
this sin, though they have by money or friends got pardon and freedom by the
law of man, yet if God touch them for it, they can never have peace, till they
have bewailed this sin, and got the pardon from God: but some of them even
pine and languish away, and never look up all their days, such is the
conscience of murder and shedding innocent blood, that he may fly a thousand
miles, he may be a great man, a king, that no man dare call him to account, yet
he carries that in his bosom which will dog him, and pursue him, neither shall
he find rest, till he have repented, and be reconciled to GOD by the blood
of Christ Jesus.

God has mercy for such as seek mercy.
notorious wicked livers, that if they can repent, be humbled, bewail their
sins, beg pardon, the Lord will show them mercy: David here found favor for
the pardon of his bloody sins, Adultery and Murder, upon his true repentance:
So Peter for his grievous and heinous sin, Luke 8.2.
and Mary Magdalene, out of whom went seven devils, was saved: Lot though he
committed incest with his own daughters yet sound favor at Gods hands, so as
we see great sinners, if they can repent, shall find great mercy.

This is warranted from the Lords own mouth, Esaias 1.18. Though your sins
were as crimson they shall be made as white as snow, though they were red like
scarlet they shall be as wool: And again, Esaias the forty four chapter, and
two and twentyeth verse, I have put away thy transgressions like a cloud, and
thy sins as a mist, Esaias 33.24. and Esaias 43.25. Ier. 31.31.

Esaias 1.16.18.
cry to God for mercy and pardon of it, the Lord will show thee mercy, so as no
sin though never so great can sever thee and cut thee off from mercy, if thou
have grace to repent, and beg the pardon of it: And therefore though thy sins
have been many and great, adultery, murder, etc. take heed thou dispairest not
with Caine to say, my sin is greater then can be forgiven: but repent with
David, and GOD will pardon it.

Romans 2.4.


David prays and intreates the Lord not only to deliver him from sin; The
punishment of sin should terrify us from sinning.
but also from the punishment due to his sin, that curse of God which was due
to his grievous sins of adultery and murder, as the Prophet told him,
because he had done this evil, The sword should never depart from his house,
2. Sam. 12.
and his own sons should defile his wives. We learn in regard of GODS
fearful judgments, plagues, and punishments that attend and wait upon
sin, to be afraid to commit sin against GOD, for sure it is, that the
curse follows sin, and as sin grows, so grows the curse, for the Lord is
a just GOD, and must needs punish the transgressors of his Law: And although
he take not his loving kindness from them, neither suffer his truth to fail,
yet he will visit their trangressions with the rod, and their sins with
scourges, as we may see here by the example of David, of the people of
Israel, Judges the fourth chapter, the first and second verses: of Miriam,
Numb. 12. of Solomon, Asa, Iehosaphat, Josiah, Hezekiah, etc. If then we
break his Statutes and keep not his Commandments, when he searches with
lights and finds out our sins, we must with Achan give the glory to God and
make confession unto him; we must pronounce righteousness to belong unto him,
and unto our selves open shame and confusion of face for ever.

but if that will not, yet let his justice terrify and fright al secure and
careless sinners.

Deuteronomy. 14.
If any man hear the curses of Gods law against sin, and shall bless
himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace although I walk after the
stubbornenesse of my heart, then the Lord will not be merciful to that man,
but the wrath of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against him, and he
shall bring upon him every curse written in this law to root him clean out;
Note.
I will visit those that be frozen in their degrees, and say in their hearts,
God will neither do good nor evil; and if neither the mercy of God will move
us, nor his judgments make us afraid to commit sin, our case is fearful
and damnable.

the Lord be so severe against sin and sinners, that he will not spare, no not
the sins and falls of his own dear children, being of his own household,
and Citizens of his own kingdom, and the members of his own body; if the
Lord do deal so sharply with these, Oh how heavy will he lay his judgments
upon the wicked? 1. Pet 4.17, 18. The time is come, that Judgment must begin
at the house of God: If it first begin with us, what shall be the end of
them, which obey not the Gospel of God? And if the Righteous scarcely be saved,
where shall the wicked and sinner appear? But God corrects the godly in
mercy, the wicked in wrath, The one as a loving father, the other as a just
Judge. O that all wicked and ungodly men would lay this to heart, and know that
assured judgment is reserved for them at the great day of the Lords general
Assizes, when they shall, will they, nill they, plead guilty at GODS bar,
where the Register Book of all their actions, shall be brought forth, and they
shall receive according to their works.

David speaks in the plural number Deliver me from blood: True note of a
penitent to aggrauate his sin.
that my most heinous, horrible and cruel sin: he does not mince it or
lessen it, but sets it out in his colors, a bloody sin, a monstrous sin,
therefore in true repentance and confession of our sins we must labor to
aggrauate them to the full, to set them out, to make them appear as vile and
filthy as we can: for thereby we show our grief and hatred for them.

Saul, 1. Sam. 15.
who would not confess his sin, but excused it, it shows men are not
humbled nor grieved, have no hatred of it: but if we do truly see the
loathsomeness of sin; Oh we would aggrauate it, yea speak as badde as we
can of it, and not excuse it in any case: the second thing in the petition is
the manner of it, namely, that he does pray in faith and affiance of Gods
mercy, for he prays unto God and describes him to be the God of his salvation,
because he put all his affiance in Gods mercy for salvation, and acknowledges
it to be the gift of God.

David thus prays for the pardon of his sins, Faith required in prayer.
with faith and affiance. We learn, that if we desire to obtain our requests,
we must pray to God with faith and affiance in Gods mercy, for at the same
time, that God touches a poor sinner to mourn for his sins, and to repent,
he gives him faith to pray to God, with affiance for pardon and salvation: So
then we see whatsoever we ask at Gods hands we must ask in faith; If any
lack wisdom, let him ask in faith and waver not, Iam. 1.5, 6 Hebr. 11.6
for he that wauers, can have no hope to obtain at Gods hand.

Whosoever doubts whether God will grant his requests, or not, can never pray
for any thing earnestly and effectually. This our Savior teaches, Mar. 11.24.
Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, Believe that ye shall have it, and it shall
be done unto you. And none can have this assurance, that GOD is ready to hear
them and to grant their requests, but only the faithful, who have first this
assurance, that their sins are pradoned, and that they are reconciled unto
God in Christ Jesus.



our desires and take heed we ask not any thing that is not warranted by the
word, for unless it be warranted by the word we cannot have any assurance he
will hear us: for there is no faith without the word, and therefore when we
shall ask things at our lust and pleasure, it is just with Almighty GOD not
to hear us.

David calls the Lord, Praise of our salvation properly belongs to God. To. 6.
vlt.
My God, and, the God of my salvation. He acknowledges that salvation, pardon
of his sins, life, and all good things come from God, and are his gracious
gifts in Christ.

It is he who at the first gave us life, when we were stark dead in
trespasses and sins. It is he again that keeps our souls in life. If we
fall, he rayseth us up; when we wander, he recalleth us from judgments past,
present, and to come, he has, does, and will deliver us; so that he may well
be called, The God of our Salvation.

that all the good things we enjoy, the favor of God, pardon of our sins,
justification, sanctification, redemption, etc. all these are the free mercy
and gifts of GOD in CHRIST, and then we shall learn to depend on GOD for the
comfort of this life: for if we know God has given us Christ, and delivered us
from sin, death, and hell: how then can he deny us the lesser things for
this life? Romans 8.32


David acknowledges it to be the free gift of God: Romans 6. Dan. 9. Job 42.6.
Ephesians. 2.
and therefore let us abhor their doctrine, and our goodness, or
worthiness, and acknowledge that all we may enjoy for salvation it is the
free and vnderserued favor of God in Christ Jesus.

David he felt now the heavy weight of Gods anger which pressed him down
exceedingly, and brake his heart: yet withal, he felt the mercy of God,
which made him bold to go to God for pardon, so that he could call him, my
GOD. Wherein we may note the difference of Gods children from infidells that
have no faith; the child of God, although he be touched at the quick, with the
feeling of Gods displeasure, yet he can by faith go to his father, and make
his moan unto him: But a wicked man that has no faith in Christ, Note.
he conceiueth nothing but GODS anger and judgment, and therefore flies from
him, and cannot give one rap at Gods mercy seat, cannot for his life cry, My
God, and my Father: but is feign to run from GOD, and so in time to despair as
Caine and Judas.

[And my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.]
THese words contain in them the reason of his request, as if he should say:
If thou shall, O Lord, pardon my sin, and in mercy deliver me from the curse
and punishment due to me for them, my tongue shall be a Preacher and publisher
of thy mercy unto others; And my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness. By
righteousness is not meant here, the justice of God, whereby he takes
vengeance for sin: but by righteousness is meant the merciful dealing of
God in keeping promise with all repentant sinners, in pardoning and remitting
their sins and receiving them to mercy.

Gods mercies must untie our tongues to praise him. Luke 22. 1. Chro. 19 Acts
11.18 1. The 2.19
who have truly tasted of Gods mercy in CHRIST for life and salvation, to keep
it in as it shall not break forth and appear: but he that has his heart
affected with Gods mercy in CHRIST, it will untie his tongue to speak of it,
and to praise God for it. As it is not possible to keep fire so close, but it
will smoke and flame in time: so the feeling of Gods love can not but break out
and appear to the good of others.

Well, by the rule of this doctrine, we may see that very few have their hearts
affected with the mercy of God in Christ, Luke 17.
because they seldom or never take occasion to speak of it, and to praise God
for it. The poor Leaper finding himself to be cleansed, came to praise God
for it, and Naaman would give Elisha a reward; but our hearts have no comfort
in it, therefore we open not our hearts to praise God.

[And my tongue]
Mark how David speaks, that as in heart he will bless God, so in words he
will praise him.

James 3.


James 3.
If any man sin not in his tongue, he is a perfect man.

[Of thy righteousness.]
His righteousness: Gods rightteousnes what.
wherein note a wonderful comfort to all repentant sinners, that GOD avouches
he should be unjust, Note.
and unrighteous, if he should not give them mercy and pardon when they
repent: seeing he has tied himself by hi^ promise: so as if he should not
show them mercy, he should be unjust, and deny himself, and be no God.



VERSE. 15. 15. Open thou my Lips, O Lord, and my Mouth shall show forth thy
praise.
David having sundry ^mes prayed, and preferred many requests to God for grace
and mercy for pardon of his sins; in the 13.14. verses he uses a reason,
drawn frorn his thankfulness, which he will show unto God, in laboring to
set forth his glory, in being a faithful and zealous Preacher of Gods mercy
unto other, to draw them to God.

But here in this 15. verse. David finding and feeling his mouth, as it were,
stopped, and his lips tied up by reason of his sins, and the feeling of Gods
anger, entreats him to open his lips again, and to give him matter of praise
and thanksgiving.

[Open thou my lips.]
Sense of the words
AS if he should say, O Lord, I confess that my sins, and the great grief I
have conceived for them, by the sense and feeling of thy displeasure, has
stopped my mouth, so as I am not able to preach thy mercy, and to praise thee
as I desire. Now then I beseech thee Lord. to take from me that sorrow and
extremity of grief, pardoning my sins, and receiving me into favor, that I may
have matter ministered unto me to praise thy name for the pardon of my sins,
deliver me from thy wrath, and eternal damnation.

Sin takes away the use of the tongue, that man cannot speak as he should.
and men are not assured of Gods love in Christ, poor souls, they can not so
much as once open their mouths, and move their tongues and lips to praise
GOD with any sound comfort. For how can a condemned man do this, that can find
nothing but hell in his conscience, and trouble of mind? No, the sin, and
grief for sin, and fear of Gods wrath, will stop the mouth. Let any man
take trial of his own heart, and he shall find this true by his own
experience, that the guiltiness of sin, and accusation of conscience for fear
of Gods anger, will stop a man's mouth, so as he shall not be able to open
his mouth with comfort to praise God.

Yea, though a man be elected, called, sanctified the dear child of God, a
sound Christian, yet when he shall fall into sin, adultery, murder, etc. when
the poor conscience is now upon the rack, he shall feel a hell for the
present, he shall find his mouth stopped; so as where be could before praise
God thankefully, and comfortably, and call on his name: yea, he would be a
means to stir on others, yet after the committing of sin, and accusing of
conscience, he shall find his lips tied up, and his mouth stopped for the
present time: no power, nor will, to praise God: No, but this will sound often
and loud in thy ears; Psalm. 50.
What have thou to do to declare my ordinance, and to take my Name into thy
mouth? So that a poor sinner in distress, and feeling the conscience to
accuse for some sin, and fearing Gods displeasure, shall fear even to name
and mention the name of God.



make much of it, and take heed of sin and disobedience, for that will be a
means to stop the mouth of thy conscience, and make thee that thou shall not
be able to open thy lips to praise the Lord.

Is any man merry, James 4.
let him sing Psalms? Is any man sad let him pray? So then, seeing wicked men
live in sin, in danger of Gods vengeance, hell, and damnation, it were better
for them to weep and ^ring their hands, as Howl and weep ye rich men. James
4.9.
So if wicked men knew all, and saw Gods vengeance hanging over them, hell fire
gaping for them, and the devil leading them blindfold to the place of
perdition: they would change all their mirth into lamentation and mourning: for
so long as thou live in sin, without assurance of GODS mercy in CHRIST,
alas thou have no power to open thy lips, or to move thy tongue to praise God.

David could not of himself open his lips to praise God, No ability in man to
perform any good.
but the Lord must unlock them by the key of the Spirit, and put his finger
into his mouth, and say, Ephata. Hence we learn that it is not in the power of
man to keep the Law of God, to merit heaven and salvation by his own goodness
and merits: for if a man have not this power, so much as to open his lips, how
much less to perform the whole Law, and so to merit heaven and salvation? No,
a man cannot of himself think a good thought, but the Lord must work both
will and deed.

able to open our lips, but by the help of God: but if God have given thee any
gift or power to do or speak well, be not proud of it: What have thou that
thou have not received? Oh then why art thou proud of it? Well, let us
acknowledge whence we receive all, and give GOD the glory.



Christ is the Lord, but by the power of the Holy Ghost; Yea in him we live,
move, Acts 27. 1. Reg. 13.4
and have our being. Oh then how should we be most careful to speak and do,
so as GOD have glory for unless the Lord give thee power, thou can not move
thy finger, nor thy tongue, nor once open thy lips, if the Lord deny thee this
favor, and withold his power, as in that wicked Jeroboam when he would have
slain the Prophet of GOD for crying against his sins, the Lord smote his
hand so as it withered, and he could not pull it in again. Well, let us all
take heed how we speak, and abuse our tongues, least the Lord in justice make
them cleave to the roof of our mouths for the same.

2 Part of the verse.
The second part of the verse contains a solem^e protestation of David, that if
the Lord shall thus show him mercy in pardoning his sin, and receiving him into
savor again, that then he will be most willing and ready to praise God, and
to publish his mercy and goodness, whereby the Lord shall reap much glory.

Thanksgiving a necessary duty.
what is that God requires at our hand for all the mercies he bestows upon
us; namely, praise and thanksgiving, that we should speak of Gods mercies,
seek to honor him and to be thankful for his blessings, this David shows
more plainly? What shall I give unto the Lord for all his benefits? Ps.
116.13. Deu. 10.12
I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. Where
he shows that all that God looks for at our hands is Praise and
Thanksgiving: so the Lord himself having rehearsed his great blessings unto
his people, says thus: O Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee,
but to fear him, and to love him, and to walk in his ways? Where he shows
wherein stands our true thankfulness; namely, not only in word to acknowledge
his mercy, but in life to fear him, love him, call upon him, trust in him, and
keep his commandments.

our own hearts to give the Lord praise, to acknowledge his mercy and
goodness bestowed upon us, Ps. 103.1.2 Psalm. 33.1.
It is a comely thing to be thankful.

And that we may the better be stirred up to perform this worthy duty of
praising God; let us consider both the greatness and continuance of Gods
blessings bestowed upon us, as David did, Forget not al his benefits who gave
thee the pardon of thy sins, etc. so let us bethink our selves of GODS love
and mercy to us: First, in electing us to be the sons of God, in delivering us
from hell and damnation, in redeeming us by the death and bloudshedding of his
own Son, in preserving us from so many dangers, in feeding us and clothing
us, and all the rest of his blessings for this life, and that which is to come,
Oh! if we could thus bethink our selves of the number, greatness and
continuance of Gods mercies, how could we be so unkind to forget or to be
unthankful for his blessings; we see if a friend do us a pleasure, though it
be but a meals meat, we will be thankful for it, speak of it; but if he
shall be a means to save our life, from sword, fire, water, or the like, oh
then we will go on our hands and knees to do him good: Well, God is our best
Friend, and we are most beholden to him, yea more then to all the world; and
therefore let us labor with our own hearts to be thankful: and because many
can skill to give God thanks in words and with their lips, let us know it is
not enough in words to bless God, and say thanks be to God, but we must
labor in life to show our thankfulness, when as we labor to honor God, when
as we seek to do his will and to serve him, and are loath to offend so
merciful and bountiful a God: for if a man shall make show in words that he
is thankful, and yet live in sin, there is no thankful heart in him. And
that we may the better be stirred up to do this, let us know there is no better
way to move the Lord to continue his love and mercy unto us, then when we do
freely acknowledge his mercy, and are thankful for it; as we see if we give a
small thing to a poor body if they be thankful to speak of it, and to
confess it, it will provoke us to do them greater favors, and say alas, he is
thankful, it is well bestowed on him, he is worthy of a better turn: so as to
be thankful for one good turn, it is to crave another, and therefore let us
remember this duty: it is comely, it is all the Lord requires, and it is the
way to procure a new mercy at GODS hands.

Luke 17.


Causes of vnthankenesse.
The causes of unthankfulness,

Psalm. 103.2.




Well, let us beware of this sin, which is so odious that the heathen men
would rather be accused of any sin, then this sin of unthankfulness.

Secondly by unthankfulness we deprive our selves of many other mercies: for
as thankfulness for an old is the beginning of a new; so unthankfulness for
an old favor is the next way to deprive us of a new.

VERSE. 16. 16 For thou desire no sacrifice else would I give it thee, etc.
DAVID having professed that it was his earnest desire to honor GOD, to praise
him and seek his glory: confesses that he has no other means but to speak
of his mercy, and to be willing to set forth the same: to become a Preacher of
his righteousness and goodness; and he confesses to his comfort that the Lord
is more delighted with this then with all those external ceremonies and
sacrifices which the people of the Jews did offer, and thought by them to
please God and to appease his anger, and to procure pardon of their sins
thereby.

So that the maine scope of these two verses is this, to show that David though
he had nothing in the world to requite the Lords mercy unto him; yet he
persuaded himself upon his true repentance the Lord will accept of his earnest
desire to honor him and to set forth his praise.

In this 16. verse he shows what are those sacrifices which the Lord cares
not for, and desires not, outward sacrifices alone, which men offer without
faith and repentance, and whereby they think to appease his anger, and merit
pardon of their sins by the same.

In the 17. verse he shows what are the best sacrifices that we can offer
unto God, which he will accept of for CHRIST'S sake, and wherewith he is well
pleased: A broken and contrite heart, truly wounded and humbled for sin, and
which does by faith embrace JESUS CHRIST: Who alone is the propitiatory
sacrifice to appease his fathers anger, and to work our atonement and
reconciliation with GOD.

[Thou desire no sacrifice.]
Sacrifices of the Jews of two sorts.
THe Sacrifices of the Jews were of two sorts, some propitiatory to procure
favor at GODS hands for the pardon of sin; some gratulatory, which were
only for thanksgiving for blessings received; now of these David speaks
especially here: and of Sacrifices for thanksgiving there were twosorts,
some were called sacrifices, as the first word signifies, where some beast was
slain and offered in sacrifice to God.

Again, some were called burnt-offerings which were all consumed and turned
into ashes, and they were called so because the smoke of them ascended up to
heaven, and both of them were figures of Christ JESUS, who should be slain and
burned, as it were, in the fire of GODS anger for our sins.

Quest. But how can the Lord be said not to desire burnt offerings and
sacrifices seeing he commanded them in his Law.

Res. We may not think the Prophet speaks here simply, that the Lord cares
not for Sacrifices, for as yet the Ceremonies of the Law were in force and the
greatest part of GODS worship stood in Sacrifices; and David himself, and
Solomon were diligent, and not sparing, in performing this duty.

But we must know David speaks here first that the Lord cares not for
sacrifices as they were done of the common people of the Jews: because that
whereas the LORD did ordain them as helps to lead them to CHRIST, that they
might deny themselves and see they were worthy to die when the beast was
slain, so they might seek to be saved by the everlasting sacrifice of CHRIST
alone: But they began to imagine that by their very offering of beasts in
sacrifice God was pleased never looking to CHRIST JESUS, whereof they were but
types and figures.

Secondly, because the people of the Jews did offer them without faith and
repentance, with impenitent hearts; Ier. 7.
and thought so long as they offered sacrifices, though they lived in sin, it
skilled not.

Thirdly, the Lord delights not, nor is not so well pleased with this outward
sacrifice as with a broken and contrite heart, when that is humbled and mournes
for sin, believes in Christ Jesus, and is careful to honor God by an holy
life.

David affirms that GOD cares not for the outward sacrifice when the inward
is wanting. A man's person must first be approved before his sacrifice be
accepted. Ier. 24.20. Esa. 29.13
We learn that though a man should perform all the outward service and
worship of God, and that in never so glorious a manner, yet if the heart be
not affected and purified all is in vain, the Lord cares not for it: as to
Preach the word, to hear it, to receive the Sacrament, etc. if there be not a
broken heart for sin, Mat. 15.
a repentant heart, a sanctified heart, all is but vain. The Scribes and
Pharisesseemed marvelous precise, in outward show, very zealous and forward;
yet their hearts were puffed up with pride, self-love, malice, covetousness,
etc. And therefore Christ says; Math. 15.
Unless your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Judas in outward show
Preached and Prayed as well as others, yet a very devil, a most traiterous
wretch, full of hypocrisy, covetousness and bloody cruelty: well we see that
though men make never so good and fair a show, yet if the heart be not sound
all is in vain and from the teeth outward, and GOD cares not for it; he
esteems as much of their Sacrifice as if they should kill a man, or sacrifice
a dog, Esaias 65.3.
that is abomination to the Lord.

Hearing, Prou. 29.9. Ps. 50.16.
it is but swines blood, dogs blood, a beautiful abomination, and therefore
let us never content our selves with the outward worship and service of God,
but let us labor to do all in truth with faith, obedience, repentance,
humiliation and good conscience.

Esaias 1.11.12.13. Ier. 7 8.
And may not the Lord even now abhor our sacrifices, our coming to Church,
Heating, Praying, etc. seeing men do content themselves with outward action,
and come with sinful hearts and affections.

A man may perform a good duty and yet fin in the manner of doing it.
, and yet not please God, but sin most grievously in doing of them: to offer
sacrifice, it is GODS own Commandment, but when people shall do it in an
evil manner, either without faith and repentance, or else to an evil end to
merit at Gods hand: then it makes that which God commands to be a sin to them,
not in it self, but in them that fail in the manner of doing of it: to offer
sacrifice was the Commandment of God, but when the Jews thought by their
sacrifices to appease Gods anger without the sacrifice of Christ, they sinned,
and God abhorred them and cared not for them: Again, to preach the word of God
is his commandment; but when Judas shall preach the word to cloak his
covetousness and treacherous heart it is a sin in Judas: to give alms it is
a thing commanded and a sacrifice wherewith God is well pleased; but if men
shall give to merit, and to be seen of men the Lord cares not for it; so as
we see a man may do things which God commands men to do, and yet be so far
from pleasing God, that they shall sin, and provoke him to anger, because
they do them not in an holy manner, Pro. 15.11.
in faith, repentance, obedience, and zeal of Gods glory.





Popish Sacrifices abominable
how much more those sinful sacrifices which have been invented by man,
without any warrant from his word, as the Idol of the Mass, Popish
pilgrimages, perpetual chastity, voluntary poverty, living in a cloister etc.

Nadab and Abihu, and such as Paul calls Will Worship, and Christ calls, The
inventions of men: for these the Lord abhorres.

Christ's sacrifice was imperfect, that must be patched up with that abominable
Idol.

Concerning these sacrifices which were Lambs, Sheep, Goats, or Bullockes, and
were all slain and offered to God in fire, let us mark that they were all so
many figures, types, and shapes of that everlasting sacrifice of Jesus Christ,
which he offered upon the Cross in his own person.

Christ an end of all other Sacrifices.
Then this does commend unto us that blessed and most meritorious sacrifice of
Christ the lamb of God, seeing there was so many prophesies of it, even from
the beginning of the world, and so many shadows and types of it as can not be
numbered, because there never passed one day amongst the Jews, from the time
of the Law till Christ's coming, but they offered at least morning and evening
sacrifice, as shadows of Christ Jesus, to come: and the people of God, the
believing Jews, and holy Fathers, and Prophets did in them behold Jesus Christ
as slain and crucified before their eyes. And as Christ says; The holy
Patriarchs and Prophets and famous Kings desired to see my days, and would be
glad to see, and yet saw it not.

So often as ye do it, 1. Cor. 11.
do it in remembrance of me, to show forth my death till I come.

For the remembrance of Christ's sacrifices it is a sweet comfort to all
wounded and distressed souls, it is sack and sugar to them all that truly
believe in him; it is an excellent means to kill sin, and to humble our hard
hearts, that we should remember our sins were as the bloody nails, and the
spear which put him to death: and a powerful bridle to restrain us from
sin, because so often as we sin, we do, as it were, pierce his heart
afresh; and as for those that care not for coming to the Sacrament, nor yet
for the word, wherein Christ is lively crucified, they show they have no
benefit by this sacrifice of Christ.

VERSE. 17. 17. The Sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: a contrite and
broken heart, O God, thou will not despise.
David having showed what be those Sacrifices wherein the Lord God has no
pleasure: namely, such as men shall offer with hope to merit, or without faith
and repentance.

Now he shows what is that Sacrifice wherein the Lord takes great delight, and
is well pleased, and that is in one word, A broken spirit, a heart truly
wounded for sin.

In this verse let us first find out what is the broken and contrite Spirit:
Secondly, the commendations of it, namely, it is called the Sacrifice of God:
Thirdly, that he does not despise.

By a broken and contrite spirit, is meant, such an heart as is truly humbled
with sight of sin, wounded and pierced with fear of Gods anger, grieved for
offending so merciful a God and loving Father, and does beg for mercy at
his hands, as for life and death; besides the endless mercy of God in Christ,
which breaks the heart of a poor sinner.

So then there be two things that wound and bruise the heart of sinners: First,
the sight of sin and knowledge of our misery, by reason thereof: Secondly,
the endless mercy of God in Christ, so as it cuts us at the heart to
remember, that we have offended so good and merciful a Father.

Broken heart most rare thing to be found
Seeing this is that broken heart, which is thus bruised with the sight of
sin, and is humbled for them; yea, has a most low conceit of it self, as
most vile and unworthy, we shall see that it is a most rare thing to be found;
for generally men are so blinded with self-love, that they see nothing, or
feel nothing, to humble them, or to bruise their stony hearts, but are like
the Church of Ephesus. for this is ever a fellow of hardness of heart, Reu.
3.14^ Ephesians 4.18.
and cause of all ignorance, of our misery: Men are like those that be sick of
the lethargy, it is a deadly disease and incurable, this hardness of heart,
it is the common judgment of God upon our people, it reigns every where.

the hard heart is so common, and so dangerous a forerunner to hell: O let us
look to our selves, how we find our hearts broken and bruised with the sense
of sin, mourn for them and bewail them: Alas! it is wonderful to see poor
souls, how men lie in sin, see nothing, and fear nothing, nor complain of
nothing, men can complain of the stone in the reins, and cry out for grief;
but no man complains of the stone in the heart, they feel no such grief,
though it be deadly and dangerous: and if thou find thy heart hardened, so as
thou art not touched and troubled with the sight of sin, of Gods vengeance,
of hell and damnation, that thou can not mourn for them, that thou fear
not GODS judgments, and art not affected with his mercies to mourn for thy
sins: O! know that thy state is fearful and miserable, thou art in extreme
danger to perish, and to be damned for ever.

judgment of God, and a forerunner of hell: let us use all good means for the
bruising of the heart, and to this end we must labor to know the Law of God,
how we break it daily, in thought, word, and deed, we must know the curse of
God due to sin, That the wages of sin is death: Romans 6. psalm. 40.12.
And because the preaching of the word, is the most excellent means to work
this, and is the Lords hammer to crush in pieces our stony hearts, let us
attend that. And lastly, let us think much of Gods mercy in Christ, that so
his mercy, patience, long-sufferance, etc. may be a special means to bruise
our hearts that we have si^ned against him.

the more proud, and therefore if thy heart be humbled indeed, bruised for sin,
there will follow a very low, and base estimation of our selves, 1. Tim. 1.15.
to think more basely and meanly of our selves, then any man can do.

The second point is the praise and commendations of this Sacrifice; namely,
that the Prophet does not only call it the Sacrifice of GOD, that is most
excellent, and such as God loves and likes: but also he calls it broken
Sacrifices, in the plural number, The Sacrifices of God: For it is not in
vain that he speaks in the plural number; and the meaning is this, to show
that a heart broken and bruised for sin, is in stead of all other Sacrifices
whatsoever: and let men offer what Sacrifice they will, never so many costly or
excellent, yet if this be wanting, it is but in vain, GOD esteems not of it,
one broken heart is more worth then a thousand Sacrifices of great price.

[Instruct.]
THis may admonish every one to take heed that we do not present the Lord
with any other Sacrifice but this; which is in stead of all, and more worth
then a thousand offered by hard-hearted sinners: for if a man offer many
Sacrifices, pray much, preach much, hear much, receive the Sacrament often,
yet if the heart be not broken, humbled, and bruised; alas! all is in vain:
GOD esteems of them as dogs blood, we can not please him without the broken
and contrite spirit.

Secondly, would thou offer unto God a most precious Sacrifice that might be
in stead of all the rest, and make all the rest acceptable? O! then present him
with this broken heart: the poor woman that cast into the Treasury but two
mites, cast in more then all the rest, because it came from a heart truly
humbled; and so if thou would have thy praiing, Preaching, Hearing, etc.
please GOD, then present the Lord with a broken heart, which is in steed of all
other sacrifices, and makes them all acceptable, and without this all is
abominable to the Lord.

[Thou wilt not despise.]
God does highly esteem of a broken heart.
with a broken heart, and contrite spirit.

Hence we learn, that God does highly esteem of, and love that man or woman,
which is of a broken heart, as Josias whose heart melted: 2. Reg. 22.19.
when as the heart is broken with the sight of sin, and sense of Gods anger,
Luke 19. Esaias 66.2. Esaias 57.15
and withal does embrace JESUS CHRIST for pardon.

them, thou art dear unto God, he loves thee and likes thee, and has respect
unto thee, and he will comfort thee and deliver thee: look on Ios^as that
godly King, on the Publican, and on every child of God, how the Lord has
refreshed them.



VERSE 18.19. 18 Be favorable unto Zyon for thy good pleasure; Build up the
walls of Jerusalem. 19 Then shall thou accept the sacrifice of righteousness,
even the burnt-offering and oblation, then shall they offer calves upon thine
Altar.
The second part of the Psalm, co^taining a prayer for the Church
HITHERTO we have heard of the first part of this worthy Psalm: wherein David
has put up sundry Petitions and requests to God for the pardon of his sins,
and turning away of GODS fearful judgments.

Now in these two last verses David is mindful of the Church and people of
GOD; and because he had by his sins, not only endangered his own soul, but
also laid open the Church and people of God to great misery, and done what lay
in him to draw the curse and judgment of GOD upon them: therefore he does
humbly entreat the Lord to be merciful to his Church, and not to plague and
punish them, as he might have done, for his sins and disobedience.

These two verses contain in them two especial points to be considered of us.

First, the request which David makes in the behalf of the Church and people of
God. Ver. 18.

Secondly, the reason taken from the vow and protestation which David and the
people make unto GOD; namely, to offer unto GOD the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving.

In the prayer be two requests: first he prays for favor and mercy to be
showed upon the Church of GOD: secondly, that the Lord would repair that
breach which he had made by his sins.

[Bee favorable.]
THat is, do well, bless, preserve, and show mercy, To Zyon, Zyon signifies
that beautiful Temple of Jerusalem, but here it is taken for the Church and
people of God; as if he should say: O Lord, I do not only entreat thee that
thou would have mercy upon me, but I beseech thee show mercy to thy whole
Church and people, be merciful unto them, provide well for them, that thy word
may be Preached, and thy name called upon, for I acknowledge o Lord, that I
have done, as much as lay in my power to bring heavy judgments upon thy Church
and people, if my sins be laid upon them, but Lord let not thy Church be
punished for my sin, O be favorable to Syon.

Prayer the chiefestrefuge in time of danger.
Seeing David in time of misery, when the Church was in danger of Gods
judgments, betakes himself to prayer, to entreat the Lord for grace and
favor, we learn hence that this is our chiefest refuge and shelter in time
of misery and affliction, when the Church of GOD is in danger of any judgment
or calamity, even to betake our selves to humble and earnest prayer: Pray for
the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee: Psalm. 122.6. Psa.
50.15. Psalm 107 Hester 4.8. Esaias 64 2. Chron. 32.20.
And of the Israelites it is reported, that they cried five times unto the Lord
in their distress: so in Egypt they cried and groaned unto the Lord; so they
fasted and prayed when Haman had got the Kings letter to put the Jews to dead.

The like we may see in Nehemiah Neh. 1.3.4. when he heard that the people
returned from captivity were still in misery, Jerusalem trodden down, he sat
down and wept, he mourned, fasted and prayed before the GOD of heaven for the
redress of those evils. This appears likewise, Psalm one hundred thirty
seven, the first, second and third verses; where the Prophet lays down the
miserable estate of the Church under the Babylonians, and the affliction of
Church conceived upon that distress: We sat down and wept when we remembered
Syon. If I forget thee (O Jerusalem) let my right hand forget her cunning: yea,
if I prefer not Jerusalem before my chief joy.

And in the first of Samuel, the fourth chapter, and the nineteenth verse, it
is noted to the everlasting praise of the wife of Phineas, that when the
P^i^istims prevailed over the people of God, and one trouble came upon her on
the neck of another; as the taki^g of the Arc, the fall of her Father, the
death of her Husband, the ouer-throw of the Host, etc. yet above all, the
report of taking the Ark of the Lord, it was a wound unto her soul, hastened
her travail, and called her child Icabod, that is, no glory: or, the glory is
departed from Israel, because the Ark of God was taken.

Aaron yield no sound, what are we to do? Namely, this must be our refuge, we
must fly unto God by true and hearty prayer, bewail our sins, acknowledge them
to God, ply the Lord with prayers and tears: Iam. 5.17.
For the prayer of a righteous Man is of endless force. Now if the prayer of
one righteous man be of that force and strength, how much more are the prayers
of hundreds or thousands, that are gathered together in one: one cord may
easily be broken, but a threefold cord cannot be broken: Elias is called the
Chariot and Horsemen of Israel, because by faithful prayers which he made
unto GOD, he could do more for the defense of GODS Church, then an Army of
Soldiers.

move pity in our selves, then woe to them that are secure, that laugh when
the Church weepeth, that live in bravery when the Church is in Sackcloth and
Ashes, that feast when the Church does fast. This was the practice of those
that lived in the time of Esaias. Esaias 22. verse. 12.13.14. In that day did the
Lord of Hosts call unto weeping and mourning, to baldness and grinding with
Sackcloth: And behold joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep,
eating flesh, and drinking, for to morrow we shall dye.

Hereunto accords that of the Prophet Amos, Amos 6. Woe to them that are at
ease in Syon, etc. where we see he pronounces the woeful estate and condition
of those who lived without any regard of the Judgments of GOD laid upon the
Church: And surely the times wherein we live, do call upon us to the practice
of this Christian duty.

But much more are they condemned, that are so far from pitying the Churches
troubles, that (rather without all natural affection, as if they were borne of
Wolves, or nourished of Tigers) seek to cut the throat of the Church, add to
their afflictions, and make their burden heavier, even of them that are ready
to fall. This does the Prophet speak of such, Psa. 69. verse. 26. They
persecute him whom thou have smitten, and add unto the sorrow of them whom
thou have wounded.

Prayer for the Church a Christian duty.
but is mindful of the whole Church and people of GOD, and therefore prays
for them, that GOD would bless them, and defend them: Hence we learn that it
is the duty of every Christian Man and Woman, that be true members of the
Church of GOD, not only to pray for themselves, but also to pray instantly for
the Church of God, that God would be favorable to his people, bless his
Church and Children, seek the welfare of GODS Church.

This we may see by the example of Abraham, Genes. 18. who prayed for the
Sodomites that they might be spared. This we may see in Nehemiah, Nehem. 1.3.4.
who mourned, fasted and prayed unto the God of Heaven, when he saw that the
Church was in misery. And this affection was in David, when he says, Psalm.
137. We sat down and wept when we remembered thee O Syon. And when the people
desired Samuel to pray for them, 1. Sam. 12.32. he said: God forbid that I
should sin against the Lord, and cease praying for you. This Paul performed
to the Romans Rom 1. verse. 9.10. GOD is my witness (whom I serve in my Spirit
in the Gospel of his Son) that without ceasing I make mention of you always
in my prayers.

So that we see here it has been the practice of the Church and people of God,
to pray for the Church of God, and that indeed for sundry reasons.

Psalm. 12.22 6.
pray for the peace of Jerusalem, that is, for the good and flourishing estate
of Gods Church and people.

they shall prosper that love thee.



How did Moses plead with God sundry times for his Church and people. Exodus 32.
So Nehemy he fasted and prayed for the Church in misery: Nehem. 1.
and for the City of his Fathers, Jerusalem.

And as it is the duty of all in general to pray and procure the peace and
prosperity of Gods Church, and people: so especially ought Kings and
Magistrates, who are the governors and leaders of Gods people, and his
Lieutenants upon earth: Secondly Ministers are bound by especial bond to pray
for GODS Church.

Esaias 6.21.
For Syons sake I will not hold my peace, and for Ierusalems sake I will not
rest, until the righteoussnesse thereof break forth as the light, and the
salvation thereof as a burning lamp. I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O
Jerusalem, which all the day, and all the night continually shall not cease: ye
that are mindful of the Lord keep not silence.

Acts 9.1.
we shall read in the Word of God, as also in the Acts and Monuments, we
shall ever find the end of persecutors to be exceeding fearful: some
stricken down with sudden death, some dying desperately, and despairing of Gods
mercy, some run mad, and the like fearful ends, which might admonish all
persecuting Tyrants, and bloody enemies of the Church to change their minds,
and no more to persecute the poor Church and children of God, lest they be
plagued in the like manner.

[Be favorable.]
Liberty of preaching one of Gods favors.
so bless thy poor Church that in it thy servants the Prophets may ever
preach thy holy word, that thy worship and service may purely be performed, and
thy name called upon; the number of the elect may be increased, and many souls
saved. Hence we learn, that it is the great favor and mercy of GOD to any
Church or people, when the word and Gospel of God is soundly and sincerely
preached, and the Sacraments duly administered; when the people may with liberty
and comfort come together to sanctify Gods Sabbath, to call upon the Lord in
his Sanctuary, to worship the Lord in his House.

And surely we see here what great cause we have to bless the name of GOD in
this Land, how gracious the Lord has been unto us above all Nations that are
round about us.

So on the contrary part it is a great and grievous judgment of God to want
faithful Ministers, and holy servants of God, when God shall cause the golden
Bells of Aaron to cease, it is a token of Gods displeasure with any people, town
or kingdom, then the Lord frowns upon them, and is exceeding angry with them,
and then woe to that nation, country or people when the Lord departs from them,
when he shall take a way their watchmen, when he shall deprive them of their
faithful Ministers, when he shall take away his Word and Gospel. The Lord
threatens this as the greatest of all judgments: Amos 8.11. Revel. 2.
then comes in sin, ignorance, prophanetie, impiety, idolatry, superstition,
and all manner of sin, till the Lord come with his judgments to destroy them.



and liked of them. But we see here, howsoever many poor souls may deceive
themselves, it is a singular favor of God to a people, when he gives them his
Gospel to be truly preached and taught unto them, when they may call upon
him in public and private. This is a special favor of God; but where this
is wanting, Where prophesying fails, Prou. 29.
the people perish. For where the word of God is not preached, and the people
taught, there they are ignorant, blind, and profane, and all manner of sin
abounds; and where sin abounds, there the curse of God must needs hang over
the heads of that people: for where the word is not preached, and the people
taught, though they abound in all prosperity, yet it is not so great a favor
as they think it to be; Nay, it may be aiudgement unto them: for what are they
the better to have peace, and plenty, ease and, liberty, when as they want the
favor of God? For every blessing is not a benefit.

[According to thy good pleasure.]
These words contain the ground of his request: namely, the endless mercy and
favor of God in JESUS CHRIST, not any goodness or worthiness of their own,
of David, or the people; but he builds his faith and petition of Gods mere
and undeserved mercy in Christ.

Faith must not rest upon others merits.
that we must build our faith, not upon any goodness, desert, or worthiness
of our own, but upon the alone mercy and good pleasure of GOD, Dan. 9. He does
confess it is true that they dare not appear in their own name or
worthiness, but only in the mercy of God in Christ: To us belongs shame, Dan.
9.
and confusion of face; but Lord for thy tender mercies sake hear us?

When as the Church of God was in great affliction, they acknowledge it the
Lords mercy they were not consumed for their sins, Lam. 3.22
Because his compassions fail not: So then let us know that we must by this
ground of all our prayers, even on Gods endless mercy in Christ, not our own
worthiness.



David does build his faith and prayer on Gods mercy alone, without any respect
of his worthiness, or goodness of the people; we learn in all our prayers to
rely wholly on Gods mercy, and not to think that we are worthy to be heard
for our worthiness or deserts: No, no, let us confess, and say; Job. 42.6.
Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name be the glory: for we are not
worthy of the least favor.

[And build up the walls of Jerusalem.]
The second part of the verse.
This is the second part of the verse, wherein he entreats the Lord not to
hinder the building of his Temple for his sake; but rather even to make up that
breach he had broken down by his foul and bloody sins; as if he should say:
O Lord, I have by my sins, done what lies in my power to hinder thy Church,
and to pluck down the wall of thy protection: yea, to lay them open to the
sword of the enemy, and to all thy judgments, but I pray thee (Lord) that thou
would in mercy make up that breach, Build up the walls of Jerusalem, the
City wherein thy Temple is built, and thy name is called upon, the Seat of
thy Worship and Service.

David confess, Sins of the Magistrate provoke Gods anger highly.
that by his sins of adultery and murder, he had done what lay in his power,
even to pull down the walls of GODS Church, and people, to lay them open to
Gods judgments, plagues, and punishments? then hence we learn, that the
sins of the Prince and Magistrate, and chief Rulers, as Kings, Queens, etc.
they do cast the whole people and Kingdom into great danger, and provoke Gods
anger against them, and open the floodgates of Gods vengeance; for their sins
be as their person be and a small sin in a great Magistrate, in a Minister,
in a King it is a great spot, and foul blemish. The Egyptians were all plagued
by reason of Pharoahs sins. Exodus 15.
So we see that when Achan sinned, though no great man yet it brought the curse
of God upon all the people. So in the days of Saul, Achab, Ioram, and the
like; when such Kings lived in impiety, idolatry, and persecuted GODS people,
and Prophets, we see in the word how God did plague both them and their people.

The reason why the sins of the King does in wrap the people in that
judgment of God, is this, because look how the King is, so, for the most
part, are the people: if he be an Idolater, so are they; if he be a persecutor,
so are they; for look how the King is affected, so be most of his Subjects.

David, who for his sin of nu^bring the people, 2. Sam. 24.
70000 were slain. We learn hence that it is a great mercy of God to have
such a King as walks with God, is careful to honor God, and to live in his
fear; for then he shall not only procure a blessing upon himself, but on
all his People and Subjects: and the contrary is a fearful judgment of GOD
upon a land, Esaias 3.1.2.3.
when he gives them wicked Kings and Princes.

David, Penitent will seek to build up that which before he had pulled down.
that those who have by their sins hindered the good estate of GODS Church, and
people, whether Kings, Princes, Magistrates, or Ministers, if they do truly
repent, they will be as careful to build up the walls of Gods Church again, to
pray for it, to procure the good of it. Saul did persecute the Church, he
sought the ruin of it, and to pluck it out the throat of poor Christians,
and to suck their blood: but after he was wounded and humbled, he became a
Preacher of the Word, Acts 9. 2. Cor. 33.14.
and sought to build as fast as ever he pulled down before.

glorifying his Gospel; else thou do never soundly repent. Have thou by evil
example, by a sinful life, by negligence of holy duties, by lewd advice and
wicked counsel, drawn and allured others to sin, and to bring GODS
judgments upon them? if thou do soundly repent, then thou shall bewail this
sin, and pray for them whom thou have thus wronged.

A man cannot pray till he repent.
namely, that David, who before durst hardly approach unto God, and open his
mouth in prayer for himself; yet now upon his repentance and reconciliation
with GOD, is bold to pray for others; yea to pray for the whole Church of God.
Hence we learn, that as long as a poor sinner lives in sin without pardon
and true repentance, he cannot pray for himself; he cannot and dares not
open his mouth to God to pray for himself, much less for others: But when he
shall truly repent, turn to God, after he is reconciled to GOD in CHRIST;
then he can come with much boldness, unto God, and pray for himself and
others too: Luke 22.
When thou art converted strengthen thy brethren; showing, that till he was
converted he could not help nor strengthen his brethren.



VERSE, 19. 19 Then shall thou accept the sacrifice of righteousness, even the
burnt-offering and oblation, then shall they offer calves upon thine Altar.
THis verse contains the fruit of Gods mercy and favor, both to David and
the people, and the fruit is double.

First, in regard of GOD, that he shall then accept and be well pleased with
their sacrifices.

Secondly, in regard of David, and the people, they vow and covenant with the
Lord to offer praise and thanks unto GOD for so great a favor and blessing.

[Then shall thou accept the sacrifice.]
AS if he should say; O Lord, when thou shall thus be favorable to thy poor
Church, and pardon my sins, and make up that breach which is broken by my
filthy sins, then shall thy mercy be seen, in that thou shall accept our
sacrifices, and such duties of thy service and worship, as we shall perform
unto thee.



of a people, when they repent an be reconciled to God, amend their sinful
lives: let us learn from this doctrine, that if we desire to have the Gospel
continued, our peace prolonged, and the service and worship of God to be
established; there is no other way but this, to seek to God by repentance, to
get our sins pardoned, and to be at peace with GOD.

Oh then repent and amend; for if you will not repent, nor amend your works and
ways, the LORD our GOD will not accept of us nor regard us, Jeremy the seventh
chapter: yea he will remove our Candl^sticke from us, Revelation the second
chapter: that our golden days shall have an end, and our mirth shall be
turned into mourning, and our light into darkness.

[The Sacrifice of righteousness.]
THat is, such sacrifices as are done by the prescript rule of thy Word, such
as GOD requires, and in that right and lawful manner which he prescribes in
his Word.

What be those Sacrifices that God does accept of.
in his worship and service: namely, the Sacrifice of righteousness; that is,
lawful Sacrifices, allowed and warranted by the word of God, and such as being
lawful are performed in a right and holy manner according to the prescript
rule of GODS Word; but as for Sacrifices which are not warranted by the word of
GOD, nor done in a lawful and a holy manner, according to the prescript rule of
GODS Word, the LORD cares not for them.

Now it may be asked, how David can say the Lord accepts sacrifice seeing in
the former verse he said GOD desired no sacrifice: Now he here affirms that
the Lord shall accept the sacrifice of righteousness.

I answer, that such sacrifices as are offered with opinion of merit, as the
Jews did, who thought by offering a beast that God was appeased, and so they
might be bold to live in sin, and such as they offered without faith and
repentance the LORD esteemed not of them.

But here he says that GOD will accept, and like well of such as are offered
in a holy manner, according to the rule of GODS word; that is, when sacrifices
commanded by God are offered in a holy manner, in faith, repentance and
obedience, and not to merit any thing, but as exercises of faith and
repentance, and types of CHRIST JESUS, to lead them unto him, and as
testimonies of their thankfulness to GOD, and so far forth as they served for
the furtherance of GODS glory and edification of his Church.

The doctrine then is clear, Note.
that it is not left to man to ordain and appoint the service and worship of
GOD, to put in what he will, and to put out at his pleasure; but if we will
have our sacrifices and worship of GOD acceptable, and truly to please GOD: we
must give the Lord leave to command and prescribe what he thinks good; and
we must not dare to add any thing of our own, nor to take away his worship
and service, Deuteronomy. 12.8.32. We are forbidden to add or take away any thing
from his Laws in which he prescribes the rules of his worship. Deuteronomy. 32.17.
When the Jews worship God after their own fantasy the Lord says they
worship not GOD but devils: and the Lord holds it a vain thing to teach his
worship and fear by the precepts of men: Mat. 15.9.
So then all such sacrifices of righteousness be the worship of God, which be
warranted by his word: and nothing may go under the name of his service and
worship, but that he prescribes in his word.

This condemns the greatest part of the worship of GOD amongst the Papists,
their seven Sacraments, their worshipping of Images, their praying to Saints,
their abominable Mass, their voluntary poverty, and perpetual chastity: For
which they can show no word of warrant in all the Scriptures, and therefore it
is no right sacrifice, and therefore to be abhorred.

all you do in Gods service? is here all the Sacrifice you offer him? it is a
cold and a slender Sacrifice.

[Then shall they offer young Bullockes upon thy Altar.
IN this part of the verse is showed what is the fruit of Gods mercy in David
and the people, namely this that they will promise and covenant with God for
this their deliverance to offer unto God praise and thanksgiving.

Solemn, vows a Christian duty.
that so he do deliver us from misery, trouble, affliction, judgment,
punishments, and from unreasonable men: that then we will offer him praise and
thanksgiving, call upon him, serve and worship him all our days: Genesis 28.20
2. Chro. 33 Psalm. 116. Judge. 11.
Jacob vowed that if the Lord would be with him in his journey to keep him and
defend him in it, he would then build a house to GOD and worship him there.
Josias made a covenant unto the Lord and all the people with him to serve the
Lord, who did deliver him from the curse of the Law. David did often use this
to bind himself by covenant to serve the Lord: Psalm. 116. He paid his vows
he made to God: So Ieptha Judge. 11. vowed unto the Lord that he would offer
sacrifice unto the LORD who gave him victory, and though the matter of his vow
was unlawful, yet his vow to honor GOD was the fruit of faith.

Syon, and build up the walls of Jerusalem; that if he shall deliver us from
any misery, iudgem nt, or affliction whatsoever, that then we will be careful
to honor GOD, to be thankful to his Majesty: let us then make this
covenant with the Lord our God, let us vow obedience and newness of life, and
let us say with David, Psalm. 119 126.
I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy ryghteous judgments.
So let us even take a solemn vow of our own souls, that by the grace of God
we will have more care to praise God, to honor him, to serve him* to call
upon him; and accordingly let us be mindful to perform the same: for the Lord
will require all the Vows we make unto him.

This may stir us up to remember what a solemn vow and promise we have made
in Baptism; To forsake the Devil and all his works, the vain pomp and
glory of the world; that we will forsake the Diuill, sin, and Satan, so as we
will not be led nor ruled by them: yea, that we will manfully fight under the
banner of Christ Jesus, become his faithful Soldiers and servants unto our
lives end.

This is the Covenant which we have made every one of us in our Baptism and
entrance into the Church of GOD before the presence of GOD and his Angels,
before the Congregation and Church of GOD; but (alas) we break it daily, and
have no care nor conscience to keep it: Well let us know the Lord will one day
require our Covenants and Vows made unto him: He looks we should as well
keep them as make them: Well then, would thou be loath to break thy Vow,
Covenant, or Promise, made to an honest man, especially being in thine own
power to keep it, and such a promise as the keeping whereof may procure thee
much peace, liberty, and happiness? I know you would: Oh then let us be as
careful to keep promise with GOD, to renounce the world, the devil, and our
own sinful lusts, so shall we bring much honor to Almighty GOD, and
everlasting good to our own souls.

Public ^hankesgiuing after deliverances required.
So likewise it is our duty publicly to render thanks unto God for
deliverance bestowed upon the same: we may not be like the nine Leapers, who
have wide mouths to beg, but no heart nor mouth to give thanks for benefits
received. It has ever been the care, and religious custom of Gods Church and
people, after great and notable deliverances from apparent and common
Judgments, to render hearty and earnest thanks unto God in solemn and
public manner. Genesis 8. When Noah and his sons and family were newly delivered
from perishing in the flood, he did the first thing build an Altar, offer
sacrifice, and call on the name of the Lord: Exodus 15.
so Moses and the children of Israel after their deliverance out of Egypt,
when they were safe, and their enemies drowned, do devoutly and publicly sing
praise and thanks unto the Lord. Deborah and Barake do the like, Judge. 5. And
the Jews being delivered from Hamans treason. Hest. 10. they rejoice and keep
a solemn day to sing praise unto God.

and devilish, most barbarous and s^uadge, threatening and seeking to destroy
and root out King* Council spiritual and temporal M^gistrates, aiming at the
utter subversion of ou^ English Nation, both Church and Commonwealth.

And surely if we consider well of i^ I do not see in all the Bible, the lik^
deliverance so wonderful and admirable.

1. Being so long a time in hatching and contriuing, with such secrecy and
concealment.

2. Being under the ground, in hell as it were, in a place under the earth,
desiring darkness more then light, because the deed was evil.

3. Being brought so near the execution of it, and never known nor suspected
before.

4. Being disclosed so strangely, even by one of the Traitors themselves, one
of the chief Actors in the Tragedy.

5. Being so general, so fearful and monstrous, that it should not have
been to the destruction of one or two, but of the chief of the whole land,
King, Queen, Prince, Nobles, Judges, Bishops; in a word, the flower of the
whole kingdom, the want of any one whereof, were a blemish to a state, and
would bring a ruin to a kingdom.

Now do as Ahashuerosh did, Hest. 6.1. Cause the Records to be read, and
Chronicles to be searched, Ancient and Modern, Divine or Profane, amongst the
Turks or Painims: yea, if Hell keep any Records, search there, and see if ye
can pattern this conspiracy, or match this danger.

But there is no counsel against the Lord: Man's wisdom is foolishness unto
him, his greatest strength but weakness, his life but a breath, and his honor
but a blast.

So then we see we have as great cause to render thanks unto the Lord as any
people or Nation under Heaven. That 5 day of November is a day to be remembered,
and never to be, forgotten, a glad and joyful day; and we ought every one in
public and private, to stir up our hearts in thanksgiving unto the Lord:
for it was the Lords doing, and ^t is marvelous in our eyes: It is the day
which the Lord made for the glory of his name, let us rejoice and be glad in
it.

Now it is not enough to keep that day as an idle Holy Day, to r^st from
labor and work, to ring B^ls and make Bon-fires, to give our selves to
eating, drinking, and swilling, to sports and pastime: for this is no honor
unto God.

Exodus 12.6.





Sam. 15. and if thi^ be wanting, all we do is nothing worth, Esaias 29.13. So
that for our general deliverance, there should (...) a general thanksgiving
in a general reformation of Church and Commonwealth, of our hearts and sinful
lives: otherwise indeed we are unthankful* if still we live in sin and
^^b^llio^. Then (notwithstanding ^ur keeping a day, ringing of Belles, ^port
and play) if there follow no reformation of our lives, we may justly fear a
more dreadful judgment, if not utter ruin and desolation to follow. Now
(alas) where is this use of Gods mercy, and our deliverance, where do the
people reform their lives, reform their ways, grow more religious,
conscionable and careful to hear, read, pray in their families: it is but a
wonder of nine days, men make little or no use of it, but to talk of it, and
speak of it.

Lord grant for his mercies sake, Amen.

FINIS.

