THE DIFFERENCES OF THE Churches of the separation:

Containing, A DESCRIPTION OF THE LEITOVRGIE AND Ministry of the visible
Church:

Annexed: AS A CORRECTION AND SVPPLEMENT TO A LITTLE treatise lately published,
bearing title: Principles and inferences, concerning the visible Church.

Published, 1. For the satisfaction of every true lover of the truth especially
the Brethren of the Separation that are doubtful. 2. As also for the removing
of an Unjust calumny cast upon the Brethren of the Separation of the second
English Church at Amsterdam. 3. Finally for the clearing of the truth: and the
discovering of the mystery of iniquity yet further in the worship and offices
of the Church.


Divided into two parts 1. Concerning the Leitourgie of the Church 2.
Concerning the Ministry of the Church:
which has two sections

One of the Eldership: Another of the Deacons office whereto aperteineth the
Treasury

BY JOHN SMYTH

Search the Scriptures:

Ioh. 5.39. Try all things keep the good thing.

1. These. 5.21. Beloved: Believe not every Spirit.

1. Ioh. 4.1. The Spirits of the Prophetts are subordinate to the Prophets.

1. Cor. 14.32. 1608. Collegium Sancti Johannis Evangelistae in Academia
Cantabrigiensi
Cambridge bookplate

To every true lover of the truth especially to the Brethren of the separation:
Salutations.
NOt long since I published a little method entitled principles and inferences
concerning the visible Church: Wherein chiefly I purposed to manifest the true
constitution of the Church, a matter of absolute necessity and now so cleared
by the writings of the late witnesses of Jesus Christ the ancient brethren of
the separation as that it seems nothing can further be added, The absolute
necessity of the true constitution appears, because if the Church be truly
constituted and framed, there is a true Church: the true spowse of Christ: if
the Church be falsely constituted, there is a false Church: and ^he is not the
true spowse of Christ: Herein therefore especially are those ancient brethren to
be honored, that they have reduced the Church to the true Primitive and
Apostolic constitution which consists in these three things. 1. The true
matter which are saints only. 2. The true form which is the uniting of them
together in the covenant. 3. The true property which is communion in all the
holy things, and the power of the L. Jesus Christ, for the maintayning of that
communion. To this blessed work of the L. wherein those ancient brethten have
labored I know not what may more be added: I think rather there can nothing be
added: but now Antichrist is perfectly both discovered and consumed in respect
of the constitution by the evidence of the truth, which is the brightness of
Christ's coming. Now al though they have also very worthelie employed them
selves in the Leitourgie, Ministry, and Treasury of the Church, both in
discovering the forgeries and corruptions which the man of syune had
intermingled, and also in some good degree reducing them to there primitive
purity wherein they weere by the Apostles left unto the Churches: Yet we are
persuaded that herein Antichrist is not utterly eythet revealed or abolished,
but that in a very high degree he is exalted even in the true constituted
Churches: In regard whereof, as also being enforced upon some courgie and
ministry of the Church: The Ministry I say consisting of the Presbytery and
Deacons office, whereto apertyneth the Treasury, and that for these ends:
partly that the truth we walk in may be manifested to the world, among whom
our opinion and practice is so straungely and falsely traduced: partly that the
differences betwixt us and the auncienter brethren of the separation may
appear, and thereby men may be occasioned to try the truth from error and to
hold it fast. And although in this writing something there is which overtwharteth
my former judgment in some treatises by me formerly published: Yet I would
entreat the teader not to impute that as a fault unto me: rather it should be
accounted a virtue to retract erroers: Know therefore that latter thoughs often
times are better then the former: and I do profess this (that no man account
it strange), that I will every day as my erroers shall be discovered confess
them and renounce them: For it is our covenant made with our God to forsake
every evil way whither in opinion or practice that shall be manifested unto us
at any time: and therefore let no man plead now, as some have formerly done,
these men are inconstant: they would have they know not what: They will never
be satisfied and the like: For we profess even so much as they object: That
we are inconstant in erroer: that we would have the truth, though in many
particulars we are ignorant of it: We will never be satisfied in endevoring
to reduce the worship and ministry of the Church, to the primitive Apostolic
institution from which as yet it is so far distant: VVherfor my earnest desire
is, that my last writing may be taken as my present judgment and so far forth
as it overthwarteth any former writing of mine let it be accounted a voluntary
retractation and vnseyned repentance of my former errors and evil ways before
the whole earth. And let no man be offended at us for that we differ from
the ancient brethren of the separation in the Leitourgie Presbytery and
Treasury of the Church: for we hold not our says at any man's pleasure or in
respect of persons, neither do we bynd our selves to walk according to other
men's lines further then they walk in the truth: neither let the world think
that we approve them in all their practices: let them justify their
proceedinges or repent of them: we have (we willingly and thankfully
acknowledge) received much light of truth from their writings for which mercy
we always bless our God: and for which help we always shall honor them in
the Lord and in the truth. But as Paull withstood Peter to his face and
separated from Barnabas that good man that was full of the holy ghost and of
faith, for just causses: So must they give us leave to love the truth and
honor the Lord more then any man or Church upon earth. Now if any of the
adversaries of us both shall heerby take occasion of offense, thereby to speak
evil, or to withold or revolt from the truth: let these men consider with
themselves: First: that they even in that their Egyptian da^knesse wherein
they walk have their most violent oppositions and deadly contentions: Again,
the Apostle has foretold that it is necessary their should be dissentions
even in the true Churches that they which are approved may be known: besides
the truth shall by our differences be further clee^ed, and their Antichristian
worship and Ministry more and more detected, and cast into the bottomless
pit from whence it issued. Finally the Apostle says that Christ is a stone to
stumble at and a rock of offense to the disobedient as well as a cheef corner
stone elect and precious to them that believe: and blessed are they that are
not offended at Christ or his truth. So desyring the reader to weygh well what
I plead and not to be offended at the manifold quotations which are of
necess^ty that by places compared together the truth which is a mystery may
appear and Antichristianisme which is the mystery of iniquity may be
discovered, I cease, commending him to the grace of God in Jesus Christ, who in
due time will bring his people out of Egypt and Babylon spiritually so called,
though for a season they are there kept in Antichristian captivity and g^eevous
spiritual slavery: which the Lord in his due time effect, Amen, Amen.

John Smyth.

The principal contents of this treatise and our differences from the ancient
brethren of the Separation.
1 We hold that the worship of the new testament properly so called is
spiritual proceeding originally from the heart: and that reading out of a book
(though a lawfu^l ecle^iastical action) is no part of spiritual worship, but
rather the invention of the man of sin it being substituted for a part of
spiritual worship. 2 We hold that seeing prophesiing is a part of
spiritual worship: therefore in time of prophes^yng it is unlawful to have
the book as a help before the eye 3 we hold that seeing singinging a psalm
is a part of spiritual worship therefore it is unlawful to have the book
before the eye in time of singinge a psalm ^ we hold that the Presbytery of
the church is uniform: and that the triformed Presbytery consisting of three
kinds of Elders viz. Pastors Teachers Rulers is none o^ Gods Ordinance but man's
devise. 5 we hold that all the Elders of the Church are Pastors: and that lay
Elders (to called) are Antichristian. 6 we hold that in contributing to the
Church Treaturie their ought (...) be both a separation from them that are
without and a sanctification of the whole action by Prayer and Thankesgiving.
THE DIFFERENCES OF THE CHVRCHES OF THE Separation, Containing a description of
the Leitourgie and Ministry of the visible Church Annexed as a correction and
supplement to a little treatise lately published bearing title principles, and
inferences concerning the visible Church.
THE FIRST PART. concerning the Leitourgie of the Church
Cap. 1. of the Kingdom of the Saints.
The visible Church by the Apostle is called a Kingly preisthood. 1. pet. 2.9.
and the Saints are Kings and Priests unto God. Revel. 1.6.

The Saints as Kings ^ule the visible Church. 1. Cor. 5.12. psalm. 149.9. Mat.
18.15-17. 1. Cor. 6.1.-9.

The visible Church is Christ's Kingdom. Mat. 8.12. Ioh. 18.33-37. Act. 1.3, 1.
Cor. 15.24.25. Hebr. 12.28.

The members of the visible Church are called the children of the Kingdom. Mat.
8.12. And are under the government of the Church: Marc. 13.34, 1. Cor. 6.1.9.
and under the governme^nt of Christ. Luke 19.27.

The actions of the Church in administering the Kingdom are actions of
opposition, difference, plea, and strif: as in admonition, examination,
excommunication, pacification, absolution, etc. 1. Cor. 5.3-5. and 6.1-9. and
2. Ep. 2.6.7. Mat. 18-15-17. Revel. 2.2, 2. Chron. 19.10-11.

Hethetto aperteyneth conference and disputation. Luc. 2.46.47. Act. 6.9. and
17: 2, compared with psalm. 122.5. 1. King. 3.16-27.

In examination of opinions and facts also in conference and disputation
evidences of all sorts may be produced for finding out of the truth. Revel.
2.2. 1. King. 3.25-27.

Evidences are of diverse natures: as confessions and lotts: Josh. 7.16-21.
Oaths: Exodus ^2.10.11. books of all sorts. Dan, 9 2-1, King. 14.19. Act.
7.22. and 17.28. 1. Cor. 15.33. Tit. 1.12. Jude. verse. 14. compared with 1.
Timoth. 1.4. and Luke 3.25-27. namly translations, dictionaries, histories,
chronicles, commentaries, etc, all which may for evidence of the truth be
brought into the Church by necessary consequence.

Actions of administering the Church or Kingdom are not actions of spiritual
worship properly so called, for as the Kingdom and Preisthood of the old
Testament were distinct as also their actions several: Heb. 7.14. Genesis 49.10.
Deuteronomy. 33.8-11. 2. Chron. 26.18. psalm. 122 4-5: So are the Kingdom and
Preisthood of the new Testament and their actions also: which were typed by the
other. Heb. 5.4.5. Act. 15.7-29. with 13.2, 3.

Chap. 2. of the Preisthood of the saints.
Thus much of the Kingdom: now follows the Preisthood of the Church.

The saints as Priests offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by
Jesus Christ. 1. pet. 2.5.

Spiritual sacrifices are such as originally proceed from the spirit: and they
are called spiritual in opposition to the carnal or literal sacrifices
performed by the sacrificing Priests of the old Testament: which originally
proceeded from the lettre: by proportion also see, Ioh. 1.17, 2. Cor. 3.6. Gal.
3.5. Ioh. 4.20-24.

The actions of the Church in dispencing the preisthood are actions of concord
or union: Act. 4.24-32. philip. 3.16. Ephesians. 4.3-6.

Actions of the Preisthood of the saints are actions of spiritual worship
properly so called. Deu^. 33.10. 1. pet. 2.5. compared with Revel. 8.3. Heb.
13.10. philip. 2.17. Act. 13.2, 1. Cor. 11.4. and 14.15.22.26-31.

In the worship of God properly so called the saints are not to oppose,
contradict, examine, or censure: to propound doubtful and controversall points
of doctrine: but in union spiritual to offer up one and the same spiritual
sacryfice to the Lord. Act. 4.24-32. 1. Cor. 11.18-20. and 10.16.17.

If any thing doubtful or false be delivered in time of spiritual worship it
is to be examyned and censured afterward. 1. Cor. 14.31-33.40. compared with
Revel. 2.2. Act. 17.11.

Chap. 3. of Spiritual worship and of the Spirit.
Concerning spiritual worship consider these things following.

1. The Fountain from whence it proceeds. 2. The helps whereby it is
supported or furthered, 3. The essence or nature wherein properly it cousisteth.
The Fountain from whence spiritual worship proceeds is the spirit. Act.
1.4.5. and 2.4.17.18, 1. Cor. 12.4, 7.11. Ephesians. 5.18.19.

The spirit signifies 2. things. 1. the spirit of God. 2. the spirit of man:
that is the regenerate part of the soul. Act. 2.17.18, 1. Cor. 12.4. Romans 7.6.
Galath. 3.2.3.

The Regenerate part of the soul is either the sanctified memory, the
sanctified judgment, the sanctified heart and affections, the sanctified
conscience: from all these must spiritual worship proceed. Psalm. 103.1. 2.
Mat. 22 37, 1. Timoth. 1.5.

The work of the holy spirit is to suggest matter and to move the regenerate
part of the soul, 1. Cor. 12.8-11, Ioh. 14.26, Luke 24.32-45.

The work of the memory is to have in a readynesse sufficiency of fit matter
for the spiritual worship, psalm. 103.2, and 119.16.93.

The work of the judgment or understanding is to discern and judge truth from
falsehood, right from wrong, good from bad, fit from unfit, 1. Cor. 14.29-32,
and 11.29, Colos. 1.9. and 3.16, Philip. 1.9.10.

The work of the heart and affections is to be moved according to the quality
of the matter and kind of the worship. Iam. 5.13, Ezra. 3.10-13, 1. Cor.
14.24.25.

The work of the conscience is a sorrowful or confortable testimony answerable
to the matter handled, 1. Timoth. 1.5. Act. 23.1.

Finally the work of the Regenerat part of the soul is an Echo correspondent
to the work of the holy Spirit and the condition of the word of God which in
time of spiri^uall worship is administered. psalm. 27.8. Esaias. 66.5. Mat. 13.9.
Heb. 10.5-7. Caut. 5.4.

Chap. 4. of quenching the Spirit.
In performing spiritual worship we must take heed of quenching the spirit.
1. These. ^.19. 1. Cor. 14.30. Job 32.18-20.

The Spirit is quenched two ways: By silence. By set forms of worship. Psalm.
40.1-3. 1. Cor. 14.29-32. compared with. 1 These. 5.19.20.

The Spirit is quenched by silence when fit matter is revealed to one that
sits by and he wthholdeth it in time of prophesying:

The Spirit is quenched by set forms of worship, for therein the spirit is
not at liberty to utter it self, but is bounded in: contrary to. Act. 2.4. and
2. Cor. 3.17. compared with Ioh. 4.24. and Gal. 4.31. and. 5.1.

Set forms of worship are either in the memory, or in the book.

Saying set forms, of worship by rote is quenching the Spirit: and Reading
set forms of worship out of a book is quenching the Spirit: for in the one
the Spirit is not manifested but the strength of the memory, in the other the
matter is not brought out of the ha^^, but out of the book: and so in neither
of them the Spirit is at liberty.

Chap. 5. of the helps of Spiritual worship.
Thus much concerning the Fountain from whence Spiritual worship comes: now
follow the helps whereby Spiritual worship is furthered or supported.

The helps are either inward or outward.

The inward helps are only the word and the spirit. Ephesians. 5.18.19. Col. 3.16.
Romans 8.26.

The outward helps are the manifestation of the Spirit: and the seals of the
covenant: 1. Cor. 12.7. and 2.4. and Act. 2.4.42. with the instruments
creatures and actions apperteyning thereto.

Instruments: as the tongue and ear, to speak, heat and taste withal: Act.
2.4.8. 1. cor. 11.24.

Creatures as bread, wine, water: Act. 8.36-39. 1. Cor. 11.23. Mat. 26.27-29.

Actions as speaking, hearing, breaking bread, pouring out wine, eating,
drincking, washing with water, by consequent from the former places.

The publishing of the covenant of grace and the putting to of the seals is
only one concrete action or part of worship, for the publishing of the covenant
gives being ^o the seals, otherwise breaking bread and baptising are but
putting of seals to a blanck.

Chap. 6. concerning books and writing.
Here a question is to be discussed: wither a book be a lawful help to further
us in time of spiritual worship. Revel. 10.10.11. Ezech. 3.3.4.

Books or writings are signs or pictures of things signified thereby.

Writings are to be considered in the concrete or in the abstract.

In the concrete writings import both the sign and the thing signified thereby,
that is both the characters and the matter.

In the abstract writings import the sign in relation to the thing signified
thereby: vis: lettres, sillables, words, syntaxe.

Every writing is compounded of words.

Every word is made of lettres and sillables except that some lettres and
sillables are words.

Lettres or characters are significative. Revel. 1.8, and 13.18. Alpha, Omega,
Chi. Xi, (...). signify, first, last, 600, 60, 6.

Words are significative in the first or second intention: as Amen in the
first intention signifies truth or truly. Mat. 5.18. Amen in the second
intention signifies Christ Revel. 3.14. So does Logos signify also and many
other words of Scripture.

Syntaxe or joining of words in order signifies discourse,

As single words signify Logical relations or arguments. So Syntaxe or words
compounded in sentence signifies Axioms, Syllogismes, Method.

Therefore words and syntaxe are signs of things, and of the relations and
reason of things

Hence it follows that books or writings are in the nature of picturer or
Images and therefore in the nature of ceremonies: and so by consequent reading
a book is ceremonial. For as the Beast in the Sacrifices of the old
Testament was ceremonial so was the killing of the Beast ceremonial.

Chap. 7. Of the kinds of books or writings.
Thus much of the nature of books or writings: Now follow the kinds of
books or the distribution of writings.

writings may be distinguished according to the subject or efficient.

The subject of writings are paper, parchment, wood, stone, metal. etc

If writings be in paper or parchment they be called books, as may be
gathered from. Deuteronomy. 31.24-26. Ierem 36.4.

If writings be engraven in stone wood or metal it is caled graving or
carving: Exo. 28.11. 2. Cor. 3.7. Josh. 8.32.

The efficient of writings are two: God, or Man.

God himself first engraved the law in tables of stone. Exodus 31.18.

Men are of two sorts: Inspired, or ordinary men.

Men Inspired by the Holy Ghost are the Holy Prophets and Apostles who wrote
the holy scriptures by inspiration. 2. Pet. 1.21. 2 Timothy 3.16. Romans 1.2. namely
the Hebrew of the old testament and the greek of the new Testament.

The Holy Scriptures viz. the Originalls Hebrew and Greek are given by Divine
inspiration and in their first donation were without error most perfect and
therefore Canonical.

Ordinary men write books of diverse kinds among the rest such as have the
word of God or Holy Scriptures for their object are called Theological
writings: among them Translations of the Holy Scriptures into the mother tongue
are chiefly to be esteemed, as being the most principal, yet only as the
stream issuing from the fountain, or as the greatest river of the main sea.

No writings of ordinary men how holy or good soever are given by inspiration,
and therefore are subject to error and imperfect and so Apocrypha.

Chap. 8. Of the Originalls or Holy Scriptures, and of the parts of Holy
Scripture.
Holy Scriptures (as all other writings whatsoever,) consist of two parts: of
the tongue and character and of the substance or matter signified by the
character.

The tongue or character has apertaining to it the grammar and the Rhethorick
where of the tongue or character is the subject.

The matter or substance of the scripture has in it, Logic, History,
Cronology, Cos mography, Genealogy, Philosophy, Theology and other like matter.

The principal part of the matter is the Theology

A Translation of the holy originalls may express very much of the matter
contained in or signified by the original characters: it can express also
much of the Rhethorickas Tropes and Figures of sentence.

No Translation can possibly express all the matter of the holy originalls,
nor a thousand things in the Grammar, Rhethorick, and characte^ of the tongue.

A Translation so far forth as it does truly and fully express any thing of
the originals may be said inspired of God and no further.

Hence it follows that a translation be it never so good is mixed with men's
devises, imperfect, not equipollent to the originalles in a thousand
particulars.

The holy originalles signify and represent to our eyes heavenly things
therefore the book of the law is called a similitude of an heavenly thing. Heb.
9.19-23.

Holy Scriptures or writings began with Moses. Exob. 24.4. and 31.18. Ioh.
1.17. 2. Cor. 3.7.

Before Moses holy men prophesyed out of their hearts and received and kept the
truth of doctrine by tradition from hand to hand: 2. Pet. 2.5. Jude verse.
14.15. Deuteronomy. 31.24.

When Moses had written the law, he caused it to be put by the arc in the
most holy place, as a witness against the people. deuteronomy. 31.26. therefore the
Apostle calls it the handwriting in ordinances which was contrary to us,
which Christ nailed to his cross. Col. 2.14. Ephesians. 2.15.

Hence it follows that the holy originals the Hebrew scriptures of the old
testament are ceremonies. 2. Cor. 3.3.7. Nomb. 5.23.24. and by necessary
consequent.

The book or tables of stone typed unto the Jews their hard heart void of the
true understanding of the law. 2. Cor. 3.3. Heb. 8.10. Ezech. 36.26.27. 2.
Cor. 3.14.15.

The Inck wherewith the lettres were written signified the Spirit of God: 2.
Cor, 3.3. Heb. 8.10. compared with Exodus 31.18.

The lettres written or characters engraven signifies the work of the Spirit,
who alone does write the law in our hearts. by proportion: also Deuteronomy 9.10.
compared with Heb. 8.10

Reading the words of the law out of the book signifies the uttering of the
word of God out of the heart: by proportion. see also. 2. Cor. 3.2.3.6. 1. Cor.
12.7.

The writings of the old Testament being ceremonial are therefore abolished by
Christ only so far forth as they are ceremonial: Col. 2.14 20. Gal. 4.9.

The thing signified by the book viz: the law of God and the new testament
remains 2 Cor. 3: 11.7. Heb. 8.6.7.13.

Chap. 9, How the Originalls or Holy Scriptures are to be used.
The Scriptures of the old Testament are commanded to the Church 2. Pet.
1.19.^0 and. 2. Timoth. 3.16. as also the Scriptures of the new Testament: 1.
These. 5.27. Col. 4.16. and by proportion.

Here consider these things,

1. How the Scriptures are to be used: 2. How they are not to be used.

The Holy Scriptures are the Fountain of all truth, Ioh. 17.17. compared with
2. Timoth. 3.16.17.

They are the ground and foundation of our faith, Ephesians. 2.20. compared with
Ioh. 5.39. and 17.3.

By them all doctrynes and every Spirit is to be judged: Esaias 8.20. 1. Ioh.
4.1. Act. 17.11.

They are to be read in the Church and to be interpeted: Col. 4.16. compared
with Luke 24.27. and 1. Cor. 14, 27. and 12.10. by proportion. 2. Pet. 3.16.

Nevertheless the Holy Scriptures are not retained as helps before the eye in
time of Spiritual worship: Reasons are these.

Chap. 10. Reasons proving the Originals not to be given as helps before the
eye in worship.
1. Because Christ used the book to fulfill all righteousness Mat. 3.15. and
having by the use of the book fulfilled the law of reading he shut the book in
the Synagogue, to signify that that ceremony of bookworship, or the ministry
of the lettre was now exspired, and finished. Luke 4.20. Ioh, 19.30.

3. Because reading words out of a book is the ministration of the lettre, 2.
Cor. 3.6. namely a part of the ministry of the old Testament which is
abolished: Heb. 8.13: 2: cor. 3.11.13. and the ministry of the new testament
is the ministry of the spirit. 2. Cor. 3.6.

3. Because upon the day of Pentecost and many years after the churches of
the new testament did use no books in time of spiritual worship but prayed,
prophesyed, and sang Psalms merely out of their hearts. Act. 2.4.42. and
10.44-48. and 19.6. 1. cor. 14.15-17.26.37

4. Because no example of the Scripture can be showed of any man ordinary or
extraordinary that at or after the day of Pentecost used a book in praying,
prophesying and sing^ng Psalms: if yea: let it be done and we yield.

5. Because none of the books of the new Testament were written many years
after the day of Pentecost, at the least seven years: and the Churches all
that time could not use the books of the new Testament which they had not:

6. Because the Churches of the Greeks had no books to use that they might
use ^awfully: for they understood not Hebrew: and the Septuagints translation
ought not to be used or made, and the Apostles made no Greek translation: And
if the Apostles read the Hebrew an unknown tongue in the Greek Churches it could
not be a lawful worship, because it edified not: if they had the Hebrew before
their eyes and interpeted Greek, let it be showed when and where and we yield
unto it.

7. Because as in prayer the spirit only is our help and there is no outward
help given of God for that kind of worship: So also in prophesying and singing.
1. Cor. 11.4. and 14.16,

8. Because it is against the nature of spiritual worship: for when we read we
receave matter from the book into the heart, when we pray prophesy or sing we
utter matter out of the heart unto the ear of the Church; Ezech, 2.8-19, and
3.1-4. Revel. 10.8-11.

9. Because upon the day of Pentecost fyerie cloven tongs did appear, not
fiery cloven books. Ac^. 2.3. and always there must be a proportion betwixt
the type and the thing typed: upon the day of Pentecost the fiery law was given
in books Deuteronomy: 33.2. Exo: 24.4.12. upon the day of Pentecost the fiery gospel
was given in tongues Act: 2.3. Mat: 3 11. Act: 1.5. the book therefore was
proper for them, the tongue for us (...) 10. Because as all the worship which
Moses taught began in the letter outwardly, and so proceeded inwardly to the
spirit of the faithful: so contrariwise all the worship of the new testament
signified by that typical worship of Moses must begin at the Spirit, and not
at the letter originally. 2. Cor: 3.6.8. 1. Cor: 12.7. or else the heavenly
thing is not answerable to the similitude thereof:

Therefore as in prayer the book is laid aside, and that by the confession of the
ancient brethren of the separation: so must it be also in prophesying and
singing of Psalms as we are persuaded. 1. Cor. 11.4. and 14.15.16.26.

Quere, whither the Prophets of the Church may not in time of Spiritual
worship, take the originals, and interpret out of them a text, and then shut
the book and prophesy from that ground of holy Scripture so interpreted. Luke
4.16-20.

Chap. 11. objections for book worship answered.
The first objection.

Reading in the old Testament was commanded by Moses. Deuteronomy. 31.9-13. was
amplified by David. 1. Chron. 16. and 25. was practiced by Josiah 2. Chron.
34.30. by Ezra and Nehemiah Nehem. 8.8. and 9.3. allowed by our Savior Christ
Luke 4.16. and by the Apostles, Act. 13.14.15. etc reported as a thing of
ancient approved continuance. Act. 15.21.

Answer to the first objection.

First the reading commanded by Moses was only once every seven year. Deuteronomy.
31.10.11 and therefore it was no part of ordinary worship, and there is no
commandment in Moses given either to the Priests or Levites for ordinary
reading of the law in the Tabernacle.

Secondly: Hence it follows that reading in the old Testament was no part of
the worship of the tabernacle or temple, or of the service performed by the
Priests therein, for all the worship that was appointed by Moses for the
Priests was limited to the holy place, whither the people were not admitted.

Thirdly: therefore reading was of another nature performed in the utter court or
Synagogue or else where, either by the levites or any other learned men of what
tribe seever: Mat. 23.2. Luke 4.16. Act. 13-15. compared with. Act. 15-21.
Deuteronomy. 31 9-11.1. Chron. 10.4.7.37.39. and 15.1-8. and 28.13.2. Chron.
34.14.30.31. Nehem. 8. and 9. so no part of worship properly so called, but
only a ceremonial ground or soundation, of inward or outward spiritual worship
common to the Churches of all ages.

Lastly: it is not denied but that reading now is to be used in the Church:
only we say it is not a part of spiritual worship, or a lawful means in time
of spiritual worship.

The second objection

Reading is commanded in the new testament Colos: 4.16. 1. These: 5.27. and a
blessing prom^sed thereto Revel: 1.3. and the commandment is that it be
practiced in the church: therefore it is a part or means of the worship of the
new testament.

Answer to the second objection.

Not every thing performed in the church is a part of spiritual worship,
forall the parts of public administration of the Kingdom are done in the
church, and yet cannot be said to be parts of spiritual worship properly so
called. Chap: 1. and 2.

Moreover when he commands his Epistles to be read in the Churches, his
meaning is not strictly literal: that is, that the very words which he wrote
should be repeated verbatim out of the book: but his meaning is that the fense
of the words or the meaning of the Apostle should be related to the brethren,
whither by reading the verywordes, by expounding the meaning by interpreting or
translating. For if his meaning be that the very words he wrote be literaly
read: the^ the Greek words must be repeated out of the book to all nations:
which is contrary to. 1. Cor. 14.26. If his meaning be, that the sense should
be given any way, by translating, by reading the translation, by interpreting
his meaning in a paraphrase, commentary etc. then how will it follow that
reading the Greek tongue which is not understood in the English Churches is a law
full part of spiritual worship according to the literal signification of
readings?

Further the Apostle wrote his Epistles to the Collossians, and Thessalonians
and the other Churches upon particular occasions for partcular ends, and the
commandment of reading then was special in those respects to them: and the
intent of the Apostle is not to enjoin the reading of them every day and in
time of Spiritual worship to al Churches: yet we do acknowledge the absolute
necessity of reading and searching the Scriptures, Ioh. 5.39.

Again that reading is a lawful yea necessary means or help to further us to
Spiritual worship is not denied, but this is denied that it is a lawful help in
time of worship, or a lawful part of Spiritual worship. For it is confessed and
defended by the ancient brethren of the separation, that the originals are no
lawful help in time of prayer: So say we they are no lawful help in time of
prophesying and singing Psalms, and that by equal proportion for there is the
same reason of helps in all the parts of Spiritual worship, during the time of
performing the worship.

The third objection.

The Apostle 1. Tim. 4.13-16. commands. Timothy and so all Elders to attend
to reading where reading is joined with exhortation and doctrine and so
imports that it is to be understood of the joining of reading in time of
Spiritual worship

Answer to the third objection.

The circumstances of the place being ^^el considered w^^ afoard that Paul
speaks no^ of the execution of his office, but of preparing himself to the
execution of his office: which is attained by reading the Scriptures whereby men
are fitted with matter fit to teach and exhort: for by this means the gift o^
prophecy was preserved in Timothy us. 14. and by this means his proficiency
should be manifested. us. 15. by this means he should the better save men's
souls, us. 16.

The fourth objection.

Let it be granted that the Apostles and Evangelists used no books being
extraordinary men and having the extraordinary direction of the spirit, for
they needed no such helps of books as we do: Yet we being men ordinary have
need of books, therefore they by the direction of the Spirit both have written
books for our use, and have commanded us to use them.

Answer to the fourth objection.

This objection may as well fit bringing of books into the time of prayer, from
whence they are justly banished: for it may be said that the Apostles were
extraordinary men, and needed no books for prayer, but we need books to help
our infirmity: and why may not a man as well say the Apostle commands the
reading of prayers, and promises a blessing to reading of prayers in time of
prayer as otherwise.

Again, though the holy Spirit be not given to us in the same manner and
measure as to the Apostles, yet we have the same Spirit to help us as they had,
and to the same ordinary purposes, is he sent to us by Christ as to them:
namely to help our infirmityes: Romans 8. 26. for the work of the ministry: Ephesians.
4.12. to be our annoynting, 1. Ioh. 2.27. to lead into all truth: Ioh 16.13. to
be our paraclete: Ioh. 14.16. and so by consequent to help us to pray,
prophesy, and praise God.

Again this objection seems to establish two forms of prophesying, one
without books by the Apostles for many years in the Church: another with
books afterward taught by the Apostles: and then it follows that the
Apostles gospel was yea and nay, who first taught and practiced one way, and
afterward taught and commanded to practice another way.

Lastly: The Apostles had the books of the Old Testament in the Hebrwe tongue,
and so might have used them before their eye in time of prophesying, either to
read out of them to the Hebrews, or to translate and interprett out of them to
the Greecians: but they did neither of these, but only prophesyed out of their
hearts, as the Holy Ghost gave them utterance. Act. 2.4. Yea and taught the
primitive Churches so to do: 1. Cor. 14.26. If it can be showed that they did
use the books of the Old Testament in time of worship to read or interpret
from them, let it be showed, and we yield: if not thus we hold and practice
for the present.

Here upon it follows that neither reading the originals, nor interpreting
or translating out of the originals the book being before the eye, is either a
lawful part or means of Spiritual worship.

Chap. 12. Of the writings of men.
Writings of men are of diverse kinds: among them are translations of the holy
Scriptures a most principal.

To translate the originals into any mother tongue is as well, and as much the work
of a man's wit and learning, as to analyze the Scriptures Rhetorically or
Logically, to Collect doctrynes and uses Theologically, to give expositions and
interpretations of places doubtful.

The translator cannot conceave nor express in writing the whole mind of the
holy Spirit contained in the originals, but only some good part of it: the
expositor, paraphrast comme^tator may express as much as the translator, yea
and in respect of some particulars, as Hebraismes, Grecismes and the like
considerations, much more.

There is as good warrant to translate the Scriptures as to expound analyze, and
draw doctrynes and uses from the Scriptures. Marc. 5.41, Mat. 1.23. and by
proportion from 1. Cor. 12.10. and 14.13.27.39.

There is no better warrant to bring translations of Scripture written into the
church, and to read them as parts or helps of worship, then to bring in
expositions, resolutions, paraphrasts and sermons upon the Scripture seeing al
these are equally humane in respect of the work, equally divine in respect of
the matter they handle.

Chap. 13. Of reading translations: and of the translation of the. 72.
interpreters.
Hitherto apperteyneth this question, whether reading a translation be a lawful
help or means in time of Spiritual worship or a lawful part of Spiritual
worship.

If originals must be laid aside as in time of prayer, so also in time of
prophesying and singing, then much more must translations be laid aside at that
time: as may further be manifested thus.

Because the Septuagints translation was a greevous sin for many reasons.

1. For that the covenant of grace ought not to have been preached unto the
gentiles til the fullnes of time. Mat: 10.5 6. 1. Timoth 3.16. Romans 16.25.26
compared with, Mat. 10.5.6. and 28.19. And therefore that the Septuagints by
their translation did communicate it to the Grecians, before the fulness of time
was their greevous sin.

2. Because all the Gentills ought to have been proselytes of the Jews Church
and to have come to Jerusalem to worship* Exodus 12.43-49. Mat. 23.15. Act. 2.10.
and ought to have learned their tongue and worship, which was prevented by the
Septuagints translation.

3. Because the Hebrew characters and writings were Ceremonies and so ought not
to have been profaned among the Grecians by their writings: and as the
Philistims were justly plagued for the presence of the Arc, 1. Sam. 5. So
might the Lord justly have plagued the Grecians for that the Oracles of God
were among them, and fearfully abused by them.

4. If it were unlawful to sing one of David's Psalms in a strange nation as
Babylon. psalm. 137.4. then much more unlawful was it to translate the
Scriptures into a strange tongue for all the Ceremonial law was bounded within
the holy land.

5. The translation of the Septuagints out of Hebrew into Greek, is
contradictory to the Lords mercy to the Jews church and there special
Privileges, see psalm. 147.19.20. Romans 3.1.2. Act. 10.28. and 22.1.-18. Ephesians.
2.11-15. Act. 13.46-48. contrary also to Romans 16.25.26.

6. Because that seeing the Hebrew writings were Ceremonies it was unlawful for
the Septuagints to chandg them from their proper kind, and to picture them out
by the Greek writings for the Greeks use.

7. Because the Septuagints did of purpose conceal many things as judging the
gentiles unworthy to know them fearing also least they should profane such holy
mysteries wherein their consciences told them plainly that their translation
was their sin: also they did pervert many things of purpose, ad something and
infinitely corrupt their translation which was their greeve us sin.

Hence it follows that seeing the Septuagints translation was so greevous a
sin, therefore the Apostles would never account it holy scripture coming from
the holy ghost and so never approve the use of it in the Greek Churches.

Again we never heard of any other translation before Christ, besides the
Septuagints: or if there were any, it were unlawful by the same reasons before
used against the Septuagints.

Further: there could be no use of the Septuagints translation for reading in
the Latin Church of the Romans.

More over the new Testament being not written, none of it till 7.10. or 20.
years after Christ's death, not all of it till John had written who was the
surviver of the Apostles, how could there be a translation of the new Testament
written during the Apostles lives?

Besides it is never mentioned that ever any Apostle or Apostolic man or
Church, either had from the Apostles or used by their direction or approbation
a translation of any sort, whathoever before the eye in time of Spiritual
worship: if yea: let it be showed.

Lastly translations therefore began in the Church after the Apostles days in
time of worship, and so were not from the beginning, in respect whereof they
are a part of the mystery of iniquity in worship.

Chap. 14. Of other arguments against reading translations in time of worship.
1. 1, These. 5.21. Try all things, keep that good thing. But no man ignorant of
the tongs can try whether the translation be fit or good: and therefore no man
ignorant of the tongs can strictly keep or read a translation in time of
worship.

2. Romans 14.23. 1. Timoth. 1.4.-7. Heb. 11.6. whatsoever comes not from faith
is sin. But no man ignorant of the tongs can of faith use the translation
seeing he cannot examyne it whether it be good or bad, and so believe or refuse
it. Therefore it is not of faith in him and so it is sin for him to use it
before the eye in time of worship.

3. A translation made verbatim from the originalls is absurd by reason of the
difference of the dialects: and therefore vnlaw^ull seeing it edifieth not. 1.
Cor. 14.26. A translation paraphrastical or a paraphrast if it be lawful in
time of worship to be read then why not a written sermon.

4. A paraphrast, come^tarie or exposition upon a chapter which contains more
of the contents of the originalles and the holy ghostes meaning is unlawful
to be read in time of worship: therefore a translation of a chapter which
contains less is unlawful also to be read in time of worship.

5. Levit. 22.22. Malach. 1.8.13.14. Mat. 22.37. Romans 12.1.2. Psalm. 119.45. and
103.1. God will be served with the best we have. But there is no one translation
the best we have: seeing the Lord may in time of worship minister better to him
that administreth, if he understand the originalls if he vnde^stand not the
originalls he has it not at all: for it is another man's work: and therefore
no one translation written may be read in time of worship.

6. Deuteronomy. 16 16. 1. Chron 21.24. Ephesians 4 8. Romans 12.3. we must worship God with
our own not with another man's with that which cost us som^hing not with that
which cost us nothing. But for one ignorant of the tongs to read the
trans^ation and offer it to God is to offer to God: not he man's labor not his
own: that which cost him nothing but is another man's cost: therefore it is
vnl^w^ull.

7. Reading a translation is not commanded nor was ever practiced by Christ,
the Apostles, or the p^imitive Chu^ches in time of worship: and so being
devised by man is in the account of vayre worship. Mat. 15.9 and w^ll-worship.
Col. 2.23. and so a kind of Idolatry and therefore the translation it self
before the eye in time o^ worship an Idol and so has a curse denounced
against the use of it in time o^ worship. Revel. 22.18. Exodus 20.4.5.

8. A translation being the work of a man's wit and learning is as much and as
truly an humane writing as the Apocrypha (so commonly called) writings are: and
seeing it has not the allowance of holy men inspired, but is of an hidden
authority: it may be justly called Apocryphon, for the signification of the
word imports so much and therefore not ^o be brought into the worship of God
to be read.

9. All the arguments used against the reading of homilies and prayers may be
applied ^gaynst the reading of translations in time of w^rship As:

1. They do st^nt or quench the spirit which is contrary to. 1. These. 5.19.20.
2 Cor. 3.17. 2. They are not the pure word of God and so contrary to Eccles.
12.10. Mat. 15.9. 3. They are the private works of men: contrary to. 1. Cor
12.7.8. 2 Pet. 1.20, 4. They are the private openings or interpretations of the
prophesies of Scripture: ^ontrary to. 2 pet 1.20. 5. They contradict the gifts
bestowed by Christ upon the Church for the work of ^e ministry: con^trary to.
Ephesians. 4.8.11.12. Act. 2.4. Ioh. 16.7. 6 They derogate from the virtue of Christ's
Asce^tion and dignity of his Kingdom: con^^ary to Ephesians. 4.8. 7. They blemish
Christ's bounty to and care of his church. contrary to. Ioh. 14.16.18.26 8. They
disgrace the Spirit of God setting him to school. contrary to. 1: Ioh. 2.27.
9. They bring into the Church a strange ministratio^ contrary to. 1. Cor.
12.5. and so a new part of the gospel or covenant contrary to, Gal. 3.15. 10.
They do not manifest the spirit which comes from within, but manifests the
lettre which comes from without. 2. Cor. 3.6. 11. Therefore they are not
spiritual worship Ioh. 4.24. compared with. 2. Cor. 3* 1^. Gal. 5.1. and 4.31.
12. Children may read a translation perfectly well: But children cannot perform
a^^ part of Spiritual worship: therefore reading a translation is no part of
Spiritual worship.
Quere: whither between the parts of Spiritual worship, that is between prayer,
prophesying and singing Psalms, a man may not inte^pose the reading of a
scripture or chapter not intending it as worship, but as a fu^ther prepara^on
to worship.

Chap. 15. Objections for translations answered.
The first Objection.

Romans 4.3. What faith the Scripture and then follows the Septuagints
translation Heb. 3.7. The holy ghost faith and then follow the wo^des of the
Septuagints translation: and it is observed that the Ap^stles quote the words
of the Septuagints translation, not only where they expound the meaning of the
holy ghost: as Heb. 10.5. and Romans 4.3. Where the Apostles follow the
Septuagints not the Hebrew, but also in their devises besides the original: as
in the second Caynan Luke 3.36.37. and in the 75. persons of Jacobs Family,
Act. 7.24. where as there is, but one caynan and 70. person^ in the Hebrew.

Answer to the first Objection.

If the originals themselves are not to be used as helps in time of Spiritual
worship, as has been proved then this objection is of no force ^or
translations.

Secondly: if it were of force to bring translations to be read in the time of
worship ^t were avay leable thus far even to bring in to the time of worship
the errors of the ^ranslations: for so this objection imports that the
Apostles quote the Septuagints ^rrors, and whereas it is said by some that in
the Apostles intention it is no error, since ^^riting to Theophilus and the
Grecians, rather then he would haza^d their faith by ^^aundging the Septuagints
errors and correanding such an approved Translation, he (...) ought it meet to
follow that received devise of theirs contrary to the truth the ^oly Ghost
th^rein yielding to man's infirmity as in the cases of Polyga^y. and Diverce,
(...) fury in the Old Testament: It is thus answered that the Holy Ghost
needs (...) the lies of men, to work his work, nor the Septuagints errors to
support the faith (...) ^heophilus and the Grecians: And this mischeef
follows herevppon that rather (...) the ^ayth of Theophilus and the Grecians,
should be endaungered the credit o^ the (...) Scriptu^es should be hazarded
their being found in then such devises errors and c^^^radictions. And further
it is the thing by connivency to pass by sin ^s wa^ the co^^^ation of
Polygamy Divo^ce and Vsu^y: See Act. 17.30. Another thing to translate (...)
from a translation into the^ original, which is to approve them, and this
whosoever affirms, speaks little less then blasphemy.

Thirdly: therefore as Antiehrist has polluted all Gods ordinances so has he
violated the original criptures: And therefore one Caynan must be put out: For so
me ancient copies have it not: and for 75. There must be read seaventy all:
Pente for Pantes: as Romans 12.11. Kairo, Kurio, and it is possible easily to
mistake so small a matter in copying out any thing as experience teaches.

Lastly fully to answer the objection whatsoever is good in the Septuagints
translation was taken out of the New Testament, and ancient Fathers of the
Greek Church: For it is manifest by historyes that the Septuagints translation
is lost, and this that goes under the name of the Septuagint is a patchery
made out of ancient writings: and therefore the Holy Ghost does not aim at the
Septuagints Translation at all as is imported in the Objection.

The second Objection.

The were Greeks and Grecians: Hellenes: Kai Hellenistai. As may appear Act.
6. 1. Romans 1.16. The Greeks were of the Progeny of the Greeks as well as of the
country: The Grecians were Jews by Progeny, and borne in Grecia: Therefore Paull
calls himself an Hebrew of the Hebrews: Philip 3: 5. Now these Grecians had
forgotten their Language and spoke Greek only: And having Synagogues in the
Cities where they dwelt, h^d the Septuagints translation read unto them, and
the Apostles coming into their Synagogues did approve that act of thei^s of
reading the translation and so it follows that reading translations is
lawful in worship.

Answer to the second Objection.

The distiction of Greeks and Grecians is vain as appears by these places
compated together: Act. 21.39. and 18.2.24. with Act. 6.1. Philip. 3.5. For
Paul was borne at Tarsus in Cilicia, and Aquila at Pontus, and Apollos at
Alexandria, And yet are all called Jews not Hellenists or Grecians: and Act.
6.1. The Helenists murmured against the Hebrews, the Helenists did understand
the Hebrew tongue, and had not forgotten their own Language.

Secondly: it cannot be proved by Scriptures that the Helenists had the Greek
translation read unto them in the Synagogues, it is manifestly otherwise by the
reasons used before against the translation of the Septuagints.

Thirdly, the worship of God properly so called of the whole Church of the
Jews* was performed in the Holy place at Ie^usalem, and so that which was
performed in the Synagogue was not properly the worship of the whole Church of
the Jews: but was of that nature that passed between Christ and the Doctors in
the temple: Luke 2.46. compared with Act. 17.2.

Fourthly if the Helenists did read the Septuagints translation as a part of
there proper worship having forgotten their own Language, therein were committed
these sins.

1. Forgetting their tongue one part of the ceremonial law. Nehem. 13.24.

2. ^^^tuting worship in a common tongue which was as unlawful as sacrif^cing a
dog

3. Therefore it was a false worship, as it was a false worship to sacrifice an
unclean beast under the law

Lastly if they did read the Septuagintes translation and the Apostles came in
and heard, it does not follow they did allow it as a part of the worship of
the new testament, no more then they did allow circumcision to be: neither did
they in deed give any allowance unto it at all, seeing they came to the
synagogues where was the greatest concourse of people not to worship, but to
draw them to Christ, not to approve their doings but to disprove them.

The third objection.

Deuteronomy: 31.12. the reasons that are alleged for readinge the law are
perpetual, and therefore the law of reading is perpetual: the moral reasons
are, hearing, learning, fearing god, and keepinge his laws.

Answer to the third objection.

First the law of reading is not moral in the parricular act, but in the
equity: for it was commanded to be done but once in seven year at the feast
of tabernacles Deuteronomy. 31.10. and if it had been moral in the particular act it
should have been from the beginning, (which was not so, seeing it began with
Moses,) and it should continue after the end of the world: for moralities
endure for ever: But books and so reading of books shall perish.

Secondly it is moral in the equity, that is, tha^ all means must be used to
attain the knowledge of the truth whereof reading is a principal, and yet hence
it follows not that reading is either a part or means of Spiritual worship:
For books are things merely artificial as are pictures and images, Genes.
4.22.

Finally let it be granted that reading is moral it does not herevppon follow
that it is lawful in time of Spiritual worship as a part or help thereto.
Seeing that reading is searching the Scripture, or preparing to the worship, and
not worship it self, and seeing that when a man does worship, he is not to
prepare to worship as he does that reads: though I deny not but that one part
of worship ^s a preparation to another.

The fourth objection.

Reading the law was performed in the Synagogue, and it was not tied to the
temple or the holy place, which is an argument that reading is not ceremonial
but moral, for no part of ceremonial worship was performed from the tabernacle
or Temple.

Answer to the fourth objection.

The argument follows not: for although all ceremonial worship was to be
performed at Jerusalem Ioh. 4.20, Yet it is so to be construed as intended by
the woman according to the laws direction: namely, of the worship which the
Priests performed as sacrificers: (...) may be seen: D^^^* 1^.5-7. and us*
11-19. For otherwise some ceremonial worship; as namely circumcizion was
performed any where in the land of Israel, for the males must needs be
circumcized at 8. days old, and it was impossible to bring the males some of
the^ 100. miles within eight days space. see Chap. 20.

Again suppose reading the law to be a moral action (which yet is not so)
hence it follows not that reading the law is a part of Spiritual worship or
a lawful help thereto in time thereof: for by the same reason every moral duty
may be made a part or means of Spiritual worship, which is absurd, for that
is to confound the second table of the law, and the duties thereof with the
first table and the duties thereof and the gospel with the law.

The fifth objection.

Luke 4.16. Christ stood up to read, and read his text, and then preached out
of it: Now his actions are our instruandions: and therefore we are to read
words out of a book in time of preaching or prophesying.

Answer to the fifth objection.

To this objection many things may be answered.

First in that it was done in the Synagogue by Christ which was neither Priest
not Levite, it is an argument (...) it was no proper pa t of the worship of the
old testament, but of that nature a^ was that ^^crise performed by Christ and
the Doctors in temple: so that reading most property is ^ea^ching the
scriptu^es, which is not worship.

Secondly: Christ had the O^^g^^^e^ the Hebrew text of Esaias the Prophet, and
read or interpreted out of it, for it is doubtful whither he uttered the
Hebrew words or speak the sense of the Hebrew in the Syriac^^ dialect: and
therefore from hence reading a translation cannot be concluded* but either
reading or interpreting the originals.

Thirdly: Hence cannot be concluded that manner of p^eaching now used ehat a
man shall taKe his text, and then devide it into parts analyzing it
Rhetorically, and Logically, collecting doctrynes and uses from every member or
argument or word of his text all this while he having his book before his eye^
to help him at all assayes: a thing whereof I am assured the holy Scriptures
yields no warrant that it may be accounted a part of Spiritual worship: For
although the Scriptures may be so handled, and that for very profitable use,
yet that is rather a Scholasticall lecture, then an Ecclesiastical worship: it
is rather an inquisition and searching of the holy Spirits intent and purpose,
then prophesying.

Lastly: If we must needs be tied to this example of Christ (which I see no
reason for seeing reading was of the Old Testament) then the example of Christ
shall bind also thus far, as that the book shall be laid aside, so soon as the
text is read, and the book that is used shall be the Originals: which is nothing
for vocal but for mental reading, or for interpreting, and which I never have
thought to contradict, but wherein I am ready to be overruled: For this
particular see the Quere in the Chap. 10.

See also the quere Chap. 14. For interposing the reading of the translation
between the parts of worship a^ a further preparation and help to worship
succeeding.

Thus much conce^^ing the answer to Objections made for the lawful use of
^^^^lations in time of worship.

Chap. 16. Of the lawfullnes of translating the Scriptures. and the use of
translations in our account.
Although before Christ's coming it was unlawful to translate the Holy
Originals from their ceremonial tongue into any vulgar mother tongue: yet the
partition wall being now broken down, translations are lawful and that for
these reasons.

Math. 28. Christ commands to go teach all nations, and therefore all nations
may have the Holy Scriptures translated into their own vernacular tongue, that
thereby they may learn the truth.

The Scriptures are a Creature or ordinance of God: and therefore as it is lawful
to picture a man, a byrd a fish, a foul, an angel virtue or vice, so is ir
lawful to picture out or resemble the Hebrew and Greek original Scriptures by
any vulgar translation of any tongue or Language whatsoever.

Again as God sent the confusion of tongs as a curse Genes. 11.6.7. so has he
sent the knowledge of the tongs as a blessing, Act. 2.6.8. and because the
extraordinary knowledge of the tongue is ceased, the ordinary knowledge of them is
left for our use* which can never be attained unto, but by grammars and
dictionaryes whe^in the Hebrew words of the old Testament and Greek of the new
Testament are interpreted, and if it be lawful to express in our own tongue all the Hebrew and Greek words singly as in Grammars and Dictionarves, then it is
lawful so to do with the^ al jointly in syntaxe, and that is a translation
whence it follows that translations of the holy scriptures are lawful and
necessary.

Further: All the members of the Church cannot possibly attain the knowledge
of the tongs, which notwithstanding they must endeavor to their utmost. 1* Cor.
14.1.5. and seeing the Holy Ghost has commanded al to try and search and read:
1. These. 5.21. Ioh. ^.39. Colos. 4.16, and all cannot try, search, or read the
originals, they must needs have translations and other Theological writings,
for their better help to the true understanding of the original Scriptures.

Lastly: these places of scripture compared together are sufficient warrant for
the law fulness of translations: Mat. 1.23. Marc, 5.41. 1. Cor. 14, 27.

Now further we have the translations of Holy Scripture in this account: viz:
The translation agreeable to the originals.

1. Is a secondary Scripture, yet much inferior to the originals. 2. It may be
read in the Church and sung in times. 3. It may be expounded in the Church. 4.
It may be so used as a means to prepare us to spiritual worship. 5. That the
matter of the translation agreeable to the originals is inspired: but not the
writing or character. 6. That it may be made the ground of our faith. 7. That
it may be made an instrument to try doctrine by.
This we hold affirmatively: Negatively we hold thus.

^. That reading the English translatinon is no part of the spiritual worship
of the new Testament properly so called: viz: o^ prayer, prophesy, singing of
Psalms.

^. That reading the English translation is no lawful means or help in time of
Spiri^^al worship.

3* That the worship of the New Testament must not begin in the book or
lettre outwardly: but must proceed originally from the heart and Spirit:

Al other public and private uses of translations we allow.

Chap. 17. Concerning the use of the translations for the hearers.
Hitherto aperteyneth another question: whither the hearers may have their
translations or the originals to read or search in time of prophesy.

The answer is Negative that it is not lawful for these reasons.

First: the Prophets and Apostles wrote books, but did never devide their
books into chapters or verses: Henry Stephen first made the verses of the new
Testament: Seeing therefore that chapter and verse were of man's invention, hence
it follows before chapter and verse came in the hearers could not turn to
search their books in time of hearing.

Secondly: the Apostles in quoting testimonies of the Prophets do not quote
chapter and verse, but only say: it is written: by Zachary, by Jeremy. The
Scripture says: The Holy Ghost says, etc. Thereby teaching us that there is no
use of Chapter and verse for searching in time of hearing: For no doubt they
preached as they wrote.

Thirdly: never was there any mention made of any hearer that ever had his book
to search in time of hearing.

Fourthly: Searching quotations hinders attention: for the mind and
affections are distracted from hearing by seeking the places: seeing the mind
and heart should follow ^he voice of the speaker, as in prayer, so also in
Prophefying. Nehem. 8.3.

Lastly manuscripts being few and very dear and large (there being yet no
printing found out) all could not have or bring their books, but there is only
one kind of true and profitable hearing, either all to have books and search,
or none to have them:

Seeing therefore bringing books and searching them in time of hearing was not
from the beginning: Therefore that also is a part of the mystery of iniquity in
hearing the word.

Chap. 18. Of the nature of essence of Spiritual worship and the essential
causses and kinds thereo:
Thus much concerning the helps of Spiritual wor^hip: Now follows to be
considered the nature or essence thereof, which may appear in two particulars:
viz:

First in the essential causses of Spiritual worship.

Secondly in the proper kinds or parrs of the worship of the new Testament.

The essential causses of Spiritual worship are the matter and the so^^^^.

The matter of Gods worship is the holy Scriptu^es which cont^^neth the word o^
God, or the Gospel, the subject whereof is Christ Jesus:

The form or soul that quickens it is the Spirit. Colos. 3.16. compared
with Ephesians. 5.18.19.20.

This may be illustrated by the ceremonial worship of the Old Testament and
the essential causses thereof.

The matter of the ceremonial worship of the Old Testament was the beasts,
incense, Oil, fatt; corn, wine, and the like Creatures whereof the sacrifices,
offerings, perfumes, lamps, and bread were made, with all the actions thereto
aperteyning.

Proportionable hereto is the matter of our spiritual worship Christ Jesus and
his merits: the word of God contained in the Scriptures which offers Christ
Jesus unto us: the seals of the covenant with all the actions thereto
aperteyning.

The form of the ceremonial worship of the Old Testament consisting in
Sacrifices, (besides the manner of doing) appeared in 4. things: two whereof
must be absent for the most part viz: honey and leaven: two must always be
present: fire and salt: Marc: 9.49. compared with Leuit. 2.11.13, and 9.24. 1.
Cor. 5.6 -8.

Proportionable hereunto the form of our Spiritual worship consists in the
fire of the Spirit working with the word: Act. 2.3.4. Mat. 3.11. Luke 12.49*
50. and 24.32. 2. Tim. 2.6.7. Ierem. 23.29.

In the salt of sound doctrine and grace. Mat. 5.13. Colos. 4.6.

In the unleavened bread of synce^ity and truth. 1. Cor. 5.8. which was also
signified by absence of honey which has a faculty to leaven.

As the fire came down from heaven, whe^with the sacrifices were off^red;
Ievit. 9.24 So the holy Ghost like fire came down upon the primitive Church,
to make their Spiritual sacrifices acceptable: So must it do also upon ours:
A^^. 2.3.4.

As the fire was daily preserved to offer withal. Levit. 6.12 13. and strange
fire might not be offered: Levit. 10.1. So whatsoever worship is offered up and
is not kindled with the Spirit of grace in our hearts is abominable: 1. Cor.
12.7.10. 1. Pet. 2.5.

Hence it follows that the worship that begins in the book or translation
comes not originally from the Spirit, but from the lettre or ceremony, and so
is not properly of the new Testament, but of the Old: 2. Corinthians. 3.6. If the
translation be made by one without, it comes from a strange fire, and cannot
be accepted, but is subject to a curse.

Thus much of the essential causses: now follow the kinds of Spiritual worship,
which are 3* Praying, Prophesying, and singing Psalms: Psalm. 50.14 17. 1. Cor.
11.4. and 14 15-17 26. Iam. 5.13. Revel. 19.10.

Therefore praying and prophesying are joined together as parts of worship: 1.
Cor. 11.4 and men must be ^ncovered at both of them.

Likewise praying and singing Psalms are put together in the same sense: 1.
Cor. 14.15.17. Iam. 5.13. Act. 16.25:

Finally: Prophesying and Psalms are coupled together for the same purpose, 1.
Cor. 14.26.

Prayer is the showing of our requests to: God by the manifestation of the
spirit: Phil. ^.^. Romans 8.26.27. 1 Cor. 14.15.

Singing Psalms is the showing of our thanksgiving to God by the manifestation
of the spirit. Phil. 4.6. 1. Cor. 14.15-17.

Prophesying is the publishing of the covenant of Grace by the manifestation of
the Spirit, Act. 2.4.11.17.18. 1 Cor. 2.4. and 12.7.10. Gal. 3.5. and it
serves specially and properly for them that believe: 1. Cor. 14.22. Psalm.
50.16.17. and it pleased the Holy Ghost to choose that word to signify unto
us, that as the Prophetts by inspiration of the Holy Ghost prophesyed without
books, so must we: the difference is in this that their inspiration was
extraordinary, ours is ordinary. Revel, 19.10.

The matter of all these 3. parts of Spiritual worship is one and the same,
viz: Gods word or the Scriptures, yet handled divers^y.

In prayer Gods word or the Scriptures are delivered by way of petition in
di^ection to God, requesting things for us optatively.

In thanksgiving Gods word or the Scriptures are delivered by way of recompense
or ^etribution to God, indic^tiv^ly or imperatively.

In Prophesying the word of God or the Scriptures are delivered
demonstratively, by way of doctrine, exhortation, consolation, reprehension,
and by such like forms.

Howsoever it be handled or delivered the matter is one and the same the manner
of delivering different: for whithor we pray, p^ophesy or sing, it must be the
word or scripture, not out of the book, but out of the heart, 1. Cor. 12.7.11.

The demonstration of the spirit and power. 1. Cor. 2.4. The manifestation of
the spirit 1. Cor. 1* 2.7. The ministration of the Spirit. 2. Cor. 3.8. The
administering of the spir t. Gal. 3.5. The ministration of the gift. 1. Pet.
4.10. The dispensation of grace. 1. Pet. 4.10. Are al one in effect, and are
opposed to the ministry of the lettre or the Ceremonial worship. 2. Cor. 3 6.

The ministration of the old Testament is called the ministry of the lettre,
seeing it disp^nced the ceremonial and literal ordinances and began in the
lettre: for the Church, Ministry, worship, Government, Temple, Tabernacle,
City, Country, Meat, Drinck, Apparel, Cattle, Fruits of the earth, etc.
Were all literal and ceremonial.

The minist^ation of the New Testament is called the ministry of the Spirit:
seeing it dispensed the true and spiritual ordinances typed by the foresaid
literal ordinances, and beginee^^ in the spirit originally, though prepared by
the lettre. 2. Cor. 3.6 - 8.24.17. compared with Revel 10.10.11.

Hence it folleweth that all book worship is Iudaisme, and so Antichristian,
and therefore by consequent Idolatry, now under the new Test^ment.

Thus much of the kinds of Spiritual worship of the new Testament.

Chap. 19. How the worship of the Old Testament did type the Spiritual worship
of the new Testament.
The lyteral or typical worship of the Old Testament was performed in two
places. viz: either in the holy place or in the court.

The Ceremonial wor^hip performed in the holy place did type most properly the
worship of the Church of the new Testament which was typed by the holy place.
Revel. 11.1.2.2. Cor. 6.16. Heb. 8.2. and 9.11. 1. Pet. 2.5.

The worship of the tabernacle or holy place consisted of 3. parts. 1. that
which per^eyned to the brazen altar. 2. that which was performed at the golden
altar. 3. that which concerned the table of show bread: Exodus 37. and 38.
compared with Exodus 29.38. Exodus 30.7, 8 and Levit. 24.1-9. Exodus 30.34-38.

At the brazen altar were offered Sacrifices propitiatory and Eucharistical.
Levit, 1.3. and 7.1-11 which signified prayer for pardon of syn through Christ's
sactifice. Heb. 10.4-14 22. and thanksgiving. Heb. 13.15. compared with Hose.
14.3. and prophesying or publishing the gospel: Gail. 3.1. For in Preaching
Christ is as it were anatomized.

At the golden altar was offered the sweet perfume which signified prayer and
thanksgiving. psalm. 141.2. Revel. 8.3.4. and by proportion. Nomb. 16.46-48
Apoc. 5.8-14. and preaching the gospel, 2. Cor. 2.14-16.

Upon the table of shewbread, was the candlestick, and twelve loaves of
vnlevened bread with incense: upon every one of them, which had this
signification.

The Candlestick with his 7. lamps burning with oil olive continually d^est
e^^ning and morning by Aaron and his sons, Levit. 24.1-9. Signified that the
Church (which (...) the golden Candlestick. Apoc. 1.20. Zach. 4.) by his seven
lamps, that is the ma^^^^d gifts of the Spirit, Revel. 4.5. Zach. 4.6. d^est by
Aaron and his sons, that is the doc^^yne of the Church, being kept pure, and
caused to thine bright by the Prophets of the chu^^^ Mat. 5.14.15. nourished
and fed continually with oil olive, that is taught daily by the ^^^rit, Zach.
4.14. Revel. 11.4. does continually give light, instruction and direction to
a^l ^er members. Psalm. 119.105. Mat. 5.16. 2. Pet. 1.19.

The shewbread with incense therevppon afterward burnt upon the golden altar,
Levit. 24.7.9. Signified that the twelve tribes that is the Church continua^ly
p^esent before the Lord are accepted through Christ's perfume, Revel. 8.3.4. are
fed wi^h Christ Jesus the true bread of life, Ioh. 6.35. are enlightened by his
word and Spirit, which are the true lamps of knowledge, Revel. 4.5.

Chap. 20. Of that which was performed in the court.
A^ the holy place with the altar and Priests did properly Signify the Church,
worship, and Saints, Revel. 11.1. 1. Pet. 2.5, under the new Testament: So the
count without the holy place whither all the people came and the typical service
performed there, did signify the confused assemblies of Antichristian
persecuters and their ceremonial worship, Revel 11* 2 which the Spirit in that
place caleth gentiles or heathen in those respects.

The parts of typical service performed in the court were reading and Music,
whe^ein the Levites were cheef agents, Deuteronomy. 31.9. 1. Chron. 16.4. compared
with us. 7.37.39-42. and Chap. 25.1-6-31. Nehem. 8.7-9.18. and 9.3-6. Though
the P^eisis also and any of the people might read and fing, Mat. 23.2.3. Luke
2.46. and 4.16.17. Act. 13.14.15. Nehem. 8.8. Marc. 14.26.

The Scriptures read and tuned Musically were, prophesies, prayers,
thanksgivings, 1. Chron* 25.1-6. Deuteronomy. 31.10, and 2. Chron. 34.30. Psalm. 7^.
for prophesies for instruandion. 1. Chron. 16, 7-36. Psalm. 146.147.148.149,
150. compared with Revel. 19, 1-8, For thanksgivings: Psalm. 102. the title, and
92. title, for prayers.

As Musical Instruments and playing upon them was typical, because it was
Artificial: So reading of a book was typical also because it is merely
Artificial,

Hence it follows that reading prophesies was a type of prophesying, reading
pray^rs a type o^ praying, and eading thanksgivings a type of praising God or
thankfulness

To conclude: as it follows not that seeing prayers were read in the old
testament ^s prayers, th^^^or we may read prayers now: for prayers no more
does it follow that though in the old testament they read Psalms and
prophesies, we may do so now: name^y, in the time of worship, or a^ parts, or
helps of Spiritual worship, properly so called.

Therefore as the ancient brethren of the Separation have taken all books from
before ^he eye in time of prayer, so do we take all books from the eye in
time of prophe^ying and singing: and that by the same reason they being al
equally excellent parts of Spi^^tual worship, for God is as much honored in
prophesying and Psalms, as in praying and ^^ey all of them remain in the
triumphant Church in heaven: even as they were all ^rac^ised by Adam in
Paradise before his fall: and therefore are properly moral, and Spiritual worship.

The second part of the Ministry of the Church.
The first section of the Eldership or Presbytery.
Chap. 1. Of the names or titles of the Elders.
Thus much concerning the Leitourgie of the Church, now follow the offices of
the Church, viz: the Presbytery and Deaconry, Phil. 1.1, Esaias. 66.21. Nomb.
3.5.-10, and 16: 5 ^8. and 17. Chap.

The Presbytery of the church is the company of the Elders which are for the
church (...) the public actions of the Church, either of the Kingdom or
preisthood, Heb. 13.17 (...) These. 5.12. 1. Timoth. 4.14. and 5.17.

The presbytery is uniform consisting of Officers of one sort, Esaias. 66.21.
compared ^^ith Exodus 28.1. and with Nomb. 11.24.25. 1. Timoth. 3.1-8. Act.
14.23. philip. 1.1. Ie^em. ^.1-4. Ezech. 34.1-16.

These Officers are called Elders, Overseers, or Bishops, pastors, Teachers,
Governors, ^^aders, prepos^ti, which are several names of one and the same
office consisting of several ^^orks or qualifications

For every one of these officers must be.

1. An Elder or Ancient in years, 1. Timoth. 3.6. and 5.1. 2. Oversee the
flock, 1. pet. 5.2. Act, 20.28. 3. Feed the ^^ock, 1. pet. 5.2. Act. 20.28. 4.
Able to teach, and exhort with wholesome doctrine and convince the gainsayers,
1. ^^oth. 3.2, Tit. 1.9. Ephesians. 4, 11. 5. Govern the Church. 1. Tim. 3.4.5. 1.
Cor. 12.28. 6. Lead the Church in all the public allaires thereof Heb. 13.17.
7. Are preferred to place of honor. 1. These. 5.12. 1. Tim. 5.17. and special
labor. 1. Timoth. 3.1.
Seeing all the Elders must teach, exhort, convince, feed, oversee, rule and
lead the church therefore they may all administer the seals of the covenant: for
that is a cheef work of feeding and applying the covenant and that particularly.

Chap. 2. Of reasons proving the Elders to be of one sort, viz: all Pastors.
First in the Old Testament there was but one kind of Priests, who had al equal
authority to administer all the holy things: excepting the high P^eist, who
typed forth Christ Jesus the high Pre^st of our confession: so p^op^^tionably
in the New Testament, there ^s but one ^ort of Elders who succeed the Priests in
the dispensation o^ holy things. Esaias. 66.21.

As in the Old Testament there was the sanhedrim which consisted of 70.
ancients for the administration of the Kingdom, which was a type of the
vi^ible church, al which E^ders in their first institution Nomb. 11.25. did
prophecy and were of one kind under Moses: so in the new Testament under Christ
Jesus, which is the King of the church, there is a s^n^d^i^n or Elder^ ^^p
cons^^^ing of Auneie^s of one kind who adminis^er (...) the good of the Church,
Reve^. 4.4. and 5.6.

Again, If Pastor, Teacher, Elder had been 3. Offices formally differing the
Apostle intending to teach the several offices of the Church, would have
mentioned them. 1. Timoth. 3. But there he only mentions Bishops and Deacons
according as Phil. 1.1. (...) Bishops are only of one sort or kind.

Moreover, if the Apstles had ordained 3. Kinds of Elders, Act. 14.23. they
would h^ve mentioned them with the ^se^eral kinds of ordination: but that i^
not d^^e: for in o^e phrase their election and ordinacion is mentioned: go
their ordination being one, their office is one and not three.

Further, if their had been 3. Kinds of Elders at Ephesus then the Apostle at
Mil^^um would have given them several cha^dges as having several duties lying
upon them: but the Apost^e Act. 20.28. gives them one general chardg common
to them all, namely the duty of seeding the work of the Pastor^ go* they are
all Pastors.

Besides. Ephesians. 4.11. Pastors and teachers are all one office: for where as the
Apostle had spoken dis^^ibutively before of Apost^es, Prophets, Evangelists as
intending them ^ever^l offices, he speaks copulatively of pastors and
teachers, exege^ically teaching (...) they are both one off^ce.

^^stly, if all the Elders have the pastors gifts, and the works of the pastor,
and the pasto^^ ordination, then they have all the pastors office: But all the
Elders have the p^stors gi^^^ v^z: the word of wisdom or the gift of
exhortation. Tit. 1.9. and therefore the pasto^^ work as Act. 20.28: 1. Pet.
5.2. which is feeding or exhorting, and so the same ordination Act. 14.23.
Therefore all the Elders have the same office of the pastor: and so a^^ all of
one sort.

Hence this consectary arises that the Eldership consisting of three sorts of
El^ers is the invention of man, having both an Antich^istian Ministry and
Government in it.

And therefore when the Popish prelacy was suppressed, and the triformed presbytery
substituted, one Antichrist was put down and another set up in his place: or
the beast was suppressed and his image advanced.

And therefore as they that submit to the prelacy are subject to that woe of
worshipping the beast, so they that submit to the triformed Presbytery are in
like manner liable to the woe denounced against then that worship the image of
the beast.

Chap. 3. Objections for three sorts of Elders answered,
The first Objection.

1, Tim. 5.17. In this place the Apostle makes two sorts of Elders viz. 1.
Those that Rule only: 2. Those that Teach and Rule. and Ephesians. 4.11. the Apostle
makes two kinds of those that Teach, Pastors, and Doctors. Therefore there are
three kinds of Elders formally differing each from other.

Answer to the first Objection.

The Apostle to Timothy teache^h that Elders are to be honored for two works
well rul^ng, and laborious or p^ni^ul-teaching: and the place does not import a
distribution of ^fficers, but a commendacion of several works of one office:
and the Specialty consists not in the works of ruling and teaching which are
common to all Elders: but in the quality of the works viz: wel-ruling (...)
pain^ul-teaching as if the Apostle should say: Elders are ^o be had in double
honor for wise Government: but much more are they to be honored for their
laborious and painful teaching: that this is so: see Tit. 1.9. and 1. These.
5.12.13. compared with 1. Tim. 3.1.4.

In Timo^hie the Apostle says every Bishop must be Didacticos: and
P^oistamenos: and therefore that some El^ers are only Di^f^cticoi, and not
Proistamenoi. i^ contrary to the Aposties intent: Further in Titus the Apost^e
expounds Didactico^ to be able to exho^t with wholesome doctrine and to
convince the gainsay^es: how then shall some of the Elders be Rulers only?

Again the Apostle in that place of the Ephesi^ns speaks copulatively of one
office, and exegetically of the principal work of the pastor which is teaching:
he does not say: some pastors, some teachers, but he says pastors and teachers
expounding the former by the latter viz: feeding by teaching which is the
principal part of feeding, and for which pastors are chiefly commended, 1. Tim.
5.17. if they labor therein painfully.

The second Objection,

1. Cor. 12.5.8.28. The Apostle says. there are divers^tyes of Ministeries:
namely one that has the word of wisdom: another the word of knowledge: another
that has Government us, 28. Therefore the Eldership consists of 3. forts of
Elders viz: of the pastor that ^ath the word of wisdom of the teacher that
has the word of knowledge: of the Ruler that has the quality of government.

Answer to the second Objection.

First it is granted that there are diversities of Ministeries as Ephesians, 4.11, 1.
Tim, 3.1.8. philip, 1.1, Namely. Apostles, prophets, Evangelists, pastors,
Deacons: yet is follows not herevppon that Elders are of diverse sorts as is
pleaded, see us. 28.

Again the word Diaconia, signifies sometime any Spiritual work, proceeding
from any member or officer of the Church, as 2, Cor 8 4, alms is called
Diaconia: 1, Pet. 4.10 Deaconein signifies any work that proceeds from any
gift: So it may signify here: and all the works that follow almost may be
referred thither: only there are certay he Energemata, mentioned verse 10.

The third Objection.

The Apostle Rom 12.6-8, makes an opposition between prophecy and an office:
and makes five kinds of officers Pastors, Teachers, Rulers, Deacons, Widows.

Answer to the third Objection.

That is denied to be the true resolution of the place of the Romans: for
although there be five several actions repeated, yet it does not follow that
there are five several officers to perform those actions: For one person may
perform then all and yet be no officer, viz. teach, exhort, rule, distribute,
show mercy, 1 Cor 14.3.26.31, Roman 12.13 1 Cor, 5.5.

Again the distributive particle Eite four times repeated, in prophesy,
Diaconia, exhorting, and teaching, imports thus much: That the Apostles
intention is not to subordinate teaching and exhorting to Diaconia, but to
oppose each of these 4. particulars to other as thus, Prophesy is the
manifestation of a gift, 1 Cor. 14.3.

Diaconia is the office, and there are diverse kinds thereof, 1 Cor. 12.5.

Teaching is one action or work of the prophets or officers, 1 Cor, 14.26

Exhorting is an other action or work of them, 1 Cor. 14 3

Hence it follows that teaching and exhorting are as well subordinate to
prophesy as to Diaconia.

But there, if Diaconia be the genus to those five species following, then I say
that Diaconia sign fieth not an Office, but a work: And of works there are
those five kinds. That Diaconia does sometime signify a work is plain: 1 Cor.
8.4. 1. Pet. 4.10.

Lastly: the Apostle that knew how to speak would never have made teaching and
exhortation members dist^^outive with prophesy and Diaconia, If he had intended
to have made them species subordinate to Diaconia; therefore questionles that is
not his intention.

The Apostle by the commandment of Christ writes to the Angels of the seven
Churches of Asia: Revel. Chap. 1, and 2. and 3. That is to the Pastors which
are but one in every particular Church for so the words are to the Aungel of
the Church of Ephesus, etc.

Answer to the fourth Objection.

First, it can never be proved by the Scriptures that there was, but one pastor
in a Church: It is plain, Act. 20.28. That there were many in the Church of
Ephesus (that was one of those seven Churches) that did perform the work of
the pastor which is p^^mainein, to ^eed, even all the Elders of Ephesus: Act.
20. verse 17, compared with verse 28. And therefore there were many Pastors in the
Church of Ephesus in Paulls time.

Again, all Churches had Officers of one sort, and one kind of Presbytery, and
therefore as all the Elders of Ephesus were Pastors, so were all the Elders of
the six Churches of Asia and of all other Churches wheresoever in the world, if
they had many Eld^^s.

Further, the Angel of every one of those Churches does not signify one pastor
only in every, Church, but either the College of postors if they were many, or
the company of the most sincere and holy men that most opposed the corruptions
of the Church, or were most holy and zealous in life and doctrine: that an
angel signifies a company of men is plain Revel. 14.6.8.9. and 18.4.

Lastly, in all likely hood there were some extraordinary men yet living in the
churches either Prophets o^ Evangelists that had extraordinary gifts, whose
Zeal and holiness might w^nne unto then special estimation in the Churches: in
regard whereof it might be that the Holy Ghost intending his Epistles to the
whole Church, chiefly directs them to these persons so qua^^fied as men best
able to prevayle with the Church and calls them Angels, whither one or more:
As John the Baptist is called an Angel. Marc. 1.2,

Chap. 4. Of the diverse gifts of Elders.
Seeing all the Prophets of the Church must have gifts fit for edification,
exhortation (...) consolation: the Pastors of the Church must have gifts for
the performance of the sam works kat, exochen, after an excellent manner and
in a greater measure.

The Pastors excelling the prophets of the Church in the gifts of doctrine
exhortation, consolation, may also excel one another in gifts: for all the
Elders have not the sam measure or degree of gifts.

In respect of the measure of gifts in the Elders, some excelling in one gift
some in another, the Holy Ghost may give several titles to the Elders or
pastors.

Every Elder according as the excellency of his gift is, so must he endeavor
himself (...) edifying of the Church and in the stirring up the gift God has
given unto him: 1. pet. 4. 10.11. Mat. 25.29. 2. Tim. 1.6. 1. Cor. 14.12.

Although some Elder excel in one gift some in another, yet it follows not
that therefore they are several officers formally di^^ering one from another: for
not the degree measure or excellency of a gift or gifts, but the several kind
and nature of gifts and works make several kinds of offices: 1. Cor. 12.4.5.6.

The Elder that excels in government most properly may be called a ruler or
Governor, although he have the gifts and power to teach, exhort, confort,
apply, and that by virtue of his office. Tit. 1.9. Heb. 13.17.

That Elder that excels in doctrine and convincing the gainsayers may most
properly be called a Teacher or Doctor, though by virtue of his office he may
administer of other pastoral duties: Act. 18.28. and 19.1. 1. Cor. 3.4-6.
compared with Tit. 1.9. Ephesians. 4.11. 1. Pet. 5.2.

The Elder that exceleth in exhortation, consolation and application, may most
properly be called a pastor or shepherd, though by virtue of his office he is
to teach convince and govern. Act. 20.28. Tit. 1.9. Ephesians. 4.11. 1. Pet. 5:2.

As the Apostle does, 2. Tim. 1.6. 1. Pet. 4.10. So may the Church give a charg
to the Elder in ordination to stir up, attend to, and use his proper and most
pregnant and familiar gift: which he is to mind: and accordingly to endeavor
himself in his administration and thus shall every one as his gift is excel
therein to the edification of the Church. 1. Corinthians. 14.12.

Thus shall al men that have excellency of gifts when they shall be added to the
church be employed in the honorable service of the Church: whereas if there be
but one pastor in a Church, men of more excellent gifts being added to the
Church shall sit still, leese there gifts and look on: which alone is an
argument sufficient to overthrow the fancy of one pastor only in one Church.

Chap. 5. Of the works of the Presbytery or Elders in the preisthood of the
Church.
Thus much concerning the presbytery: Now follow the works of the Elders, or
the presbytery. Which are of two sorts.

1. Works of the preisthood of the Church: 2. Works of the Kingdom of the
Church.
For the prophecy of the Church is comprehended under the preisthood as a
branch of it. Deuteronomy. 33.10. Revel. 1.6. with 1. Cor. 14.31. Act. 2.17.18.

The works of the preisthood are: prophesying, that is publishing the covenant
of grace or the new Testament, whereto aperteyneth putting to the seases:
praying singing psalms of praise and thanksgiving unto the Lord,

The office of the Eldership or the work of the presbytery is to lead and
moderate the Church in these Spiritual Sacrifices, in regard whereof they have
their names: as Leaders, prepositi: etc.

Although the presbytery lead and moderate these Spiritual Sacrifices, yet the
brethren are interessed in using their gifts for the performance of al these
parts of Spiritual worship, 1. Cor. 14.31.26. Revel. 2.6. 1. pet. 2.5. and that
when the whole Church is come together in one 1. Cor. 14.23. yet things must be
done in order, 1. Cor. 14.33.40.

Exception. The administration of the scales of the Covenant someth to
apertayne only (...) Elders or presbytery, as sa^^^^ing did only to the
priests: Mat. 2.6. and 26.^6-^0 (...) 14.12.

Chap. 6. Of the presbytery or Elders in the Kingdom of the Church.
The works of the Kingdom are Admonition, Conviction, Examination,
Disputation, (...) communication, Absolution, and handling all matters of
difference betwixt brother and ^^other: and if there be any of like nature.

The Eldership is to lead and moderate the Church actions and speeches in these
matters and causses of the Kingdom and government. Deuteronomy. 16.18.-20. and
1.14-18. 2. Chron. 19.5. ^1. 1. Cor. 6.1-8. 1. These. 5.12.13. 1. Tim. 5.17.
Heb. 13.17.

The brethren are all interessed in all the parts of administration though the
Elders ^^^d and moderate them. 1. Cor. 5.4.5. 1. Th^^^. 1^ and 2. Ep. 3.6.
Revel. 2.2. and 1.4. and 1.11. and 1.6.

The brethren jointly have all power both of the Kingdom and preisthood
immediately from Christ: Revel. 1.6. 1. Pet. 2.5. 2. Cor. 6.16-18. Mat. 18.20.
and that by virtue of the covenant God makes with them, Gen 17.7. with Act
2.39. Romans 4.11. Gal. 3.14.16

Therefore when the Church wants an Eldership, it has never the less power to
Preach, Pray, Sing Psalms, and so by consequent to administer the seals of
the covanant: also to admonish, convince, excommunicate, absolve, and al other
actions either of the Kingdom or preisthood: by necessary consequent.

When the Church has chosen and ordained her self Elders, then the Church
leeseth none of her former power, but still retayneth it entyre to herself to
use when occasion seweth: by necessary consequent.

The presbytery has no power, but what the Church has and gives unto it:
which the Church upon just cause can take away: Colos 4.17. Gal. 1.9. Revel
2.2. 1. cor. 16.22

The Church has some power which the presbytery alone has not, viz, power of
Elections and communication: 1. Cor. 5.4.5. Act. 6.5. and 14.23. and so by
consequent of all other Sentences.

The second Section.
Chap. 1. Of the Treasury of the Church, and the Deacons office.
Thus much of the office and works of the preebytery:

Now follow the office and works of the Deacons.

The Deacons office respects the body and bodily necessityes of the Saints:
Act. 6.2. which is called serving tables in that place: as also bodily service
of the Eldership and Church, Esaias 66 21 compared with Ezech 44.10-14 Nomb 3.5-10

In respect whereof the deaco^s may be termed the servants of the Eldership and
church ^s the Levites were given to serve the priests and the people in the
tabernacle, no^b. 3.5-10

The Deacons in the new testament are answerable to the Levites in the old
testamet: ^s the Elders are answerable to there priests: Esaias 66, 21. compared
with 1. Chron 26.20

The Deacons office especially is occupied about the treasury of the Church. 1.
chron. 16.20. compared with Act. 6.2. Ioh. 13.29.

Concerning the treasury consider these things.

1. Who are to contribute and what is to be given to the treasury. 2. Of what
nature the treasury is, and when it is to be collected. 3. How the treasury is
to be employed and at whose appointment.
Chap. 2. Who are to contribute.
They that have but two mites (as the poor widow in the gospel) are to
contribute to the treasury, Luk 21.2. as well as they that are wealthy, us. 4.
Exodus 35.20-29.

They that have much are to give much, Luke 21.4. Act. 4.34.

They that have but little are to contribute a little, by proportion.

All the members of the Church are to contribute something, because the alms or
contribution is the manifestation of grace, even of our bowels of mercy and
compassion, and a part of our holy communion, 1. Cor. 16.2. 2. Cor. 8.2-3 7.
Act. 2.42. Luke 21.4.

As al Rivers go into the sea and flow out of the sea: so we must all cast
into the treasury, and all receave from the treasury again as our necessityes
are.

Quere: whither they that are mayntayned by the treasury are to contribute into
the treasury: as the officers and poor brethren.

Chap. 3. What or how much is to be given to the treasury.
So much is to be given to the treasury as may serve for supplying the present
necessityes of the Church, Act. 2.45. and 4.34.35.

In the necessityes of the Church the rick must sell their goods and possessions
for the help of the Church, Act. 2.45. and 4.34.35.

In the necessityes of the Church the brethren must contribute not only
according to their ability, but even beyond their ability: and their extreme
poverty must abound to their rich liberality, 2. Cor. 8.2.3. 1. Pet. 4.11.

A man is accepted of the Lord according to that which he has, and not
according to that he has not, in contributing if their be a willing mind
though only two mites be given, 2. Cor. 8.12. Luke 21.3.

If in the necessityes of the Church the rich brethren do not releeve the poor
by contributing to the treasury and otherwise, they are unworthy members of the
Church: and un natural parts of the body: and are to be censured according to
the rule: Mat. 18.15-18.1 Timoth. 5.20. Deuteronomy. 15.7-11.1. Cor. 12.22.25.26.

The rich that have friends that are needy of the Church, must releeve the^
themselves, and must not chardg the Church with them, 1. Tim. 5.4.16. under
nephews and widows all poor friends are to be understood by proportion.

Quere: whither: if a brother have wife and children and friends to releeve that
are without: The Church is bound to releeve him so far forth as he may also
releeve them.

Chap. 4. Of what nature the treasury is.
The treasury is holy. Act. 2.42. 1. Chron. 26.20, compared with Mat. 27.6. and
2. Cor. 8.4 ^. Hence therefore follow these two consectaryes.

1. Every holy ordinance of God must be sanctified by prayer and thanksgiving,
1. Tim. 4.3 ^. and therefore Alms or contribution to the treasury must be
sanctified by prayer and thanksgiving: see for this point, 2. Cor. 9.12-15. and
us. 8-11.1. Chron. 29.10-20. 2. There ought to be a separation in alms and
contributio^ to the treasury as well as in other parts of our Spiritual
communion, Act. 4.32. and 5.13. 2. Cor. 6.17. Act. 2.42. Heb. 13.^6. 2. Cor.
8.7. therefore they that are without if they give any thing must lay it a part
seve^al from the treasury and it must be employed to common use, Mat. 27.6.7.
The treasury is Holy in these respects.

1. In regard of the persons that contribute who are Holy. 2. In respect of the
grace manifested in contribution which must be: 1. Sympathy or ^ompassion, 2.
freenes or voluntary offering, 3 liberality or bountifullnes: Romans 12.13.
^5.16. 2. Cor. 9.5-7. 3. In regard of the persons and uses whereto it is
employed which are the Saints and their ^ecessityes 2. Cor. 8.4. and 9.12.1. 4.
In regard of the Lord himself: it being a Sacrifice wherewith God is well
pleased, ^hilip. 4.18. Heb. 13.16. And a memorial of the Saints before the
Lord. Nomb. 31. ^0.54. Phil. 4.17. and a testimony of the love of the brethren,
2. Cor. 8.8.24. and so con^ortable to the conscience.
Chap. 5. When the treasury is to be collected.
The treasury is to be collected every first day of the week, when the whole
Church ^ommeth together to break bread, Act. 20.7. compared with 1. Cor. 16.2.

Reasons hereof are diverse as follows.

1. Because the Lords Supper is weekly to be administered, and so from the
Treasury ^eekly there must a portion be employed to the provision of bread and
wine and other ne^ssaryes for the more seemly administration thereof, Act.
20.7. compared with 1. ^or. 16.2.

2. Because the Elders are worthy of double honor, which is yielded them by
weekly ^ayntenance according to their labor and necessities 1. Tim. 5.17 - 18.
Gal. 6.6.

3. Because the poor of the Church are weekly to be releeved, and other
necessities con^^ually supplied Act 6.1. and 2.42.

Hence it follows that when the greatest communion of the church is held, the
co^^nio^ of this grace also of ministering to the necessities of the saints
should be exercised

Quere: At what time of the Lords day, and after what manner the Treasury is to
(...) collected.

Chap. 6. How the Treasury is to be employed.
The Church Treasury is to be employed to these Special uses.

1. Mayntenance of the Elders especially such among them as are most painful in
the ^ro and doctrine, 1. Tim. 5.17.18.

The Elders that are of hability ought not to require maintenance of the
church, but ought rather to contribute to the treasury, Act. 20.35.

The elders may sometime upon good grounds work with their hands for avoiding
offense and helping the Church. Act. 20.34.35.

2. Mayntenance of the widows and by consequent other officers that want
mayntenance: 1. Timoth. 5.3.4.16. Act. 6.1.

3. Releef of the poor brethren, also orphans, and widows of brethren
deceased. Act 2.44. and 4.32. 2. Cor. 8. and 9. chap. and that not only of the
own, but of other true Churches especially of them from whom they received the
faith, Romans 15.27.

4. Provision for necessary uses: as places, vessels, bread, wine, and other
implements so the common necessityes of the whole body. Exodus 35.25-29. Nomb.
7: 1. Chron. 29.1-^

Quere: whither it the chardg of bread and wine be very great as it falls out
in some countries and some years, and the officers and poor want mayntenance,
the Lords supp^ may not be deferred, and not be administered every Lords day.

Chap. 13. At whose disposition the Treasury is.
Seeing the Deacons are the hands of the Church as it were, and the servants of
the b^d^ in the bodyly necessityes, therefore the delivering of the treasury, and
so the custody of perteyneth to them. 1. Chroh. 26.20.

The Eldership as they are to oversee the flock, and to enquire into the
occasions and (...) faires of the whole body and as they are officers for the
whole body and in the Church name, therefore it apertey^^^ unto them for the
Church to oversee the treasury: and take accouts of it. and to appoint the
disposition of it, 2. King 22.4. Act. 11.30. and. 4.35.

The Church is the owner and primary possessor of the treasury, and the cheef
Lord (...) under: Christ: and unto the Church must the account be made finally.

Thus much concerning the Deacons office and works: and concerning the
treasury (...) the Church.

FINIS.
Certain demaundes, whereto we desire direct and found answer, with proof from
the Scriptures.
1. Concerning the Kingdom and Preisthood of Christ.

VVhither the Kingdom and Preisthood of the old Testament were not distinct and
se^^rall, both in person, office, and actions.

VVhither the Kingdom and Preisthood of the old Testament were not typical,
sha^^ win^ out the Kingdom and Preisthood of Christ?

VVhither the Kingdom and Preisthood of Christ are not distinct, buth in office
and act^ though united in one person?

VVhither as Christ is both King and Priest, so also the Saints are not by
Christ annoy^ted to be Kings and Priests unto God?

VVhither the office and actions of the Saints in the Kingdom and Preisthood,
are (...) distinct and several, though united in person?

VVhither the office and actions of the Kingdom in the old Testament were not
of (...) position, difference, plea, and strife?

VVhither the office and actions of the Kingdom of the Saints in the new
Testament are not of the same nature?

VVhither the office and actions of the Preisthood of the Old Testament were
not of union, concord, and agreemt in Sacrificing.

VVhither the office and actions of the Preisthood of the Saints in the new
Testament be not of the same nature? Romans 15.6.

2. Concerning the Spirit and Spiritual the Lettre, and Literal.

VVhither in this phrase and the like (viz. The manifestation of the spirit)
the Spirit does not signify principally, both the Spiritual and regenerate
part of the soul, and the Spiritual matter in the regenerate part.

VVhither the manifestation of the Spirit does import either the Spiritual
matter which a man brings out of a book by reading: or the Spiritual and
gracious gestures and motions which a man expresses in reading and performing
other actions.

VVhither quenching the Spirit be not to withold and restrain the Spiritual
matter which by the Spirit of Sanctification is stirred up in the regenerate
part of the soul.

VVhither reading words contained in a book does manifest the Spirt; that is,
express the Spiritual matter which is the regenerate part of him that reads
or rather does not clean put it by, leave it, and diverteth to an other
subject and so quenches it.

VVhither the letter does not properly signify the literal and ceremonial,
ordinances of the old Testament, 2. Cor. 3 0. Which began outwardly signifiyng
and conveighing Spiritual matter into the regenerate part of the soul from
without?

VVhither reading the words contained in a book be not as much and as truly
literal beginning outwardly and conveighing matter inwardly as the sacrificing
of a beast in the Old Testament?

VVhither sacrifi^ing in the Old Testament may not as truly be accounted the
manifestation of the Spirit as reading: seeing sacrificing did express the
Spiritual matter Christ Jesus, and was done with a grace by the Prei^^s, even
as reading, does express the Spiritual matter of the book Christ Jesus, and is
performed with a grace by the reader?

3. Conce^ning, writing, and Reading.

VVhither lettres or characters are not invented by the wit of man to express
the articulate sounds of natural speeth: and whither the inventors of lettres
are not mentioned in historyes?

VVhither writing be not the invention of man by the same reason.

VVhither reading be not the invention of man by the same reason?

whither writing and read ng be not things merely artificial though speaking be
natural?

VVhither writing and reading being mere artificial devises may be properly
called Spiritual worship: and whither if reading be Spiritual worship, writing
be not so also?

VVhither that because the manu^rie trade of the butcher and cook in killing
rosting or boiling the Sacrifices, of the ingraver in the stones of the
brestplate of the Apotecary in the annoynting oil, of the Mason and carpenter
in the hewing of stone and wood, and so co^seque^tly of the scribe or paynter
in writing and reading, were literal and ceremonial either worship or actions
in the old Testament, they may now be called Spiritual worship or actions in
the new Testament: and whither one rather then another: and why?

4. Of the Holy Scriptures and translations.

VVhither the holy Scriptures viz: the originals Hebrew and Greek do not
conteyne in the^ infinite depth of truth: and whither the holy Spirit did not
intend by the^ to signify all the truths, which all the men of the earth, either
hertofore, now, or hereafter truly collect fom thence?

VVhither the holy originals do not conteyne more matter the^ the Prophets and
Apostles that wrote then did conceave?

VVhither the Hebrew and Greek tongue in their idiomes, words and phrases are not
plentifuly more comprehensive and significative of matter the^ any other
language whatsoever?

VVhither as the original Scriptures are the jmage of the mind of God: so a
translation be not the jmage of the original Scriptures.

VVhither the jmage can possibly express the thing thereby signified, fully.

VVhither it be possible for any language verbatim without paraphrast to
express the Hebrew and Greek text of the holy originals fully?

VVhither a translation made by the most learned and holy men of the earth does
or can express truly and fully the holy ghosts meaning in the originals?

VVhither therefore a translation made by the most learned and holy men of the
earth be not an Apocrypha writing of an ordinary man?

VVhither if any Apocrypha writing may be brought into the worship of God to be
read all may not: and whither if some Apocrypha writings must be cast out of
the church why not all, yea the translation also?

5. Of worship, and use of books in time of worship in the new Testament.

VVhither prayer, prophesying, and singing Psalms be the true and only parts
of the worship of the new Testament?

Whether reading be either prayer, prophesy, or a Psalm?

VVhither reading be lawful in time of prayer, prophesy and singing Psalms?

VVhither reading does not put matter into the heart of him that reads, and
worship be not the producing of matter out of the heart of him that worshippeth?

VVhither the Apostles and primitive Churches did ever pray, prophesy, and sing
psalms out of books, after the day of Pentecost. Act. 2?

VVhither they did not pray, prophesy, and sing Psalms as the holy ghost gave
them utterance?

VVhither the place 1. Cor. 14.26. does not teach that a man must have a
Psalm, have doctrine, that is in ^is heart, whence he must produce it by the
manifestation of the Spirit?

VVhither if 2 book must be laid aside in prayer, it must not be so also in
prophesy and singing Psalms and why?

VVhither if a book be retained in prophesy and a psalm, it may not be so also
in prayer and why?

VVhither thet be two kinds of prayer, prophesy, and Psalms, one with books,
another without books: or one sort of prayer without books* and two sorts of
prophesying and Psalms: with and without books and why: and whither this can
be warranted by the Apostles doctrine and practice?

6. Concerning a Psalm.

VVhither as in prayer and prophesy one alone speaks, and the rest pray (...)
prophesy by consent. 1. cor. 11.4. so in a Psalm one only must speak, and the
rest must cose^t. 1. cor. 14.16.

VVhither in a Psalm a man must be tied to meter and Rithme, and tune, and
whither voluntary be not as necessary in tune and words as in matter?

VVhither meter, Rithme, and tune, be not quenching ^he Spirit?

VVhither a psalm be only thanksgiving without meter, Rethme or tune, yea or
nay?

7. Concerning the Elders or Presbytery.

VVhither all the Elders must not be able to teach, and rule as the Apostle
says, didacticoi, and proistamenoi^. 1. Timoth. 3.

VVhither didacticos that is apt to teach be not expounded by the Apostle, Tit.
1.9. by three particulars: viz: 1. to teach wholesome doctrine: 2. to exhort: 3.
to convince the gainsayers?

VVhither Teaching and Ruling be not the two parts of feeding?

VVhither feeding that is Teaching, Ruling, exhorting, conforting be not the
pastors office, and therefore all the Elders pastors?

VVhither the Eldership has not all their power from the Church?

VVhither the Eldership has a negative voice in the church that nothing can be
concluded without them?

VVhither if most or the Church consent and the Elders dissent, the matter
cannot pass against the Elders dissent?

VVhither seeing the church may depose and excommunicate the Eldership they may
not pass other sentences without or contrary to their liking?

VVhither may not a man propound his matter to the church without acquaynting
the Elders with it in the first place.

VVhither in the second degree of admonition a man is not bound to take an
Elder for witness?

Whether one Elder only in a church be Gods ordinance and whither if there be
chosen any Elder there must be chosen more then one?

VVhither the seals of the covenant may not be administered, there being yet no
Elders in offiice?

8. Concerning the Treasury and contribution.

VVhither the treasury be not Holy?

VVhither contribution be not an action of the communion of the Saints?

VVhither as in other parts of communion so in this, there ought not to be a
separation from them that are without?

VVhither the action of contribution must not be Sanctified by prayer and
thanksgiving?

A Recapitulation of the Chapters to be found according to their pages.
The first part concerning the Leitourgie of the Church.
Chap. 1. Of the Kingdom of the Saints. page 1. Chap. 2. Of the Preisthood of
the Saints. page 1. Chap. 3. Of Spiritual worship and of the Spirit. page 2.
Chap. 4. Of quenching the Spirit. page 2. Chap. 5. Of the helps of Spiritual
worship. page 3. Chap. 6. Concerning books and writing. page 3. Chap. 7. Of
the kinds of books or writings. page 4. Chap. 8. Of the originals or holy
Scriptures, and of the parts of holy Scripture. page 4. Chap. 9. How the
originals or holy Scriptures are to be used. page 5. Chap. 10: Reasons proving
the originals not to be given as helps before the eye in worship. pdg. 6. Chap.
11. Objections for bookworship answered. page 7. Chap. 12. Of the writings of
men. page 10. Chap. 13. Of reading translations, and of the translation of the
72. int^^preters. page 10. Chap. 14. Of other arguments against reading
translations (...) time of worship. page 11. Chap. 15. Objections for
translations answered. page 13. Chap. 16. Of the lawfulnes of translating the
Scriptures, and the use of translations in our account. page 17. Chap. 17.
Concerning the use of the translation for the hearers. page 18. Chap. 18. Of
the nature or essence of Spiritual worship and the essential causses and kinds
thereof. page 18. Chap. 19. How the worship of the old Testament did type the
Spiritual worship of the new Testament page 30. Chap. 20. Of that which was
performed in the court. page 21.
The second part of the Ministry of the Church. page 22.
The first section of the Eldership or Presbytery. page 22.
Chap. 1. Of the names or titles of the Elders. page 22. Chap. 2. Of reasons
proving the Elders to be of one sort viz: all Pastors. page 23. Chap. 3.
Objections for three sorts of Elders answered. page 24. Chap. 4. Of the diverse
gifts of Elders. page 26. Chap. 5. Of the works of the Presbytery or Elders in
the Preisthood of the church. pa. 27 Chap. 6. Of the works of the Presbytery
or Elders in the Kingdom of the church. page 28.
The second section.
Chap. 1. Of the treasury of the Church and the Deacons office, page 28. Chap.
2. Who are to contribute. page 29. Chap. 3. What or how much is to be given to
the treasury. page 29. Chap. 4. Of what nature the treasury is. page 29. Chap.
5. When the treasury is to be collected. page 30. Chap. 6. How the treasury is
to be employed. page 30. Chap. 7. At whose disposition the treasury is. page
31. Certain demaundes, page 31.
FINIS.

