PARALLELES, CENSVRES, OBSERVATIONS.

Aperteyning: TO THREE SEVERAL WRITINGS, 1. A Lettre written to Mr. Ric.
Bernard, by John Smyth. 2. A Book entitled, The Seperatists Schism published
by Mr. Bernard. 3. An Answer made to that book called the Sep. Schism by Mr.
H. Ainsworth.


WHEREUNTO ALSO ARE ADJOINED. 1. The said Lettre written to Mr. Ric. Bernard
divided into 19. Sections. 2. Another Lettre written to Mr. A. S. 3. A third
Lettre written to certain Brethren of the Separation. By John Smyth.


Mat. 24.23. Then if any shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there,
believe it not.

Us. 24. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders, so that if it were possible they should deceave
the very elect:

Us. 25. Behold, I have told you before.

Mat. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps clothing but
inwardly are Ravening wolves.

Us. 16. Ye shall know them by their Fruytes.

Ioh. 10.1. He that enters not in by the door into the Sheepfold but climeth
up another way, he is a thief, and a robber,

Us. 10. The thief comes not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy.

2. Cor. 11.13. For such false Apostles are deceiptful workers, and transform
them selves into the Apostles of Christ,

Us. 14. And no marvayle, for Satan himself is transformed into an aungel of
light.

Printed. 1609.

TO EVERY ONE THAT SEEKS AFTER the truth in since^ity: Salutations.
NOt every thing, Gentle Reader, which a man writes privately and suddenly to
his friend is fit to be published openly to the view of the world: neither did I
think that this lettre written to Mr. Bernard in private upon three days
meditation should have been made public in print to every man's eye and
censure: which had I thought should have come to pass, I would with better
advyse and le^sure and so with more mature judgment have conceaved and penned
it. But seeing it is justly occasioned through Mr. Bernards importunity in his
late published book entitled the Seperatists Schism, and his slanderous
misconstructions and misreports up and down the country behind my back, that
this lettre of mine is strongly suspected of error, bitterness, rashness,
uncharitableness, and imputations of the^ like nature: and by reason thereof my
se^ falls under the hard and unknown, and happily undeserved censure of many
well affected to the truth: whe^eat I cannot but be much wounded, both in mine
own soul inwardly, and in my good name outwardly, which is always better and
mo^e to be esteemed then a good ointment: I thought it much more tolerable to
adventure my self, by exposing this untimely birth, I mean this suddenly
conceaved and penned lettre, to the variable censures of the multitude: the^ by
burying it in darkness and silence, like unto one still borne to superinduce a
strong presumption of justly imputed blame upon my self by reason of this
present lettre: Therefore I do earnestly entreat every one friend, or other,
into whose hands this present writing may come, to esteem it, as it is
indeed, even a sudden private lettre of one fre^d unto another: and not to
respect it as it now falls out to be a public wriring proclaimed as it were
upon the house top: I cannot nor may not with fidelity alter one sentence or
word of it, but as Mr. Bernard has it copyed in his hands, so have I published
it word for word without any the least chandg to my knowledge, least Mr. Bernard
should say it is not the lettre he had from me and that his slanderous
collections and aspersions cast upon me in respect of the lettre may be
perceaved by them that read this lettre, and compare it with his book, notes,
and speeches: And seeing necessity enforces the identity of this lettre without
correction either of matter or words, I beseech the Gentle Reader friendly and
favorably to construe all things, and interpret them in the better p^rt*
promising that if any either error in matter: or tartnes of speech be
manifested unto me as my sin, I shall willingly confess and repent it before
the world.

And so upon hope of a favorable construction I desire to advertise further
that Mr. Bernard had in his hands this lettre of mine six or seven months
before he published this his book entitled the Seperatists Schism* which book
as may be perceaved by this letter, compared therewith, is principally directed
in opposition and reprehension thereof: but how little cause Mr. Bernard had so
to do, may now appear. For he should have answered before he had opposed: but
that which he does oppose is indeed answered already in the lettre by
prevention and anticipatio^ that I shall not need to make answer a fresh to Mr.
Bernard, he being now twice answered, once before his book was published, and
now again since by Mr. Henry Ainsworth: Only I desire the reader to be
advertised that there are some particulars wherein Mr. Ainsworth has lest me
and the truth in the open plain field to shift for our selves: In regard
whereof, as also because of Mr. Bernards misaledging and misconstruing diverse
parts of my letter written unto him, I have thought meet, not barely to publish
this lettre, but parallele-wise to compare Mr. Bernards book* Mr. Ainsworths
answer, and this my lettre together, as also to annexe a few animadversio^^ and
observations aperteyning thereunto, that by this means the agreement and
difference being discovered, the truth may appear where it is.

Now although it be a greevous thing unto me to raise up adversaries against me
without cause, especially brethren of true Churches: yet seeing I am
necessarely interessed to defend the truth manifested in mine own writings,
which I cannot possibly do but by way of opposition, the^for it comes to
pass that will I, will I, I must needs answer the opponent, left I betray the
truth which by due order I am particularly called and singled out to defend.
Wherefore for more evidence sake I have caused this lettre written to Mr. Bern.
to be divided into 19. Sections, and in every Section where need required, I
have made parallels, animadversions, and observations for several purposes as
the reader shall perceave in perusing the^: Finally upon persuasion of friends*
and for further clearing of the truth I have annexed two other lettres, the one
written to Mr. A.S. a Minister of the Church of England containing certain
principal and main grounds of our cause which I desire may diligently be
considered of every one that is willing to see the truth: the other written to
ce tayne brethren of the Separation for the confirming and establishing of them
in the truth, against the assaults of Satan transforming himself into an
aungel of light thereby the better to deceave the simple: and howsoever it be
needless to publish any thing further for the clearing of the truth of our
cause out of those mysts and foggs which subtle disputers and pleaders for
cor^uption have like jannes and jambres those Egiptian jugle^s cast before men's
eyes, that they cannot readely discern a true serpent from a ^alfe: yet
because new adversaries arise daily with new shifts and cavils therefore it is
not amiss to discover their forgeries also that at the length it may evidently
appear that the truth has devoured error as Moses Serpent did the Enchanters:
So desiring every one that loves the Lord and the truth especia^ly Mr.
Ainsworth and Mr. Bernard to judge wisely of my course, and not to take any
thing in the evil part which is a strong fruit of the flesh, I cease, wishing
the truth may be honored though men be shamed, Amen.

JOHN SMYTH.

A LETTRE WRITTEN TO MASTER Ric. B^^nard Minister off worksop, by Ioh. Smith
Pastor off the Church at Ganesburgh.
The First Section.
Master Bernard I have sufficient reasons that have moved me to break
silence in respect of you, and by this Lettre to attempt a further trial of
your pretended Zeal for the truth and faith of Christ: I have long time
observed the applause yielded you by the multitude: Likewise I have taken
notice of your forwardnes in leading to a Reformation by public proclamations
in Several pulpits out of that Text off Daniell. 3.16.17.18. As if you had
meant contrary to the Kings mind to have carried all the people in the country
after you against the Ceremonies and Subscription: afterward having lost your
vicaridge of worksop for refusing Subscription or conformity I have observed
how you revolted back and upon Subscription made to the Prelate of york, have
reentred upon your said vicaridg. Again I have noted your vehement desire to
the parsonage of Sawenb^e, and your extreme indignation when you were defeated
of it: Further your earnest desire to have been vicar of Ganesburgh, and all this after your subscription: besides I have carefully weighed with my self
your Readiness to embrace this truth we profess, First, at Sr. VV. Bows his
house when it was opposed by some adversaries, after that your acknowledging of
it before many witnesses at one time, and before one or two witnesses at diverse
times, aledging Naamans speech for your continuance in your Ministry, 2.
King. 5.18. as if thereby you meant to reserve liberty to sin against your
conscience. And now of late I have considered your covenant made with one
hundredth people, a thing of such note and observation as that the whole country
ringeth of it: but alas again you have revolted from all this truth (only
excepting your opposition against the dumb ministers) and have not only
rejected it, but set your self against it, hinder diverse from it, both in your
putpits, and writings proclaim against it as error and schism, yea and begin
to justify all the corruptions of the ministry, worship and government of
the assemblies and all this with a high hand: Al these things and many more I
have noted in you, and all the forward professers, yea and the very ennemies
also have observed the same. In all which particulars two things may be minded:
your inconstancy: and apostasy: (misconstre not the word) for how can I judge it
otherwise seeing you have acknowledged the truth, and now reject it and oppose
it* your inconstancy in falling of and on so often as you have done: now
allthough these general reasons might have moved any of the Prophets and
Teachers of our Church for the truths sake, to have dealt with you: and to have
discovered you to the simpler sort whom you seduce: yet I have attempted it
upon two private grounds wherein I am especially interessed to this business:
one is certain aspersions by you personally cast upon me: Another is
certain particular oppositions directed against some of my writings: For the
First, you may remember that at Broxtow when you returned from Mr. Hildersham
before certain competent witnesses you uttered words tending to this purpose:
that in defense of the truth we profess, I chose out asitt adversary (viz:
Mr. Rich Clifton) to deal withal; a man that could not dive into the depth of
my arguments and that I refused to deal with you in that respect. This speech
savoreth very strongly of pride, which vice take you heed of especialy: it
conteyneth also an untruth, and manifests contempt against a man of better
hability then your self in the judgment of them that know you both, besides the
wrong that you do me, as if I knowing the cause we testife to be weak and
bad durst not adventure it to the trial of your sufficiency and diving wit: but
in good earnest Mr. Bernard tell me: is your dealing upright in this point? Do
not you remember that you have in your hands and had in your hands at that
instant when you uttered those words my answer written in one Column, to
certain doubts and objections you made written in another Column, which I
desired you to answer and whereto as yet I have received no answer from you?
Surely you may pretend holiness and zeal for the truth, but this dealing and
these speeches declare no such matter: yea rather they do manifest the
corruption of your heart: This your speech and dealing is one reason that moves
me in Special to deal with you that your mouth may be stopped in that behalf:
although it be stopped already since you answer not my writing that is in your
hands: and for Mr. Richard Clifton, I assure my self as you shall find shortly
to your little credit, he will approve his sufficie^cy to be Superior to your
diving wit: A Second reason that in particular leads me to meddle with you in
this matter, is your oppositions against some truths which I have expressed in
some of my writings.

Paralleles: Censures: Observations: aperteyning to the first Section.
The place of Daniel mentioned in the beginning of this Section is: Dan. 3.16.
O Nebuchadnezzar we are not careful to answer thee in this matter: 17. Behold
our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the hot fiery furnace, and
he will deliver us out of thine hand o King, 18. But if not, be it known to
thee o King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the golden jmage which
thou have set up.

This place of Scripture Mr. Ber^a^^ handled often times in several places, in so
much as every man conceaved that he would have been a ring leader to
reformation: For the circumstances being considered, that this Scripture was
handled when the King urged Subscription and conformity throughout the whole
land, and when diverse of the forwardest preachers were silenced, and himself
then endaungered to leese his vic^^ridg: that then he should thus p each was
enough to have brought him within the compass of petty-rebellion, in stirring
up the minds of the people against the Kings proceedings: besides the show of
the text might aford that he compared the King to Nebuchadnezzar: Subscription,
to the Kings commandment of worshipping the golden jmage: Refusal of
Subscription, to the Refusal of worshipping the golden jmage: the parts of
Subscription to the golden jmage: the Ministers refusing Subscription to the
three persons that refused to worship the golden image: their Resolution and
courage to the Resolution of those three: The Prelates that urged Subscription
and conformity, to the accusers of the Jews: I would therefore know of Mr.
Bernard whither his mind be now altered from that he held when he Preached
these Sermons upon this text, if yea: then I demand whither fear of
affliction and love of his living and reputation with the world, have not
caused that in him: and whither a man should believe him rather now he is a
formalist, then before when he was a reformist.

The place of Naaman the Assirian is this: 2 King. 5.18.

When I bow in the house of Rimmon to worship, the Lord be merciful unto thy
Servant in this point.

By this place Mr. Bern. intended to sin against his conscience for he did
acknowledge this truth we now profess diverse times, and was upon the point of
Separation with some of his people with him: yet loving the world and
preferme^t as Naaman is thought to do he chose rather to stay still in his
vicaridge against his conscience, then to leese it and to follow Christ with a
good conscience: do you not remember Mr. Bern. what you said to me and Mr.
Rob. Southw. coming together from w: that speaking of the danger of walking
in this truth of Christ we now profess you said you could easily die upon the
tree for the truth, but you could not withour great horror think of being burned
as the Martyrs were in Q. Maryes days? and that all the jorney you were
casting how to dispatch your estate and to get away with safety: I speak this
to prove unto you and the world, that you were as forward to the truth of
Christ with us then, as you were before to the cause of the Reformists: and yet
as then so now you have wholly and I fear finally apostated from it: the L. be
merciful unto you in these your sins: whereupon this follows that if ever
you come to the truth of Christ we profess, you can not be admitted into the
office of Elder in the Church, but therein you must bear your iniquity,
because you have apostated fearfully from the truths you did acknouwledg,
therein giving Suspicion of your constancy and faythfulnes for the time to
come: and whither you be a worthy Minister of your own Church, let the
Reformists judge who have betrayed their cause into the Prelates hands so
shamefully as you have done: wherefore be it known unto you, first, that we
reject you, Seconbly, that the Reformists have just cause to reject you whither
then will you go, but to your LI. the Prelates to whom you have sworn your
Can. obedience, and unto whom you have now at the last fuly returned as it
were a dog to the vomit, and a swine to wallow in the mire.

But your covenant Mr. Bern. is beyond all the endevors of all the reformists of
the land that you should cull out an hundredth persons of so many paris hes so
far distant to enter covenant together not to hear the dumb Ministers, to
watch one over another, to admonish one another, etc. And therevppon to receave
the Lords Supper: What? was not the covenant the Church of England large
enough, but you must enlarge it thus? Did not your conscience tell you then that
the dumb ministry was unlawful? that you sinned in not admonishing your
brethren and therefore went to seek out an hundredth brethren where your proctor
or agent could find them? That al your parish were not your brethren, being not
of your covenant, though of the covenant of the Church of England? or that you
had two sorts of brethren, one of a general nature, viz: all the people of the
parish? another of a Spiritual nature, viz: Those hundredth persons of your
covenant? and yet that you admitted both those sorts of your brethren to all
the holy things among you, excepting the particular covenant? I pray you with
your logic, or divinity, justify unto us these things. But now all this is
forgotten and the Prelate of york has so bewitched you with his flattery,
eloquence, and angels, that your covenant is profaned and cast in the dust,
men of your covenant must shift for themselves, you have deceaved them like the
staff of reed, and you justify your wonted speeches, you love the world, and
ease with all your heart: and therefore I say unto you with the Apostle: The love
of the Father is not in you: I do therefore Proclaim you unto the whole land to
be one of the most fearful Apostates of the whole nation that excepting,
White, and Clapha^, you have no Superior nor equal that I know or remember,
who have thus often confessed and witnessed much truth, and now not only have
fallen from it, but have so childishly and yet most slanderously written
against the cause of the Lord, to blaspheme the name of the Lord, his
Tabernacle and them that dwell in Heaven, as if, because your sins were^ not
known Sufficiently to the world, your would with inck and paper publish them to
al men and ages to come, that they might remain in record against you upon the
file at the day when the Lord shall recompense every man according to his work.

But Mr Bernard there is yet one other thing that I must discover to the world:
namely that you have written a book against the Prelates, wherein you have
proved by diverse arguments that their authority is Antichristian: this book
some of your Friends have see^ and read and though you durst not print it your
self, yet you would have been content a Friend should have caused it to be
published under the vizard of an unknown Author: is not this so Mr. Bern? then
tell me with what face, or conscience you can Subscribe to the Prelacy, you can
plead for the Prelacy: is not this to build that which you have destroyed?
Surely all these things compared together do plainly convince, your deep
Hypocrisy: and yet in your pulpit and among the simple sort you would seem a
brother to the Sons of Thunder: but I desire the Lord to open the eyes of his
people that they be no longer deceaved by such Pharisaical Hypocrites as your
deeds manifest you to be even in the indifferent censure of those that love
you best.

Now therefore to conclude this Parallele of your Famous or rather infamous acts:
compare your resolurion against Subscription and conformity, with your
Subscription to the Prelate of york: your acknowledgment of the truth with
Naamans presumption to sin: your covenant, with your confirmity: your book
against the Prelates, and your book against the Separation and therevppon it
will follow, that you are as chandgable as the Moon, as mutable as Proteus, as
variable as the Chamaeleon. And whereas you object aganst me page 37. and 73.
that before I came to the truth I wrote against it and was distracted to and
fro before I saw it cleared to my judgment and conscience, I must needs
acknowledge it so to be, which was my greater sin, and the weakness of my
understanding, but therein the L. has showed mercy unto me, which mercy I
desire also for you: but what is this to excuse your slaundering, railing,
scoffing, inconstancy, Apostasy, conformity, subscription, blasphemy, and the
rest which you have plentifully discovered to all the world: Show me, how and
when after the acknowledgment of the truth, I fell back as you have done many
times? that I ever yielded to the Prelates, conformity, or Subscription, after
I once withstood it? and among the rest of your follyes there is one untruth
that I did kneel down and praise God for Satisfaction after doubting, Not so:
I remained doubting always till I saw the truth after I once doubted, but
during the time of my doubting which was 9. Months at the least I did many
actions arguing doubting, but that I ever sell back from any truth I saw I
praise God, I can with a good conscience deny it, and you are never able to
prove that against me: but the L. will cut out the tongue that speaks lies.

The second Section.
These oppositions of yours you have written in a lettre which came of late to
my sight: which are thus in your lettre.

Touching your oppinions in these things shall I never be persuaded that you
do well in:

1, In Seperating from all the Reformed Churches. 2. In holding that one sin
of one man publicly and obstinately stood in and not reformed by a true
constituded Church does so pollute it, that none may commicate with it in the
holy things of God til the party offending be by the Church put out after
lawful conviction. 3. In maintayning that its not lawful to hear any ministers
amongst us whatsoever thy be, nor to join in prayer with such as fear God
among us. 4. In holding that Princes have no more to do in Ecclesiastical
causes, the^ one of you in a particular congregation. 5. That the power of
binding and losing is given to the whole multitude, and not to the principal
members thereof. 6. That the word truly preached and Sacraments rightly
administered are no infallible tokens of a true Church. 7. That a minister may
be made without Elders ordinarily I mean for extraordinary courses are not now
to be used, for ought I see. 8. That such as are not in your way are to be
accounted without after the Apostles meaning, 1. Cor. 5.12. 9. That those which
are not of a true constituted Church are no subjects of Christ's Kingdom. 10.
That an erroneous constitution of a Church is a real Idol. 11. That only Saints
as Mr. Smith defines them by 4 proporties are the matter only of a visible
Church. 12. That every of our assemblies are false Churches, al our ministers
false ministers, our worship a false worship. 13. That a company truly fearing
God, if any open wicked join with them are not capable to chose them a
minister over them. 14. That baptism is not administered among us simply into
the faith of Christ, but into the faith of the Bbs. or Church of England. 15.
That ministers ought only to live of voluntary contribution and not of stipends
or any set mayntenance. 16. That our Churches ought to be rased down, and not
to be employed to the worship of God. Al which I do verily believe to be
crrors, and I see not which way men can join to you to swallow up al these as
truths into which you do run in avoiding our corruptions: and that with such
deep condemnation of us, as is greatly in your behalf to be lamented: but I am
tedious, etc. (...) R. B.
This is your writing word for word: wherein you have taxed me by name in one
particular, and indeed in most of them: it shall be my part therefore to clear
these matters for your information, that if it be the will of God, you may see
the truth and walk in it, which I unfeignedly desire of the Lord: or else that
you may no longer seduce others from the truth, your corrupt walking being once
discovered unto the simple: my intent therefore is not to take these points in
that order which you have placed them in, but to assume the^ in the natural
order wherein things usually among Scholars are discoursed.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the Second Section.
I desire here to advertise the reader, that these 16. points which Mr. Bern.
accounts error are again in his book entitled the Seperatifts Schism
rehearsed, refined, augme^ted changed, as it pleases the forger into another
order, shape and number which it shall not be impertinent here to propound for
evidence sake, that the Reader comparing these 16. points with those 22. (For
so they are in number) may discern the agreement and difference, and so more
fully be informed of the whole cause.

The particulars are these following, as they are expressed in diverse pages of
his book as. page 78 the title of them is this.

The Errors of the Seperatists, and the matter of their Schism.

1. They hold that the constitution of our Church is a false constitution, page
78. 2. They hold our constitution a real Idol, and so us idolaters, page 79. 3.
That such as are not of a particular constituted Church (to wit such a one as
theirs is) are no subjects of Chapter Kingdom. page 80.81. 4. That all not in their
way are without; and do apply against us, 1. Cor. 5.12. Ephesians. 2.12. page 82. 5.
That only Saints, (that is) a people forsaking al known sin of which they
may be convinced, doing all the known will of God in creasing and abiding ever
therein, are the only matter of a visible Church, page 83. 6. That the power of
Christ, that is, authority to preach, to administer the Sacraments and to
exercise the censures of the Church belongs to the whole Church, yea to every
one of them, and not to the principal members thereof. page 48. 7. That the
sin of one man publicly and obstinately stood in being not reformed, not
the offender cast out, does so pollute the whole congregation, that none may
communicate with the same in any of the holy things of God (though it be a
Church rightly constituted) til the party be excommunicated, page 102.103. 8.
That every of our assemblies are false Churches, page 109. 9. Al our Ministers
say they, are false Ministers, page 128. 10. Our worship say they is a false
worship, page 146.
Diverse other opinions they hold which I will also set down: and they be
these, page 150.151.

1. That our congregations as they stand are all and every of them incapable
before God to chose them Ministers, though they desire the means of salvtion.
page 151. 2. That God in our best assemblies is worshipped after a false
manner, page 151. 3. That baptism is not administered into the faith of Chapter
simply. but into the says of Bishops or Church of England, page 152. 4. That
our says and repentance is a false faith and false repentance, page 152. 5.
That our Ministers converting men to God here, do it not as Pastors, but as
Teachers, page, 152. 6. That our Church standoth in an adulterous estate, page
152. 7. That they cannot say certainly by any warrant off Gods word that any
of us has either faith, or sear god. page 152. 8. That none off our Ministers
may be heard, page 152. 9. That it is not lawful to join in prayer with any
off us, page 155. 10. That Ministers may not celebrate marriage, nor bury the
dead, page 156. 11. That Ministers should only live off voluntary contribution,
and not either off set stipends or tithes, page 156. 12. That our Churches
ought to be raced down, and not to be employed to the true worship of God,
page 156.
And thus much off this and al other their Brownistical opinions, page 157.

This is the Recapitulation of our Brownisticall opinions, as Mr. Bern. of his
blasphemous uncharitableness gives them their denomination: Remember herein
that every company of men whom god raised up in this latter age to testify
for the truth against the man of sin, has been entitled with like names, as
Lutherans, Calvinists, Zwinglians, etc. As in the act: Christians are caled the
Sect of the Nazarits. whence I for my part should rather gather encouragemeht
in the truth we hold then any discourageme^t, seeing no other thing befalls us
herein then befell all the witnesses of the L. truth in all ages: but let Mr.
Bern and his conforts understand that we chardg them with Antichristianis me,
which they can not deny, but which the best and most sincere professors of the
truths which he calls Brownistical, we justify from the holy Scriptures,
wherein let Mr. Bern. consider whither he do not wound the Holy Scriptures,
the Holy Apostles, Christ Jesus himself, and the Holy Spirit, the author off
the Holy Scriptures, and that through our sides. For if these opinious as we
hold them be the truth of God, then is he a blasphemer in a very high degree
and I would know whither he that heretofore often times confessed them for truths
can nowwithout horrible impiety apostasy and blasphemy, proclayme them
Brownistical opinions: see also whither his conscience can be clear in this

Now Further I desire the reader to compare these 22. particulars, with the 16.
points which I in this lettre have answered, and thereby he shall observe two
things. First that Mr. Bern her in chardgeth us with no thing truly which is
not already answered in this lettre, and therefore he needed not again to have
objected these things publicly except he had first published the lettre and
answered the particulars thereof, but herin it seems he thought to bleare the
eyes of the world, and to bear me^ in hand that he had something to say which
was unanswerable, which notwithstanding was already answered as may be
perceaved. Secondly, that this book of Mr. Ber. is most properly and directly
aimed at my lettre, wherein I am most especialy interessed to yield answer, and
though it be once answered by another: and happily may receave a third answer,
yet I cannot overpasse it least I seem to betray the truth who am by name
singled out to the co^bat? finaly seeing Mr. Bern. has published against us
without answer to this lettre, let us also herin consider his fraud and decept,
in perverting, misconstruing, adding, detracting, falsely chardging us
following therein the dealing off his Father the Devil, with Christ, and our
first parents: For all these evil courses I will discover evidently to the
reader, that Mr, Bern. in the particular Sections of this lettre has used with
me: and so let these be added to his former sins mentioned in the First
Section, and it will appear that he is now manifested by the L. to be one that
has fulfilled the measure of his iniquity.

The third Section.
The first point therefore that I will speak to is vour tenth. viz:

10. That an erroneous constitution of a Church is a real Idol.

Here I would feign know whence you had this position, I confess I have
written some such thing: but neither have I written neither do I hold it as
you propound: I say that a Religions society framed after the invention of a
man without the warrant of the word is a real Idol: but I do not say that some
errors in the co^stitution of a Church makes that Church a real Idol: For as
in generation every fault in the seed which is the matter, as for example a
seed inclined to the gont, or consumption, or stone does not make a false man,
but the party begotten may be a true man not withstanding the infirmity of the
seed: So in the constitution of a Church not every error, (as if the members
whereof the Church is framed have ignorances errors or infirmities in them,)
makes the Church a real idol: For so there should never possibly be a true
Church in the world, seeing it is impossible to find men free from error.
Therefore this is the ground that I hold, that if either the matter of the Church
be not such as the word teaches, but a devised matter: or of the form be not
that which the word teaches, but a devised form: or if the Church have not
the properties which Gods word teaches, which do necessaryly proceed from the
form induced upon the matter: then such a Church I avouch to be a real idol:
take a fimilitude to illustrate it: The seed of an ass and a horse mingled
together in generation do not produce either a true horse, or a true ass, but
a third thing formally differing from both viz: a mule: even so wicked men
joined with Godly men in a Church, do not produce a true Church, but a false
Church, viz: a real Idol the church of Antichrist. For this point consider
what the holy Ghost writes: Apoe 18.2. That Antichrists Church is there
Prophesyed to be a cage of every unclean and hateful byrd, which might not be
eaten or offered in Sacrifice by the Holy people, Deuteronomy. 14, 3.11. again, 2.
Cor. 6.14. The Apostle wills the Corinths not to yoke with unbelievers
because as in the old Testament the Holy people were forbidden to yoke an ox
which was a clean creature, and an affe which was unclean to draw the plough
together, Deuteronomy 22.10. Even so the faithful may not now yoke themselves to draw
the L. plough with un belevers, because they may have no communion, concord,
agreement, followiship, or part the one with theother, but the faithful who are
righteousness, light of the body of Christ the Temple of God, the Children of
God, must come out from the unbelievers, who are unrighteousness, darkness, of
Belial, the habitation of Devils, Apoc, 18.2, yea and must be separated from
them: and must touch none of there uncleanness. For if they still stand in
confusion with the unbelievers, consenting to al there sines, they in that
constitution are not a true Church, but the prayers they offer up with the
prayers of the wicked, coming from that false constitution are taynted with
the idolatry of that constitution: but perhaps you will say that although a
false constitution be a sin yet it is not Idolatry: you must manifest it to
me to be a sin of another commandment if you plead that: otherwise I still
hold it to be a sin of the Second commandment viz: to worship God in a
constitution of an humane invention, even as it was in the Church of Ieroboams
in vention: and as it is in a popish parish assembly, and as it is in the
English assemblies: now further to prove unto you that a false constitution of
a Church is an Idol: I use these places.

2. Cor. 6.16. What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols?

The faithful who have made a covenant with God are here cailed the temple of
God: and thereunto are Idols opposed: signifying that an assembly of men who are
unfaithful, (though some faithful me^ be among them who are commanded to come
out and to be Separated) endevoring to worship God after there fashion are an
Idol: therefore if the temple of Jerusalem now stood, and the Jews assembled to
worship God there after the fashion of the Old Testament, that assembly was an
Idol: So are the assemblies of Turks Idols: So are the assemblies of Papists
Idols: as Abbayes, Monasteries, etc. Such are al churches framed of a false
matter, or having a false covenant.

1. Ioh. 5.21. Babes keep your selves from jmages. Zach. 11.17.

The Apostle who wrote the Revelation forseing through the Spirit of prophecy
the abominable Idolatryes of Antichrist, which would grow up in the Church
gives the Churches a caution especially to take heed of those Antichristian
Idolatryes: now the Idolatryes of Antichrist are not heathenish and paganish,
but of another nature, viz: not false Gods, but means invented by men to
worship the true God in or by: Hence I gather thus:

Whatsoever means is devised out of a man's brain and used as a means to
honor God in or by, is an Idol:

A devised constitution of a Church is of that nature.

Ergo an Idol.

For further amplification whereof consider that as a false minister (whereof
afterward) is an Idol minister: Zach. 11.17. So a Church of a false
constitution is a false Church that is an Idol Chuch: and as it was unlawful
yea flat Idolatry for a Priest of Ieroboams devising to offer Sacrifice to the
L. So is it also Idolatry to offer up service to God in a Church of a false
constitution.

Col. 2.23. Mat. 15.9. Will Worship and vayne-worship is forbidden in these two
places: namely, such worship as is offered to God after the will and precept of
man, whose wisdom is enmity to God:

But a false constitution of a Church is after the will and precept of man even
invented and devised: go it is forbidden: but will worship and vain worship is
a transgression of the second commandment, go: it is idolatry, and so that
false Church wherein or whereby it is offered up to God an Idol.

These things are manifest to him that will not blindfold himself, I pray you
consider of the particulars by me alleged: and if you find a truth in them
embrace the truth and lead on your people with you to the truth: if not, let us
here from you an answer, that we may see our errors, and we will and can
reform: so cannot you so long as you stand as you do: there is no way to
reform but to Separate, as we have done already.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the third Section.
I published a little Method not long since entitled, Principles and
inferences concerning the visible Church: in the tenth page of the book I write
thus: visible Churches constituted according to the devise of men are Real
Idols.

Mr. Bern. in the beginning of his third Section charge us to hold,

That an erroneous constitution of a Church is a real Idol. and in his book
entitled the Seperatists Schism page 79, has these words: They hold our
constitution a real Idol, and so us idolaters: and page 152. of the same book
he writes thus: that our Church (viz: the Church of England) stands in an
adultrous estate: accounting this as an error that we defend.

Mr. Ainsw. in the answer to Mr. Bern. page 172. faith, that a false
constitution of a church set up in stead of a true, what is it better then a
very Idol?

Here let us consider the difference and agreement betwixt Mr. Ains. and me: he
says a very Idol, I say a real Idol: I call a false constitution a real Idol,
For that in existence and being it is an Idol: Mr. Ainsw. calls a falsely
constituted Church a very Idol, because it is indeed and truly an Idol: here is
little difference except it be in words: but for the further clearing of my
position viz: that a falsely constituted Church is a real Idol: two things must
be discovered: 1. what an Idol is: 2. what Real is.

For the first understand that most properly an Idol is contrary to an
ordinance apoinred by God in matter of Religion: So the Apostle wills the
brethren to keep themselves from jmages or Idols, 1. Ioh. 5.21. and the Lord
himself in the Second Commandment forbids, under the phrases of making and
worshipping jmages, al inventions of men in matter of Religion, Exodus 20.4.5,
Now matter of religion especially subsisteth, in Religious worship, or
religious government, For the Saints are made Kings and Priests unto God: and
as Kings they exercise a regiment, as Priests they perform their Sacrifices
Revel. 1.6, 1. Co. 6.1-9.1. Pet. 2.5. and therein they perform homage to the
Lord, and submit their consciences to be wrought upon. and seeing the
conscience must bow only to the Lord, and not to man otherwise then in the
Lord, therefore in matter of Religion the conscience is not to yield to any thing
devised by man: but must always have the Lord for the leader and Governor
therein: hence then it follows that whosoever substituteth any devise of man,
any thing taught by the precept of man: Mat. 15.9. Esaias 29.13. any will
worship, or any ordinance of the world in matter of Religion, sets up that
which is contrary to the Lords ordinance, contrary to the Lords will, contrary
to the Lords wisdom, and I would feign learn whither this be not an Idol or
jmage: So that Idols are of two sorts: 1. A false God, 2, A false means to
honor or submit, or do homage to the true God in or by: as a false or devised
time, place, person, instrument, action, and if the^be any thing of the like
consideration: therefore a false or devised time may be caled an Idol day as 1,
King. 12.33. the month which Jeroboam appointed for the worship of his Calves
is called the month which he had forged of his own heart, that is an Idol
month and so by consequent the 15 days of that month an Idol day. So in the
old Testament the place where God was to be worshipped was the Tabernacle or
Temple. Deuteronomy. 12.5-8. and therefore the high places in judah also Da^ and Bethel
in Israel were Idol places because they were places forged out of the hearts of
them that first appointed them: such were all the places dedicated by the hethen
to worship their Gods in, which therefore were commanded to ^he rased down:
Deu, 12.2.3. so likewise a shepherd or minister framed according to the devise
of man is called a foolish or Idol Shepherd: Zach. 11.17. Such were Ieroboams
Preistst 1. King. 12.31. and the false Apostles, 2. Cor: 11.13-15. who are
therefore called the ministers of Satan: In like manner Gideons Ephod: judge.
8.27. Michaes Ephod, Teraphin^ and molten jmage, Judge. 17.4.5. The brazen
Serpent 2. King. ^8.4. being instruments of idolatry might justly have been
called Idol instruments and so forth for actions. Thus we see the first point
what an Idol is, and by consequent that Idols are infinite in number, and that
they are not only 47. as Mr. Bern. faith Marlorat reckeneth them: and again
that Mr. Bern. question is answered which he makes page 152. What Idol worship
we Says Mr. Bern? I answer that Mr. Bern. does both worship an Idol, and
worshippeth in or by Idols: The Idol which he worshippeth is a false Christ,
who is neither a King to him, seeing he submitreth not to his kingdom and
ordinances thereof, nor a Priest, seeing he yields not to his true Ministry,
nor a Prophet, seeing he receaveth not the Holy doctrine which he teaches: but
yields to a Kingdom, Preishood and Prophecy erected and established according
the doctrine and commandments of men: as shall be sufficiently cleared hear
after and has been o^t times already done: The Idols wherein and whereby he
worshippeth, is, 1. his own false Church, 2. his own false standing as a
meber of the false church 3. his own false Ministry, 4. his own false parish
Church, or Idol Temple, 5. his service book, 6. his Lords the Prelates, their
courts, and ministers wherein and whereto he submits. Generally: look how many
Prelates, Priests, Deacons, Parishes, Temples, Service books, Surplices,
Crosses, Holy days, Courts Ecclesiastical, Officers in these Courts there are
in the Land: So many Idols there are: that we may say as Esaias said in his time
of Judah, Esaias, 2.8. their land is full of Idols. and so this question of yours
Mr. Bern. is answered: Now the second point to be manifested is. What is Real:
I opposed Real to mental as may be seen Princip Inferenc. page 9. and 10.
Mental or intellictual is that which has his being in the mind or
understanding: as the frame of the English Churches conceaved in the mind, I
called a mental Idol: Real is that which has an existence and being out of the
mind and conceit: as the Parish Church of worksop, whereof Mr Bern. is vicar,
is a real Idol, having existence, and being not only in the mind and conceit,
but also in deed and truth. Now Real is either Natural, or Moral, or
Artificial, or Political. Natural as a man, Moral as virtue, Artificial as a
house, Political as a City or common wealth, and whereas I called a falsely
constituted Church a real Idol, I intended it a real Politic Idol: For so a
Church is a polity, City, or common wealth. Revel. 11.2, and 18.2.
Wherefore as the true Church is the Holy City the new Jerusalem that comes
down from God out of heaven: Revel. 21.2. Even that true Polity and common
wealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12. So the false Church is Babylon, Egypt, Sodom, that
City, Polity, common wealth, or Sinagogue of Satan: and so a Political Real
Idol: and therefore the English assemblies being proved to be false Churches, are
real Idols. Let us in the next place consider what Mr. Bern. says to these
things: First he says the Scripture never takes an Idol in this sense: I have
both in this Section of my lettre, also in this Parallele showed him already
that an Idol is so taken in the Scripture, but for further evidence I use this
argument.

That which is contrary to a true Church is an Idol.

A falsely constituted Church is contrary to a truly constituted Church.

Ergo: A falsely constituted Church is an Idol.

The Major is true by natural reason as also by the consideration of the nature
of contraries: For as light is contrary to darkness, virtue to vice: white to
black: fire to water: So is true contrary to false, and a true Church, to a
false Church.

The major is the Apostles own argument, 2. Cor. 6.16. his words are: what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? whence I reason thus:

That which is contrary to the Temple of God, is an Idol.

That which is contrary to the true Church, is contrary to the Temple of God

For the true Church is the Temple of God.

Ergo: That which is contrary to the true Church is an Idol.

Herevppon it follows that seeing the Apostle opposes an Idol to the temple
of God as he opposes light to darkness, Christ to Belial: and seeing the Temple
of God is the true Church, therefore an Idol in that place is a false Church: now
Mr. Bern, with all your learning avoyde this place, and I will yield you this
particular.

Further, A false Christ is an Idol.

A false Church is a false Christ.

Ergo, a false Church is an Idol.

The Major is undeniable.

The Minor is proved two ways: First by the contrary thus:

A true Church is true Christ as may be collected from these two places, 1.
Cor. 12.12 Gal. 3, 16.

Therefore a false Church is a false Christ.

Secondly it may be proved by Christ's own words, Mat. 24.24. there shall arise
false Christ's, and false Prophets, that is to say false churches, and false
Ministers which profess and teach doctrynes of the Lord Jesus falsely, both of
his person and offices as the Arrians, the Lutherane vbiquitists, the Papists,
the Anabaptists, etc. Thus you see we have proved unto you now this second
time that a falsely constituted Church is a real Idol. But because you cannot
soundly answer, therefore blasphemously you scoff at the doctrine of the
constitution of the true Church, we do constantly and bouldly defend that out
of a Church truly constituted (when a man can and may join thereto) no
ordinance of God can be accepted, neither preaching, nor praying, nor
Sacraments, nor any other religious action. what the Lord accepts in secreat
that we dispute not: but what the word of God teaches unto us to be acceptable
that we speak of.

And tell me Mr. Bernard, can there be a true ministry, a true baptism, a true
faith, true prayer, true preaching, or administering the L. supper true
excommunication in the church that is falsely constituted? did the L. accept of
the Sacraments and Sacrifices of the Church of Israel constituted by Jeroboam
that author of Idolatry? does not the Lord say unto that people in that false
Church, Lo, Ammi, Lo, Ruhamah, No People, No Pity, Hosea, 1.6.9. and is not
the Lord as severe now against a Church falsely constituted in the New
Testament, as he was against the false Church of the ten tribes in the old
Testament? or do you think that the Lord accepts of a false says, ministry,
baptism, prayer, preaching, excommunication and the rest? make these things
agree Mr. Bern. if you can: if you cannot, cease your scoffing, and give glory
unto God: I demand of you: do you think that God accepts the prayers and
Religious exercises of the Papists, the Arrians, the Anabaptists, the
Familists, or any other heretics or Antichristians, if not what is the true
cause that God accepts them not? is it not for that there is not that true
communion of the Saints there, the true Church, the true spouse of Christ, the
Spiritual Temple where God has provised his presence? So then it follows
invincibly that a tiue constitution of a church, that is a true communion of
Saints, is that only lawful religious, society, or communion of men, whereby God
will be honored, wherein he will be served, and whereto he has promised his
presence and acceptance: and as conventicles are unlawful assemblies of men in
civil states, so are al false churches unlawful ecclesiastical assemblies and
the actions therein performed unlawful, and so abominable in the sight of God,
the sum of all (...) breefly thus much.

That communion of men whereto God has given the covenant: the Holy things the
promises, Christ for King, Priest, and Prophett, is only accepted, and their
Ecclosiasticall actions only acceptable: But a true visible church, that is a
communion of Saints, joined together in the true covenant, is that only
communion of me^ whereto God has given his covenant, his promises, his holy
things, Christ for King, Priest and Prophet.

Therefore a true visible church, that is a communion of Saints, and their
actions ecclesiastical, as preaching and prayers, etc. are only accepted. and
by consequent on the contrary (...) inserre thus.

That communion of men whereto God has not given the covenant, the holy things
the promises, Christ for King, Priest, and Prophet, is not accepted of God,
neither their actions ecclesiastical are acceptable.

A Church falsely constituted (as in the old Testament was the Apostate church
of the ten tribes, and in the new Testament is the churches of Antichrist) is
such a communion of men, whereto God has not given the covenant, the holy
things, the promises, Christ for King, Priest, and Prophet.

Therefore a church falsely constituted is not accepted of God, neither are their
actions ecclesiastical, as prayer, preaching, etc. acceptable in the sight of
God.

Herevppon I conclude not as Mr. Bern. blasphemously scoffeth that the Idol or
Goddess constitution, but that the true constitution of a Church which is the
Lords Holy ordinance is that which Sanctifies al ecclesiastical actions: and
that a false idolatrous, Antichristian constitution of a church, corrupts,
polluteth, stayneth all the ecclesiastical actions of that false church: So
says the Apostle, unto the pure al things are pure: but unto them that are
defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure. Tit. 1.15. and this is my welbeloved
son (says the Father from heaven) in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3.17. and
God hears not sinners, but only the true worshippers: Ioh. 9.31.

Finally, I avouch that a falsely constituted church is a greater and more
abominable Idol, then any Idol that possibly can be in a true church: For a
false worship, Ministry and government may be indeed in a true Church through
ignorance and the like occasions: But a true ministry, worship and government
cannot possibly be in a false Church: For the true Ministry, worship, and
Government are the Holy things of God, which are not given to false Churches,
but only to the true Churches of Christ, the true communion of Saints: and a
false Church being an Idol does conveigh her idolatrous and false constitution
as a poison through all her Ecclesiastical actions or works off communion:
Breefly therefore to compare True and False: Idols and Ordinances together:
Bonum qu^ communius eo melius: Malum quo communius eo peius: They are two
maxims true in nature and experience, and* so also in Religion: Truth and
ordinances the more common and universal the better and more excellent:
Falsehood and Idols, the more common and general the worse and more
pernicious, For example, a true Church better then a true worship, then a true
Ministry, then a true government, etc. A false Church worse then a false
worship, then a false Munistery, then a false government, etc. For a true
Church is the first and most noble and universal in Religion, from whence all the rest issue as a stream from the Fountain: and a false Church is the
first, most ignoble and general qualifying all the ecclesiastical actions of the
Church with her own falsehood and idolatry: Therefore I am bold to pronounce
your false and idolatrous Church constitution to be worse then your false
Ministry, worse then your false worship, worse then your false government,
etc. and on the contrary, our true constitution to be the most honorable and
beautiful ornament of our Church; more glorious then our true Ministry,
worship, and government, since these latter issue and do flow from the former as
from the spring ^r Fountain. A true man may have a wooden leg, an eye of
glass: So a true Church may have a false ministry and worship, or government.
A man carved out of wood, cannot possibly have any truth of a man in him, but
al his parts and limbs are wooden, eve^ as the image is of wood So a false
Church can have nothing true in it, but al is false, idolatrous, usurped, for
what agreement has Christ with Belial? These things are plain enough to them
that will understand.

The fourth Section.
Your ninth position follows, viz:

9. That those which are not of a true constituted Church, are no subjects of
Christ's Kingdom: This you hold error, and I hold it truth which I will manifest
unto you most evidently,

The true Church in the Scripture is called the house of God, Heb. 3.6.

The Temple of God which the L. inhabiteth, and wherein he walks. 2. Cor. 6.16.

The household of faith, Gal. 6.10. the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.15.16.

The Kingdom of heaven of Christ and of God, Ephesians. 5.5. Mat. 3.2. Luke
19.11.12. Act. 1.3. Further this true Church is but of one shape, form,
fashion, or constitution: Ephesians. 4.4 The body that is the Church is one, that is
of one shape: For one in that place signfieth vnum specie, not vnum numero, for
there are many Churches in number, but one true Church in the frame or
constitution: Let this therefore be set down for an invincible truth that the
true visible Church is the Kingdom of Christ, where Christ the King only rules
and reigns in his own laws and officers and over his own subjects: and al
those that will not be subjects to this King in this his Kingdom he accunteth
his enemies and will have them slain before his face Luke 19.27. Hence then it
follows that those that are not members of a true constituted Church, are not
subjects of Christ's Kingdom: which you say is error, wherein you see you give
the Holy Ghost the lie, imputing error unto the word of truth: But you will say
if men be not subjects of Christ's Kingdom, there is no salvation for them* I
deny that: will you condemn all the Jews, Turks, Papists in the world? yet I
say they are no subjects of Christ's Kingdom which is the true visible Church:
I pray you therefore be as good to us, as you are to your self in that censure:
wherefore we must remember to distinguish betwixt the visible Church which is
Christ's Kingdom, and the Catholic Church whi^^ is invisible. The visible*
Church has in it a visible communion, visible and sensible ordinances for men
to walk in a visible faith expressed in the outward declarations thereof in
confession, and profession of the truth, this visible Church must we join to
and live in, this is the sheepfold wherein Christ foldeth his sheep, into this
sheepfold both sheep and shepherd must enter by the door, and not clyme up
another way as thieves, and robbers do: Of al those that live and continue in
this true visible Church we are bound to believe holmes, faith and election in
particular. Ephesians 1.1.4. Now the Catholic Church which is invisible is the
comprehension of all the elct in all ages and places: whose persons are unknown
to us, and such secreat things the L. has reserved to himself, and concealed
from our knowledge, and therefore we are not to search after them, but must walk
in that way which he has taught in his word where so much of his will as is fit
for us to know is revealed: now I would have you manifest to me two things
concerning this point: one is that the Catholic Church is Christ's Kingdom,
another is that all that are ont of the visible Church are condemned: I for my
part hold the contrary, viz: First that the visible Church truly constituted is
the only Kingdom of Christ, which he at the day of judgment shall give up into
the hands of his Father, 1. Cor. 15.24. and that therefore they who are not
members of Christ's true visible Church are no subjects of Christ's Kingdom: and
Secondly, notwithstanding that there are many who are no members of the visible
Church, and therefore no subjects of Christ's Kingdom, who notwithstanding
aperteyne to the L: Election, and are within the compass of the Catholic
Church, out of which there is no salvation, Now Mr. Bern. if you have any thing
to object against this truth, let us have it I pray you that we may receave
instruction and reformation from you: you assume great dexterity in diving
into men's arguments, I pray you dive into the bottom of this point and
discover the error thereof if you be able: if not, lay your hand upon your
mouth, and give glory to God, and confess your ignorance and errors.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the Fourth Section.
In this Section Mr, Bern. says that it is error to hold: that those that are
not of a true constituted Church are no subjects of Christ's Kingdom.

In his book entitled the Seperatists Schism page 80. and 81. He affirms
the same thing in these words: viz: That such as are not of a particular
constituted Church (to wit, such a one as theirs is) are no subjects of Christ's
Kingdom.

Mr. Ainsworth answering Mr. Bernard, page 173. uses these words:

Neither is this position set down in our words (to my knowledge:) if therefore
Mr. Bern. were not a caviller, he would not have reckoned this among our errors

Although Mr. Bern. oppugneth this truth, and Mr. Ainfw. forsakes the defense
thereof, yet I still defend it as the undoubted truth of God. First, therefore I
will expound the true meaning thereof: then also answer Mr. Bern. cavils and
cautions.

I say not therefore as, Mr. Bern. ignorantly and vaynly and captiously
conce^veth, that whosoever is not actually a joined member of a true visible
Church not living in communion with that church, is no subject of Christ's
Kingdom, but I say thus: they that are not of a true constituted Church are no
subjects of Christ's Kingdom: now it is one thing to be in a true church as a
member thereof actual walking in presence and communion therewith, another thing
to be of a true church. which one may be either as yet actually vnjoyned or
being a joined member actually and yet absent in regard of bodily presence,
that one vnioyned actually may yet be of a true visible church, I declare by
diverse particulars* as first one that by violence is deteyned from a true
constituted church yet may be of it in desire, will, affection and purpose
though actually vnioyned, the Lord accepting the will for the deed when it
cannot be performed. Again when as yet there is no true visible church
established actually? a man may be of it, in that he would be joined unto it,
if it ^ad any real existence, So the Martyrs in Q. Maryes days may be said to
be of a true visible church, both for that they would have actualy joined to
the true co^stituted church if it had bee^ established, as also for that they
in will and purpose desired so to do, although violently they were deteyned by
imprissonment: Further they that are of the true says which is professed in
the true Church may be said to be of that true church: which faith is not a
thing invisible, but visible and sensible: as namely a man Separated from all
false churches, and professing the true visible faith of the church, holding it
unlawful in regard of some corruption which he sees in the true church, to
join thereunto may yet be said to be of the true church. Lastly, if some
brethren though but two or three walk together in holy communion, they are a
true Church: and although perhaps they have not solemnly entered covenant, yet
there communion in holy exercises is a declaration that they have contracted
together, though weakly and corruptly yet truly So that these particulars
being well weighed may sulficiently inform you of my meaning but Mr. Bern you
have in your book quoted this point otherwise then I have propounded and
expounded it in my lettre, and that in two particulars, viz: 1. in saying, a
particular constituted Church: 2. in adding these words: Such a one as theirs
is: For there is as much difference betwixt a true constituted Church, and a
particular constituted Church, as there is betwixt a man, and this man or that
man: the one is species: theother individinum: and it is evident that a man may
be of a true constituted Church, and yet not of a particular constistuted
Church as may be perceaved by the 4. particulars before mentioned. Again in
adding these words, viz: such a one as theirs is: after a scoffing vprayding
and disdainful manner he seeks to draw into hatred and abomination the true
Church of Christ: but the time will come when the Lord will reward every man
according to his works.

In the second place let us consider of Mr. Bern. cavils and cautions which are
4. in nom ber. page 81.

First, he says the Scripture never sets forth any of Gods people by this
mark: say you so Mr. Bern? is not the Scripture plentiful in declaring unto us
that the L. adds daily to the Church, such as should be saved: Act. 2.47.
that they that gladly received the word were baptized and added to the Church,
and continued therein: Act. 2.14.42 does not the Apostle teach that there is one
faith, one body, one baptism, one Lord, and but one? Ephesians. 4. And that they
that are not of this faith, body, baptism, Lord are without the faith, without
the body, that is the Church, without the true baptism, without this true Lord
and King Jesus Christ? and so are none of Gods people visible, none of Christ's
Kingdom, none of Christ's body, none of his faith, and baptism? Are not true
faith, prayer baptism, the Lords Supper, the true church plain and pregnant
do monstrative proper adjuncts of Gods visible people? and how can you with any
face of truth or a good conscience of your judgment and knowledge say, that to
be of a true visible church, is no note of Gods visible people? out you say
further that he synneth which does not live in a true co^stituted Church
ordinarily, when he can and has means offered: nay we say further then so:
that he synneth that does not seek means to live in a true constituted Church,
and not only he that uses not means offered so to do: wherefore we say that
which you say and more also: but I pray you, what means your ordinarily
living in a true constituted church: do you hold that there are two sorts of
members and conversers in the true church some ordinary and some occasional or
extraordinary? and do you think that to be of a true chuch, and to live in a
true church are one thing? we say that members of true churches are al ordinary
and of one kind and consideration: and further we say, that it is one thing to
be of a true church or a member of a true church another thing to live in the
true church: and a man may be a member of a true church potentialy and actualy,
as I have already declared in the 4. former particulars. but all this is nothing
to that which I affirm, for I say thus: that he which is not of a true visible
Church, is no subject of Chr. Kingdom, that is he is not under the visible
dominion and Lordship of Chr. in his church which is his Kingdom: I do not say
that he is invisiblie none of the L. people: for a man may be one of the L.
people in election and grace invisiblie, and yet not in the true visible church
which is Chr. visible Kingdom: again take an instance to exemplify the matter:
al we that are of the separated churches in these contryes are of the common
wealth of England, and therefore subjects of the King of England our Sovereign
Lord on earth, though we are not actually under the execution of his laws,
courts, officers, by reason of banishment, and that we may submit to Chr.
ordinance, etc. So a true separated Christian is a subject of Chr. visible
polity and Kingdom, which is his church, either actually or potentially,
although by banishment that is by undeserved communication, by imprissonme^t,
by other occasions he be actualy absented and separated from the presence
thereof. wherefore Mr. Bern. I do in this section indite you before the L. and
the world, as one that of purpose and so maliciousty perverteth my meaning and
slaundereth this excellent truth of God: does not your conscience tell you may
you not read it in the copy of my lettre that I distingnish betwixt Gods
people, which are of two sorts, visible subjects of Chapter visible church which
is his Kingd. and invisible ones known only to the L. certainly and
particularly? further this doctryn of mine you say is contrary to 4, places of
Scripture, pa. 81. the first place is Gal. 3.7.9. the Apostles words are
these. They which are of says are the children of Abraham. us. 7. and they
which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham which scripture proves my
doctrine or rather the L. truth. I say that faith here is oposed to the works
of the law, and that faith signifies a visible faith. For the Apostle James
says, Iam. 3.21-24. Speaking of the same matter, viz: of Abraham's faith that
it was made perfect by works: for if Abraham's faith had not been manifested by
his works, it had been invisible, and it would not have been discerned by man:
and therefore in the same place us. 14. the Ap. speaks directly of a visible
faith this place of the Ap. therefore confirms my assertion plainly, that they
that are not of a true constituted Church, are no subjects of Chr. Kingd.
because they do not by their works show their faith (...) but if they have
faith they have it with God, and not with man, who can judge only by the fruits.

The second place is, 1. Ioh. 3.14 where the Apostle speaks thus: We know
we are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren? Who are
the brethren, are not they that call God Father? who can call God Father but they
that have Christ for their Lord and Mr. for their Elder brother? To whom is
Christ Lord and Mr. but to them that are subjects of his Kingdom? So that this
place also makes most evidently for the confirmation of this truth of God
which I defend. But you Mr. Bern. dream of am visible faith, of an invisible
Kingdom, of an invisible brotherhood or consanguinity: whereas Christ says
directely, that they which do the will of God, are his brethren and of his
Fraternity, Marc. 3.35. and what have we to do with things invisible, hidden,
and secreat, Deuteronomy. 29.29. I avouch that you cannot prove to me by any rule of
Gods word certainly, that those that are not members of a true constituted
Church, are subjects of Christ's Kingdom invisible as you I am sure intend it:
Further, what is the love of the brethren whereof the Apostle speaks? is it
not a visible love testified in the performance of the visible ^utyes of love:
Christ faith Ioh. 14.25. if ye love me keep my commandments: obedience is the
true touchstone of the love of God, and 1. Ioh. 3.17. whosoever has this
worlds good, and sees his brother need, and chutteth up his compassion from
him, how dwells the love of God in him? So the visible duties of brotherly
love are the true touchstone of brotherly love: but the principal visible
duties of brotherly love are the duties of admonition, consolation,
supportation, patience. 1. These. 5.14. Exhortation, edification, us. 11. among
the^ admonition is most excellent. Mat. 18.15-17. compared with Levit. 19.17.
they therefore that altogether omit these visible duties of admonition in the
degrees thereof enjoined by Christ and the Apostles, how can they be said to
love the brethren? but al they that live out of a true constituted Church wholly
omit the visible duties of love to the brethren, seeing they neither know, nor
have brethren upon whom they may exercise these duties: Therefore this place of
the Apostle is pregnant and invincibly strong against you.

The third place is 1. Cor. 1.1. Now what words Mr. Bern, intends in this
place I can not conjecture except they be these: viz. in the second verse: with all those that call upon the name of the L. Jesus Christ in every place: whence
it may seem he would gather that there were some subjects of Christ's Kingdom,
and not of a constituted Church. I do verily think that seeing these persons
that were absent from the Church of Corinthus, did call Jesus Christ Lord they
did therefore acknowledge him for their Lord and King, and therefore did apertayne
to his Kingdom which is his visible Church: happily they might be some
brethren which did not dwell in Corinth, but in some villages about Corinth: and
that this is so the place afordeth evidently: For he wrote both to the Church
that was in Corinth, and to the brethren that were in other places which were
no doubt of the church of Corinth, El^ how did that Epistle in the contents of
it concern them, For seeing the Apostle writes this Epistle to them they had
to do with the matters whereof he taxes the church, for he taxes them al
indifferently, seeing he writes indifferently unto them al Herevppon it
follows that either these persons that were in other places were members of
the Church of Corinth: or else if they were no members off that church, the
Apostle in vain does direct his Epistle to them taxing them off the
corruptions off that Church: Except it be said that the Apostle does hereby
interest other churches to deal with the Church of Corinth, for their
corruptions, and then Mr. Bern. gayneth nothing by it neither, seeing thereby he
confesses that these other brethren were members of other true constituted
churches.

The third place therefore is nothing to the purpose.

The last place is 2. These. 3.15. and count him not as an enemy, but admonish
him as a brother.

To pass by what some think of this place, I say unto you Mr. Bern: that it
has not so much as a show for your purpose: The Apostle speaks in this verse
negatively and affirmatively. For he teaches that they ought not to reckon of
an excommunicate, as they account of an enemy, but they are to admonish an
excommunicate as they do admonish a brother: Thereby teaching us that an
excommunicate is in a middle condition neither an enemy nor a brother, but one
that is under the censure of the church, as a means ordained by God for his
reformation how will this place prove that an excommunicate is a member of
Christ's invisible Kingdom? or if it should prove that some excommunicate are
members of Christ's invisible Kingdom, how can you prove that this or that
excommunicate is so? do you know the Lords Elect certainly, and particularly,
that are out of the church? Or what does this assertion of yours, and this
place of Scripture against my assertion? who say, that such as are not of a
true constituted church, are no subjects of Christ's Kingdom: viz: Of the
Kingdom which he shall give up into the hands of his Father in the day of his
final judgment,

In the third place Mr. Bern. asks what may be said of wicklife, Hus, Luther,
Bucer, Melanchtho^, the Martyrs, Gods people in England, of Lot, Job, the
people in captivity in Mordecay his time: whereto I answer as I have already
done: That Job was a member of a true constituted church, and so a subject of
Christ's Kingdom, So was Lot, so were the people of the Jews in captivity,
though violently deteyned from the Holy land, City and Temple: and therefore
Mr. Bern. in these three demaundes gains nothing except the estimation of
ignorance and folly be gain: to that of the Martyrs, Hus, Luther, and Gods
people in England, I say two things: either that in affection and desire they
aperteyned to the true visible church being separated from the false church: or
that they were of the invisible church, and of the invisible Kingdom which is
unknown to man, and the members thereof unknown: disprove you this if you can.

In the last place you demand, whither Christ's Kingdom be not Spiritual and
invisible also? Ioh. 18.33. and 10.16.

The two places of Scripture quoted by you do not prove that Christ has an
invisible Kingdom, and so invisible subjects known to us, For Ioh. 18. Christ
says my Kingdom is not of this world, that is to say: it is not begun,
continued, and perfected by worldly means: So Christ expounds himself,
afterward saying: my Kingdom is not from hence: my subjects would fight for me
us. 36. meaning that his Kingdom is neither erected nor supported by worldly
means as by sword, spear or shield: in respect whereof the Apostle says Romans
14.17. The Kingdom of God is not meat nor drinck, and 2. Cor. 10.3.4. Though
we live in the flesh, yet we do not war after the flesh for the weapens of
our warfare are not carnal The second place is Ioh. 10. VVher Christ says not
as you dream very ignorantly and childishly, that he has an invisible
Kingdom, but that he has sheep of two sorts, some of the visible Church of
the Old Testament, which is one fold, some of the visible Church of the New
Testament, which is another sold o^ the Jews and Gentiles: both which sorts of
people shall in Christ Jesus, the partition wall being taken away, be joined, and
made one that so there may be one sheepfold and one shepherd, but what is all this Mr. Bern. to disprove the truth of my position? Again to answer your
demand, I say that Chr. Kingdom is Spiritual and invisible as well as outward
and visible: For when we say that Christ's Kingdom is visible and sensible, we
do not deny that it is also invisible and Spiritual: neither are these two
contraryes to be oposed, as excluding one another: For as a man is not only the
body which is visible and sensible, but chiefly and principally the soul which
is invisible: and as the true Sacraments are not only the outward Elements, but
the inward grace also, and that most especialy: So the visible Church which
consists of men, is not only the outward communion, but especially and
chiefly the inward and Spiritual fellowship which the Saints have with Christ,
and one with another: The Apostle therefore says both that there is one body and
one Spirit: Ephesians. 4. and that all that are baptized are baptized into one body,
and all that communicate are caused to drinck into one Spirit, 1. Cor. 12.13.
And as the Saints are members of Christ's body, of his flesh, and of his bones,
Ephesians. 5.30. So they that are joined to the Lord are one Spirit: 1. Cor. 6.17.
we grant you therefore Mr. Bern. that Christ's Kingdom is Spiritual and visible,
but we deny that Christ's Kingdom is only invisible, or only visible: he that
does plead to me that he is a member of Christ's visible Kingdom, and yet
cannot show unto me his faith by his works, I say unto him as James says:
What avayleth it him? o thou vain man? shall thy says save the? thy says is
dead: and he that shall plead with the Lord in the day of his judgment, that he
has prophesyed in Christ's name, and by his name cast out Devils, and wrought
many great works, given his body to be burned in the fire, given al his goods
to the poor, has spoken with the tongs of men and angels, wanting true
inward love and faith the Lord will say unto him depart thou worker of iniquity,
I know the not: all this outward show was hypocrisy: and thou art but as
sounding brass, and a tinckling Cymbal. Therefore as the Apostle says: glorify
God with your body and Spirit, for they are Gods: 1. Cor. 6.20. he that is only
an invisible member of Christ's kingdom, is but half a subject of Christ's
Kingdom at the utmost, though it be the better half: and he that is only a
visible member of Christ's Church, he is unto us truly and fully a subject of
Christ's Kingdom, though unto the Lord he is but half, and so the worse half,
and so as good as nothing: Let the Lord judge in secret what he pleases in
mercy, but we must judge in visible that which we see visiblie, and therefore to
conclude this Parallele: I say he that pleads himself to be a true subject of
Christ's Kingdom by his invisible faith, yet standing in confusion with the
world in the false Church, worship, ministry and Government, let him be what
he may be unto the Lord, to me he is either an Antichristian or Famelist: and
he that wanting true faith only in secreat known to the Lord, is yet a member
of a true Church, though I must needs say unto him thou art holy, faithful,
and Elect, yet the Lord will call him an Hypocrite, and a worker of iniquity in
the day when he will bring unto light every secreat thing whither good or evil:
Therefore my position stands firm notwithstanding al your cavils, that he that
is not of a true constituted Church is no subject of Christ's Kingdom.

The fisth Section.
In the next place follows your eighth position which you account error, viz.

That such as are not in your way are to be accounted whithout after the
Apostles meaning, 1. Cor. 5.12.

I take it to be most evidently true upon the former grounds, that seeing the
true visible Church is Christ's sheepfold, his Kingdom, his house, his
household or family, his Temple or Tabernacle, his body: That therefore al those
that are not within this sheepfold this Kingdom, house, family, Temple, body,
are without: For they are either within or without, but they are not within:
go: they are without: Now for the Apostles meaning in that place of the 1. Cor.
5.12. I do also take it to be manifest that he aymeth not only at the gross
Idolaters in paganism, but at al manner of unbelievers, that is both Jews and
Gentiles that did not embrace the says: now these persons were of 4. sorts, 1.
persecuting pagans, 2. civil pagans, 3. persecuting Jews, 4. the Jews that
were Zealous and vnreprovable in the law of Moses, (as was Paul) and yet
refused Christ: Such as the Apopstle speaks of Romans 10. 1.2.3. Who have the
Zeal of God, but not according to knowledge who sought to establish their own
righteousness and did not submit to the righteousness of God: al these 4. sorts
of persons were then without the true visible Church of the Apostolic
institution, which is called the Kingdom of God: Now whereas you say we do
account al without that are not of our way, I answer two things. First, that
all the members of every true Church in the world we do account within.
Secondly, that all the members of false Churches we do indeed account without:
and therefore we do account your particular Church at worksop to be without:
For it is not the true constituted Church of Christ, and therefore it is a false
Church, and therefore without according as the holy Ghost testifies, the court
that is without the Temple cast out: Apoc. 11.2. Now you know that in the old
Testament al sorts of people good and bad came into the utter court: but now in
the new Testament, John by vision was commanded to cast that utter court out
and not to measure it, because it is given to the Gentiles who shall tread the
Holy City under foot: and now only the true visible Church, which is the
Temple of God: 2. Cor. 6.16. consists of a holy people which must come out
from the unrighteous and unbelievers that are Belial even without the yoke of
the L. ordinances: and must be a Separated people: And must have no followship
nor agreement with unrighteousness, not touch any unclean thing: and such a
people the L. promises to receave to be his own people and no other: I avouch
therefore that seeing you parish Church whereof you are parish priest consists of
a confused rowt even such a people as came into the utter court in the old
Testament, that therefore by the commandment of the Lord your parish church
must be cast out and not measured. and therefore it is without and so are all
such assemblies as yours is: what say you Mr. Bern. now? either justify your
Church or forsake it: Let us here what answer you make to this matter: for I
guess it touches your freehold very nearly: but I proceed.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the fifth Section.
In the beginning of this Section Mr. Bern. imputes to us to hold that such as
are not of our way are to be accounted without after the Apostles meaning, 1.
Cor. 5.12.

In the book called the Sep. Schism, page 12. Mr. Bern. says, This is one
^^ror of ours, that all not in our way are without. And that we do apply
against them. 1. Cor. 5.12. Ephesians. 2.12.

Mr. Ainsw. confutatio^ of Mr. Bern. page 173. says: we hold that al not in
the way of Christ, are without.

In the midst of this fifth Section I expounding what we hold, saying thus:
All the members of true Churches we account within: and all the members of
false Churches without: and all that are of Christ's visible Church, which is his
Sheepfold, Kingdom, Family, Temple, Body, are within, and all that are not
within this true visible Church, are without.

Hereby it appears that in this particular there is no difference betwixt Mr.
Ainsw. and me indeed and truth.

Mr. Bern. I do wonderfully mervayl at your boldness, that you dare so
contrary to all truth, and contrary to my express words in this Section thus
impute unto us: I say, and so al of us say: That the members of the true
Churches whatsoever, are within: and therefore not only our particular Churches
that Separate from the English assemblies, but all other true Churches that
separate from the false ways of Antichrist, and walk in the true faith of
Christ, are within: al false Churches and the members of them, are without:
There is one only faith and truth, Ephesians. 4.5. as in the Old Testament so in the
New the true church ministry, worship, and government is but of one kind: all the Churches or assemblies of the Edomites, Ammonites, Moabites, Ishmaelites,
Israelites, Samaritanes, and the rest were false churches, hada false
ministry, false worship, and false government, and only the Jews had the true
Church, Ministry, Worship, and Government with them: So in the New Testament
al Churches or assemblies of men whatsoever professing Christ (as Abbayes,
Monasteries, Nunries, Colleges, Cathedrals, Seminaries, Rectories, Parishes,
etc.) and not Separated from the Antichristians and worldlings, are false
Churches, and so without: only the Separated Churches are the true Churches,
and are within: you should have answered this Section of my lettre Mr. Bern.
before you had printed your book, if you had dealt ingeniously and plainly but
seeing you cannot answer (for I take it so because you do not answer, for your
book declared that there is no will wanting) let us see what you object, your
objections are three.

First, the two places of Scripture, 1. Cor. 5.12. Ephesians. 2.12. you say are meant
of such as never made so much as an outward profession of Christ Jesus at al:
your argument is this: No Scriptures directed against pagans, can truly be
applied against Antichristians.

These places are directed against pagans: vic: Ephesians. 2.12. 1. Cor. 5.12.

Ergo these places cannot be truly applied against Antichristians.

I deny your Major Mr. Bern. and you have not proved it at al: Let the reader
judge whither your speeches be oracles that they must be believed, because you
utter them: but herin your fraud and evil conscience or palpable ignorance
appears, that you leave out your Major, which you should have confirmed, and
propound only your minor: For that these places are understood of Pagans I deny
not, but that they are only to be understood of pag^^^, and that they ^^nnot be
understood of Antichristians I deny (...): and I prove the ^^ntrary evidently
to your conscience, and the conscience of al men after this manner.

That which the L. has taught us to do, we may lawfully do. But the Lord
has taught us to apply against Antichristians places of Scripture directed
against pagans,

Ergo: places of Scripture directed against paga^s may by us be applied against
Antichristians.

The Major is evident. The minor is proved by the consideration of these
Scriptures, ^evel. 11.^. and 18.2.7.21. where the holy ghost applies against
the Antichristians, matters and Scriptures spoken literally of Sodom, Egypt,
and Babylon, which were all pagans.

Ag^^^^, If Antichristians be in condition either equal to or worse then
pagans, the^ by proportion, Scriptures directed against pagans, may be applied
against Antichristians.

But Antichristians in the Lords account are in a condition equal, you worse
then pagans:

For so Christ says, Mat. 11.22, that it shall be easier for Tyrus and Sidon,
and the Sodomites then for Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum, and Ezech.
16.44-52. Judah, Sodom, and Samaria are sisters in sin and punishment, and
Judah has justified Sodom.

Therefore, Scriptures directed against pagans may be applied by proportion
either of equality or superiority against Antichristians.

Now for your further instruction in this point Mr. Bern. consider that in the
new Testament the phrases, speeches titles, privileges and benefits of the
Church of the Jews, considered as the true Church are ordinarily applied to
the visible Church of Christ in the new Testament: and contrariwise the
phrases, speeches, titles, privileges, and judgments pronounced against the
Gentiles in the old Testament are customabley applied against the false Churches
and Antichristians in the new Testament: Hence it is that the true visible
Church of the new Testament is called the holy City, Temple, Tabernacle, the
new Jerusalem and the like, and the false Church is called the Gentiles, Egypt,
Sodom, Babylon, etc. the reason whereof is because that the Church of the Jews
was a type of the Churches of the new Tastament, so the assemblies of the
Gentiles were types of the false Churches of Antichrist: as you may see through
the whole book of the revelation in diverse particulars: which point if you had
either understood or attended, you could not thus frivolously have objected to
us this one particular, that speeches understood of pagans may not be applied
against Antichristians: I pray you what use do you make of the prophesies of
the old Testament against Nineveh, Babylon, Elam, Madai, and the rest? What
use can you make of the judgments threatened and inflicted upon the Ge^tils if
not this that Christ and the Apostles make, Mat. 11.22.24. and 12.41.42. 2.
Pet. 2.5-7.15. Jude. 7.11. Here I know you will say that you are not
Antichristians, and so though these places may be applied against
Antichristians, yet not against you: that particular we will see afterward in
his proper place: in the mean time thus much we have gained that places af
Scripture directed against pagans may as well be applied against Antichristians,
as places of Scriptrue spoken to the true Church of the Jews may be applied to
the true Church of the new Testament.

Secondly you object that we cannot prove, laying aside the forge^^s of our
own brains, that this scripture phrase without, may be applied unto you as to
a people without. Well we will lay aside our own devices: and so let us try
what we can do.

Arg. 1. Churches that are in condition equal or worse then assemblies of
pagans are without. Revel. 11.2.

Antichristian Churches are in condition equal or worse then assemblies of
pagans.

Ergo: Antichristian Churches are without.

Again. 2. False Churches are without.

Antichristian Churches are false Churches.

Ergo: Antichristian Churches are without.

Again. 3. Dogs, Enchanters, Whoremongers, Murderers, Idolaters and they
that love or make lies are without. Revel. 22.15.

Antichristian Churches are assemblies of such persons,

Ergo: Antichristian Churches are without.

Again. 4. The habitation of Devils, the hold of al foul Spirits, cages of
every unclean and hateful byrd, are without.

Antichristian Churches or Babylon are such. Revel. 18.2.

Ergo: Antichristian Churches are without.

Again. 5. The utter court which must not be measured by the golden reed, but
which is given to the Gentiles that persecute the Holy City, is without.

Antichristian Churches are that utter court, Revel. 11.1.2.

Ergo: Antichristian Churches are without.

Again. 6. The Serpent and his seed or angels are without, Revel. 12.9.10.
Genesis 3.15.

Antichristian Churches are the Serpent, his seed, and angels.

Ergo: Antichristian Churches are without.

Now Mr. Bern. I have proved by plain Scripture, that Antichristian assemblies
are without: and I know you will not deny it: but you will plead that your
Churches are not Antichristian assemblies, and therefore you account that one of
our errors page 109. viz: our 8. error as you sum the^: that position
therefore: viz: your Churches are false Churches shall be proved unto you fully in
the Paralleles, Censures, Observations aperteyning to the 10. section of this
lettre, whither I refer the reader desiring him for his information and
satisfaction in that particular to read that Section before he proceed any
further in reading, lest it should be thought that I deceave and shift of this
main point, which is indeed the cheef and most principal of our cause and
Separation.

The third thing that you object is, that God Almighty has witnessed that you
are his people: by giving you his word, and Sacraments, by effectual
conversion, by his strange and miraculous delivering you: these things Mr.
Ainsworth has answered most fully, and has stopped your mouth for ever that you
shall never be able to mutter any more in this matter: and therefore I will spare
my pains.

Nevertheless I advertise you of one thing that we do acknowledge that the Lord
has his people among you, whom he calls to come out from among you and to
be Separated, and to touch none of your vncleames, 2. Cor. 6.17. Saying unto
the faithful that are among you. Go out of Babylon my people, that ye be not
partaker of her sins, and that ye receave not of her plagues, Revel. 18.4.
and that they may be the better persuaded to come out from you and to be
Separated the Lord threatens a woe, a fearful woe to them that worship the
beast or his jmage, or that receave his mark in their forehead or right hand.
Revel. 14.9. and all this the Lord performs by our testimony. Yet
nevertheless we say that your assemblies Ecclesiastical are false Churches
that they are Babylon, Epipt, Sodom, where Lot and the Lords people are kept
captives: and by reason of the presence of Gods people with you, therefore it is
that you have those many delivera^ces which you have, even as the Lord gave
Paul the lives of all that Sailed with him in the Ship: Act. 27.24, and whereas
you plead you have the word, Sacraments and conversion, I say it is but as the
thief has the true man's purse, and as the false Church of Jeroboam had, and as
the Samaritanes, the Edomitts, Moabites, Ammonites, and Ishmaelites had
circumcision and the Sacrifices by usurpation: which by continuance of time
were at the last worn out among them: even so you see Mr. Bern. that Gods
people, the sincerest preaching by the forwardest among you, and the
conscionable practice of the truth by the best professors, and the reformation
which the reformists so long have sought is almost expired and out of date in
the Land: The Prelates, Subscription, Conformity, Declining to Popery, and a
Linsy wolsey Religion prevayleth in the Land: and you your self among the rest
have lost or forsaken your sincerity, and are become a Tymeserver, a Newter, a
Temporizer, and then what else but an Hypocrite? and except the Lord be
merciful unto his people among you, it is likely to come to pass among you as
among the Samaritanes, Edomites; Moabites, Ammonites, Ishmaelites, that the
Holy things of God which by violence and usurpation you have invaded will be
either overwhelmed with Egiptian darkness, or utterly banished out of the
nation: and I would feign know whither even at this present, there be not a
thousand parishes in the Land, where there is no more true profession of Christ
then among the Antichristian Papists.

Finaly, to conclude this Parallele: whereas you object that we like it that
you call us brethren, but we will not so account you nor admonish you as
brethren: I answer that we like it to be counted brethren by you, nor for that
we are so unto you: but for that here by we would judge you out of your own
mouths: that whereas you account us Brownists, Schismatics, Heretics,
Traitors, etc. you may hereby perceave your wicked slanders, that thus entitle
us, and yet account us your Brethren: For otherwise as we detest your Church,
ministry, worship, and Government as Antichristian: So also we have in
abomination your brotherhood, which is Antichristian: also we abjure to be
brethren to your Lords the Prelates, to your vice Lords the Archdeacons,
Chancellors, Comistaries, Officials of their Courts, to the damned crew so
termed in the Land, to your Church Papists, to the adulterers, Th^eves,
Murderers, Witches, Conjurers, Usurers, Atheists, Swaggerers, Dronkards,
Blasphemers, and infinite sorts of sinners impenitent in your Churches, yea and
take the forwardest preach^rs and professors of the nation we utterly dislike
their brotherhood visiblie standing members of the assemblies, visiblie joined
in communion with the forenamed Antichristians and abominable persons in one
and the same body: nay we go further we reject the fraternity of those that
deny themselves to be ordinary members of your Churches, and ye^ are so
extraordinarily: that refuse communion with you continually and yet reserve
liberty to hear and communicate occasionally: For seeing they hereby are made
one with (...) ^ntichristian body and wicked members there of, being vnseperated
from them, we cannot acknowledge our selves th^^r brethren, l^^^ we join light
and dar^^es, Christ and Belial, the Temple of God and Idols together: wherefore
neither are we your brethren, nor you our brethren visibly: neither do we
delight so to be called in these respects, but only as you have heard, that we
may be well reported of by them that are without, and that we may heape^ coals
of fire upon your head, when you acknowledge us brethren, and yet slander us
so shamefully and this shall suffice as conc^^ing this Section.

The fixth Section.
Your ^leventh position follows to be considered of which is this.

That only Saints as Mr. Smyth defines them by 4. properties are the matter
only of a visible Church: This you hold error: I hold it the most certain
truth of Gods word as these Scriptures do evidently prove: Romans 6.4.5.8.11-22.
1. Pet. 3.11. 2. Pet. 3.18. 1. John. 2.19. Apocal. 3.5. compared with Roman.
1.7. Ephesians. 1.1.4, Revel. 11.2. and 22.14.15. and 18.2. compared with Deuteronomy.
14.2.3.11.2. Cor. 6.16. compared with 1. King. 5.12.

The 4. properties whereby I describe saints are these though you mention them
not i^ this your note: 1. To forsake all known sin, 2. to do all the will
of God known. 3. to grow in grace. 4. to continue to the end: For the further
clearing of this point consider that all the members of the true visible Church
of the Apostolic institution are persons who are to be accounted, holy
faithful and elect: now if they be elect, I hope they will continue faithful to
the end: but you will happily object that many fall away by Apostasy: true and
then they are fit to be entertained in your churches as some of ours have been:
of them I say as the Apostle John says, if they had been of us they would have
continued with us: Therefore they were none of us: For although they were in the
outward communion, yet they were not of the true visible Church, but were only
Hipocrites, and as superfluous excrescences in the body no natural true parts
of the body: For as in the matural body an eye of glass is not indeed a true
part of the body, though it occupy the place or a natural part: So an
Hypocrite or one that continues not to the end possesses only a rome in the
visible Church, and is not indeed a true member. You will demand then why we
receave Hypocrites among us: whereto I answer we cannot discern an hypocrite,
and therefore we are to judge of men according to that we see measuring them by
the word of God: That which is concealed from us we are not to pry into:
VVherfor our judgment must alter and chang as occasions vary: and so the
Scripture speaks of a righteous man forsaking his righteousness, Ezech. 18.24.
Whereas in truth the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, Romans
11.29. Breely therefore to deliver unto you the truth I hold concerning this
point:

1. The visible Church consists of an outward and inward communion. 2. The
inward communion is known only to God: So are the members thereof. 3. The
outward visible communion is (...) and discerned by men: So are the members
thereof. 4. We a^^ to judge men for the present to be both of the inward and
outward communion if they manifest to us an ourward (...) faith.
^ (...) afterward men Apostate finaly then we chandg our mind and say they
were ^ever of us for had they been of us they would have continued with us.

Now Mr. Bern. I pray you answer us this which we thus justify out of the
word if you can: if you cannot yield to the truth and embrace the faith, and
we shall rejoice (...) you and with you.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the sixth Section.
Mr. Bern. in his book intit^led the Seperatists Schism, pa. 83. has these
words, viz: Their fifth error is, that only Saints: that is a people forsaking
al known sin, of which they may be convinced, doing all the known will of God:
increasing and abiding ever therein, are the only matter of a visible Church.

In this Section Mr. Bern. says thus, It is an error to teach: That only
Saints as Mr. Smyth defines them by 4* properties, are the only matter of a
visible Church.

Mr. Ainswortht confutation of Mr. Bern. page 174. Says that he denies this
position and disclaymeth the errors which Mr. Bern. gathers from them
referring him to them that hold it: then Mr. Ainsworth shows what he holds;
that Saints by calling are the only matter of a true visible Church: yet that
many be called, and few chosen.

Let the reader consider the exposition that I have given to this position in
this section of my lettre and then let him give his verdict: the exposition is
summarily thus much: viz that seeing the visible Church consists of an ontward
and inward communion, they that are only of the outward visible communion as
hypocrites, are no true members of the visible Church, but only in reputation
and account before men.

Now I demand of Master Bernard again with what face or good conscience he
durst thus ^^^se the World, to publish this position barely without my
expo^^^ion, or not to answer that which I brought for the confirmation thereof,
but na^^dly to set it down and then only to object against it: Herein you
bewray to me a mind willing to hyde the truth, and to deceave the World, and
to draw the Lords truth into detestation: which whither it be not the quality
of a false Prophett^, I leave to the judgment of the Godly minded: And whither
hereby you do not verefie Christ's speech, that you come to rob, kill, and to
destroy, and that therefore you are a thief and a robber, Ioh. 10.1.10.

But because you are so importunate with your objections and reasons, let us
here what they are,

First, you say my description of Saints, is a proper description of the
invisible members of Christ Jesus, and that it excludes Hypocrites from being
true matter of the visible Church: I answer two things: namely, 1. that an
Hypocrite may perform al these 4. properties mentioned in the description of
Saints for he may, 1, Forsake all known sin, 2. do all the known will of
God, 3. grow in knowledge and grace. 4. continue to the end: and yet be an
Hypocrite to the Lord in sec^eat^: do you think Mr. Bernard that all that die
thus qualified in the estimation of men are indeed saved with the L? I confess
to me they are undoubtedly saved, but are they so to the Lord? make a direct
answer to this particular, and you shall be compelled to see and confess your
(...) V^^ 2. I answer more properly thus: when I define Saints I must define
them not as they are in show for the present, but as they are indeed and truth:
Now truth is so either before men or before God: before men that is true
sometime which is false before God: and before God that is true sometime which is
false before men: That is true before men which is proved by two or three
witnesses. Mat. 18.16. He therefore is a Saint before men in truth, that
continues to the end in faith repentance and the fruits thereof: He is a
Saint before men in show and appearance for the present, that for the present
brings forth fruits worthy amendment of life. For a righteous man may
forsake his righteousness: Ezech. 18.14. I am not therefore to define a Saint as
he is in show for the present, but as he is indeed for ever in the judgment of
men: neither do I define a Saint as he is in the Lords knowledge which is not
revealed to men, but as he is revealed to be judged by the word of God: I will
declare this by instances for your further information and satisfaction:
Stephen: Damas: Tertullus: Stephen continued to the end: Demas embraced the
world and fell back from the truth: Tertullus never came to the truth for ought
that is revealed: I say, Stephen was a true member of the visible Church who
continued to the end: Demas was no Saint nor no true member of the visible
Church indeed, but only in show: Tertullus was no Saint nor true member of the
visible church so much as in show or appearance what Tertullus was in secreat
to the Lord I dispute not, nor regard not* what Demas was, what Stephen was in
the Lords counsel it does not aperteyne unto us: we must judge according to that
we see and know: I say still with the Apostle continuance is a true property
of a Saint and member of the visible Church indeed and truth, and of the full
and complete communion thereof, 1. Ioh. 2.19.

Your second Objection and reason is that by this my definition of Saints, or
the matter of the visible Church so determined, I exclude the members of the
visible Church of the old Testament, as Hezechiah, David, Ichosaphat, Moses,
etc. Who committed and suffered known sin: yea and the Corinthians, 2. Cor.
12.21. Also the Churches of Asia. Revel. 2, 20.21. Who did not amend, and yet
were Saints and true matter of the visible Church.

I answer: First to that of the old Testament objected by you, I say your
bewray therein great ignorance of the true nature and constitution of the
Church of the Old Testament, as also of the ministry, worship, and government
thereof, which were al typical and ceremonial: Know you therefore Mr. Bern that
there is as much difference betwixt the Old Test^ment with the ordinances
thereof, and the new Testament with the ordinances thereof, as there is betwixt
the sign and the thing signified: betwixt the ceremony and the subst^nc^: the
type and the truth: the shadow and the body: L^^eral and Spiritual: the lettre
and the Spirit. For in these and the like Phrases does it please the Holy
Spirit in the Scriptures t^ discover unto us the differences of these two
Testaments, and the ordinances thereoff: you cannot plead, because in the Old
Testament there were Sacrificing Priests, therefore t^e^ m^st b^ such in the New
Testament, neither can you plead, for that they had one high P^e^^t in the Old
Testament, therefore there must be one Pope or Patriarch over the ^hu^ch ^n the
N^w Testament: To reason thus were to bring in Iudaisme; and to disanull the
blood of Christ: Therefore if you will reason aright as you ought to do, you must
^rame your reason from the Type to the Truth after this manner. This was a Type
figure ^hadow, ceremony, sign, literal ordinance in the old Testament,
therefore we must not have that type; figure, shadow, ceremony, sign, literal
ordinance in the new Testament, but we must have the thing typed, figured,
shadowed out, signified thereby: as for example: In the old Testament they had
a visible Tabernacle, Temple, City, we must have a visible Church, which is
indeed the true Tabernacle, Heb. 8.2, and 3.2-6 The true Temple, 2 Corinthians.
6.15. the Holy City, Revel. 21.2.3. In the Old Testament the material Temple
was made of material stones: in the New Testament the visible Church is made of
living and Spiritual stones, 1. Pet. 2.5. in the old Testament the people that
offered sacrifice were a holy people literally, Deuteronomy. 14.2.3. in the new
Testament the people that worship God must be holy indeed and spiritualy, 1.
Pet. 2.5.9. the same may be said or the sacrifices, sacrificers or Priests and
of al other ordinances of the old testament: hence it follows by a necessary
consequence that the constitution of the church of the old testament was a
ceremonial constitution: the worship of the old testament a ceremonial worship:
the ministry a typical ministry: the government a typical government: the
people a typical people: the land or country a ceremonial country. and so forth
of the rest by proportion This being propounded and confirmed thus as the
undoubted truth of God discovers the vanity of your reason: I say unto you
that David, Iehosaphat, and the rest of the Godly in the old testament though
they did suffer known sin in the land, yet were the true matter of the typical
Church being typicaly or ceremonialy clean: For to the constitution of the
typical Church there was not required true holiness, but ceremonial cleanenes:
and although it was signified unto them of the old testament, and necessarily
required of them for their aceptation before God that they should be truly,
holy, and sanctified: (for never was any accepted before God without true
inward holiness) yet it was not necessarily required of them to the constitution
of their Church, for to make them true matter or members of that typical
Church, or to fit them to that typical communion which was the proper communion
of that typical Church, and of that typical service. Hence it is that as in the
old testament a Saint was a typical Saint, so an hipocrite was a typical
hipocrite: and a wicked man was a typical wicked man, and therefore
excommunication was typical: Nomb. 5.2-4. and 12.14. Hence also it follows
that lawfully they might have typical communion in typical worship that were
typicaly clean or saints typicaly though they were wicked indeed: For their
real wickedness did not polute their ceremonial or typical Church, worship, and
communion, although it did polute their own consciences and works Their
ceremonial uncleanness did polute their ceremonial communion: Their moral
uncleanness did not so: If their communion had been moral and Spiritual, then
their moral uncleanness had defiled their communion: but their communion being
only ceremonial and typical, their polution was only of that kind: therefore you
shall never find that in the old testament the L. chardgeth the^ for communion
in their typical service with wicked men, howsoever the wicked men themselves
are sharply reproved for their wickedness. Besides the nature of their worship
being well weighed does instruct us thus much: For their worship was
reconciliation and repentance to acceptance: but our worship is of another
nature, viz: Sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving after repentance,
reconciliation, and acceptance. For they did worship to repentance, we do
worship from repentance: therefore they might and did worship thereby to reconcile
themselves to God: we being reconciled to God and accepted in Christ do proceed
to offer unto the L. the calves of our lips, the best grace we have: with us
men first declare their repentance, and then we receave them into our communion
to worship with us: with them first men were received into typical communion,
and then they were trained up to repentance and faith in Christ by the typical
sacrifices of that typical communion: Their worship began outwardly in the
lettre, and proceeded inwardly to the Spirit, so did their co^stitution,
ministry and al: our worship begins inwardly in the Spirit, and proceeds
outwardly to the lettre: Therefore our constitution, ministry, worship, and
government, is contrary to theirs: and therefore Mr. Bern. if you had known or
observed this, you would not have objected these things of the old Testament
for the joining with and suffering of open known sin in the new Testament,
and the communion thereof: For how can these things agree, except you will make
the New Testament, the Old Testament: and abolish Christ, and set up Iudaisme
again.

But I would feign know how you can prove that these holy me^ did suffer open
known sin, or suffering it were not defiled thereby? defiled I say not in
their communion which was typical, but in their consent which was Spiritual.
But this point I must thus leave waiting for your answer: For I avouch that
either the sins which they suffered were not known: or if they were known
they were defiled by them: and so not repenting of them, al their worship was
defiled to themselves, but yet being ceremonially clean their communion in
ceremonial worship was not unclean unto others. and if you do object unto me
that their Spiritual communion was polluted unto others: I answer that their
moral or Spiritual communion was invisible, and so could not pollute others:
and there visible communion was typical and ceremonial, and that only polluted
others: For such as was there communion, such was there pollution: There communion
visible being typical did only polute typicaly our communion visible being
moral or Spiritual does pollute us moraly and Spiritually. Now I do confess
unto you, that by there typical Church, ministry, worship, and government,
Spiritual things were signified both for them and for us: For them the morality
or Spiritual signification was double, viz: 1. that the Lord required that they
should be that indeed which was typed unto them, else they could not be
accepted. 2. That in them they ought to see as in a glass the glorious
condition of the Church, ministry, worship, and government of the new
Testament, which were shadowed out by those ceremonies: For us the moral or
Spiritual signification is, that except we be correspondent, in our
constitution, ministry, worship, and Government, to those types of the old
Testament, our constitution, ministry, worship and government, is either
jewish, or paganish, and therefore Antichristian: Herevppon thus may I reason
against you most soundly and therein you Mr. Bern. shall have your mouth so
stopped as that you shall never be able to reply, or once to mutter against the
truth any more except you have a cauterized conscience, viz.

If in the Old Testament there visible typical communion was typically polluted
by typical and ceremonial uncleanness uncleansed: Then in the New Testament our
Spiritual visible communion is really poluted by moral uncleanness uncleansed,
that is, sin unrepented of.

But in the old Testament, there visible typical communion was typicaly poluted
by the typical and ceremonial uncleanness uncleansed.

Therefore in the new testament our visible Spiritual communion is realy poluted
by moral uncleanness uncleansed, that is sin unrepented of.

The major cannot be denied for it is a just analogy and proportion from the
type to the truth, from the shadow to the substance.

The minor is evidently confirmed by these places of Scripture, compared
together. Nomb. 19.13.20. Hag. 2.14. Act. 21.28.29.

Again: If in the old Testament the persons ceremonialy unclean during the
time of their uncleanness, we excluded from the tabernacle or the host of Israel:
then in the new Testament persons morally unclean by impenitency, during the
time of there impenitency, must be excluded from the communion and fellowship of
the true visible Church.

But in the old Testament persons ceremonialy unclean during the time of their
uncleanness were excluded from the tabernacle or host of Israel, as may be seen:
Nomb. 5.2-4 and 12.14.15. 2. Chron. 26.21.

Terfor in the New Testament persons morally unclean by impenitency, during
the time of there impenitency, must be excluded from the communion of the true
visible Church.

But I shall have better occasion hereafter, namely in the 8. Section, to
manifest this particular, whither I refer the reader.

Breeflie I answer concerning David his suffering of loabs murder: The Kings
of Judah suffering the brazen Serpent to be worshipped, and the high places:
Moses giving the bill of divoice: that either they knew them not to be sin,
or if they knew the^ that they were polluted therewith by consent: but yet there
typical communion was not defiled there by if they were ceremonialy clean: they
therefore being typicaly Saints were true matter of the typical Church, and for
the Church of Corinth, and the Churches of Asia, I answer that they were not
impenitent in sin, and so were Saints: For know you that not sin but
impenitency in sin makes me^ a false matter of a church: making saints no
saints Now how can you prove that either the Corinthians or the Churches of
Asia were impenitent after once and twice admonition? I think it passes your
skill to prove that, and therefore I think this second objection of yours to be
idle and of no value.

Your third objection and reason is that the places of Scripture which we bring
declare what men ought to be not what men are: and you say we cannot conclude
from the places of Scripture we bring, that because men are commanded so to
be, therefore if they be not so they are none of Gods people.

To this objection and reason I answer: that hereby you confess, that the L.
requires that all the members of the visible Church should be Saints: whence I
also conclude that seeing they ought so to be, therefore if they be not so they
are otherwise then they ought to be, and so by consequent, if the Church be
framed of those that are not Saints, it is framed of another matter then the
Scripture appoints: and I would know if that be not a false matter. Moreover
I avouch flatly contradictory unto you that if men be not as God commands,
they are none of his people: but you are to know that true repentance is the
true trial of a Saint, or of one of Gods people: and impenitency is an evident
declaration that the party therewith affected is none of Gods people: Therefore
you must observe the difference betwixt the commandments Legal, and
Evangelical: The commandments legal require absolute obedience in the highest
degres thereof: The gospel requires true and unfeigned repentance in the best
degree we can aford: I would not have you think that we imagine men should
beframed in obedience absolutely according to the exactnes of the low, For we
are not under the law: no: we only hold that men must in unfeigned desire and
endeavor yield obedience to the law, and repent of all that wherein they are
defective: and this is the obedience of the gospel which is acceptable, for we
are under grace: wherefore Mr. Bern. if you do conceave that we intend the most
perfect obedience of the law as a proper adjunct or formal difference of a
Saint, you are very gross in your apprehension: if you conceave that we entend
that men should be absolutely according to the gospel in faith and repentance,
or else to be none of Gods people, then your conceit is true and fit, but your
objection is frivolous and ridiculous: For then men either are so or none of
Gods people, and this does our places of Scripture which we quote, prove, for
any thing you yet have manifested to the contrary: when we see you manifest
otherwise, you shall receave answer, in the mean time you have discovered your
self to be but a wrangler.

Your fourth objection and reason is, for that Saints in Scripture are not so
called, 1. either for soundnes of knowledge, 2. or internal pure affection, 3.
or holy practice of their duty always: But, 1. For their outward calling to
Christianity, 2. For their profession of faith, 3. in^espect of their baptism,
4. in regard of the better part, 5. or in respect of the visible signs of Gods
favor, 6. and Gods good pleasure.

I answer you thus: you deny three things and affirm six: I do poremptorily
deny your three negatives: and I constantly affirm; that sound knowledge, pure
affections, and continual obedience are most pregnant and couvertible
properties off true Sanctification.

Soundnes of knowledge is a proper note of life Eternal. John. 17.3. Heb. 8.11.
and so a true note of Sanctification. Tit. 1.16. and that which you bring of
Christ's Disciples, being ignorant of many things (which we acknowledge) is
nothing for your purpose: For you speak not of perfect knowledge, but of sound
knowledge, and that Epithete does not argue the quantity or perfect measure, but
the quality or true condition of knowledge which I do avouch by the former
grounds to be a true convertible sign of sanctification, and so of a Saint.

Pure affection also is another true token of Sanctification. Matt. 5.8. 1.
Tim. 1.5, Tit. 1.15. which pure heart or affection is not a heart void of sin,
but of hipocrisy, and for that you object of Paul, Romans 7.18.21. it is nothing
to overthrow his pure affection: For though he had sin, yet he know nothing
by himself, whereof he had not repented.

Continual practice of Holy duties, also is a true sign of a Saint, or a
Sanctified person, Psalm. 119.101.102.106.112. And although Ecclesiastes says
that there is no man without sin, vet that hinders not, but that some may
continualy practice their duties, since this is the sum of al, that by
repentance and faith which are the continual practice of the Saints, a man does
always perform his duty: and the speech of Eclestastes is the sentence of the
law, not of the gospel.

But heerin is your monstrous fraud and abominable dissembling manifested,
that under these doubtful terms of sound knowledge pure affection and practice
of duty always, you would bleare men's eyes that they should not see the
truth: What do you think that any of us would be so absurd as to say that
perfect knowledge, love, and obedience, without any imperfection or fault are
the signs of Sanctification? And yet we say, that sound knowledge, a pure
heart, and continual practice of Holy duties are the most infallible tokens of
true Saints, and men truly Sanctified: But you are wholly transformed as I
perceave into vain jangling.

In the next place I do acknowledge that your fix affirmatives are something to
the purpose: But nevertheless you have mingled much chafe with the wheat:
wherefore breefly in all that which you write page 85. 86. 87. 88, Concerning
this matter I do observe these particulars: Namely, 1. That although an
outward calling, profession, and baptism to the faith be part of the signs of
Saints: Namely, visible marks outwardly: yet they must be thus qualified, else
they are nothing but pictures, or images, resembling and shadowing
Sanctification superficialy: For they must be true and inward also: True
calling, profession and baptism: and inward calling, profession, and baptism,
are the infallible tokens of Sanctification and Saints: The inward must be
discerned by the outward, the truth must be judged by the word: He that is so
called, so professes, is so baptized as the word teaches: that is to say: He
that is called and Separated from the World, Antichristianisme, and all false
ways known unto him: he that professes that true faith, taught in the New
Testament of Christ, which is but one: he that is baptized into that true
faith, after that true manner Christ has prescribed, I must needs say that he
is truly called, truly professes, is truly baptized, and so he by reason of
his outward true calling, true profession of the true faith, and true baptism
is discerned and judged to be inwardly called, inwardly to have faith, to be
inwardly baptized, and that truly. A company of men thus called, professing,
and baptized, are Saints: But if half ot but some of them only be thus, and the
rest impenitent and obstinate in sin, it cannot possibly be that they should
jointly together be a true Church: being light and darkness, righteousness and
impenitency, Christ and Belial: or being joined together, those former called,
professing, and baptized, do forsake their righteousness, and partake with the
wicked in their sins, and so shall receave of their plagues: How then can that
mixed company be called Saints, yea they are as accessory to fearful sin
before the Lord, and before men judging according to the rules of Gods word,
which is the touchstone of al truth: and according whereunto all our judgments
must be squared, as by a canon and rule of direction.

2. The better part, visible signs of Gods favor and presence, Gods good
pleasure and acceptance, are excellent respects in the Church: But they are
not demonstrative proper adjuncts of saints sufficient to cause a mixed company
to be al saints in definition: But you speak of a mixed company one way, and we
understand a mixed company another way: You define a mixed company to be of men
that are truly Sanctified and men openly wicked and profane: I for my part do
abhor to call such a Company Saints: Nay I should rather and that truly call
such a mixed Company a false Church, and all of them visiblie Antichristians:
Neither do I any whitt quayle that you say all divines say-so: I know there is
o^^, namely John the divine, and the rest of the Apostles that teach the
contrary and if the divinity of your divines be contrary to the divinity of the
Apostles and John that worthy divine I reject it, I abhor it, I wish it cast
to the bottomless pit, from whence it came: For know you Mr. Bern. that the
worser part sometime gives denomination to the thing If a peck of wheat be
intermingled with an hundredth quartar of chafe, it is not a heap of wheat,
but of chafe: if a pint of wine be mingled with a gallon of lees, it is the
lees of wine not wine: you know in Logic conclusio sequitur deteriorem partem.
Now a company of wicked men having some few Saints known only to the Lord among
the^ (for being mingled with the wicked in Spiritual communion, they cannot be
judged Saints by the rule of Gods word to man particularly and certainly) as
your assemblies of England are, cannot be al caled Saints in any color of
truth: For then all the men of England are Saints, seeing they al are joined
together into one Ecclesiastical body, which I suppose you cannot nor dare not
say the Scripture ever intended so to give them denomination: but you must
understand that we acknowledge the visible Church a mixed company in the Lords
account and estimation, and in our general comprehension: For so we learn
that the visible Church consists of wheat and tares, Mat. 13. The Lord he
knows that the Church has Hypocrites in it, and we are informed so by the
scriptures: there were but twelve Apostles, and one of them was a Devil: but
eight persons in the Arck, and cursed Cham was one: but four persons in the
beginning and Runagate Kain was one: but still we deny that open wicked
impenitent persons can be called Saints, because of the communion and presence
of some elect ones who are only known unto the Lord, being of one
ecclesiastical body with the wicked.

Neither can a wicked company be called Holy or Saints truly in respect of the
visible signs of Gods favor or presence, For then the Papists, Anabaptists,
Familists, Arrians, and among them and Exodus 3.5. the ground was caled Holy:
and Mat. 4.5. Jerusalem is caled the Holy city, typicaly not truly, as I have
expounded unto you before in respect whereof also the Lord is said to see no
iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression in Israel, Nomb. 23.21-seeing that people
at that present was typically Holy and so typically without imputation of
iniquity in respect of their typical communion.

And for the Parable, Mat. 13. of the wheat and tares I do constantly avouch
that though you and al divines with you do expound it of open wicked
impenitent persons, and Saints, supposed in communion together, yet the parable
is wrested from the true purpose of Christ, who does not intend to teach that,
for then he should teach contrary to himself, who by the parable of the Leaven
declares that one wicked person defiles the whole lump, Mat. 13.33 compared
with 1. Cor. 5.6 Exodus 12.18,

And whe^eas in the conclusion of this point, page 88. you would prove that,
because the ancient Church of the Separation have (as you say) wicked men
among them: therefore the parable Mat. 13. is truly expounded in that sense of a
mixture of good and bad: I say for that point as the parents of the blind man
said, they are ancient enough, let them answer for themselves.

And thus have I ended this parallele with you Mr. Bern. and concerning Mr.
Ainsworth who renounceth this Holy truth of the Lords, which I have thus
clered, I say hereby he renounceth the says in this particular, and renounceth
the Apostles testimony, who says, they went out from us, they were not of us,
for had they been of us, they would have continued with us, 1. Ioh. 2.19.

The seventh Section.
Now follows you fifth position which you also persuade your self to be an
error, and which being well expounded I account the undoubted truth, viz.

5. That the power of binding and losing is given to the whole multitude, and
not to the principal members thereof: These are your words.

I hold and maintain out of the word that a company of faithful people
Separated from al uncleanness and joined together by a covenant of the L. are a
true Church: yea though they be but two or three: So Adam and Hevah were a
Church: so Lot, his wife, and his daughters were a Church: So Noah and his
family in the Ark were a church: So the twelve men at Ephesus were a Church,
Act. 19.7. So in Q. Mary's days the Martyrs separated were a church, if but
two or three of them lived together: That this is a truth, I prove unto you thus.

2. Cor. 6.16-18. with whom God makes his covenant to be there God, and whom
he receaveth to be his people, they are a Temple, that is a Church unto him,
us. 16.

But two or three faithful people coming forth from the unbelievers, and being
Separated, and touching no vneleane thing, are Gods people, and God with them
makes his covenant, and they are his sons and daughters, and he is their
Father, us. 16.17.18.

Therefore two or three faithful people are the Temple and Church of God.

The Premises are evidently delivered in the Scripture: therefore the conclusion
follows necessarily.

Mat. 18.20. where two or three are gathered together into my name, there am I in
the mids of them.

In the mids of whomsoever Christ does dwell and walk, they are a true Church of
Christ: Even his Temple, Tabernacle, and habitation: as these Scriptures teach
being compared together, Mat. 28.20. 2. Cor. 6.16. Levit. 26.11.12.

But among two or three gathered together by love, and into the name of Christ
by faith, Christ is present to dwell and walk, Mat. 18.20. 2. Cor. 6.16.
compared together.

Therefore two or three faithful people are the Temple and Church of God. I
could alledg other Scriptures: but two or three witnesses are sufficient.

Remember for this point that the covenant made with Adam, Abaham, Isaac,
Jacob, and all the faithful, is made with any faithful people in the world, as
if two or three faithful people should aise up in the dominions of the Turk, or
Pope, or Jews, or Pagans, and join together to walk in the faith, the Lord
makes his covenant with them, he is their God, they are his people, they are
his Temple, he walks there, he is their Father, they are his sons and
daughters, Christ is their King, they are his Kingdom, even a Kingdom of
Priests, etc: and therefore whersoever in the Scripture the covenant is made with
any, it is to be understood as made with Abraham's children according to the
faith, and therefore with two or three faithful people any were in the world.

This being premised as the ground of our whole cause, and we having departed
from all the profane of the Land, and having separated and touching no unclean
thing, 2. cor. 6, 17 We are Gods people, his temple, his Church: he dwells
and walks among us, and he has given to us, and made with us his covenant,
Heb. 8.10. and although we were but ^ew in number, yet the Lord chose us to be
his.

We being now the Church of God, we have the power of the L. Jesus Christ
given unto us: For we have himself out own by title and possession, and use,
and that by virtue of the covenant God made with us: for so God is our God and
our Father, only in Chr. and through him: and all the promises of God in Christ
are yea and Amen: Christ therefore is ours: Christ he is our King and our Priest,
and we are his Kingdom: and we have his power, that this is so I prove unto
you by these Scriptures.

Marc. 13.34. Christ ascending up into Heaven (for that is his going into a
far country as may be perceaved by Luke 19.12. with Mat. 28.18. and Ephesians.
4.8.) gave authority to his servants leaving his house that is his Church
according to his bodily presence: now what authority is this that Christ gave
unto his servants? that is evident by other places of scriptures, 1. Cor. 5.
the power of our Lord Jesus Christ which the Corinths had that is the power of
admonition and excommunication, the power of binding and losing, a power to
administer Christ's Kingdom, and all the ordinances thereof.

Mat. 16.19. The power of binding and losing is given to Peter.

Ioh. 20.23. The power of binding and losing is given to all the Apostles.

Marc. 13.34. The power of Christ it given to his Servants.

1. Cor. 5.4 The power of Christ is in the hands of the Corinths.

Now let us make collections and gather instructions out of these places, and
the truth will most evidently appear.

The Pope says out of the 16. of Matthew, that the power of binding and losing
is give^ to Peter and his successors the popes of Rome and that all the Bbs. and
Priests in the world, and the whole Church universal receaveth binding and
losing from him.

Nay say the English Prelates out of the 20. of John Christ gave the power of
binding and losing to all the Apostles and their successors the Lord Bbs. of
England, and that all the Priests, and people in the Land, receave binding and
losing from them in their several dioceses.

Nay say the Presbyterians of England out of Mat. 18.17. The power of binding
and losing is given to the Edership, and the poeple they are bound or losed by
the Presbytery: For by the Church they understand the Presbytery.

Nay say we, the power of binding and losing is given to the body of the
Church, even to two or three faithful people joined together in covenant, and
this we prove evidently in this manner.

Unto whom the covenant is given, unto them the power of binding and losing is
given.

The covenant is given to the body of the Church, that is to two or three
faithful ones: For God is their God, and they are his people.

Therefore the power of binding and losing is given to them.

Again. Unto whom Christ is given for King, unto the^ the power of Christ the
King is given, as being his deputies and lieftenants.

But Christ is given for King unto the body of the Church, even to two or three
faithful people, who are his Kingdom, and house, and city.

Therefore unto them is given his power, that is his power to bind and lose.

Finally. Unto whom the covenant and Christ is given, unto them all the
promises are given, for all the promises are contained in the covenant, and in
Christ, as these places prove, 2. Cor. 1.20. Psalm. 133.3. Act. 2.39. Gal.
3.14.15.16. and the power of binding and losing is one of the promises, and is
a part and parcel of the covenant, Mat. 16.19. Ioh. 20.23. Mat. 18.15-20.

But the covenant and Christ and all the promises, are give^ to the body of the
church even to two or three faithful ones.

Therefore the power of binding and losing is given to them also.

But there are certain objections which must be answered in number three.

Ob. 1. One is that Christ speaks only to Peter and to his Apostles, and
gives the power only to them therefore, Mat. 16.19. John. 20.23. Mat. 18.17.

For answer thus much.

The place Mat. 16. although it be directed to Peter personally, yet it is
intended unto all the Disciples of Christ: For unto them is the power given,
that have the says and made the confession there mentioned: But the faith and
confession of faith is of all the Disciples, and spoken by Peter in behalf of
them al: and therefore the power is by promise given to al,

The place Ioh. 20.23. imports plainly that Mary Magdalene, and diverse other
of the Disciples were present when Christ spoke unto them for they were
assembled together in a house, the door being shut, and it was the L. day: and
not the Apostles only, but the rest of the Disciples were assembled in all
likelihood for the Sanctification of the L. day: yea further Thomas was
absent, and so the promise of binding and losing could not be made to him at
that present, and afterward it was not made to him, and so by consequent that
one of the Ap. had not the power give^ him by there reason which plead it to be
given to the Apost. only. The place Mat. 18.17. does not prove that this power
was given to the Presbytery, for that place imports that it was given to the
Church, now the Eldership is not the Church, but a part of the Church, and it
must be proved that the word Church does signify the Eldership (or else this
place will help nothing), as I am sure cannot be showed out of the word: besides
the circumstances of the place teach that Christ inte^deth the power of binding
and losing to be given to every brother, for so he says, if thy brother sin:
and let him be unto the: and take two or three witnesses: and where two or
three, etc. I am in the midst of them.

Finally, It cannot be denied but admonition aperteyneth to every brother, and
why should not excommunication: For their is power to bind and lose in two or
three witnesses toward a brother, and why not power to bind and lose in the body
of the Church, if the whole Church be but two or three: or some small number.

Now for the utter over throwing of this conceit of the power given to the
Presbytery only, consider that the twelve were not yet Apostles, only they
were nominated to be Apostles: they were invested in their office at the
descending of the Holy Ghost on the day fo Pentecost: which I prove unto you
evidently. Ephesians. 4.8.11, when Christ ascended he gave gifts unto men, viz: the
gifts of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers: For Christ
received his Kingdom when he ascended. Luke 19.12. For Christ obtained a
Kingdom by his death, and he received his Kingdom, when he went into that
fane country: and Christ by his sufferings entered into his glory: So that
Christ's Kingdom in regard of the outward regiment and ordinances thereof
began at the day of Pentecost, when the Apostles were endued with power from
on high Luke 24.49. Act, 1.8. and it shall end at the day of judgment, 1. Cor.
15.24.25. Seeing therefore that they were not yet Apostles, but only Disciples,
the power given to them was given to them as Disciples, not as Apostles: and
therefore all Christ's Disciples may justly in all ages challendg that power of
binding and losing: For a conclusion therefore in a word, the commandment of
binding and losing is given to every brother, go the promise and power of
binding and losing is give^ to them also: as the forsaid places do evince. and
as the charter of a corporatio^ is from the King and all the offices have power
from the corporation, so the Church has power from Christ, and the Eldership
from the church and as the body has power from the head, and the parts of the
body have their power from the body: So the church which is Christ's body; has
power from Christ, and the Eldership a part of the body has power from the
body.

Ob. 2. A second objection is this that if the power of binding and losing be
give^ to the body of the Church, then power of preaching and administering the
seals of the covenant: truth: we confess it: and the church being a
corporation commits power to administer to such officers as Christ has
appointed to his church, viz: to the Elders or Bishops: still reserving power to
correct her officers by the same power of binding and losing in admonition and
excommunication, the benefit whereof does as well perteyne to the Elders as other
of the brethren, except it be said the Elders are to be exempted from censures,
and so to want those means of Salvation which the brethren have, which is a
pitiful condition, and alamentable privilege.

Ob. 3. A third ebjection is that the benefit of binding and losing, of the
word and seals of the covenant is given to the church, and all the members, but
not the power of the^: whereto thus much may be answered, viz: that the Church,
viz: two or three faithful ones have as is said the covenant, Christ, the
promises not only in use, but in title and possession: and the faithful have as
good power and title or interest to the covenant, Christ, and the promises, as
a freholder has to his lands and possessions. Esa 9.6. Unto us a son is
given: the chruch is the spouse of Christ, and so has power to Christ the
covenant and promises: the Church is the body of Christ, the body has a real
possession, title, and power to the head and all the helps thereof: For the
faithful are flesh and bones of Christ, Ephesians. 5.30. these things are manifest to
them that will understand: and if any man be ignorant let him be ignorant.

But it may be Mr. Bern. you will say that power to bind and lose are no
properties of the Church, but only privileges: For shame say not so: Surely
this plea argues that either you got little Logic in the university, or that
you have forgot it, or if you remember it you either carelessly neglect it, or
wilfully pervert the use of it to seduce your followers: I pray you tell me in
good sooth what difference is there betwixt a privilege and a property: Is not
a privilege according to the notation of the word privata lex: a private law
wherein one person or state is interessed. The King has certain previledges or
prerogatives as to pardon condemned persons, to dispense with his law, a
negative voice in parliament etc. I would faigne know of you, whither these be
not properties, such as the Kings and Queens of the nation only have title to
and no other: but consider well with your self what relation there is betwixt a
privilege and the person that is interressed in the privilege: Is it not the
relation of the subject and the adjunct? A privilege therefore is an adjunct to
the privileged person: Now al adjuncts are either proper or common adjuncts:
but a privilege is not a common adjunct, as I am sure you will confess, or else
you want reason: therefore it is a proper adjunct: It it be a proper adjunct it
is a property, and so your distinction is senseless and vnscholler like you
may as well say that pepper is hot in working and cold in operation, as to say
that the true Church may be without her privileges, but not without her
properties: Therefore I do here before the L. attach you as a deceaver of the
people in teaching thus contrary to al learning and true use of reason, that
the power of the Lord Jesus Christ given to the church, one part whereof
consists in binding and losing is only a privilege and not a property of the
true Church: and that the true Church may want it: It is as impossible for the
true Church to want Christ's power, as for a man to want reason: Mr. Ber. answer
now or else yield to the truth you cannot for shame deny the one of them.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the seventh Section.
In this Section I write and prove, that the power of binding and losing is
given to the whole multitude, and not to the principal members thereof.

Mr. Bern. in his book entitled the Sep. Schism, pa. 88. calls it the
A.B.C. of Brownisme to hold: That the power of Christ that is, authority to
Preach, to administer the Sacraments, and to exercise the censures of the
Church, belongs to the whole Church, yea to every one of them, and not the
principal members thereof.

Mr. Ains. answering Mr. Ber, pa. 174. Says that Mr. Ber. may put this
opinion, if he please in the Criss-crosse-rew of Bernardisme, he himself being
the first that ever he heard to utter such a position: and afterward pa. 175.
176. 177. 178. Expounds what that ancient Church whereof of he is teacher
holds concerning it.

Well: Let us handle these things largely, and to full satisfaction: and herein I
profess before the Lord, and before the whole world, that if I do not prove
evidently my assertion that the power of binding and losing is given to the
whole multitude, and not to the principal members thereof. I will acknowledge the
Churches of England, yea the Churches of Rome yea and the Greek Churches also
to have a true ministry, and to be true churches of Christ For if the
ministry, and the holy things with the ministry, come by succession from
the Apostles hands, through the churches of Rome and the Grecians, and that
there are no ministers, but such as are made by the^ and from the^ successively,
our whole cause of Separation lies in the dust and we must disclaim our
Schism which we have made, and our heresies which we hold: but if it be proved
that the true ministry comes not by succession from the churches of Rome or
the Grecians, and that the holy things are not given to the ministry by
sucessio^, but are give^ first to the body of the church, the faithful, yea
though they be but two or three, and that both the ministry and all the power
that the ministry has does ^^ow from the Fountain Christ Jesus, through the
body of the Church (...) the Presbytery, then is your Church and ministry
false, so are the Churches of the East and West much more: and then we and
those Churches only which raise up their Ministry from the Election,
aprobation, and ordination of a faithful people, are the true Church of Christ
having the true Ministry of Christ, and you with the rest of Gods people in
Babylon must separate and join together, and walk in the Lords ordinances as
we and other true Churches do, or else woe be unto you from the Lord: Therefore
in this particular I would supplicate the Kings Majesty my Soveragne Lord on
earth, the Lords of the Parliament, The Gentlemen that sustain the person of
the commons in the nether house, all the learned men of the Land, to confider
and to search out this point: For it being thoroughly cleared may breed peace
and infinite good to the whole nation: whereas it being suppressed, choked,
darkened, and neglected draws with it all the contentions and controversies
amongst them that profess Christ in the whole earth: For my part Mr. Ber. I
will endeavor according to my poor hability to discover what I have conceaved,
and do undoubtedly believe from the Scriptures, and do make the beginning of
my inquisition after this manner which I desire the gentle reader to weigh and
consider of with his best attention. Christ's visible church which is his
Kingdom, has in it a spiritual power and jurisdiction by the confession of all that profess Jesus Christ: which power is of two sorts: 1. The power of
Christ himself, who is the Lord and King of his Church. Mat. 28.18 and he is
the Fountain of power, being the head of the Church which is his body, Ephesians.
1.22.23. For as the head is the Fountain of life, sense, motion, and power to
the whole body, and as the Mr. of the house is the original of al oeconomical
power: So is Christ the original of al spiritual life, sense, motion, and power
to the Church which is his body and family: This is evident: and in regard of
this power which is inherent in Christ, the church which is Christ's Kingdom
may truly be termed a Monarchy, Mat. 23.8-11. Ephesians. 4.5, Iam. 4.12. This
power which Christ has in himself cannot pass from himself to any other: For
as his preisthood is eternal, and not passing from him to another, Heb. 7.24.
so may it as truly be said of his other offices, and particularly of his
Kingdom and Monarchical power: Nevertheless 2. The Lord Jesus has ordained
and appointed a certain order to be observed in his absence in the true
visible Church, and has delegated a certain power and authority to his
Servants and subjects for the preferving of that order, and for the execution
of those ordinances: This delegated power and authority is mentioned Marc.
13.34 1. Cor. 5.4. This delegated power is avouched by the Papists to be in the
Pope, by the English Prelates to be in the Lord Bbs. and Archdeacons: By the
Presbyterians to be in the Eldership: by the brethren of the Separation to be
in the body of the Church primarily and fundamentally: For if the Pope,
Prelates, Presbytery, or Body of the Church do say that the power which is in
Christ Jesus is in them, they do blaspheme most fear fully robbing Christ of
his honor and Regal power, and make themselves even Christ him self: The Pope
therefore is not Antichrist for that he usurps that regal power which is proper
to Christ: neither are the Bbs. of England Antichrist for usurping that proper
kingly power which is only in Christ: nor the Presbytery Antichristian for
challendging the power Monarchical of Christ: but they are al Antichristian for
usurping the delegated power of Christ which he has originally given to the
body of his Church which is his mystical body.

This delegated and Ministerial power which the Pope, Bbs. and Presbytery
challendg, they say comes to them by succession from Christ: The Pope he
says Christ has given this ministerial power to Peter only and his successors
the popes of Rome: The Bbs. say Christ has given this delegated power to all the Apostles, and the Apostles have given it to the Bbs. their successors. The
presbyterians say that Christ has given this ministerial power to the
presbytery, or Eldership, and they conveigh it successively to the elders
succeding to the worlds end in the Church: Al these three opinions are equally
Antichristian, for they al of them establish succession which is Jewish, and so
Antichristian. For in the old Testament the preisthood was conveyed by
successiuon Here therefore I will prove unto you by undeniable arguments, that
the power of Christ is not given either to the pope, Bbs, or presbytery, but
primarily it is given to the body of the Church.

First Argument.
If Christ's ministerial power be given by succession to the pope, Bbs, or
presbytery primarily, then the ministry is before the Church: Seeing that there
must needs be a ministry before there be any power of Christ, this consequent
is infallible.

But the ministry is not before the Church, but after the Church: For it
arises out off the Church, as a part off those Holy things which God has
given to his Church.

Therefore Christ's ministerial power is not given to the pope, Bbs. or presbytery
primarily: but to the body of the Church.

They that affirm the ministry to be before the Church must needs hold that
a minister is no relative to a Church, but that a man may be a minister, and
have no flock to attend on, yea that there may be and is a ministry when and
where there is no Church: or that the chardges of other men are his chardg: or
that the world is his chardge: they must also maintain that all grace flows
from the ministry to the Church: that the ministry is a more excellent
ordinance then the Church: that the Church has no power to make ministers, but
that the ministers have power to make both ministers and churches: and that
ministers are properly by their office Apostles over the whole world for the
converting of men, and planting of Churches: and the like absurdityes.

Second Argument.
If Christ's ministerial power comes by succession to the pope, Bbs. and
presbytery: then the ministry of Rome is a true ministry, and al they that
are made ministers by the pope and his clergy, are true ministers: Then it is
lawful to join with the true ministry of Rome, and then whosoever are
ordained and not by a precedent ministry are falsely ordained, and so are
false ministers.

But the ministry of Rome is no true ministry, and they that are ordained by
the pope and his clergy are no true, but false ministers: and it is utterly
unlawful to join with the ministry of Rome by the confession of all the
Protestants, and ministers may be ordained truly without ministers by the
confession of the sincerest reformists.

Therefore Christ's ministerial power comes not by succession to the Pope,
Bbs. and Presbytery primarily: but to the body of the Church.

Third Argument.
If Christ's ministerial power comes by succession to the pope, Bbs. and
presbytery: then the Lord has absolutely bound men to sin, seeing that we
must needs join to the sins off the Ministers, otherwise men cannot
possibly have and enjoy the holy things of God: For it is the ordinance of
God, that we should use the holy things: and this assertion does avouch that
we must have the^ from the ministry: and therefore let there sins be what they
will, we must have them from their hands, and so must join to them in all there
sins.

But the L. has not bound us necessarily to join to other men's sins, seeing
he has commanded us to Separate from them, and this were to lay our sins
upon the Lord most blasphemously.

Therefore Christ's ministerial power comes not by succession to the pope, Bbs.
or presbytery primarily: but to the body of the Church.

The fourth Argument.
If Christ's ministerial power comes by succession to the pope, Bbs. or
presbytery: then the Lord has made the Ministers Lords over the Church, so
that the Church can not have or enjoy any of the holy things, any of the L.
ordinances, except they will agree or consent them, unto for there Holy things
are in there power.

But the L. has not made the Ministers Lords over his Church which is his
inheritance but they may have and enjoy his own ordinances even all the Holy
things contrary to the will of wicked ministers.

Therefore Christ's ministerial power comes not by succession to the pope, Bbs.
or presbytery primarily, but to the body of the Church.

The fifth Argument.
If Christ's Ministerial power comes to the pope, Bbs. or presbytery, then the
presbytery may excommunicate the whole Church: Then the Bbs. may excommunicate
there whole dioceses or provinces, then the pope may excommunicate the whole
church universal on earth.

But the L. Bbs. of England say the Pope cannot excommunicate England: The
Reformists hold that the Prelates cannot excommunicate their diocesses, and by
consequent and just proportion the Presbytery cannot excommunicate that
particular Church whereof they are Presbyters.

Therefore Christ's ministerial power comes not by succession to the Pope, Bbs.
or Presbytery primarily, but is given to the body of the Church.

The sixth Argument.
If Christ's ministerial power comes by succession to the Pope, Bbs. or
Presbytery: Then the office of the Deacons and widows are lost since
succession: in them is interrupted and lost: for as in the old testament a
Priest came of a Priest, a Levite of a Levite, so an Elder makes an Elder, a
Deacon ordeyneth a Deacon, a widow must ordeyne a widow.

But the office of the Deacon and widow is not lost, for none of Gods
ordinances are perished, but may be had, or else Gods truth and mercy to his
Church fails, who has said that he will be with his Church to the end of the
world.

Therefore Christ's ministerial power comes not by succession to the Pope, Bbs.
or Presbytery primarily, but is given to the body of the Church.

The seventh Argument.
That doctrine which destroys it self is false.

The doctrine of succession, viz: that Christ's ministerial power comes by
succession to the pope, Bbs. or Presbytery, destroys it self.

Therefore the doctrine of succession is a false doctrine:

The minor I manifest thus: If the papists say truly that al ecclesiastical
power flows from Christ to the Clergy though the pope, then why does the
college of Cardinals make a pope by Election? and why does not one pope make
another pope before his death? Therefore Election overthrows the succession of
the popes office: For the pope cannot both give Christ's Ministerial power to
the Clergy of Rome, and take the same ministerial power from the Cardinals by
Election: but when the pope is dead, then is Christ's ministerial power dead
also in the popes person: and thus does succession overthrow it self in the
pope: and by consequent in the rest: For Christ's ministerial power being once
interrupted in the pope, can never be recovred again, but is utterly lost: and
so the Church is abolished: For if the presbytery be lost the Church is lost:
if the bbs. be lost, the presbytery is lost: if the pope be lost the bbs. be
lost: if the pope be dead the pope is lost: if the pope be lost, Christ's
ministerial power is lost: for if it be said that the pope has his power by
Election from the Cardinals the^ succession is destroyed: and so you may see
evidently that succession destroys it self, seeing Election must needs be
interposed: Therefore indeed there is no true succession, but that of the old
Testament, viz: by descent and genealogy: and this succession which is pleaded
for by ordination of precedent presbytery, bbs. pope is man's invention and
destroys it self, and therefore is a mere Antichristian devise.

But here certain objections must be answered for the further manifestation of
the matter of succession, and for sactisfaction therein.

The first Objection.
Alchough the Ministerial power of Christ be not given to the pope, and so
perishes not with him, yet it is given to the bbs, who are the Successors of
the Apostles in that Ministerial power, and in the dispensation of it to the
Ministry and Church: Seeing therefore that there is a certain and undoubted
Succession of bbs. from the Apostles days hitherto, one ordeyning another
successively, therefore though succession be interrupted in the Pope whose
ministerial heads hip we renounce, yet it is continued in the Bbs. who are the
Apostles successors in dispensing this ministerial pow^e to the ministry and
Churches.

Answer to the first Objection.
This objection depends upon an vncertanity, viz: That there has been a
succession of Bbs. one ordeyning another successively from Peter, Paul, James,
through the Church of Rome, and the Greeks: and therefore I answer, that except
they can show the court rowles (that I may so speak) of the undoubted
successive ordination from Peter, Paul. James, etc. I shall say unto all the Bbs.
of England, as Nechemjah said to the Priests, that could not show there
succession from Aaron by Genealogy. Nehem. 7: 64.65. Because their successive
ordination is not found, they shall be put from their Bishoprics, and they shall
not administer in the Bbs. office til their arise up one as with Vrim and
Thummim to divine unto us the truth of this matter: For we will not believe the
records of the Church of Rome, who also are defective in this particular, for
though they have the succession of Popes, yet not of other Bbs.

Further the vanity of this objection appears in this, that hereby they are
urged for the justifying of this Antichristian devise of succession by
ordination to go to the throne of Antichrist, the popedom, to fetch their
ministry thence, as if the true ministry off Christ could be in the false
Church of Antichrist: hereby also they do acknowledge Rome to be the true
Church, their Sacrificing Preisthood a true Ministry, orders a true
Sacrament, the Eucharist a true propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and dead,
prayers for the dead, and a thousand such abominations, which are necessary
dependances therevppon: They must also acknowledge themselves Schismatiques from
the Church of Rome, and are never able to answer the popish books, and the
petitions of the Papists to the King, who object these and the like things
against them.

The Second Objection.
Although the pope and Bbs have not Christ's ministerial power given to them by
succession, yet the presbytery may have that power by delegation from Christ,
when their shall arise a company of true faithful teachers, who standing out
against the popedom, and prelacy, and all the abominations thereof: also
renouncing all the corruptions of their ordination, and refining both the
doctrine of faith, and the true calling of ministers, from the dross of
Antichristianisme, do yet notwithstanding retain the truth which they in the
seat of Antichrist had, as in the faith, so in the ministry: For Antichrist
had not ^^^erly abolished, but only corrupted the Lords ordinances.

Answer to the second Objection.
This objection depends upon the former grounds, namely, that the Church of
Rome is a true Church though corrupt, having a true ministry though corrupt,
etc. of the rest: For otherwise how can they plead there ministry to be true
from the Bbs. except they do acknowledge also the Bbs Ministry to be true
received from the Popedom: and the popish ministry to be true, for otherwise
they must maintain that a true ministry comes from a false ministry,
which is as impossible as to bring light out of darkness: So that this Objection
is also answered in the former already, and needs no further answer: yet
nevertheless I say unto the point that all the refining of the world can not
bring a true ministry out of a Sacrificing Preisthood: Or a true presbytery
out of a false Antichristian prelacy: For as it was impossible for the priests
of the Old Testament to ordeyne true Ministers of the New Testament: So much
more is it impossible for the false popish Sacrificing preisthood, to ordeyne
true ministers of Christ's true Church: For the Sacrificing preisthood of Aarons
Family was the Lords ordinance sometime, but the popish Sacrificing preisthood
in the main substantial parts thereof, is not only man's device, but infinitely
impious and blasphemously derogating from the honor and dignity of Christ's
Sacrifice and preisthood which is aparabatos intransitive, Heb. 7.24. and
according to the order of Melchisedech: and seeing the popish Sacrificing
preisthood is in the very essence of it false: how can the English prelacy,
preisthood, and Deaconry, which issued from that Romish preisthood, be any
other but a sacrificing preisthood? and although the English prelates have cast
away that essential Sacrificing property (or form rather) of the Romish
preisthood, and have reduced it to a better temper, yet that will not serve the
turn: for all that they have in their prelacy, preisthood, and Deaconry, they
had from Rome or else where: If from Rome then their prelacy, preisthood, and
Deaconry is absolutely Romish and no other: if elsewhere then their Succession
is gone: If both from Rome and else where let them declare that Ridle unto us.

The third Objection.
The presbyters may have ordination or imposition of hands from the Romish
preisthood, and yet not their office: For that may come from heaven, or by some
extraordinary means, even as the Lord raised up some men extraordinarily in
these last times to restore the truth of doctrine, and to reduce things to the
Apostolic primitive institution as amongst others, Hus, Luther, and the rest.

Answer to the third Objection.
It is strange that a man shall have imposition of hands from one, and his
office from another: Besides it is contrary to the nature of Succession,
wherein the party that ordeyneth gives the office and ministerial power to
him that is ordained: for that it the thing that is pleaded, that Christ's
ministerial power comes by Succession through ordination of precedent
presbyters: It contradicts their own ground therefore to say, that
imposition of hands is from a popish priest, and the true office from some
other means: But let us inquire what that other means may be: To say that
Christ's Ministerial power is from heaven, is not denied, but the question is:
What is the instrument or means which Christ has appointed to conveigh that
Ministerial power unto man kind? And who are they that first receave it from
Christ's hand out of heaven: Or what is proton dektikon the first subject of
this ministerial power: We say the Church or two or three faithful people
Separated from the world and joined together in a true covenant, have both
Christ, the covenant, and promises, and the ministerial power of Christ given
to them, and that they are the body that receave from Christ's hand out of
heaven, or rather from Christ their head this ministerial power: you say: not
so: but this ministerial power comes by succession from the ministry which
is the first subject of this power, and that all this power is derived from man
to man, from the Apostles hands through all the Priests hands of Rome, and the
Prelates hands of England to you Mr. Bern. and your line and pedigree of
Preisthood is lineally descended from Peter or Paul, etc. to you through so
many generations of popish priests, as have succeeded from Peter's person to your
person: Even as Annas and Cayaphas descended lineally from Aaron: only this is
the difference, that the succession of Annas and Cayaphas was by genealogy or
generation, yours is by succession of ordination or imposition of hands: and
therefore because you see that you fall under this foul absurdity, that your
Preisthood must be of necessity of the same kind that the popish preisthood is,
you have invented a new trick to say that it comes from heaven
extraordinarily with Hus and Luther, and the rest of those glorious witnesses
which the Lord in these last times raised up to the destruction of the man of
sin: Which if it be so: Then say I: show your succession from Luther, Hus,
Prage, etc. Or else Nechemiah will putt you from your preisthood.

The fourth Objection.
But every King in his dominions is appointed by Christ to be a head
ministerial to the Church, and all the Priests of that country do receave their
ministerial power from the King by the ordination of the Bbs. unto whom the
King has committed the dispensation of that power: so that the King being the
Lords Lieftenant in his own dominions, has this ministerial power from
Christ, the Bbs. from the King, the Priests from the Bbs. the Church from the
Priests.

Answer to the fourth Objection.
If the King of every country has Christ's ministerial power given to him
immediately from heaven, and that the Clergy of that nation have Christ's
ministerial power from the King, then these consequents follow: which are
intolerable absurdities.

1. The King of every country is a person civil and Ecclesiastical, having al
civil and ecclesiastical power and that immediately from Christ.

2. The King of every country can preach, administer the Sacraments, exercise
Spiritual jurisdiction, excommunicate, etc.

3. The King of every country can make and ordeyne Ministers.

4. The King of every country is a Pope or Patriarch in his own territories
and Dominions.

How these points will agree with the Analogy of faith let every man judge, and
so give sentence whither this objection conteyne any the least show of truth in
it, yea or nay.

Now what authority the Lord has given every King in his own dominions I
leave to be descussed in his proper place, viz: in the 15. Section of this
lettre to Mr. Bern.

The fifth Objection.
But the ministry is now extraordinarily raised up: For as in the first
planting of the Churches the Lord Jesus used the extraordinary ministry of
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, to publish the Gospel to the world, and to
plant Churches, so after the Apostasy of Antichrist, in the restoring of the
truth the Lord uses the same extraordinary ministry not endued with those
extraordinary gifts which they had, but appointed by the L. for the same
purposes, viz: the planting of true Churches and the revealing of his truth.

Answer to the fifth Objection.
First the Ministers of England, and namely you Mr. Ber. among the rest, do not
chalendg to be Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, but you say you are true
presbyters, or Pastors of particular true visible Churches, and therefore this
objection helps you nothing, if it were yielded you:

Secondly, you cannot maintain your ordinary ministry as succeding by
ordination from these supposed, Apostles, Evangelists and Prophets, for then
you must acknowledge the prelates of England to be Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, whereas they do challendg no such thing. But only maintain
themselves to be ordinary Bbs. the ordinary Successors of the Apostles, neither
do they intend to make you ministers as Apostles but as Bbs.

Thirdly, there is none of the Reformists that ever I heard of that undertake as
Apostles Prophets, Evangelists, to ordeyne Elders.

Finaly, how can any of you be Apostles, Prophets, or Evangelists? who stand
members of the assemblies in subjection to the prelates, whose Lords you are,
if you be either Apostles, Prophets, or Evangelists: but you see they are your
Lords: For either you are false Apostles, and false Prophets, or else by the
evidence of the word and Spirit, you must rise up and stand out against and
depose the prelates, whose authority you say is Antichristian: besides that you
must prove unto us by good and sufficient warrant that the Lord raises up
Apostles, prophets, and Evangelists, to overthrow Antichrist, and to restore
the true ministry: and that you who with all your might support the Throne of
the beast are those Apostles, prophets, and Evangelists, whom the L. raises
up for that purpose: which yet you never have done or attempted to do, and
whither you can do or not I leave to the consideration of al those that search
after the truth.

Hitherto I have proved by sufficient arguments negatively, that Christ's
Ministerial power is not given by Christ primarily and by succession, either
to the pope, Bbs. or presbytery: whose claim depends upon one and the same
title, viz: Successive ordination from the Apostles, through the Church of Rome
to the hands of every priest or presbyter in England: and therefore the
Ministerial power of Christ must needs be given primarily to the bodx of every
visible Church, though they be but two or three in number: For this is a
sufficient Enumeration of parts that Christ's ministerial power is given
primarily either to the Pope, Bbs. Presbytery or body of the Church: except
that men will say it is given to the King of every Kingdom, which is an
absurdity intolerable, as is already declared, and which I never heard pleaded
for, and which the Kings of England do renounce: But Christ's ministerial power
is not given by successive ordination, either to the Pope, Bbs. or Presbytery
primarily or originally: therefore Christ's ministerial power is give^ to the body
of the Church, viz: to two or three faithful people joined together into an
Ecclesiastical politic body by the true covenant, or new testament of Christ
Jesus. But because happily some persons may be unsatisfied, seeing the former
arguments are only grownded upon reason, and not from particular evidence of
Scripture: Therefore I hold it necessary furthermore to confirm this truth of
the L. by undeniable growndes of Scripture, and that affirmatively as follows.

The first Argument from Mat. 16.13-20.
From this place of Scripture I frame an argument after this manner.

Christ's Disciples are Christ's Church, Mat. 16.13.18.

Christ's ministerial power is given to Christ's Disciples.

Ergo: Christ's ministerial power is given to Christ's Church,

The Minor of this argument which only is doubtful I confirm thus.

That which was spoken and given to Peter, that was spoken and given to all the
Disciples of Christ, Mat. 16.13.14.19.

Christ's ministerial power was uttered, and delivered to Peter, who spoke for
and in the name of the rest, Mat. 16.13.15.16.18.19.

Ergo: Christ's ministerial power was by speech and indeed committed to all
Christ's Disciples.

The Major of this argument only is controversal which I manifest thus:

Unto them did Christ speak and commit his ministerial power that made the
confession, viz: that Christ was that Christ, the Son of the living God.

But Peter and all the Disciples by Peter's mouth made that confession, viz: that
Christ was that Christ, the Son of the living God.

Ergo: Unto all the Disciples did Christ speak, and give that his Ministerial
power.

The Minor being cleared the whole Argume^nt is evident: VVherfor consider, 1.
That Christ in the us. 13. asks his Disciples a question, 2. In the us, 15.
he says whom do ye say that I am: by which it appears that Christ asks
this question of all his Disciples generally: and so it follows by proportion
necessarily that seeing all were demanded that question therefore all made that
answer and confession: the argument is framed after this manner.

They answered and made the confession unto whom Christ propounded the
question, or made the demand.

But Christ propounded the question or demand to all his Disciples, and not
only to peter, or only to the twelve Apostles, as may be proved in the course
of the text, us. 13-24.

Ergo: All the Disciples answered and made the confession there mentioned by the
Evangelist.

The Second Argument from Mat. 18.15-20. and 16.19.
From these places I reason after this manner.

That which is given to two or three of Christ's Disciples, is given to the body
of the Church, if they be many in number.

Christ's Ministerial power is given to two or three Disciples of Christ.

Ergo: Christ's ministerial power much more is give^ to the body of the church
being many in number.

The Major is without controversy for if Christ's power be given to two or
three, then much more to twenty, thirty, an hundredth, they being al of them
Christ's Disciples.

The minor is proved after this manner:

The keys of the Kingdom of heaven, or the power of binding and losing, is
given to two or three Disciples of Christ.

Christ's ministerial power is the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, or the power
of binding and losing.

Ergo: Christ's ministerial power is given to two or three Disciples off Christ.

The minor being evident, the major may thus be confirmed.

Unto them does Christ give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, or power of
binding and losing to whom and of whom he speaks:

But Christ speaks to Diseiples, and of brethren.

Ergo: the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, or power of binding and losing, is
give^ by Christ to the Disciples or brethren.

The minor, viz: that Christ speaks to Disciples and of brethren, is manifest
by diverse particular, us. 1.15.21. The Disciples move a question unto Christ,
concerning the Kingdom of heaven: and Christ teaches unto them, us. 15. that
the little ones, that is the brethren and the Disciples must not be offended: or
if they go astray and be lost, they should be sought again, and us. 15-17.
teaches the duties of admonition in the degrees thereof for the winning of our
brethren, and perserving of them from going astray: therefore us. 18. he speaks
of brethren and Disciples, attributing to them the power of binding and losing,
and us. 19. promising the hearing of their prayers, and us. 20. promising to
them his presence, if they be but three or two, and us. 21.22. teaching them
remission of offenses private, unto seaventy time seven times: Whereupon I
ground this infallible argument.

If the whole scope and intent of this place, Mat. 18.15-20. compared with
Mat. 16.13-20. does aim at the Disciples of Christ, or the brethren, Mat.
23.8. teaching that binding and losing, the keys of the Kingdom of heaven,
Christ's presence, and acceptance of their prayers, etc. aperteyneth to them:
then Christ's ministerial power is given to the Disciples or brethren, if but
three or two, and so much more if they be a multitude.

But the whole scope of these places is directed to the Disciples or brethren:
Teaching that offenses must be avoided among them: Lost or wandering sheep must
be sought out: brethren impenieent must be bound: and penitent losed: That they
have the power of binding and losing on earth: That Christ promises to them
his presence and acceptance, that they must til 70. times 7. times remit
offenses private etc.

Ergo: Christ's ministerial power is given to the Disciples or brethren, if they
be but three or two, and so much more if they be a multitude.

The third Argument from Mat. 28.16-20.
From this place of Scripture I reason after this manner.

To whom preaching and baptizing is committed, to them the power of binding
and losing is given.

Power to preach and baptize is given to the Disciples of Christ, or to the
brethren, or to the body of the Church.

Ergo: power to bind and lose, that is Christ's ministerial power is given to
the disciples, or brethren, or the body of the Church.

The Major of this argument is true by proportion of parity: For by one and the
same power, does the Church, preach, pray, baptize, administer the L. Supper,
excommunicate, absolve, etc. viz: by the ministerial power of Christ: and
therefore if the body of the church being more or fewer have power to preach and
baptize, they have power to bind and lose: The rather considering that
preaching the Gospel is a main part of binding and losing of men to and from
their sins, and a principal part of the power of the keys in shutting and
opening heaven gates to the impenitent or penitent sinners.

The Minor of this argument may be confirmed by this reason.

To whom Christ promises his presence to the worlds end: To them he gives
power to preach and baptize.

But to his Discipls Christ promises his presence to the worlds end, even to
two or three gathered together into his name: Mat. 18.20. and 28.20. yea to any
Separated people. 2. Cor. 6.16-18.

Ergo: To his Disciples, to two or three gathered toge^ther into his name, does
he give power to preach and baptize.

The fourth argument from Marc. 13.33-37.
From this place of Scripture I frame an Argument thus:

Christ's Servants have Christ's authority:

Christ's visible Church, or two or three faithful people are Christ's Servants.

Ergo: Christ's visible Church has Christ's authority.

Here by the way may be noted that in this place Marc. 13.34. Christ gives
authority to his Servants: But Mat. 28.18. Christ receaveth authority or power
from his Father, eve^ all the power in heaven and earth, whereby we may collect
that which was before affirmed that Christ's power is donble, 1. that power
Monarchical which is inherent in his own person, and is incommunicable to any
creature, 2. That power Ministerial which he delegateth to his Servants, to
his Disciples, to two or three faithful people wheresoever.

But concerning the argument if it be objected that Christ's Servants are the
Apostles, and their Successors: I deny it: For there is a distinction made
between the Servants and the Porter: Now the authority is given generally to
the Servants of the house, and watching is specially enjoined to the Porter:
and if it be any thing that the Apostles and their Sucicessors have, it is
watching by way of office, for so the porter is to wach: and yet that duty also
is particularly applied and enjoined to every one us. 37.

The fifth Argument, from Ioh. 20.18-24. and Luke 24.35-53.
From these places of Scripture compared together I collect this argument.

If Christ's Ministerial power of binding and losing be given to Marie
Magdalene, and Cleopas, jointly with the rest of the Disciples of Christ: Then
it is given to the body of the Church.

But power of binding and losing, remitting and retayning sins is give^ to
Marie Magdalene, and Cleopas, jointly with the rest of Christ's Disciples.

Therefore Christ's ministerial power of binding and losing, or remitting and
retayning sins is given to the body of the Church.

The Minor of this argument may easily be proved by comparing the two former
places of Seripture together: For in Luke Cleopas and the other Disciple
brought tidings off Christ's Resurection to the eleven, and others that were
with them: Luke. 24.33.34.36. Whence it is evident that Cleopas, the other
Disciple, the eleven, and others were together: This day was the first day of
the week, us. 23.33.36. Even that very day wherein Christ arose: Now upon
this day Christ spoke those words, and gave the power of remitting and
retayning sins unto all the Disciples, not only to the eleven, but to Cleopas,
Marie Magdasene, and others assembled together that night when Christ appeared
to them al together jointly in the house, Joh. 20.23.

The sixth Argument. from Act. 2.39. and 3.25. compared with Romans 4.11.12. and
Gal. 3.7.9.14.15.
From these places of Scripture compared together I frame this argument.

Unto whom the promises, the covenant, the blessing is given, unto them the
ministerial power of Christ, viz: the power of binding and losing is given.

But the promises, the covenant, the blessing is given to the posterity of
Abraham, according to the faith, that is to all the faithful, who are indeed the
true children of Abraham, Ioh. 8.39.

Ergo: Christ's ministerial power, viz: The power of binding and losing is
given to the faithful: That is to two or three faithful people which are a
true body unto Christ,

The consequent of this argument only is doubtful: For clearing whereof we
must know that the keys of the Kingdom of heaven is a promise which Christ
makes to his Church, Mat. 16.19. wherein the cheef part of the comfort of the
Church consists: it is also one principal part of the covenant or new
Testament which Christ has established by his blood and purchased for his
Church, which is sealed up unto the Church in administering and pertaking in the
seals of the covenant: it is also a special part of the blessing by the same
reason: For the blessing is this: That they that bless the Church and faithful
shall be blessed: and they that curse the Church shall be cursed: Genes. 12.3.
also remission of sins is a part of the blessing, Romans 4.7.8. and binding and
losing is remitting or tetayning sin, blessing and cursing, as is most
evident. So that seeing that power of binding and losing, remitting and
retayning sin, is a part of the promise, covenant, and blessing, therefore the
faithful having the covenant, promise, and blessing given to the^, they have
also therewith the power of binding and losing, that is Christ's ministerial
power, and therefore the consequent of this argument is fume and the undoubted
truth of God.

The seventh Argument from Esa. 9.6. Ioh. 3.16. Ioh. 13.13. Act. 2.36. and
3.22.23. Luke 2.11.
From these places of Scripture compared together I reason thus.

Unto whom Christ is given to be King, Priest, and Prophet, directly and
immediately: unto them is Christ's ministerial power given, viz: power of
binding and losing.

But Christ is given as King, Priest, and Prophet, directly and immediately to
two or three faithful people wheresoever living together in the world.

Therefore Christ's ministerial power of binding and losing is also given unto two
or three faithful ones wheresoever joined together in the world.

The consequent of this argument only is doubtful which may thus most
manifestly be confirmed and expounde^d: when Christ is given, then with Christ
al things else are given, Romans 8.32. Christ I say with all his apurtenances: when
Christ the King is given to the faithful, then Christ's Kingdom is given unto
them, then have they Christ's power to administer that Kingdom according to his
direction: when Christ the Priest is given to the faithful, then Christ's
Sacrifice is given unto them, and power to administer all the efficacy of his
Preisthood unto the Saints according to his direction: when Christ the Prophett
is given to the faithful, then Christ's Prophesy, or the Holy doctrine of
Salvation is give^ to the Church, with power for the dispensing thereof
according to his own ordinance: b^ reason whereof the Saints are said to have
an anointing or Chrisma from him that is Holy, 1. Ioh. 2.20. and therefore are
called Christians, Act. 11.26. being anointed to be Kings (...) Pre^sts unto
God, Revel. 1.6. and Prophets, Act. 2.17.18. Seeing then that by Christ the
(...) Pressed, and Prophet who is given to the Saints, the Saints are made,
Kings, Priests, and P^^phets, therefore as Kings they have a ministerial power
given them of binding and losing, (...) so ^orth of the rest.

The eight Argument from Mat. 18.15-20. compared with 1. Cor. 5.4.5. Mat. 6.12.
Luke 17.3.
^^^n these places of Scripture I collect this argument.

If one brother has power to retain the sins of a brother impenitent
privately, and to remit the sins of a brother penitent privately: then a
communion of faithful men have power to retain the sins of an impenitent
member publicly, and to remit the sins of one that is penitent publicly.

But one brother has power, given him by Christ to retain the sins of a
brother privately impenitent, and to remitt the sins of a brother privately
penitent.

Ergo: a communion of faithful people have power to retain the sins of a
member publicly impenitent, and to remit the sins of a brother publicly
penitent.

To the same sense the argument may be framed after this manner.

If witnesses admonishing a brother have power given them by Christ to retain
the sins of a brother impenitent before witness and to remit the sins of a
brother penitent before witness* then a communion of faithful men have power
to retain the sins of a brother publicly impenitent, or to remit the sins
of a brother publicly declaring his repentance.

But witnesses admonishing a brother, have power from Christ to retain the
sins of a brother impenitent before witness, and to remit the sins of a
brother penitent before witness.

Ergo: a communion of faithful men have power to retain the sins of a
brother publicly impenitent, or to remit the sins of a brother publicly
declaring his repentance.

The premises of both those arguments are evident out of Matthew and Luke: and
the conclusion is the Apostles direction to the Corinths.

The ninth Argument from Ephesians, 5.30.32. and 1.22.23. Revel. 21.2. and 22.17.
From these Scriptures compared together I draw this argument.

The wife has power immediately from her husband, and the body has power
immediately from the head.

The visible Church or a communion of faithful people, are Christ's spowse, the
wise of the lamb, and Christ mystical body.

Ergo the visible Church or a communion of faithful ones have Christ's
ministerial power immediately from him.

Again: As the body has life, sense, motion and power from the head, the
hands and feet have power from the body: So the Church has power from Christ
the head, the members of the Church as the Elders and Deacons have power from
the Church.

But it is true in nature, that the body has life, sense, motion and power
from the head: and all the members have power from the body.

Ergo: the Church has power from Christ the head: the members of the Church,
viz: the Elders and Deacons have power from the Church.

By all which arguments put together it appears most evidently that Christ's
ministerial power of binding and losing is given to the body of eyery true
visible Church, and that all the Officers of the Church have their power and
authority to administer derived unto them from Christ through the body of the
Church where they administer.

And thus have I proved evidently as I take it both that Christ's ministerial
power comes not by successive ordination by the hands of the ministry: and
that it is immediately given to the body of the Church.

And here for your further informacion Mr. Bern. I wish you to take notice that
succession is a typical ordinance of the Old Testament, and therefore abolished
by Christ's coming: For the Apostle wishes us to take heed of Jewish Fables
and Genealogies. 1. Tim. 1 4. Tit. 1.14. because these genealogies were of
necessity for the carnal ordinances of the old Testament, but the Spiritual
genealogy and succession is for the new testament: In the old Testament they
had carnal parents a carnal seed, carnal children, carnal csrcumcision, carnal
commaundeme^ts, a carnal temple, a carnal city, a carnal preisthood, a carnal
Kingdom: in the new Testament we have spiritual parents, a spiritual seed which
is the word, spiritual children, viz: the faithful, circumcision made without
hands, spiritual commandments, a spiritual temple, an heavenly city,
spiritual Priests and Kings, and a spiritual kingdom and preisthood: Therefore
succession in the old Testament was carnal by genealogy: if you therefore will
set up a carnal succession in the new Testament by ordination for the
ministry, you must do it also, 1. For the Church, and so fetch it from Rome,
2. For the baptism, and so fetch it from Rome, 3. For the L. Supper, and so
fetch it from Rome, 4. For the Faith, and so fetch it from Rome, 5. For
excommunication, and so fetch it from Rome: and so forth of the rest, and this
is to tie all Churches to the unity and succession of the chair of Rome, as in
the old Testament al were tied to the unity and succession of the temple at
Jerusalem: Herin therefore you see how you vanish away in your jmaginations by
setting up succession, approving your self before you be aware a Jew, a Papist,
an Antichristian: this shall suffice for the matter of ordination or succession,
whereby it apeareth to be a Jewish Popish, and Antichristian devise.

In the next place let us here your nine reasons Mr, Bernard which you bring to
confute this our faith, and most evident truth of God: where first in general
note that we do not deny, but that the power of the Church is for order sake
committed into some particular persons hands, who in the Churches name, and for
the Churches good, and in the Churches presence are to handle al Church
matters, and therefore whereas your 9-reasons are brought against popularity as
you call it, you are to remember that Christ's church in several respects is a
Monarchy, an Aristocraty, a Democratie. In respect of Christ the King it is a
Monarchy, of the Eldership an Aristocratie, of the brethren jointly a
Democratie or Popular government: For Christ the King he rules by his own
laws and Officers: The body of the Church, the spowse of Christ rules as the
wise under the husband, according to the will and appointment of her husband:
The Elders rule as the stewards of Christ the King, and of the church which is
the wise or spowse of the King: Now as it is unreasonable to appoint the
steward or Servant of the King either over the King himself, or over the Queen
who is the Kings wife: So is it Antichristian to place the Elders as Rulers
over the whole body of the Church, although every particular person and cause
is subject to be ordered by that authority which the Church jointly received
from Christ, and delegateth to them: we say therefore that the body of the
Church has all power immediately from Christ: and the Elders have al their
power from the body of the Church, which power of the Eldership is not
exercized, nor can not be used over or against the whole body of the Church,
for that is an Antichristian usurpation: but only it is exercised over and
against particular persons and disorders arising in the Church, the Eldership
herein dealing for the body in the public works thereof: breefly therefore
to answer in general to all your nine reasons, used against popularity, we
dispute not whither the Elders must rule or not, but we dispute who have the
negative voice in their hands, or who have the determining power in them: or
who give the definitive sentence in all matters: We say that the definitive
sentence the determining power, the negative voice is in the body of the
church, not in the Elders: yet we say the Elders are to lead and govern al
persons and causes of the Church, but to lead and govern contrary to the
definition and voice of the body that we deny, and that we say is Antichristian.

Your first reason Mr. Bernard is that popularity is contrary to Gods order
under the law and before the law, under the law the power of Governing was in
the Levites: before the law it was in the first borne, and this governing power
was not received from the people under the law, but from the Lord by Moses: but
the people only approved the Lords appointment.

I answer: The first borne and so by consequent the Levites did type two
things, 1. That Privilege and prerogative which Christ Jesus has, who is the
first borne having the preeminence in all things, Colos. 1.18.1, Cor. 15.20.
Revel. 1.5. For Christ is the first and most noble in the Church, even the
head, and Fountain of al heavenly grace and excellency: 2. The first borne and
so by consequent the Levites did shadow out the church. Exodus 4.22.23. who is
the first borne of all the men of the earth most dear and precious to the Lord:
So that this reason of yours may thus be retorted upon your selsf.

If the first borne before the law, and the Levites for the first borne under
the law, had the pre-eminence: then Christ, and the visible Church which were
shadowed out by the first borne, and by the Levites, have the preminence and
power in the new Testament.

But the first borne before the law, and the Levites for the first borne under
the law had the power and pre-eminence: by your own confession.

Ergo: Christ and the visible church from Christ, shadowed out by the first
borne and the Levites, have the power and pre-eminence in the new Testament.

Remember for this particular that the first borne, the first Fruits, the
Priests, Levites, Rings and Princes of Judah did al type forth unto us in the
new testament the visible church and the Saints next under Christ who is the
head to the body of the Church as these scriptures do manifestly declare, 1.
Pet. 2.5: 9. Revel. 1.5, 6. Col. 1.18. 1. Cor. 15.20.

The second of your nine reasons against popularity is that it is without
warrant in the Apostles time: The Apostles always begune, continued and
composed church matters, the body of the congregation were only made acquaynted
with matters, aliberty granted them to chose officers, but they did never make
any themselves: nor attempted any thing of themselves.

This argument Mr. Bern. is partly untrue, partly against your self: Untrue it
is thus far forth that you say the body of the congregation never attempted any
thing without Elders: For I demand of you: what did the 120. persons in the
first of the acts, did they not choose an Apostle into office and ordeyne him?
but they had no Elders as yet: for the holy Ghost was not come down upon
them, and so the^ were no Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and
Teachers. Ephesians. 4.8.11? did not the Churches of Lystra, Iconium, and Antiochia
think you worship God, admonish and excommunicate, during the time of the
Apostles absence from them, when as yet they had no Elders, Act. 14 21-23? did
not the Churches in Creta think you worship God, and govern in the absence of
the Apostles and Titus when as yet Elders were not appointed, Tit. 1* 5. you
cannot deny that the Churches were established before they had officers: if you
do the Apostle says that they that are to be chosen Elders, must not be newly
planted into the faith, 1. Tim. 3.6. and so by consequent from the time of
establishing Churches til Election of officers, there must needs be a space of
time for trial of men's gifts and conversation and constancy in the faith during
which time the Apostles being absent from the Churches, I make no doubt, but
they did worship God, and perform the other parts of their Spiritual
communion: it they did so, then I say, look how many Churches were established
by the Apostles: So many examples there are of the congregation attempting every
thing almost, without Elders: and so the Second reason of yours conteyneth so
many untruths as there were Churches planted by the Apostles in the Acts, who
did not the first day of their planting institute their Elderships, but some
certain competent space of time afterward, wherein there might be sufficient
trial* and knowledge of men's gifts and qualifications fit for office: and this
may suffice for your untruths.

Now further your reason is against your self in this particular wherein you
yield the cause, that the body of the congregation had a liberty to chose their
officers: whence I reason thus against you.

They that have liberty to chose their own officers, and to worship God
publicly before they have officers: they have all the rest of Christ's power
ministerial before they have officers.

But the body of every congregation has power to worship God publicly (as
you see) and have liberty to chose their own officers (as you confess) and
yet want Elders.

Ergo: the body of every congregation has all the rest of Christ's ministerial
power before they have officers.

I say the body of the Church has power: which power comes after into act
and execution when her officers are chosen, viz: The power of baptizing and
administering the Lords Supper: and yet it may also be questioned whither the
Church may not as well administer the Seals of the covenant before they have
Officers, as Pray, Prophesy, Elect Officers and the rest, seeing that to put the
Seals to the covenant is not a greater work then publishing the covenant, or
Election of officers, or excommunication.

The third of your 9. reasons against popularity is that it is against Christ's
commission granted to the Apostles and their Successors, as Timothy, Titus,
and the cheef ministers of the Gospel: and that therefore the place 1. Cor. 5.4.
must be expounded of the Elders as you say the Apostle shows, 1. Cor. 2.6.

Well Mr. Bern. this is old rusty rotten popish stuff even as ancient as the
Church of Antichrist some of it, viz: that of succession: which has already
received answer, and the contrary been proved at large in this Section whither
I refer you.

But here are certain untruths avouched by you which must be answered, viz:
one is: that Christ's commission was granted only to the Apostles, and their
Successors: I have proved already in the former reasons that the commission was
given to the body of the Church expounding those four places which you quote,
viz: Mat. 28.19. and 16.19. John. 20.21-23. Marc. 13.34. which also is further
clee^ed, for that the twelve were not yet Apostles, but only nominated to the
office, for they were endued with power from on high upon the day of
Pentecost, Luke 24.49. compared with Act. 2.4. Ephesians, 4.8.11. as also for that
Cleopas, Mary Magdalene, and others besides the eleven were present when the
commission was given unto the Disciples, finally because the Apostles were the
Church representative, yea every one of them: having in them power to perform
all the offices of al officers, and members of the Church: and the Church only
is the true Successor of the Apostles, and no one man o^ Minister whatsoever,
seeing no one person has power to perform al offices of all officers and
members, which notwithstanding the whole Church jointly has.

A second untruth is this, that you say the Apostles committed that commission
given them by Christ not to the body of the Church, but to Timothy, Titus, and
there successors as appears 1. Tim. 6.13.14. as you say: whereto I answer that
the Apostles leave the power which they received from Christ jointly with the
rest of the Disciples, in the hands of the Church not of Timothy and Titus
only, and that chardg which Paul gives to Timothy respects the whole
Epistle and all the contents thereof which aperteyne to all sorts of persons in
the Church as well as to Timothy, as may be seen in the whole second Chapter:
and how prove you that Timothy an Evangelist Succeeded Paull an Apostle? Or
that the Elders of Ephesus succeeded Timothy an Evangelist?

A third untruth is this, that you say the place 1. Cor. 5.4.13. must be
understood of Elders as you say may appear, 1. Cor. 2.6. whereto I answer that
this is a pretty trick, but it will not serve your turn, to turn away the truth
and evidence to this place: For first the Epistle is written to the whole body
of the Church, all the circumstances of the Chap. 5. teach that the whole body
was leavened, and that their rejoicing was not good, and that they ought not to
be mingled with the brethren that were fornicators, and that they ought not to
eat the L. Supper with such persons: that they have power to judge them that
are within, and that they must cast out from among them that incestuous person:
and whereas you would needs by one phrase (viz: the rebuke of many, 2. Cor.
2.6.) expound this general as spoken of many Elders not many brethren, I say
herein you coin a false exposition: For does it follow that because the rebuke
was delivered by many either brethren or Elders who are to lead in all public
actions, therefore the Apostle enjoyneth the Elders only to excommunicate? or
because some only pronounce the rebuke, and the sentence of excommunication,
therefore they only have power to decree it? I desire you would make these
consequents hang or depend necessarily upon there antecedents or else you do
but wrest the Scriptures to your destruction: besides that place, 2. Cor. 2.6.
does not teach who either decreed or pronounced his excommunication, but only
who rebuked him for his sin which were many (Elders if you will:) For I take
it the place is manifest that he was not excommunicate, because he repented
upon the reproof: which the Apostle says is sufficient. And sometime in the
Scripture many, signifies all: and all signifies many: as these places
declare, Matt. 3.5. Roman. 5.18.19. Therefore this quirck off yours is but a
mere Sophistical cavil to put of the truth.

The fourth of your 9. reasons against popularity is that the place of Ephesians.
4.11.12. is against it, for there the Apostle declares (say you) that gifts for
the ministry are given to the Ministers for the Church, not to the Church for
the Ministers: and that therefore the power of Christ is not given to the body
of the Church, but only to the Elders: and this you show by a similie from the
parts of the body which do not receave their qualityes, facultyes, or gifts
from the body, but from God.

To this reason I answer: that you declare your self to be either blind or
wilfully to shut your eyes against the truth and evidence of this place: For
it is as clear as the shining of the Sun in the Firmament of heaven against
your exposition and objection: For I pray you in good sooth does this argument
follow, viz: Christ gives gifts unto me^ not by the mediation of the body of
the Church: therefore Christ gives his ministerial power to the officers, and
not to the body? yet this is the force of your argument, which may for more
evidence be framed thus.

If Christ give gifts to the officers of the Church, not by the Church, but
immediately by and from himself: Then Christ gives power of binding and losing
to the officers of the Church, not by the means of the church, but by such
means as God has appointed: (that is as I guess by Succession.)

But you say the Antecedent is true by the place of the Ephesians, 4.

And I say the consequent or conclusion follows not upon the antecedent: but
it is merely asyllogiston.

But I will declare the inconsequence more fully: The Lord he gives gifts to
men either ordinarily or extraordinarily: Extraordinarily he gave gifts to men
in the primitive Churches: Ordinarily he gives gifts to men by study, and
pains, and by nature, so he gave the gifts of Tongs and Prophesy
extraordinarily to the primittive Churches, be gives the same gifts now
ordinarily by means of Study and the help of natural wit: How will it follow
that because the Lord gave gifts, therefore he gave his Ministerial power
extraordinarily from heaven? Why? you confess that power of binding and
losing was given before Christ's ascension, but now you would prove by this
place Ephesians. 4. that the power of binding and losing is given after Christ's
assension, and that these gifts and this power are given together: is not this
to contradict your self? hereby you see the weakness of your reason: For you
must distinguish betwixt the power of binding and losing which the Disciples
had committed unto them before Christ's ascension: and betwixt the gifts of the
day of Pentecost.

But what are those gifts mentioned in that place of Ephesians. 4.8.11.12. and unto
whom are those gifts given? I will declare it unto you, and so your mouth
shall be ^^opt.

These gifts which are said to be given to men are those four sorts of
Officers which the Apostle mentions us. 11. Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors and Teachers, for the two last are one office. These officers with
their gifts are said to be given to men: who are these men unto whom these
officers with their gifts are give^? are they not the Church? is not the office
of an Elder, Pastor, or Teacher the L. gift to the Church? This place you see
therefore is most pregnant against your opinion: as may appear thus,

That which is given by Christ to the Church is in the power and possession of
the Church.

The officers and offices of the Church are given to the Church.

Ergo: the officers and offices of the Church are in the power and possession
of the Church.

Wherefore I say unto you that the gifts of preaching, administration of the
Sacraments and Governing, are given unto some me^, but the office and officers
endued with these gifts are given unto the Church, who have power to appoint
them to their office, and who do receave both their office and power to
administer in their office from the Church, unto whom the office and power of
Christ is given primarily, being the next Lord thereof under Christ the Monarch.

And for your similie of the parts receaving their properties from God: not
from the body, it is perversely applied: For this is the true use and
application of the similie: as the head communicates all the power and
faculty which any part has from it self, to that part by the body: so the
head Christ communicated his power to the parts and officers of the Church by
the body of the Church: which is Christ mystical: I confess some parts of the
body have some special properties and qualities which they receave not from the
head: as the Stomach has the quality Chilificandi, the liver Sangnificandi,
etc. not from the head, but the power and faculty to use the property it has
from the head: So some members of the Church have special gifts given them of
God, but the power of using those gifts they have from the head Christ by the
means of the body, which is the pipe that from the Fountain conveigheth all
power Ecclesiastical to every officer.

The Fifth of your 9. reasons against popularity is that the Scripture does not
lay the Government upon the people, nor reproves them for sussering abuse of
Holy things: but upon the governors civil and Ecclesiastical, Ezech. 22.26. 1.
Sam. 2, 17. 1. King. 13. Mat 23. Revel. 2.1.8.12.18. and 3.17.14.

I answer breefly from the Type to the truth concerning matters of the Old
Testament: Seeing now the Saints are all of them made Kings and Priests unto God
Revelat. 1.6. Or as the Apostle Peter says: Basileion hierateuma, 1. Pet. 2.9.
a Kingly Preisthood: Therefore now in the New Testament the Saints succeed in
the place of the Kings and Priests of the Old Testament in Ecclesiastical
causses: and as they were burdened with Government and reproof for profanation
of holy things: so are the Saints the members of the visible Church, now
burdened with Government Ecclesiastical, and reproof for violating the Holy
things committed to their custody and fidelity: and therefore I reason from your
own confession against you thus,

If Kings and Priests in the Old Testament were chardged with Government, and
blamed for violation of holy things: Then in the New Testament the Saints (who
are Kings? and Priests) are chardged with government, and blamed for violation
of Holy things.

But Kings and Preistts in the old Testament were chardged with government, and
blamed for violation of Holy things.

Therefore the Saints in the new Testament are chardged with government
ecclesiastical, and blamed for violation of Holy things.

And thus you see Mr. Ber. how your own weapon enters into your own bowels:
and concerning the places of the Revelation that the Angels of the seven
Churches were chardged with government, and blamed for abuse of the Holy things
and not the body of the Church, I say herein you utter foul untruths: For
Chap. 1. us. 4-7. the Apostle witeth to the 7. Churches of Asia, and wishes
grace and peace to the Churches and all the members of the Churches: and Chap.
2.11. and at the end of every Epistle, the Apostle makes application of every
Epistle to all that have ears, and to the particular Churches: where for I
wonder at your shameless ignorance that should thus falsely belie the
Scriptures, and abuse the reader: To turn the point of this reason of yours
also upon your self, I say thus.

If John chardgeth the whole Churches with government and abuse of holy things
(though the message be sent to the aungel to be published to the whole church)
then the whole churches are charged therewith, viz: with government and
violatio^ of holy things.

But John chardgeth the whole Churches with the government and abuse of Holy
things: (though the message be sent to the Aungel of every Church, to be
published to the whole Church.)

Therefore the whole Churches are chardged with the government and violation of
the holy things.

Thus much breefly concerning your fifth reason: and here you make a digression
to prove unto us that Matt. 18.17, Tell the Church must be expounded: Tell the
Governors: For confirmation whereof you bring us seven reasons which I will
handle in order.

Your first reason to prove that: Tell the Church is Tell the Governors, is this:
for that otherwise Christ could not be understood, for if he had brought in a
strange course not heard of before, nor then practiced, no man could understand
his meaning: Seeing therefore before then and after the practice was to tell to the
Elders or governors: therefore tell to the Church is tell to the Governors or
Elders.

A las for you Mr. Bern. this is borrowed stuff, and yet stark naught: For it
is but froth and chafe: and what is the chafe to the wheat? Do not you think
that the whole Gospel is a mystery which was kept secreat from the beginning
of the world and is not the visible Church of the new Testament with all the
ordinances thereof, the cheef and principal part of the Gospel? and therefore,
seeing this ordinance of telling the Church is a part of the Gospel, it was
formerly hidden and mystical, and now it was revealed plainly by Christ: and
although happily the Disciples understood not Christ's meaning at that present,
yet after ward the Holy Ghost brought that and many other necessary things
which they either understood not Christ's meaning at that present, yet afterward
the Holy Ghost brought that and many other necessary things which they either
understood not or forgot, to their knowledge and memory as the Scripture
witnesses: But further I say that particular was obscurely signified by the
Typical King and Priests in the Old Testament unto whom the Government was
committed, as I have already more then once declared unto you: and further the
government was then given to al Christ's Disciples by commission as I have
already proved sufficiently to your conscience and the conscience of all that
love the truth in sincerity.

That of the excommunication of the blind man Ioh. 9.22. was a devise of the
Jews, for there is no warrant for it in all the law: and if it were the L.
ordinance, it typeth unto us thus much that the visible Church succeeding in
the place of the typical Kings and priests have in their hands the power of
excommunication.

And although Cloe made complaint to the Governor yet it is nothing to the
purpose: For Cloe complayneth of an whole Church to an Apostle: not of a
particular person to the Elders of a particular Church: and do you think that
this is a good argument? That seeing a particular person complayneth to or
informs the Apostle of the state of the Church (who had an infallible gift of
instructing and directing of Churches) therefore a particular person in the
third place or degree of admonition must tell the Elders, and that therefore
those Elders are the Church? The argument is altogether inconsequent.

Your second reason that tell the Church is tell the Governors is Christ's chandg
of the person: From the third to the second: The force of your argument is this.

If Christ having spoken in the third person saying: Tell the Church: afterward
turns his speech to the second person saying: whatsoever ye bind etc. then
tell the Church is tell the Elders.

But Christ chandgeth his speech from the third to the second person.

Therefore tell the Church is tell the Elders.

Mr. Ber. you were not well advised in making this argument: For it overthrows
your exposition most manifestly, as thus.

If Christ calls his Disciples the Church, then tell the Church is tell the
Disciples or the body of the Church.

But Christ calls al his Disciples the Church: For this commission of binding
and losing is given to all the Disciples jointly as is already declared more
fully in the former arguments.

Therefore tell the Church is tell the body of the Church, al Christ's Disciples,
and not only the Governors.

Therefore this reason confirms the truth we hold, and not the error which you
seek to defend by wresting the Scripture.

Your third reason that tell the Church is tell the Governors is, for that
Christ speaks of two or three. That is to say (after your exposition) of two
or three Elders or governors and not of the whole body.

I answer that your argument is without al force of consequence: For to argue
thus is to argue without reason or force of argument, viz.

If Christ speaks of two or three, then he speaks of two or three Elders
or Governors.

But Christ speaks of two or three.

Ergot Christ speaks of two or three Elders or Governors.

Further by this argument one Apostle could do nothing, but there must needs be
two or three: and so one Elder can do nothing, but there must needs be two or
three: and so your Prelates Monarchy in their dioceses falls to the ground but
your arguments grow ridiculous.

Now the reason why Christ speaks of two or three is for consolation to the
Church and Disciples of Christ, teaching that if but two or three of them at any
time walk together in the faith and truth of Christ, those two or three have
title to Christ and al his ordinances and have promise of audience and
acceptance: as also to instruct the Saints, to stand for the truth against
multitudes, though they be the smallest number which is three or two, for
Christ he will not leave them destitute of his presence and asistance.

Your Fourth reasons that Tell the Church is Tell the Elders in this: that the
person is changed from the second to the third, us. 19. if two of you shall
agree, etc. whatsoever they shall ask etc: the force of the argument is al one
with the second, and so has received answer there, but it seems you delight
in number and multitude: yet for further evide^ce I will show you the reason:
the frame whereof is thus to be conceaved.

If there be a Grammatical change of the person, viz: you: they: then there is
a Real chandg off the person physical, viz: The Governors: The Church.

But there is a grammatical chandg of the person, you: they.

Ergo: There is a Real chandg of the person physical, viz: The Governors: the
Church.

I deny your Major, and still I avouch that the chandg of the person is by way
of exposition. teaching: that they: and you: are one: namely, whither they be
two of Christ's Disciples then living (viz:you) or any other two or three to the
end of the world, (viz: they,) Christ has promised his power, presence, and
acceptance to them: For so he says wheresoever two or three, us. 20. and Mat.
28.20. Lo I am with you always: So that these two general circumstances of
place and time are for the consolation and instruction of the Church if they be
but two or three in all ages: For not the multitude, but the truth is respected
of Christ: and al times and places are indifferent for the Church of the new
Testament which was otherwise in the old Testament: For the Lord then promised
his presence especially in the Temple, upon their Sabbaths, and to the special
people: but now the partition wall is broken down, and now al times, places,
and persons are indifferent for the church and the Lord.

Your fifth reason that Tell the Church is Tell the Governors is this: that
otherwise absurdityes cannot be avoided that arise out of the text: the
absurdityes you suppose would follow are, 1. confusion, 2, carelesnes,
whereupon follow pride and contention, 3. weomen and children speaking in the
Church, 4. that the whole Church ca^ speak. 5. Christ's should cross himself,
who gives the power to two or three.

Hereunto I answer: the supposed absurdities either do not follow, or if they
do follow are no absurdities: For the truth is not absurd.

First, it does not follow that there must needs be confusion, carelesnes,
pride, or contention, if a brother be promoted to the body of the Church for
his offense after once and twice admonition: but rather the brethren
understanding that al are interessed in the business will be careful to dischardg
their duties, whereas by your fancy the care and chardg being cast upon the
Elders and from the brethren, they may wholly neglect the matter, and the
Church grow corrupt through the Elders partiality negligence, or other sinister
respect: and for confusion: it is not intended as you grossly imagine that al
should speak, but that al should consent: For as in prayer one speaks and all the Church consent: So in public admonition and excommunication one speaks
at once and the rest consent: and if any man have any thing to say he may
speak, and the first hold his peace, as, in Prophecy so in admonition by
proportion, 1. Cor. 14.30. and yet the Lords o^der not be violated. and if
pride and therevppon contentions do arise it is through the corruption of men,
not through the ordinance of God, and may there not much more pride grow in the
Elders think you when they are absolute Lords (as it were) over the people? and
will not that breed much more contention? And to contend for the truth is good
and warrantable, yea and contentions must be in the true church, but woe be to
those by whom they come.

Secondly, you say the whole Church cannot speak jointly, nor severally, one
by one except weomen and children speak: I deny it: the whole Church may speak
jointly as in prayer and prophesying, 1. Cor. 11.4. So also in admonition and
excommunication, by some persons deputed thereto either Elders if there be any,
or other if there be no Elders: and for the speaking of weomen in the Church I
say it needs not: for they, and so all the brethren may speak by silence: or
if any dissent they may speak either woman or youth, and yet the rule of the
Apostle not violated, who forbids weomen to lead the action of worship in
prayer or prophesy, or praising God, or any action of Government in the
presence of men: but he does not forbid a woman to speak when she is called
thereto, in matter of Government: neither does the Apostle intend to forbid
weomen to pray or prophesy in the presence of weomen only, as sometime the
occasion may be ministered if the church consist only of weomen: that this is so
you shall perceave by comparing these places, 1. Cor. 14.34. 1. Tim. 2.12, and
considering the reasons of the Apostles prohibition: but let us see the force
of your argument.

If tell it to the Church be tell it to the body of the Church: then every member
of the Church must speak in rebuking the party.

But every member must not speak in rebuking the party that is promoted to the
Church for sin.

Therefore tell it to the Church is not tell it to the body of the Church, and so
it must needs be tell it to the Elders.

I deny your consequent, for all may hear, take notice give consent, and speak
if they se just cause orderly, and yet it follows not that al are bound to
speak vocaly one by one: For silence is a sufficient testification of consent:
Further I say your minor is weak: For every one is bound to speak that sees
just cause or else he shall there by strangle his conscience, and quench the
Spirit, and suffer sin which he cannot do without sin.

Lastly, Christ crosses not himself, in giving power to two or three: For he
may give power to two or three if there be no more, and yet to twenty, an
hundredth, a thousand, if there be so many: but you Mr. Bern, raise up false
expositions, and wrack the text to support heresies, thereby making the
Scriptures a leaden rule to frame to your crooked conceits, and a nose of wax
to be wrung which way your perverse apprehensions incline.

Your sixth reason that tell the Church is tell the Governors is this: that else
the Corinthians offended who were al commanded to deal with the incestuous
Corinth. and yet some only did so: and Paul should sin who upon the
advertisement of Cloes house, did not wayt for the churches consent, but
himself alone determined the matter, and wills them to exente his sente^cein the
open congregation.

I answer: all the Corinths did deal with the incestuous person though many
spoke the rest giving consent to their speeches: and therefore there can no more
sin lie upon the^ for not rebuking by voice, then there lies sin upon the
whole Church, for not lifting up their voice to speak in prayer and prophesy,
being al commanded so to do: besides all might speak: for many sometime
signifies al, as I have already showed: but this is but idle stuff which you
object. Furthermore Paul was an Apostle having power and infalibility to plant
and direct and reform Churches, and will you from hence fetch a rule for the
perpetual government of the Church? it follows not Paul did thus: go, one
Prelate may do thus* nay by your own exposition there must needs be two or three
Prelates: but what did Paul? did he perform the whole decree of
excommunication? I deny it utterly: but the Apostles meaning is that he for his
part gave his voice, and advise, and commandment (as having rece^ved grace to
be faithful) that the incestuous person should be excommunicate: and note it
well Mr. Ber. Paul does bid the Elders (as you say) excommunicate him: ca^ these
things agree? I believe your wit was wandering when you wrote these things: for
you avouched out of the 2. Cor. 2.6. that many Elders did excommunicate the
incestuous person: and now you say that Paul at the information of Cloes
Family, like a Lord Bb. decrees the sentence of excommunication in his court,
and commands them to pronounce it: you gave this power of late to the
Elders, and now you take it from the Elders, and give it to Paul, and make the
Elders only his deputyes* but I will show you the reason of this your oversight
and contradiction: you had by you in your study when you penned your book, the
writings of the Reformists, and the writings of the Prelates: and being in
wrath and choler enraged against us of the Seperatio^, you thought to make
Herod and Pilate friends against Christ, and have gathered both the Prelates and
Reformists objections against us and put the^ down in your book without
judgment, and so through the weakness of your understanding not discerning the
reasons of the Reformists and Prelates to contradict, because they fitted you
against us, you not regarding the truth but the victory, have fallen into this
gross contradiction which your learning can never salve: only your repentance
and confession can cure it.

Your last reason that tell the Church is tell the Elders is this: for that al
reformed churches judge so: well: yet you said even now that tell the Church is
tell the Apostle Paul, and the Lord Bb. by consequent his successors: are you in
your right mind Mr. Ber. that stumble thus? but you see what it is to resist
the truth.

But what if all the reformed Churches say so: is it so? if the Scripture say
contrary it is not so: and the Churches must be reformed yet further according
to the Scriptures.

Finaly, you prove that figuratively the part may carry the name of the whole:
who denies it? and that therefore the Elders are called the Church: I deny that.
For it follows not: yet I yield you thus much (which you shall gain nothing
by) that two or three Elders may be termed a church being severaly by
themselves, but jointly with the body they are not so: so a Christian family,
or rather the Christians in a family may be truly termed a church severaly: yet
jointly with the body they are not so: For know you Mr. Ber. that the parts of
the Church are similares and Homogoncae: as every part of water is water, so
every part of a Church, if they be a communion, is a Church being severed
necessarily from the whole: you say also that a company without officers no
where is called a Church (Christian families only excepted) in all the new
Testament except Act. 14, 23. by anticipation. First you must prove unto me Mr.
Ber. that this place Act. 14.23. is by anticipation: For does it follow because
heaven and earth are so called by anticipation Genesis 1.1. therefore a company
wanting officers are called a Church by anticipation? besides you speak
falsely, saying that in all the new testament a company without officers is not
caled a church: what say you to Act. 19.41. any company of people is called a
C^^rch in that place: and whereas you confess that a Christian family is
called a Church by the warrant of the new Testament, you yield the cause: For
if two or three faithful persons of a family are a Church, then two or three
faithful persons of diverse families are a Church: or else show you a found
reason to the contrary: hence I reason thus.

They which the Scripture call a Church, are a Church.

The Scripture calls two or three believers in a family a Church.

Therefore: two or three believers in a family are a Church.

Again: If two or three believers of one family are a Church: then two or three
believers of diverse families are a Church by proportion.

But two or three believers of one family are a Church, by your confession and
testimony of the Scripture.

Therefore: two or three believers of diverse families are a Church.

But know, Mr. Ber. that we strive not about the word, but about the matter:
be they Ecclesia, Synagoge, Disciples, brethren, Saints, we regard not the
word: we say that two or three Disciples, Saints, brethren, are Sinagoge,
Ecclesia, a congregation with whom Christ is present, who have Christ's power,
unto whom every member of the body must be promoted for sin, this you
neither have disproved, nor ever shall be able: and here ends your digression:
and now you come unto your sixth reason.

Your 6. reason against popularity is a repetition of things already answered
in the fifth reason, that Tell the Church is Tell the Governors: Therefore I
refer the reader thither.

Your 7. reason against popularity is that it is against the commandment of
Christ: For Heb. 13.17. 1. Pet. 5.2. the sheep must obey the shepherd, and the
flock must depend upon the Pastor: and he is not to obey them or depend upon
them.

I answer: To the place Heb. 13.17. I say the Apostle does not intend to teach
that the whole body of the Church must yield to the voice of the Elders in
every thing that they list: nor that the Eldership has in their hands the
power of Christ to rule contrary to their liking: For the Lord submits both
Pastors and Flock unto his own laws and will: but the intent of the Apostle is
to show that all the particular members in all their affairs must submitt
themselves to the instruction direction and guidance of the Elders: For
although Christ has placed the Elders as stewards over the Servants, yet he
has not appointed them as Lords over his spowse and wife: your argument
therefore is a fallacian a conjunctione and divisione, thus.

All the particular members must obey the Elders in their lawful instructions,
and their wholesome admonitions severally.

Ergo, the whole body must jointly obey the voice of the Elders.

Again, the whole Flock consists of two parts, Officers, and the Saints: The
Saints must obey the Officers, that is one part of the Church must be directed
by another, as the foot by the eye: yet the whole body jointly is above any
one member or members apart.

Further all the Saints shall yield obedience to Elders in things commanded by
God, and the Elders shall al of them obey the voice of the church in things
commanded by God, but the question is how far the sheep must obey the Elders
who are shepherds, and how far the Elders which are the L. Servants must obey
the wife and spowse of Christ which is the Church: For know you Mr. Ber. these
things may well stand together, that the whole Church may obey the Elders in
some things: and the Elders must obey the body of the Church in other things.

The other place 1. Pet. 5.2. to en humin: may as well be translated with all your
best ability, as, that depends upon you: but I say further that the Flock
must depend upon the shepherds, as they are sheep, and as they al jointly are
the wife of the lamb the best members must submit to her voice being the voice
of her husband and Lord.

You eight reason against popularity is this, that it is against common sense
that the parents should submit to the Children, the workman to the work, the
Seedsman to the corn.

I answer, neither is it reason that the whole body should yield to the hand,
or the Servant to the Mr. Or the wife to the maid. But you know the Church is a
body and the Elders hands and other parts the church is the Mrs. and the Elders
are Servants: but comparisons are not to be urged further then their intention:
lest we break them in pieces and spoil the proportion: and sometime in some
cases the parents may lawfully submit to children, the workmen to the work,
and the husbandme^ to the corn: For you know that relations chandg arguments.

Your ninth and last reason against popularity is, that it is against the
dignity and office of true Ministers who represent Christ's person, having their
power from him and which none but such as represent Christ can give or take
away: But the body of the Church does not represent Christ's person, nor ever
did depose or make Ministers: and because the body of the Church are not
Ministers, therefore they cannot make Ministers: and such like rotten stuff.

I answer: That the Ministers do represent Christ's person I deny not: but
avouch that the Church does much more represent Christ's person, who is the
Spowse and wife of Christ: and that the Ministers have their power from Christ
I deny not, but al their power comes from Christ through the body of the
Church as I have sufficiently proved already: That the Church has made
Ministers I have showed, Act. 1. they chose an Apostle when as yet they were
not Apostles, they Elected Deacons, Act 6, Now Election is the very essence of
a true Minister: The Church admonishes an Elder, Col. 4.17. and deposes false
Apostles, Reve. 2.2. preaches, prays, and worshippeth wanting Elders, Act.
13.22.23 and whereas you say that Ministers only make Ministers, I answer it is
the ground of Succession which I have formerly overthrown: and I say that the
body of the Church has in it al ministerial power immediately from Christ, and
your slender stuff has prevailed nothing against this truths of the Lords:
the university may make a Doctor, a Bachelor, a Master, and yet ^t not any
such thing, but a compound body having a charter from the King for that
pu^pose: a corporation may make a Major and Sherifes, and yet the corporation
is not a Major or a Sheriff: So the Church may make Ministers, and yet the
Church it self is not properly an Elder, or Deacon; or VVidow, but a body
politic having power to produce such works by verue of the charter which
Christ has given unto it.

And thus Mr. Ber. I have done with you for this point: but Mr. Ains. steppeth
up with a new kind of Antichristianisme never heard of before: and he teaches
us if we will beleve him, that Christ's ruling power is in the Eldership, and
that the Pope and Prelates are not Antichrists for taking into their hands the
power of the multitude, but the power of Christ.

Here in the first place we must remember that the power of Christ which we
speak of is a ministerial delegated power given to man: and that the question
is who is the first subject of this ministerial power, who receave it
immediately from Christ: I say the body of the Church is the first subject of
it, and I say that whatsoever the Eldership has, it has from Christ through
the body of the Church; and by the Churches disposition, and this if you deny
Mr. Ains. (which I think you do not) I say you are therein departed from the
faith: The body of the Church having al her power from Christ retains and
keeps it entire to it self, and does not so delegate it to any officers, as
that she leeseth it and is deprived of it: neither does she delegate any power
to her officers, but that which she formerly received from Christ her head,
husband and Lord: For Christ gives not a double ministerial power, one
immediately to the body of the Church which she has and keeps: another
mediately to the Eldership by the Churches disposition which the church has
not at al, but is only a conduit pipe to conveigh it to the Eldership: if you
hold such a matter, declare it unto us out of the word of God and we will
receave it when we see it: in the mean time we hold that whatsoever the Elders
have, they have it from the Church by delegation: and that the Church has it
in there own hands, and received it from Christ by virtue of the covenant God
makes with it in Christ, giving Christ for King, Priest and Prophet to the
Church, and therefore the Church has from Christ the head al power, and all the
members and officers of the Church have al their power from the body, which
they hold and use in the body and not Separated from the body: The Elders as it
were the hands are conjoined to the Church as to the body: The body of the
Church is conjoined to, Christ the head: The body has no power divided from
the head: the hands have no power divided from the body. So a company of men
have no power Separated from Christ: an Eldership has no power Separated from
the Church: but as all power flows from the head to the body, and then to the
hands through the body, which is first in the body before it come to the hands:
So al power Ecclesiastical or ministerial is derived from Christ to the
Church, and then through the Church to the Elders, which is first in the Church
before it come to the Elders: And as when the hands are cut of the body still
retains the power entire though it want hands and the power of the hands is
s^^^ in the body: So when the Eldership is deposed the Church still retains
the power of the Eldership, though it want an Eldership: and as the hands can
do nothing contrary unto the liking of the whole body, but the actions of the
hands are by consent of the body: So the Eldership can do nothing contrary to
the liking of the Church: but the actions of the Elders must be by consent of
the Church: and as those hands are worthy to be cut of that rebel against the
body and wrong it, or endaunger it: So are these Elders worthy to be cut of
from the Church that rebel against the Church, wrong it, or endaunger it. This
is the faith which I hold Mr. Ains and if you hold any other faith, it is not
the faith of Christ: but let us see what your book will aford us.

First, you say: Christ's ruling power, which the papists say is in the pope, we
say not is in the body of the congregation the multitude, but in Christ
himself: and that the Pope is Antichrist, not for taking into his hands the
power of the multitude, but of Christ, to rule and govern the Church as head
of the same, confutat. of Mr. Bern. page 175.

You know Mr. Ains, that the Pope does not assume that power which Christ as
King has in his own hands reserved to himself: but the pope claymeth to be a
ministerial head under Christ, having a Ministerial power given unto him by
succession from Peter: and although it cannot be denied, but that he does many
actions which are proper works of Christ's power Monarchical proper to himself,
yet that is but the misinterpretation of his ministerial headship, not
understanding how far that ministerial headship, which he challenges,
extends, and it is not his proper claim to Christ's office: therefore properly
the Pope is not Antichrist for challendging Christ's Kingly power proper to
himself: but for assuming Christ's Ministerial power delegated to his Church:
although I do not deny but the Pope enlarges the delegated power further then
Christ has prescribed in his word: So that the Pope is Antichrist in two
respects. 1. For clayming that power which Christ has given to the body of the
Church, 2. For extending that ministerial power beyond the compass which
Christ has limited in the word.

Secondly, you say: Christ's ruling power, which the Protestants say is in the
Bbs. the Prelates, we do not say is in the multitude, but in Christ himself,
and that the Bbs. are very Antichrists for assuming Spiritual jurisdiction
aperteyning to Christ alone, confut. of Mr. Bern. page 175.

Here also you cannot be ignorant Mr. Ains. that the Prelates do not challendg
that Monarchical power which is properly inherent in Christ's person, but
renounce it utterly as confidently as you do: but they only challendg that
Ministerial power which Christ (as they say) has delegated to the Apostles and
their Successors the L.Bbs. neither can you with any good conscience say that
they claim Christ's Kingly power, but only they are Antichrists as the Pope is
for two causes. 1. For clayming that power Ministerial which Christ has given
to the body of the Church. 2. For enlarging that ministerial power beyond that
compass which Christ in his word has determined.

Thirdly, you say Neither that ruling power of Christ, which the Puritanes say
is in the presbytery, do we say is in the multitude: For we acknowledge Christ
to have ordained a presbytery or Eldership and that in every Church, for to
teach and rule them by his own word and laws: unto whom all the multitude,
the members, the Saints, ought to obey and submit themselves as the Scriptures
teach, confut. of Mr. Bern. page 176.

We say Christ's ruling power is originally and fundamentally in the body of
the Church the multitude: and we acknowledge further that the Elders receave by
delegation power from the body of the Church, which power ministerial in the
hands of the Elders is not so large as that which is in the body, but it is
rather a leading power then a ruling power: neither are the Elders in all the
new testament (to my knowledge) called Rulers archontes, but overseers, leaders,
Elders, prohistamenoi, whereby the holy Ghost would teach that their power is
not to rule, but to lead and direct: I do therefore utterly disclaim this
your error Mr. Ains, as one part of Antichristianisme in your Church: but you
had need expound it well for the satisfaction of the brethren of the Separation,
least you here in destroy your constitution before you be aware.

What we hold concerning the Presbytery I have delivered partly in that which
before I have written in answer to Mr. Bern. partly in that which I lately
published concerning the differences of the Churches of the Separation in the
second part, and the first Section, Chap. 5. and 6. wherefore if you hold that
Lordly, usurped, Antichristian power of your Eldership to be that ruling power
which the word of God warranteth, it shall be your part to justify it, and to
rebuke all that against and it, for herein we utterly disclayme your judgment
and practice: we maintain that the power of the Eldership is a leading,
directing, and overseeing power, ministry, or service, both in the Kingdom and
Preisthood of the Church, and that the negative voice, the last, definitive,
determining sentence is in the body of the Church, whereto the Eldership is
bound to yield: and that the Church may do any lawful act without the Elders:
but the Elders can do nothing without the approbation of the body, or contrary
to the body.

The eighth Section.
In the next place follows your second position which is this in your copy.

In holding that one sin of one man publicly and obstinately stood in and
not reformed by a true constituted Church does so pollute it that none may
communicate with it in the holy things of God til the party offending be by
the Church put out after lawful conviction: you say is error: I say it is the
most comfortable and holy truth we hold in our walking one with another in
communion of Gods ordinances.

This truth arises from the former ground, that all the members of the Church
have power to the censures of admonition and excommunication, to bind and lose:
For (observe I pray you) that every brother is bound to admonish his brother
for a fault he observes in him if he reform not he must take one or two
witnesses and admonish him: if he reform not yet, he must bring the matter
before the Church, suppose the Church consist of 12. persons as at Ephesus,
Act. 19.7. The matter being before the Church the eleven deal with the
twelvth, discover his sin, and convince it to his conscience, he refuses to
^eer them but despises the admonitions: I say if they retain him still in
communion they consent to his sin: For as the civil Magistrate in pardoning
wilful murder consents to it, because the murderer should die: Even so
the Church suffering the unrepentant person among them, consent to his sin,
and are polluted with it, and consent to all the profanation and violation of
the Holy things committed by that vnrepenta^t person: For God has commanded
the church to watch over their brethren, and if they do not they hate their
brother in suffering sin to rest upon him: God has commanded that no
unclean person should meddle with the Holy things, if they do they profane and
polute the Holy things offering violence to the Lords ordinances.

But it may be you will say that by this means we assume to our selves a kind
of perfection and purity in that we will have no sinners among us: I answer
that you must distinguish betwixt our persons and our communion: we confess
our persons severally every one of us to be subject to sin, and that we do
sin daily: and because of our sinning nature the Lord has appointed the
ordinances of the visible Church as helps and means to subdue this sinning
nature of ours, especially these ordinances of admonition and excommunication
which are to be used and administered upon al and by all as occasion is offered:
Now this is the perfection and purity of our communion that we suffer no
unrepented sin, no unrepentant sinner among us, but either we cast out the
sin by repentance or the sinner unrepentant by excommunication: that our
communion may be pure and holy, and the church without spot or wrinckle: and
that we may be a new lump daily unleavened, the leaven being purged out of us
continually: oh Mr. Ber. if you knew but the comfort and power of the L.
ordinances of admonition and excommunication: as we do (blessed be our good
God) in some measure, and that growth and reformation which is in some of us
thereby, you would be so wonderfully ravished with the power of Gods
ordinances, that you would acknowledge the Church to be terrible as an army
with banners, and yet amyable and lovely comely and beauteful: in so much as
Christ himself says that the love of the church is fair that she wounds his
heart with one of her eyes, in regard of the beautyful and holy communion which
is daily maintained in her by virtue of the censures: but your confused
assemblies and all the members of them not only omit, but reject, yea oppose al
these holy ordinances which Christ has given to his Church, and thereby you
proclaim to all the world that you are of Belial, that is without the yoke of
Christ's ordinances, and you cast away from you these cords and bands wherewith
we are bound one to another, and knit faster and faster unto Christ our head:
and therefore you living thus without the yoke, out of the Lords Holy order,
having broken these bands and cast the cords from you, mingling your selves
unto, and joining with all manner of profane persons that violate al Gods
ordinances, how can we have any fellowship, communion, agreement, concord or
part with you? Answer to this now Master Bernard, and seduce your hearers no
longer with vanities.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the eighth Section.
Mr. Ber. in his book entitled the Sep. Schism pa. 103. has these words,
viz: that ou^ seventh error should be to hold: That the sin of one man
publicly and obstinately stood in, being not reformed, nor the offender cast
out, does so pollute the whole congregation, that none may communicate with the
same in any of the Holy things of God, (though it be a Church rightly
constituted) til the party be excommunicated.

In this eighth Section the position is thus uttered by you, and by me
justified, viz: That one sin of one man publicly and obstinately stood in
and not reformed by a true constituted Church does so pollute it, that none may
communicate with it in the Holy things of God til the party offending be by
the Church put out after lawful conviction.

Afterward expounding this truth I say, that if the Church hold this obstinate,
impenitent, convicted person in communion they consent to his sin, as the
civil magistrate suffering wilful murder consents unto it.

Mr. Ains. confutat. of Mr. Bern. page 178.179. does first renounce this truth,
and denies it to be either their judgment or practice referring us to the
confession of their faith, Art. 26. where their judgment is, that none is to
Separate for offenses, but by due order to seek redress: and yet afterward
affirms, that if the Church will not rebuke nor cast out a man obstinate and
impenitent in wickedness, but plead for him against such as call upon them for
judgment then are all such abettors of the wicked sinner themselves, and that
in a high degree: and now not that one man's sin, but the sin of them al
polluteth them.

Well Mr. Ains. you and I will not differ about this point, for wither it be his
sin consented unto by them, or their sin which is a consent and approbation
to his sin, or both, I regard not: The truth is the truth, that that one
sin polluteth them al by contagion, as the leaven leaveneth the whole lump:
and although Mr. Bern. has not so plainly and directely propounded it as he
might, yet let it not be denied for it is the truth he does chardg us withal,
giving a true exposition: and I tell you true Mr. Ains. you deny the truth, if
you deny the position: but indeed your denial, and your affirmation contradict.

Here Mr. Bern. for your sake I will perform two things: First I will confirm
this truth which we defend against you that join with open known sinners in
the communion of your false Church: Secondly, I will refel your cavils against
this truth of God, wherein we walk.

For the first point I wish you to remember what has been proved unto you in
the former Section, viz, That Christ's ministerial power is given to the body of
the Church: which if it be true as it is proved to be the undoubted truth of
God, then this second position follows necessarily therevppon and therefore
is to be embraced for the truth of God in like manner: For every consequent
necessarily deduced from the Scripture is as well and as truly the word of truth
as that which is in plain terms expressed and noted down in number of
words. For even as the branches of the tree do as truly proceed from the root
as the great grains or body of the tree, and are al of one kind and nature
does root, body, graynes, and branches: So a necessary consequent growing by
true discourse out of the Scripture is as well and as truly the word of truth as
the position, or doctrine, or sentence is whence it was raised, wherefore I frame
an argument from the former ground afte^r this manner.

If they that have Christ's ministerial power to reform obstinate convicted
sinners, or to excommunicate the^: do neither reform them nor cast them out
from among them, but suffer them still in communion consenting thereby to their
sin: then the persons so suffering and consenting to sin are polluted by
contagion of the sin, and impenitent wicked sinner.

But it may fall out that a Church true in the constitution having Christ's
ministerial power yet afterward declining may neither reform an obstinate
convicted, sinner, nor cast him out of their communion, but may suffer him still
in communion thereby consenting to his sin.

Ergo: a Church truly constituted, having Christ's Ministerial power of
reformation or excommunication, suffering and consenting to sin and sinners
convinced are polluted by infection of that sin, and of that impenitent
obstinate convicted sinner.

And so by necessary consequent I conclude after this manner.

If a Church truly constituted be all of them polluted by consent as is already
declared, then they do violate and profane all the Holy things of God wherein
they partake: For to the unclean nothing is clean, as the Apostle testifies.
Tit. 1.15. and the Prophet, Esa. 1.12.

But a Church truly constituted may grow to polution by consenting to obstinate
sin and sinners as is already declared.

Therefore a Church truly constituted may grow to the violation and manifest
profanation of all the Holy things of God.

From this evident truth I proceed and reason after this manner.

To that Church, company, or communion of men we may not join in Spiritual
communion that violateth or profaneth the holy things of God.

But a Church truly constituted may grow to the violation and manifest
profanation of all the Holy things of God.

Ergo, to a Church truly constituted grown to polute and violate the holy
things of God, we are not to join in communion.

Thus you se Mr. Ber. the evidence of this truth manifested unto your
conscience, if the Lord vouchsafe you mercy to see the truth.

Like arguments may be drawn from many places of Scripture: as from Mat.
13.33. compared with 1. Cor. 5.6. an argument may be framed thus.

As the whole lump and the feast of the passover was leavened with a little
leave^: so one open known sin polluteth the visible Church, and the holy
things thereof: for you must understand that the Apostle does not call unknown
sin leaven: but by leaven he understands sin openly known, convinced,
and unrepented: else there could be no communion for men on earth.

But the Apostle and our Savior says out of the law that a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump and feast of the passover.

Therefore, one sin convinced and unrepented polluteth the visible church, and
the holy things thereof: and thereunto may no man join.

Again, from persons ceremonialy poluted, and so defiling the Sanctuary of the
Lord, as appears Nomb. 19.13.20. Hag. 2.14, I reason thus.

As persons ceremonialy poluted vnclensed entering into the Sanctuary of the
Lord, or meddling with the holy flesh or pottage, did polute the Sanctuary, and
the holy flesh, pottage and the rest: So the visible Church of the new
Testament morally poluted and impenitent in sin meddling with the holy things of
God polute and defile the same.

But the L. avoucheth by the mouth of his holy Prophets, that persons
ceremonialy unclean vnclensed, entering unto the Sanctuary, or meddling with
holy flesh or pottage, polute and defile them.

Therefore the visible Church of the new testament morally poluted and impenitent
in sin dealing with the holy things do profane them: and therefore no man with
good conscience can join with that profanation.

Finally: as in the old testament the King and Magistrates suffering sin
unpunished were poluted therewith by consent: So in the new testament the
visible church (who are Kings Spiritualy, and have committed unto them the
judgments of the L. the ministerial power of Christ) suffering sin unreformed
among them, are polluted thereby.

But in the Old Testament the Kings and Magistrates (by your own confession
Mr. Bernard page 94.) were poluted with sin unreformed in the common wealth.

Therefore in the New Testament the visible Church (who are Kings Spiritualy,
having committed unto them the judgments of the L. the ministerial power of
Christ) suffering sin unreformed among them are poluted thereby: and so no
communion to be had with them, least partaking with them in sin by consent,
we receave of their plagues.

Now you se evidently proved by testimonies of Scriptures, and by direct
consequents from the same, that it is unlawful for any man to join to a Church
that was truly constituted, now grown to profane and violate the holy things
of God by consenting to sin and wicked, obstinate, convinced, impenitent
sinners: and that therefore much more is it unlawful to join to your false
churches which never were truly constituted since the defectio^ of Antichrist,
but remain in the gulf of Antichristianisme unto this day: the first point
therefore being manifest, the second follows to be enterprised which is to
answer the objections and cavils which you make against this comfortable truth
of the L. I call it a comfortable truth because herin consists the true
comfort of churches and Christians publicly and privately: that they neither
live in nor consent to any known sin in themselves or other For otherwise seeing
sins and corruptions break out daily in the best Churches and Christians,
herin is our comfor that we give no allowance to them no not so much as by our
presence in that communion where open known sin is suffered, as it is most
plentifully and abundantly in your false Churches and in other Churches that
are of a true constitution.

In your objections against this truth the first thing that I reprove is that
you do falsely interpret consent to sin: for a man may consent to sin, though
he in judgment, affection, contena^ce and action do declare his dislike of it
as for example: Ely did all this to his sons that poluted the L. Sacrifices,
and committed adultery with the weomen that came to sacrifice, 1. Sa^. 2.22.23.
for he should have proceeded to the utmost that the word of God had required at
his hands, viz: to have put his sons to death, which because he did not he
was poluted with their sins by consent, and therefore the fearful judgment of
God befell him which whsooever heard both their ears tingled, 1. Sa. 3.11. so
except a man do by all me^ anes save himself from the froward generation, by
Seperating himself as the Apostle practiced and counsels, Act. 2.4. and
19.9. and 2. cor. 6.17. he cannot be fre fro the contagion of their sin (...)
the profanation of all the Holy things of God: For these places do evidently
declare th^^ Paul and the Apostles not only command to separate from the
Gentiles, but from the Jews who were the true Church of God now growing
obstinate in sin, and so practiced themselves commanding the Disciples and
training them up by his example so to do: and so teaching us to follow his
example herein.

In the next place you proceed to declare by diverse reasons (such as they are)
that to join to the holy things when obstinate impenitent sinners partake in
them is no sin: your first reason is: For that in the old Testament there was
no Sacrifice appointed for this: Ergo it is no sin: I deny the antecedent:
and I declare the contrary by the examples of the tribe of Bemjamin consenting
to the sin of adultery committed upon the Levites concubine, Judge. 19. and
20. of the tribes of Israel, fearing lest wrath should fall upon them for
suffering their brethren to make another altar, and to forsake the true worship
of God as they suspected, Josh. 22. and of Achans sin which brought wrath upon
the whole congregation. Wherefore in the law the Lord did appoint a Sacrifice
for the whole congregation as well as for any particular person. Levitt, 4.13.

A Second reason of yours is: For that in the Old Testament the Godly are never
reproved for being present at the ministration of holy things though wicked men
were present: but the Prophets reprove the Priests only for not Seperating the
clean from the unclean. whereto I answer that their communion was typical, and
therefore persons typically clean though wicked in their lives might come to
Sacrifice, and yet not pollute others as I have already sufficiently declared
in the former Section: besides whereas the Prophets reprove the Priests, and
the Saints in the new Testament succeed the carnal Priests as Spiritual
Priests, thereby it follows that the Saints in the new Testament are polluted
by not distinguishing and seperating the clean from the unclean: see these
places of Scripture, Ezech. 22.26. compared with Revel. 1.6. and 11.1. Jude us.
23.2. Cor. 6.17.

But still some may object, that in the old Testament they did pray, and preach,
and praise God, and yet notwithstanding the faithful herein were not defiled if
the wicked did join with them in communion thereof: and therefore now under the
new Testament, though me^ do join in communion with open known sin, and
suffer known sin yet may be saints, and unpolluted in communion: and this is
the very pith and warrow of your second abjection Mr. Bern. whereto I make
answer many ways.

First* I deny him to be a Saint or that he ought to be esteemed a Saint of us,
that is impen^tent in any known sin: Known I say to him: For I may know it
to be a sin, and yet because he knows it not so to be, he cannot be
accounted impenitent though he live in it: since ignorance is a sin whereof a
man repents generaly, and so in his general repentance of sins done of
ignorance that particular sin is included.

Secondly, I am to judge of another according to that which I know and according
to the rule of the word therein: wherefore if i know any of my brethren to live in
any sin known to me: I must admonish him and prove it to him to be sin,
and require his repentance: if he repent not to take withnesses and the^ to
admonish him before withnesses, and so to convince it again to his conscience,
if he repent not, then to tell it to the Church, where also he is to be
admoni^hed and convinced openly: if then he repent not, to me he is a Heathen
and Publicane, and no Saint: what he is in the L. account, and to himself in
secreat I know not, nor regard, for it aperteyneth not to me.

Lastly, for the consequence of the argument, viz: That seeing in the Old
Testament the faithful were not defiled joining in prayer, preaching and
praising God with open known sinners, therefore we in the New Testament so
doing are not defiled, I deny utterly: yea and I deny the Antecedent in some
sense also: It shall not be unprofitable therefore fully to discussce both the
Antecedent, and the consequence of this Objection.

The Antecedent is thus to be expounded and conceaved of, namely.

That the L. required one thing outwardly in the communion of the Church,
another thing inwardly in the heart for acceptance before God.

If any circumcized Israelite or proselyte cleansed according to the
purification of the Sanctuary did join in prayer, preaching and praising God,
no man could justly refuse his outward communion in these actions seeing he was
outwardly clean according to the dispensation of those times: For us in the
new Testament there are required other visible actions for our outward clensing,
which were not then required of the carnal Israelites for their outward
clensing: if they did declare their inward repentance by Sacrifices for their
sins general and Special, by clensing themselves with those rites and
ceremonies which were appointed by the Lord for those infant times of the
Church, they were to be judged holy by all men, and so communion might be had
with them without sin: but if they were not cleansed according to the
purification of the Sanctuary, they were not visibly clean, and therefore
communion could not be had with them without sin, and so Hezechiahs prayer
imports, 2. Chron. 30.18-^^. and the Prophets declare plainly, No^b.
19.31.20. Hag. 2.14. yet here also cautions must be remembered, viz: That this
ceremonial uncleanness must be made known unto others, for otherwise how could
it polute others if it were unknown to them: Furthermore it cannot be denied,
but that the Sons of Belial very vild wicked men did deal with the holy
things in the old Testament, but yet I say it cannot be proved but they were
visiblie clean according to the dispensation of those times: the Lord did not
then require men to proceed with their brethren in the three degrees of
admonition, and so to bring them to the acknowledgment of their sin and
repentance. That is the Lords dispensation for the new Testament: But the L.
order for those times was 1. reproof for sin, Levit. 19.17. 2. The party
reproved was to offer a Sacrifice which if he did he was cleansed from his sin
visiblie, Levit. 4.23. 3. If he wilfully refused to harken he was to be
promoted to the Magistrate, and put to death for his presumption, Levit.
15.30.31. Deuteronomy. 17.12. This was the L. aeconomie for those times when this
order was violated, then al communion was defiled, whiles it was observed all
was well in the visible communion: Let any man declare the contrary if he be
able: breefly therefore to make a full answer to the objection: if the faithful
did keep communion with persons visiblie unclean, (according to the
uncleanness of the old Testament,) known unto them, I say they were polluted
with their uncleanness by consenting thereto, and to the violation of the Lords
order appointed for those times: if men were the children of Belial, and yet
were cleansed according to the dispensation of the Old Testament, their visible
clensing did entitle them to the ordinances of the old Testament before men,
though before God their consciences were impure: wherefore both the Antecedent
and consequent of the argument are weak and unsound: and so this truth of God
remains firm, that impenitency in sin defiles the communion of the
visible Church, as in the old Testament,

Your third reason is for that the Prophets did not Separate who did know the
meaning of the L. for this thing, nor taught not the people so to do: I answer
as in the new Testament so in the old there ought not to be Separation til the
utmost means be sought for redress of things: The utmost means for reforming
abuses in the Old Testament was the Magistrates authority, in whose hands the
power of reforming was: Hence it is that the Prophets always reproove the
Kings for the wickedness of the Land: but the Lord did never teach (because he
thought it not meet, there being but one true Church) that when the King
neglected his duty the people should forsake the Holy things of God and
Separate, but still they ought to depend upon the Lord for redress of things:
but now in the New Testament the Lords administration in this particular is
otherwise, 1. Visible Churches may be infinite, and so there is a possibility of
enjoying the Lords ordi^ances though a man forsake the communion of one Church,
2. the fulness of time being come, and the nonage of the Church being past, the
Lord has now revealed his whole will and pleasure, and has set us at liberty,
whereas in the old Testament they were in bondage under worldly ordinances, 3.
The Saints now in the new Testament are answerable to the Kings in the old
Testament having power Ecclesiastical in their hands (but not civil) to reform
the abuses that arise in the visible Church, 4. Therefore we are in the new
Tament to use al means appointed by the Lord for reformation before we
Separate, all the means I say whatsoever: If then there be no reformation what
then? I answer Separation is then lawful: why? The reasons are these 1. The
visible Church cealeth to be a time Church being obstinate in sin, and from a
false Church Separation is lawful, 2. the Lord has commanded to come out ^^om
among persons obstinate in sin, and so the Apostles practiced. 2. Cor. 6.17.
Act. 19.9. and 2.40. 3. because the Lord has said that if we partake with them
in their sins, we shall receave of their plagues, 4. because if but two or
three faithful ones being Separated join together, they are a true Church unto
Christ where the Lords presence and acceptance is: But in the Old Testament
they were necessarily tied, to the Kingdom, Preisthood, and Temple for the
worship and obedience of God, but now in the New Testament al things are free,
and the bondage is gone: Mr. Bern. I would have you note this well and lay it up
in your heart for your instruction and reformation, for in this particular I
know you all that fear God in the land are scandalized from the truth, not
understanding the difference between the New Testament and the ordinances
thereof, and the Old Testament with the ordinances thereof: Summarily therefore
to deliver the truth: The Church, Ministry, Worship, and Government of the
Old Testament were so constituted by the Lord as that no Separation could be
made from them seeing they were al by Succession and the people therefore were
necessarily bound over unto them, otherwise they could not find the Lord and
his truth which was only at Jerusalem: in the New Testament, the Church,
Ministry, Worship and Government are so constituted by the Lord, as that in
them there is no Succession nor alligation of time, place, person, etc. But when
the Church is become false by impenitency, the faithful may Separate and carry
the truth with them if but two or three.

Mr. Bern. the L, open your eyes, and the eyes of al his people in England to
see this blessed truth of the Lord: and then the cause of Separation will be
evident unto your consciences in the mean time you cannot but be ignorant.

A south reason whereby you would prove that to join to the Holy things in the
communion of obstinate impenitent persons is no sin, is, for that the
Scripture teaches the contrary (as you say) two ways, 1. by acquitying the
Godly from the transgression of others, 2. by declaring it to be a sin to
leave the Holy things of God, for the wickedness of others: and this you say
cutteth deeply.

I answer you Mr. Ber. that we do not feel this cut at al, for the iron is
blunt, and you had need put to more strength, and your reason has in it no
cutting quality at all: For I do acknowledge that the Godly, if they consent
not to, nor approve not the sin of others, are by the Lords sentence acquit
from the transgression. but I would learn of you, if the Holy Ghost in the
Scripture does not account the principal and the accessory in the lame
condition though not in the same degree of sin: what say you to the sin of
Achan? the sin of the men of Gibean concerning the Levites concubine? The
fear of the Israelites in respect of the Altar built in the border of the Land
of Canaan by Jorden? These places are evident, that consent to sin polluteth
the person consenting: and the places by you quoted do not prove any thing
contrary to this assertion of ours: but rather they prove this undoubted truth
of the Lords: the place Ezech. 33.9. proves that as the watchman that
discharges his duty is acquit, so if he discharg not his duty he shall be
accessory to the sin, and partaker of the punishment as may be seen, us. 6.
the place Ezech. 18.14.17.20. does declare two things, that if the child follow
not the sin of the parents he shall be guiltless: if he partake in there sins
he shall be partaker of the. punishment the place Ezech. 14.18.20 shows that
Noah, Daniel, and Job shall deliver their own souls by their righteousness: but
al those that are polluted with other men's sins shall partake of their
plagues, Revel. 18.4. So that you see these places of the old testament quoted
by you do not only not help you, but utterly overthrow your conceit.

The places of the new Testament alleged by you also make as little for you.
Tit. 1.15. teaches that al thing are pure to the pure, yet the intent of the
place is not to show that sin is pure to any man: and although I may lawfully
use the Holy things of God being my self clean: yet being partaker of another
man's sin by consent, I polute all the holy things to my self, and have no
title to use them, and so the Apostle says presently to the impure is nothing
pure: the place Revel. 3.4. teaches that so many of the Church at Sardi as
defiled not their garments by consenting to the polution of the rest of that
Church, but that stood out against their corruptions to the utmost, shall be
innocent: and the other place, Revel. 2 22-24. shows the same thing: but for
these two places I say: you must prove Mr. Ber. that your assemblies are true
churches as these were: again, you must prove also that these persons
neglected their duty of admonishing and standing forth against the Church: and
that the church was convinced by them and yet did join with them in communion
of Holy things: For otherwise we say we are not to Separate till we have done
our utmost endeavor: neither are we poluted til then: your last place is Gal.
5.10. where the Apostle teaches that he that troubles the Galatians shall bear
his condemnation whosoever he be: and yet the Apostle tells them us. 9. that
a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump: that is to say: if you consent to this
false doctrine of joining circumcision to Christ the person that persuades you
shall bear his burden whosoever he be, yet you also shall be punished receaving
the false doctrine, but I hope otherwise of you: this is the meaning of the
Apostle.

Secondly, you say the Scripture teaches it to be a sin for to leave the
holy things of God, for the wickedness of other, and for this purposes you
alledg, 1. Sam. 2.24.17. where (you say) the words are plain, and cannot be
avoided by another exposition of the word gnabarwell: although the word does as
properly signify to pass upon or to pass by as to trespass, and that it is
so expounded by Pagnin: yet I will not plead it at this time since it needs
not: Therefore take the place according to your construction that the Sons of
Ely by their sins caused the people to sin by abhorring the L. offering
through occasion of there wickedness: I answer thus: in the old Testament no man
was to forsake the Sacrifices for other men's sins if they were ceremonialy
clean: and therefore that the people did abhor these ordinances of God upon
the wickedness of Elyes Sons was there transgression: the L. taught no such
thing in the old Testament and in the typical communion thereof: but now in the
new Testament we having the truth that was then signified by the old Testament
and the ordinances thereof, it follows necessarily thus: that as in the old
Testament and the communion thereof which were typical, persons typicaly clean
might not have communion typical, with persons typically unclean, without
polution ceremonial: So in the new Testament and the communion thereof which is
the truth, persons moraly clean may not have Spiritual communion with persons
moraly unclean without polution moral which is sin: and so you are answered
according to your exposition of the place: yet I deny it to be necessary to
expound the place so as you do.

Your fifth reason proving it lawful for the Saints to hold communion in the
holy things though persons obstinate in sin be present is: For that in the
word we have liberty given to come to partake in the holy things if we look to
our selves to reform our own ways, mat. 5.23.24. 1. Cor. 11.28. and the
Corinths did partake in the holy things with them that were once and twice
admonished, 2. Cor. 12.21. go: so may we do.

I answer. The place of Christ Mat. 5.23.24. teaches that a man must first
reconcile him self to his brother before he offer his gift: truth: but it must
be for all the sins he commits against his brother: now to hate his brother
by suffering sin to rest upon him and not to admonish and bring him to
repentance, is a greevous sin of one man against his brother, and so it is a
very greevous hatred for a man to suffer the whole Church unreformed from
sin, and therefore by this place or Christ you gain nothing, but rather leese
the cause which is hereby confirmed, viz: that til a man do his duty to the
utmost to his brethren, he cannot offer his gift: now his utmost duty is,
either to bring him to repentance, or to leave him impenitent, and al them that
justify his sin in their impenite^cy and so in the violation of the holy
things: For they being al poluted with his sin have deprived themselves of
title and power to the holy things, and so using them do violate them, and all that partake with them therein partake with sin, and shall receave of their
judgments.

The place 1. Cor. 11.28. is also against you: For the Apostle wills the
Corinths to examine themselves how they have performed their duty to God, and
their brethren, in the first and second table: and finding themselves to be
clear then to eat and drinck: otherwise finding our selves to fail in that
commandment, Mat. 14.15-17. we are poluted by contagion and cannot eat and
drinck without hurt and judgment, because we have not judged our selves aright.

But your last place Mr. Ber. is something to the purpose: viz. 2. Cor. 12.21.
and 13.1.2. compared together, for I will help to urge your argument, and then
give you an answer.

Your argument may thus be framed.

If the Corinths might without sin have communion with the Church, of the
Corinths after they were once and twice admonished, and did not repent: then
may we have communion, with persons obstinate and impenitent, in the holy
things without sin in us.

But the Corinths had communion with the Church of Corinth poluted with sin
after once and twice admonition, without sin.

Ergo: we may have communion, with persons obstinate in sin, in the holy
things without sin in us.

This is the force of your reason: whereto I answer, that you must prove your
minor: For it is weak: and the places of Scripture do not confirm it: For you
must know that the latter Epistle to the Corinths was the second admonition as
may be seen, 2. Cor. 13.2 and before the despising of the second admonition
they could not be judged obstinate and impenitent in sin: now for the full and
sufficient confirmation of your minor you should prove unto us two things:
First, that the Corinths did despise Paul's second admonition in this his second
Epistle: Secondly that if they did despise this his second admonition, the
faithful among the Corinths did keep communion without sin with that poluted
and obstinately impenirent company: now because I know this is to hard a task
for you, I will therefore conclude that this argument of yours is insufficient
to prove your purpose.

Your last and least reason whereby you endeavor to prove it lawful to use the
holy things though obstinate impenitent sinners be present in communion, is,
that Gods commandment must be obeyed absolutely, and another man's sin
cannot dissolve the bond of allegiance betwixt God and man, which our position
seems (as you pretend) to dissolve: seeing we say that a man must not keep
communion in the holy things if wicked men be present in communion with us:

To this argument I answer thus: viz: that God indeed commands us to pray,
hear the word, and communicate in the Sacraments, but he also prescribes both
the persons wherewith, and the manner how we must perform these actions:
prayer, hearing the word and partaking in the Sacraments are actions of
communion, and there is in the preformance of them a manner of doing (modus
agendi) to be observed: we must therefore respect two things in performing these
actions of Religion: First that our communion be such as it ought to be, for I
may not keep communion with Jews, Turks, Pagans, Papists, but with Christians,
viz: true Christians such as the new Testament describes ought to be members
of the visible Church which is the mystical body of Christ: Secondly, that the
actions of our communion be performed after that holy manner and order as the
new Testament of Christ teaches: as that prayer be conceaved not read out of a
service book, that prophecy come out of the heart, and not be read out of a book
as Homilies be: that baptism be administered simply as Christ teaches without
Godfathers, the cross, questions to infants: and that the L. Supper be used
sitting not kneeling. finaly, that all the parts of worship be cleansed according
to the primitive institution, and not used with those polutions which the man
of sin has cast upon them: breefly, we must worship God with the means he
has appointed as the 2. commandment teaches, and after the manner he has
taught as the third commandment informs, otherwise there is idolatry
committed in violating the second commandment worshipping God by other means
then he has ordemed: and profanation of the name of God in violating the third
commandment when his ordinances are not so used as he has prescribed: So
that to speak directly to your objection, the bond of allegiance betwixt God
and us is preserved and kept inviolable by our position: for we teach that men
must pray, hear the word, and receave the Sacraments, but in a true visible
communion of Sains as the Lord has appointed, not with all manner of persons,
as thieves, mu^derers, witches, conjurers, Papists, Atheists, Dronkards,
perjured, persons, etc. as in your Church: nor after your manner which is
devised by man as Jeroboam devised in Israel: but as the Lord has in the new
Testament taught unto us.

And here Mr. Bern. you take upon you to reduce the places of Scripture which
we alledg for Separation from your assemblies to certain topical or
categorical heads, and so give them answer according to your fashion: as thus:
the places that forwarne Gods people to Separate under the law are thus to be
taken: 1. From idols of false Gods: as Israel from heathenish Gods. 2. From
Idols of the true God as Indah from Isreal's calves. 4. From persons
ceremonially polluted.


The places urging Separation under the Gospel are thus to be taken 1. From
jews not receaving Christ, but railing against him. 2. From Gentiles without
Christ. 3. From Antichrist under the show of Christ persecuting Christians. 4.
From familiar companying with excommunicates or wicked men.


But (say you) what are al these places to us who are not under any of these
heads of reference? I answer you Mr. Ber. that your Church is respectively
under al these topical places which you mention excepting the first, For 1. you
make Idols of the true God, in setting up your own inventions, and making
Christ a King, Priest, and Prophet, as you jmagine 2. you ought much more to
Separate from persons morally unclean, if the jews ought to Separate from
persons ceremonialy unclean, 3. if the Apostles command Separation from the
Jews members of that true Church of the old Testament, refusing Christ and
railing against him: Then much more ought we to Separate from you the members
of false Churches, refusing and persecuting Christ in his members and new.
Testament unto death: as they have felt, 4. if Antichristims and Gentiles be in
degree equal (as they are in the Holy Ghosts account as I have forme^ly
proved) the^ from you who are Antichristia^s and visible members of false
Churches ought Separation to be made, 5. although you are not excommunicate
from the true Church whereof you never were, yet you entertain excommunicates
from true Churches, and you are cages of every unclean and hateful bird: and
if I must avoid private familiar communion with excommunicate and wicked
persons then much more must I shun Spiritual holy communion with them: except
any man will be so ridiculous as to say that the Ho^y and Spiritual communion
afordeth more liberty to sin and sinners then private civil communion in
meat and drinck: etc. and so by your own: confession all the places of
Scripture alleged against you by us, may by just and due proportion be applied
upon you, being as you stand in your constitution and worship, false Churches,
and false worshippers, and persecuters of Christ his truth and faithful
witnesses.

To end al: you say that it cannot be proved that it is sin to hear the word
preached and to receave the Sacraments of one that has converted him, and is
called of the church, well Mr. Bern. I understand your drift, and I will give you
an answer: I say in your assemblies men do not convert to the true visiole
faith of Christ taught in his word, viz: in the new Testament: nor you ever
converted man thereto, but pervert men from it, as this book of yours and al
your railings against our testimony do plainly evince: what you do invisibly
the Lord knows, and every man's own conscience can speak that feels: but
what say you of the Popish preachers do you think they convert none invisiblie?
and what do you gain by this fancy? neither they nor you convert to the faith
or new Testament of Christ, but they pervert me^ from you, and you pervert men
from the Separation: and both hinder and draw from the truth: what you do
invisiblie I seek not nor ought not to respect for visible walking: yet know
that we hold that there are 7000. that are of the Lords Election in your false
Churches: So are there in Rome it self. Revel. 18.4. whence did all the worthy
witnesses of Christ arise, as the waldenses, Hus, Prage, Luther, the Martyrs in
Q. Mary's days in England, and at other times in other places? did they not
come out of the bottomless pit of Antichristianisme being converted there? yet
I hope you will not say that they might still join to that ministry: and yet
the ministers then had the calling of that church, such as it was: if therefore
the argument be not good for them no more is it for you: for you will be proved
to be Antichristian Ministers as truly in quality, though not as much in
quantity as they are: and this shall suffice for answer to this point.

The ninth Section.
Your next point whereto I will speak is the sixth in number: which you hold
error, but I hold as a truth if it be well conceaved: it is this.

6. That the word truly preached and Sacraments rightly administered are no
infallible tokens of a true Church.

I am sure you do or may remember that proprium cum specie convertitur as the
Logicians speak: For example: Every man is reasonabl^ and every reasonable
creature is a man: Now al I say is: that the word truly preached, and the
Sacraments duly administered are no properties of a true church: For although
this be true, that whersoever the word is truly preached ex officio, and the
Sacraments rightly administered, there is a true Church, yet I deny the other,
viz: That whe^soever there is a true Church. the word is truly preached, and the
Sacraments are rightly administered: For these two are not convertible: but this
I hold that a true Church, and power to preach the word truly, and administer
the Sacraments duly, are convertible: and therefore that the power of our Lord
Jesus Christ given to the Church is an essential property of a true Church,
and therefore convertible with a true Church: Now sometime it falls out that
a true Church has not the word ministerially preached, nor the Sacraments
administered, namely, when it wants Officers, as it sometime falls out: This
point also is plain enough if you have not loft your Logic: and therefore I
leave it requiring your answer.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the ninth Section.
I cannot find in all Mr. Bern. book entitled the Sep Schism, any thing in
opposition to this Section of my let unto him, whereby I collect that he
yields it as a truth: and it is not material to the point of Separation any
thing at al: only the truth must be defended for the Author of truths sake that
the Lord and his truth may in all things be honored: the sum of all this
Section is thus much: that as not the act of reasoning is the true property of
a man, but the faculty to reason: Non ratiocinari sed rationale: So not the
actual preaching and administering of the Sacraments, but the power of Christ to
have and use all the holy things of God is the true property convertible, and in
fallible token of a true Church: For as every man although he be reasonable,
yet does not actually use reason at al times, as namely, being an infa^t, being
a sleep, being in a Lethargy or sincope So the true Church though it have
always power to all the holy things, yet actually it does not use the power:
But I list not to speak much concerning this particular which is more
Scholasticall then profitable, the rather seeing Mr. Bernard contendeth not
about it.

The tenth Section.
The next position is according to your order the twelvth, viz:

That every of our assemblies are false churches, al our ministers false
ministers, our worship a faise worship: you call this en or, I cannot believe
you: wherefore I declare them unto you particularly in order after this manner.

But because your Words seem to import that you do not defend all your
assemblies to be true Churches, all your Ministers true Ministers, and the
worship of every assembly to be a true worship, for that I guess by your
covenant you exclude dumb Ministers, and the assemblies over which they are,
and the worship offered up by them: Therefore I will only plead against your
parish Church at worksap, and your own Ministry, and the worship offered up
by you for your people in the parish Church at worksap.

First, for your assembly I use this reason to prove it no true Church: where
the people are not Holy, Elect, and faithful, having not entered covenant to
walk in all Gods ways, standing in confusion with every abominable liver
subject to all the Antichristian orders and officers set over them, deprived of
the power of Christ for there mutual help and edification, there is no true
Church.

But the parish assembly of worksap is such go, it is no true Church.

The Major is manifest by these Scriptures compared together, Math. 15.9.
Apocal. 14.9-11. Ephesians. 1.1.4. 2. Corinthians. 6.14-18. Math. 28.20. and 5.19.
Apocal. 18.4. Math. 5.24.

The Minor you dare not deny I assure my self: For you have at least five or
six hundredth communicants, and you account not past 30. or 40. of them
faithful: and al of you submit to Antichrist his laws and courts daily:
especially your self who cap and knee run and ride after Antichrists officers
and courts feeing him with your money: yea you plead for them and write your
penny pamphlets for them, and yet once yon wrote against them, and lost your
vicaridg in your testimony against them, but because you could not buy and
sell except you received the mark of the beast, now you are content to yield to
all, yea and to plead for all, that you may t^affique with your merchandise.

Secondly, for your self I hold you to be no true minister of Christ: For your
Church being false, how can your ministry be true: For if the Fountain be
bitter the stream ca^ not be sweet: your Church is false, your ministry
which arises out of your Church as astreame from a Fountain is false also.

Thirdly, your worship which comes from a false Church, and a false
ministry cannot be true: but is false in that double respect, but
particularly I except these things against your worship. 1. That it is
qualified with your false ministry. 2. That it is offered up in a false
Church. 3. That it is offered up to God in the behalf of al your people which
are many of the^ (I presume) lewd persons, al of them subjects of Antichrists
Kingdom: this I except against your conceaved prayers.


Against your service book I except thus besides the former. 1. It is devised
and invented by the man of sin. 2. That it is imposed upon you and your
people of necessity. 3. That it is stinted and limited and the Spirit thereby
quenched. 4. That it is read upon a book. 5. That it is corrupt in all the
particular errors objected by the Puritans.


All these 8 particulars are contrary to these Scriptures compared together,
Roman. 8.26. Math. 15.9. Apocal. 5.8. and 8.3. 1. Thessal. 5.19. Apocal. 9.20.
and 16.13.14. Act. 16.18. and 19.13-16. Math. 24.23-26. 1. Corinthians. 12.7. and
2.4. and 14.15.26. Ierem. 23.16 Deuteronomy. 13.3. Col. 3.16. Iam. 5.13. Ioh. 4.24.

Mr. Ber. I would not have you pass by these things lightly but weigh them well
and let us have your answer unto them.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the tenth Section.
This Section consists of three maine branches which Mr. Bern. handles from
page 109. to the 150. of his book called the Sep. Schis. Here therefore I must
endevor two things: First, to prove by undeniable arguments drawn from the
Scriptures that 1. the asse^blies Ecclesiastical of England are false churches,
2. the Ministers administering the holy things to these Ecclesiastical
assemblies are false Ministers, 3. the worship performed by the ministry and
people in the communion visible to be a false worship: Secondly, Mr. Bern.
objections and cavils must be refuted: where the reader must be advertised that
in performing this latter part I shall not endeavor to handle all things that
Mr. Bernard propounds, for there is much truth by him propounded, which I with
him consent unto, only the points of difference shall be discusted, and the rest
omitted.

In the first place therefore to deal as they say positively Kataskeuasticos: I
prove that all the Ecclesiastical assemblies of the Land, as they stand
established by law are false Churches: that is to say not framed or constituted
according to that president which Christ has left for the constituting of the
Churches of the new Testament: but are framed according to the invention of
man, even that man of sin, Antichrist the Archenemy of Christ.

The first Argument from Mat. 3.6. Iam. 2.18. Romans 1.7. 1. Cor. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.1.
Mat. 28.19.
From these places of Scripture compared together I collect an argument which
may thus be framed.

The true Churches of Christ were established of men that did repent and
believe, and show their faith by their works, that were Saints and faithful
visiblie: and of these only.

The assemblies Ecclesiastical of England are not established only of such
persons: but of al sorts of persons, even the most profane of the Land: being
compelled by law to submit thereto.

Ergo: the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England are not the true established
churches of Christ's institution.

Here it may be considered that before the Churches of the new Testament were
established the gospel was preached, and upon the publishing of the gospel men
were converted to the faith of Christ, being made the Disciples of Christ, and
so many of them whither Jews or Gentiles as gladly received the word were
baptized, and added to the Church, and continued in the Apostles doctrine, and
fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayer: this was the constitution and
walking of the Churches of the Apostolic institution: and therefore the
Churches of England being raised by compulsion without procedent teaching, and
conversion to the faith, and making of them Disciples of Christ, being newly
and hardly drawn from the Egipsian darkness of most palpable Antichristianisme,
being many of them brutishly ignorant, prosessed Papists, vild Atheists,
witches, conjurers, thieves dronkards, blasphemers, al of them submitted to
Antichristian Lords and Laws, to Popish Sacrificing Priests, (for their
ministers were not newly ordained) to a stinted devised, corrupted, Popish
service book or worship: they in this their constitution and walking cannot be
accounted the true established Churches of the Apostolic institution but
rather are yet ^emayning in the gulf of Antichristianisme.

The second Argument from 2. Cor. 6.17. Revel. 18.4. Act. 19.9. and 2.40.47.
and 5.13. 1. Timoth. 6.5.
From these and such like places of Scripture compared together and truly
expounded, may be collected an argument framed after this manner.

True Churches of the Apostolic institution consisted of a people separated
from ^^eleevers, whether Jews or pagans or other.

The Ecclesiastical assemblies of England consist not of such a Separated
people: but are compounded of a mixed people, which for the most part are as bad
as Jews or Pagans, viz: persons notoriously wicked.

Ergo, the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England are not the truly constituted
Churches of the Apostolic institution.

Here it will nothing avail them to alledg as they are accustomed that they are
neither Jews nor Pagans: For I have already proved that persons that submit to
Antichrist and his abominations are in the Lords account equal to Pagans,
being called in the book of the Revelation, Egiptians, Sodomites, Babylonians,
Gentiles: and the Apostle wills the Disciples to Separate themselves from
brethren walking inordinately from persons excommunicate, from converteous
persons, and al other that either teach false doctrine, or deny the power of
Godliness indeed, though inword they profess the same. 2. Tim. 3.5. Tit. 1.16.
2. These. 3.6. 1. Cor. 5.11.

The third Argument from Mat. 28.19.20. Act. 19.4.5. and 10.48. Mat. 18.20.
The true Churches of the Apostolic institution were by baptism gathered
into the covenant or new Testament of Christ.

The Ecclesiastical assemblies of England are not by their baptism conunited
into the New Testament of Christ, but only into the constitution, ministry,
worship, and government, and into that faith and doctrine which is by law
established in the Land.

Ergo: the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England are not the true Churches of
the Apostolic institution.

The ground of this argument is this: that the Apostles baprized men in
definitely into the whole new Testament of Christ, and all the ordinances
thereof, which was not stinted or limited at the pleasure of men under certain
canons, injunctions, articles, or Ecclesiastical constitutions, but was large,
even as large as the whole word of truth then inspired or written by the
Apostles and Prophets: whereas the assemblies of England do neither them selves
profess the true says of Christ contained in the new Testament, their faith
being stinted and limited under certain devised articles and convocatio^ house
Synodical decrees or constitutions, whereunto all the ministers of the la^d are
bound to Subscribe and which is the faith of the whole nation: neither therefore
do they baptize into the new Testament of Christ indefinitely and simply, but
respectively and definitely into that faith and doctrine which is taught in
their stinted book of articles, whereto they subscribe which they believe and
teach, and whereof the body of that Church is, wherein whereto they are by
baptism admitted and received: their faith therefore being devised and stinted,
or false: therefore their baptism false: therefore their covenant false: therefore
the form of their Church false: and therefore the Church it self a false Church:
For how can that be a true Church, which has a false faith, covenant, form?

The fourth argument from Mat. 18.18-20. Marc. 13.34. Ioh. 20.23. Mat. 16.19.
These places and other like Scriptures afoard an argument which may be framed
after this manner.

The true Churches of the Apostolic institution had Christ's power ministerial
in the body of the Church.

The Ecclesiastical assemblies of England have not Christ's ministerial power
residing in the body of the Church.

Ergo: the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England are not the true Churches of
the primitive Apostolic institution.

The Major or first part of this Argument has been largely proved in the
seventh Section and in the Paralleles, Censures, Observations, thereto
aperteyning: whither the Reader is to be referred: where this particular is
handled affirmatively and negatively.

The Minor or second part of the argument is evident in it self: For the power
Ecclesiastical of the assemblies is resident in the hands of certain Archb.
Lordb. Archdeacons, Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials, and other
Ecclesiastical Superintendents, which have power over thousands or hundreths of
Parish Ecclesiastical assemblies, and the Ministers in them: and which have
power Ecclesiastical one over another to suspend excommunicate, and absolve
them according to their canons, decrees, and decretals: the Prelate in his
diocese or jurisdiction having absolute power to interdict one or more Parish
Churches from having any prayers or Service: they have no power to come into
the Parish Church, or Temple to worship, whiles the interdiction with the Bbs.
seal cleaves upon the Church door, etc. and diverse particulars of like
nature which do evidently declare that the parish assemblies have no power at
all of themselves, but are merely and wholly subject and in bondage to the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and subordination of Clergymen, having
Superintendency, Superiority, and jurisdiction over them as their proper
Spiritual LL. to Whom they daily yield Spiritual homage and Subjection in
their oaths off Canonical obedience, and actions of like Servitude.

The fifth Argument from 1. Timoth. 2.5. Heb. 9.15. Gal. 3.15.16. John. 17.9.
These places of holy Scripture and other of like nature may asoard an argument
which may thus be framed.

The true Church of the primitive institution Apostolical had Christ Jesus for
their mediator, that is, for their King, Priest, and Prophet.

The assemblies Ecclesiastical of England have not Jesus Christ for their
Mediator, that is their King, Priest, and Prophet.

Ergo, the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England are not the true Churches of
the primitive institution Apostolical.

The Minor or second part of the Argument may be confirmed by diverse
particulars, as 1. Christ is not their King, seeing he only rules by his own
Laws and Officers, and not by Antichristian Lords, and Laws, such as are
their Prelates, and the Officers, Courts, and Canons. 2. Christ is not their
priest to ratify unto them by his blood that ordinance of Church, Ministry,
Worship, and Government which they retain among them, which is not Christ's
Testament, but the Testament of Antichrist the utter enemy of Christ: neither
does he prostitute the blood of his Testament to establish such a worship as
their service book affoardeth: or such a Ministry as their Clergy is from the
ArchP. to the ParishP: or such a Government as their Ecclesiastical Hircarchy:
or such a people for his body, as are compounded of the Serpents seed, a
viperous brood of wicked men of all sorts. 3. Christ is not their Prophett to
teach them by the false Prophetts the instruments of Antichrist, which daily by
their doctrine set up Antichrists Officers, and Laws, and oppugn the true New
Testament of Christ in the true constitution, Ministry, Worship, and
Government taught in his word: Seeing therefore Christ is not their King, Priest,
and Prophet, how is he their Mediator? Seeing his mediation consists not in
the execution and dispensation of these their offices of King, Priest, and
Prophet.

The sixth Argument from Ephesians. 1.22.23. 1. Cor. 12.27.12. Gal. 3.16. Ephesians. 5.23.
From these places of Scripture compared together, and truly expounded, may an
argument be drawn framed thus.

The true Church of the Apostolic primitive institution has Christ for the
head, and is a true body unto the true head Christ, truly united by the Spirit
of Christ.

The ecclesiastical assemblies of England are not a true body unto Christ the
true head truly united by the Spirit of Christ.

Ergo, the ecclesiastical assemblies of England are not the true Churches of
the primitive Apostolic institution.

The Minor or second part of the Argument may thus be confirmed in the three
parts thereof, 1. Christ is not their true head seeing they deny all his offices
(though they hold the doctrine of his nature and persons soundly) as is plainly
proved before in the fifth Argument, 2. the assemblies as they stand in
confusion with all the ungodly and vicious persons of the Land, under the
Antichristian Lords and Laws Ecclesiastical, can not be a true body unto
Christ, but is a monstrous body, like unto the body of Nebuchadnetzars image:
Daniel. 2.32. 3. this monstrous body cannot be united to the true head Christ
by his Spirit, but the people of the assemblies being for the most part the
seed of the Serpent must needs be knit together, and unto their head
Antichrist by the Spirit of Antichrist, the Spirit of Satan. All this I speak
of their visible communion, and of that politic body Ecclesiastical which is
called their Church: For otherwise I do acknowledge unfeignedly, and do
undoubtedly believe that the Lord has his thousands among them, even a remnant
according to the Election of grace.

Thus have I proved unto you Mr. Bernard positively, that the Ecclesiastical
assemblies of England in their present constitution, and walking, are not the
true churches of the primitive Apostolic institution, but are in their
outward, visible, politic subsistence the churches of Antichrist, framed
after the shape of the popish asse^blies, though much refined from the venomous
dross of popery: now in the second place it remains that I deal
anaskeuasticos with you answering those things which you alledg for your
Churches to prove them true:

The great and maine pillar of your building is this, that seeing your Church
has not a false head, false matter, false form, false properties, therefore
it is not a false, but a true Church.

To these 4. particulars I answer distinctly: First, you have a false head in
that you worship God in a fantastical Christ of your own devising, in that you
shape him a Kingdom Preisthood, and Prophesy of your own invention, making him
a mediator and intercestor to all the profane people of the Land, causing him to
offer up other worship and worshippers to his Father then he has taught in his
new Testament purchased by his blood: by this means dealing with Christ as
sometime the Jews did, putting a reed in his hand, a crown of thorns upon
his head, and kneeling down unto him as to a King, and bidding him prophecy,
and yet smite him upon the face, spit at him and presently crucify him: For
whereas you frame him a Kingdom, Subjects, Officers, Laws, and a government
after your own invention, or rather out of the Propes decretals and decrees,
hereby you seem to make him a King, but indeed you Crucifye him again, and
tread under foot the blood of the Testament, which he has purchased and
established at so high a rate.

Secondly, your church has a false matter: For seeing you do all this indignity
to Christ the head of his true Church, do you think that he will entertain you
for the true matter of his Church, the true subjects of his Kingdom, the true
members of his body, the faithful Servants of his house, his chaste and true
welbeloved Spowse and wife? either you must repent and reform your selves of
all that vild indignity which you offer unto Christ or else he will never receave
you for the matter of his Church, the Subjects of his Kingdom, the members of
his body, the Servants of his house, his espowsed wife: For Christ will not take
a wife of fornication, and children of fornication, Hos. 1. he will not have the
Servants of Antichrist to be his howsehold Servants, Mat. 6.24. nor will he take
the members of an harlot, and make them the members of Christ, 1. Cor. 6.15,
and the Subjects of his utter enemy Antichrist, cannot possibly be the true
faithful Subjects of Christ's Kingdom. Luke 19.27.

But in the pa. 111-116. of your book you make a distinction of matter, as: No
matter True matter, False matter: they are no matter of a church (say you)
which do not profess Christ: as Jews, Turks, Pagans: They are true matter
that profess Christ to be the Son of God, and the Son of Mary, and the
only Savior of man. False matter (say you) is contrary to the true: Further
this true matter of the Church (you say) is good and bad: good matter (you say
as it seems to me) is men walking uprightly in this profession of Christ: bad
matter are men walking wickedly: and this you illustrate by the matter of
marriage, for she may be a true wife though a bad one, and also by the
similitude of subjects to a King, who may be true, though bad ones, breaking
his laws: and a true tradesman though unskillful in his profession: and for
your selves you say you are true matter of Christ's church (though not good
matter) because you profess Christ truly as is said before: well Mr. Ber. I
yield the general distinction of matter, but I deny the particular application
of it to your selves: and I say you are false matter: how therefore do you prove
unto us that you are ^^ue matter? by 4. reasons: whereof the first is for that
you beleving this forsaid truth you believe the sum of the gospel: I deny it
utterly: the sum of the gospel is this, that Jesus Christ the Son of God,
and the Son of Mary, is the only King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church,
governing, Sacrificing, making intercession, and prophesying after that holy
manner and according to those rules which he has prescribed in his Testament:
Now to believe truly concerning the person of Christ, and to believe falsely
concerning his office as you do, is not to believe the whole gospel, but only
a piece of it: So that this is the doctrine alone by which the Apostles did
gather a people to make them a Church and disciples of Christ: and the
profession hereof admitted men as true matter of a Church: and this only
differenceth the true Church from Jews, Turks, Pagans, Papists, and al other
Antichristians and Heretics, viz: Jesus Christ, God and man, King, Priest,
and Prophet, and mediator of his own Testament: Therefore your second, third,
and fourth reasons fall flat to the ground, the first being vnderminded as you
see: but there is one thing that I wonder at: that you should hold the Papists
to be false matter of a Church for holding justification by works, thereby
denying Christ's Preisthood and hold your selves to be true matter of the Church
denying Christ's Kingdom in the true frame, ministry, worship, and government
of his Church: what is not Christ's Kingdom as precious as his Preisthood? is it
not as horrible impiety to deny Christ's Kingdom, and the ordinances thereof: as
to deny his Preisthood and the virtue thereof? or is Christ's Preisthood more
fundamental then his Kingdom? or justification by works more pernicious then
to deny Christ to reign as King, and to refuse his regiment? well if the
papists be false matter by your own confession for the one, you must needs
also be false matter for the other: For I am confident that Christ's Kingdom is
as precious an office as his Preisthood, even as the Kingdom in the old
Testament was as excellent as the Preisthood: now Mr. Bern. what is become of
the Church seeing your matter is false as you may perceave by this description?
and what shall your similies of a bad wife, a bad subject, of a bad artificer
help you? you see they vanish away as chafe before the wind: your matter is
false and not bad, as appears evidently if you will not be blind.

To proceed, page 116-122. of your book you describe unto us the true form of
the Church, inwardly, to be the Spirit, Faith, and Love: and outwardly, the
word, profession, and the Sacrament of the L. Supper: and these things (say
you) are in your assemblies: Ergo: you conclude your Church has a true form.

I answer: have not the Papists the word preached? do not they make profession
and live as strictly as you? do not they communicate in the L. Supper? and so
by consequent have Love, Faith, and the Spirit? yet you say they are false
Churches, wanting the true form, even so are you although you do all that they
do, and much more, (for so you are much bettered in doctrine and use of the
Sacrament, but in profession and practice I suppose you are inferior to many of
them:) because rejecting Christ in his offices as has been said especialy in
his Kingdom, it is impossible in that constitution and communion, you should
aright use the word, make profession, and partake in the Sacrament, or have the
true visible Love, Faith, and Spirit of Christ: For a false matters incapable
of a true form: and it is impossible that the body of Antichrist should have
the true Spirit of Christ, or the true covenant and new Testament of Christ
invested upon them: invisibly I hope well and am persuaded of millions among
you: but I speak of your visible, politic, body Ecclesiastical in that
mixture of persons, and subordination of Ecclesiastical officers, and communion
Spiritual in the Holy things, which by Law is established and supported in your
Ecclesiastical assemblies.

But page 121. you bid us note this: what? viz: that corruptions do not hinder
men from being a true Church before men, no more then the corruptions of the
heart do hinder a man from being an elect one invisiblie to the Lord: I suppose
because you bid us in the margent of your book note this, that you account it a
matter worth noting: and I surely think it a note worth nothing: For although
corruptions of matters accidental make not a false Church, yet corruptions
essential of matters essential make a false church namely, if the matter be
false or the form false: yea I avouch that if a truly constituted Church
detected of corruptions accidental, convinced, and impenitent therein, do so
continue, they become a false Church as has been proved already before in the
8. Section: for impenitency inward or outward, makes a false Christian and
Church, inwardly or outwardly, according to due proportion.

Furthermore, page 122-128. you bring us three true visible properties of your
true Church as you say, 1. continuance in the use of the word, Sacraments and
prayer, 2. the holding forth of the truth against the enemies thereof, 3.
mutual care for the welfare each of other: and al these (you say) you have
among you, and so you say you must needs be a true Church.

I answer: Seeing your matter and form is false, your propertyes cannot be
true: For they arise necessarily from the union of the matter and form, or
from the form induced upon the matter: seeing therefore the first is already
proved, the latter also must needs follow: but let us examine these things
particularly: I deny therefore in the first place that you have well propounded
the propertyes of the true Church: For the first and principal essential
property of a true Church is interest and title to all the Holy things, which is
extant in diverse particulars as parcels of that general and whole property.
therefore a people declaring their faith and repentance by Seperating themselves
from all uncleanness, and by resigning themselves wholly to the Lord to become
his people, have God for their Father, and Christ for their King, Priest, and
Prophett, and so with Christ have title to all the means of Salvation: and
this title consists in the Word, Sacraments, Censures, Prayers, Alms, and
al other parts of Spiritual visible communion whatsoever: even as when the
soul is induced upon the matter, viz: when the breath of life is breathed
into the nosthrils of dust of the Earth. Genes. 2. then there is a man with a
reasonable and Religions Soul: So when a company of faithful people are
invested with the New Testament of Christ, then there is in them title to all the
holy things of God whatsoever: This is evident by that which I have before
manifested in the seventh Section whither the Reader is to be referred:
wherefore Mr. Bern. to apply this unto your Church, I avouch that seeing you are
a false matter of a Church: and have a false form or covenant induced upon
you, as has been showed before, therefore you have no true title to the means
of Salvation, but in usurping the Word, Sacraments, Censures, Prayers, Alms,
etc. you therein incur the reproof of the Prophet, saying: Psalm. 50.16. what
have thou to do to declare mine ordinances, that thou should make my
covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my
words behind thee? And as the Prophet speaks: Esaias. 1. 11-18. your worship
is iniquity, I cannot bear it, I am weary of it, I hate it: Therefore you may
plead as long as you will the Temple of the Lord: the Temple of the Lord: yet I
say, until you intertayne Christ's true Kingdom, Preisthood and Prophecy, you
are but usurpers of all that visible communion in the Word, Sacraments,
Prayers, etc. which is among you: For it does not follow that because you have
the Word, Sacraments, Censures, prayers, etc. therefore you are a true Church:
neither are the using of these, true propertyes of a true Church: But the title
to them is the true property of a true Church: For the Papists and all
Antichristians and Heretics use the Word, Sacraments, Censures, prayers, but
they are not therefore a true Church, as I know you will confess.

But here you wish us again page 122. to observe well: Let us here what it is
that you wish us to observe well: Namely, the true Word preached, and the true
Sacraments administered, are the true propertyes to a true Church: And that you
have those things as you say: well: What is the true word? and what are the
true Sacraments: is not the true word the true doctrine of the word? the true
doctrine of the New Testament? but you have rejected the whole doctrine of
Christ's Kingdom in a manner, and have advanced all that false doctrine of the
Antichristian hierarchy, which is taught and commanded by Law to be taught in
your Church: And you in your pulpits proclayme all them Heretics or
Schismatiques, that teach and erect the Church, Ministry, Worship, and
Government, according to the pattern of Christ his New Testament: And so you
have abrogated and disanulled the Word of God by your traditions and
Antichristian devises. Again: What are true Sacraments? is the breaking of
bread, and drincking of wine performed by any persons, after any manner, or
washing with water likewise, true Sacraments? I think you will not say it: it
is therefore necessary that there be a concurrence of other matters: viz: That
seeing Sacraments are in relation and reference, those references or relations
must needs be annexed, else they are not true Sacraments: as a baptized person,
must baptize into the true Faith of Christ, a person capable of baptism: A
communion of men having title to the Lords Supper must break bread, and drinck
wine, to remember Christ, and show forth his death till he come: Therefore
whereas you hold and teach, that the whole bundel of the Antichristian
constitution, ministry, worship, and Government of the assemblies are the
Lords ordinances, you teach a false word: and whereas you being a false Church
and Ministry, do baptize with water, and break bread and wine to remember a
false Christ, and a false Testament, and a false Faith, therein you declare
plainly that you have not the true Sacraments: and whereas in your (Observe
well) you say, Truly and Rightly, respect grace in administering the Word and
Sacraments, and therefore to preach the word Truly, and Rightly to administer
the Sacraments, are no convertible signs of a true Church. I answer: That
Truly and Rightly to administer; do also respect the outward manner of doing
in the Essential relations spoken of before and not only grace: And so your
(Observe well) is not worthy observation.

In your third essential property, you will needs have discipline no true
convertible sign of a true Church: Sir. I confess unto you that the use of
the Censures of admonition and excommunication which I suppose you call
discipline, is not a convertible sign of a true Church: but only power and
title and interest to use them: this title I deny you to have: For how can you
being in your constitution mighled with the world, and vnseperated, and poluted
with so many Antichristian fornications as yet are extant in your assemblies,
have title to any of the Lords ordinances: does the Lord (think you) give his
covenant and new Testament, purchased by the blood of Christ unto such persons
as trample under foot the whole Testament of Christ, and the ordinances thereof?
has the thief title to the true man's purse though he have the possession of
it? no more have you title to Chr. visibly though you vsurp him and challendg
him never so peremptorily: wherefor to end this point of the properties of the
true Church I say til you have Separated your selves from all the wicked people
and Antichristian ordinances in your assemblies, til you have vowed and
covenanted to embrace and practice all the ordinances of Christ's new Testament
you can have no title or interest to the holy things of God: use them as long
as you lift, you abuse them.

Lastly, to conclude this first part of the Section, viz: that your Churches
are false churches: I say to that which you object, page 110. that many
corruptions may be in a church, yet it a true Church the constitution being
true, viz: So long as they are not impenitent after conviction: and therefore
Israel the Lords people so long as they retained their true co^stitution,
Ezech. 16.21.22. the men of Ephesus believers ignorant of the visible gifts of
the Holy Ghost, Act. 14.2. The Corinthians Saints though incest dronkennes,
fornication false doctrine, contention, and much evil among them, because they
were not impenitent after twice admonition or conviction. and so forth of the
rest: but you will confess that the Prelates and their faction are obstinate
after conviction: and we avouch that the Puritanes are obstinate after
conviction, for they neither have answered nor can answer that we object
against them: and therefore although you constitution had been true (which was
never) yet your Church is become false being obstinate in sin and persecuting
to death, imprissonment, loss of goods, etc. all that testify against her
abhomin: tions: that this is a sign of a false Church, read, 2. King. 17. and
Ierem. 3.8. Math. 23.37.38. Math. 21.33-43. Act. 19.9.

The second point to be handled in this Section, is, that al your ministers are
false ministers: in handling whereof I will proceed as in the former point of
this Section, viz: First, confirm the truth by arguments drawn from the
Scriptures: Secondly, refute your fancyes whereby you would prove your ministry
true.

Therefore in the first place to prove your ministers false Ministers, I use
these Arguments.

The first Argument.
The true ministry cannot be raised out of a false Church.

The Ecclesiastical assemblies of England are false Churches.

Therefore the ministers of those assemblies Ecclesiastical are false ministers.

The ground of this argument is propounded and confirmed in the 7. Section,
where it has been proved by diverse undeniable reasons that Christ's ministerial
power, whereof one part is the calling of Ministers, is not given by succession
to the Pope, Bbs. or presbytery, but to the body of the congregation, if they
be but two or three: So that seeing the true Church is in nature and being
before the ministry, and the ministry is but one of the holy things given to
the Church: one part of Christ's power delegated to the Church: one branch of
that true title and interest which the L. Jesus the Bridegroom and husband of
the Church gives to the Bride, the Spowse of Christ, the true Church: The
Ministry therefore must needs follow the Church, be after the Church, be
raised out of the church: and therefore the true Ministry of Christ is only
where the true Church of Christ is, and so it cannot be in the astemblies
Ecclesiastical of England, being not the true Churches of Christ.

The second Argument.
The true ministry has a true office, in execution whereof it is exercised:
Romans 12.7 1. Cor. 12.5.28. Fph 4.11.

The ministry of the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England have not a true
office, in execution whereof it is exercised.

Ergo, The ministry of the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England is not the
true ministry.

The foundation of this argument is this: viz: that seeing the ministry of the
Church of England arises out of the ministry of the Church of Rome, as a
branch out of the root of the tree, therefore it must needs be of the same
nature and kind with the ministry of the Church of Rome: For as a man
begets a man, one light comes of another, one Priest begets another in
the old Testament, so in ordination by succession, one Minister makes another:
and therefore, as the branch is of the same nature with the root, the Son with
the Father, one candle light with another, one Aaronical Priest with another:
So must the minister ordained be of the same nature and office with him that
ordeyneth him: Seeing therefore the ministry of the Church of Rome is a popish
Sacrificing Preisthood, that is a false ministry, having a false office: it
must needs follow that the ministry of the Church of England proceeding from
the ministry of the Church of Rome, as one light is inflamed of another, is
of the same nature and office, and therefore a false ministry: neither can it
suffice to say, that (as it is most true and I do willingly confess) the
ministry of England is much Refined and Reformed from the dross of popery:
For Refine Sugar as long as you will, it is Sugar still in nature: Refine light
as often as you please, from brimstone light to a tallow light, from tallow to
Rosen, from Rosen to wax, from wax to Venice Turpentine, from that to the most
precious subject that can be devised, yet the light is of the same nature with
the brimstone light: So Refine the ministry by Succession of ordination as
long and as often as you will, yet it is still of the first nature: and til it be
Refined to nothing, that is, til it be abolished and extinguished, a true
ministry can never be raised up again: For who can bring a clean thing out
of that which is unclean?

The third Argument.
The true ministry has a true vocation and calling, by election,
approbation, and ordination of that faithful people where he is to administer.

The ministry of the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England, has not the true
vocation and calling, by election, approbation, and ordination of a faithful
people where thy do administer.

Ergo, the ministry of the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England is not the
true ministry which Christ has placed in his Church.

The Major or first part of this argument is evident by these Scriptures
compared together, Act. 6.2-6. and 14.23. 1. Timoth. 3.10. and 4.14. also it is
evident by that which was observed, proved, and answered, concerning the
seventh Section of this Lettre.

The Minor or second part of the argument is evident in it self: For it is
apparent that the ministry of England is called by Successive ordination made
by a Prelate and his chaplin, in his own chapel, with Subscription to the
abominations of Antichrist, contained in the 3. articles, with the oath of
Canonical obedience to the Antichristian prelacy their Spiritual LL. and
jurisdiction, courts, and canons: by giving the holy Ghost, apishly and
blasphemously abusing the words of Christ, Ioh. 20.22.23. giving thereby to the
Priest ordained, power to remit and retain sins, which Christ has given
only to the body of the Church, and not to the ministers by Successive
ordination, as Sacrificing power was propagated by Genealogy in the old
Testament from Priest to Priest: then the priest thus ordained is enforced
upon a parish, with the Patrons presentation, and the Lord B. his institution,
and the Archdeacons induction, and his own tolling of a bell, and taking hold
of the Ring of the Church do^e contrary to the liking of all the bad men in the
parish if he be a reformist, and contrary to all the Puritanes in the parish, if
he be a Formalist and with the liking of all the goodfellowes in the parish if
he be a dumbdrincking-swagge ring Priest: and if this be the true vocation of
Christ's true Ministers, taught in his Testament, then are the ministers of
England true: if not, then is their Ministry false: and for this point I
appeal to every good conscience and upright heart in England: if any man be
made minister any other way, he is not made according to law, and his ministry
is void by law and a mullity in England: and I dispute only against the
ministry established by law and if there be any other ministry besides, or
contrary to law, which you Mr. Bern. will plead for, let it be discribed and
confirmed by the rules of Christ's Testament, and when we know it, we will then
acknowledge it, if the Lord Jesus in his new Testament will give approbation unto
it: otherwise this we hold for the present concerning the ministry of the
assemblies Ecclesiastical of the land.

The next point to be handled is the answering of your objections, reasons, and
cavils which you bring against this doctrine which we teach, and for the
ratefying of your ministry to be true, and I tell you Mr. Bern. you had need
bring good ground, or else you and your Fellow ministers will be found False
Prophets, Thieves, and Robbers. Math. 7.15. John. 10.1.

That which you alledg for your selves is contained from the page 128-146. of
your book* the first point whereof is this that (you say) your ministry is true
because you convert Souls: I answer two things, 1. that you convert no man to
that true visible faith taught in the new Testament of Christ, whereby man's
conversion must be judged: but you do pervert men from it daily: as evident
experience teaches: For your books against the Separation, your preaching and
Sermons against the way of the Lord, your conferences and disputations, and
persuasions, for men to forsake the truth, and to continue still with you in the
communion of your Antichristian abominations, or having forsaken you to
return back again into Egypt, these and the like courses of yours most
frequent to the best Reformists of the land plainly manifest that you convert
none at all to the faith of Christ's new Testament, but you pervert all that you
possibly can from the same: Now what you do in secreat betwixt the L. and the
souls of them that hear you, he only that sees in secreat knows in
particular: particularly and certainly we know not nor enquire not: See more of
this point in that which is written before and in the lettre to Mr. S. at the
end of this book, 2. let it be granted that you do convert me^ even to the true
visible faith of the new Testament, I say this is no proor sufficient of the
truth of your ministry, that is to say, that you are those true Pastors
mentioned, Ephesians. 4.11. Act. 20.28. 1. Pet. 5.1-3.1. Tim. 3.2. Tit. 1.6-9 For
these officers were give^ to the true church: which Church was established
before these officers were, and these officers were occupied about the feding,
that is teaching and guiding of those particular Churches whereto they attended:
the Churches therefore consisting of Saints already converted to the faith of the
new Testament, how does conversion argue a true ministry of Pastor, or Elder,
or Bb. which converteth not as his proper work, but only feeds, that is
edifieth and builds up men converted, by teaching and guiding them in the
ways of the Lord? See more of this point also in the letter to Mr. S. at the
latter end of this book: and in that which is written before which I desire may
be considered.

but here you object that the Apostle, that is, one sent proves his calling by
the seal of his ministry, viz. conversion: see: Romans 4.14.15. 1. Cor. 9.2.
and 2. Cor. 3.1-3. and 13.3.5. and that it cannot be proved that Jesus Chr.
does work by false means, and it is our own grant. I answer that if your
argument be framed into form it is this.

He that converteth Sou^es is an Apostle, as Paul, 2. Cor. 3.1-2,

The Ministers of England convert Souls.

Ergo, the ministers of England are Apostles as Paul: or thus.

He that converteth Souls is sent of God. Romans 10.14.15.

The Ministers of England convert Souls.

Ergo, the ministers of England are sent of God.

If I should yield your first argument the^ it would follow that you and all the
ministers that convert souls in England are Ap. but you intend not to prove
your selves Apst: but ordinary Pastors of visible churches: and therefore your
argument if it were yielded proves not your purpose: and I know you do not
challendg to be an Apostle as Paul was.

Again to answer to your second argument, we yield you that no man ca^ co^vert
to the true says of Chr. new Testament which is visible, except he be sent of
God: but seeing you pervert men from the new testament of Chr. (as I have
proved) how can you herby prove your selves to be sent of God? nay I say you
are the instruments of Satan sent by the L. in his wrath to keep the people in
bondage from the obedience of the faith taught in the new testament: I do not
determine what you are invisibly, secreatly known to the L. neither does the
Scripture teach us so to judge of faith: For how can the Scripture teach us
visiblie to judge an invisible thing which is not appearing in visible Fruits?

Further where as you say that the 1. Cor. 9.1. and 2. Cor. 3.1-3. does not
intend the constitution of the Church of the Corinths, and other Churches: but
their conversion from idolatry to embrace the doctrine of the gospel by faith:
I answer that these two things which you distinguish are al one, and they are
no other in distinction then Arons beard, and the beard of Aaron (as you
speak): for to convert men to the Faith of the gospel, is to convert men to
the true constituted. Church of Christ: For they are not converted to the true
faith til they be converted and established into the true Church if it may be
sound: So that this objection of yours is very insufficient if not altogether
ridiculous: and for the force of the Apostles argument in these two places of
the Corinths, I say it is mistaken by you utterly, and so wrested from the Holy
Ghosts purpose, and misapplyed by you to prove your intention. For the seal of
Paul's Apostles hip was the Church of the Corinths converted to the says, and
established into the true constitution of the new Testament 1. Cor. 9.2. and so
Paul expounds himself in the other place 2. Cor. 3.10. saying, that he was
made an able Minister of the new Testament, even as Moses was of the old: For
the understanding of which place and the whole matter, you must remember what
Moses did to the Church of the Jews, and what Paul did to the Church of the
Corinths: Moses did constitute the Church of the Jews, according to the
pattern showed him in the mount and that most faithfully, Heb. 8.5. Paul being
the Apostle of the Gentiles sent by Chr. Jesus for that purpose, has
established the Church of the Corinths, according to that pattern which Christ
the Mediator revealed unto him: which none could do but an Apostle sent by
Christ: So that the force of Paul's Argument to prove himself an Apostle must
thus be propounded and conceaved.

He that has the seal of an Apostelship is an Apostle.

Paul has the seal of an Apostelship, viz: an infallible direction from
Christ Jesus by the Spirit to convert and establish the Church of the Corinths
into the true constitution of the new Testament.

Ergo: Paul is an Apostle of Jesus Christ.

Now Mr. Bern. I would require you to answer directly and plainly whither this
be not the true Scope and intent of these two places of Scripture: if yea: then
are you a most ignorant and shameless perverter and false interpreter of the
Scriptures, whereof I require your repentance before the Lord and the world (for
your sin is public:) if nay: then discover the contrary if you can and
justify your self: or else I do profess unto you, and to all the ministers of
England, that you do abuse the honest hearted people of the Land, misleading
them merely by the pretense of this argument of converting souls: For they
feeling in their consciences secreatly the Lords work of inward conversion by
the ministry of the Land, especially the sincerest and most forward puritans
thereby are brought to reverence their ministry: and under the viza^d of this
inward work in their consciences pretending conversion to the visible faith of
Christ's new Testament, do hereby resolutely persist under that ministry
whereby (say they) they were converted, assuring themselves that it cannot be a
false ministry that converteth men to the Lord inwardly and secreatly: then
you the ministers of the Land, deceaving others, and being deceaved your selves
by the misconstruction of these and the like places of Scripture stand up
stoutly to defend your ministry after this manner: are we not true ministers
of Jesus Christ? have we not converted Souls? are not you the Seal of our
ministry, the forward professors of the Land? we appeal unto your
consciences if you in our ministry have not felt the power of the word to your
inward conversion: If this be so: how can you forsake your Fathers that begat
you? how can you go to the Separation that never co^verted you? etc. I answer
what you do inwardly in conversion, I dispute not, and the Scripture regards
not: what you do outwardly that I plead, and the Scripture discovers: you
convert not a man to the true faith of Christ which is visible in the visible
communion of the true Church of the Apostle Paul's constitution such as was the
Church of the Corinths: and therefore you cannot by your inward invisible
conversion (which you plead for) prove your ministry: For except you can
produce such an effect as Paul did in the Corinths you cannot prove your selves
to be the true ministers that are sent of God. For Paul says ye Corinths are
our Epistle understood and read of al men: So that Paul's Seal of his ministry
was an outward visible, legible faith, viz: The faith of the true Church of the
new Testament whereinto the Apostle had established them, which al men did see
behold, and read manifestly: wherefore if you the Ministers of England will
prove your selves to be the true ministers of the new Tesament, then show me
such a seal of your ministry as the Apostle here speaks of: convert men,
and establish them in the true Apostolical Church of the primitive institution,
and I for my part will yield unto you, that as paul was sent extraordinarily, so
are you ordinarily by the Lord, and you are the true ministers of Jesus Christ
truly sent: Romans 10. but seeing you do what you can to hinder al your disciples
from the true Corinthian Church established by paull according to the pattern
of Christ's new Testament, not bringing the people that depend upon you so far
as you know and acknowledge, but still counsel them to stay and wayt for a better
time, til the civil Magistrate will give his allowance, under these pretenses
still keeping them in Spiritual boundage to the abominations of Antichrist
retained in the Land: I say herby you manifestly discover unto all the world,
that seeing you know the will of your Lord and Mr. Christ, and do it not, you
are worthy to be beaten with many stripes: that seeing you break the
commandments of Christ and teach men so, you are the least (that is none) in
the Kingdom of Heaven: practicing flat contrary to the Apostles who thought it
better to obey God then man and yet the Magistrates that forbad them were the
Magistrates of the true Church of the Jews: wherefore breefly to answer both
Ministers and professors: To the professors I say: Show me your faith by
embracing the whole new Testament of Christ. To the ministers I say: Show me
the Seal of your ministry by converting and establishing a Church after the
Apostolic Corinthian frame and constitution: and I will grant that then you
are true ministers, and your disciples truly converted: in the mean time I will
judge your visible standing in Christianity as it is visible: and your invisible
being in Christianity I will leave to the Lord, who sees in secreat, and who
knows who are his not doubting but the Lord has his thousands even in the
depth of popery much more among you: and this is that Mr. Bern. which we hold
and grant concerning this point.

Now for your objection which you for us make and answer page 129. 130. That
private persons may convert, I say you herein also are deceaved and deal
deceiptfully: For you are to distingnish of conversion according to the
circumstance of time wherein me^ were converted to Christ: John converted and
baptized many into Christ Jesus before the visible Church of the new Testament
was revealed, which came upon the day of Pen^ecost, Act. 2. Ephesians. 4.11. Thus
were all the Disciples of John and of Christ converted, of this conversion and
Faith must the places of the Evangelists be understood: as namely that Ioh.
4.39. and others: so were the Jews, Proselites, and some of Samaria converted,
for as yet Chr. was not preached to the Gentiles, which he himself for bad to be
done, Mat. 10. thus were me^ converted to beleve that the Messiah which they
knew should come, was come, and that Jesus the Son of God, and the Son of
Mary was he: who upon their conversion and baptism became Christ's Disciples
to learn and practice whatsoever he should afterward teach them: That this is
so read, Act. 18, 23. and 19.2.3. Now after the day of Pentecost, conversion
was larger as I may so speak in respect of the visible manifestatio^ ther^f
and other like considerations: For then men were converted to the matter of the
day of Pentecost, and to all that frame and constitution of the church of the
new Testament which was purchased by Christ's death, and exhibited unto the
Apostles by the promise of the Spirit given unto them: Thus were men converted
after the death, resurrection, and ascension of Christ, and after the coming
of the Holy Ghost as may be seen, Act. 2.38-42. and 8.16.17. and 10.44-48. So
that John converted men to the Faith of Christ to be manifested: after the day
of Pentecost, the Apostles converted men to the Faith of Christ already given
and exhibited: Seeing therefore that the new Testament of Christ is now confirmed
and established, and revealed manifestly in the Scriptures of the Apostles of
our Lord, all that are converted now are converted to the new Testament and the
ordinances there of, or else they are not converted to us visiblie: This being
thus premised as necessarily to be understood for the true knowledge of true
conversion: in the next place we must take notice (for the answering of the
objection of private men's converting) that Antichrist has defaced the Faith of
Christ in the whole new Testament, and so the true ministry: and therefore it
must needs be that whosoever does convert from Antichristianisme, and
establishes a people into the true Faith and new Testament of Christ
performs that work either as a minister of Antichrist: or as an Apostle,
Prophet, Evangelist of Christ: or as a Private person: For this is a sufficient
enumeration of parts there being no other sort off persons to convert men from
Antichrist to Christ but one of these: For you have heard that Pastors do not
convert but feed the flock: I suppose you dare not a vouch that the Ministers
off Antichrist do convert to the true Faith and new Testament off Christ Jesus:
neither dare you say that there are now in the world the offices of Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists: wherefore when men convert they do it as private persons:
Therefore choose Mr. Bern. which of these three you will affirm: and then tell
me whither private persons do not convert, as Act. 11.19-21. and this shall
suffice for this point, of converting performed by private persons in the
rising up from the Apostasy of Antichrist, and for the discovering of your
objection and answer.

Now from the pa. 130-141. you teach us the doctrine of the vocation of
ministers which I will not altogether disalow, nor approve wholly: and seeing it
aperteyneth not to our question, I leave it wholly untouched: and come to that
which is pa. 141-146. where you endeavor again to prove your ministry true,
and that after this manner.

They that are called of Christ, having both gifts and graces: they that are
also outwardly caled of the church being examined, aproved, elected, ordained:
they that preach true doctrine, administer the true Sacraments, pe^forme their
office faithfully, live conscionably, are assisted by Chr. to convert souls,
and are approved by the people, are the true ministers of Christ.

The ministers of the Church of England have al these particulars.

Ergo, the ministers of the Church of England are the true ministers of Christ.

I answer you Mr. Ber. that the Popish ministers have al these forsaid
qualifications in common with the ministers of England, (I plead not of the
degree or measure of these things, for I confess some of them to be much more
in the English ministers but I speak of the kind or nature of the
qualifications): which I prove by induction thus.

1. The Popish ministers many of them have excellent outward gifts and graces
as much learning, utterance, zeal, and gravity as any ministers of England,
though al of them have not so: as all the ministers of England have not so.

2. The Popish ministers are called examined, aproved, elected, ordained of the
Church, (that is as you expound, the cheef governors, who are as true ministers
as you are, seeing your ministry is a branch of the root): So are you.

3. The Popish ministers preach the true doctrine of Christ, and administer his
true Sacraments: for you retain the baptism that men have in popery as true,
and they break and eat bread and wine in remembrance of Christ's death: and
although you preach more truth then they do, and administer baptism and the L.
Supper more purely, or rather less corruptly, yet they have the same truths
and Sacraments that you have, even the Scriptures, baptizme and the L. Supper.

4. The Popish ministers many of them perform their office Faithfully in many
things as Faithfully as you do: and the best you do not perform all the parts
of the true ministry, and the worst of you are as bad as ^he worst popish
priest.

5. The popish ministers some of them live conscionably according to their
rule, the best of you do no more: and the worst of you are as vild beasts as
the grossest shavelings in Rome.

6. As the Popish ministers convert none visibly to the true Faith and new
Testament of Christ, and vet I doubt not but that thousands are by them
converted and saved (what Mr. Be. will you condemn all the men that have lived
from Gregory the great til the council of Constance, and to this day under the
dominions of the pope? For shame do not so.) So though the forwardest ministers
of England convert many invisibly to life and Salvation by Christ, yet you
ordinarily say, that the Formalists convert none, and the dumb ministers cannot
convert, because they cannot preach: and none of you al convert a man visibly
to the true Faith taught in the new Testament of Christ, but with all your might
pervert men from it.

7. Finally, the popish ministers are approved by their people, as well as the
best or worst of you are, according to the dispositions of the people.

Seeing therefore that al these things are as evident and pregnant for the popish
ministers as for you, therefore either they are true ministers if you be true: or
else because they are falls (as you say) and yet have al these forsaid
qualifications, therefore these qualifications make not a true ministry: So that
you see Mr. Ber. that you argument is weak to prove your ministry true, and
you must seek out a better definition of a true ministry, and according thereto
shape your ministry, if you will have it true.

In the next place you with an objection and answer would prove that although
your ministers have a false entrance, viz: ordination of the Bb. yet may be
true ministers: and namely by two reasons, 1. For that none were ever ordained
but by ecclesiastical persons, as Apostles, Evangelists, Bbs. 2. a false
entrance cannot make a false ministry, as in marriage.

I answer: First, if it were yielded you that there could be no true ministers
made without ordination of Apostles, Evangelists, Bbs. yet because your L. Bbs.
are not those true Apostles, Evangelists, Bbs. of the primitive institution,
but rather the Servants of Antichrist, (as your forwardest professors and
preachers instantly affirm) therefore there ordination is Antichristian, and so
your ministry is false in the entrance: but Secondly, I deny it to be true
which you affirm for ordination by procedent Elders: For I have proved unto
you by many undeniable reasons that the whole ministerial power of Christ is
given to the body of the Church, whereby, as in the first constituting of
Churches, so in the rising of Churches from Antichristianisme, the body has
power to all the Holy ordinances of Christ for there mutual edification to life
and Salvation, whereof the true ministry is a principal: and therefore the
Church has power to enjoy the true ministry: and you confess the Church
wanting officers has power to elect her officers, which is the principal, Act.
6. and 14. and why not to approve and ordeyne which are but the inferior and
less principal? Further, you may read Act. 1. that before there were any
Apostles actually in office, the Church did chose Mathias into the rome of
Judas, and that by a common consent: wherefore this first exception of yours is
nothing.

Your Second exception is as weak: that seeing a faulty entrance into marriage
which is one ordinance of God, does not disanul it, why should a faulty
entrance into the ministry disanul it? I say the violating of accidental
circumstances through ignorance shall not disanul any of Gods ordinances: For
then their should be no true having of any ornance of God whatsoever: Seeing it
is impossible we should perfectly and strictly keep all and every circumstance
thereto aperteyning: but the wilful breach of essential parts of the ordinance
does corrupt the ordinance and make it false: as for example: The matter or
form being false, the ordinance cannot possible be true: A man marieth a maid
that is 6. year old: or a woman marieth an Eunuch: the marriage is false, for
the matter is false: A man takes a woman not as his wife, but as a concubine,
as the younger brethren the ge^tlemen of Venice do, this is no true marriage,
because it wants the true form of marriage: so your Churches assume them
ministers, suppose they be the true pastors described in the word, as I am
persuaded your Puritanes so endeavor, I say because your churches or
Ecclesiastical assemblies are false, your ministry is not true: For a true
Minister and a false Church cannot mary together: Further, if your Church and
ministry were true, yet if you should be presented by a Patron, ordained by a
Prelate, inducted by an Archdeacon, contrary to the will of the Church, the
marriage is false, because the calling is false: So then you see Mr. Ber. how
little your similies help you wherein notwithstanding you by your disciples are
thought Specialy to excel, and to have the prehemenence over your fellow
Priests.

And here you bring a flourish out of the 10. of John to prove your ministers
true ministers: what Mr. Bern. in good sooth do you plead this for all your
Ministers of England? Speak plainly and double not with God and man: do you in
your conscience think that all the ministers of England, eve^ your dumb Priests
(whom you have excluded by your covenant) your gross nonresidents and idle
bellyes the Cathedral or Collegiate Priests, your double benificed men, that al
these and every one of them do enter in by the door? have entrance by the
porters opening, know their sheep by name, lead the^ by sound doctrine and holy
life save many and destroy none: Speak plainly Mr. Ber. to this point, and seek
no shifts: and yet these are the only men allowed by Law in your ministry: For
be he never so dumb, idle, non resident, wicked, yet if he subscribe wear the
geere, and do read the Service book, and will do homage to his Spiritual Lords
and their Courts, if he be amicus curiae, if he be conformable and obedient al
is well: is not this even so? this you know in your conscience Mr. Bern. and
therefore page 143. Lin. 7.8. you speak warily: you say: The propertyes of a
true Shepherd agree well with Ministers in England: you dare not say with all
the Ministers of England: Therefore by your own conscience all the Ministers of
England are not true Shepherds: your Lords the Prelates will con you little
thank for this: but let us exclude your dumb Priests, idle bellyes, and all the
rabble of the conformists if you will, which are 9. parts of 10. (and then I
think you are excluded your self among them:) I will plead only against the best
minister that stands by Law in your assemblies: 1. he enters not in by the
door, seeing the door is only in the Sheepsold, that is in the true Church: and
seeing you are a False Church (as is proved) your door cannot be true. 2. The
porter (that is as you say Gods Spirit: but I think rather the porter to be the
watchman, that is the whole Church, Mat. 13.33-37) he opens not to you, for
you convert none to the true visible Faith of the new Testament, or if you did,
it does not prove your true Pastorship, seeing Shepherds do not make sheep, but
feed them: it should only prove that you are Spiritual Fathers that convert men
which private persons do as you have heard, 3. he does not know them nor is
known of his Sheep: For of 300 perhaps he will not acknowledge above 30. to be
sheep, the rest he thinks goats, and the goats will not acknowledge him as
Shepherd, but hate and fly from him. 4. he does not lead them by sound
doctrine to perfection^, but by False doctrine perverteth them from the truth,
which blasphemously he proclaymeth daily in his pulpit to be Brownisme,
Schism, Heresy, etc. 5. he does not lead them by Godly life, for if the cheef
part of Godliness be the true worship of God, how does he lead them in Godliness,
that leads them up and down in your False Church, Ministry, Worship, and
Government, blind fold like the men of Sodom that sought Lots door: Therefore I
dare in the true fear of the Lord call the best of you al a Spiritual thief,
and a robber, yea a Wolf that comes to kill, rob, and destroy: not that you so
entend to do: or that you do so wilfully, (and yet I would have you Mr. Bern.
Look well to your self, for I dare not clear you from sinninge against your
conscience, who have acknowledged the truth:) but for that you do so indeed,
and by necessary consequent: For seeing you are in a False Church, and
Ministry, and use a False worship, and submit to a False Government, you must
needs by defending all this Falsehood and teaching it to others, and persuading
them to the obedience thereof, persuade them to al these abominations of
Antichrist, and so do rob them, kill them, and raven them, like wolves, thieves,
and robbers: For men may rob, kill, and destroy ignorantly, as Paul did when he
was a Pharisee, as I my self did when I was one of your Priests, and as many do
in popery, except you will say that they al do sin against their conscience,
Act. 3.17. 1. Tim. 1.13.

And here you have a fling at our ministers, and will needs have them no Lawful
ministers: you dare not say false: and this you endeavor to prove because that
we are not made Ministers by Successive ordination.

First, Mr. Be. I tell you because of your importunity in this particular of
ordination by Succession that if it must needs be (which we deny utterly) that
we have it, if you have it, for we were made Priests by your prelates: why then
do you condemn our ministry say you? why do you condemn the ministry of the
Church of Rome say I? For if you may have a true ministry, and yet condemn
the ministers of the Church of Rome, from whence yours came: then may we have a
true ministry, and yet condemn your ministry whence ours comes: this I
speak, not for that I plead it, but to stop your mouth: For I utterly renounce
your orders which I had from Wicka^ prelate of Lincoln, when I was chosen
Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridg: and I received and do retain my
ministry from that particular Church whereof I am Pastor: which has the whole
power of Christ ministerial delegated to her from Christ her Husband, when he
contracted with her.

Secondly, you neieher can nor do prove Succession in the new Testament: For
that which you alledg for the Succession of the old Testament, I say it was
typical, and is abolished by Christ: For do you think this is a good argument:
one Priest begat another in the old Testament, therefore one minister must
ordeine another in the new Testament: why may you not plead after this manner:
Therefore one Priest may beget another Priest in the new Testament? and whereas
you say that Priests did consecrate priests, which consecration was there
ordination, I deny it utterly, and I prove the contrary, that during the
captivity of Babylon there were many priests borne and none consecrated, only
for their admission in to the priests office it was requisite that they should
show their Genealogy, Nehe. 7.64, 65. but their ordination was their
generation or birth: though I deny not but when they entered into the
performance of their office there were some rites performed which was no part of
their ordination: but I would know of you what is ordination: is it any thing
but the declaring of the party elected and approved to be in office, by prayer
for him and a chardg given unto him? can none do this but a precedent officer?
Again, for the old Testament I say, God created the first Priest, viz: Adam,
then til Aaron men begat Priests, for the eldest in the Family were the
Priests: Moses who was the younger brother and no priest ordained Aaron and his
Sons: after that Priests begat priests til Christ's time: then Christ
appointed officers in the Church: Apostles made Evangelists, Evangelists and
Apostles ordained Bbs. and Deacons: all this I confess Mr. Ber. what is this to
Succession in the new Testament? I show you plainly that the Church Elected
Mathias, there being yet no Apostles, Act. 1. there being Apostles the Church
elected Deacons, Act. 6. and Elders, Act. 14. and seeing they performed election
which is the contract, why may they not perform all? For ordination is nothing
in respect of Election, as you may see in all Societyes and corporations
whatsoever: The contract which is the mutual consent of a man and woman for
marriage makes man and wife before God Election which is the mutual consent of
the pastor and his Flock, makes a man pastor of his Flock: So that in this
particular Mr. Bern. you show your willfullnes and blindness as much as in any
thing in your book, although I doubt not, but it is the best that can be
pleaded for Antichrist: and thus much for the second part of this Section.

The third part of this Section is, that your worship is a false worship
wherein, as I have dealt in the two former points, so will I deal in this, viz,
first prove the position: Secondly answer your cavils.

To prove your worship a false worship I use these Arguments following.

First Argument.
The true worship of the L. cannot possibly be offered up in a false Church.

The Ecclesiastical assemblies of England are false Churches.

Ergo. The worship offered unto the L. in those Ecclesiastical assemblies is a
false worship.

The ground of this argument is this, that all the Ecclesiastical actions
performed by a false Church are stained with the false constitution of the
church: For God will not have every communion of men worship him, but he will be
worshipped by such a company of people as he has described in his new
Testament: and as in the old Testament no man or company of men might worship
or be accepted visibly, but such as were circumcized, Genesis 17.14. Exodus 12.48.
Deuteronomy. 23.1-4. Act. 21.28. 2. King. 17.25-28. Ioh. 4.22. So in the new Testament
no man or communion of men visiblie can be accepted of the L. but such as are
described in the new Testament, viz. men Separated from all the abominations of
Antichrist, 2. Cor. 6.17. and gathered into the name of Christ Jesus, Mat.
18.20. and being made Disciples have received baptism whereby they are
counited into Christ, Mat. 28.19. If any communion of men otherwise constituted
(viz: men not Separated, not gathered together, not gathered into Christ's name,
not made Disciples, not baptized truly with the baptism of the new
Testament,) if any such company of men do worship God there worship is not
accepted of God: but as the L. sent Lions among the Samaritanes for persuming
to worship him in the land of Israel, they being an uncircumcised company, 2.
King 17.24.25. and as the L. punished the vagabond Jews, exorcists by the
violence of an evil Spirit, for naming the L. Jesus being an unbelieving and
unbaptized company, Act. 19.13-17. even so will the L. be avenged on al them
that joining together to worship God, have not Separated themselves, or calling
upon the name of the Lord, do not depart from iniquity, 2. Cor. 6.17. 2. Tim.
2.19. neither will it serve to say that the worship is true because it is true
conceaved prayer, or true preaching, or thanksgiving: For true worship must be
defined, not only in the matter, but chiefly in the form: For otherwise among
the Antichristian papists and Heretics there is true conceaved prayer,
preaching and thanks giving. and else in the old Testament there was true
Sacrificing among the Babylonians when they Sacrificed an ox to the God of
Israel, Dan. 6.25.26. whereas it was manifested that no Sacrifice could be
accepted that was offered with strange fire, Levit. 10.1.2. and there for the
Sacrifices of the Babylonians must needs be abominable, though the matter was
true, because the form which chiefly consisted in the fire was false: So
though the matter of the worship of the new Testament be true, viz: conceaved
prayer, preaching, praising God, yet because it proceeds not from the true
fire which is always living upon the Altar, Levit. 6.9-13. at Jerusalem, that
is, in the true Church and Tem^^e of God, because it is not inflamed by the
true Spirit of Christ, the true visible annoynting which is only in the true
body the true Church, (Ephesians. 4.4. For there is one body and one Spirit:)
Therefore the worship is not true worship visibly: what it may be inuisibly I
dispute not: nor do not censure at all, but leave to the Lord, and to every
conscience.

The Second Argument.
The worship that is offered up unto the L. by a false Ministry, is a false
worship, and ce^ not visibly be judged true or accepted.

The worship of the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England is offered up by a
false ministry: as has been proved already.

Ergo: the worship of the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England is a false
worship, and cannot visibly be judged true or accepted.

The ground of this Argument is the same with the former: wherefore as in the
old Testament the worship that was performed in Israel by the Priests of
Ieroboams devising which were not of the Lineage and genealogy of Aaron was a
false worship, and could not be accepted visibly, or be judged as accepted
judging by the rules of the word. 1. King. 12.31-33. and as the ince^se which
Azariah the King of Judah would have offered, could not be accepted or so
judged, because it was not offered by the true Priests the Sons of Aaron, 2.
Chron. 26.16-22. and the King was punished with Leprosy for his presumption: So
all the worship which is offered up unto the Lord by a false ministry, is
visibly to be judged abominable, because Christ only offered up to his Father
the worship of the worshippers which his new Testament has described and no
other, Rev. 8.3.4. compared with Revel. 5.8-10. and 11.1. still let it be
remembered that I dispute not, nor censure not, the invisible things of the Lord.

The third Argument.
Jewish, that is literal, stinted, imposed book-worship is false worship.

The worship of the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England is Jewish, that is
literal, stinted imposed, boom-worship.

Ergo, the worship of the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England is a false
worship.

The ground of this argument is the Analogy and proportion which there is
betwixt the type and the truth, the shadow and the substance, the lettre and
the Spirit, the Old Testament with the ordinances thereof, and the new Testament
with the ordinances there of: For seeing the old Testament was a type of the
new, therefore the Church, ministry, worship, and government of the old
Testament were types of the Church, ministry, worship and government of the
new Testament, therefore the worship of the old testament being lyteral beginning
in the lettre (as was carnal circumcision Romans 2.29.) did type forth the
worship of the new Testament to begin in the Spirit, Ioh. 4.23.24. For the
Lettre was a type of the Spirit, Col. 2.17. Seeing therefore that Reading the Law
was a typical ordinance of the old Testament, and therefore literal, stinted,
manifesting the letter, and book-worship, it follows that it is now abolished
by Christ, and the thing signified by the literal Reading is now to be retained
in the new testament, which is, uttering matter out of the heart, called the
manifestation of the Spirit, the demonstration of the Spirit, the ministering of
the Spirit, and the like: by which phrases of Speech the Holy Ghost would teach
us, that seeing we are fet at liberty from the bondage of the law which was a
Schoolmr. to lead to Christ, we are not therefore again to be entangled with
the yoke of bondage in any thing, no not in this matter of stinted, literal,
book worship which is flat ludaism^ but we being placed in the liberty of the
Spirit, are to use our gifts in Gods worship, as the spirit gives utterance,
as we see the Apostles practiced upon the day of Pentecost, when the promise
of the Spirit was fulfilled upon them, and as we see the Church of Counth
practiced, 1. Cor. 14.15.16.26. and 12.7-^1. He that desires to know further
of this particular of book-worship let him read the book lately published
entitled: The differences of the Churches of the Separation: where this point
is largely discussed, which if it be the truth I desire may be embraced, if
not. I require an answer of them to whom it is specially directed: to conclude
this first point, Mr. Bern. seeing your Worship for the most part is
book-worship, I conclude it to be Jewish, and so false Worship.

Now I come to answer your cavils which are contained page 146-151.

First, you refer us to the treatise in the end of your book, and I refer
you for answer partly to Mr. Ains. partly to the book entitled the differences
of the Churches of the Separation: For I do acknowledge that in the Old
Testament, Psalms, Prayers, and Prophecies were read out of a book: and yet
further I answer three things: 1. that it will not follow that seeing it was so
in the old Testament, therefore it must be so in the new: nay contrary: it was so
in the old Testament, therefore it must not be so in the new: This is the true
manner of reasoning: or thus: In the Old Testament they had Psalms,
Prophecyes, Prayers, read out of a book, which was the Type, the manifestation
of the Lettre: Therefore in the new Testament, we must have Psalms,
Prophecyes, Prayers, brought out of the heart, which is the Spiritual book of
the New Testament, wherein the Lord does write his Laws, Heb. 8.10. which is
the truth, the manifestation of the Spirit, 2. it will not follow that if it
were granted that reading the Prayers, Prophecyes, and Psalms of Scripture out
of the Original tongs the Hebrew and Greek, were lawful, that therefore the
reading of the Apocrypha translations which are the works of men is Lawful:
For theone is interpretation of a Language or Tongue, that is the uttering of
matter from the knowledge of the Tongs and the gift of interpreting: the other
is reading words out of a book, which a child of eight years old may do. 3.
neither will it follow that if it were found lawful to read the English
translation of the Scriptures, therefore it shall be lawful to read your English
Masse-book, your book of Homilies, and Articles your book of Canons: For then
why may you not read also Mr. Perkins upon the Creed, Henry Smyths Sermons, or
any other good Catechism, Commentary, or Sermon book?

Secondly, you prove your worship true by two reasons, 1. Say you, you worship
no False God. 2. you worship the true God with no False worship: For you preach
the true word, admister the true Sacraments, pray such prayers as are agreeable
to the Scripture, and the form of prayer taught by Christ: and if any things
else be prescribed, it is not imposed as worship: Or if it were prescribed as a
part of worship, it does not therefore follow that all the worship is False:
well: I answer: That Israel in Ietoboams time and after, and when Aaron made
the Calfe, did not worship worship a false God, and yet their worship was
false: So may your worship be false though you worship the true God that has
revealed himself in the old Testament: but their worship is not true by your
own confession: therefore your consequent is not good that seeing you worship the
true God, your worship must needs be true: if the means whereby you worship be
a false means devised by the wit of a man and not taught in the word of God, I
say your worship is false: and so that place of Mat. 15.1. imports that
whosoever worshippeth God by any invented means, taught by man's precept
worshippeth God invayne: Such is an image as the second commandment teaches:
now the means of your worship are false, as first your false Church which is
an Idol. 2. your stinted devised, imposed, literal service book, which is an
Idol, 3. your false Christ which is not your King, Priest, and Prophet, which
is one of our Idols: For though you truly believe concerning his person, yet
your Faith is false, and your doctrine false concerning his offices and
mediation: and therefore these means of your worship being false means, they
must needs be false worship: therefore, seeing your doctrine is much of it false:
your communion false: your worship stinted and book worship: it follows that
your word is not the true word, your Sacraments the signs of your false Faith
and communion are not true: your prayers are not true: and whereas you plead
that other things besides the word, Sacrament, and prayer, are not imposed as
worship, I answer: what do they then in your worship? will you mingle that
which is no worshis, and worship together? either they are worship, or else let
them be cast out of your worship: and further, whereas you alledg that though
some parts of your worship he false, yet al shall not be false, I grant it, if
your Church were true, and your ministry true: but seeing your Church and
ministry be false, therefore though you do preach the true word, and administer
the true Sacraments, and pray true prayers, yet they can not be true worship
offered up in a false Church, by a false ministry, for the falsehood of the
Church and ministry does essentially corupt the worship: if all that is set
upon the table be either poiso^, or poisoned meat, I say such is your
worship: For death is in your worship, as Coloquintida was in the pot: So that
you see the distinction of true and false does most properly aperteyne to your
worship: as it does also to your ministry and Church, as has been showed.

In the next place you declare unto us out of Philip Mornaeus the order of the
worship of the old Testament, and out of the Scripture the parts of the worship
of the new Testament, and out of Justinius Martyr the order of worship in his
times, which I will not contradict, and yet I plead, that seeing your Church is
false, your ministry false, your service book a false means of worship,
therefore though all that you alledg were true, it does not follow that your
worship is true: and whereas you plead that reading, Col. 4.16. is commanded as
a part of worship, I wish you to read the book entitled the differences of the
Churches of the Separation, and you shall have your answer: and thus much for
this Section.

The eleventh Section.
The next position is your third, which is this, viz.

3. In maintaining that it is not lawful to hear any ministers amongst us
whatsoever they be no^ to join in prayer with such as fear God among us: I
for my part hold both unlawful: because your ministers are false ministers: and
your people of false Churches: Now how can we who are the Church and body of
Christ, have any Spiritual communion with you, who are the ministers and
subjects of Antichrist. 2. Corinthians. 6.14-16.

But here you would needs have us believe that there be many that fear God
among you. and that they are particularly known unto us: for my part I do
believe generaly that God has his people in Babylon, and even among you who
are Babel that is confusion: and I do also believe that those who are miscalled
by the name of Puritanes, are the most likely to be Gods people: but to say,
certainly this or that Puritan has says or fears God, I cannot do by any
warrant out of the word of God that I see. For know you that there is only one
true form of a visible Church, Ephesians. 4. there is one body: in this body there is
one only true faith, for the Apostle faith the ^aith is one: but none of you al
are members of this body which is a communion of faithful men Separated from al
uncleanness, and walking in the obedience of al Gods ordinances: and therefore
none of you al are of the true faith which is found only in the true body.

You shall see Mr. Be. how many things I chardg you al with.

1. You are mingled with all the abominable people of the land contrary to
these scriptures. 2. Cor. 6.17. Apoc. 18.4.

2. You call God Father jointly with all the people of the Land who^ are brethren
of you and members of the same Church with you: with is untrue if you take your
selves to be faithful: For they are of their Father the Devil.

3. You make Christ a Mediator to you al in common with all the profane people
of the land, which is contrary to Apoc. 8.2. Ioh. 17.9.

4. You make all the wicked people of the land members of Christ, and members of
your selves, in the seals of the covenant, if you challendg your selves to be
Faithful: which is contrary to 1 Cor. 6.15. and 10.16.17.

5. You refuse Christ's Testament and his Kingdom, and will not have him to
reign over you in his own Offices and Laws: which is contrary to these
places. Luke 19.27. Apoc. 14.9-11.

6. You utterly reject the censures of admonition in the three degrees thereof
contrary to Mat. 18.15-17. Heb. 10.24.25.

7. You suffer your selves (if you challendg to be Gods people) to be deprived
and robbed of the power of Christ, to chose your own officers contrary to Act.
6.5. and 14.23.1. tim. 3. toto. and 5.21. and 6.13.14.

8. You reject the truth, we by our testimony offer unto you; yea you persecute
it by slanders, by lies, by raylings, though many of you have been enlightened
by it: how then can we account you faithful certainly: but we must certainly
know the^to be Faithful with whom we pray: For whatsoever is not of Faith is
sin: I pray you miconstrue me not: For although I dare not say you have Faith
of a certainty, yet I hope well of many of you in particular: but to tell you
plainly I hope better of many that never knew this truth then of you and some
of your Disciples whom I know by: their own confession to have bee^
enlightened with it, and yet now oppose against it: look to your selves, your
estate is fearful: if our gospel be hid says the Apostle, it is hid to them
that perish, 2. cor. 4.3. and when certain were hardened and disobedient
speaking evil of the way before the multitude (as you do) Paul departed from
them, and Separated the Disciples, Act. 19.9. and so do we to you, and
therefore our practice is warrantable: Therefore consider these things that I
write, for I profess before the Lord that this truth which we testify unto
you is as clear and evident unto us as the noone day: and observe it well that
those among you that have been enlightened with it, and now quench it, shall
grow from evil to worse, and shall have Gods hand out against them, so as every
man shall say the Lord is avenged of them, except they return again: and so I
leave this point.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the eleventh Section.
Mr. Bern. Sep. Schis. page 152. Says that those men have lost the feeling of
former grace and all true charity, that say thus, viz: That they cannot say
certainly, by any warrant off Gods word, that any of us has either Faith or
fear of God: and he names Mr. Smyth in the margent.

Again, page 58. he writes thus, viz: one of them writes that certainly he
cannot by the word be persuaded that any of us has either true Faith or fear
of God: naming Mr. Smyth in the margent.

I write in this Section thus: that particularly, and certainly, I cannot say
by any warrant of Gods word that I see, that this or that person has Faith,
and fear of God among you: yet I say also: That I verily believe generally
that God has his people among you, and that they are in all likely hood the
persons that are miscalled Puritanes:

Here I wish the conscionable reader to consider Mr. Bern. evil dealing whither
ignora^tly or maliciously I know not: I speak generally and specially:
Generally I do certainly believe that the Lord has his people in England:
Specially I say certainly and particularly, I know not who they be yet in
likelihood they are the Puritanes so called: now Mr. Bern to make the Lords
truth odious, and his own part good, perverteth this speech off mine in 3.
particulars, 1. he leaves out the good that I say, viz: that I certainly
believe Gods people to be in the La^d, and that in likelihood they are the
Puritanes, 2. in his speech he leaves out this word particularly known to
me, 3. he in one of his speeches, viz: pa. 59. transporteth the word,
Certainly, to the beginning of the Sentence, as if I were certainly persuaded
that none of the Land feared God or had Faith: I beseech the Gentle Reader to
mark his fraud and evil dealing, and so to trust him according to his desert,
as also to consider what I say, and therefore to read the beginning of this
Section where my words are manifest: all that I entend is this: That visibly,
certainly, and particularly I cannot say any one to have Faith or fear of God
in the Churches of England, which are False Churches: buc generally, certainly,
and invisibly, I believe there are thousands, viz: a remnant according to the
Election of grace: See for this Romans 11.3.4. compared with 1. King 19.10.
Revel. 18.4. Mr. Bern. I will not desire the Lord to reward you according to
your works as Paul did: but I desire the Lord to give you eyes to see, and a
heart to acknowledge this your sin, and I desire all men to take notice of Mr.
Bern. deceiptfull dealing in this one particular, and accordingly to judge of
the rest, of his dea^^^s.

Further, page 152. Mr. Bern. accounts this one of our errors, to hold that
None of the Ministers of England may be heard: and page 155. He reckeneth this
as another of our errors, to desend it to be unlawful to join in praver with
any of the assemblies.

Seeing the assemblies Ecclesiastical are false Churches, and the members of the
assemblies members of false Churches, how can the members of true Churches have
communion with them in that estate and standing. For Christ and Antichrist, the
members of Christ, and the members of the strumpet cannot be mingled together,
and as it is impossible that oil and waters should mingle, so cannot the body
of Christ and Antichrist the members of the one body and of the other be made
one: Brass, Iron, Silver, Gold, cannot possibly be mingled with clay or earth:
No more can the members of the true Church, and the members of the false
Church: but in all the parts of Spiritual communion, as prayer, prophecy,
praising God, the Sacraments, the persons that partake in them are commingled,
and make one body. 1. Cor. 5.9.11.2. These. 3.14. 1. Cor. 10.15.17 and 2. Cor.
6.14-18. Therefore whosoever shall mingle with false ministers or members of false
Churches therein offer as shameful indignity to Christ, as it is to take the
members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot. 1. Cor. 6.15.

And here Mr. Bern. page 153-156. indevoureth to prove it, 1. Lawful to hear
their Ministers, 2. to be unlawful to hear us, 3. to be lawful to pray with
them that are Faithful among them: For the first you say, who ever heard, that
to hear the word should be a sin? yes: I have heard it in these places of
Scripture, Deuteronomy. 13.3 Math. 7.15. 1. Timoth. 6.3-5. and 2.3.5-6. again you
say: you have converted by the word, go: you may be heard: I deny that ever
you converted men visibly to the Faith of the New Testament, I regard not what
you do invisibly, for I cannot see it nor know it: what say you to them that
convert in popery, shall they be heard? or do you think they convert none
invisibly? Visibly I am assured they convert not: the like I say of you.
Further you plead that the Scripture commands to hear the word, pronounces
them blessed that hear it, and makes it a mark of Gods Child so to do: I
grant it, if it be preached in the Lords true ordinance, else men are forbidden
to hear it, pronounced accursed that hear it, and are marked for the Servants
of Antichrist for so doing, Revellat. 14.9-11. Moreover you say, Christ
forbids not to hear the Scribes and Pharisees: true, for they were members
of the true Church of the Old Testament, and their communion Typical was not
polluted by Typical uncleanness for ought that is mentioned to my knowledge: but
you say Paull rejoiced that Christ was preached, though of contention and with
a purpose to increase his afflictions: Well: Paull rejoiced not that false
Ministers in false Churches preached Christ, or that Christians heard them so
do: neither does Paull speak of visible sins, but of invisible affections,
which he by the Spirit discerned to be in the Teachers, even as Peter
discerned Ananias and Sapphyras dissembling: And what is this to your purpose
who are both false Ministers in false Churches, and Antichristian convinced
Heretics, except you can and do make answer, which when you have done, then,
etc.

For the Second, you say we are not to be heard, because (as Brownists) we
speak our own fantasies, and visions of our own hearts, and are obstinate Well
Mr. Bern. I say no more for this point, but this, that every Godly minded man
give sentence whither you or we have the truth: the time will come when secret
things will come to light: and your selves do approve all that we profess in
substance except the Separation: the Lord judge betwixt you and us: you say
again, that we convert none but are our selves converted by you: I say all that come from you to us are* by us converted to the truth from your errors and
false ways, and you do not convert one man visibly to the faith: Besides I
demand when you Separated from Rome, who converted you from Rome? Finally, we
condemn no man among you, only we declare what you are visibly in the account
of the Scriptures, by reason of your false Church, and standing: and they that
see the truth to be the truth and yield not to it woe be unto them: and take
heed you be not of them who have seen it to be the truth, and have confessed it
so to be, and yet write your books against it: if it be so, woe be unto you
from the Lord: I say from the Lord except you repent you shall grow worse and
worse: as for them that sin through ignorance, their is a Sacrifice for their
sins: Let wilful scorners look to them selves.

For the third, you say, that if we hold you the children of God we may pray
with you: For so Christ has taught us to say our Father: Well: I deny not but
those among you that apertayne to the Lords Election have God for their Father,
but I say they are in visible, unknown to us certainly and particularly,
therefore we cannot have visible communion with them: For whatsoever is not of
faith is sin: I may have visible communion with one that is a reprobate in
the Lords account, as Peter had with Judas: and I may not have visible
communion with one that is Elect in the Lords invisible Election, because he is
not visibly faithful to me, as namely with thousands of you in the assemblies,
because I cannot possibly know them certainly, and particularly.

The twelfth Section.
The next particular of yours is the thirteenth in number, viz.

13. That a company truly fearing God if any open wicked join with them, are
not capable to choose them a minister over them: which is a truth, though you
hold it error: I manifest it in this manner.

First, you cannot approve to us certainly that you truly fear God.

Secondly, you cannot convince that they who suffer wicked men in communion
with them truly do fear God: because they live in confusion with the wicked
from whom they ought to be Separated: and that therefore in that confusion and
estate they have no title to choose them a minister.

Thirdly, let it be granted for disputation sake that some fearing God do
consent with open wicked in chosing a minister, I say that Minister so chosen
by the good and bad is no true Minister: For that mixed people are not the true
Church: Seeing the holy Ghost testifyeth, 2. Cor. 6.17. that God will receave
only those that are separated to be his people: and that seeing those supposed
faithful have the Spirit of God, and the open wicked have the Spirit of Satan,
they cannot possible combine together, except you will say that the holy Spirit
and satan can combine: seeing then those contrary persons cannot conjoyne how
can they in common choose them a minister, or if they do how is he a true
Minister? seeing they that choose him are not a true Church: I pray you Mr. Ber.
in your answer dissolve us this knot, if you can, that we way receave
instruction.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the twelfth Section.
Mr. Ber. Sep. Schism, page 151. Says that this is one of our errors to hold:
That our congregations as they stand, are all and every of them incapable
before God to choose the^ Ministers, though they desire the means of Salvation,

In the beginning of this Section, I say, that a company truly fearing God, if
any open wicked join with them, are not capable to choose them a minister over
them: and afterward in the end of the Section I say, such a mixed company are
not a true Church, and a minister chosen by them is not a true minister.

Here I desire that it may be observed that I do not deny, but men that are
mixed may apoint one to preach the word unto them: but that which I say, is,
that a mixed company of good and bad is not a true Church: and that a man chosen
by them to be their Minister, is not a true minister: If men desire instruction
I deny not, but they may appoint one to teach them, and that Magistrates in
there dominions may appoint men to preach the word to there subjects for there
conversion, and that it is a lawful thing, for the people to hear such men,
and for men of gifts to preach to such a people, this we see practiced Act.
13.42. and 17.19-21* and 28.30. and otherwise how is it possible that men
should be brought to the knowledge of the truth and Mr. Ber. if you think that
we deny the lawfulnes of this, you do us open wrong: and if his Matie. should
dissolve the parish Ecclesiastical assemblies and the false ministry, and
should command men of knowledge and gifts to preach the word to his subjects, I
doubt not, but al of us would herein readily yield our selves to hear and
learn the truth at any such persons, and ourselves to teach the truth to such
a people: but to say that such a people are true Churches, or such preachers
the true Pastors of true visible Churches that we deny: and that you shall
never be able to prove: but if after such preaching by such preachers the L.
work with the people, so as that they gladly receave the word, repent, and
believe, and desire to walk in the truth, and therevppon do promise to the L.
and each to other to walk in his ways, this promise makes them a true Church:
and then if they chose among them men able to lead and seed them, and appoint
such men to such office, the men so chosen and appointed are the true Pastors
which the Scripture describes: but what is all this to your assemblies and
Ministers? who as yet have not cast of the yoke of Antichristian bondage, whose
communion and ministry is not dissolved, but remains firm, the same in
nature (though much bettered in degree) with the Roman assemblies
Ecclesiastical: and whereas you in this particular object to us, that two or
three of us Separated from you, and gathered together into the new Testament of
Christ, assume power to make Ministers, a practice (as you say) far from
plain evidence of Scripture, or any practice of the Church these thousand
years: I answer it is no matter for the practice of the Church these thousand
years, for Gregory the great Bb. of Rome who lived a thousand years since,
hoysed up Antichrist into the highest exaltation against God and his Christ in
a manner: and his Successors especially Boniface and some other have maintained
and enlarged that Antichristian Kingdom even to our days: and yet the mystery
of iniquity is exalted in these particulars: wherefore this allegation of yours
is nothing to the purpose, if you be a sound protestant: For if prescription of
a thousand years be good in any thing, why not in all things? if not in all
things then in nothing. And whereas you alledg that it is also far from plain
evidence of the Scripture, I answer the evidence is plain to them that will
understand: and I would know what is plain evidence of Scripture: is not a
true natural consequence plain evidence? is not this plain evidence, Math.
18.20. whersoever two or three shall be gathered together into my name, I will be
in the midst among them? and this, 2. Corinthians. 6.17. be ye Separated, and I
will receave you and be your Father: and this. Gallat. 3.16. the promises are
made to Abraham and to his seed: So then they that are of Faith are blessed
with Faithful Abraham. Gallat. 3.9. If Christ will be present with two or three
of his Disciples: If God will receave them that are Separated, and be their
God: if the promises be given to them that believe as Abraham believed: Then
Christ is their Christ, God is their Father, the promises are theirs, and the
ministry is theirs by plain evidence, then they may assume the ministry and
use it as God has appointed, But for this point read the seventh Section, and
the Paral. Censur. Observat. thereto aperteyning.

The thirteenth Section.
The next point to be handled is your seventh in number, viz.

That a minister may be made without Elders (ordinarily I mean) for
extraordinary courses are not now to be used for ought I see: this point you
blame as error: Let us see whether it be error or not.

I hold that a minister may be made without Elders: more plainly I say that
when the Church wants Elders, the Church has power to Elect, approve and
ordeyne her own Elders, also: to elect, approve, and ordeine her own Deacons
both men and women: For if you remember what was before spoken to your fifth
position, viz: that the church has the power of Chr in it self, viz: that it
has Chr. the covenant, and all the promises given to it being yet but few in
number, and that the Church has these things in true title and interest as her
own freehold then you shall see what will follow hervppon: namely that the
Church has power to receave in members and cast* out members, to receave in
her Officers and to dischardg the^ of office, the church has power to the
preaching of the word to the administering of the seals of the covenant, to
binding and losing, which works she cannot do herself being many, therefore she
appoints fit persons thereto, viz: such officers as Christ has given to his
Church, which are the Elders, still notwithstanding reserving her power to
herself when occasion shall be offered: these things are sufficiently proved
already in answer to your fifth imputation: but you have some thing perhaps to
say for ordination; that the Church has not power of it: then belike all the
promises are not given to the Church, for if ordination be not given to the
Church, then the ministry is not given to the Church, for it seems you make
ordination a great part of the ministry: but know for your learning that
ordination does give nothing at al to the Minister: For election is the ver^e
essence and form of the minister: for in election power to administer is given
to the officer elect: For when the Church choseth the minister, does not the
Church in effect say: we give the A. b, power to administer the word, seals of
the covenant, and censures in the behalf of the whole Church? and the minister
Elect does then actually possess and assume that power delegated unto him by
the Church: so when the Church choseth her Deacons does she not in effect
speak thus: we give you, c.d.e.f. power to collect, and distribute the
Churches Treasury, and to minister for the body and members of the Church in
other general services, helpful to the body and outward part: this is evident
enough if you will not be blind wilfully: For as in matter of marriage, this is
the very form of marriage: I take the formy wife, and I take the for my
husband: So in the matter of office this is the very form thereof: we take the
for our Pastor: I take you for my flock: and so forth of the rest: now
ordination is nothing but the publishing of the officers election with prayer
made for him and admonition given to him to be faithful: The Church does the
former which is al in all even the very form, the latter is but the lesser and
an accident without which the officer may be a true officer: declare the
contrary to this if you can if not yield to the truth.

Ob. But you will say the word mentions an Eldership which must ordeine, and
Paul commands Titus to ordeyne Elders, Tit. 1.5. 1. Tim. 4.14.

Ans. 1. The place of Timothy compared with 2. Timoth, 1.6. yields this
sense, that Timothy by ^he exercise of prophecy wherein he was trained, and by
the imposition of the Apostles hands whereby the extraordinary gifts of tongs
and prophecy were then usually conferred, had an excellent grace (so the word
is in the original) conferred upon him.

But let it be granted that Timothy had a ministry conferred unto him,
surely it must needs be the office of an Evangelist, and what is that to an
ordinary Elders office: Paull only and the Apostles could create Evangelists.

Further let it be yielded you that Timothy was made a Bishop of Ephesus by
the Eldership of Ephesus, the Eldership in that action did nothing but that
which the Church appointed them to, and for the effecting whereof they had power
and authority from the Church who is the Fountain of all the power that any
officer has.

Ans. 2. To the place of Titus I thus answer, that Titus there is not commanded
to ordeyne ministers, but to constitute Elders: For the word is not to ordeyne,
or to lay on hands, but to constitute: if you understand the Greek tongue you
will acknowledge that I say to be true: now to constitute an Elder signifies
Election, approbation, and ordinatio^: not ordination only as the objection
imports: but you know, or else you are a sworn slave to the Prelates, that
the Church has power to Elect and approve her Elders: yet Titus is here
commanded to do it: whence we must needs conclude that Titus only should
teach and direct the Churches in constituting of her Elders according to the
Apostolic institution: which what it was Titus being an Evangelist and well
acquainted with the Apostles course, could well tell: and this must needs be the
sense of this place, except you have any thing to say against it, which we pray
you let us here if there be any thing: you seem in this point to distingnish
the calling of Elders; as if there were two manners or forms of calling Elders
ordinary and extraordinary: I know no such thing, and therefore I leave that
till I see it expounded.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the thirteenth Section.
All this thirteenth Section has for the subject matter of it the ordination or
making of ministers, and the question of it is this, viz: whither a company of
faithful people gathered into the name of Christ by the voluntary covenant of
the new Testament, have not power of themselves to create their own Pastors,
and Deacons: Although that which has been spoken concerning the seventh
Section may fully and sufficiently satisfy all this doubt: yet I thought meet
to add certain arguments of plain evidence for the further declaration hereof
that al scruples and shifts may be taken away.

The first Argument.
They which have power to enter into, and to assume the New Testament, have
also power to assume all the ordinances of the new Testament, and so by
necessary consequent the ministry.

Two or three faithful people have power to enter into, and to assume the new
Testament of Christ:

Ergo: two or three faithful people have power to assume all the ordinances of
the new Testament, and therefore the ministry.

The Minor only is doubtful which may thus be confirmed, Gal. 3.14-16. where the
Apostle says plainly that the promises were made to Abraham and his seed, viz:
to the Faithful, us. 16. that the blessing of Abraham came upon the believing
gentiles: us. 14. and that these promises and blessing is the covenant or new
Testament, us. 15. whereupon it follows that seeing the Faithful have the
blessing, the promises, the new Testament, therefore they have the power of
enjoying the ministry: For the ministry is one part or ordinance of the new
Testament.

The second Argument.
They that have Christ and with Christ all things else: they that have al things
aperteyning to life and Godliness: they that have the promise of this life and
of the life to come have the power to assume the ministry, for that is a part
of Godliness.

But the Faithful, be they but two or three, have with Christ al things else,
Romans 8.32. have the promise of life and Godliness, 2. Pet. 1.3. have the promise
of this life, and of the life to come, 1. Timoth. 4.8.

Ergo: The Faithful though but two or three have power to assume the Ministry.

The third Argument.
They who have power to examine, and elect their Officers have also power to
pray for them, and to command them to minister, which is ordination.

But the Scripture teaches plainly that the Faithful have power to Elect and
choose their own Officers: as Deacons, Act. 6. one to be an Apostle, Act.
1.26. Elders, Act. 14. also to approve them: Act. 6.3. 1. Timoth. 3.10. and you
confess no less your self.

Ergo: the Scripture teaches plainly, (and you by consequent grant indeed,
though you deny in words) that the Faithful have power to pray for there
officers Elect, and to command them to administer: and that is ordination,

The Fourth Argument.
They that have power to make a Church, have power to make a minister or
ministers: For they that can do the greater, can do the less.

Two or three Faithful people have power to make a Church.

Ergo two or three Faithful people have power to make ministers.

The reason of this argument is, for that the Church is the body of Christ, the
Spowse of Christ, and the ministry is but one part of the body, one Servant of
the Spowse, one of the ornaments of the Church.

The Minor is plain: For two or three Faithful people have Christ Jesus, have
the promises, have the holy things of David, which are Faithful, have the
blessing of Abraham, being Abraham's seed and furthermore the Apostle, Heb.
8.10-12 expounding what the new Testament is teaches that they that have the
Laws of the Lord put in their minds, and written in their hearts, are the
people of God, and have God for their God, and so are the Church of the new
Testament: Mr. Bern. this point is cleerer then can be denied, and all the world
can never be able to overthrow it, the understanding and feeling whereof I do
^artily wish unto your soul, and to all the upright hearted of the Land.

The Fifth Argument.
They that are the true matter of the Church of the new Testament, shallbe
invested with the true form of the new Testament: they that have true matter
and form, have the true property which arises from the union of matter and
form, that is Christ's ministerial power to assume all the means of their
edification to Salvation: and so by consequent the ministry.

Two or three Faithful people are the true matter of the true Church of the new
Testament: and therefore have the true form or covenant of the new Testament
induced upon them: and so being a Church subsisting of true matter and form,
have the true property arising from the union of the matter and form, viz: the
power of our L. Jesus Christ; to assume and use all the means of their
edification to salvation: and so by consequent have power to assume the
ministry.

Ergo two or three Faithful people being a true Church, may create, that is
Elect, approve, and ordeyne their own officers.

And this may suffice for the proof of this point.

The Fourtenth Section.
And so I pass to another point which is you Fourtenth, viz.

14. That baptism is not administered among us simply into the Faith of Christ,
but into the faith of the Bbs. or the Church of England.

This point you say is also erroneous: let us consider of it I pray you
seriously: I would know into what Faith they are baptized if not into the Faith
of the church of England, they are members of the Church of England, and they
profess the Faith of the Church of England, are they not then baptized into
that Faith of the Church whereof they stand as members, and of which Faith they
make profession? are they baptized into one Faith, and do they profess another
Faith? or do you think that the Faith of Christ and the Faith of the Church of
Engeland are not one? me thinks Mr. Bern. you lay a foul imputation upon
your Church: in holding that the Faith of the Church of England is not the
faith of Christ, and that baptism is not administered into the Faith of the
Church of England respectively, but into the faith of Christ simply. I dare say
your Lords the Prelates will co^ you little thank for this gear: but let us
consider of your Faiths: The Prelates and Church of England have one Faith
whereto they Subscribe: The Puritanes and their Faction have an other Faith, for
they will not Subscribe to the Prelates Faith: Christ and we of the Separation
have a third Faith, for we will Subscribe neither to the Bbs. Faith, nor the
Puritanes Faith, but to the Faith of Christ indefinitely comprehended in the
Holy Scriptures: Here now are three Faiths: three Churches: and so three
baptismes. But the time Faith is one, the true Church is one, the true baptism
one: Therefore you and we have not both the true Faith, Church, and baptism: but
we approve unto you our Faith, church, and baptism to be true: and therefore
your Faith, Church, and baptism is false: and so certainly it is: For
whosoever have stinted their covenant, and limited their repentance, and
abridged their Faith, have a false Faith, Covenant and Repentance: but you in
your assemblies have your Covenant, Faith, and repentance at the will of the
Prelates, and you dare not covenant and practice all that you know, but walk in
violating of the whole Kingdom of Christ, are mingled among all the refuse of
the Land in your Church, worship, and communion of holy things: therefore your
Repentance, Faith, and Covenant is false, your church false, your Ministry
false, your worship false, your baptism false, the Lords Supper false, al
false: and here give me leave to advertise you to look to your selves that know
the will of God and do not nor dare not practice as you know: I wish you
consider your own doctrine that whosoever lives in any open known sin has
no grace: but you live in open known sins: For you know you should reform
many things, which you do not nor cannot seeing you want the Censures: how then
can you persuade us that your repentance is true, and that your faith is true:
you plead you have a true ministry, because you convert souls: you convert
souls a pace do you not? when you convert them to your falfe repentance, false
Faith, false Church, false Ministry, false Worship, false Government: is this
the conversion whereby you would prove your ministry? not only to live in your
false repentance, covenant, Faith, Church, under your false Ministry and
Government, but to reject and oppose the truth, and that with such slanderous
and lying courses as we hear of you? you must affoard us better evidences of
your Faith, repentance, and of your true ministry, or else we hold them al
false. Consider what I say Mr. Bern. and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the Fourteenth Section.
Against this Section of my Lettre Mr. Ber. takes exception in two
particulars, pa. 252. of the Sep. Schism: accounting them both errors. 1. that
baptism is not administered into the Faith of Christ simply, but into the Faith
of Bbs. or Church of England: (so say I,) 2. That our Faith and repentance, is
a false Faith, and a false repentance, (so say I of their visible Faith, not
speaking of things secreat:) Mr. Ainsw confutat. of Mr. Bern. page 159.
accounts both those imputations of Mr. Bern. uncharitable collections, and
caluminations: Seeing Mr. Ainsw. does renounce them, I will therefore undertake
the defense of them unto whom they aperteyne and here I wish the Reader to
observe whither it lay not upon me justly to answer Mr. Be^n. whose whole
book in the essential parts of it was directed against this lettre of mine as
may evidently be perceaved as in the whole tenor of it, so especially in these
two particulars against which he excepteth in this Section.

Now for the first let us consider the intendment of the baptizer: How the
Ministers of the Church of England intend their baptism: How the law of the
Land intends baptism: how the Service Book intends and directs baptism:
how the parents Susceptors or Suretyes do demand baptism and consent to
baptism administered: and upon the conceaving of these particulars the
baptism must be censured: now if al these intend definitely that Faith which
is by law established in the Land, and that the party is baptized into that
Faith which they intend, it will follow necessarily that baptism is administered
not simply and indefinitely into the Faith of Christ, but particularly and
definitely into that Faith which the Bbs. and the Church of England do teach
and profess: For which consideration an argument may be framed thus.

Into that faith are the members of the Church of England baptized, which the
Law establishes: which the Prelates and Ministers teach: which the Church of
England professes: which the minister baptising intends: and whereto the
parents, witnesses or Susceptors consent: and which the Service Book expressly
mentions.

But the law does not establish: the Prelates and ministers do not teach: the
Church of England does not profess: the baptizer does not intend: the parents
and Susceptors do not consent to: and the Servicebook does not mention the
Faith of Christ simply, but the Faith of Bbs. or Church of England.

Ergo, The members of the Church of England are not baptized into the Faith of
Christ simply, but into the Faith of the Bbs. or Church of England, which is
the false Faith of the baptizer, of the Suertyes or parents, and so the Faith
of the baptism.

For the second point let us consider the faith and repentance of the Church of
England, I mean of the faith that is visibly professed and expressed in the
fruits of repentance among them and thereby we shall know the tree.

The faith of that Church is not a true faith which teach and profess a false
mediator: and the repentance of that Church is not a true repentance, which
practice according to that false doctrine.

But the assemblies Ecclesiastical of England with the teachers and professors
of them, teach and profess a false Mediator: For they teach that Christ is a
Mediator of all that false Church, Ministry, Worship and Government,
established in the Land: Sacrificing and making intercession for them in the
daily practice al those abominations: Ruling and Governing them by all the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and by the courts and canons Ecclesiastical, which
are the inventions of the man of sin: Teaching and Prophesying unto them by
those Antichristian, Prelates, Priests, and Deacons, which reign in the Land:
and so practicing according to this false Faith practice a false repentance.

Ergo, the Faith of the Church of England, of the teachers and professors
thereof, and the repentance of them is not true, but false.

But it will be objected against both these assertions that although one thing be
intended in baptism, yet the Lord may admit of and accept another and though
they profess and preach falsely, yet the Lord he can and does no doubt work
mervaylously besides all that we can think or speak: Truth I yield it most
willingly: and blessed be the Lord for his infinite and unspeakable mercy
therein: but we dispute not what God can do of his power or will, do of his
mercy, things unknown unto us: but we speak of things revealed and manifested
unto us, according whereunto we must walk and judge of matters according to that
which we see: according as the word judges: according as the Church and
members of the Church of England teach, profess, and practice visibly, which
is seen and discerned of us, we are to pass our censure: but we judge no man
before the time: we do not clyme up into Gods judgment seat: our Faith is
visible: our repentance is visible: our charity visible: our Spirit visible:
our baptism visible: our preaching visible: our covenant visible, our Church
visible: our judgment visible: things that are revealed aperteyne to us and our
Children, that say we is false in the assemblies Ecclesiastical: Secreat things
aperteyne to the Lord: these we leave to the Lord, we meddle not with them: this
I desire may once for all be remembered and pondered, and so I end this matter.

The Fiftenth Section.
The next point is your Fourth wherein you do us open injury, viz.

4. In holding that Princes have no more to do in ecclesiastical causes then
one of you in a particular congregation: these are your words.

Mr. Ber. I challeng you in this particular imputation, to be either a
malicious or an ignorant slaunderer: For either you know not what we teach
concerning Princes Authorityes, and so slander us ignorantly: or if you know
our judgment in that matter you slander us maliciously. Remember that the
Prophet in the Psalms complayneth that his enemies digd pits for him, laid
snares, grinnes and nets in his way to catch him ynawares and to bring evil
upon him: are you now become such an enemy unto us? do you think by calling
into question the Supremacy of Princes imputing therein treason to us to catch
us in a snare, and cause us to fall into the pit? if this be your course, thus
to hunt the Souls of men, look unto your self, therein you manifest little grace
to me: but let us here the cause you impute to us. you say we hold that princes
have no more to do in ecclesiastical causes then one of us in a particular
congregation: I say for mine own part, and I think I may say it for all the
brethren of our Church, that herin you do shamefully belie us: I will therefore
manifest what we hold and teach concerning Princes Supremacy.

1. First, we teach and hold according to the Scriptures that Princes and
civil Estates are the Lords blessed ordinance, Romans 13.2.

2. Secondly, that every Soul ought to be subject unto the civil Magistrates
of what estate and condition soever they be, Romans 13.1. Tit. 3.1. 1. Pet. 2.13.

3. Thirdly, that we must absolutely submit unto the civil Magistrate either to
do his lawful commandments, or to suffer his unlawful punishments: by
consequence from the former places.

4. Fourthly, that it is unlawful for any subject to make insurrection or
rebellion against the civil Magistrates: by consequence from the former places.

5. Fifthly, that it is the Magistrates office to be the keeper of both the
tables of the co^maundeme^ts: both to abolish Idolatry and al false ways, also
to forbid and punish al unrighteousness as also to command and cause al men
within there Dominions to walk in the ways of God, being fitted and prepared
thereunto: and that by the examples of David, Iosaphat, Hezechiah, Josiah,
Nehemiah, Roman. 13.4.5. Psalm. 101. toto. and 132. 2-5.

6. That a Prince has power in a particular visible Church, to punish any
wickedness any one commits: and to cause that visible Church to assume and
practice any truth Gods word teaches: ex praecedentibus: now this is more
authority then any one particular member has.

7. We teach notwithstanding that Princes if they will be saved must be
members of a true visible Church, and must walk there in the obedience of Gods
Commandments and ordinances, submitting to the censures for the reformation
and salvation of his soul, as well as to the preaching to the Word,
administration of the Seals of the covenant, prayers, etc. because God has
appointed but one way to save the Souls of Princes and Subjects.

8. If civil Magistrates be by censures cast out of the true visible Church,
yet they are still to be accounted Gods ordinance, still to be obeyed in the L.
still to be submitted to in regard of their punishment, no rebellion or
insurrection to be made against them by any of the Church whatsoever: but
prayer to be made for them instantly and daily.

Now Mr. Bern. stop your mouth and cease slaundering, and take away the poison
from under your Tongue.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the fiftenth Section.
I desire here that the reader would observe carefully: that although Mr. Bern.
in his Lettre to Mr. Hell. had charged us with this slanderous untruth
concerning our disloyalty to Magistrates: yet I having written this Lettre unto
him, he in this his book says not a word to this Section of my lettre:
whereas if he had dealt uprightly he should have cleared us in that particular
of disloyalty, wherein he chardged us falsely: but like a subtle adversary he
thought to bring us into disgrace and hatred by all means, and wherein he saw
us approvable therein he craftily forsakes us: and leaves us to the obloquy
of the world, which usually lay this false imputation of disloyalty upon us:
well let Mr. Bern. and al men know, especially al lawful civil Magistrates of
what degree soever, that the Churches of the Separation are in their judgments
as sound, and in their hearts as loyal and dutiful unto Princes and civil
States, as the best prelate of England, and that the more popelike they are the
more traiterous they will prove unto the civil Magist. and that if they be let
alone, they with the Pope at the length will take upon them: Petrus dedit
Petro, Petrus diadema Radolpho, and cause the Emperor to hold the stirrup.

The sixtenth Section.
Your fiftenth point follows: which is this, viz.

15. That ministers ought only to live of voluntary contribution and not of
stippends, or any set maintenance: this you impute to us: we reject it, for we
hold it lawful for the Elders of the Church to receave weekly, monthly, or
yearly a pencion of the Church for their labors, all that we teach concerning
the mayntenance of the ministry is this.

1. That it is unlawful for the Elders of the Church to challendg at the hands
of them that are infidels and unbelievers, tithes, and offerings as you do.

2. We hold that tithes are either Jewish or popish,

3. That the officers of the visible Church may receave any gift of any Friend
that is without, and live of it.

4. That the officers of the Church in the necessity of the Church ought to
work for their living, as Paul made tents.

5. That the officers of the Church may challendg mayntenance of the Church, if
the Church be able to yield it.

6. That also the poor of the Church may require mayntenance upon the same
grounds for we are al members one of another, and have al things common in use,
though not in possession: al these particulars are plain by these Scriptures,
Heb. 7.12. and 9.9. Act. 2, 44.45. 1. Cor. 9.1-15. Gal. 6.6. and 4.9.10. Col.
2.16.17.20.21.

This is the substance of that we hold herein and therefore Mr. Bern. you do
us open wrong in this point also.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the sixtenth Section.
Mr. Bern. page 136. of the Sep. Schism avoucheth that to deny tithes, and a
set mayntenance to Ministers is contrary to the Lords wisdom, who under the law
appoints tithes a set maintenance, and there is nothing against it in the
gospel: I answer with the Apostle, the old Testament (I do not mean the
w^^tings of the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms) and the ordinances thereof
are abolished: The bond woeman and her Children are cast out, Gallat. 4.30. and
if there be a chandg of the Preisthood there must needs be a chandg of the
law, Heb. 7.12. wherefore seeing set stipends by tithes were a part of these
worldly ordinances of the old Testament, of those impotent and beggarly
rudiments, of that yoke of bondage whence Christ has set us free: It follows
that set mayntenance by tithes is ^bolished by Christ and as the liberty of the
gospel is to be carefully preserved in other things, as in that of
circumcision, of the passover, of the preisthood, of the Sacrifices and the
res^^* So must it be ca^efully preserved even in this particular of se^
maintenance by tithes, for if any Mosaicall, impotent, beggarly rudiment, ^r
worldly ordinance: if any part of the yoke of bondage may be joined with
Christ, why not all? if not all, why may any? Again whereas you say there is
nothing against set mayntenance by tithes in the New Testament, I demand two
things: 1. Vhither Christ has not abolished the Mosaical ordinances and
brought in the New Testament? and whither this be not contrary to set
maintenance by tithes? 2. whither we ought not to have something for set
mayntenance by tithes in the New Testament, (if it must be retained) that we
upon faith may submit unto it? Seeing that what soever is not of Faith is
sin: So that this speech of yours, viz: there is nothing against it in the
gospel, is both false, and if it were true, yet is insufficient, seeing that it
is not a good plea to say there is nothing against it, except we can also say,
that there is something for it: and thus much for this point.

The sevententh Section.
Your sixtenth point follows, viz.

16. That our Churches ought to be rased down, and not to be employed to the
worship of God: we are not absolute and peremptory in this: only this we think
for the present that all the relics, shapes, forms, memorials, instruments,
and remembrances of Antichristian Idolatry ought now as well to be defaced, as
in the old Testament ought Relics of paganism, because that the proportion
of paganism and Antichristianisme is equal, therefore the L. calls Rome and al
Antichristian assemblies, Babylon, Egypt Sodom, Apoc. 18.2. and 11.8. and
Antichristians are called by the same reason, Gentiles, Apo. 11.2. even
Babylonians, Egiptians, Sodomites and so by consequent proportion the Temples
Babylonish Temples, pagan Temples, Egiptian Temples, Sodomitish Temples: and
therefore to be defaced utterly according to the commandment, Deuteronomy 7.5.6. and
12.2. Judge. 2.2. Genesis 35 1-4.2. King. 10.27.28. and 18.4.5. Psalm. 16.4. Exodus
23.13. Esaias. 30.22. the same may be said of your holidays, your tithes and
offerings, your Surplices, Copes, Crosses, Fonts, and al other Superstitious
relics, that God will not be honored by instruments of Idolatry: nor Idols
must not be so much honored as to retain a nail or pin of them or their
implements to honor God with all: Let us see Mr. Bernard what you can say, to
convince us of error: You see the reasons that move us thus to think till we
see better.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the sevententh Section.
Although Mr. Ainsw. has sufficiently stopped your mouth Mr. Bern. in this
particular, yet I think it not amiss to add thus much, for further clearing of
the matter: know therefore, that as Iehu turned the Temple of Baal into a jakes
after he had defaced it, 2. King 10.27. and as Hezechiah brake in pieces the
brazen Serpent, the Lords own ordinance being abused to Idolatry, 2. King. 18,
4. So the Kings of the earth should do well to follow the Holy Ghosts prophecy,
Revel. 17.16. even to make the whore of Babylon desolate, and naked, to eat
her Flesh, and burn her with fire: and not to suffer her wares, that is her
vessels of wood, Ivory, Brass, Iron, marble, to be bought any more: which I am
persuaded shall in due time be accomplished: that as the goodly buildings of the
Abbayes, Monasteries, and Nunries, are already destroyed, and made barnes,
stables, swineslyes, jakes, so shall it be done with all the Idol Temples when
the hour of their visitation shall come: and whereas you object for the
justifying of the use of the Idol Temples, that seeing Antichrist sits in the
Church of God, that therefore when the Idol Temples were built, the Church took
possession of them to keep possession for the Lord in his creatures, thereby
concluding a lawful use of them now for the Church restored, I answer you: your
ground is faulty, and therefore your building tottereth: the place of the
Apostle, 2. These. 2.4, where it is said that Antichrist sits in the Temple of
God, is falsely by you conceaved and interpreted, for it does not import that
(as you would have it), Antichrists Church, and the true Church of Christ are
one and the same, and that the same company of men can be, and are, both the
true visible Church of Christ, and at that same time the Church of Antichrist:
this is impossible: for the true Church is not the false Church. But this is
the meaning, viz: either that Antichrist shall sit in the consciences of men
which is properly the Temple of God: Or that Antichrist shall arise up out of
that company of men which once were the Temple of God, as Rome was: or that the
Church being true in the constitution, Antichrist shall foyst into it by little
and little his false ministry, Worship, and Government, as experience teaches
he has done: For a true Church may have Antichristian ordinances retained and
raised up in it: this being the true meaning of the Apostle, how can you hence
conclude soundly that the true Church took possession of the Temples, which
the false Church of Antichrist built? Seeing the true Church is not the false
Church, and seeing that the temples were built in the palpable darkness of gross
popery, some of them perhaps dedicated to heathen Idols, some of them to
Antichristian Idols, as there He, and she Saints; al of them to Devils. For if
Ieroboams Priests were appointed for Devils, 2. Chron. 11.15. and if the
Antichristian priests are the Spirit of Devils, Revel. 16.14. and the worship
of Antichristians the worship of Devils, Revel. 9.20. and the Antichristian
Churches the habitation of Devils, Revel. 18.2. then the Temples are dedicated
to Devils: not that they intended so to dedicate them. but for that they are so
indeed the Lord accounting that to be done to the Devil, which is not done to
him as he has commanded: and the Devil substituting himself in Gods place,
when men go a whoring after there own inventions: Therefore the Apostle says
plainly that the Gentiles Sacrifice to Devils, 1. Cor. 10.20. to conclude this
point therefore, and so to leave you to meditate upon these things: Seeing the
Gentiles Sacrifice to Devils, seeing the Antichristians worship Devils, seeing
Ieroboams priests were appointed for Devils: and yet al these intended to
worship God even the true God: then it follows that though the Antichristians
did intend to dedicate their Temples to the true God (which yet is not granted)
nevertheless they were dedicated to Devils: and therefore are to be raced down
and converted to the habitation of Iim, and Zijm, Satyrs, Shrich ^^yles, and
Raveas as the Prophet speaks Esaias. 34.8-15.

The eighteenth Section.
Your first point now comes in the last place to be considered, viz.

1. In seperating from all the reformed Churches: you say we do il: Let us
consider what we hold: Surely we say the Churches are of two sorts, false
Churches such as yours of worksop is, and al others of like fashion: 2. true
Churches, and those also of two sorts: pure, wherein no open known sin is
suffered corrupt, wherein some one or more known sin is tolerated: to the
true Churches which are pure we may and will join: to the true Churches which
are corrupt we carry our selves thus: First, we labor to discover their faults
unto them, admonishing them to reform which we are bound to do, because they
are our brethren. Secondly, if they will not reform after we have convinced
their errors unto them, we depart from them lest we should partake with their
sins: this is our judgment, and practice: if you can reprove it, let us here
from you we pray you.

Paralleles, Censures, Observations, aperteyning to the eighteenth Section.
Here I desire the Gentle Reader not to be offended that we endeavoring to
walk in the liberty of the gospel, do not tie our selves to any Church or
Churches whatsoever, but only to the rules of Gods word: and therefore howsoever
it may seem odious that we Separate from al churches, yet the causses being
indifferently considered, the matter will seem reasonable, for we Separate from
al Churches upon several reasons, 1. From some (such as are the English
Churches) we Separate for the Falsehood of them: and that is a just cause in
any indifferent man's judgment, 2. from other (such as are the Reformed
Churches) we Separate not for that they are false, but for that being true
they are corrupt: and herein our Separation is not total but for a time, til we
have performed our duties unto them: when we have therefore admonished them of
their corruptions and they repent, then we join in communion with them: if
they repent not we leave them to the Lord: and we must needs keep our selves
unspotted, and take heed that we partake not with other men's sins,

The nintenth Section.
And now Mr. Bern. suffer me a little to deal with you as with one of whom I
have thought so well as I have done: it greeveth my Soul for you to see you so
straungely seduced by Satan, and so violently carried in your boisterous and
robustious disposition against the truth, and the professors thereof: it has
greeved me heretofore to see you arrogant, proud and ambitious carriage
preferring your self in place before men both more ancient, holy, and learned
then your self in the judgment of all that know you and them it has greeved me
to hear such calumnies as you have in the bitterness of your wrath uttered
against diverse of us which I could relate to your eternal infamy, but I spare
you: it has greeved me to hear your formality that you are become an absolute
conformita^t in judgment, and that you would be so in practice if some persons
hindered you not: it greeveth me exceedingly to see some Letters of yours
wherein you and your Disciples lying at the advantage take all things in the
evil part, pervert and misconstrue men's writings manifesting therein much
perverseness of Spirit: it greeveth me above all that you should support the
Kingdom of Antichrist; by your writings against the truth, and by your untruth
uttered of me and others, You have now two writings of mine in your hands this
and theother you know of, wherein our cause is discovered, which I have
especially directed to you for your good: I beeseech yo^ in the name of the L.
look to your self and search into this truth, I wonder you should not see it,
it is clearer to me then noone day, or if you see it as it seems you once
did by your confession, then I wonder much more that you who seem so holy as
you do, should dare to continue in your evil way. if you have any thing to say
in answer to this and theother writing let us here from you: take heed of
wresting and misconstruing my writings: you shall gain nothing by it I assure
you at my hands: set your conscience upon the wrack before the Lord, examine
your heart what hinders you from the truth: know this that if any sinister
respect hinder you, you therein shall find little peace to your conscience, and
declare less thankfulness to God: know it would be the greatest honor ever
befell you to be one of the Lords witnesses, and it will be the greatest disgrace
that can possible light up on you to be found one of those that fight against
the lamb Jesus Christ in resisting his truth, and the witnesses thereof: assure
your self Gods truth will prevail in despite of all the gainsayers: remember
that our cause is the same in a manner with the Puritan cause, only they dare
not practice as we do remember that the Lord has had those that have spilt
there blood in this testimony, and there blood and testimony has stirred us up
to this our witness: consider that this truth prevayleth daily, and shall
prevayle: it was opposed in the Queens days it has prevayled and stands in
despite of all the gainsayers: consider that though the Prelates and you with
your fellow Priests oppose against it, yet it has grown to this head as you
see: what are you Mr. Bern. to oppose against it: you are a simple man in
comparison of them that have dealt against it, and have taken the foil, All the
Oxford Doctors, Mr. Hildersha^, Mr. Jacob, Mr. Bredwel, Mr. Giffard, could not
with there writings overthrow this truth, and do you think that you can batter
it with your mediocrity? nay you are to young to deal against this cause: al
your rage and wrath, and choler, and revendge shall never be able to daunt us,
or to diminish the credit of Gods truth: you had need more then any man I know
in your way to walk in this way with us: For you have so many vagaries to and
froe, so many rebellious courses, so many distempered affections and speeches,
that so long as you are not under the L. yoke, and vnhampered by the L.
ordinances the censures of the Church, you shall find little rest to your Soul:
we for our part care not for your help, for our gain will be little by you, if
any thing at all, but we respect your own good: God has no need of you, you
see he can work his work without you: Let these things work upon you, take
heed you be not deceaved by the applause of the multitude, nor by the Prelates
fair words, nor by his angels: Remember that if you receave not the love of
the truth God may deliver you over justly to believe lies to your own
overthrow: think not, much that I write thus unto you: I do it out of
compassion and love to you, unto whom I wish so well: David was content to be
smitten by the righteous, and flattery I think overthrows you: your
Parasites have robbed you of your wisdom: believe me I speak the truth: So
requiring your answer to both my writings I bid you farewell.

Here ends the letter which was written to Mr. B. divided into 19. Sections,
with the Paralleles, Censures, and Observations, aperteyning to every
particular Section thereof.

Thus have I Mr. Bern. passed through the substantial part of your book, which
con^erneth the cause it self: which although you have placed in the last place,
namely from gag. 78. forward, yet I thought meet to make answer to it in the
first place, because it is the most material part of your book: and heerin you
have used a notable piece of Sophistical Rhetoric, first to draw our persons
into dislike with your readers, and so to prejudicate and forstal there minds
against our cause: For so it falls out customably that the person being
dislliked the cause cannot be entertained: wherefore after you had collected al
your superficial stuff, all the accidental conjectures which you heap up in
your book from page 21. to 78. and had cast them in the Readers way, whereat he
might stumble: the^ you come from page 78. to the end, to the matter, and
varnish that also as well as you can, thereby thinking utterly to pervert your
Reader from the truth: well Mr. Bern. I have through the mercy of God answered
all the substantial points of your book: not omitting one to my knowledge that is
worth answer: but especially I have labored to manifest the main cause of our
Separation, the first fondacion and rock of truth, which is, that Christ's
ministerial power is given to two or three Faithful ones, who are the true seed
of Abraham, to whom the promises, the covenant of the New Testament, Christ,
and all the holy things are given: For this is the groundwork and Foundation of
the L. truth: and this I beseech all the land, all the faithful of the land
especialy to look unto: and if they yield this ground they must needs
Separate: if they deny this ground, then there is no footing for them but in
Succession, and the Popes chair: So that here is the controversy, here is the
state of the Question, whither the holy things with Christ be given originally
to the body of the Church to the Faithful: or whither the holy things with
Christ be given to the Ministry originally, and that the Church has al from
the ministry: and that is the point of succession: I beseech you Mr. Bern. and
all the honest hearted people of the Land to waygh and determine this point in
their own hearts, and then your book will be found to be but froth: now having
answered your main matter: I come to answer your probabilities against the
Sep. schism: From the page 21-44. you propound 7. Likelihoods that the way of
the Separation is not the truth which probabilities may be framed into these
forms of reasoning.

The first Likelihood against the Sep. is thus framed.
Novelty is not the truth: The Separation is Novelty, go not the truth: For
answer to this argument: I ask, whither Luthers and Calvin's opinions were
false, because they were new: For popery had the prescription of a thousand
years against Calvin: but Calvin has not had the prescription of an hundredth
years against the Separation: nay I suppose not above fifty years: and may
not the Prelates reason against the Puritan thus: or the papists against the
Protestants? wherefore although I will not scoff at this argument, yet I pity
your simplicity in it: but I alter your argument, and frame another after this
manner against you, Antiquity is the truth: The Separation is true antiquity:
go: the truth, the reason of this Argument is for that we approve the Doctrine
and practice of separation from the beginning out of the writings of the Holy
Apostles: and on the contrary I reason thus against your Protestancy: Novelty
is not the truth: The ministry, worship, and government of the protestant
churches of England are Novelty go: Not the truth that al these things are
novelty, I prove because they are not of the primitive Apostolic institution
as I have sufficiently proved in the former Treatise: Thus much for your first
Likelihood.

The second Likelihood against the Sep. is thus framed.
They that in some things agree with ancient Heretics and Schismatiques, are
Heretics and Schismatiques, and their opinions heresy and Schism.

The Sep: in some things agree with ancient Heretics and Schismatiques.

Ergo, they are Heretiq. and Schismatiq. and their opinions heresy and Schism.

I answer by this arg I can prove you Mr. Bern. to be an Heretic and
Schismatique, except you will renounce the Deity, and Trinity, the fall of
Adam, redemption by Christ, etc. For I can prove that Heretics, yea most vild
Heretics have held these opinions with you: if my argument be not good
against you, neither is yours good against us, besides you should, counting us
to agree with ancient Heretics and Schismatiques, have proved two things, 1.
that they were indeed and in truth Heretics and Schismatiques, for holding
the points that we hold, 2. you should have set down the particulars wherein
we agree with them: but you have done neither of them: and therefore fail in
your proof: and so let this Likelihood also pass as a matter not worth taking
up.

The third Likelihood against the Sep. is framed thus.
That is not the truth, the Teachers, and professors whereof sometime do give
straung expositions, and thereby do wrest the Scriptures.

The Teachers and professors of the Separation do straungely expound and wrest
the Scriptures sometime.

Ergo, the Separation is not the truth.

I answer: First do you expound no Scripture straungely to the Papists: do not
they instantly defend against you al, that you shamefully wrest those two
places of Scripture, Mat. 16.18. upon this rock will I will build my church. 1.
Cor. 11.24. this is my body: yea and a hundredth more besides? if therefore the
argument be good for you against us, it is good for the Papists against you:
but the argument is naught: For may not a company of men have the truth and
sometime through ignorance misinterpret, and so pervert the Scripture? it may be
so undoubtedly, except you will say that men professing the truth have in them
(as the Pope says he has in Scrinio pectoris) the infa^ibility of expounding
Scriptures, as the Apostles and Prophets had in writing Scripture: and except
you will say that men have the perfect and full knowledge of the Scripture: but
secondly what are the Scriptures we do straungely expound and wrest: I require
you Mr. Bern, before the Lord to produce the places of Scripture that I do
wrest and pervert, and either I will acknowledge my sin, or else justify them
to be truly expounded: in the mean time the reader may se that this is but
simple stuff, and the Papists can take it up every whit against you.

The 4. Likelihood against the Sep. is framed thus.
They that are not approved by the Reformed Churches, have not the truth.

The Sep. is not approved by the Reformed Churches.

Ergo, The Separation is not the truth.

I answer: That seeing the Separation have published the confession of their
Faith where in they have by name desired the approbation of the universities of
the Reformed Churches, either by writing or silence, and the said Christian
universities have not disalowed that their confession though long since
published, their silence is therefore in all equity to be accounted their consent:
and Mr. Iunius his silence what is it else to be esteemed but consent? but
suppose that all the men upon earth should disalow the Separation, if the
Reformed Churches of Corinth, Rome, Thessalonica, Galatia, and the scaven
Churches of Assa, the Mother Church of Jerusalem planted by Christ, John
Baptist, and the Apostles, all of them being of one and the same primitive
Apostolic constitution, if I say the Separation have the allowance and
approbation of these Apostolic Churches it shall be sufficient for them: and
therein they shall rest contented by my consent. In the mean season you for get
that your Church is utterly disalowed by the reformed Churches in regard of
your prelacy, which is one of the cheef abominations among you: and in many
other particular which I shall not need to relate: but remember for a conclusion
for this point: The stone which the builders refused is become the cheef corner
stone: and I appeal unto your consciences if you do not think the Churches of
the Separation better then your own and then tell me how you can stay in a
worse knowing a better.

The 5. Likelihood against Sep, may be framed thus.
Whatsoever Mr. Whittakers, Mr. Perkins, Mr. Bredwel. Mr. Willat, Mr. Allison,
Mr. Cartwright, Mr. James, Mr. Rogers, Mr. H. Smyth says of the Separation is
true.

These forsaid learned men say the Sep. is not the truth.

Ergo, The Separation is not the truth.

I make another argument like unto this which shall be your answer.

Whatsoever, Herod, Pontius Palate, Annas, and Cayphas, the learned Scribes
and Pharisees, Tertullus the Orator and all the Learned men of the Church of
the Jews say is true, that is true.

These persons al of them with one consent say that Christian Religion is
Heresy and schism, as you may see in the History of the Gospel and acts.

Ergo, Christan Religion is Heresy and schism,

If this argument be faulty then is yours faulty much more: but I will reason
thus for the Separation and against you: whatsoever Christ the Apostles the
Holy Scripture (...) the Primitive Apostolic Churches collected of the Jews
and Gentiles do allow or disalow, is to be allowed or disallowed:

The separation is allowed, and the Church, ministry, worship and Government
of the English assemblies is disallowed by these forsaid persons.

Ergo, The sep. is to be allowed, and you are to be disalowed.

The minor of this argument is proved in this book which I present to every
honest heart of the Land, to be measured by the golden reed.

But me thinks Mr. Bern. should blush at his Logic.

The 6. Likelihood against Separation may be framed thus.
They have not the truth that are judged of the Lord.

The separation is judged of the Lord.

Ergo: The Separation has not the truth, and again.

They have the truth that are prospered by God in their course.

The English Protestants are prospered in their course.

Ergo, The English Protestants have the truth.

I answer: That this is false doctrine: For the wiseman says Eccles. 9.1-3.
That prosperity or adversity are no signs of love or hatred, and Ierem. 12.1,
2. that the wicked are in prosperity: and 1. Pet. 4.17. judgment begins at
Gods house: This your reason therefore is most absurd and false, and is fit to
breed Atheism, and overthrow the whole truth of the Scriptures: but let us see
what judgments are upon the Separation: you frame them thus.

If Mr. Bolton that Apostated did hang himself: if Mr. Harison and Mr. Brown
did differ, and one fell back: if Mr. Barrow and Mr. Greenwood, for calling you
serpents, generations of Wipers, were martyred by the persecuting Prelates: if
Mr. Johnson pronounced excommunication against his brother: and if the Church
excommunicated the Father: if Mr. Burnet died of the Plague: if Mr. Smyth was
delivered twice from the Pursivant, and was sick almost to death, and doubted
of the Separation for 9. months space: then the Separation is not the truth.

But al these things befell Mr. Bolton, Mr. Brown, Mr. Harison, Mr. Iohnsons,
Mr. Burnet, Mr. Smyth.

Ergo: The separation is not the truth.

I answer: The Churches of England have had thousand thousands of such
accidents as these are befalling their Officers and Leaders, and yet as it were
folly in us to alledg them against you as the Papists do: so it is no wisdom
but weakness of judgment in you to mention them in your book against us: What
is it good reasoning to say?

Judas hanged himself, Christ was Crucified for blasphemy: Demas embraced the
world: Nicholas the Deacon proved an Heretic: Paull and Barnabas fell out:
Paull chardged Peter and Barnabas with dissembling: Peter denied Christ: All
the Apostles were put to death for heresy. Ergo, the Christian Religion is
(...) be false, yours false: yet this is your goodly reason: if this be a
good argument where is your Faith (...).

But in this Likelihood you have a sting at me in particular Mr. Ber. charging
me with diverse untruths, which I will manifest.

1. That I doubred 9 months I acknowledge: but that ever I did acknowledge the
separation for truth, and separated from the English assemblies, and then
returned again unto them (which you say) I do utterly deny, and I appeal to
the town of Ganesbrugh, and those there that knew my footesteps in this matter:
and therefore herein I indite you as a public slaunderer.

2. Whereas you say I became satisfied at Coventree after conference had with
certain Ministers, and herevppon kneeled down and praised God: I answer: I
did not confer with them about the separation as you and they know well enough
in your consciences: but about withdrawing from true Churches, Ministers, and
Worship, corrupted: Wherein I received no satisfaction, but rather thought I
had given instruction to them: and for kneeling down to praise God I confess
I did, being requested to perform the duty at night after the conference by
the Ministers: but that I praised God for resolution of my doubts, I deny to
death and you therein are also a slaunderer: I praised God for the quiet and
peaceable conference, and such like matters, and desired pardon of the L. for
ignorances, and errors, and weakness of judgment, and any disordered caryage: if
the ministers that heard my prayers and praises of God did misconstiue my
meaning let them look unto it.

3. Whereas you impute an absurdity to me as yet unanswered, viz: that I
should affirm the spit whereon the passeove was roasted was the Altar: I say:
seeing the passover was a sacrifice, Marc. 14.12. and that every sacrifice has
an altar, either the spit was the altar, or else it had no altar: Now ^el me
which is the Likeliest of the two? and if this be a reasonable speech that the
wooden cross was the Altar whereon Christ was sacrified, why may not by a good
reason, the spit be the altar of the passover? the sacrifice was not slain
upon the altar, but it was burnt upon the altar: so that was not the altar
whereupon the passover was killed, but whereupon it was burnt or roasted: Mr.
Bern. I do confidently affirm against you, that the spit was as much the
altar to the passover, as the cross was an altar to Christ: and let me hear
what you in your best Logic can say against it.

The 7. Likelihood against the Sep. is framed thus.
The truth increases in short space into a multitude.

The Separation does not increase, but is kept under.

Ergo, the Separation is not the truth.

I answer you Mr. Bern. that this is but a popish argument: and Christ says
his Flock is but a little Flock: but how very many years has the cause of the
Separation had il success? Forsooth 20. or 30. years: alas as Mr. Be. what
increase has the Prelacy gotten in the world this hundredth veeres? they say
that is the truth against the Presbytery: what increase has puritanisme gotten
this 20. or 30. years in England: yet they say that is the truth against the
Prelacy: is not the cause of the Reformists almost dead and buried? but know
Mr. Bern. that the cause of the Separation being the same in the main
grounds, and essential parts with the Reformed Churches, it has had infinite
increase ever since Luthers time: and whereas you object here that we leave
our country without leave: I answer that you know the Law of the Land does
banish us all: and if Abraham did lawfully pass from one country to another
people, I^se no reason that we may not do so: and though Israel could not get
from Egypt, nor Judah from Babylon being deteyned by violence in captivity, yet
the Lord in working there deliverance declares that he will have his people
depart where they may freely profess it without let or disturbance: besides you
do pervert the Prophet Ezechiell his speeeh: Cap. 3.6. For was not Jonas sent
to Nineveh: were not the Jews carried into captivity? were not the Apostle sent
to al Nations? did all the Corinths speak with strange Tongues? is it unlawful
to send men to convert the Pagans? but the meaning of Ezechiell is that though
the Jews understand his preaching yet they will not believe: and the strangers
(viz: them of Tyrus and Sidon as Christ says) would sooner believe him then
the Jews, for a Prophet is not without honor save in his own country: and so
the place is misconstrued by you. Finally whereas you object that the L.
leaves a curse behind us in the Land, I say that is an argument that it is the
truth we profess, which because it is not entertained does therefore prove the
savor of death unto death, and hardens the heart of that people where it has
been offered and is refused: and thus much breefly of your froth.

In the next place you bring us reasons of more force then bare probabilityes,
whereby you confess that your 7. Likelyhoods are of little force, which I desire
the reader to take notice of, that the alleging of them by Mr. Ber. argues an
ill mind seeing he confesses them to be of small force against our cause.

The first reason against sep. may be framed thus.
That way is not the truth which teaches to renounce the constitution,
ministry, worship, and Government of the English assemblies Ecclesiastical as
false: and so in respect thereof to separate from them and al spiritual
communion with them: and to entertayne the true constitution, ministry,
worship, and Government of the Apostolic institution.

The way of the separation teaches thus much.

Ergo, the way of the separation is not the truth.

I answer: if the scriptures approve this which we teach of you and of our
selves, then is your arg. worth nothing: now whither the separation be the
truth or not I refer me to the scriptures, whereby I desire that which I have
written may be examined, and if it be sound sound let it be intertayned, if
not, follow the truth whatsoever it be: and whereas you say here that men in
seperating from you must cast of the word which begat them, I deny it, and you
are a slaundeter herin: For we retain al truth that you have, and we reject
only your Antichristianisme: and for acknowledging your Faith, repentance,
baptism false I say it is necessary, but understand that we speak of your
things that are visible, and leave things invisible to the Lord: and for that
objection you make from our own confession that we say our Separation is only
for corruptions, I say it is truth: but yet know that your corruptions are
essential: and effential corruptions corrupt the essence of things, and make
them false: viz. when the matter is essentially corrupted, or the form, etc.
as a mule procreated of an horse and an ass: Now such is your Church,
Ministry, worship, and Government, as is already proved sufficiently.

The 2. reason against Sep is framed thus.
That way is not the truth, which teaches the professors thereof to entertayne
and join with open wicked, obstinate sins and sinners.

The Separation Teaches men so to do.

Ergo, The Separation is not the truth.

I answer: That the truth may be the truth though men that profess it walk
never so wickedly in it: neither does it follow because the Churches of the
Separation walk corruptly, therefore the Separation is not the truth: you know
Mr. Bern. that this is but sophistry, and hereby you might prove the Doctrine
of Christ not to be the truth, because the Corinths had contentions, incest,
fornication, dronkennes and heresy among them: and what say you to your selves
who have as many thousand obstinate sins and sinners in the land as there be
men of the Separation among us? is your way therefore error? For the force of
this argument therefore I refer me to your own conscience, and to every
indifferent man's censure.

Well: Let us see what obstinate sins and sinners are in the Separation: the
sins are these as you reckon them up, 1. unthankfulness, 2. spiritual
uncharitableness, 3. abusing the Scriptures, 4. Obstinacy in schism, 5. Railing
and scoffing, 6. false opinions or Brownisme, and the persons persisting in
these sins are (you say) obstinate wicked.

Let us handle these things in order.

1. Unthankfulness to God that regenerated us by the word among you, and unto
the Church of England our mother that bare us, in calling her an harlot: I
answer: what truth the Lord has wrought inwardly in us we do thankfully
aknowledg: and I for my part do profess that in your assemblies I received the
seeds of true faith invisible, which (if I had dyed not knowing the
Separation) should I doubt not through Gods mercy have been effectual to my
justification and salvation in Christ: but this was so invisibly judging
according to the inward feeling of my heart, not according to the outward
censure of the word: For though I could truly judge so of my self out of mine
own feeling, yet I deny other men could so judge of me judging truly according
to the Scriptures. and this I suppose none of the Separation will deny: This is
the thankfulness which we can yield, and do yield to God daily: but for our
visible conversion we learned it not from you: and therefore we deny any
tha^kfulnes to be due unto you for it: neither do we acknowledge the church of
England our mother therein, but we say she is barre^ and bears no children
unto the L. in respect thereof.

2. Sin you impute to us is spiritual uncharitableness apearing first in
censuring 3. sorts of persons among you, 1. The ignorant as blinded by the God
of the world, 2. judging them that know the Separation, and do not yield unto
it as fearful persons and worldlings, 3. such as tasting of it and falling
back are censured as Apostates by us: well Mr. Bern. if the way of the
Separation be the truth (as it is proved to be) then I know not why it is
uncharitableness thus to censure you: For it is but the censure of the holy
Ghost in the scriptures, and in censuring of you herein we manifest no more
uncharitableness toward you then the Scriptures teach. and take heed you do not
blaspheme the scriptures censure through us.

Secondly, our uncharitableness appears (say you) in our ungodly desire to
have the word utterly extingnished among you and Egyiptian darkness to come over
you rather the^ it should be preached by your false ministry: I answer you by
making a demand which is this: of two sins, viz: of murder or adultery
which is to be chosen? I suppose you will answer, neither of them, and that
truly: so say I for this particular: if it be demanded whither we would that
the word should be utterly extingnished, or preached by your false ministry, I
make answer: we would neither of them: but we desire both that your false
ministry were dissolved, and that the word might by the Kings commandment,
or allowance, or permission be preached throughout his dominions by men fitted
thereto: wherefore in this point I challendg you for an uncharitable slaunderer
of us: and here you digress to prove that the word may be preached without a
true constitution of a Church: and that preaching is more necessary then a true
constitution: I confess it unfeignedly and most heartily: neither came the
contrary into the thoughts of the brethren of the Separation I suppose: For
certainly the true constitution must be taught, and men must be brought to
the faith, before the Church can be constituted: and this is it which we must
labor for, that first the word be preached by men of able gifts, and that men
be taught and converted to the Faith, and then they be established into the
new Testament of Christ but you have done and do practice the contrary: First,
you have established the^ into an Antichristian communion and constitution
jumbling together all the people of the Land, of what Religion or condition
soever, and then you set over them a false ministry, and then teach them still
to hold and retain that Antichristian constitution, ministry worship, and
government, placed over them: and wholly to reject any reformation offered: and
in this your disgression you ^unne out into another calumny, viz: that some of
us are so in dislike with your Church, as that we would rather intertayne
popery, then return to you again: For my self I confess my thoughts and
speeches have been and are to this purpose, that whenever I return to keep
communion with the English asse^blies acknowledging them true Churches, and
their Ministry true, then must I also of necessity acknowledge Rome to be a
true constituted Church, and their ministry true: For your Church and
ministry are of the same nature and kind, though of diverse degrees of
corruption, yours being much refined from infinite dross which is still
remaining with them. Now if I should return to succession, and so acknowledge,
the East churches of the Grecians, and the West Churches of Rome, and her
Daughters whereof England is one (for Rome is the Mother Church.) to be true
Churches, yet I would make my choice there to join where are fewest corruptions:
and so rather return to you then to Rome: and therefore herein I suppose also
you are but a slaunderer, in advancing a false report, Psalm. 15.3. wherefore
brefly I say, to desire your reformation, and the truth to be practiced among
you, is neither hatred of you (as you strongly plead) nor any uncharitable
desire to have the truth extinguished, and popery intertayned, as you most
uncharitably suggest unto your Reader.

Thirdly, our uncharitableness appears (you say) in this that we envy that
good things prosper with you: wretched man that you are thus to slander and
calumniate us falsely: I profess that I wish from my Soul, that every
Formalist in the Land were a Reformist, and that every Reformist were of the
Separation, and this is all the hurt that we wish unto you: whereas you object
that the Separation, and this is all the hurt that we wish unto you: whereas
you object that the Separation scoff at your Religious exercises and your
conversion: I do detest scoffing, and if I my self have at any time scoffed I
do proclayme my repentance for it unto you and the whole Land: yet know that
scoffing at Baals priests was lawful in Elias, if you call scoffing an Eironie:
neither do we scoff at any thing that is good, but at your irrecoverable
stifnes in your corrupted courses: neither is this ei^onie used as a mock to
disgrace you, but as a means to reform you as Elias his eironie was: again
you say we pray not for your Ministers, but wish coffeehouse, that men may
thereby come to the Separation: I answer we pray for the Ministers and people,
that they may repent and yield to the truth: and we wish that men may be
discontented with their corrupt and evil ways, which is the high way to
repentance: but we wish no man through coffeehouse of poverty, or reproach,
or disgrace to fall from any truth, as it seems you have done from
Puritanisme to the Prelates faction and conformity: Further you urge
uncharitableness in hasty excommunications for small matters: I answer, (not for
others) but for our particular Church of the Separation, that we do not use
excommunication as a matter of hatred, but of love, neither do we
excommunicate any man but for finne convinced, and that after once and twice
admonition, and that is not hastily: and whereas you teach us not to
excommunicate for every sin we do practice your advertisement: but if you
will have us retain in our communion any sinner wilfully impenitent and
peevishly obstinate sin, we answer, that we abhor your counsel, and we
think such persons fitter for your Antichristian Synagogues, then for the true
Church of Christ, which is a communion of Saints only.

Again, you censure the Separation of uncharitableness for excommunicating them
that here the word of your Ministers: I deny it except they continue impenitent
in that sin: and then indeed we do: and the reason is, because we hold
according to the truth, that you are false Churches, and false Ministers, and
that we ought not to have any Spiritual communion with Idols: and do you
think that impenitency in Idolatry is not worthy excommunication? and do you
think that impenitency in Idolatry is not worthy excommunication? and for that
you say it is no sin to hear the true word of any man: I ask whither you
think it lawful to hear the Popish priests preach, and to pray with them: if
it be unlawful then you are answered: and the Lord forbids to hear false
Prophets. Deuteronomy. 13.3. and the Apostle wills to Separate from such as teach
false Doctrine, 1. Timoth. 6.3-5. to reject an Heretic after once and twice
admonition: Tit. 3.10. and not to give entertayment to the false teachers. 2.
John. 10.

Here I omit your gibe of the annoyning which is the Holy Ghost, that the
Apostle says the Faithful have to teach them all truth, whereby the brethren
of the Separation presume (as you say) to teach wanting gifts: and refer you
to the Apostles speech. 1. Cor. 14. where he wills all the brethren to endevor
to prophecy: and teaches them that they may prophecy one by one: and will you
to remember that this gibe of yours falls upon Paul, the Holy Scriptures,
the Spirit of God, and Christ Jesus the mediator or of the new Testament which
has established the exercise of Prophecy in the Church for all the brethren
that have gifts: and there is no man that does believe but he can speak.

Finally, this want of love which you impute to us, I wonder how it is bettered
among you who persecute one another so hatefully as you do: as the Prelates and
their faction do devour the reformists and there faction: So as it seems you
are blind at home, though you can see so dragon-like abroad.

3. Sin you impute to us is misaledging, and wresting the Scriptures:
instances you give none, only you say that some have accused some of the
principals of us: but does it follow therefore that the accusation is true?
Christ was accused for blasphemy: was he therefore a blasphemer? But if you
mean that the Ministers in the conference the conference of Coventre with my
self have accused me thereof: I answer it was before I knew the Separation, as
you and they can tell: and what is this to the Separation: but for their
chardging me with wresting the Scriptures I answer that wherein I have wrested
the Scripture it is of ignorance, and I do not presently remember the
particulars: Let them be produced to the world, I desire no savor, if it be
my sin I will confess it, but neither do I know it, neither do you prove
it, only you say it, and whither you must be believed on your bare word that
are so common a slaunderer in this your book I refer me to the Censure of
every man that is not partial, and doteth not upon you.

4. Sin you chardg us with is wilful persisting in Schism joined with
contempt and scorn of others: I answer: do not you wilfully persist in your
Schism from Rome, contemning and scorning of them? you will say, they are in
error: and we say you are in error, and that the difference betwixt you and us
is more, then betwixt you and them: For your constitution, ministry, and
Government is one with theirs: but we are opposite unto you in all these. If
it be no finne in you thus to deal with Rome: it is no sin in us thus to
deal with you: but I deny utterly that we Schism from you: For there can be
no Schism from a false Church, ministry, worship, and Government, except it
be Schism to depart out of Babylon.

Again we do neither contemn nor scorn any man, only we single the truth,
and leave their corruptions and errors, and refuse to build our Faith upon
men, or Churches, or false expositions of Scriptures: and we desire no man to
come to us further then we have the truth, which whither we have or not, I
refer it and must do to the conscience of every one that loves the truth,
who shall live by his own Faith, and dye for his own sins.

5. Sin you cast upon us is Railing, Scoffing, and blaspheming, this you
exemplify in two particulars, 1. Mr. Barrowes sharp speeches in the discovery,
2. our approbation of it in him.

I answer: First: that Mr. Barrowes Scripture phrases whatsoever I do approve,
and justify them fitly to be applied to your false Church, Ministry, worship,
and Government: and til you have forsaken all that falsehood they do deservedly
lie upon you: Secondly, The phrases which Mr. Barrow alleges and borrows
else where, I dare not either allow them or reprove them, because I know not what
particular motion of the Spirit guided him so to write: but the things
signified by those phrases declaring the Idolatry of your Church, Ministry,
Worship, and Government, I approve. Thirdly, that Mr. Barrow eironically
vpbraydeth the preaching and Worship of the assemblies, following therein
Elias his example, I dare not censure that as an ungodly act of his though I
doubt not but you do performe^ these Religious exercises in the honesty of
your ignorance, as I my self sometime did. Fourthly, that he specially
inveigheth against the Reformists he does it not for that they are the worst
men, but for that by their doings the Lords truth is most hindered, they being
like the Pharisees aptest to deceave. Finally, I will not undertake the defense
of Mr. Barrowes tartnes, neither dare I absolutely condemn it, seeing the
Prophet Esaias is as sharp against the true Church as ever was Mr. Barrow
against your false Church: and whereas you alledg my writing upon the Lords
prayer before I saw the Separation, as a confutation or contradiction to Mr.
Barrow, I say you may as well alledg against St. Paul his Pharisaical practices,
persecutions, and blasphemies before he came to the truth, as evidence to
confute Christian Religion which afterward he embraced.

6. Sin you lay upon us is our opinions the matter of our Schism Brownisme
as you call it: which I have already cleared to be the undoubted truth of God,
and whereto I require you^ answer, or else I affirm before the Lord that you are
not able: and that being convinced and your mouth stopped, either you must
yield to the truth, or else woe be unto you from the Lord.

And so lend my answer leaving your advertisements and counsels of peace
untouched as matters nothing perteyning to the cause of the Separation: they
being like Apollos Oracles apt to be expounded either way: or like Delphos
sword fit to be used for any purpose: for they may fit, either Papist,
Protestant, Reformist, or the Separation.

An advertisement to the Reader.
It may happily be thought that this treatise (by reason of the tartnes of some
speeches phrases, and censures, passed upon Mr. Be. the ministers, and Church
of England) may pass the bounds of Christian wisdom and charity: especially
considering that we of the Separation cannot be ignorant, what great offense
there is taken at Mr. Barrowes bitterness in his discovery, and that we know how
greatly the forward preachers and professors of the land desire to be mildly
and gently handled, and to have a charitable censure paste of them in respects
of their Religious dispositions to the truth: well: For Mr. Be. let him know for
his part that he is fallen into a deep pit of Apostasy from his formerly
seeming sincerity, and if men may be judged by that which is visible, I see no
reason why the forward preachers and professors of the Lands should not esteem
of him as they do of Mr. Merbury, since Mr. Be. is now fallen to his gracious
Lords as well as the other: only Mr. Ber. case is something better in this
respect, that he wants some of Achitophels policy, and Rabsakeh his railing,
and of Tertullus Rhetotick to oppose the truth: in respect whereof there is hope
that Mr. Be. sinning through infirmity, simplicity, weakness of judgment, and
violence of affection may by some sharp effectual ingredients, having vomited
up al his choler, and purged out al his evil humors, be reduced either to as
good, or to a better constitution then wherein he formerly was and ^o this
purpose is all the sharp physic administered upon him in this prescript: and
so the Author does intreath Mr. Ber. in his best love to interpret it: and to
remember what Nathan said unto David: thou art that man: and what David
answered Nathan: I have sinned: and what comfort Nathan presently annexed: The
Lord has put away thy sin: This condition we unfeignedly wish to Mr. Be. our
old and kind friend: and for the forward preachers and professors of the Land,
they must understand, that our censure must be and is only according to that
which is visible in their communion: now in that respect seeing the Church,
Ministry, Worship, and Government, of the English Ecclesiastical assemblies
is judged and proved false, and Antichristian: how is it possible that we
should speak otherwise of them as they are ministers and members of that
Antichristian body then as of false ministers and false Christians what would
they have us speak as the false Prophets did, Peace, Peace, where there is no
peace? would they have us proclayme, The Temple of the Lord: The Temple of the
Lord: to the Synagogues of Antichrist? this were to deceave them, and to daube
the wall with untempered mortar: but if the forward preachers and professors of
the Land do imagine that we condemn them, as persons void of grace, as
excluded from salvation by Christ or the like censures: we give them to
understand that the Scripture teaches us no such thing, but rather forbids
such censures, for we are not to judge before the time: and therefore concerning
this particular we absolutely leave them to the Lord, not doubting but he has
his thousands among them: desiring them to remember that it is one thing to
apply the Scripture, to lay the salve to the sore, to denounce judgment against
the sin: another to pronounce the sentence of absolution and condemnation
which Christ Jesus alone (into whose hands the Father has committed al
judgment) shall do, and which for any man to vsurp is to intrude into Christ's
throne and seat of mercy and justice.

But if there be any in the assemblies, either forward preacher and professor
that sees this truth of the Separation, and yields not in obedience to
forsake that Antichristian way, and to walk in the truth, let him know, that
seeing his heart condemns him, God is greater then his heart: and blessed is he
that condemns not himself in that which he allows: and thus humbly and
heartily desiring the Lord to show the light of his truth more and more upon
the Land, and at the length utterly to disperse all that mist and darkness that
overshadweth and obscureth the truth, I cease writing: wishing all welfare to
the upright hearted Reader.

FINIS.
A Lettre written to Mr. A. S.
By John Smyth.
Aister S. being requested by Mr. H. your kind friend and mine, as also, out of
M mine own inclination to do you good, whom I hear to be strongly carried
out of the true way, and in respect of the ancient acquaintance which I had
with you in the university of Cambridge, I thought good at this time in few
lines to salute you, hoping that you will interpret this which I do in good
part. I desire you would communicates this my writing with Mr. B. our old
Friend, and with whomesoever else you shall see cause, that you al whom I take
to be the Lords people yet in Babylon, may come forth of her, that ye be not
pertaker of her sins, and that ye receave not of her plagues: you wrote to
Mr. H. certain reasons provinge your Church a true Church, and your ministry
a true ministry, this Letter Mr. H. has lost, and so the particulars there of
he cannot perfectly remember: you wrote another Letter after unto him, wherein
you triumphed before the victory: I have adventred in this writing to declare
unto you, both the insufficiency of such your reasons, for your Church and
ministry, as Mr. H. remembers, as also the substance of that truth which we
profess; and for the which we suffer bonds, loss of goods, banishment, and
death, according as the Lord allotteth to us: Mr. S. I pray you be persuaded
that that which we do, we do it not rashly, nor upon coffeehouse, nor in
pride, or upon any sinister respect: no: we call God to record to our fowls
that the evidence of the truth workinge upon our consciences through the Lords
unspeakable mercy, even contrary to our rebellious nature, has mightelye
convinced and violently carried us to this truth we profess and practice:
hear our grounds, and then give sentence, weigh al things indifferently, cast
prejudice into nether balance, examine what I say by the word, and lean not
to any man's opinion, and I dare adventure my credit that then the light of this
truth wills shine in your heart, and then I pray you put it not away: so with
this preface I begin to lay down the grounds of our cause which is also the
Lords everlastinge truth the grounds are these.

1. The covenant, the promise, Christ, is given to Abraham the Father of the
faithful, and to al those that are of the faith of Abraham, and to no other: as
is plain by these Scriptures. Genesis 17.7. Levit. 26.9.12. Luke 1.72.74 Romans
4.10 12.23.24. John. 8.39.44. Mat. 3.9. Gal. 3.7.9.16.

2: This covenant is not limited at the pleasure of men, but it is absolute,
no Prince nor State can either ad to it, or take ought from it, or alter the
least part of it, but God gives whole Christ, all the promises, the whole
covenant on his behalf to the faithful: and the faithful on the other side
promise to be Gods people: wholly to deny themselves and to obey God in every
one of his precepts, even the least, though it cost them their lives, Ge^.
17.1. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Mat. 22.32. Romans 8.32. 2. Cor. 1.20. Mat. 10.37-39.

3. Two or three faithful men have this covenant, promises, Christ, given unto
them immediately from heaven, and not by means of any State, Prince, Priest,
Prelate whatsoever: but whersoever two or three faithful people arise in the
world, in what country or nation soever, at what time soever, there and then,
the covenant, promises, and Christ is theirs, and with them, 2. Cor. 6.17.18.
Mat. 18.20. and 28.20, Act. 4.12. Heb. 8.10. Apoc. 1.11. and 14.9.^2. 1. Pet.
1. 1 Act. 2.39. Aproc. 17.13.14.

4. These faithful people whersoever they arise in the World, must be
Separated from the World, and from all uncleanness whatsoever: For the
faithful must not draw the yoke with unbelievers, righteousness can have no
fellowship with unrighteousness, light can have no communion with darkness,
Christ can have no concord with Behall, that is, with a Society that is
without his yoke, the believer can have no part with the unbeliever, and the
Temple of God can have no agreement with Idols. 2. Corinthians. 6.16.18. Apoc.
14.9-11. Deuteronomy. 22.10. and 7.2.3.6. Act. 19.9. Ephe. 5.7.11.

5. A few faithful people standing in confusion with unbelievers, vnseperated
from them, being one body with them, in that estatestanding are not a true
church of Christ, which I prove by diverse reasons.

1. The faithful have the Spirit of Christ, the unbelievers have the Spirit of
satan, how can these two contrary Spirits, these two contrary sorts of
persons combyne together, 2. Cor. 6.14.15.16.

2. There is enimity put betwixt these two sorts of persons, ergo: they cannot
combine together, see Genesis 3.15.

3. The covenant, promises, Christ, is the faithfuls only: how can unbelievers
have any part in them.

6. Seeing the faithful being but few, have the covenant, promises, Christ,
therefore they have power to all the means whereby they shall enjoy Christ as
the word, seals of the covenant, the ministry, the power of binding and
losing, for all these are parts of the covenant, they are the promises, they
are the means of pertaking Christ. Roman. 3.2. and 4.11. Act. 6.5. and 14.23.
Math. 18.18.20. 1. Cor. 3.21.22. 2. Pet. 1.3.4. 1. Tim. 4.8.

7. As they have the power of all these things, so they are commanded to use
al these helps, and are bound to obey the Lord in using all these means for
enjoying Christ, therefore they are bound to use the word, the seals of the
covenant, the ministry, the censures for their own mutual good. Deuter.
5.31.32.33. and 6.17. and 12.32. 1. Corint. 14.37. 1. Tim. 5.21. and 6.13.14.
Gal. 3.15. Iam. 1.19-22.1. Cor. 11.24. 25. Act. 6.3. Heb. 13.17. Mat. 18.15.17.

8. The faithful must be Separated from the wicked and unbelievers, 2. Corinthians. 6.17. They must Separate wicked men from among them by the censures,
1. Corinthians. 5.13. Math. 18.15.17. 2. Thessa 3.6.14. They must chose, aprove and
ordeine their own Elders and Deacons, Act. 6.3. and 14.23. 1. Tim, 3.10 and
6.13.14. As well as use the word and seals of the covenant.

9. If the faithful either do not Separate themselves from the wicked, or not
Separate the unbelievers from them: if they still mingle with them they
forfeite the covenant, they consent to all the sin of the unbelievers, to all
their profanation of the Holy things: seeing God has given them power to
reform themselves, and to keep all wicked persons from among their communion
by the censures of admonition and excommunication, Apoc. 18. 4 Ephesians. 5.7.11, 1.
Cor. 5.6. Mat. 13.33. 1. Cor. 12.17.22. Levit. 17.19. Mat. 22.39. Mat. 18.15.17.

10. If Kings and States forbid the faithful to use any of these helps and
means which God has given and commanded them to use, they are to lose their
lives rather then to forbear, because they are bound to obey God rather then
men, Act. 4.19. Deuteronomy. 12.32.

11. If Princes and States command the Church and faithful to entertain any
other ordinances, then these before rehearsed, they are not to obey, but rather
to leese their lives, 1. Tim. 6.13.14. Mat. 16.24.25. Apoc. 22.18.19.

Mr. S. these are the very grounds and principles of our cause, which is the
Lords truth, there are diverse other particulars which I think not fit to
relate unto you: They may be after discovered unto you upon occasion: Now I
come to answer your reasons for your Church and ministry: First, you say you
have a true church your reason is, for that you have the word truly preached,
and the Sacraments duly administered.

I confess that wheresoever these things are found there is a true Church,
but I deny the word to be truly Preached, and the Sacraments duly
administered in any parish Church of England, which I manitest unto you after
this manner.

1. First, the people pertakinge in the seals of the covenante in prayer, and
in the communion of Holy things: are not a people Separated from all the
unbelievers, open sinners of the Land, but stand still in conlusion with them,
submittinge to all the false Government of the Prelates, etc. Such a people so
standinge have no title to the covenant, to Christ, to the promises, see the
first ground: supra.

2. Secondly, this people so mingled with the wicked of the Land, cannot be a
true Church, saying it is impossible for them to be conjoined and combyned
together into one body, as the true Church is. For as two disparate seeds,
viz: of an horse and an ass, do not produce either an Horse or an Ass, but a
mule. Genes. 36.24. So of the two contrary seeds of the Woman and of the
Serpent, Genes. 3.15. can not proceed a true Church, but some thing of another
nature, viz: a false Church: Wherefore in the false Church cannot the word be
truly preached, and the Sacraments duly administered.

3. Thirdly, there is one only true form of a visible Church. Ephesians. 4.4. One
body, which body is called Christ, 1. Corinthians. 12.12. Galat. 3.16. This one
body has one Spirit, Ephesians. 4.4. This one body guided by this one Spirit, has
one Lord. Ephesians. 4.5. Which Lord is Christ the only Lawgiver: It has also
one faith, which is the faith expressed in the writings of the Apostles. it
has also one Baptism whereby men are admitted into this faith, submitted unto
this Lord, baptized into this Spirit, incorporated into this body: and so have
one God and Father: one hope of life everlastinge, to whom the promises and
covenant is given: Now in the assemblies of England there are diverse Faythes,
one off the Puritanes so miscalled, another of the Prelates, a third of the
Papists that come to Church, a fourth of the ignorant persons. go, they
cannot be one, and they deny themselves to be of the same body with Papists,
Atheists, Prelates, witches conjurers, theves, murderers, blasphemers,
drunckerds, usurers, etc. Therefore they are not the true body of Christ, the
true Church of God, therefore all the holy things are profaned, when they are
there administered, how then can they be said, as you plead to be truly
administered in the assemblies of England.

4. Add hereunto that the most forward Preachers and Professors of the Land do
not practice according to that which they know the Lord requires to be
practiced, viz: in admitting of al to the Holy things good and bad, in
neglecting the censures utterly: in setching the Ministers calling from the
prelates whom they hold Antichristian: in submitting to their Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction which is unlawful thereby yealding their consciences to other
Lawgivers then Christ: For their canno^s and Christ's laws are contrary: how
can we say that they that thus do, sinning against their consciences, in this
manner, are Separated from al sin, touch no unclean thing, and so how can
they be said in that constitution the true Church, and so how can the word be
said truly preached and the Sacraments duly administered in that estate?

Thus Mr. S. you see your Church is proved not to be true, and your signs of a
true church therefore not to be found in your assemblies. Your second point
follows, viz: that your ministry is a true ministry: I pray you how can
there be a true miuisterie, where is a false Church: does not the true
ministry arise out of the true Church? can there be a true ministry and a
false Church? I know not how these things can stand together.

But let us hear your arguments, to prove your true ministry.

First, you say there is a true ministry because men are converted thereby: I
answer conversion is no sign of a true ministry: For Prophets, Priests,
Apostles, Evangelists, ordinary Prophets, Pastors, private men, private women
have converted, John. 4.39. Phillip. 1.14.15. 1. Cor. 14.24.31. Act. 9.1. and
11.19.21. Ergo: conversion apertaineth not only to ministers nither is it a
proper effect or adjunct of a true ministry.

Secondly, let your argument be framed after a true form: it will be this:
whosoever converteth souls is a true Pastor: The ministers of the church of
England convert souls go, they are true Pastors.

I make another argument: whosoever converteth souls is an Apostle, 1. Cor.
9.2. The ministers of England convert souls, go: they are Apostles: The like
arguments may be made to prove the ministers of England, Priests, extraordinary
Prophets, evangelistes, yea Christ himself, Mat. 11.5. Ierm. 23.22. Malach.
4.6. Act. 8.12. Now Mr. S. judge whither your Argument be good, to prove a true
ministry, yea or nay.

Thirdly I would know whither you think that the Ministers of the Romish
Church are true Ministers, yea or nay: but it is manifest, Apoc. 18, 4. that
Gods people are in Rome how came they thither? there they are converted: how was
Luther, Husse, Ierom of Prage the waldenses converted? how were they converted
in King Henry the 8. time? answer this if you can I pray you.

Fourthly, it is not the work of the Officers of the Church to convert souls,
but to sede and edify them being convertedia Pastor does not make sheep, but
fedeth, guides, and tends his sheep: the members of the true Church are al
Saints, now Saints are converted already: and the Officers of the Church are
conversant about the Saints converted, not about the profane unconverted, you
know a shepherd and a flock are convertible: therefore the place Ephe. 4.12,
does not signify as it is transtated gathering or converting the Saints. But
it signifies the joining of them as you may see, Gal. 6.1. and the mending of
any thing, Mat. 4.21.

Lastly, how can you or any man prove to me out of the word that you convert
souls by your ministry? men that are converted, are converted to the true
faith, which is one, which true faith is only in the true Church, which is the
body Christ, which is but one, Ephesians. 4.4.5.6. But your Church is not true,
therefore your faith is not true, therefore you convert none to the true faith
which Gods word does declare unto us: I confess that there are thousands which
I am persuaded aperteyne to the Lords election, but which they be in particular
I certainly know not: I hope well of you and many more that I know.

Now that your faith is not true I prove thus: They which beleve not Christ to
be their King, or if they know him to be there King, do not submit to his
Kingdom have not the true says, Luke 19.27. But none of you in your assemblies
believe Christ to be your King, or if ye do yield not to his Kingdom, which is
his visible Church, and the ordinances thereof, seeing you mingle with all the
profane in the Land, reject his Officers, submit to the Prelates unlawful
authority Ecclesiastical, neglect his laws, statutes and Judgments, viz: the
censures of admonition and excommunication.

Secondly, you say you have a true ministeri, 1. because God has sent you,
because he has given you gifts, 2. you are allowed to exercise your gifts by
some approved there unto, and 3. your gifts are approved by your people among
whom you administer, this is the some of your reason, where unto I answer many
things, first to your first point.

1. That God sends none ordinarily, but those whom the true Church sends,
but your is not the true Church as is proved: therefore God sends you not,
seeing you are not sent by the true Church, which you have not: again it does
not follow that because you have gifts, that therefore you are sent, for there be
among the Popish Priests men that have excellent gifts, and yet you will not say
they are sent: so among the common and civil lawyers, there are men that have
gifts, yet you cannot say, they are sent: Lastly, if you be sent of God, how
is it that contrary to the L. commandment you keep silence when the
Prelates silence you? For if God has sent you, who can forbid you?

2. To your second point I answer thus: viz: 1. that the allowance you have,
is not sufficient for the true Church must and does and can only give
sufficient allowance or power to her Officers, which you have not.

2. The Prelates which are in unlawful Ecclesiastical authority, can give no
sufficient authority or allowance to true Ministers, for can good come from
evil? 3. if you say you have your authority from the civil State, I answer,
the civil State can not give Ecclesiastical authority, 4. if you challenge your
power from some Presbytery of Ministers: I answer they must show that they
have power to give you authority.

3. I say as before, that every particular visible Church, which is a communion
of Saints and faithful people, has al power Ecclesiastical with in it self,
which your parishes can not have, because they are confused rowtes, mingle
mangles of al sorts, cages to hold every unclean and hateful bird, Apoc.
18.2. contrary to Deuteronomy. 14.2.3.11.12. unequally equally yoaked contrary to
the Type. Deuter. 22. to. And contrary to the truth, 2. Corinthians 6.14. and
therefore it is impossible that you should have a true calling, from them who
have no power of Christ given them to enjoy the covenant, promises, Christ, or
any means to partake Christ: as is already proved unto you, and so your third
point all so falls to the ground.

Breefly therefore to discover unto you the true calling which is only one,
for there is only one true way for Officers to enter into Office, viz: that
way which is taught by Christ, for he is the door into the Shepefold, and
whosoever climeth up any other way (Christ says) is a these and a robber,
John. 10.1.7.9, the true calling is this. 1. A company of faithful people, 2.
must be Separate from all wicked men, 3. joined together into covenant to enjoy
all Gods ordinances. 4. assembled with fasting, and prayer, 5. must chose out
from among themselves, one or more able persons, 6. must be approved according
to the rules: mentioned by the Apostle, 1. Timoth. 3. and afterward, 7. charged
and commanded to administer faith fully that this is so, these places witness,
Roman. 1.7. 1* Corinth. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.4. Apocal. 17.14. and 15.3. Apocal. 18.4.
2. Corinthians. 6.17. Ephesians. 5.7. Deuter, 29.9.13. Joshua. 24.25. Act. 3.25. Heb.
8.10. Act. 13.2.3. and 14.23. and 6.5.1. Tim. 3.10. Tit. 1.6.9.1. Tim. 6.3.14.
Act. 20.28. 1. Pet, 5.1.3.4.

Now Mr. S. show me such a Church, and such a Ministry, in any parish Church
in England, and I will acknowledge it a true Church, and that ministry, a true
ministry: but if you cannot show it, give us leave to do as we ^oe
according to that which we have showed you warrant for our of the word.

And now I pray you examine these things carefully, and think it not labor
lost to search and weigh seriously the Scriptures by me quoted in every point.
Know that the Lord will not be served with halves, he will have all or none: I
confess you have much good doctrine among you: yea you have the doctrine of
Christ's Preisthood pure in his Sacrifice and intercession, but you have utterly
cast of his Kingdom, which as the true constitution of the visible Church in
the true causes essential thereof, viz: 1. the true matter which are only
Saints, 2. the true form which is the covenant to walk in all Gods ways. 3.
The true essential properties which is the power of our Lord Jesus Christ
especially in binding and losing, without which it is impossible for the Church
to continue a Holy communion among themselves: all this you want, and therefore
you in the assemblies deny Christ the King to reign over you, you have
rejected Christ's Testament, for his Testament is that which he has purchased
with his blood: as you may see, 1. Corinthians. 14.25. Heb. 10.29. For the Old
Testament was abolished by the blood of his cross, and the new Testament
succeeded and in established in stead thereof by his blood: for Christ by his
Preisthood obtained his Kingdom, and now in his Kingdom dispenceth the virtue
of his Preishood to his subjects: Mr. S. I pray you consider carefully these
things, I know they are the undoubted and most clear and evident truth of Gods
word: and that will I adventure further to prove before any witnesses, upon the
hazard of my life if I may have audience: do not you now as you have once done
in your Letter to Mr. H. take it granted that nether he nor his leaders, as you
speak, can answer your arguments, you see it is otherwise: I pray you do not
oppose against this truth in your pulpits till you have thoroughly scanned all
things, and til you have had further passages with me about it: I did think
that I ought to do many things against this way, but it pleased the Lord at
the length to reveal his truth unto me, for the which I bless my God for
ever: I know if you once interest your self in opposition against the cause
publicly, it will be very hard for you afterward to deny your doings, and
to pull down that which you have built: Therefore be advised: raise up your
heart to enter into the cause, and be not afraid of it, deny al, even wife and
children, and life also: else you are not capable of this truth.

I pray you commend me to Mr. B. and to your self most kindly: The Lord of
his mercy vouchsafe to enlighten you with the evident brightness of his truth:
and the Lord open your heart to entertayne it in love: and the Lord guide your
feet into the way of peace: so in all kindness I take leave of you bidding you
most heartily farewell,

FINIS
A Lettre written to certain brethren in S.
By John Smyth.
Mercy and peace be multiplied unto you.

Rethte^: I am excedingly rejoiced in my soul hearing of the grace of God
bestowed B upon you: and althongh you are but few in number, yet considering
that the Kingdom of heaven is as a grain of mustard seed small in the
beginning: I do not doubt but you may in time grow up to a mu^titude, and be as
it weere a great t^ee full of Fruitful branches which I vnfeignedlie desire,
brethren, in your behalf at the Lords hands.

I have received your lettre long since, and I had sent you answer ere this if
I had had a co^venient messenger, but now having fit opportunity offered I do
willingly and of duty to you my brethren, to the L. Jesus, and his truth, make
answer to your motion: and whereas Mr. K. is a man famous in the Churches of
England for learning and sincerity being now grown aged in them both, it might
therefore be thought boldness in me to deal with him, yet being provoked
thereunto by you and by himself, and by my place which I sustain in the Church
of Christ, I durst not refuse, but choose rather to incure the undeserved
suspision of arroga^cie (if any man dare so deem it) by manifesting the truth,
then the deserved reproach of the denial of the truth, which is committed when
the truth is not defended upon due calling thereunto: First therefore I do
profess before al men that the truth we profess is mani^ested already
sufficiently (to all that will but open there eyes) in the writings of those
worthy witnesses of Jesus Christ, who have gone before us in the Testimony of
this truth we hold out to the world: and therefore I shall by this my writing,
only do that which is already done: and therefore this my labor might w^l have
been spared: Secondly, nevertheless because things may be further explaned and
manifested by several gifts: I thought it not amiss to show mine opinion also:
The rather being called thereunto, by your selves as also by Mr. K. breefly
therefore to come to the matter the two points to be proved are these.

First, that such matters as a^e excepted against in the Church of England are
contrary to the word of God.

Se^ondly: That they are in such sort opposite thereunto as thereby it is
become no Church meet for any good Christian to Remain in and to communicate
with.

These two points shall be manifestly proved by these Scriptures following.

1. First, your Church is not of the Apostolic constitution, but framed
according to the invention of man, which is proved thus. Deuteronomy. 14.2. compared
with 1. Pet. 2.9. Roman. 1.7.

1. The Churches of the Apostolic constitution consisted of Saints only.

The Churches of England consist not of Saints only.

Therefore the Churches of England are not of the Apostolic constitution, and
therefore are framed according to the invention of man.

The major is proved by the former Scriptures, for Moses calls the Jews an
Holy people ceremonially typing that the people of the new Testament should be
truly holy as Peter does expound it, and Paull exemplify it to the Romans
and in all his Epistles.

The minor is manifest: for all sorts of persons, Atheists, Papists,
adulterers, thieves, etc. and who not? are compelled to be and are members of
the English Churches. Ergo.

2. Again from that Church which is not of the Apostolic constitution, but
of man's invention, all the faithful must make Separation, 2, Chron. 13.5.-13.
and 30.5-12. compared with Revel. 14.9.10. and 18.4.5.

The Churches of England are not of the Apostolic constitution, but of man's
invention.

Therefore the faithful must make Separation from the Churches of England.

The major is proved thus as Ezechiah persuades the Israelites to Separate
from the Church of Ieroboams invention to join to the true Church of Judah
which was of Moses constitution, so John by vision is commanded to pronounce a
woe to them that give homage to Antichrists ordinances, and to persuade all the
faithful to Separate from Babylon, which is by interpretation a confusion: Now
all men's inventions are Antichristian, seeing that as Christ and Antichrist are
opposite, so are Christian and Antichristians. if there for the constitution of
the Churches of England be not of Christ's, that is of the Apostolic primitive
frame, it is of man, of Antichrist, and so woe be to them that do not Separate
from it.

2. Secondly, your ministry is not of the Apostolic primitive institution,
but framed according to man's invention which is proved thus, Heb. 5.4.5. Levit.
8. compared with Esaias. 66.20.21. Act. ^.3 -6. and Act. 14.23.

1. The true ministry of the Apostolic institution was by election,
approbation, and ordination of that particular holy people whereto they did
administer.

The ministry of the assemblies of England is not so, but after the invention
of man.

Therefore the ministry of the assemblies is not the true ministere of the
Apostolic institution, but devised by man.

The major is proved by the former scriptures, for as that only was the true
preisthood which Moses by the commandment of the L. appointed in the old
testament and therefore that of Ieroboams was false, 1. King. 12.31. and 2.
Chron. 13.9. So it the new Testament that is only the true ministry which is
of the Apostolic institution, viz: by election, ordination, approbation, of
that faithful and holy people whereto they administer.

The minor is evident: For the ministry of England, viz: the Prelacie,
Preisthood, and Deaconry, like three unclean Spirits proceed out of the month
of the beast, that is are by the Authority of the Roman Empire established:
Revel 16.15. out of the mouth of the false Prophet, that is are by Authority of
the Pope of Rome established: and out of the mouth of the Dragon, that is are
by the Authority of Satan himself established: For there is not a minister in
England Elected by that faithful people where he administreth, but is chosen by
a profane mixed people, if he be chosen, and law does not allow such election:
he is approved and ordained by Antichrist himself, coming but of the mouth of
the false Prophets the Prelates of the Land.

2. Again, from that ministry which is not of the Apostolic institution,
but of man's invention must all the good Christians make Separation, Deuteronomy. 13.3.
Math. 7.15. ^. Timoth. 3.5. Revel. 14.9.2. Corinth. 11.13-15. Rever. 2.2.

The Ministry of England is not of the Apostolic institution, but of man's
invention.

Therefore all good Christians must make Separation from the Ministry of
England.

The Major is proved thus: as in the old Testament Moses commands not to
harke^ to false Prophets, Ezechiah endevoreth to draw the people from Ieroboams
Priest, So in the new Testament Christ wills to take heed of false Prophets,
Paull wills to turn away from such, and a woe is threatened by John to all that receave the beasts mark from his Ministers.

Thirdly, you worship is not of the Apostolic primitive institution, but is
invented by man and so is Antichristian: as may be proved thus, Act. 2.4.11.42.
and 10.46. and 19.6. Romans 8.26. 1. Cor. 12.7. and 14.15.26.

1. The true worship of the Apostolic institution proceeded merely from the
Spirit having no outward help of devised forms of prayers, exhortations,
psalms, and Ceremonies.

The worship of the English assemblies proceeds out of the Servicebook in
devised forms of prayers, exhortations, and psalms, and other Ceremonies.

Therefore the wors his of the English assemblies is not the true worship of the
Apostol^que institution, but is invented by man.

The major is manifest by the places alleged: For upon the day of Pentecost
the Apostles had the holy Ghost given them in the shape of fiery and cloven
tongues, and thervppon they spoke as the holy Ghost gave them utterance,
manifesting the Spirit to the hearets, and so was it with the Gentiles afterward
when the holy Ghost came upon them, and since that time all the churches of
the Apostolic institution worshipped afther the same manner, for all Churches
worshipped after one manner, 1. Cor. 16.1. and 14.36.37. and 11.2 16. where note
that if devised forms of prayers, psalms, exhortations, were Gods ordinances,
the Apostles would have delivered them to the Churches, and they should have
received upon the day of Pentecost fiery books as well as fiery tongs.

The minor is evident and needs no proof. Ergo.

2. Again* From that worship which is invented by man, and not of the
Apostolic institution mustal the good Christians Separate, Col. 2.20-23. Mat.
15.9. Levit. 10.1.2. compared with Act. 2.3.

The worship of the English assemblies is invented by man, and not of the
Apostolic institution.

Therefore from the worship of the English assemblies ought al good Christians to
Separate.

The major is proved thus: For seeing the worship of the asse^blies is
wil*worship, vaine-worship, devised by man, not kindled with the true living
fire which came down from heaven upon the primitive Church, but with such a
strange fire as Nadab and Abihu offered withal, therefore it is idolatry and so
to be Separated from.

4. Fourthly, the Government of the assemblies is Antichristian by the
confession of themselves, and therein can no good Christian join, except it be
lawful for a good Christian which is or ought to be a subject of Christ's
Kingdom which is visible Church, to submit to the utter enemy of Chr. and to
his authority, which what is it else but to be a traitor against the L. Jesus?
yet for further proof I reason thus from these places, Act. 14.23. and 20.28.
Phillip. 1.1. 1. Pet. 5.1.-4.

1. The Government of the primitive Apostolic institution was by a College
of pastors, or presbytery.

The Government of the English assemblies is by an Antichristian prelate and
his Officers.

Therefore the Government of the English assemblies is not the primitive
Apostolic Government.

The major is evident thus: For the Apostles instituted Elders by the election
of the Saints to oversee the Church and feed the Flock of one particular
visible Church only, as is manifest among the Ephe^ians, Philippians, Hebrews,
and al Churches.

The minor is evident: For the Prelates and there officers are not those
Christian Bishops of the Apostolic institution, elected by and placed over
one particular Church of the Saint, but are a devised ^yrannical Lord^hip
^uling hundreths of parishes by there own devised Canons. Ergo.

2. Again: From the Government which is devised by man in the Church, and so
is Antichristian, and which is not of the Apostolic institution must al good
Christians Separate. Luke 19.27. 1. Cor. 7.23. Revel. 14.9.

The Government of the English assemblies is not of the Apostolic
institution, but is devised by man and Antichristian.

Therefore, from the Government of the English assemblies must al good Christians
Separate.

The major is manifest by the places alleged, for seeing Christ Jesus only must
reign in the hearts of the faithful by his own^ officers and laws: therefore
good Christians must only submit to his officers, and if they submit to any new
officers devised by man, Christ says he will have the^ slain, they are the
Servants of men, and obeying the Antichristian beast have a woe threatened
against them.

Thus brethren have I written unto you according to your request, and Mr. K.
his direction proofs of those two points which you expect and that in 4. main
transgressions in the English assemblies, viz: in the constitution, ministry,
worship, and Government of them: I pray you brethren keep the copy I send you
safe, and let Mr. K. have a transcript of it, and if it please him to answer, I
will be ready to explane matters more fully if there be any ambiguity, and to
confirm matters doubtful and that especialy for your establishment in the
truth: which now blessed be the Lord is so evident that all the men upon earth
with there learning can never be able to obscure it: Brethren I beseech you grow
in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be praise in
his Church throughout all generations, Amen.

Your Brother in the Faith John Smyth.

The Printer to the Reader.
Though in this treatise there be diverse Lettes, either wanting, or superfluous,
or displaced, or changed, by reason whereof some words are corrupted: yet
because English men can easily help that fault, I thought it needless to put
them in these Errata: Only these four great oversights I desire may be
corrected, page 41. Lin. 1. for: Church by the Presbytery, read, Church to the
Presbytery. page, 75. Lin. 44. after the last words, read. So in the New
Testament. page 128. Lin. 32. For Religion is etc. read, Religion is. heresy:
if this argument be false then is yours false. page 128. Lin. 34. For: is so,
read, become. The lesser faults I desire the Reader to pardon.


