XII. merry Jests, of the wyddow Edyth,
THis lying widow, false and crafty,
Late i^ England, has deceived many:
Both men and women of every degree,
As well of the Spiritual, as temporaltie
Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen also:
Yemen, Grooms, and that not long ago,
For in the time of King Henry the eight
She has used many a subtle slight,
What with lieng, weepyng and laughyng
Dissemblyng, boastyng, and flatteryng,
As by this Book hereafter does appear
Who so list the matter now for to here:
No feigned Stories, but matters in deed
Of. xii. of her Iestes, here may ye reed.
Now newly printed, this present year,
For such as delight, merry Jests for to here.
1573.

The Contents of of these. xii. merry Iestes following.
THe first merry Jest, declares: how this fair and merye Maiden Edyth, was
married to one Thomas Else, and how she ran away with another, by whom she had
a bastard Daughter and how she deceived a Gentleman, bearing him in hand, how
her Daughter was Heir to fair Lands, and great Richesse.

The second merye Jest: how this lying Edyth, made a poor man to vnthatch his
House, bearyng him in hand, that she would cover it with Lead: and how she
deceived a Harbor, making him believe she was a widow, and had great abundance
of Gooddes.

The third merry Jest: how this wydow Edyth, deceived her Host at Hormynger,
and her Host at Brandonfery, and borrowed money of them both: and also one
master Guy, of whom she borrowed iiii. Marks.

The fourth merry Jest, how this wydow Edith deceived a Doctor of divinity, at
S. Thomas of Akers in London, of. v. Nobles he laid one for her, and how she
gave him the slyp.

The fifth merye Jest: how this wydow Edyth deceived a man and his wife that
were ryding on Pylgremage: of. iiii. Nobles yt they laid out for her: and how
she deceived a Scriuener in London, whose name was M. Rowse.

The sixth merye Jest: how this wydowe Edyth deceived a Draper in London, of a
new Gown and a new Kyrtell: and how she sent him for a Nest of Gobblets, and
other Plate, to that Scriuener whom she had deceived before.

The vii. merry Jest, how she deceived a Servant of Sir Thomas Neuells, who in
hope to have her in Marriage, with al her great Richesse, kept her company, till
al his money was spent: and then she took her flight, and forsook him.

The eight merry Jest, how this wydow Edyth deceived a Servant of the Bishop of
Rochesters, with her coggynge, and boastynge of her great Richesse: who like
wise thought to have had her in Marriage.

The, ix. merry Jest: how she deceived a Lord, sometime Earl of Aru^dell: and
how he sent. v. of his men servants and a handmaid, to bear her company, and
fetch her Daughter: who as she boasted, was an Heir of great Lands.

The tenth merye Jest: how she deceived three young men of Chelsey, that were
servants to Sir Thomas More, and were all three suitors unto her for Marriage:
and what mischaunce happened unto her.

The xi. merry Jest: how she deceived three young men of the Lord Legates
Servants, with her great liyng crakyng and boastyng of her great Treasure and
Iueiles.

The. xii. merye Jest: how this wydow Edyth deceived the good man of the three
Cups in Holburne, and one John Cotes: and how they both ryd with her to S
Albons to ouersee her houses and lands: and how they were rewarded.

FINIS.
The Preface,
IN the City of Exceter by West a way
The time not passed hence many a day.
There dwelled a Yoman discrete and wise,
At the Sign of the Flowerdelyse.
Which had to name John Haukyn,
Descended he was of an honest line:
A Man but of a mean stature, * reversed

Full well compact in every feature.
Broad he was from pine to pine, (*)

And red in the face when he drank wine: reversed

Black was his Hair, and hooked his nose,
And now and then, had the cough and the pose.
A sycknesse rayned upon him aye, * reversed

Which troubled him sore night and day:
Beside the Cough, a bloody flyx, (*)

And ever among a deadly yex. (^)

Which brought him to his final day ()

But ere that time. I will you say * reversed

He did espouse within that Country
In process of years Wives three:
Each after other in mirth and game,
Women of great substance and fame.
And namely the last wedded wife,
With whom he lived withouten strife:
The space of full fyfteen^ year,
By than: he was laid on a Bear.
A Daughter he had within band of marriage,
By his last Wife, a worthy caryage:
Which named was Edyth at the Fontstone,
Of. ii. women and a man, of blood and bone.
And when that her Father was laid in grave, * reversed

From fire and water her to save.
Her Mother aye did her busy cure,
As Mothers done by course of nature:
And virtuously as I have hard say, * reversed

She brought up her daughter night and day.
Charging her upon her blessyng,
That she ne should meddle with any thing:
That sowned unto good huswyfry,
But aye study to forge and lie:
And countenance it right well thereto, * reversed

In every place where she did go.
This Child obeyng her Mother dear,
Answered to her as you shall hear:
Mother she said, I am your Daughter,
I will endeavor my self there after:
While that I live, I shall resign * reversed

All such as pertayne to verteous dicyplyne.
My study shall be: how I may conclude
In things the people to delude:
Thus is the Mother and Daughter agreed,
Now go said the Mother, God thee, speed:
Thomas Else loves thee well perfay,
And woeth thee fast day by day:
His desire is to have thee to wife,
And to live together all your life.
Wed him hardely spare not a dele, * reversed

And take another, when he has not his hele:
Daughter, meke merry whiles thou may,
For this world will not last always. * reversed

She promised her Mother to do full well,
Every thing after her counsel.
FINIS.
The first merye Jest: declares, how this fair and well nurtured Damsel
Edyth, was married to one Thomas Else: and how she ran away with another, by
whom she had a bastard Daughter: and how she deceived a Gentleman, who (for
her worthiness) preferred her to Sir Thomas De^nys, before whom she avouched
her Daughter to be Heir of fair lands.
THomas Else she married for a year or two,
And then left him, and away did go:
With a servant of the Earl of Wyltshyre,
The which paid her well her hyre.
By him in aduoutry a child she had,
Which dyed when it was but a Lad:
Than her Lemman cast her up,
Go where she would, gup queen gup:
She took her way from thence over,
To a Town called Andouer.
And there she made a Gentylman
Believe that she was from him gone,
To seek her a friend, which in her right
Would defend her with main and might,
For great wrong she said she had:
And by mighty hand, was sore bestad.
And by mighty hand wrongfully rest
Both house and land, and nothing to her left,
And what so he were that of good Affection,
would her help: the whole disposition
Of her only Daughter he should have,
which is a great Heir, God her save:
This Gentilman went her right,
To Sir Thomas Dennis a worshipful Knight
Informyng him, how that it stood,
With this wydow, of gentle blood.
And how that she had a Daughter and Heir,
Tender of Age, goodly and fair:
Which should inherit successively,
Both house and land: and that good plenty.
And who that would help her to her right,
Should have her Daughter day and night,
In honesty to use: and her self both,
which thing she bound with a great Oath.
The Knight hearing this every dell,
Bad the gentylman, no longer to dwell,
But walk with her, and fet her Daughter,
And we shall commyn more hereafter.
Then they departed, and wandered right forth,
Till they with good speed came both to Wainsworth
And there the gentylman, full well did epsy,
How the c^ggyng queen, most falsely did lie.
Then would he no longer give heed to her talk
But bad her be packyng with a vengeance, and walk
And never to come in his sight any more.
Sir, no more I will not (quoth she) and god before.
The second merry Jest: how this liynge Wydowe Edyth, made a poor man to
vnthatch his House, and bore him in hand, she would bestow the coueryng of it
with Lead: and how she deceived a Harbor, making him believe she was a Wydowe,
and had great abundance of Richesse.
FRom Wainsworth than, she took her way.
To liew: where the^, ye Lord Chamberlayn lay
And not far from his place, a good long space,
In a poor man's house lodged she was:
And was in good credence with him in deed,
She seeing the house covered with reed:
Said to her Host upon a day,
Mine Host (quod she) next to the hye way,
Take ye the thak of your house a down,
It is a foul sight buttyng on the town:
Have it away fast, leave the Rafters bare,
And for a new covering take ye no care.
It shall be hilled again ere it be long,
But look ye well that the Rafters be strong:
For I tell you they shall bear a great weight
Host (quod she) I swear by this light:
I will have that end covered with Lead,
Came never such a covering over thy head.
Nor none of thy kin I may say to thee,
It lies in my Store house, so mote I thee.
In fair plain rolls new melt with glede,
My Plommer bestowed it, I pray God him speed
An honest man is he, and expert in that Art,
The self some day that he did depart
A way from my house I cannot tell where,
Many a fair Noble with him he did bear.
Her Host when be had hard this tale,
With his hands his cap he began avale:
And with his knees flexed, said unto her there
I cry you mercy Mistress, what do you here?
In this poor cotage which is not meet for you
Hold thy peace (quod she) for I will not be kno
What I am as yet* and for consideration,
Go thou thy way and work after the facion.
As I have said: and look thou speak no word
But is none of my Lords servants at board
With you (quod she) nor hawnte they not hear
It is like yt they should, for you have good beer.
Yes (quod her host) now and then among,
My Lords Harbor is here, with many a good song
A lively young man I tell you and full of courage,
Sometime we have here, our whte Wine with borag
And waters pyping hot, out of the glede,
We chat and laugh it out, so God me speed:
Mistress folk must need be merry sometime.
Host, ye say true by holy, Saint Sym:
Quod the wydow, but let us go to dinner,
It is. xii. of the cloak and somewhat over:
Into the house they go, and take refection,
And after they fell in further communication.
This young man yt harbor as he was accustomed
Came in suddenly and bids them God speed:
Welcome my guest (quod ye good man of yt house)
How have you done, since we eat the sowse:
The last night ye remember to bedward?
Tut and it were a stone never so hard
Quoth this harbor, it should digest with me
For sometime when it will not forge,
I drink a little lamp Oil, and cast up my gorge
And then forth with, I am as hole as a trowt,
But Host, (quod he) what woman went out
At the Door now: do you know her well?
By gods body Thomas harbor, I shall thee tell
She is a widow of late come to town,
But at al adventures, I had lever tha^ my gown
Thou were sure to her, for she to me said,
She is worth a. M. li. and every man paid
Beside land, I cannot tell how much,
The harbor began to claw there it did not ych
Hold your peace (quod he) she comes in again,
Mistress said Thomas, will it plese you to drink
And be ye merry, and use not to think:
Me seems, it becomes a well favored wight
And namely a woman to be glad and light.
Young man (quod she) I thank God of his lone,
I have no great cause to make any moan:
I knowledge this, that God has indewed me
An hundred fold better than I am worthy:
And I pray to him, that I never do the thing
Which is contrary, unto his hye pleasyng:
Gods blessig have you (said Thomas harbor)
Forsooth ye speak like a good Cristian creature
But let us leave all this, and make some good cheer
Ostes, fill us another pot with beer
Quod yt Harbor, and bid this gentilwoma^ welco^e
Mistrisse said yt good wife, this is all and some,
Ye be heartily welcome, even at one word
And therewith she drove ye Cat of the board
And made rome for a dish or two more.
This wydow had under her chin, a sore
That Surgeons call Noli me tangere,
Which when the harbor did espy
He said Misterisse, may I be so bold?
Nay yet I will not touch it, for my hand is cold
I pray you what is this, God save the mark?
A thing (quod she) yt I will take no great cark,
For Surgery thereto: for I was borne so,
I thank God whether I ride or go:
It does not grieve me otherwise than you see
And it is no great blemysh, so mote I thee
Quod the Harbor, but a little eye sore:
Now Mistrisse, do ye gladly, I can no more,
I trust we shall make better chere then this,
And then he began for to coll her and kiss:
So long they were dalliyng, both day and night
Till each had others their troth yplyght,
which was the same day, as I hard say,
That the thatch of the house was pulled away
And asked they were in holy church,
where Christ's workmen do wurche.
But when he by long communication,
Knew her falshod and dissimulation,
And after he perceived, he was begyled,
In all the haste, his wife he exyled,
Ratyng her with terms somthyng rude,
And here of him, I will conclude.
The third merye Jest: how this Wydow Edyth, decyued her Host at Hormynger,
and her Host at Brandonfery, and borrowed money of them both and also, one
Master Guy, of whom she borrowed iiij. Mark.
THis wydow then walked withouten fere,
Till that she came to Hormynger:
within two miles of S Edmunds bery.
And there she abode, full iocunde and merry.
For the space fully of. vi. weeks day,:
And borrowed money there as she lay
Her old lies she occupied still.
The people gave credence her until.
At Thetford she said her stuff lay,
Which false was proved upon a day:
Than one master Lee committed her to ward
And little or naught she did it regard:
On the vi day after delivered she was,
And at her own lyberty to pass and repasse.
Then straight way she took to Brandonfery,
In all her life was she never so merry.
And there she borrowed of her Host,
Thirteen shillings: with myc^^^ boste
Of her great substance, which she sard she had,
To Bradefolde straight her Host she lad:
Where she said that she dwelled as than.
And when she came thither, she filled him a can
Full with good ale, and said he was welcome,
For his thirteen shillings, she had him bum
And laughed tyghe, no more could he have.
An oath he swear so God him save:
The Justice should know of her deceyt,
A whore (quod he) ^eyt whore,(...)eyt.
The Justice (...) was master Lee.
He sent her to Saint Edmunds berye,
And there in the Iayle half a year,
She continewed without good cheer.
But after she was delivered out,
Upon a(...) doubt.
My Lord Abbot commanded it should so be,
When he was remembered of his charity.
From thence she departed. and to Coulme she come
Where with her lies all and some:
She sudiorned, and was at horde.
In an house of my Lord of Oxenforde
Wherein a servant of his own did dwell.
Which brewed bear: but none to sell,
The Brewer was called John Douchmon.
With whom. vi. days she did won:
Then after to Stratford at the bow
She repaired right as I trow,
And. vii. days there she abode:
Spreding her lies all abroad.
In which time one Master Gye,
Supposing naught that she did lie:
And trustyng of not to have some good
Four Marks, by the sweet roode
He lent her out of his purs anon,
And ashed ay, when she would gone.
To the place where her goods were laid,
Which was at Barking (as she said)
Master Guy and his sister both,
To ride with her; they were not loath,
Ne grudged nothing, till they perceived
That she had them (...) deceived
Than Master Guy with (...) mood,
In the place there as they stood;
Raft her both Kyrtle, and gown
And in her Peticote: to the Town
He sent her forth, Mahound her save,
For his. iiii. Marks. no more could he have.
FINIS*
The fourth merry Jest, how this Wyddow Edyth deceived a Doctor of Diuynitie at
S. Thomas of Akers in London of five Nobles that he lay out for her; and how
she gave him the slip.
TO Barkyng than she took her gate,
And lodged she was, at the Abbay yate:
For a day, or two, till she could provide
A Gown: and then would no longer bide
In that quarter she thought it not best,
She deemd her profyt, there did not rest.
Namely so neat the Nuns nose,
In a morning she got her over the close:
West ward she yede the soth to say,
And came to London that same day
At Londonistone, she was hosted,
And there she prated and she bosted,
Of much fair stuff that she had,
The which stuff she would be glad
For the love of Christ to forsake.
And Mantle and Ring for to take:
She prayed her Host after a day or two.
To let his work, and with her to go:
And bring her to some discrete man,
The which full well tell can:
What belongs unto that thing.
I mean the Mantle and the Ring:
Of him she said, she would confessed be,
Desyring the hole Trinity:
To be her aid in that foresaid matter,
Her Host brought her to S. Thomas of Aker:
And there she was provided anon,
I tell you for trothe of such a one:
As knew by learning what was to do,
In such busynes, and what longs thereto.
A Doctor he was of hie deuinytie,
Called devout and full of charity:
A good publysher of Gods word,
In Church and Town, and sitting at the Board.
This world dispising night and day,
All mundayne glory, he would say
I wholly defye, and utterly forsake,
The Devil (quod he) shall them al take:
That loves these riches, and pomp temporal,
More then God that sent them all.
They shall never see their maker in the face:
With Satan prepared is their place:
In the dark dongeon, in the region allow,
Of joy and blis never for to know,
More sinful living was never used,
Than is now a days: no vice refused:
And worst of all, with us of the Church,
That should teach other, how they should wurch,
And to show them the way to heavens bliss,
Where our Saviors dwelling is:
O God, why do we not so?
Why do we not let these Beneficies go?
Why do we retain more then suffises?
Why do we not give unto them that cries?
Why fill we our Bellyes? and let other go wtoute
Why do we not walk out all about?
Why do we not pray and watch all night?
Why do we not our duty, as it is right?
Why do we not let men's wives alone?
And fylly poor: wenches, making their moan
Why observe we not: the precepts of God?
What if we be punished with our own rod?
Whom shall we erecte the fault unto?
But to our selfs that can never say bo:
And one thing there is, yt makes my heart to blede
As often as I think thereon so god me speed
This coueitousnesse used, with men of my facultye,
Oh, what mean they? Christ's holy benedicitie,
Can they not be content with iiii. no(...) five,
I trow they would that no man should thrive:
But them selfs only, an heavy case,
I know one man whersoeuer he was
That has vt. benefices, and yet not content
And the least of them is. xx. ii. rent:
I mean by the year, and the cure served,
And no good is don, but all reserved:
It is marvel to see the insatiable mind,
That can never be full filled, before nor behind:
I assute you, I could be well pleased
With iiii. such promocions: and hold me well eased
As for a certain time, till an other fall,
Welcome good wife, what say you to all
This world? now (quod be) have done let see,
Sir said this Widow, under benedicitie.
I have for to speak if it like you to hear?
Come your ways (quod be) and be of good cheer
Despair not what so ever the matter be,
I shall go between the Feend and thee.
And eke discharge thee again our heaven king
If that you will do after my teaching?
Wherefore begin ye in Christ's holy name,
Break your mind hardly, avoid all shame.
She kneeled the^ a down on her knees devoutly
And told her confessor many a great lie:
And of the treasure that she had in store,
And when that she could tell no more,
Master Doctor bad she should be merry
He said Ego absoluo te,
Forte sic, forte non.
And when that they had al done
Out of the C^^^ch they went both,
She promised him a Gown of cloth:
Of Scarlet color very fine in grain,
And an hoode thereto, to keep him from the rain
She promised him beside all that,
He should have, ye mary algate:
Of Goblets no more but a nest,
And of other things she made him hest,
So that he would, while she were in town,
Walk with her up and down:
And lay out money always as she need,
And three times double so god her speed:
He should have again within three days
Therein should be made no delays.
Master Doctor was well content,
And in the City before her he went:
So long: till that he had out laid,
Of his own money, and for her paid:
Five Nobles, if the reknyng be right?
And then anon she stale away by night.
Master Doctor thought great unkindness,
That he was so served for his gentylnes:
But she is gone what remedy now,
His money shall be paid him, I wot never how.
The fyfth merry Jest, how this wydow deceived a man and his wife that were
going on pilgremage: who laid out for her. iiij. Nobles: and how she deceived
a Scriuener in London, whose name was Rowse.
BUt more will I tell you in very deed,
Of this wydow, whom I pray god speed
Shortly after she walked by the Thems side
Not far from a way where folk did tide:
Among all other a man and his wife,
She saw riding withouten strife,
Both being of meetly good age,
It seemed that they were on pilgremage:
Toward Canterbery. or some other place,
Where as it pleased god of his grace:
But where ere they ryd, or to what end,
Right soon she made them both descend:
Down from their caple to the cold ground,
For she fared as she would her self drowned:
This goodmans name, was called John Frank,
His wife Annes, a Dame full crank:
Both they came ronning in great have,
Toward this wydow, fullsore a gast:
Leest that she ere they come near,
Would spill her self, she made such cheer.
John Frank cried, woman remember thee,
What intendest thou? aye benedicteie:
Thynk on God and banysh the foul feend
Beware of despair, thy self not shend:
She stayed at that, and sighed sore,
And said belssed be you, I can no more:
For had ye not come the sooner, verily
I should have been damned perpetually,
But I pray you now, tell me what I shall do
Quod this frank come away and with us go
And tell us further of your estate
Then (quod she) I have great hate,
God I take to judge for mine own right,
My goods ar taken away by might:
Undone I am standing on this ground,
I am scarcely left worth. iii hundredth pound,
As in mouable substance, beside a little land,
Which mine husband left unto my hand,
For she said, that her husband was a great man
Of land, and said that he was dea^ ta^l,
God assoyle his soul (quod she) he was kind to me
And I trust, I quyt his kyndenes quod she)
For all folk saying, God forgive them.
This Frank desired her to walk with him,
As far as London, and he would do his pain,
That she might be restored again:
And the malefactors punished what soever they be
Wydow dread ye nothing, quod he,
But come on this way in the name of any lord,
And I shall bring you where ye shall be at board
with a friend of mine, in an honest house,
The good man's sir name is called Rowse:
There ye shall be honestly entreated,
But where is the Stuff whereof ye speaked?
At Kyngston, at Kyngston, then quod she
I care not much for it, so mot I thee,
Ne for all this world, and therewith she began weep
This Frankes heart than in his body lepe,
This game thought he goes fair and well.
He required her no more to tell,
As at that time: but went foorthryght
And came to their lodgyng before night.
To Frankes friend, as I told you before,
A Scryuener he was, and wrought full sore,
To him they were welcome and welcome again
And specially, when Frank had told him certain
what woman she was, and of what substance.
Then she told the Scryuener of the great dystance
That she was at ^or her right,
And much wrong she had by means of a knight
which shall be nameles as yet, (quod she)
Till I see my time avenged for to be.
God will send me once a friend I trust
Before which time, I can take no rest,
Another in body, nor in conscience.
Tarry ye here, said ye Scryuener go ye not hence
And we shall have friends ynow for money,
I will not stick for that, truly quod she,
Howbeit my money is almost spent,
But I have other things, which shall be hent,
And money made thereof me to defend,
I never had that Jewel, so God me mende,
In all my life, but could find in mine heart,
In time of need, therewith to depart.
At Kyngston on Temmes I have certain Plate,
Xl. pounds wurthe for all this mortal hate,
And other things withal, else I be shrewe some*
She desired her Host to her for to come,
I have quod she to tell you in p^iuitie:
Step ye a little apart, let your busynes be*
Into the shop they go out of the hall,
And than she began for to tell him all,
And more too by an hundredth lies,
The Scryuener thanked her. xl. sythes,
For she had made to him grant
Of part of her Plate, whereof she made vaunt*
And the keepyng of altogether he should have
An Oath she swear, so God her save
Of all her treasure, she cared nor a myte,
So that she might her enemies acquyte.
But Host quod she, my friend leefe and dear,
I pray you of your good counsel here:
This wretched world I am minded to forsake,
And chastytie for to avowe and take,
All my causes I am content to resine
Into your hands, mine own Host mine,
Do as ye list, be it good or ill,
Ye shall have all to order at your will:
The Scryuener said, gramercy Maistresse,
Forsothe quod he, ye intend well doubtless,
If ye will do as ye say, I hold well withal
Than he called John Frank out of the Hall,
And made him preuie unto every thing.
She said unto the^ both, that she ought offering
To Saint Saviors, and she would very feign
Go pay her Offering, and then return again.
And after she said, that she would desire
Her Host to write her Testament for hyre
And last will, while she were in good mind,
So discretly that as for unkind,
Her friends should not hold her another day,
when that her presence is hence away.
The Scryuener and Frank both, praised her greatly
For her good purpose: and said to her truly,
To perform your Pylgremage, it is well done,
And I my self shall wayt you upon
Quod John Frank, and eke I will provide,
A Maiden servant, to walk by your side.
Toward Saint Saviors in haste she yede,
As ye have heard being accompanied.
Rowsys wives best Kyrttyll and Gown
She weared on her back throw the town,
Which was lent her of good affection,
Because that her own was welnye done
Frank was her amner, and laid out to the poor,
By the way as they went, and at the Church door:
Of his own proper money, which did amount
To the some of. ii. Marks, by true account.
And while they were forth this Rowse ye Scriuener
Sent to Kingston for to inquire
Of her treasure there being in mew,
But in all the town, she was not worth a q.
How be it, she was there, full well I know
The people laughed all on a row:
Home goes the messenger and told in have,
Unto the Scriuener all this quoynt cast:
By coks soul (quod he) it is not so I hope,
Else (quod the servant) hang me with a rope.
For I have inquired substancyally
In every place I tell you by and by
By our Lady mass then all is not right,
But whist no more, she will be hear to night
My cosen Frank will not let her depart away,
Thou shall hear other tidings to morrow or day.
At five of the clock in the after noone,
These Pilgrims came home full soon:
And anon was laid to this widows charge,
With hye words out at large:
Her falce deceit from point to point
Than stood she in great disioynt,
And no reason could she aledge nor say,
For her excuse, but began for to pray:
Nay then said yt Scriuener, god give me sorrow,
How be it thou shall tarry hear till to morrow
And then forth shall thou, sterk belly naked,
With dogs arrand quen, thou shall be bayted.
The Scriuener was half ashamed of this,
And at. iii. of the cloak, when he rose to piss
He put forth his gest on the backside,
Without companyon or any guide,
Her Gown and her kyrtle he took away,
And Frank went to Fuliam on the next day:
Deferring his pylgremage to Caunterbery
Full sad he was and nothing merry:
His money was gone and spent indede
The blessed Marter quit him his mede.
FINIS.
The syxth merry Jest, how this wydow Edyth deceived a Draper in London of a new
Gown: and a new Kyrtell, and how she sent him for a nest of Goblets to the
Scriuener that she had deceived before.
HEre will I tarry no longer while
But to the wydow again my style
I shall direct: and tell some deal more
Of her pastime, and God before.
In the City she walked in her Peticote,
Yet at the last, acquayntaunce she got
Out of her old walk, on the other side.
A Draper there was, that loved no pride:
To whom she preferred her accustomed craft
Lie after lie, and said she was beraft:
A great part of her goods, full wrongfully.
Alas (quod the Draper full piteously)
It is ruth, to see you go so slender:
I shall mend it (quod she) when I come yender
To winsore (I trust) where my stuff is,
Gods curse have they, that make me do this.
Master mine (quod she) I pray you be not wroth
Might I be so bold, as of your hole cloth
To desire you for to deliver unto me
As much as will suffyse (quod she)
To make a large Gown, and a Kyrtell,
And I shall pay you therefore, full well:
When I come to winsor, and after your own price,
So that ye set not on me all the dice:
But let me have a penny worth for a penny.
Mistress said the Draper if there be any
Ware in the Shop: that will do you good
You shall have it, I swear by the roode:
So that ye put me in good surety
For my money: for I know you not truly.
Sir said the wydow, if it be your pleasure?
To command your servant to ride to Wynsore:
In my company within these. vi. days,
You shall have your money without any delays
And a pleasure withal, for your good will.
Forsooth ^^yd ye Draper, you speak good shyll
And shortly without any interogation,
He delivered unto her at the motion:
Of broad cloth. iiii. yardes full wely mote
And eke as much as would make her a cote
A Kyrtell I would say of good wolstet,
And commanded his servant for to bear it:
To the Taylour to be made in have.
And on the. 4. day after, when she had took repast
The Draper sent a Iurneyman of his
With her to Winsore, the way they did not mis.
A gardeuyaunce the servant with him bare
Therein to bring thence all the short ware:
That she had promised the Draper before,
He should have in keeping, I can no more.
To winsore they came. ii. hours before night,
And at a door off her horse down she light:
And in she goth, no more but for a countenance,
And came out again, saying with a vengeance:
They must go by water and the way so fair,
But I think they lacked horse to repair.
The servant a broad walkyng the horses,
Hard her well, when she said all this:
No force (quod he) I shall have the less to carry,
So you shall said she, nor ye need not to tarry.
But set up your horse therefore anon,
In some Inn, and in the mean season
I shall hastily go wright a skrow,
To certyfie your master shortly as I trow.
The servant to an Inn the horses had,
While she caused the letter to be made.
And then gave it him, and bad him go to bed
To Colbroke: where his horse better might be fed.
And sir she said, I thank you for your pain,
Your master wylbe plesed this letter when he has lain
A cup with ale at yt door she made him drink.
And the^ he rode to Colbroke, ere time was to wi^k
And to London on yt morrow, and delivered his letter
Unto the Draper that was his master
The letter bad that he should resort
To a Scriuener, take heed what I report
He dwells in chepeside, and his name is Rouse
Bid him deliver you out of his house
By such a token, an hole nest of Goblets
A dosen of spoones, se there be no lets,
A standing cup with a cover percell gilt.
Now thought yt Draper, I have in my hand the hilt
I will plede in possession might I yt possed
To the Scriuener his servant he sent with speed,
For this foresaid gear, and bid him not tarry
This servants name was called Harry.
His errand he says unto the Scriuener
And diligently this Rouse gave an ear
From the beginning, markyng his tale well,
And when the Servant had told every dell,
The Scryuener said, I will deliver none to thee
Go home and bid thy Master come to me:
I will so answer him, that he shall be content.
The Servant in haste to his Master went,
And told him that he must him self repair,
For this Plate so costly and so fair.
A, I see well quod the Draper, this man is no fool,
Lo what it is, to put a child to scoole
To learn wisdom, while he is young.
Upon his way, he walked so long,
Till he came thither, and began to tell his tale.
Neibor quod ye Scriuener, let us drynk some ale
And speak no more in this matter for shame,
For ye are begyled, and I am the same.
Nay by cocks body, I put you out of doubt,
Said the Draper, ye shall not laugh it out
With me after such manner: for I will have it in deed
Ye shall have none of me by Christ's creed
Quod the Scriuener, get it where ye can,
But harken what I shall tell you man,
Let me rownd in your ear that no body know
For and if it be abroad yblow,
we shall be laughed to scorn both,
Wherefore Neighbor, look ye be not wroth:
She showed you she had Plate, and so she told me
But all the good she has is not wurth a penny.
I have it proved, therefore leave your sighyng,
This shall be good I tell you for our learning.
Good quod the Draper in the Deuylles name,
A vengeance light on her and open shame.
By the holy Mass quod he, I will have tde queen
Else, it shall cost me the labor of all my men,
For the space I tell you of this fortnyghts day,
She shall be punyshed truly, as I you say,
To the ensample of all other, and god grant me life
Farewell neighbor, I will go dine with my wife.
Said the Draper since it will be non other,
A dieu neighbor, and fare well quod the the other.
This Draper went him home in all the haste
And commanded his servant to take repaste:
And after to ride as fast as he can,
To winsor and demand for this woman:
And if it so betyde, thou can her find?
Take an officer and fast her bind:
Se her bestowed, and then come and tell me,
And by my thyrst shortly will I see:
What the Law will say to yt hoar and these both
I pray thee make speed, and take my boots of cloth:
Draw them on thy legs, for the way is deep,
The servant in have, upon his horse lepe
And rode to winsor, by then it was night,
And at an Inn where he did alight:
He hard tell that the widow was gone
Where ne whether wist no man.
The seventh merry Jest who this wydow Edyth deceived a servant of Sir Thomas
Neuelles, who in hope to have her in marriage with all her great riches kept
her company till all his money was spent: and then she went to seek her
Friends.
THe servant to London returned again,
And on the next morrow she was seen
in South wark where she did abide,
The space of. iii. days, and then away did ride
with carryars into Sussex the sothe to say,
And at Towton she arrived upon a day,
And there not far from a knyghtsplace:
Nine days her tarying was.
In which time, a Seruyng man,
Ha wnted that House now and than,
With whom she began to curry fauell,
His Master was Sir Thomas Neuell.
She promised him to be his Spouse,
And desired him to ride to her house:
To see her treasure, and also her store,
I will quod she send him before,
If that ye will tell me what time ye will fare,
Some of my friends forsooth shall be their,
And eke my tenantes, as their duty is.
Then he began her to halse and kiss,
Saying* heart root, if it please you,
I am all ready, and it were even now,
I wot well my Master will not say me nay
And if that I be forth a Months day
So that I tell him where aboutes I am,
He will not be angry: but in Gods name,
Peradventure he will say, where have thou ben so long
Than, and I make curtsie and hold my tongue
He has done with the twinklyng of an eye.
But after that I have told him truly,
That I ride with you he will be well content,
Once considering the cause ye fine of our intent.
Well then quod she, on Saturday in ye morning
Let us ride forth our way fasting
And at Senock there will we bayt,
I fear least my Gerle take some concept
Because that I am so long her fro,
It is, xvi. weeks and some what mo
Sinc I garnished her with ye sign of the Cross,
She learneth her book, with the goodman Rosse
In Senock town, not far from the Church
Ye know him welynow, for he does worch
And makes Carpets now and than:
True you say (quod he) I know that man
Now in sooth I will go and ask my master leave
And here is a Ring which I you give,
Upon condition ye wot well what:
Yes I warrant you quod she, I remember that
Then farewell honycombe til I se you again,
God be with you, and shield you from the rain
Said the wydow, but look that you tell,
Unto your master wisely and well:
All our foreward, and leave nothing behind.
Yes, yes quod he, as ye shall well find:
To his master he goes, as fast as he can,
And desired him of license an on:
To ride with this widow, a little way,
As far as her house, at S. Mary Skray:
And I trust in God omnipotent,
My labor in vain, shall not be spent.
His master gave him leave for to ride,
Work wisely (quod he) what so ever betide
And if that her daughter be borne to land,
Than I advise thee to fall in hand:
With the child, and let the mother go.
By God said the servant, and peradventure so
I will yet do, when I have seen both:
And upon the friday, forth he goth:
Toward this widow ioly, and amorous,
She was lodged in an honest man's house.
That night they made merry, with fyl ye cup, fill
And on the morrow, they ride forth at their will.
To Senock they come, by than it was prime
And goes to dinner all by time,
They made good cheer, and spared for no cost
The wydow of new began for to bost.
But of her daughter, she spoke no word,
And when that taken up was the board:
And all paid for, that was come in,
Come hither (quod she) sweet heart mine,
I require you that you will take the way,
As fast as ye can, to S. Mary Skray:
And demand there, for the wydows house
That lately was both wise and Spouse,
To such a man, whose soul god pardon,
And when that ye come, to the house anon:
Ye shall say unto my servant there
I mean him that is charged with my gere,
And all my household stuff in my absence,
That he ere ever ye depart from thence:
Show you mine house round all about,
And eke my commodities, within and without
And when you have viewed every thing,
Than bid my servant, without tarying:
Lead you fast into my closet right,
And do up the window, to let in the light.
Unlocke the door, with this same key,
If I trusted you not I swear by my fay,
Ye should not come so near my gromelseede,
And take no more than I you bid.
Within my closet ye shall anon find
A little Casket that stands al behind
My ship Coffer down (...) by the wall,
Bear with you the Casket pretty and small.
But I charge you take none other thing
For and you do at my returning,
I shall know all: therefore now take heed
Mary said the young man God forbede
Seeing that ye do trust me so well,
Go your ways the^ quod she: and here I will dwell,
Till ye come again, but look ye make haste:
I will ride (quod he) even all as fast.
As my Geldyng can bear me away.
Forth he galopeth to saint Mary Skray
And there he inquered. as she him bad
And anon perfect tidings he had
That he was begiled: for there was no man
Could tell any tidings of such a woman.
Then a way rides he as fast as he may,
And came to Senock at the next day.
But he could not come to (...)her to soon,
But ere ever that he came, the wydow was gone:
No body could tell wether she (...) yede.
Master Neuels servant (...) good speed
Being in his mind* not well content
For some money he had her sent
And paid for her cost, I cannot tell what
Yea, with a mischife I could not beware that
Quod he than: but yet no force let go
I wylbe advised again or I do so.
The eight merry Jest, how this wydow Edyth deceived a servant of the Bishop of
Rochesters with cogging and boastyng of her great Richesse: who likewise thought
to have had her in marriage.
THe Wydow northward took her way,
And came to Rochester the next day:
And there within a little space,
To a yongman that servant was
Unto the Bishop in the Town:
She promised him dale and down
On that condition he would her wed.
And keep her company at board and in bed:
This yongman was glad and light,
Now thought he I shall be made a knight:
By the means of this gentlewomans store,
Gramercy Fortune I can no more:
He permytted in have to be assembled,
With her at the church and there resembled:
Or joined in one flesh, that is dying*
And two souls evermore living.
Good cheer he made her in her Inn,
And eke be would not never blinne
Till be he had brought her to his Lord,
Before whom they were at accord
Upon a condition married to be,
Which condition was if that she.
Could perform all that she had said
He would then marry her, it should not be delayed
Here upon they departed and forth went.
On the morrow my Lord for her sent.
To dyne with him and to commen further,
Then was she gone: but when and whether
No wight any word of her could tell,
But yet she walked to my Lord of Arundell.
The nynth merry Jest, how this wydow Edyth deceived a Lord, sometime Earl of
Arundell: and how he sent five of his men servants and a handmayden to bear
her company, and fetch her daughter who as she boasted was Heir of great
Lands.
ANd there anon she told the Earl,
That she had a daughter a little gerle:
Which was borne to be Heir
To great inheritance and lands good and fair
And mouable substance not a lyte,
If it please God her to respyte.
And grant her life till she succeed,
Her elders alive: of whose led
She is issued by line all dissent.
And eke she said or that she went,
That her daughter should hold land
Heareafter when it comes to her hand,
Of that Earl and pay him rent,
Wherefore she said that she was contet:
His Lordship should have her to dispose
And mary her as him best suppose.
Unto gentylman Yeman or Grome
She would have her daughter come:
If it pleased his Lordship it should so he?
She wood fetch her into that contrie.
The Earl was contented it should be so,
And bad his servants for to go
That is to say, to the number of five,
And ready make them bliue:
To wayt on this gentil woa^ and bring her thither
She her-selfe could not tell whether
Notwithstanding she did say,
That her housshold was at Foots Scray:
Where she retained great famely.
As they shall well find sykerly,
At their repair, and God before.
And forth they ride without more:
She was accompayned as I have said,
With five yemen and a Maid.
And all they woed as they rode,
Each to him self at large abroad:
One shows his lustynes and mastery,
An other takes up his horse on hye
The third said that he had treasure in store
The fourth said that he had mychle more.
The fyft was a man of few words
At the last he said, a straw for your boords,
Paraduentre he is here that says not all,
That somewhat could say; if need should fall,
Be merry Wydow, then (quod he)
And cast a Sheps ep(...) on me:
For though that I ride pensive and still,
Perhaps yet I could satisefy* your will.
As well as some other, though I cry not out
But all this while she cast about
How she might conveniently steal them fro,
But at a woods side it happened so:
A fair house there was whrch she said
Her husband bought it and for it paid.
Two years before he let his life,
And she was now in mikell strife:
For the said house and lands withal
And sued she was in Westmynster hall,
Great thought she took for a friend,
That in her right would her defend.
One of the company that hard this,
Feigned him to light down to pis:
Purposedly for to go to inquire
Of this matter to know if that it were
As she had said, or else that she lied.
To the house be goes and there he tried,
That she was falce and a noughty queen:
In all England not worth a bean.
When he hard this he galoped fast,
His company he over took at the last.
And declared unto them from poy it to point
Then all their love, was suddenly quoynt
They light down all by one accord
Xv. mile when the bad rode
And stripped her out of her array
Walk hoar they all began say.
Home again they took the way.
And yet she repaired to Foots Scray.
There she abude a certain season,
The next house unto one master Heron.
A Gown and a Kyrtle there she did hyre,
Of a poor woman to were to a fair
Kept there besides upon an holy day:
Feign she would have made her self gay,
At the foresaid fair to have be sold
If any man would be so bold,
Without examynation for to alight.
And when that she was out of light,
She got her away a great pace.
Then came she to Croyden there as she was
Continewing for the space of a wook
During the which time a poor Cook.
There dwelling she did begile,
And borrowed of him in that while
Five shillings in Groats and pence.
And then privily she stale away from thence.
Then she came to Eltham the right way,
Where she rested her three weeks and a day:
And did nothing but ay enquere
Of Gentlemen dwelling here and there
And when she saw her time on an holy day,
She walked to a Thorp called Batersay:
And on the next day after, she took a Whery,
And over Thames she was rowed full merry.
The tenth merry Jest, how this Wydow Edyth deceived three young men of Chelsay
that were servants to sir Thomas More, and were all three suitors unto her for
Marriage: and what mischaunce happened unto her.
AT Chelsay was her ariuall,
Where she had best cheer of all:
In the house of sir Thomas More
After that she had told of her store
And of her hauyour and credence eke,
There was nothing for her to seek
That could make her merry other even or morrow
I pray to God now give her sorrow.
At Eltham she said that she did dwell,
And of her substance there she began to tell:
Two wolsted Lomes she had by her fay,
And two Mills that went night and day:
A Beer brewhouse in which every week once
Twenty quarters were brewed al at once,
Four Plowes she kept, the earth to cultiue,
And. xv. great knaves to help her to thrive.
Seven women servants ye wull to spin and card,
And to milk the kyne abroad in the yard
She recounted her famyly and houssholde so great,
That three young men she cast in a heat
Which servants were in the same place,
And all they woed her a good pace.
By means I tell you and by brocage,
They swear they would be all her own page:
One of them had to name Thomas Croxton,
And servant he was to master Alengton
A man I tell you in whom dame nature,
Had don her part as in stature:
He was mighty chyned, with boanes strong,
Shoulders broad, and arms long.
Uery active and apt to every thing,
Able to serve any Prince or King,
As for his person and conditions withal
But there is a point least that for parciall
I should be holden: because he is my friend
Wherefore of his praise here I make an end:
And somewhat I will tell of his woyng.
To his master and mistress, he was greatly beholdig
For busy suit they made night and day,
In his cause if I shall the sooth say:
And he him self was full seruiseable,
To this wydow at dinner and at the table:
And eke at supper he stood ay at her back,
So near that and if she had let a crack.
Never so still he must have had knowledge,
But all is honycombe he was in such dotage
Whertu a little while, I let him dwell,
And of the second woer I shall you tell.
Which had to name Thomas Arthur,
And servant he was to master Roper.
A proper man neither to hye nor to low,
But Dame nature sothely as I trow:
Referred his gift unto Dame grace,
Desiring her to consider the case
Concerning this man, and that she would
I^de to him with verteous manners manifold
And no doubt she was therein nothing slack
Peace no more he stands at my back.
And if he here me praise him, he will wene I flatter.
Therefore I will resort to former matter.
And tell of his woyng partly as it was,
And what spe(...)olke he had by gods grace.
His own Master and Mistress also,
With other beside, I cannot tell who.
That labored for him incessantly
And his own self I tell you truly:
Was not necligent ne lost no time,
But gave attendaunce from morning to prime,
And the after none with part of the night,
In her chamber the candels he did light:
And tymbred her fyres in the chymney,
And can ye find in your heart he would say,
To love me sweet heart best of all?
Yes quod she, but I will not tell you all,
What my heart thinks as now,
But Thomas against to morrow I pray you
That you will get you leave to ride with me,
As far as Braynford and there ye shall se
Some money received else it is ill,
But I would we had one that this cup would fill,
With Malmesey yt we might drink to bed ward
Whip quod Thomas and got him down ward
And comes again with the cup full,
Drink Wydow quod he a good pull
And when ye see your time get you to rest
He have you in his keeping yt may keep you best,
Adieu quod she, and farewell till to morrow,
Here is good Malmesey else god give me sorrow.
On the next day Thomas rode with this wydow,
As far as Braynford and I shall tell you how:
And what chere they made by yt way as they rod
Thomas right well his horse bestrode
A full fair styrrop out at the long.
His horse was a beast goodly and strong:
And bear them both easily away,
And still would stand while Thomas did say
Let me kis you darling, turn your face hither
Be it quod she, ere that we wend farther:
And thus the pass the time as they ride
To Braynford where they did not long abide:
For shortly to Thomas she began then tell,
Her debtour was gone to Kingston to dwell.
Thomas began for to muse of the matter,
And there then privily he did inquere:
Of the goodman of ye house where his horse stood
Which knew her right well and swear by ye roode
She lied in every thing that she did say,
Then quod Thomas to him self a syrra, a syrra.
Is this the matter in very deed?
Home ward he carried her with good speed,
To Chelsay again where she was used
As she was before and holden excused:
Thomas kept all this within his own breast
Because his felows should not at him jest.
And in her chamber the next night following
There was the revel and the gossupping
The general bumming as Marget Giggs said
Every body laughed, and was well apayde:
Two of her woers being there present.
Thomas Arthur when he saw his time went
And sat him down in a chair solemply
And said nothing but now and then an eye:
He cast at his love, as she stood at the Cubord,
When she perceived she spoke nere a word.
But stepped unto him and kissed him sweet,
Sayi^g how is it with you, I pray you let me weet.
Thomas answered on this world I think
Cut a straw quod she, take the cup and drink.
Therewith she embraced him be merry sweet heart
She turned her arse in his lap, and let a great fart,
And I loved you not (quod she) I would not give you this
Ha ha quod Tomas, ye be a merry one twis
They laughed on a row yt some of them shoke,
The Wydow desired ye court to be broke
And each wight to his bed to repair.
The morrow was Sunday and the wether fair.
This Wydow determined her self to walk,
As far as Haly well, for she hard men talk:
That there should be a sister that day professed,
And to offer with her she was disposed:
Desiring the young Nun with her sisters all,
To pray for her to the hie God immortal
That it shall please him of his abundant grace,
In the end of this world, yt away from his face:
She ne should be separate in any wise,
To Holy well she walked and once or twice
She drank or she came there, for ye way was long
The Nuns in ye quyre had begone their song:
In the hye mass and Bells gyn to ryng,
When the wydow approached to make her offering
After ye Gospel her purse she took in hand:
And serched therein, but nothin she fand.
A side she cast her eye and anon was ware,
Of Thomas Croxton at Chelsay her first woer,
To whom she said I pray you lend me fast,
Some white money that I might offer in have,
Or else change me a noble quod she anon
Thomas Croxton looked her upon
And said sweet heart ye shall change no Gold
At this time: I have money enough, hold.
How much will steed you, say on, lets see.
Xii. pence I pray you, deliver unto me,
Quod she than, and see it be in Grotes,
For I will offer. xl. pence, because of reports,
And I might once get home, I would not care for money
When she had offered the sooth to say,
She romed in the Cloister too and fro,
Till a young man saw where she did go,
And water Smyth was this yongmans name,
One of her wowers, and I might tell for shame,
A, thought Water, now here is good place,
To speak of my matter, and to show the case
Now it stands with me, and also to be plain.
Softly he walks this wydow again
And first hayled her as him thought meet,
Then took her in his arms and kissed her sweet
She knew him well enough for he was one of the^ three
That I told you before dwelt in Chelsay
This Water his tale began for to tell
Wydow quod he take keep and mark well,
What I shall to you say without dissimulation:
I can no longer mew mine heartily affection.
Ne enclose the secrets of my true mind,
But to you I must break trustyng ye will be kind
Syrcu^stance voydyng because I cannot suiurne
Long with you at this time, but I must return
From whence I come, therefore to you anon
Among all your suitors I pretend to be one.
Now Wydow look well upon me quod he,
And if you can find in your heart to love me:
As well sweet darlyng as I love you,
Than I trust there shall be such seeds isow
Betwyxt us both that it shall be principally
To Gods pleasaunce and to our comfort secondly
Then the Wydow answered with a smiling chere
And said goodma^ Water I pray you tell me here
Whether ye mean good sadness or else yt ye jest,
I think as I speak so god my soul rest.
Quod Water therefore show unto me
That I shall be excepted, or else that I am not he
I am a young woer and dare not speak for shame
But yet to love vnloued ye know it is no game,
Troth ye say quod she, I affirm the same
And if I love you not again in faith I am to bla^e
When I come next to Chelsay ye shall well find
That before all other I bear you my good mind
A Crucifyx quod she of the pure Gold
Which many a day has remained in my hold,
Ye shall have it for a token and a remembrance.
Tha^ water stood on tipto and began him self avance
I thank you quod he even with all my heart,
He kissed her deliciously, and then did depart.
To Chelsay again, she came the same night,
But tha^ ye world was cha^gd al was cum to light
Her substance was known and her self also,
For Thomas Arthur yt day had ridden to and fro:
And tried her not worth the sleue lace of a gown
In all England in City nor yet in town:
Than well away her diet was changed
Her potage and eke her ale were well poudred
With an wholesome influence that surgeons call,
Powder Sinipari yt will make on cast his gall:
It made her stomach unable to broke any meat
Now was she cold and forthwith in an heat.
Her pulses beat, and her color went and come
No morsel did she eat but now and then hum,
S^e was greatly (...)o, and lat out of frame
All that (...) at Supper had good game
(...) to b^hold, and they laughed all about.
Quod she, for Gods love let me come out
Let me come let me come, for our Ladies sake,
My beir rumblytn, and my heart does ache
In such wise, that I know I am but dead,
If I have non air: ah good Lord my head.
But she was ay kept in, that she could not start
Till my Lady began to have pytte in her heart,
And for woman's honesty, bad that she should rise
But ere that time, I am sure twyse or thryse,
It knockyd at the Door to have issued out,
But with great pain, she made it walk about.
When that she was up, she got her forth apace
And er she had walked. xxx. foot, she marked a chase
And eftsoon another, through the Hal as she yede
Her nose burst out also and began for to bleed.
Into ye colehouse she goth, and there made a draght
Held her ay thereon, till she had laid her laght.
And when she was of her nest, one yt hight Brown
Came ron^yng in his Dublet without cote or Gown
Saying Madame, Madame, by the man's bones
I fear me, least there be fire among your coals,
Howbeit, I saw no light, but a stynkyng smoke:
O bont Deus quod my lady, get thee fast and look
God sheld and out lady, that any recheles wight
Bare thither any Candel, this present night:
Go look, go look quod she in haste get thee hence,
Brown went him forth, and by the sufflemence,
He tried that there was no materyall fire,
He laughed and swear by the soul of his Sire
That one word more he could not speak for sha^e
Good night quod he, at the best is this game:
Soon after the wydow came forth well eased,
That Cony, yt cony quod she, was not well roasted:
That I eat at Haly well, but I have made auoydance
The devil go with all, and a vengeance,
I shall mend now I trust: and then she went to bed:
Her lodging was changed there, yt rested her head
But she was in more honor, than ever she was before
Not wtsta^di^g her gown and kyrtle of her gore
Was taken away and restored to the owner.
The massiff chains day and night she did were
And where great Estats were chains about their necks
She had disayne to were the^ on her legs
But whether she he content or displeased,
For the space of three weeks ye chains she wered
And after in a day at a gayle delivery,
She was discharged being glad and merry.
The. xi. merry Jest, how this wydow Edyth: deceived three yongmen if the Lord
Legates servants with her great lying crakyng and boastyng of her great
treasure and Iuelies.
TO Westminster, she walked after as I trow,
And in the house with the pie in ye wyndow:
She was lodged, but there was no place,
Long for to tarry considering her case.
Gone was her money well near all
She had full suddenly a great fall
As ye have hard before, but yet nothing dismayed
On a day to her self thus she said:
What should I here dwell and no penny in purse
If I tarry any longer I pray that gods curse
Light upon me even by and by.
Then away she got her and that hastily
And ere she had walked a forlong way or two
She had bethought her where for to go
Heaven king quod she full of grace
Why remembered not I my Lord Legates place
By God I must have there, yet some good cheer
Alone will I go without any fear
And fuist into the porters lodge full right
And there demand for such a knight:
That I know well is not there now.
I shall report in what manner and how
My lands be kept from me by strength,
Such a tale I will tell at length,
That some man will give an ear I trow
And desire me further for to know.
To the Porters lodge she goes a great pase,
And as she had devised, opened the case.
The Porter asked, why she went so bare?
In sooth quod she, I take no great care,
How that I go, while my busynes last,
I trust it shall be mended now in haste.
Than, in came a yoman that was called Shyre
And stood upright, and warmed him by the fire,
Geuyng an ear always now and than,
And at the last, he stepped forth like a man
Saying fair mistress, what is your suit?
If ye think it best: come tell me without
And for the good mind I bear to all wydowes
I promise you ere you go out of this house
Ye shall have friends and that without money,
Wherefore take ye no thought but be ay merry.
And while they were co^monyng of this warke
A Yeman approached yt was called John Clarke:
And he demanded what the matter was?
Gentle man quod she, thus stands the case,
I am a poor wydow left all alone
And hither I am come to make my moan.
Great wrong I have, as God well knows
For in all this world I ne owes
Pound nor Noble that ought to be paid,
But of ten times so much I am delayed.
I pray to God once to send me an head
That I may sleep at home in my bed:
For I am weary of this renning about,
And yet always I stand in great doubt
Least that the bigger will eat the Been,
Gentylmen quod she, ye wot what I mean?
Therefore help me for your mothers blessyng
And ye shall have gold and gold good sterlyng:
Further she saw coming to her ward,
The third Yeman called Thomas Apricharde
Which anon demanded what yt matter meant
John Clarke quickly by the hand him hent:
Led him apart, and told in his ear,
See thou quod he, this homely gere?
By gods sids she is a wydow and yt of great substance
And mary she would, I know by her daliance
Peace quod Thomas, have her to the wine,
And let us draw cuttes, either thine or mine,
So be it, said Clark and let us no more talk
Misteris said he, will it please you to walk
In to the town? and drink a pynt of wine
And doubt ye not ye shall do well and fine:
For and if that ye pretend title of right,
Ye shall have them yt in your quarrel will fight
And need be: but it shall not come thereto.
Gentlemen quod she, I am pleased to go,
With you at this time trusting of your aid
And one of you three, I shall make well apayde
Who so ever he be and God before.
Master Clark tell me where ye were bore,
And if ye wylbe a good husband so god me speed
And follow my counsel, ye shall have no need:
To none of your kyn, but ye shall be able
To lend unto him, Hall, Chamber and stable,
As he shall be able to lend unto you.
God thank you said Clark, but here is ye house now
Wherein we will drink and make good chere.
Hosts quod he, fetch us bread, ale and beer
And eke wine and that of the best,
Said Thomas Aprichard, for so god my soul rest
This night I am disposed to laugh it even out
Be merry wydow and nothing doubt.
For he dwells not under our kings obeisance,
Shall do you wrong in England nor in France.
But all Thomas words little she did regard,
Her eye was ever to John Clark ward
To whom she said the self saine tide,
Master Clark quod she, will ye to morrow ride?
As far as Barking, ye shall have horse of me,
And eke a noble in your purse so mot I thee
And there nothing else shall ye do
But se my folks and cattels also:
And then return when ye shall se it good.
Quod John Clarke I shall by the rood:
But where stands your horse, let me yt know,
He is not far hence as I trow
Quod she: I shall tell you in the morning,
Well then let us drink in the evening:
Quod John Clark, for here is good drink indeed
And good meat also, I pray you widow feed.
The time they pas merely til ten of the clok
Yea, and I shall not lie, till after the first coke
Then they departed and to their beds went,
Thomas aprichard paid for all that was spent,
John Clark in the morning made him yare,
Thought he: now I will yander away fare
I like this gere even very well.
He in quereth for ye wydow, but no man can tell
Where she is become, with walk queen walk
Ihon Clark then fell into other talk
And let her go the feend be her gyde,
But here now I can not long abide.
Considering her pastime in every place,
For if I should leave off, it should deface
In a manner her book, which were greae pity
And ruth also, I swear by Saint Dauye
Wherefore somewhat further of her I will write,
And without addition truly to indyte.
FINIS*
The, xii. merry Jest, how this wydow Edyth deceived the goodman of the three
Cups in Holburne, and one John Cotes that tyd will, her to Saint Albons to
ever see her lands and tenements, and how they were rewarded.
FRom Westmi^ster to Holburne she flew at one flight
And at the sign of ye three cups she did alight
Trustyng there to season on her pray
For she had eaten no meat of all that day.
First she asked for the goodman of the Inn,
And as soon as she saw him, anon she did begin.
To tell him a tale and never a true word,
Host quod she, might I be with you at board
For the space of eight, or else nine days
And ye shall find me honest at all assayes
Full well I shall pay for all that I take,
O blessed Lady so mine head does ache,
I have ron so fast that my wind is near gone:
Maid I pray you step to the door anon
And look if ye may se fowr tall men:
With swords and buklers as fast as they may ren
They have chased me all this long day,
And will not be answered for ought yt I can say,
I see well that she is best at ease,
That has little or naught in this world to lose
All my trouble I may wit a little substance
Which is my own, it procures me greuance
But my Host quod she, help me now,
I shall tell you in what manner and how.
The case stands, and remedy is none,
But and if I be taken I must needs begone:
What betwixt ye kings servants and my lord Legates
I am so asayled yt I wot not whither to go
Diverse would have me but I am determined this also
Never to be coupled to a Courtier iwis.
While that I live, and god be my good Lord
Her host desired her to sit down at the board
Ye shall quod he, have the best help that I can
And for your sake: I would I were a single man.
Therewith he twinkled and looked full narrow
And kissed her twife and chirked like a Sparow.
In sooth said she if there were an honest man?
Wise and toward I may say to you now
I could find in my heart to make him a man,
And if ever I marry he shall be such a one
As to look for great goods I will not in soth
For I have inow for him and me both.
And if that he be not to great a waster?
But I will none that shall be called master.
These Roysters of the court no point towchon
My nebors when they com to make their moan
Desiring of reformation of things misused
Shall not stand caples i to him that is used
To lyg by my side, and to kis me in the night.
Nay, nay: I will none such by god almight.
But host quod she, against the next saturday
I pray you provide me and if that ye may
Whatsoever they cost two men and two horse
For I must ride to S. Albons in manner perforce.
I have been long thence the worse huswife am I
But I trust I have them there yt will look and espy.
If any fault be: and se it amended,
Mine houses there be metely well defended
I mean this, they stand in good reperation
And my house at ye cross keys is like ye facion
Of your house here, but yt it is much bigger
God have mercy on the soul of my good father,
He had great pleasure there to lie.
And is the cross keys yours, say ye truly?
Quod her host: mary there is a fair lodging
And a goodly backside there unto belonging.
Yea quod she, I have there housing and also ground
In ye town and nere by, worth. v. hundred pound.
And if it should be sold to the value.
And in Barnet the Inn repaired new
With the sign of ye Lion is mine own right
My father bought it of a good Knight
God remit their trespass both twain,
But I pray Christ grant we have no rain
Against we ride: for the way wylbe foul.
Her host answered and swear by his soul,
I shall man you quod he, and against that tide
Eke puruey an other that gladly will ride:
Waiting upon you and if that need be,
He shall stand in a man's stead so mot I thee.
Also you shall have to your handmayd,
Mine own dear daughter, as my wife said:
Ride when please you al things shall be ready
I lack no more but a pair of Boots truly.
Mine host quod she care ye not for that
Take ye pain till ye come to Barnat,
And there ye shall have choice of twelve pair
Which I distrained for mine house there.
A tenauntry I have there in which did dwell.
A Sowter yt made Boots for to sell:
And shoes also full good and strong,
I may say to you he dwelled there so long
Till his hair began to grow throw his hoode,
Ind than when the falce knave understood
That I was at Otford away in kent,
Besy there proving my husbands testament
He would have stolen away by night,
But yet his purpose came to light.
It happened so that a tenant of mine,
Was late in the evening milking of kine.
And saw mine horeson when he busked him foreward
With such trash as he had, and then ho^ward
She her hied as fast as she may,
And told her husband to morrow or day
Twyfeld will fleet and the rent is unpaid:
Go and distrayne him, in have she said:
In my masters name: and so he did indede
Boots and Shoes I have inow so God me speed
And other trumpery, I cannot tell what
But I will se when I com to Barnat.
Host quod she, I pray you let us well be horsed
For I have been many times trobled:
By the way as I have ridden for lack of horse,
Her host answered give ye no force
Ye shall have such that shall bear ye through
Well then quod she, al is good inow,
At S. Albons I have horse of mine own.
The goodman than walked into the town
And provided her a servant that was called
John Cotes, a man that never failed:
His master, nor maystresse in time of need.
On the day appointed, they ride forth with speed.
And at their departing, this wydow borrowed
Upon her Hostess, which she heartily desired
A Cap: an Hat, and three kerchieues thereto
A cople of silver pinnes, a payr of Hokes and no mo
A pace they ride, till they come to Whetston,
And there began to speak to them anon,
My friends quod she, take keep what I say,
I have be thought me, rydyng by the way
That it is not best for us this day,
To ride through Barnet, and I shall tell you why?
One knave or other will us there espy,
I know that I am waited for in the town:
Wherefore by mine advise, let us light down,
And bayt here, and rest a little while,
And then ye shall see us them all begyle.
For when that we come to Barnet towns end,
We shall there then spyte of the feende
Ride in the Lane, on the backside.
I know the way, we shall need no guide:
And at the wyndmyl we shall come in our way again
And than furthryght fair and plain
Till that we come to Hatfeld Parkepale:
And there I have a Tenant that sells Ale,
And a farm besides which yelds me by the year
Thirteen pound: and when I come good chere:
Mine horse meat and man's meat, and cost me naught
Mine husband when he died, for yt Farm ought
Forty Marks: but I thank God now
My Farmer may go both to Cart and Plow,
At his own pleasure, and no man him warn,
well then said Cates, beside this barn,
Let us now light and walk to our Inn
This Maid here wall first begin:
Lepe down quod he, and let me help your Misteris
Nay said the wydow I will none of your service
At this time: I shall descend without assistance
The place where they baited was not far thence
To the which they romed and made good chere
And when they had paid for bread ale and beer
And for other things. I cannot tell what,
The wydow departed from ye place there she sat,
And called for horse: let us ride now quod she.
I am well contented so mote I thee
Said her host and Cotes agreed thereto,
But hosts quod she, or ever that we go
When we be on horsback fyl a pint with Malmsay,
And syrs between you, look that ye well pay:
For every thing, and that with the most,
I have done said Cotes, whatsoever it cost
She is allowed after her own price.
To horsback than, they yede at a trice,
And ridden forth till they came to Barnat.
Now friends quod she, I will algate
Leave the town as I told you before.
Cotes answered and a great oath swore,
That he would not ride out of his way,
Care ye not quod he, what folks say
And if that ye be known: what for that,
Put on your head this hood and your hat.
And eke this cloak about you, and if you doubt*
Than and they gawren round about
Ye shall not be known of any manner wight
I pray you let us ride for it draws unto night.
Tut quod she ye be a merry man,
Trow ye that my own folk ne can
Know me: and if I be disgused
Yes I warant you ye shall hear it cried:
If we ride through ye town, for I shall tell thee Cotes
I have them in my Inn and they se but my foot
They will know me, and what remedy then
I know you will defend me like pretty men,
Unto your power: but what is one or tway
In comparison to six, if they mete in the way?
But seeing ye will ieopard it give me my cloak
Ride forth a pace and not once a side look.
When we com against ye Lion but hang down your heads
And give me in my hands your beads
I will occupy both my heart and eke my mind
The better assystance, I trust we shall find.
Ye but quod her host, how shall I do for my boots
I pray you that either I or else Cotes
May ride for them, and gallop after in have
I say quod she, till we be this town past
We will not tarry for ought that may fall
Worce arrayed then you are, ye cannot be at all
At S. Albons we shall amend al fawtes,
And I trust arm us for all assautes.
Well then let us ride in Christ's holy name
If ye think it best: for I am yet the same
Man that I was yerst for all the mire,
They rode through ye town like as wild fire,
Mad be^ new put in every horse tail.
And when yt they came to ye wyndmyl with ye sail
There Cotes began for to speak anon,
What way quod he, shall we ride upon.
Misteris where is your Farm ye ye told of before
Alas said she that ever I was bore:
It makes me sick to think on the foul way
That we must pas throw, what should I more say
A lane there is between us and that
The Porter of hell I dare say with his hat
Cannot escape but he must ligge in the mire,
But we will do well. I wot what is our hyre.
To Hatfeld we shall ride this same night,
And to morrow when we have the day light
We shall yede to S. Albons by than it is noone
And my besynes there, will not be don soon.
It will cost us two or three days wark.
But syrs quod she, is none of you a clark?
I must have a quytance made for my rent
To a knave which me sore repent:
That ever he occupied any ground of mine,
I am sure be has of Oxen and kyne
An hundred heds: and much stuff beside
And ye arrand knauee when I com he will him hyde
Making him as bare as a byrds tail,
And when I speak with him he will not fail
To tell me a tale hinching and pinching.
And in faith Mosteris I have no good thing.
To make you there: but it does me good to se you.
But if I could tell in what wise and how
To avoid the heynard, he should not long abide.
Well said Cotes what so ever betyde,
This same present night I will ride
To S. Albons: I like not this tittell tattel.
Why quod she, and ye think your horse be able
To bear you through, than do as ye list
But I pray you that you bring me first:
To Hatfelde, and than ye shall have a token
To my servant that dwells in my Inn,
With the cross keys in S. Albones to wne:
And tomorow in the morning, up and down
Ye may se mine house, and my easment there,
And afterward trusse together al my gere
You shall have in ye parlour next to the street
A Cofer standing at my beds feet:
In which Cofer all my money is,
Tree Hundred Marks, I have therein i wys
In six bags, but look that ye bear
But two of ye lest with you, for I have certain gear
In the the other so were, which shall not as yet,
Be seen of any body: I let you wit:
Ye may say that I trust ye, to let you com so nere
Show Thomas Edwards my servant there
Where I am and that I sent you thither,
Commandyng him for is deliver.
My keys to you: by such a token
The which keys were made to open
The new chest at mine own beds feet
And eke my Whuch that is fast i shyt:
Wherein remains all my plate
Trusse it surely: and yet beside all that
I pray ye that ye will take so much pain
At that ye se no lyhelyhood of rain
As to bring with you unto this town,
A Kyrtle of chamblet and my tawny Gown:
They ly on the press in my own chamber,
My purse also, with my Beads of amber.
Take these things I pray you, as fast as ye may,
Make a fardle thereof and send them a way,
By Thomas Edwards to the Lion in Barnet,
And when ye have thus don, remember this yet.
Take two fresh Geldings out of my stable,
And leave yours there, till they be better able
To iornay on the way: Syrs say I not well?
Yes said Cotes, if it be as you tell?
At the Checker in Hatfelde, she took her lodgeing
When it was full late in the evening.
There her Host and Cotes departed her fro
And also as fast, as their horses can go
They ride till they come to S. Albons town
And there demanded up and down
For the cross keys and found it at last:
Thomas Edwards there they asked for in have
And than was none such in all the throwfare
That hoar quod Cotes evil mote she fare
Has begiled us, and what remedy now.
His fellow answered I shall tell thee how
Peradventure there ar more cross keys then one
Ask ye some body, and ye shall know anon.
The hostler told them yt there was yet an other
I thank you said Cotes my own good brother.
There they demanded as they did before
The good man asked where they were bore:
And what they would have, that time of night?
Quod Cotes to his fellow let us down light
This is the house I wot well inow,
A master Edwards, I pray you tell us how
That ye live here in your mistress absence
Masters quod he: Syrs get you fast hence.
(...) By mine aid as I entend well,
Therewith she went and on her knees fell.
Than her host asked what she would give.
On that condition she might have leave
To walk at her will whether she would.
Three Grots quod she in fair peace itolde
And that is all that ever I have,
At this time upon me so god me save.
The money he received, and then bad her go
Whether she would: but do no more so.
At three of the clock in the dark morning
Away she yed before the dawning.
And where she become then that tide,
I cannot tell you in all this world so wide*
But fare well frost sith that she be gone.
Cotes and his fellow in the morning when
They were up risen, and kempt their heaire
For the wydow they asked: and than was there
No body could tell whither she was yede,
Their host they demanded: and he said by creed
He wist not where she was let her go
Quod he then: it is well ye skaped so.
One looked on an other, and wist not what to say.
And in conclusion even the right way
To London they took in all the haste,
They would not once tarry to break their fast:
And of this prosses I make an end.
God save the wydow, where ever she wend.
FINIS.
by Walter Smith.
Imprinted at London, in Fleetlane: by Richard Iohnes.


