A Godly Sermon preached in Latin at great S. Mary's in Cambridge, in March
1580. by Robert Some: and translated by himself into Engglish.

MARK 1.15. Repent and believe the Gospel.

Imprinted by Henry Middleton, for George Bishop. 1580.

To the Right worshipful Master William Killigrew Esquier, one of her
Majesty's privy Chamber and Mystresse Margerie Killigrew his wife, R. Some
wishes increase of Gods gifts to their everlasting comfort.
IT has pleased your worships to use me very friendly, I am very mindful of
it, and for some proof of my thankfulness, I offer to you that short Sermon
in English, which I presented in Latin to the Right honorable the Earl of
Leicester, my singular good Lord and Master. It is, I confess very plain,
and my desire was so to have it: but it will, I am sure, minister comfort by
the grace of God to such as have a feeling of their sins. And this either
is, or should be one principal drifte of our sermons, especially in these
days, wherein as many as are to be awaked out of the sleep of sin by Gods
fearful threatenings so other are to be raised up, and must have life put
into them by Gods sweet promises. I could easily, and would like well to go
on in this argument, if it were not both the butte and white that my Sermon
principally does level at. Unto the which because I refer your self Master
Killigrew, and your good bedfellowe, I take my leave and commend you both to
Almighty Gods tuition. Cambridge the 20 of April. 1580.

Your worships to command in Christ, Robert Some.

A Godly Sermon preached in Latin at great Saint Mary's in Cambridge, in
March. 1580. by Robert Some: and translated by himself into English.
That all may be done to Gods glory and our edifying, let us pray to his
Majesty, that his holy word, which is a most precious treasure be not as a
shut book, and as a sealed letter unto us.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

THE TEXT.
Hoseas Chap. 14. ver. 3.4. Take unto you words, and turn to the Lord and say
to him, take away al iniquity, and receive (us) graciously, so will we render
the calves of our lips. Asshur shall not save us, neither will we ride upon
horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our
Gods, for in thee the fatherless finds mercy.

These two verses may be reduced unto two parts.

In the first the Prophet exhorts the Israelites unto repentance, and
teaches them what words to use in their prayer to the Majesty of God.

Take unto you words, and turn to the Lord, and say to him, take away all
iniquity, and receive (us) graciously.

In the second part he sets out the fruits of repentance in lively colors.

So will we render the calves of our lips. Asshur shall not save us, neither
will we ride upon horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our
hands, ye are our Gods: for in thee the fatherless finds mercy.

TAke unto you words. The eternal god bestowed many benefits upon the
Israelites, even with both the hands: but they were as untamed horses. When
they were fatted, they lifted up their heels against his Majesty, and would
not be reclaimed by his most pleasant voice. The Lord perceiving the
Israelites to resemble the Ethiopian, which retayneth his blackness, though
he be washed an hundred times: and the Catt of mountain, which is not clear
of spots though her skin be taken from her: the lord, I say, dealt more
sharply with them, and to knotty woodde applied a wedge of Iron. Amongst these
lightnings, and as it were, thunderboltes of Gods judgments, least the
faithful which had forgotten themselves should be discouraged, and think that
no hope of pardon remained, he speaks unto them (as a natural father to his
children) most lovingly, by his Prophet, Take unto you words, as if he
should say, albeeit you have infected the earth and air with the stench of
your wickedness, albeeit you are more filthy than the dunghilles, hang not
down your heads, unless you be set to wallow still in the mire of your
sins. You shall appeasse Gods anger, not if you bring into his presence great
store of gold and silver, heaps of frankincense, droues of Oxen, and flocks
of Sheep, but if you present unto him words which may easily be come by. The
Prophet Hoseas speaks not of fained words, which cunning and holow
hypocrites are well acquainted with. Genesis 3.4. Esaias. 58.3. Matt. 22.16. Iere.
41.6.
Such were the words of the serpent unto Eve: of the hypocrites which fasted
in Esaies time: of the Herodians and Pharisees disciples, that they might snare
Christ in his speech: of ungracious Ismael to the godly men of Sichem and
Samaria, when he shed Crocodyles tears before he carried them to the slaughter:
and of many now a days, whose words are bredde and borne in their lips.
Dissembling words are the greatest plague that can be, they smell of an evil
conscience, they are sure arguments of hypocrisy, and do them which use them
the greatest harm: for they are like to a broken shield, which cannot abide
ye least prick of a weapon. The prophet Hoseas did not give the Israelites in
charge to put of the gross contempt of God, and to cloth themselves with
hipocrisy: that had been the next way to have marred all, and of evil men to
make them devils: he rather commanded them to testify godlily in holy and
sound words, that which they had conceived most holily in their minds. There
must not be a divorce between the heart and the lips: they must resemble
Hippocrates twins, which do laugh together, and weep together. The mind
must beget godly words, and the lips bring them forth. This is a golden
brood, and highly pleases almighty God. Such was the prayer of the Primative
Church for Peter, Acts. 12.5. James. 5.17. Mat. 27.46. 2. Cor. 12.8.
when Herod Agrippa had imprisoned him: of Helias, which ye Apostle James
remembers: of Christ hanging on the cross: and of the Apostle Paul when the
Angel of Satan did buffet him. Such a prayer would the Prophet Hoseas have the
Israelites to use in this place, that Gods anger by this beautiful consent of
the heart and lips, might be appeased. Such a prayer must ours be, unless we
will be like to Barge or Whirimen, which row one way, and look another.
Demosthenes and Cicero were famous Orators, ye one in Athens the other in Rome.
I confess they were able to work great masteries by their eloquence. Their
orations were greatly accounted of in Rome and Athens, and are in good credit
with us. But if they be compared with the broken and imperfect speeches of a
truly repentant sinner, Demosthenes words must stand behind the door, and
Ciceroes are with out life, and are as far exceeded, as the Pibble stone of
the costly Diamonde. The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: Psalm. 51.17.
a contrite and a broken heart.

And turn to the Lord. To deserve well of other, is not the least of the
duties of this life. To help every man as he needs help, is a very singular
thing. He that relieueth the poor, does well: he that delivers them out of
prison which are in fetters there, does better: but he that leads them which
are, as it were, past grace, out of the shadow of death into the light of life,
deserves best of all. Egypt was barren when Nilus did not ouerflow it: Mount
Sion was barren when it was not watered with dew from Heaven: but without godly
admonition, which is like to a precious and sweet smelling ointment, men do
rot in wickedness, and do call a thousand evils to themselves. Hoseas least the
Israelites which had given Gods glory a grievous blow, should ever be at war
with the eternal God, and at the length be stricken through with Gods sword as
they deserved, calls them to repentance, Turn to the Lord, as if he should
say, you are the sons of Abraham: albeeit you have forgotten your selves, and
have wrastled with the Lord, cast from you the weapons of monstrous wickedness,
neither continue battle with him, which with an iron rodd can break wild
beasts in pieces, and does with stretched out arms embrace repentant sinners.
The Prophet Esaias when he had dealte sharply with the Jews for running in
their distress to Egypt, and so casting themselves head long to hell: least
they should still be prisoners to Satan, who is a wily Fox, and did mightily
bestirre himself to bar them of all hope of pardon, the Prophet Esaias, I say,
calls them to repentance. Esaias. 31.6.
Turn again O ye children of Israel, in as much as ye are sunken deep in
rebellion. Jeremy when he had lively, and in Orient colors set out the
madness of the Israelites touching Idolatry, and had grievously complained
that they had broken their faith with God, like unto filthy strompets: least
they should ever run awrie, if they did see the gates of Gods mercy shut
against them, he cried alowde in Gods name, that pardon was ready for them:
Thou disobedient Israel, Iere. 3.12.14.
return, says the Lord: and a little after: O ye disobedient children, turn
again says ye Lord for I am your husband. The spirit of God having roundly
taken up the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, because He had left his first
love, before he will put any punishment in execution, he commands him to
repent: Revel. 2.5.
Remember from whence thou art fallen and repent, and do the first works: or
else I will come against thee shortly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his
place, except thou amend. We must tread in the steps of Esaias, Jeremy,
Hoseas: when we will cast down the rotten walls of sin, we must in any
wise remember to call grievous sinners unto repentance. When the sinner is
amended we must deal lovingly with him: Luke. 10.34. 2. Cor. 2.10.11.
we must use oil with the Samaritane, and with S. Paul which gave especial
charge to them of Corinth, to receive again into the bosom of their Church
the excommunicate Corinthian, after his amendment. They which take not this
course, that is to say, they which deal hardly and roughly with them which
are wounded with the feeling of sin, do them as much good, as smoke does
the eyes, and as the East wind does the fruits of the earth, and are
hipocrites though they thunder a thousand times in the pulpits. And because
they know not what it is to feel the heavy hand of God, howsoever they have
the countenance of Cato, they do in deed resemble Ismael and Nero. I speak
not this, that sin which is too too rise should more increase, but because I
would have the ministers try every way before they condemn other to hell,
and bar against them the door of Gods mercy with Acesius, Socrat. lib. 1.
Cap. 10.
which was one of wicked Nouatus his scholars. The eternal God is very
gracious, if we desire his favor: he gives to the repentant milk, as it
were, out of his breasts. He that found his lost sheep, laid it upon his
shoulders, and was a glad man. The woman when she had found her lost grote, was
as joyful as might be. The prodigal young man by riot and dissolute behavior
being brought to a very low ebb, returned with great humility to his
father. Did the old man entertain him as Gregory the seventh did Henry ye
Emperor? Benno Cardi.
if he had, he had marred the fashion of his son which was mightily grieved:
but let us hear what the Evangelist Luke says: When he was yet a great way
of, Luke. 15.20.21.22.23.24.
his Father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck, He
did not tread on his sons neck as Alexander the third did upon the
Emperor Frederikes, And kissed him, not as Ioab did Amasa, and Judas Christ.
When the father heard this speech of his son, Father I have sinned against
heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son, He did
not revile his son, or cast in his dishe his former unthriftiness, but,
said to his servants: bring forth the best robe not such a one as Dianeira is
said to have given to her husband Hercules, imbrued in the blood of the
Centaure: And put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, not such a one as
bloody Gyges had, and bring, not an Italian fig, yt is, poison in a golden
cup, but the fat calf and and kill him, and let us eat and be merry, for this
my son was dead, and is alive again: and he was lost, but he is found. If
the earthly father did so freely pardon a riotous and graceless unthrift, and
in steed of his rags, clothe him in excellent sort, we may assure our
selves that God will bury our sins, and furnish us again with those good
gifts which for our naughtiness he did strip us of. The great goodness of
God, if it he compared with the earthly Fathers, does as far pass it, as
the maine sea does a de^p of water: Esaias. 65.24.
Yea before they call, I will answer, says the Lord. And say to him, take
away all iniquity. Hoseas dealt before with the Israelites, To take words
unto them and to turn unto the Lord, If a word more had not passed from him,
the Israelites had been greatly in his debt: but when he opens his heart unto
them, and teaches them what words they should use, to win Gods favor, they
owe no less then themselves to the Prophet. As Hoseas, so did David, Joel,
Christ. David when he had highly commended Jerusalem, for that it was a bond of
holy unity, a barborough of the Church, and the seat of the kingdom: that
that city being, watered with Gods blessing as with pleasant streams, might
ever flourish like the palm tree: he teaches ye godly how to pray for ye
happy estate of the holy city: Psalm. 122.6.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let them prosper that love thee. The Prophet
Joel, least the Assirians army should (as a great stood) swallow up the tribe
of Judah, plagued before of God by famine for their sins, calls them
earnestly to fasting and tears: and least they should be dumb in this
excellent action, he gives the priests in charge to pray thus unto the
majesty of God. Spare thy people O Lord, Joel. 2.16.17.
and give not thy heritage into reproach, that the heathen should rule over
them. Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, least his disciples in praying should
fall into the vain repetitions, and much babbling of the heathen, delivered to
them a short, but yet an excellent form of prayer in these words, Our Father
which art in Heaven etc. As David, Joel, Christ, and Hoseas did, so must we. If
we shall have to do with them which are contrite and broken in spirit, it is
not enough to speak thus unto them, pray to the lord, pray to the lord, pray
to the lord, but we must teach them with what words they may procure his
favor. So shall we heal a wounded conscience, and it will easily appear,
that we have applied our plaster aright with the skillful Surgian, and our
medicine aright with the learned Phisician.

Take away all iniquity. This is an excellent prayer, and consistes of two
parts. In the first, the Israelits confess yt they drank iniquity as water:
in the second part they desire pardon. The first part is contained in these
words, all iniquity: the second, in these words, take away. Concerning the
first, the Israelits dealt very Christianly when they gave sentence against
themselves and spared not themselves ye the Lord might spare them. If they had
pleaded not guilty, and had impudently cried that they had not offended the
majesty of God, they had lost their labor, and had reached him an iron rod to
beat them in pieces with. Notable therefore is that speech of the prophet
David: Psalm. 32.5.
I said, I will confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord. The
Israelites being dispersed under the tira^t Antiochus, used this speech unto
the Lord: Psalm. 106.6.
We have sinned with our fathers, we have committed iniquity and done
wickedly. Ezra, Job, Nehemias, and the Publicane did the like. So must we do,
even freely and from the heart. Confession of our faults must be our medicine
when we have done amiss, as it was to the Israelites. We hate those impudent
fellows, which are either dainty, or refuse to confess those things which are
in every man's eyes and mouth. Gods eyes cannot be dazeled: unless we confess
our sins, we deceive not the Lord, but our selves: we hide our selves with
Adam amongst the trees, and with Fig leaves we do cloth our selves. The
Israelites in this excellent peticion, take away all iniquity, do not only
give out that they are guilty of one falt, but that their wickedness (like a
great flood) ouerfloweth them. Ezra, when the Israelites after their return
from captivity in Babylon, had joined in marriage with the daughters of the
Canaanites, Ammonites, Egyptians, is not content to remember only ye strange
sin which the lord God hated deadly, but spreading out his hands to the lord
he burst into these words: Ezra. 9.5.6.
Our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up
unto the heaven. David when he was touched in conscience for the unjust
slaughter of Vrias, and for betraying the Lords army, did not only crush that
Byle, but confesses himself to be further plunged in wickedness: Deliver me
from blood, Psalm. 51.14.
O God etc. They that have offended God by any notable sin, if they will
seriously call the rest of their life to a reckoning, it will be clear unto
them, that their sins cannot be told on their fingers, or trussed up in a
fardel: and therefore they must cry with the prophet David: Psalm. 11.12.
Who can understand his faults: cleanse me from my secret faults. I could if
I listed, tarry longer in this argument, but because I desire to be brief, and
yet to have variety, I will remember in a word or two, that the Israelits
after the confession of their sins, desired pardon. The confession of our
sins sauoureth of a good and godly mind: but unless desire of pardon be
joined with it, we sail in a shipp that has a hole in the bottom. Cain,
after that he had murdered his brother Abel, gave out this speech: My sin is
greater then can be pardoned. Genesis 4.13.
Judas after yt he had betrayed his master Christ, Mat. 27.4.
said: I have sinned betraying the innocent blood. But because Cain and Judas
did here, as it were, ride at an anchor, they made shipwreck of everlasting
life. The Israelites, of whom Hoseas speaks, were not of the same parish yt
Cain and Judas were: they desire pardon. It profits not the wounded man to
look on his wounds, unless he call for a Surgian, neither the sick man to
know his disease, unless he call for the Phisician: I will add a third thing,
neither does the hatred of sin profit the sick and wounded sinner, unless
he crave for mercy at the hands of God, the most skillful both Phisician and
Surgian. David when the staff of his sins had so galled his heart, that he
felt, as it were, a grievous hell within him, both humbly and earnestly
desires pardon: Psalm. 51.1.2.7 9.14.
Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness: according to the
multitude of thy compassions put away mine iniquities. Wash me thoroughly from
mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. Purge me with Hisop, and I shall be
clean: wash me and I shall be whiter than snow, hide thy face from my sins,
and put away all mine iniquities. Deliver me from blood O God etc: Daniel when
the Israelites had been long in captivity at Babylon, desires pardon of his
and their sins, and that it would please the majesty of God to perform his
promise for their return from Babylon: O Lord hear O Lord forgive, Daniel.
9.19.
O Lord consider and do it, deferr not for thine own sake, O my God. The
Publicane in the Gospel, albeeit he durst not lift up his eyes to heaven, yet
he smote his breast, and desired forgiveness of his sins: Luke. 18.13.
O God be merciful to me a sinner. We our selves groaning under ye burden of our
sins, must hunger and thirst for the grace of God, and therefore crave pardon
of our sins. Almighty God is not such a one as Minos or Rhadamanthus was: he
is not a judge that will not be entreated: He is therefore merciful because he
is God. The laws of Draco the Athenia^ were written with blood: Aristot. pol.
2.
nothing in them is worthy of remembrance but extremity of punishment. But
Gods laws are written with milk. Psalm. 130.4.
Mercy is with God that he may be feared. Ask and it shall be given you, Matt.
7.7.
seek and ye shall find, knock, says Christ, and it shall be opened unto you.
If any plain dealing man should give out to his debtors yt he would forgive the^
their debt, would they so much as think of paying that creditor? if god has
set it down in his word, that he will pardon repentant sinners, do we think
that he will not keep touch with them? Nomb. 23.19.
God is not as man that he should lie, neither as the son of man that he
should repent: has he said and shall he not do it, and has he spoken and
shall not he accomplish it? as it is in Balaams parable to Balak, the King of
Moab. Though your sins were as crymsin, Esaias. 1.18.
they shall be made white as snow: though they were red like scarlet, they shall be
as wool, says the lord. Much more might be fetched out of the rich storehouse
of Gods book, but I have done with this argument, when I have added these
sweet and comfortable speeches, Mich. 7.19. Psalm. 32.1.
that God does not remember our sins, that he castes the^ into the botom of
the sea, yt he lays them not to our charge, but does cover the^. August. in
Psalm. 52.
If therefore God has covered sins, he would not cast his eye upon them: if
he would not cast his eye upon them, he would not thoroughly consider of them:
if he would not thoroughly consider of them, he would not punish them: he
would not know them, but had rather pardon them.

And receive us graciously. The value of good things is better known by the
want, then by the continual having of them. Health is sweeter to them which are
recovered after grievous sickness, then to them which were never sick. Riches
are more pleasant to poor men which were sometimes wealthy, then to the which
never knew what want meaned. The Israelites when they were plagued with want
and beggary for their manifold transgressions, after pardon craved for their
sins, do humbly and earnestly desire at the lords hands that he would deal
graciously with the^: that is to say, that he would reach his hand to them and
water the withered Israelites with the streams of his liberality. Job. 8.11.
Can a rush grow without mine, or can the grass grow without water? as Bildad
said to Job. Unless almighty God do make the rivers of his goodness pass
unto us, we are like to a parched bladder. If God bless not our labors, our
early risings will not serve the turn: for the heaven shall be as iron, and the
earth as an armed soldier to execute Gods judgments, and he that earneth
wages, shall put it in a broken purse. But when God does favor us, it goes
well with us, we have wealth at will, and in a ground, as it were, barren, fair
corn, and a beautiful Vine comes up. Moses, lest the Israelites whom he
commended for their godliness, should either reuolte or wax faint in the midst
of their race, does singularly harten them: God will love thee, Deuteronomy. 7.13.
and bless thee and multiply thee: he will also bless the fruit of thy womb,
and the fruit of thy land, thy corn, and thy wine, and thy oil.

The Prophet Joel, that the tribe of Judah being now turned to the Lord might
put off the mourning weed, promises them from the Lords mouth great store of
temporal blessings. Joel. 2.24.
The barnes shall be full of wheat, and the presses shall abound with wine and
oil. Hoseas, that the Israelites might assure themselves of Gods favor,
delivers the Lords mind very comfortably to them, I will break the bow
and the sword, Hoseas. 2.18.21.22.
and the battle out of the earth, and will make them to sleep safely: and in
that day I will hear, says the Lord, I will hear the heavens, and they shall
hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the
oil, and they shall hear Izreel. And that these sweet promises might take
deep root in the hearts of the Israelites, ye Prophet Hoseas, or rather the
Lord by the prophet handles the same argument in the last Chapter of that
prophecy: I will love them freely: I will be as the deawe unto Israel, Hoseas.
14.5.6.7.8.
he shall grow as the lilly, and fasten his roots as the trees of Lebanon his
branches shall spread, and his beawtie shall be as the olive tree, and his smell
as Lebanon. They yt dwell under his shadow, shall return: they shall revive as
the corn and flourish as the vine: the sent thereof shall be as the wine of
Lebanon. When Almighty God has put away our sins as a cloud, and has made
the beautiful son of his grace to shine unto us, he feeds the hungry,
clotheth the naked, heals our diseases blesses our studies, and does lade us
with heaps of benefits. God is never weary with doing us good. His storehouse
cannot be emptied and his fountain can never be dried up.

And we will render the calves of our lips.

A good turn must be remembered, and we must be thankful to him that has
deserved well of us. If any have done us good, either by preferring us, or
delivering us from danger, we may not forget the pleasure done unto us, and it
is in every man's mouth that we must imitate the fruitful fields, which bring
forth more corn then they received. The eternal God did power infinite blessings
upon the Israelites, as it were with a full horn: he planted the^ a noble
vine: when they brought forth wild grapes, the Lord did prune and cut the
vine. When they cast them selves headlong to all ungodliness, he pulled them
often back with the bridle of his fear: he forgave them infinite sins and
laded them with external benefits. The Israelites having received large
measure of Gods blessings, give out yt they will be humbly thankful to his
Majesty: We will render, said they, the calves of our lips, as if they should
say, in the time of the law they offered calves when they accomplished their
vows: but in steed of offering calves, we will render the calves of our lips,
that is to say, we will praise and commend the goodness of God. The prophet
David, when the Lord had turned his mourning into joy, and his sackecloth into
gladness, Psalm. 30.11.12.
gives out that he was therefore graciously dealt with, that he might be
always a trompet of the praises of God. And in another place after that he had
tasted or rather dronk deeply of gods singular goodness, he brust out into these
words. Psalm* 69.30.31.
I will praise the name of God with a song, and magnify him with thanksgiving:
this also shall please the Lord better then a young bullock that has horns
and hoofes. When Joel prophesied, the grassehoppers, the canker worms and the
caterpillars were the Lords army to destroy all the Israelites increase. The
Israelites were for a time shrewdly pinched, and hungerbitten: but the Lord at
the length had mercy on them. And when he had made the earth very fruiteful,
the Israelites are called on to be thankful to his Majesty You shall praise the
name of the Lord your god yt has dealt maruelously with you. Joel. 2.26.
But let us leave the Israelites, and a little while examine our selves. The
eternal God has been very gracious, and good to the university of Cambridge,
his pleasure was and is, to have it an orcharde of most precious fruit, a
temple of religion, and a chapel of godliness. Are we thankeful to God for his
singular goodness? If we will be truly thankful, we may not bury the Lords
treasure in ye earth, and hide his light under a bushel, and like the harper
Aspendius play and sing only to our selves. If we will be truly thankful, if
any in our Colleges be suspected of Popery, we must teach them Gods truth,
if they be willing to learn it: if they refuse to be taught, we must expel
them. If we will be truly thankful, we must make much of poor men's sonns
which are toward and godly, and we must take heed, that College preferments be
given freely to the worthiest, and be not chopped or changed for money. If we
will be truly thankful, we may not prefer bold and idle fukes which are
fitter for ye cart, then for their books, and never knew what good learning
meant we may not, I say, set them over the painful Bees in the university,
and College hiues, unless we will deal strangely, which God forbid, with the
Church and common wealth. For as the cover is for the shield, and the sheath,
for the sword, Lib. 2. De not. De.
as Chrisippus said: so University Coledges were built for men of learning and
towardness. Lastly if we will be truly thankful, we may not have any liking of
such as are well schooled and taught to flatter, which can ducke like Friars
and kiss the ground with their knees which have tears at commandment, which
can counterfeit and lively express ye countenance and speech of others, and can
dissemble very cunningly. These men are the worst, and the veriest dishclouts
of all other, they are like to the Cameleon. Though they be born in England,
they are but bastard Englishmen, wheresoever and whosoever they be, they are
unworthy of the lowest place. But I have spoken to much of these graceless
fellows whom I should not have honored so much as to remember them though to
their discommendation. I do freely confess that there is in our University a
goodly number of excellent wits: if I should not, I might by me^ be justly
charged with and convinced of a lie, and by Almighty God of unthankfulness. I
do not envy the good estate of the University: thanks be to God for this
worthy increase, and I do humbly pray his Majesty that this happy harvest
may be more plentiful then even now it is. And because I have gone thus far
in the mention of sharp wits, I am very earnestly to entreat you which are
set over the Colleges of our University, that you will account of the^ which
have showed singular proof of learning, religion and virtue in our Colleges
and University as of your dear brethren, and your own bowels: and that you
will make much of those young men and scholars of lower place but yet of
excellent hope. So shall our Colleges (as the apple tree of Persia) budde,
blossom, and bear fruit all times of the year, The Church of England shall
be better furnished then it is, and ye glory of God more brightly shine
amongst us. As for you (my well-beloved brethren) give your selves wholly to
learning and godliness, neither take it grievously, if you be forgotten a time,
when prefermentes are bestowed. Live in peace and the God of peace shall be
with you. If ye put in practice these things which I have in godly sort
delivered: whether we be Masters, fellows or Scholars of Colleges, it will
easily appear, that we have rendered to God, The calves of our lips, that is
to say, that we have very humbly both in word and deed, given thanks to his
Majesty. My meaning is to reserve ye next verse until another time: here
therefore I will make an end. The eternal God and merciful father give us grace,
unfeignedly to turn unto him, earnestly to pray to his majesty, and to obtain
at his hands that we pray for, lastly, for his infinite benefits to praise
without ceassing the infinite goodness of God the Father, to whom with the Son,
and the holy Ghost, be all praise, honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
2. Cor. 13.13. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the
fellowship of the holy Ghost be with you all. Amen.


FINIS.

