MVNITION AGAINST MAN'S MISERY AND MORTALITY.

A TREATICE CONTAIning the most effectual remedies against the miserable state
of man in this life, selected out of the chiefest both humane and divine
authors;

BY RICHARD SMYTH preacher of Gods word in Barstaple in Devonshire.

The second Edition.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful the Lady ELIZABETH BASSET, his singular good Lady,
RICHARD SMYTH heartily wishes all happiness in Jesus Christ.
IN reading of Authors either divine or humane, Dear Madame, men have ever
propounded to themselves different ends according as they have been diversely
affected; which is not to be wondered at, says Senee ep. 109.
the most sage heathen, since in one and the same meddow the ox seeks grass,
the dog a hare, the storke a snake or lizard. Bernard. in Cantie. sermon. 36.
Bernard the best author that lived in so bad a time, reduces these ends to
five. There are, says he, some that desire to know only that they might know,
and this is filthy curiosity; and there are some that desire to know that they
themselves might be known, and this is filthy vanity; and there are some that
desire to know that they may sell their knowledge, and this is filthy
greediness, and there are some that desire to know that they may edify
others and this is charity, and there are some that desire to know that they
themselves may be edified, and this is wisdom. So that of these five ^ndes of
knowledge only the two latter are commendable, namely, when we covet knowledge
either to better our selves or others in virtue and piety. Which two ends for
my own part I have through Gods grace ever principally intended in the course
of my poor studies, seriously considering with my self how vain even the
lawful knowledge of al other things is without the knowledge of those things
which concern our own welfare and happiness: which your Ladyshippe may find
expressed with profitable particularitie in the second section of the first
Chapter of this Treatise. Now because there is nothing the knowledge whereof so
nearly touches us as of our misery, and true and effectual remedies against
our misery, therefore have I in these my first labors published in print made
choice of that argument, not only to edify others, but also to edify my
self, and to have in a readiness necessary antidots and preservatiues
against such crosses as I both heretofore have felt, and also must feel still
as long as my habitation is in this vale of tears. Touching the manner of my
handling this so important a subject I may say as Just Lips. Politic. in
prooemio.
a great Scholar of these times said of a work of his of another nature, that
all things in this Treatise are mine, and nothing mine: all things mine in
regard of the collection and disposition of them, and nothing mine in regard of
the things themselves, which I have taken out of others, or at least very
little mine. I held this course best for sundry reasons which I cannot but
impart to your good Ladyship. First hereby I laid a necessity upon my self to
rank and put in order my best observatio^s in reading both humane and divine
authors concerning these two so material points before specified, namely ma^s
misery, and his relief. Secondly distrusting mine own sufficiency to handle
any matter laudable out of mine own meditations, I thought it good to make my
self beholden to others, whose names and credit could not but procure
authority to the work and stir up attention in the readers. Thirdly forasmuch
as it is impossible for a man to avoid concurrence and coincidence both of
notions and terms with others that have written long before, which in this
malignant age of ours might breed suspicion both of theft and vain glory, as
if I had robbed others of their meditations, and would derive the praise
thereof to my self, I have therefore alleged the authors themselves where I
needed not, in very many things which mine own thoughts suggested unto me. As
for the style, saving where I tie my self to the words of others, it is plain
and familiar without pomp, art, or affectation, which I naturally as much
abhor as any man living: and that specially in such an argument as this, where
I labor to comfort my self and others against the two maine branches of man's
misery, the evils of pain, and the evils of fault, that is, the evils we
suffer, and the evils which we do, sin, and the punishments for sin. Fab.
Quin tilian. Instit Orator. lib. 9 c. 3. and l. 11. cap. 1.
The very heathen Orator has wisely observed that they are altogether
unworthy of mercy, that can talk arteficially of their misery: and Arnob.
co^tra Gentes lib. 1.
a Christian author well says, that when we deal in matters that cannot
stand with affectation and ostentatio^, that is, that admit no florishes of
art, unless men will bewray palpable both absurdity and hypocrisy, we must
regard what is said, not with what delight it is said. For it is an argument of
too vain and wanton a mind to seek for pleasure in earnest and important
matters. Now as for the reasons that have moved me to dedicate these
meditations to your Ladyshippe, something must be said thereof, I am not
ignorant that men in the dedications of their labors are led with sundry and
very different respects; some intend the eternizing of their fame and memory
to whom they dedicate their writings, as we read of that intolerable arrogant
Appion Plinius nature. hist. praefat ad Vespasian.
who was wont to brag that he made all them immortal to whom he vouchsafed to
entitle any of his books. But as for this benefit, nether does your Ladyship
esteem it, whose thoughts are not confined within the compass of this world
were it eternal, nor can I bestow it, being so mean and obscure, that it were
madness in me to think that I could ennoble others by any monuments of mine,
although otherwise wish, I were as able to do it, as I know your Ladyship
worthy thereof, and that as he Sen ep 23
says of Pomponius Atticus, Cicero's letters will not suffer the name of
Articus to perish, so it were in my power to perpetuate your memory. Others by
their dedications hope to extort some benevolence or gift from their
benefactors, need being, if I may so speak, the fatal penance of most
Scholars. And indeed Gulielmus Xylander as Lewen Clai. us re^orts praefat. in
Dionem a se editum.
a worthy Scholar of our time (an eternal blot and reproach to the time)
confessed to a friend of his, that famine not fame had caused him to publish
diverse of his works But neither was this any motive with me herein, since your
ingenuous bounty toward my self, and others (so far as your intricated and
distracted state will permit) is so open that it rather needs restraint then
provocation, or excitation, and for my own particular, it has ever been far
beyond not only my desert, but also my desire. But to come to the more ordinary
ends of such dedications, they are principally three, comfort, honor duty, or
rather discharge of duty, all which I confess, have prevailed with me, in the
dedication of these my slender discourses unto your Lady ship. Many have not
only dedicated their writings, but directed their whole Treatises to such as
they desired to comfort, as Plutarch. consolat ad Apollonium
Plutarch, Senee consolat. ad Polyb. Abin. Martiam.
Seneca, and others. Now this Treatise of mine, te^ding only to comfort us in
general against all misery, whereunto our life in this frail and transitory
world is subject, I have dedicated the same to your Ladyship, that if it afford
any use of that nature, your Ladyship might principally have the benefitte
thereof, whose almost insupportable crosses yea without great measure of grace,
merely insupportable, stand not a little in need thereof: I must in
discreation omit particulars, which are to well known to them that know you,
and your state. Secondly, whereas many in their dedications, as much as in them
lie, seek to honor their virtues to whom they entitle their works, I profess,
that I have here in much respected the same, in behalf of your Ladyship. For
having been a long time an eye witness of your virtuous and religious
conversation, and occasionally as it were enforced to take notice of the
manifold and excellent graces of God shining in you, I could not but most
willingly embrace any opportunity to give some public testimony thereunto,
and a fitter could not occur then the publishing of this Treatise. And yet here
I must do you wrong by omitting particulars, who of your excessive modesty
would hold your self wronged if I should in particular give you but your due
praises, and specify your most eminent virtues. I therefore rather choose to
wrong you indeed, then you should conceive and complain that you are wronged.
Lastly, as for obligation and duty, mine toward your Ladishippe is so great,
that this consideration alone without any other motive would have been
sufficient to make me strain my best endeavors to the highest, to strike out
some part of my scoare, if paper payment may be current, and verbal
acknowledgement may satisfy for real benefittes, which indeed cannot be, but
by the favorable acceptance of generous and noble minds, who deem that
mercenarie beneficence is no beneficence. Of which temper knowing your
Ladyships spirit to be, I have been encouraged to shift out by this kind of
beggarly recompense. I hear therefore, dear Madame, present unto you the
Anatomy of my best thoughts, entreating your favorable acceptance thereof. To
you are they due above al others, such as they are being the fruits of that
tree, to wit my unworthy self, that has continually bin watered and
cherished by your manifold Christian favors. But here again, I must forbear
particulars, least I should be offensive; and therefore I end, mosi
affectionately commending your good Ladyship to the grace of God in Christ.
Barstable in Devonshire 1609. January 1. alias Newyeares day.

Your Ladyships most obliged RICHARD SMYTH.

THE CONTENTS of the several Chapters.
Chap. 1. The vanity of all knowledge without the right knowledge of our selves.
Chap. 2. Agenerall consideration of man's misery. Chap. 3. The Gentiles
miserable ignorance of the true cause of man's misery. Chap. 4. That as the
Gentiles knew not the true cause of man's misery, so neither did they know the
utmost and height of it. Chap. 5. That the Gentiles being ignorant both of the
cause and the greatness of man's misery have grossly erred in the true remedies
against the same. Chap. 6. That true religion reveiled unto us by Gods word
only discovers unto us the cause of our misery. Chap. 7. The true remedies
which Christian religion affords against the first kind of man's misery,
that is, the evils of pain. Chap. 8. That the Christian religion only
affords us true remedy against the second kind of evils, that is, the evils
which we do, or our sins. Chap. 9. Consolations against certain
circumstances of sin, namely long continuance therein before our conversion,
and relapse into it after our co^version. Chap. 10. Of the greatness of Gods
mercy, wherewith the greatness of sin has no proportion. Chap. 11. The
Christians peculiar comforts against death and the terror thereof. Chap. 12.
Consolations against the terrors of the general judgment. Chap. 13. The
ioies of heaven, and glorious state of the faithful after death.
The sinners counsel to his soul. A Sonnet of the Authors.
A wake o Soul, and look abroad,
Shake off this drowsy sleep of sin,
Shake off the clogs that thee so load,
And to be wise at length begin.
Thou come of a race divine,
Derived from the Deity,
And therefore should with virtue shine
Such parentage to testify.
But thou through Satan's guile and spite
Did shamefully degenerate,
And now to sense and appetite
Thy self do basely captivate.
And so with vice art thou defilde,
Which fowler is than leprousie,
That now thou seem no more Gods child
But one of Satan's progeny.
Appointed heir of heavenly ioies
With God himself above to reign,
Thou doatest here on earthly toys,
On ciphers, shadows merely vain.
And here thou foolishly do think
In pleasures vain, content to find,
While thou do but thy poison drink,
Such deadly dregs they leave behind.
For pleasure which in sin men take
Is in a moment gone and past,
Whereas the wounds which it does make
Remain behind and ever last.
And of such wounds thou bearst the print
And with them fowly gashed art,
Although that thou more hard than flint
Felst not at first their deadly smart.
But now that God in mercy great
Good thoughts into thee daignes to send,
And everlasting death does threat
Except with speed thou do amend.
O fly thou from that monster vile
From subtle and enchanting sin.
That has so wronged thee all this while
And cause of such annoyance bin.
The birds and beasts that escape the snare
Back to the same no bait can train,
So wary afterward they are,
As never to come there again.
Then blush o soul, that creatures mute
The dangers past should after shun,
And thou should be so mad and brute,
As into them again to run.
Think how thou do thy self expose
To danger deep by every sin,
Even heaven and heavenly ioies to lose,
And bell and bellish woes to win.
For who so ventures to rebel
Against the Lord and follows vice,
His soul he to the devil does sell,
And takes vain pleasure for her price.
Then loath this world sofull of snares
A maze of errors. shop of lies,
A stage of shadows, cage of cares,
An Echo of complaints and cries.
Thou see all worldly joys deceive:
They promise to content the mind,
And yet still empty do it leave,
Which shows they feed it but with wind.
Then cleave to God thine only stay
Who for himself did first thee make,
From whom as long as thou do stray,
In vain thou seek rest to take.
And shame not unto him to fly,
Nor let not terror hope confound:
Although thy sins for vengeance cry,
Yet grace shall more than sin abound.
MVNITION AGAINST MAN'S MISERY, AND Mortality.
CHAP. 1. The vanity of all knowledge without the right knowledge of ourselves.
CVRIOSITY, that is, excessive care for things impertinent, and little or no
care for things important, is a vice so gross and sensible, that the very
Gentiles by the light of nature in part perceived it, and so far as they
perceived it, reproved and condemned it. Plut. de Curiositate.
One of the^ has written a whole treatise of this argument. ^encca ad Luc
epist. 1.
An other complains that a great part of our life slideth away while we do
evil things, a greater while we do nothing, the greatest of all while we do
things impertinent, and that concern us not. No marvel then if the sons of
light, that is, they that have been called to the saving knowledge of God in
Christ, reveiled by the Gospel have so sharply censured this vice, as August.
de Trin. l. 4. c, 1.
one of them does in this manner, The knowledge of the world for the most part
is accompanied with arrogancy, and curiosity, whence it comes to pass,
that the world is ignor ant of things necessary to be known, because it
learneth things needless to be known. Alas what folly is it for men to take
such pains in the search of things, that, as the Sen. ep. 45
sage Gentill says, neither hurt him that is ignorant of them, nor profitte
him that knows them; and in the mean season neglect the things that tend to
their true happiness, and can only procure their sound comfort and content: at
whom Bernat* de Consid. l. 4.
Bernard justly scoffeth, Doubtless, says he, they very wisely weigh and
measure things, who have: greatest care for the smallest things, and small or
no care for the greatest things. But the check which Luke 10 v. 41.43.
our Lord Jesus Christ himself gives to this fault in reproving Martha that in
some sort was guilty thereof, should most move us. Martha, Martha, says he,
thou art troubled about many things, one thing is necessary, Marie has chosen
the good part, which shall not be taken from her.

2 And this vice and vanity is so much the greater, because not only the
knowledge of things merely impertinent, and superfluous, is unprofitable
without the knowledge of those things that belong to our true happiness: but
even the knowledge of things in part and in some degree necessary is so also.
Grammar.
What is the skill of Grammar worth, to know how to speak by rule, Rhetoric.
and in the mean season to live without rule? * What a vaileth the art of
Rhetoric, that our language be eloquent, Logiek.
and our manners barbarous? * What good can Logic do us, to be perfect in art
of reasoning, and yet that all our actions and courses are without reason yea
flat repugnant to reason? to be so armed therewith, that words shall not deceive
us, and all the while to be deceived with things themselves; with covetousnes
under pretense of thrift, and good husbandry; with prodigality under color of
liberality, with cruelty under show of severitie, and so forth, which are the
most pernicious errors of all, Artithmetick
and far exceed all sophistical fallacies of words? * What benefit can
Arithmeticke yield us, to be able to number all other things, and to have no
care to number either our many sins, or our few days in this tra^sitory
life? Geometry.
* What can Geometry avail us, if we be cunning in measuring all other
things, and yet to set no measure nor prescribe any bounds to our infinite
affections and passions, and to keep no measure either in our hopes or fears,
prosperity or adversity, ioies or sorrows? Music.
* What can Music steed us to discern between concords and discords of
sounds, to be pleased with the former, and offended with the latter, and yet to
have our whole life consist of nothing but discordes, iarring not only with
others, but also with our selves, having desires contrary to desires,
resolutio^s contrary to resolutions? * What will knowledge in Physic
advantage us: Physic.
if we have learned what medicine or receipt is good against the gout, the
dropsy, the stone, and other bodily maladies; and yet have no remedy for
anger, envy, lust, covetousnes, and other diseases of the mind? To conclude,
* What are we the better to be never so learned Lawyers, Law.
and able to plead never so sufficiently either in our own or other men's
causes for debts, houses, lands and the like, and to have never a word to say
for our selus when we must plead for our own souls, how our infinite debt
toward God in regard of our innumerable sins may be discharged, and our title
to a heavenly inheritance maintained and justified?

3 Now if the knowledge of things in their place, and degree necessary, be so
vnavailable, and of so small account, without the knowledge of those things
which belong to our everlasting happiness and welfare: much more is the
knowledge of things superfluous, unprofitable, and merely vain. It behooves
us then to have special care to know those things which so deeply concern
us, and to make use of that excellent speech Aeschylus.
of the very profane Greek Poet, that he is wise, not who knows many things,
but who knows profitable things: and doubtless true it is which a famon^
Christian author wrote long ago, that August do trin. l. 4. c. 1.
that soul is more to be commended which knows her own infirmity, then that
which not knowing this labors to know the compass of the world, the courses
of the stars, the bottom of the earth, the height of the heavens.
Digressions in speech and words are odious much more indeeds and action, and
not only odious, but also dangerous and pernicious. And yet if we duly
examine our courses, we shall find our whole life to be nothing else but
digressions, and impertinencies: and it is greatly to be lamented that many
thousands even of those that profess christianity, go out of the world before
they consider wherefore they came into it.

CHAP. 2. A general consideration of man's misery.
1. OF what importance the knowledge of our selves is, we have heard in the
former Chapter. Now this knowledge of our selves consists in these two points:
the knowledge of our misery, and of the remedies against our misery. Our misery
is two fold, or lies in two kinds of evils, the evils which we do, and the
evils which we suffer, or as Tertull, contra Marcion. l. 2. c. 14.
Divines long ago have distinguished them, the evils of fault, and the evils
of pain, that is, sin and the punishment of sin. Now although the laws of
Method and order require that I should first speak of the first* namely the
evils of fault, as being the cause of the later, to weet the evils of pain:
yet because we are more moved with the punishments of sin, then with sin it
self, I will begin with that which is most sensible, applying my self herein
to our corruption and grosnesse.

2 The evils of pain are of two sorts. For the punishment of sin is either
temporal, to weete all the miseries of this present life; or eternal, that is
to say, the torments of hell in the life to come. The former are so palpable,
that the mere natural man feels them, and groans under the burden of them, as
the complaints of the very heathen manifestly testify. Sen. praefat, in
natural. question.
Seneca the miracle of nature for moral learning, cries out thus, Ah what a
base and abject creature is man, except he adva^ce and lift up himself above
man, that is, above the condition and state of man, Plin. natural. hist. l. 2,
cap. 7.
An other says that this only is certain that nothing is certain, and that
there is not a more miserable, nor yet for all that a more proud creature than
man. And Idem lib. 7 in prooem.
again, that it is uncertain, whether nature be a kinder mother, or harder
step mother to man kind. Cic. de repub. lib. 3. apud August. contra Julian.
lib. 4 c. 14, and 15
A third renowned for his learning and eloquence, complains, that Nature has
brought man forth into the world, not as a mother but as a step mother with a
body, naked, weak, and sickly, and a mind, distracted with cares, dejected
with fears, faint for labor, and addicted to lust, and pleasures. And hence
grew that common speech among the Gentiles related by Aristot. in Eudemo apud
Plutare consolat. ad Apolon.
Aristotle, repeated Cic. Tu^c. quaest. lib. 1.
by Cicero, and Plut. ibid.
Plutarch, and fathered by all three upon Silenus, that the best thing in the
world was not to be borne, the next to die soonest. And Senec. co^solat. ad
Polyb. e 28.
Seneca again exclaimes that our whole life is a penance. Which the Thracians
confirmed by their practice, celebrating their childre^s birth with we ping
and lamentatio^, but their death with joy and mirth, as Herodot. lib. 5. Solin.
Poly. hist. cap. 15 Val Maxim. lib. 2 cap. 6.
diverse ancient writers record, thereby insinuating that our life was nothing
but misery, and death the end of misery. But Bern de consid. l. 2.
a Christian author more effectually expresses this point thus in substance,
that if the greatest man in the world do in a holy meditation strip himself
out of his robes and ornaments of state, which he neither brought into the
world with him at his birth, nor shall carry out of the world with him at his
death, he shall find himself to be nothing but a man naked, poor, pitcous,
and to be pitied, lamenting that he is a man, blushing that he is naked,
weeping that he is borne, and murmuring that he is at all.

3 And thus much in general (for particularitie would be infinite) of man's
misery in regard of temporal pain, which is all that the heathen and infidel
apprehends For as for any eternal punishment for sin after this life, he
never dreams of it, nay makes a jest of it, as we by Gods assistance shall
see * hereafter. Chap. 4, Sect. 3.


4. But the Christian proceeds further, and touching evils of pain is most
troubled with fear of eternal punishment for sin in the world to come. He
has learned out of Gods word Exodus 20. v. 5.
that God is a jealous God and full of indignation when he is dishonored, and
we know that jealousy is the anger of angers, Exodus 34. v. 7.
that the will in no wise absolve the wicked and vngogly, Hab. 1. v. 13
that his eyes are so pure, that they cannot endure to behold iniquity, Romans
2, v. 6
that he rewards every man accerding to his works, Verse 9.
that tribulation and anguish shall be upon every soul that sins, that the
sinner daily heapeth up wrath against the day of wrath, and declaration of the
righteous judgment of God, Heb. 10. verse. 31.
that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Rom 5.
verse. 12.
that death came into the world by sin, Romans 6. verse. 21.
and is the end and reward of sin, Heb. 9. verse. 27.
that after death comes judgment. 2. Cor. 5. verse. 10.
and that we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ to receive
our meed according to that which we have done in the flesh, whether it be
good or evil, Matthew. 8. verse. 12. and Marc. 9. v.
that whosoever shall be condemned in this judgment, shall be cast for ever
into utter darkness where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth. Aug. in locos
aliquot ep. ad Romans numero. 42.
Finally, the Christian considers as Saint Augustine says, that every man by
sinning sells his soul to the devil, taking the sweetness of temporary
pleasure for the price thereof. And thus much for the evils of pain that make
man's state so miserable.

5 The second branch of man's misery, are the evils of fault, or his sins,
which indeed is the greatest part of his misery, although commonly it be
least felt, and the Infidel scarce feels it at all. For as Sen. ep. ^8
a Heathen himself well observed, Men are not greaved for their faults before
they be greeved with the bad success of their faults; that is, they are not
sorry for doing ill, but for speeding ill, not that they are naught, but that
they are wretched, in a word, they grieve that they are miserable, not that
they are wicked and worthy to be miserable, that they are punished, not that
they have deserved to be punished. Which is verified not only in the common
sort of whom he meant it, but of the best amongst the Gentiles, yea of himself
too. For howsoever they seem to teach sometimes that vice is an evil of it
self, as Plato de Repub l 4.
Plato divinely affirms that no man can do wrong to another, but first he
must do wrong to himself, and Plutarch. quod solum vitium sufficiat ad
hominem miserum reddendum.
another has written a whole Treatise to prove, that vice alone is sufficient
to make a man miserable which work of his is pitifully mangled by injury of
time yet they only apprehend vice as a political or at the most a moral evil:
a political evil for as much as it made men subject to punishment, and
obnoxious to public justice; or as a moral evil that stained and impaired
their reputation and credit in the world, and hindered that delight which they
took in admiration of their own imaginary excellency, which was a mere
shadow or rather a detestable idol.

6 But the Christian, at least the true Christian is more moved with sin than
with the punishment of sin and apprehends sin not only as a political or
moral evil, but as a spiritual evil, that is to say, as it defiles the
soul and makes it odious unto God, and defaceth his image in us, after the
which we were first made, tra^sforming us into the image and likeness of Satan
his and our sworn enemy, in a word as it daily works in us in gratitude,
disobedience and rebellion against the most high, in whom we live, move, and
have our being. Our sins then are the evils of evils, and it is an
uncontrollable principle in Divinity, that the least evil of fault is worse
then the greatest evil of pain and that we are bound rather to endure the
greatest evil of pain, then to commit the least evil of fault. For as long
as we be merely passive and suffer only, although the things be not only
grievous, but also infamous, they cannot hurt us, nor endanger us, but that
rule will ever hold that no man is hurt but by himself. Wherefore August. de
Civit. Dei lib ^. cap. 19
S. Augustine says of the ravishing of Lucretia by Tarquinius, that Tarquinius
and Lucretia were two, and yet it was but one of the^ that committed adultery.

7 Sin then I say is that which principally makes a man miserable, sin is
the very leprosy of the soul, sin transformes a man into a monster, and
makes him a base degenerate creature, yea the worst of all sensitive creatures.
This has so altered man, that, as Idem Ibid. lib 1* c. 2^*
S. Augustine elegantly expresses it, he that should have been spiritual in
his flesh, is now fleshly in his spirit: his meaning is, that whereas if man
had continued in his innocence, his flesh should have been in a manner
spiritual, because all the senses and motions of the flesh should have been
comely, regular and holy, now his very spirit is become fleshly, because all
the operations and motions of the very mind and soul are inordinate and
vicious. And how fowly sin has deformed us, and distempered nature, and what
confusion it has wrought in us appears by this, that whereas the soul in
man, whom some have sitly termed a little world, is the principle agent, and
the body the instrument, reason the Sovereign, and appetite and sense the
subjects, sin has turned this little world quite vpside down. The body is
become the master, and the soul the servant; or rather, the body a Lord, and
the soul a slave: appetite and sense command and sway, reason is brought into
subjection unto them, and must do as they will have it. Thus as the common
saying is, the cart draws the horse. The soul should lift up the body, but
the body pulles down the soul, and forces her to suspend her proper
operations, that appetite and sense may act all. We place cur happiness not in
things proper to us, as the right use of reason, contemplation of heavenly
things, union with God, and the like, which indeed are the life of the soul,
but in things common to us, and beasts, in the satisfying, or rather glutting
of appetite and sense, although Sen. ep 93
the very Gentill could say, that pleasure is the chief good of beasts. Nay
sin makes us worse then beasts. For although beasts are guided in all their
actions with sense and appetite only, yet are sense and appetite in them so
regular and uniform, that they hold one constant course, only seeking to
satisfy nature, not to oppress it, and therefore neither surfe it with
eating, nor are drunken with drinking, nor in copulation between male and
female exceed the necessity of generation for multiplication and continuance
of their like, which being accomplished, they afterward live most
temperately, and in all these things, as we use to say do but their kind. And
all this they do being destitute of reason and discourse, herein more happy
then man Bernard. in Cantic. sermon. 8.
as S. Bernard well says, that they are not judged, because they themselves
cannot judge. But man on whom God has bestowed reason to conduct, and direct
him in his doings, disdaineth to be governed by reason, yea purposely rebelleth
against it, and thinks it his glory to be unreasonable, he despises even
pleasure it self if it be natural, and such as God allows him, using
artificial enforcements as it were to disguise Gods ordinances, and to forge
new delights of his own, although sometimes they be rather torments then
delights. Of all material and visible creatures he only knows order, and yet
only breaks order, herein inferior not only to beasts* but to senseless and
lifelesse creatures. The sea in ebbing and flowing, the sun and moon in rising
and setting, the stars in moving and turning, the very earth in springing and
withering keep a certain order whereas man must needs be exorbitant and out
of course, as if his reason had been given him to make him mad and void of
reason.

8 And which not a little aggravates this part of his misery, he is so
entangled in the snares of sin, that of himself he cannot possibly vntvvine
himself, nay to speak properly, he truly desires not to untwine himself,
but whereas all other prisoners loath and hate their fetters the sinner loves
his, he is in bondage and yet is well pleased with his bondage. One would
think that necessity and willingness were incomparible, and could not
stand together, yet sin has joined them in one, men cannot choose but sin,
and yet are willing to sin Thus, Bernar in Cant. sermon. 81.
as a divine author complains after a strange manner, neither necessity can
excuse the will, be cause it is willing, nor yet the will shake of necessity
because it is content to be allured to evil, and to be overruled by such
necessity; So that this is after a sort a willing necessity, a favorable or
gentle violence, flattering us while it forces us, and forcing us while it
flattereth us.

9 And hence it is, that men often relapse into the very same sins which
they had formerly renounced and abiured The very Gentiles perceived and
condemned this vanity or rather madness of men so far forth as it was a
moral evil, the extent whereof we have seen before, See Barth Keckerman
System. Eth. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Polybius was wont to say, that others thought a man to be the wisest creature
that was, but for his part he thought him to be the most foolish, because
other creatures would beware of those things by whom they had bin once hurt,
whereas man oftentimes falls back again into the same vices: And Sen. ep. 20*
and de vita beata ca. 28
as Seneca expresses it, returns to the things which he had given over, and
condemned, forsaking what he longed for, and again longing for what he had
forsaken, thus our love and loathing of the very same things play their parts
by turns, and desire and remorse devide our life between them. And herein
again we must needs acknowledge that sin makes us worse then beasts. For
says Hieron. ep. 10. ad. Furiam.
S. Ierom, the very seely beasts and wandering birds will not be taken twice
in the same traps or snares, and yet foolish man relapseth often into the same
vices, that is indeed, is often taken in the very same snares of sin and
Satan. This is the sinners Labyrinth, or maze, whereinto being once entered he
of himself can never get out of it.

10 This I say is the evil of evils, and makes man miserable, even sin
considered in it self, without regard of any punishment either temporal or
eternal, which notwithstanding inseperably accompany the same. And surely the
spiritual man cannot choose but be ashamed of himself, yea loath himself, and
conceive indignation against himself when he seriously co^sidereth his sins
barely in the^selus, both for the importa^t reasons before specified, and also
because it is an intolerable ingratitude against God, that he having made all
other things for man, and man for himself, those other things do still serve
man, and yet man will not serve God. O what unkindness is this that God should
make all creatures serve us, yea and a great many of them to maintain our life
by their death, and yet we should refuse to serve him? This should most pinch
man; and does the spiritual man. And this is the proper difference between
moral repentance, and Theological repentance, that by the former men are
grieved that they have offended against honesty, but, by the latter that they
have offended against piety. This made Romans 7, ^.24.
the blessed Apostle to cry out against the bondage of sin in this passionate
mann^r. O wretched man that I am, who shall d^l^uer me from the body of death?
He 2. Corinthians 11. verse 23.
else where makes mention of his imprisonments, his whippings, his stoning, and
sundry other extremities, which he had endured, but none of these made him
cry when he spoke of them, only when he comes to speak of his bondage under
the tyranny of sin, then he cannot choose but break out into woeful
exclamation. And the same affection although not the same degree of affection
is in all the godly, that abhor sin even as hell it self Aug epist, 144.
as S. Augustine notably says. He that is afraid of hell fire, is not afraid
to sin but to burn; he is afraid to sin, that hates sin it self as he hates
hell fire. And thus have I in general decyphred and discovered man's misery, I
say only in general, for to anatomize it in particular, were to roaue in a sea
that has neither bottom nor shore. It remains that we should now come to
the true remedies thereof but that I think it expedient first to speak of the
cause thereof, since the knowledge of the cause of any evil brings great light
to the cure; and before that again to show man's gross ignorance of the
right causes of his misery, and this God willing shall be the argument of the
next Chapter.

CHAP. 3. The gentiles miserable ignorance of the true cause of man's misery.
1 We have heard in the former chapter, that man's misery is so sensible, that
the very heathens have apprehended it, and much complained thereof, specially
of the evils that man suffers in this world: for as for the evils which he
does, which are far the greater, and of greater force to make him miserable,
they were but coldly touched therewith. But as concerning the cause, either of
the one, or the other kind of misery, they were altogether ignorant thereof,
and therefore no marvel if they knew not the true remedies either against the
one or the other. And surely touching the cause of man's misery their conceits
and conjectures were so strange, that it is doubtful whether we should more
piety them, or laugh at them.

2 The general co^ceipt of the most sufficient among them, much more of the
vulgar sort was that the first bra^ch of man's misery, namely the manifold and
grievous evils which he suffers in this life, grew from this, that Gods
providence was confined in the higher parts of the world, and descended not
nor extended to things below the moon. Of this opinion were many
Philosophers. Many* says August. de Genesi ad literam.
S. Augustine, have thought, that indeed the high parts of the world are
governed by Gods providence, but that this low part of the earth and the air
next above it, where winds and clouds do rise, are rather tossed to and fro
by casual motions. In this error was Aristotle himself, who thought that Gods
care for the affairs of the world, reached not below the moon, as a great
many of the chiefest ancient fathers report of him, but above the rest Ambrol.
de offic. lib. 1. ca. 13.
S. Ambrase, who most excellently confures that his profane fancy at large,
and I cannot here omit one golden speech of his that way, Qu^s ope^ator
negligat operis ^ui curam? Quis deserat aut destitu^ at quod iple condendu^
putatits Si iniutia est regere, non ne est mayor iniuria fecil se^ Cum aliquid
non fecisse nulla sit iniustitia non curare antem quod feceris summa est
inclementia.
What workman, says he, can neglect the care of his work? who can forsake
and abandon that which himself thought meet to make? if it be a wrong to God
to rule, was it not a greater wrong in him to make? Since not to have made a
thing at al is no injustice, but not to care for that which one has made, is
greater cruelty. Thus the most judicious Philosopher dreamed that God had no
care of men nor their affairs, and therefore no marvel if he in Plaut cap.
in prologo.
the Poet, speaking popularly cry out, Enim vero Dii no^ qua fipilas homines
habent.
that the Gods made tennisbals of men, tossing them to and fro they cared not
how Hence then, namely from Gods neglect and contempt of men and their
affairs, some held that man's so miserable state in this world did proceed.

3 Others thinking this too gross, and that such an imputation did much
derogate from the wisdom and goodness of god, devised another shift and
starting hoale to help the matter, to weete that men's souls were created long
before their bodies, and lived in heaven, but committing some great offense
there, were condemned to be joined unto bodies here on earth, and so to endure
those infinite miseries whereunto man's life is subject, by way of penance for
the faults they had done in heaven. And this being first forged by heathens,
seemed so probable, and was so plausible, that afterward many great persons in
the very Church also greatly liked it, and set it abroach. Touching the Gentiles
Cicero in Hortensio apud Aug. contra Iuli^ an. l. 4. c. 12. and 15.
Tully himself professed his approbation of this opinion, namely that we were
borne into this wretched world for some foul matters committed before in a
former world to suffer punishment here for the same. Who also compares man's
case herein to that of those, which fell into the hands of thieves of Tuscany
mentioned by Aristotle, who were dealt with after this lamentable manner The
one half of them were left alive the other half murdered, then the living
were bound back to back to the dead, and so rotted with them; and that even
so our souls were coupled with our bodies, as the living with the dead for the
greater torment And as for Divines in the Church, that they also applauded to
this invention and vain imagination, appears by the testimony of S.
Hieronim. epist. 8 ad Demetriad.
Ierem, who warns a religious woman of his time to take heed of the
Origenists who used to buzze into the ears of the simpler, that very reason
constrained them to believe, that men's souls had lived in heaven first, and
that for some old faults committed there, they were punished here, and adjudged
to be put into bodies as into prisons, and to do penance in this vale of
tears. And the reason that constrained them to be of this mind, was
forsooth, that young children many times were borne deformed and monstrous, were
subject to sickness, and greevous pangs, and often times were punished with
death it self before they had actually offended, which could notsta^d with
Gods justice, unless they had sinned before their coming into the world. The
vanity of which imagination shall, God willing appear hereafter. Thus they
seeling this part of man's misery and not knowing the cause thereof, run into
many sottish errors August. ^bi supta hac s^^ct. lit. margin. d.
as S. Augustine says of Tullie, He saw the thing but knew not the cause of
it.

4 And as for the cause of the other and greater evil, namely sin, the
general opinion and conceit was, that it proceeded only, either from il
education, or at the least from man's bad husbanding of his own free will which
was equally inclinable to good or evil. Which if they had understood of the
first man Adara when he fell, had been true and sound: but of this they never
dreamed. They thought that man considered in the state of corrupt nature, or as
he is now of himself, was without sin by birth, and had equal power to do
good or evil, to be virtuous or vicious, and as I said, that it was only bad
education and imitation of the bad, or bad imploiment of his freewill and
natural faculties of his soul, that made him naught; in which error we
find the very best and wisest to have been Cie, Aead. quae (...) lib. ^woud^:
and Tusculan lib. 4.
The Stoics, the best of all Philosophers for morality, were so blinded
herein, that they thought even good and lawful affections to be merely of ill
custom, not of nature, much more that corrupt and evil affections were so.
And Seneca epist 22.
Seneca brings in nature complaining of her children as degenerate, and telling
them that she brought the forth with out passions, and evil desires and lusts,
without fears, without superstition, without treachery, and the like; and
Seneca c. pist. 116.
in an other place makes this the only cause that we are naught, because we
will not use the strength which nature has give^ us to shake of our vices,
which is abundantly sufficient to do it. Not to be willing says he, is the
cause hereof: but not to be able is made the pretense and color. Chap 5. Sect.
8.
We shall have occasion * hereafter to speak more of this blindness and madness
of the Gentiles touching the cause of this part of man's misery, namely sin,
when we shall come to handle the remedies which they prescribed for the same.
And as for the falshoode thereof it shall be showed * in place convenient.
Chap. 6. Sect 4.


CHAP. 4. That as the Gentiles knew not the true cause of ma^s misery so
nether did they know the utmost height of it.
1 AS we have seen in the former Chapter that the blind heathe^s knew not
the cause of man's misery, so it rests to be here declared that they knew not
the true measure and greatness thereof, nay were merely ignorant of many
principal branches of it.

2 One special point of our misery is, that by sin we incur the
displeasure of God, and become liable to his wrath and vengeance, who by nature
is an adversary to all sin and sinners, Chap. 3. sect. 1.
as has been * before showed at large But this the heathens apprehended not.
For not only Ovid. Amor lib 3. eleg. 3. and de art amandi. lib. 1.
the profane Poet imagined, that God did wincke at men's sins, yea allow them,
nay laugh at them, but also the chief Philosophers thought and taught that God
was not offended with any thing that me^ did, much less would punish it. Sen.
ep. 31.
Seneca the most moral of them, and the wonder of wit tells us, that no man
knows God, and that many think ill of him, and that without any danger. In
Idem de been fici^s lib. 7. c. 1.
another place he thinks he has spoken wisely, when he speaks most
beastly, saying that one principal point for the attainement of perfect
happiness is, to shake of all fear of God and man, and to resolve that we are
not to fear much from man, but from God nothing at all. Idem de ira l. 2. c.
27.
In another, that there are some that have neither will nor power to hurt, as
the Gods, whose nature is wholly mild and gentle, and who are of power only to
relieve and cherish, but not to annoy or affl ct. And Plutarch. tractat de
superstit.
another famous both for his learning and diligence, yea for his virtue too, so
far as heathnish blindness would permit, makes it flat superstition, to think
that God would hurt any, being superlatiuely good, yea goodness it self: both
being childishly deceived in this, that they thought, that for God to punish
any for their wickedness, and to do harm were all one, See Tertul cent. Marci^
on. lib. 2. c. 14. and Lactant. de ira Dei cap. 17.
whereas it is a maine branch of his goodness to hate evil, and take vengeance
on evil doers. Without the which no earthly Prince deserves the name, nor can
maintain the reputation of good.

3 Secondly they bewraye most gross ignorance touching man's misery in this,
that they think it is all ended by death: whereas the far greater and more
grievous part thereof follows after death, as we have hard Chap. 2. sect. 4.
before. Yet herein the most renowned of them have shamefully erred, and drawn
others into error. Cie Tuse. quaest ^ib 1.
Tully in a large discourse takes it for granted, that after death men either
shall be happy, or else not be at all. Senec de remediis fortui. orum
Seneca peremptorily avoucheth, that all things are ended by death, yea death
it self. Which speech of his Tertul. de resurrect. carnis cap. 2. and de any.
ma cap. 42.
Tertullian both justly reproues, and pithily confutes. And in Sen. conso sat,
ad Matriam. c. 19
another place the same Seneca more distinctly affirms, that those things
that make bell so terrible unto us, are but a mere fable, that no darkness, no
prison, no lake of fire are appointed for any after death, that there shall be
none arraigned, no judge to condemn, that those that devised these things have
but frighted us with scarre-crowes, that death is the dissolution and end of
all griefs, beyond which our evils do not reach. The same in effect is
delivered by Epict. dissertat. lib. ^. cap. 13.
Epictetus, otherwise almost more then an humane author. But most blindly and
profanely of all others writes Plin. hist. ^at. lib 7. cap 55.
Pliny hereof, although in most elegant words and plausible language. The sum
whereof is this that all men are in the same case after their last day, as they
were before the first day, and that there is no more feeling either in the body
or soul after the day of their death than there was before the day of their
birth, that they may think otherwise are foolish and absurd, as if there were
any difference between the manner of man's breathing, and other creatures, or
as if there were not many other creatures of longer continuance than man, of
whose eternity notwithstanding no man dreams, that these are but childish
imaginations, and false conceits of mortality that affects immortality. and
would never have an end, etc. Thus were the heathens ignorant of the chiefest
branches of man's passive misery, namely Gods vengeance on sinners, and the
full execution thereof after death in the world to come.

CHAP. 5. That the Gentiles being ignorant both of the cause and the greatness
of man's misery, have grossly erred in the true remedies against the same.
1 NOw the blind heathens being so grossly ignorant both of the cause, and
also of the measure and greatness of man's misery, it must needs be that they
were ignorant of the true remedies for the same. The things that make man's
state so miserable, as has * formerly been said, are principally two, the
evils we suffer, Chap. 2. sect. 1,
and the evils which we do, with the former whereof carnal and natural me^ are
most moved, although they should be most moved with the latter, Chap. 2, sect.
6.
* as has bin showed. Touching the evils which we suffer, as sickness,
famine, pestilence, war, poverty, banishment, imprisonment, torments at our
enemies pleasure, unhappy matches, and the like both innumerable and
intolerable crosses, and last of all death it self, which although to natural
men it has seemed the end of all evils, yet withal they have taken it for the
highest evil, the remedies which they by their best meditation and study could
devise against the^, are very poor, yea miserable, and therefore unfit to
relieve misery.

2 For let us hear what they can say touching these things that so much
trouble and vex us in this world. Indeed me^ have strained their spirits to the
highest, and wonderously labored to fortify their minds against all
occurrents of that nature, but with poor and pitiful success For if we
read those which with most particularity have handled this argument, as two
specially have done Senec. de remediis fortuit.
the one ancient, Petrarch. de remed. vtriusque fortunae.
the other of later times, we shall see they feed us with words and wind, and
give us only verbal comforts against real evils. I must forbear the
particulars, and insist only in those general remedies wherein all agree. The
first was devised by the founder of the Stoicall profession Zeno, and carries a
goodly show of securing us that way. Cic Tuse. quaest. lib. 2.
His best munition against this branch of humane misery was that nothing could
make a man miserable but evil, that only vice is evil, and therefore that
only vice could make a man miserable; that poverty, sickness, banishment,
imprisonment, cold, hunger, famine, whipping, racking, cruel kinds of death,
were no vices, and therefore no evils; no evils, and therefore could not make
us miserable. And Sense. de constant. sapient. sive de tranquil. vi^e. lib. 2.
Seneca strains the point yet farther telling us, that a wise and virtuous man
cannot be wronged by any. But alas, what poor and cold comforts are these?
What, is sickness, imprison. famine, whipping, racking, hanging, burning, and
other like, or greater torments the less or easier, because I am told they are
no evils? What fond cavillation and sophistical delusio^ is this, that because
these be not evils of fault, therefore they be not evils of pain, or no evils
at all. Cicer. qu^ supra hac sect. lit. mar. giu c.
A heathen author himself justly laughs at this vanity, and pithily confutes
it The Stoics, says he, conclude by certain v^ine cavillations, that pain^,
or grief is no evil, as though the word [evil] did trouble us not the thing.
Why do thou mock me o Zeno? for when thou deniest that which is so terrible
to me to be an evil, thou do but cosen me, and I would glodly know of thee,
why that which seems to me most miserable, should not be evil. Thou say
that nothing is evil, but that which is naught and dishonest. In so saying thou
do but return to thy old fooleries: for by all this thou do not take away
the things that torment me. I know well enough that pain is not wickedness.
Never tell me what I know well enough already, prove to me that there is no
odds in the matter, whether I be in pain or not in pain. And here it is
worthy of observation, that when these Gallants that thus in words braved al
outward pain and grief incident to the body, came to practice and action,
they recanted these brags, which they had uttered in their idle speculations.
So Tullie himself who much inclined to this paradox of the Stoics, and
labored to fortify his spirit thereby against these evils of pain, when it
came to trial, miserably discovered his weakness, and that in the least and
lightest of these external crosses, namely banishment Dio Cassious hist Roman.
lib. 38.
For he so basely behaved himself therein, that one Philiscus of his old
acquaintance sharply reproved him for the same: and specially because himself
had spoken and written so stoutly in contempt of all such casual grievances,
and given very good counsel to others. Whose poor excuse of such his
weakness was, that it was one thing to advise others, and another to comfort
our selves when the case was our own. But most memorable to this purpose is
the behavior of Cie. Tuse. quaest. lib 2.
Heracleotes Dionysius Zenoes own scholar, by whom having been taught this
stout contempt of pain, as being no evil, afterward having a bitter and
extreme fit of the stone, he recanted his error, and cried out that all which
his master had maintained touching that point was false, and that he now found
and felt the contrary, namely that pain was an evil.

3 A second supposed remedy against these evils of pain both taught and
practiced by carnal men is volu^tary death, or self murder, whereby men at
their pleasure might free themselves from all these evils of pain. Hereupon
Oedipus apud Sense The^ai act 1. Sen. 1.
he cries out in the Tragedy, that death is to be found every where, and that
God in this has provided wondrous well for mankind: that, whereas any man
may take our life from us, none can take death from us, meaning that none can
let us from dying, having power to kill our selves when we please. And least we
should think this to be but a Poetical fiction whereby men are made to
speak what the Poet pleases, let us hear the wisest and worthiest of the
Gentiles speaking in good earnest of this matter. Quintil. instit. or at. li^.
^^n pro^emio.
Quintilian affirms that no man is long in pain, or sorrow, unless it be
through his own fault, meaning that by killing himself he may be rid of it
when he pleases. Yea even Seneca himself appr^^ues of this selfe-murther or
killing our selves to end all pain. Are we in distress and misery? Why, Sen
ep. 12
says he, there are many and short and easy ways to free our selves. Let us
give thanks to God, that no man can be compelled to live whether he will or
no. And Ide^ ep. 70.
again, If thou will follow my counsel, so prepare thy self, that thou may
entertain death, nay if need be, that thou may send for it. For it makes no
matter whether death come to us, or we go to death. Yea Sen. ep. 71
he mockes and derides those that made any scruple thereof. And Idem de ira
lib. 3. c. 15
in another place, says he, Which way soever thou look, there is an end of
all evils to be found. Do thou see an high and steep place, by falling down
from it, thou shall fall into liberty; feast thou such a sea, such a river, or
such a pit, liberty lies in the bottom of them, if thou have the loart to
cast thy self into them. Do thou see a tree whereon others have been
hanged, there hangs liberty, if thou will hang thy self. Do thou see thy
own neck, throat, heart* etc, they are all places of escape to fly away
from bondage. Are these too hard and painful means to get out, and would
thou yet know the way to liberty? Every vain in thy body is a way to it. Sen.
ep, 89.
Again he tells us, that if sickness be incurable, and disable the soul to
execute her proper actions, she may as well go out of such a body at her
pleasure, as a man may out of a rotten and ruinous tenement, or dwelling house.
So Epict. dissertat lib. 2. cap. 16.
Epictetus himself the wonder of humane both wisdom and piety, says that as
they are fools, who when they have sufficiently refreshed themselus at a
feast, yet will sit longer, yea even until they loath their meat, and are
ready to vomitte, so they are fools, that having had their fill of this
present life, yet will live longer. And in Epict. lib. 1 dissert. c. 24
another place, Even as, quoth he, boys when they are weary of any player
sport use to say, I will play no longer: so men when they are weary of living,
must say, I will live no longer. And therefore in Idem lib. 1. cap. sen.
dissertat. 9.
an other place he laughes at their simplicity that complain of poverty and
want, What fools, says he, are they that when they have filled their bellies
to day, sit weeping and pensive bethinking what they shall eat to morrow. Base
slave, if thou have meat, thou have it: if thou have it not, thou may be
packing out of the world, the door is open. So Sen. ep. 12.
Seneca highly commends that speech of Epicurus, that indeed it was a misery to
live in necessity, but that there was no necessity for a man to live in
necessity. Meaning that every man by killing himself might free himself from
it. Yea which is strange Plato de legibus l. 9.
Plato himself, that approached so near to Christian truth in many points,
although he appoint some public infamy in the manner of burial for those that
kill themselves, yet it is with diverse exceptions, and amongst others this is
one, if a man so do by means of poverty and want. And to conclude Plin. not.
hist. lib. 2. cap. 63.
Pliny would have us believe, that our mother the earth having pity upon us,
does bring forth poyso^s, that we may dispatch our selves out of this wretched
world when there shall be due occasion. And this was practiced by those that
were counted very worthy men, Plutarch. in vita Caton. Do Cassius ^ist Roman,
lib. 43.
as by Cato when Pompey whose part he had taken was overthrown by Caesar,
killing himself, as it was conceived, principally because he would not be
beholding to Caesar for his life, or at least would not be put to death at his
pleasure. Cornel. Nepo^ in vita Tit^ Pompon. Attici.
Likewise by Pomponius Atticus, who being impatient of a cruel diseale that
took him in his old age, willingly famished himself to death, and could not
be dissuaded from so doing by the prayers and tears of his nearest and
dearest allies and friends. But particulars of this nature are infinite, and
therefore let these suffice.

4 Now how poor a remedy this is for a man to kill himself when he is in
misery, may sufficiently appear by that which has already been spoken
touching the woeful state of man after this life dying out of Gods favor, as
they that thus make away themselves needs must. So that this is not to avoid
misery, but to change misery, yea to change the lesser miseries for the
greater, and as we use to speak, to leap out of the frying pan into the fire.
Yea the Gentiles themselves saw at last the vanity and absurdity of this
remedy, deriding those that because they would not be put to death by others,
put themselves to death. Sen. ep. 71
Seneca, who as we have seen so much favored this profane conceit, yet in
some places forgetting himself, truly says, that it is folly for a man to
die for fear of death: and Martial epigt. lib 22. epigram. 80
another says it is madness, Hic rogo no ^uror est ne moriare mo^i^.
I pray thee, says he, is not this madness to die least thou should die?
Others have seen the unlawfulness hereof, namely Cicero de senect. and in
somnio Scipionis.
that this is to forsake the standing wherein God our General has placed us,
and to refuse and shun the office which God has assigned us in this world:
Arist. Eth lib 3. cap. 7.
others, observe the baseness of it, that it is a token of a coward, and not
of a valiant man, since valor consists in a patient enduring of al extremities.
And therefore Martial. epigram.
the very profane Poet scoffs at Cato for killing himself, of whom we have
heard before, truly affirming, that it is an easy matter to co^te^ne death in
our misery, and that he is the valiant man that ca^ patietly bear misery. Yea
Virgil, Aed. lib. 6.
some have gone farther, and seen the danger hereof also, namely that it is
punished in the life to come, placing those that have offended that way in
hell, and that in such torments, as they wish themselves back again, and upon
that condition would be content to endure all the miseries incident to this
life. Lo the poor remedies that nature can teach us against this first kind
of evils, namely the evils which we suffer.

5 Now touching the evils which we do, which as has been showed, we should
hold the greatest, as natural men have less known and felt them than the
former, so have they been less either careful or able to find out any sound
and effectual remedies against them, nay I may boldly speak it, that as they
give us foolish Physic against the former, so they give us rank poison
against the later. And as it falls out in bodily diseases, that i^ the Physician
mistake the causes of them, they apply medicines clean contrary, and such as
exasperate the evil not assuage it; so it fares with the maladies of the
mind, if they that profess skill to cure them err in the original ground of
them, instead of healing them they poison them and make them far worse.

6 The guilt of sin which al men carry in their bosom tells them that sin
needs some purgation and expiation, or else they must incur the indignation
and vengeance of God. But when it comes to particulars, what the true means of
delivering us from the danger of sin should be, here the wit of man is a
ground and utterly amazed and confounded, and the best remedies it can devise
in this case are either foolish as we have seen they were against the first
kind of evils, namely of pair, or else impious and wicked.

7 See Natal. Comes Mythiol. l. 1. c. 11.12.
Some thought that sin was blotted out and Gods wrath appeased by offering of
flowers, franckincense, and other sweere perfumes, but suppose that every mean
person could be as liberal that way as Alexander the great, Plutarch. Apopht
Regum. and Imperat.
who used to sacrifice with so much franckincense at a time, that Leonidas his
steward reproved him for it, telling him that he must first conquer the
country where frankincense grew, before he wasted it so prodigally, suppose, I
say, every man could be so costly in that respect. yet who that is well
advised, can dream, that the sweet smell of herbs and perfumes can take away
the filthy stink of sin? Others thought by certain washigns with peculiar
and hallowed waters the filth of sin was washed away, as if that which made the
skin clean, made the heart also clean, and that purify the mind which never
came near the mind. Others truly judging these cures to be light, and
superficial, though it must be death and blood at least that must do away
sin, usually killed beasts of al sorts in great abundance, and sacrificed
them to appease Gods anger, and make satisfaction for their transgressions. But
hear again reason awaked will tell us, that if all men could be as
bountiful as Julian the Roman Emperor usually was, Ammian. Marcellin. lib. 25.
of whom the jest went, that if he had returned with victory in his last
actions against the Parthians, the very kind and race of bulls, oxen, and kyne
would have been extinguished by means of his monstrous excess in sacrificing
of beasts, if, I say, every man could and should be at such cost that way: yet
what strange blindness were it to think that the blood of beasts could purge
the sins of men, or that man should commit the fault, and beasts should
bear the punishment of it?

8 But the remedies which the natural man devised against this second branch of
our misery namely sin, were not only foolish, but also wicked and pernicious
For first, some looking further into the matter, and considering that it was no
reason, that man should offend and beasts should be punished, and die for his
offenses, perceived that in all equity man must be punished for the faults of
man. See Natal. Comes Mythol. l. 1. c. 8.
And therefore most nations used to sacrifice certain men at certain times of
the year to make an atonement for the sins of all the rest. So Plutarch
tractat. de supe^stit*
the Carthaginians sacrificed their own children to Saturn, being present
thereat, and looking on, and such as had no children of their own, bought the
children of the poorer sort, as if they had been lambs, or goats, and the
order was, that the very mothers of them must be present at the sacrifice
without making any show of sorrow or compassion at the sight, and if they
did, they forfeited the price of them, and yet their children were sacrificed
nevertheless. The wickedness whereof is so palpable, that Silius Ita li cus
lib. 4. Lucret. lib. 2.
some of the heathenish idolatours themselves perceived it, and cried out
against it, yea Plutarch. quo supra.
some were so moved therewith, that they disputed the point whether Atheism
were not far better, then superstition, and much inclined to the affirmative
part. Lucret. quo supra.
Others here upon directly became Atheists, crying out that religion was the
cause of all impiety. And which is yet more strange, the Gentiles were so blind
in this point, that some of them, Strab. (...)*
as the Leucades, yearly made choice of some notorious malefactor, and
sacrifized him for the whole, as though his death could expiate the sins of
others, who had deserved many deaths for his own sins: whereas indeed
Bernard. ad Milites templi, c. 4.
the death of the best man now in the state of sin cannot profit an other,
si^h every man owes a death for himself. But as has been said, this remedy
is not only foolish and unprofitable, but also impious and detestable, Ang. de
^ivit. Deili. 6. cap. 12.
making God more cruel than any man; for what man, although justly angry,
would be appeased by such a bloody and barbarous means? How were they
blinded that thought one sin was a remedy for an other, and that so heinous
a sin as murder; that they purged sin, when they added sin to sin, that
they appeased Gods wrath when they most grievously kindled it?

9 Secondly for cure of this so great an evil, namely sin, they sent us to a
supposed power in our selves, whereby we are able, if we please, to shake of
all sin, yea utterly to conquer the least evil motions and affections of the
mind as we have heard Char. Sect. 4.
before, and so instead of healing sin thrust us into one of the greatest sins
in the world, namely pride and self liking. Hence came that saying that went
for a principle among the^, Vnusqui^que fortune suae faber.
that every mon was the forger of his own fortune, that is, had power to frame
and shape his own state and condition, and to make himself good or bad, happy
or miserable. So Ovid. de Ponto eleg. ^. ad Germanicum.
one flatters a great man. The Gods grant thee l^ng life, for as for other
things thou will give them to thy self; and Horat, ep. 18. lib. 1.
another flatters himself to the same effect, saying, It is enough that I pray
to Jupiter for long life and riches, for as for a good mind and virtue, I will
give that to my self. Neither are we to think that these were only Poetical
florishes, since the best Philosophers in their most serious discourses and
meditations affirm and maintain as much or rather more sometimes. Arist. Eth.
Aristotle lays this for a ground, that both virtue and vice are in our
power, or else we were neither to be praised for well doing, nor dispraised
for ill doing: and Cie de natura Deoru^ lib. 3.
Cicero, most profanely a voucheth, that we truly and justly glory of our
virtue, which we would never do, if it were the gift of God, and not a thing
of our own. And Sen. ep 31
Seneca is angry with those that trouble the Gods with their prayers that they
might be happy, saying withal, make thy self happy, as if he had said. It is
a matter in thine own power, what nee dest thou be beholden to God for it? Nay
Ide^ ep. 54.
he goes farther and tells us, that in some respect, man has the advantage of
God himself; since God is happy by the benefit of nature, but that man is happy
by his ow^e good hushanding of his mind, being indifferent liable to felicity
or misery: that is, God is happy of necessity, but a wise and virtuous man by
election and choice, for as much as whereas he might be either miserable or
happy, he by his free choice and wise managing of his will makes himself
happy* To conclude Senec. de vita beata c. 8.
he affirms that one principal step and degree unto happiness is for a man
to admire himself, that is, to d^ate upon his own excellency.

10 But alas what poor comfort is there in all this. For first, so far of is
it that man has any such power to shake of sin, as he is of himself in
irremediable bondage unto it, as has Chap. 2. Sect. 8.
already been declared, neither is he naught by ill education, or custom,
but by birth, or rather before his birth, as shall God willing appear Chap. 6.
Sect. 4.1.
hereafter: so that to bid a man not to sin, is to bid him not to eat when he
is hungry, not to drink when he is thirsty, not to sleep when he is
drowsy, and overwatched, or rather indeed, to bid him not be hungry, not to be
thirsty, not to be sleepy or drow sie; yea it is al one, as to bid water not to
moisten, fire not to heat, the sea not to ebb or flow, the sun not to move,
since he can no more of himself forbear to sin, tha^ those creatures can
suspend such their natural actions and motions.

11 Yea not only is this remedy also vain, but here under color and show of
remedy, is there most deadly poison ministered unto us. Being dead lie sick we
are made believe we are hoale, being by nature Ephesians 2.3.
as the Apostle tells us the children of wrath, and Psalm 51.7.
as the kingly Prophet says, formed and conceived in sin, we are told, that
we may choose whether we will be guilty of sin, or no, and that sin comes only
of ill custom; being most miserable bond-flaues, we are borne in hand that we
are free men, or might be free men if we would our selves, the falsehood
whereof has been showed before; having just occasion to hang down our heads
we are counseled to bear them aloft, and to look big, and whereas we
should be ashamed of our selves, and loath our selves we are taught to admire
our selves and doat upon our selves, which is the very high way to make us
incapable of mercy and favor. For as Aug. delibe^o Arbitrio lib. 3.
S. Augustine well says, What can be more unworthy of mercy than proud
misery? And indeed he makes himself unworthy of pity, that stands upon high
and proud terms, when nothing can relieve him, but pity. The dissembling of
misery, says Ber. sermon. quodam.
Bernard, shuts out mercy: and they shall never be accepted as worthy, that
presume they are worthy. Many in regard of this life have perished without
mercy, because in their stoutnesse they would not be beholden unto mercy. It
were easy to give instances hereof both in ancient and later times, but
generality herein is sufficient It must be humiliation and submission, that
must procure offenders favor; not presumption or peremptory standing upon
their justification in a bad cause. To counsel the malefactor to plead his
innocence when his capital offense is notorious and manifest, what is it else,
but to help him the sooner to the gallows? Whereas perhaps by confessing
himself guilty, and suing for a pardon in time, he might have been
acquitted. And thus we have seen that all the remedies which natural reason
has been able to devise against our misery, that is, against the evils which
we suffer, or the evils which we do, against our pains and punishments, or
against our sins which are the cause thereof, are either vain and ridiculous,
or impious and pernicious.

CHAP. 6. That true religion revealed unto us by Gods word only discovers
unto us the cause of our misery.
1 HOw ignorant the natural man is touching the cause of his misery, has
sufficiently appeared by things already spoken. It remains that we now
show the true cause thereof, which only Gen c. 3.
Gods word notifies unto us: and that is, that our first parents Adam and Eve
being created by God and placed in Paradise in a most happy and pleasant state
of life, only restrained from tasting of the fruit of one only tree, to vveete
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, as a trial of their subjection
and loyalty, by the Devils suggestion Gods deadly enemy and theirs, presumed to
eat thereof, and so lost the love, and favor of God, and incurred his
displeasure and indignation, and consequently became subject to al misery and
calamity not only in this life, but also in the life to come.

2 It may seem that this offense was not so heinous nor deserved such severe
punishment. But we must consider that many and grievous iniquities yea
abominations lurked in this fact. For first of all, God having expressly told
the^ that whenever they should taste of this forbidden fruit, they should
die the death, that is, they should surely die, they harkening to the serpent
telling them the contrary make God a liar, yea take the Devils word before his.
Now how great a wickedness this was, the simplest may easily perceive. Secondly
here was great ingratitude and unthankfulness. The Devil tells them that God
had dealt craftily with them in telling the^ there was such danger in eating
of that fruit, whereas indeed it had that virtue to make them equal to
himself, and therefore in policy he forbade them to taste of it. Which
necessarily argues that they were malecontent with their present estate, as if
God had dealt niggardly with them, and had not bestowed so much upon them as
he might have done, and so in effect, that the Devil would by his counsel
and advise do more for the^ then God had done or would do. Thirdly and
principally, here was high treason against the most high, accompanied with
detestable blasphemy. For they eating of the forbidden fruit, because as the
Devil informed them thereby they should be equal to God, manifestly showed
that they disdained to be Gods underlings, and to hold a happiness from him by
inferiority and dependancie, and would be happy absolutely, and of themselves
without being any way beholding to God for the same. Now when the subject
denies homage and fealty to the Sovereign, the Creature to the Creator, man
to God, what can it be but high treason, yea highest treason as committed
against the highest? Besides it could be no less than abominable blasphemy,
that a mortal man should so much as admit a thought to make himself equal to
the immortal God, much more to desire it, yea to attempt it.

3 And yet further this does not a little aggravat their sin, that they the^
had absolute power not to sin. To express this point, I had rather use
Saint Augustines words then mine own. If, says Aug. de eivitat Dei li. 14. c.
15.
he, any man think that Adams condemnation was either too heavy, or unjust:
surely he knows not how to weigh the matter, namely how great the iniquity
of sinning was, when there was so great easines not to sin. And a little
after, Where there is great punishment threatened for disobedience, and the
matter commanded by the creator to be obeyed, so easy, who can sufficiently
declare how great a wickedness it is not to obey in a matter so easy, and
where there is so great power to obey and so great danger for not obeying?

4 I omit many other considerations which might farther aggravat the greatness
of our first parents sin. But that which has been already said may suffice.
Only this I thought good not to omit, that it may be replied by some, that how
great soever their personal offense were, yet what reason is it that their
posterity should bear the smart thereof, and that in so hard measure, as we
see and feel by common experience, that they do? The answer is easy, that
Adam had either happiness or misery in his own hands, not only for himself
but for all his: and therefore by making himself miserable willingly, I
mean, at least, willingly doing the thing that justly made him miserable he
also justly drew misery upon all his. We see that even humane justice
punishes the children for the offense of the fathers. He that commits treason
not only dies himself for it, but brings misery upon all his children, who
by his offense loose all their goods and lands that otherwise should have
descended unto them, as also if the parties so offending be of such quality
and rank, their nobility and advantages of birth, and parentage. Again, we as
commonly kill the young foxes, wolves, and such like ravenous and noisome beasts
as the old, although as yet they have done no actual harm, because we know
they are of the same nature, that the old are, and lack not malice but time
to hurt and destroy. Much more therefore may God, that more hates malignitie of
nature in man, than man does in beasts, manifest his wrath against mankind
even in their infancy, knovving that the root and seed of all evil lurkes
in them from the womb, yea in the womb, and that the poison of sin and
wickedness is even incorporated into their essence. And this is the cause of
all those miseries and extremities which many times we see young children to
endure. The ignorance of which point drew the Gentiles out of the Church, and
heretics in the Church into that ridiculous error * before specified, Chap.
3. Sect. 3.
that men's souls had committed some foul fault in heaven for the which they
were sent into bodies here on earth to do penance for the same. Now man having
thus willingly separated himself from God his Creator, and the only author
of his happiness, it is no marvel if he became subject to all kind of
misery. This was, says Aug. de civit Dei lib. 6 cap. 13.
S. Augustine, a perverse haughtiness, to forsake that original cause
whereunto only the soul ought to cleave, and after a sort to become his own
original, that is, to leave God, and go about to be his own God, and to be
happy without being beholding to God for it. And a little after, Man by
affecting to be more then he was, is now less then he was: and while he made
choice to be sufficient of himself, forsook him that only could be sufficient
for him. And Ambro. de Elia and ieinmio cap 4.
S. Ambrose brings in God expostulating and reasonning the matter with man
after his fall, thus, Did thou think to be like unto us? therefore since
thou would be what thou wast not, thou have ceased to be what thou wast. And
Bernard. tractat. de gratia and libero arbit.
S. Bernard very sweetly expresses this point, says he, they (to wit our
first parents) which would needs be their own, became not only their own,
but the Devils also, that is, the Devils slaves, held in bondage by him at his
pleasure, as 2. Tim. 2.36.
the Apostle speaks. This was a woeful alteration that man who was the son
of God, while he would be Gods equal, ceased not only to be his son, but
also his servant and became the servant of sin and Satan And what a misery
it is to be in bondage unto sin, yea what an evil sin of it se^fe is, Chapt.
(...). sect. 5. and 6.
has * already been sufficiently declared.

CHAP. 7. The true remedies which Christian Religion affords against the
first kind of man's misery, that is, the evils of pain.
1 What poor and cold comfort natural me^, yea the best of natural men, and
as it were the flower of them have been able to find out against man's double
misery, namely the evils of pain, and the evils of fault, that is, the evils
which he suffers, and the evils which he does, sufficiently appears by
things * before spoken. Chap. 5. throughout.
Let us now see what better relief and remedy true religion yields us in
that behalf. As for the evils of fault, that is, sin the cause of all evils
of pain, the remedy that Christianity affords us, is free pardon of our
sins and reconciliation to God by faith in Jesus Christ. As for the evils of
pain, they are of two sorts: either of temporary pain in this world; or of
eternal pain in the world to come. The remedies against the former, namely
temporary pains in this world, are the gracious change of them unto many
profitable uses: the remedy against the latter, namely eternal pains in the
world to come is all one with the remedy against the evils of fault, or
sins. For the same mercy of God which frees us from sin, does withal free
us from the eternal punishment due unto sin, and therefore I will join them
both in one in the next Chapter. For howsoever the strict laws of order
require I should first speak of the evils of fault as the cause of all evil
of pain, and then of the evils of pain that proceed there of: that is, first
of sin; and then of the punishments for sin: yet, because the evils of
pain, that is, punishments for sin, specially temporary punishments, whereof
I only entreat here, that is, the miseries and afflictions of this life, are
more sensible to our nature then the evils of fault, that is, than sins
themselves, as also because they be the lesser evils of the two, howsoever more
felt, I rather regarding the conveniencie of matter, than curiosity of method,
will speak of them first.

2 The first consolation then against all worldly miseries, is this, that
whereas of themselves they are tokens of Gods wrath and displeasure, and a part
of his justice upon sinners beginning in this world, and ending in the world
to come, or rather to speak properly never ending, and are a taste, and as it
were forerunners of hell torments; now clean contrary, unto all that are in
Christ, and by faith in Christ stand reconciled unto God, whereof by Gods
assistance we shall ^eare more at large in the next Chapter, they are signs
and pledges of his love and favor. A strange alteration, that they which
before were heralds of defiance, should now be messengers of peace, and
proclaimers of amity and love: yet that the case thus stands, is manifest by
Gods express testimonies. My son, says Prove. 3 11. and 12.
Solomon, that is God by Solomon, despise not the chastisement of the Lord, nor
be weary of his correction: For the Lord corrects every one that he loves*
as a father does the son to whom he wishes good. And the Heb. 12.5. and 6.
Verse. 7. and 8.
Apostle repeating it almost word for word, * infers out of it by necessary
consequence, that affliction being the badge of all Gods sons, therefore
they that tasted not of it were bastardes and not sons. And so Apoc. 3.19.
Christ himself professes to the Church of Laodicea, that he dealt thus with
all that he loved, namely that he exercised them with affliction As many,
says he, as I love, I rebuke, and chastise. Thus all afflictions and worldly
crosses to the faithful are so many tokens, sent from heaven to earth from God
to man, from Christ to the Christian, to assure us of love and favor; and who
would not be glad, nay proud to receive love tokens from an earthly king, how
much more from the king of heaven?

3 Secondly it is to be considered that these evils of pain are not only
comfortable for testification, but also proficable in operation, and bring
forth most notable effects in the godly. So says Ps 119. v. 67. and 71.
David, Before I was afflicted, went astray: but now do I keep thy
commandments. And again, It is good for me that I have heene in trouble,
that thereby I might learn thy statutes. And Heb. 12.10.
the holy Apostle is bold to say, that God chastises us for our good, that we
may be made partakers of his holiness: now all chast^seme^t for the present
seems not to be joyous, but grievous; but afterward it brings the quiet
fruit of righteousness to them that are exercised thereby. And Romans 5.^.3.4.5.
S. Paul goes yet further, affirming that afflictions to those that are in
Christ, minister matter not only of profit, but also of glory. Therefore,
says he, We glory in tribulation, knowing that tribulation brings
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not
ashamed.

4 And hence it is that Divines reach that afflictions to speak properly, unto
the godly are not punishments but ought to be termed by some other name So
says Chrysostom. in 1. Corin. hom. 28.
S. Chrysostom; we are not punished, but instructed: so that our affliction
is for admonition, not for condemnation; for Physic, not for torment; for
correction, not for vexatio^. That is in a word, all our tribulations are for
instruction, not for destruction.

5 The very heathe^s could see that some benefit did grow from trouble and
misery. As first, that it was a counterpoyson against the danngers of too much
prosperity, as pride, riot, wantonness, and the like, which have been the bane
of many men. Herod. l. 3
Amasis king of Egypt desired that he and his might taste of adversity, and
understanding of the incomparable prosperity of Policrates Prince of Samos, who
was so luckie in all his affairs, that when of purpose he had cast his signet
that had in it an Emerald of wondrous value, into the sea, he had it brought to
him again in the belly of a fish that shortly after was served in at his table,
he presently renounced the amity and league that had been long between
them, suspecting that some great mischief would befall him, wherein he would
be loath to share with him: as indeed it fell out; for being craftily trained
into the hands of his enemies he was crucified alive. Yea Iuvenal. Satyr. 6.
the very Poet observed and complained, Heu patimur longae pacis malasaevior
armis Luxuria incumbit etc.
that in his time they were even sick with ease and prosperity; and more
plagued with peace, the^ ever they had been with wars. And Sen. ep 52.
the Philosopher wittily says of Hanniball effeminated by ease and delicacie,
that he overcame by arms: but was himself overcome by vices: Idem ep. 19.115.
who also notes, that this was the spoil of Mecoenas, and not only of him, but
generally of very many who^ prosperity brought to a madness of vanity and
luxury. Again they saw that sometime crosses occasioned increase of judgment,
and bred an experimental knowledge which was not a little to be esteemed. So
Chion in ep. quadam
Chion gave hearty thanks to the cross winds that kept him at Byz a^rium
against his will: because by this means he grew acquainted with Zenophon
arrived there during his constrained stay, and greatly benefited him self by
conference and intercourse with him. And Plutarch. Apopht. Regum and Imperat.
Themistocles being banished by his unkind country, was wont to say to his
followers, Except we had been undone we had been undone. So much did he
think he had gained by his banishment; because he thereby grew in favor with
the king of Persia, and was greatly advaunced and enriched by him.

6 How much more the^ may Christians pick profit out of adversity, yea such
profit as the blind Gentiles never dreamed of? For all that they gained or
possibly could gain by adversity, was but a civil and moral wisdom, or
reformation of their outward behavior in this present world and in regard of
men: But the Christian takes out far higher lessons from adversity.

7 For first hereby they learn contempt of the world, which is no small
matter. For how dangerous a thing the love of the world is appears by this
that it is incompatible with the love of God, and cannot stand with it. Know
ye not, says Iam. 44,
S. James, that the friendship of the world, is enmity with God? Whosoever
then will be n friend of the world, becomes the enemy of God. And says Ioh.
1.2. verse. 15.
S. John, See that ye love not the world, nor the things of the world: if any
man love the world, the love of the father is not in him. Thus we see that of
necessity we must be out of love with the world, if we would be in love
with God: enemies with the world, or else we cannot be friends with God. The
contempt of the world then touches us as nearly as our very salvation,
neither can there be any salvation without it. But now what can so well teach
us the contempt of the world, as experience of the vanities and miseries of the
world? It is then a special token of Gods love and favor when he by
afflictions and crosses makes the world bitter and unsavory unto us, thereby
to waine us from the love thereof. As mothers or nurses when they would weyne
sucking children do use to anoint their teates with wormewoode or some other
bitter thing, thereby to make them weary of sucking, and to leave the sweet for
avoiding of the bitter, so God when he would weyne his children from the love
of the world, by adversities and crosses makes it bitter and unsavory to them,
least they should too deeply suck in the poison thereof, yea even suck
themselves to death, as carnal men that live in all prosperity and iolity
usually do, according to that saying of wise Pro. 1.32.
Solomon, that the ease of fools kills them, and the prosperity of the
foolish destroieth them; by fools meaning the wicked, whom prosperity makes
wanton and foolish, depriving them of all spiritual understanding, if they had
any, or else keeping them from ever having any. And this as Ier. 48.11.
Jeremy or rather the Lord by Jeremy witnesses was the over throw and ruin
of the Moabits, because Ierem. 48. ver. 11.
Moab was quiet even from his youth, and sat upon the Lees, nor was powered out
from vessel into vessel, nor lead into captivity. Thus a flattering world
poysoneth* but a frowning world preserves: a flattering world defiles, a
frowning world purifieth: in a word, a flattering world damneth a frowning
world saves. And who would not be content to have the world his stepmother,
so that he may have God his father? And how necessary it is that the world
should be a stepmother unto us that we might not over love it, appears by
that golden speech of Augustine.
an ancient divine; Behold, says he, the world is stormy and te^pestuous, and
yet we love it, what should we do if it were calm? How would thou embrace
and cole a beautiful world, that make so much of a foul and deformed
world? how greedily would thou gather the roses of it, that can hardly
hold thy hands from the thorns of it? That is, how should we doare upon the
world, if it were an indulgent mother; that can scarce forbear to love it,
being a cursed stepmother?

8 Besides the miseries of this life do serve notably to mortify our lusts,
and concupiscenses. For, as prosperity is oil to kindle them: so adverfity is
water to cool and quench the^. Hereby anger is mitigated, lust abated, pride
dejected, and in a word, all inordinate affections and desires rectified. Hence
it is that affliction in holy scripture is often termed a furnace, yea a fiery
furnace: because it purges out our corruptions, and makes separation between
the gold and the dross of our souls, between our vices and our virtues. And
hence it comes, that our very enemies are our servants and procure our good,
when they seem most to hurt and annoy us. Would thou know how this comes to
pass, says Augustine. de tempor. sermo 78,
S. Augustine? Why they so serve us as files and hammers serve gold; as milles
serve wheat, as ovens serve for the baking and making of bread, finally as
straw, and chafe in the furnace serves gold, where the chafe is consumed to
nothing, but the gold remains yea is made better then it was, being purified
thereby. Which resemblances, if we well mark them, are very proper and
excellent. For one would think that the file by galling, and the hammer by
beating should mar the gold; and yet they both better it: one would think
that the chafe which nourishes the fire in the Goldsmiths furnace should be
hurtful to the gold, as also the mil to the wheat which it grindeth to
powder, and the oven to the loaves which it burns and scorcheth with so
violent hear; and yet are all these things brought to their perfection by the
things which in show so much annoy them: gold by the file, hammer, and burning
chafe; wheare by the mill, and loaves by the oven; And so a true Christian is
purified and perfected by the things that threate^ him destruction, namely by
crosses and ^ffictions.

9 Neither do the miseries of this life only mortify our vices, but also
either breed, or at least increase many excellent virtues in us, as has in
part * already been touched. And therefore In this chap. sect. 3. ^ 2. Corinthians
4 verse. 16.
the blessed Apostle ioineth both these benefits together, saying that while
our outward man perishes, our inward man is renewed thereby: meaning, that as
afflictions do weaken and consume our natural life; so they strengthen and
further our spiritual life. And o happy loss that causes such gain, o happy
smart that causes such ease, yea o happy death that causes such a life. Thus
we ever come out of affliction better the^ we were before. Whereof we have a
notable resemblance, or rather a type and prefiguration in the children of
Isreal's bondage in Egypt recorded by Genes 15. ver. 13. and 14
Moses in his holy history. God foretold that they should be slaves in Egypt
for many years, and suffer great affliction there: but yet that in the end
they should come out of it, and that with advantage, namely with gold, silver,
jewels, and far greater substance the^ they had when they went thither, as Exodus
12. v. 35.36, and
the event indeed manifestly showed. Even so it fares with all true
Christians; they must go into Egypt, and endure bondage there, that is, they
must suffer many troubles and miseries in this life: but they shall come out of
them in better case then they were before. But what? do Gods children come out
of their troubles and adversities with more gold, and silver, or with better
apparel then they had before, as the Israelites did out of Egypt? No surely:
but yet with far more precious things then gold, or silver, or gorgeous
attire, namely with more knowledge, with more wisdom, with more potie^ce,
with more humility, with more zeal, with more contempt of this transitory
life, aed more longing after the life to come, which is eternal. Now what
goodly treasures are these, and how far more precious then those which the
Israelites brought out of Egypt after their long bondage and manifold
grievances there? Tertull de p. ^. e^tia. c. 7
Tertullian says strangly, Let the whole world perish so that I may gain
patience. If he held that one virtue of patience worth the buying at so high
a rate, eve^ with the loss of the whole world: how much more should we think
so many other virtues together with it, worth the buying with some short and
transitory adversities and crosses of the world?

10 Last of all a true Christian has by the benefit of his holy profession
this notable comfort against the miseries of this present life, that making
such religious uses thereof, as has been said, he is acquitted of eternal
miseries of the life to come. So Luc. 16. ver. 25.
Abraham from heaven tells the rich glutton in hell, Remember, says he, that
thou receivedst good thing in this life and Lazarous evil: therefore now is he
comforted, at thou art tormented. And, says 1 Corinthians. 11. verse. 32.
S Paul, When we are judged of the Lord, we are corrected to the end we
should not be damned with the world. Thus, if God correct us, the Devil shall
have nothing to do with us. And how happy would the son think himself,
that having deserved to be strangled by the hangman, might escape by whipping,
and the whipping too referred to his own father? Thus the evils of pain or
the afflictions of this life to a true Christian minister many comforts, and
yield them many benefits, so that we should rather desire them, then be
overmuch afraid of them, or dismaide with them, Therefore Bern in Cant. ser. 42
S. Bernards meditation is excellent touching this point, that God is never
more angry then when he is not angry, that is, when he shows no tokens of
his displeasure by correcting us. For although this may seem to be mercy and
favor, yet says he I will none of this mercy; this mercy is worse then all
wrath or anger. To conclude, let us make such holy uses of the miseries which
we endure in this life, as has been showed; and they shall serve us for an
acquittance of al miseries, and torments in the life to come.

CHAP. 8. That the Christian religion only affords us true remedy against the
second kind of evils, that is the evils which we do, or our sins.
1 THAT the greatest evils in this world, are the evils which we do, that
is, our sins has been Chap. 2. Sect 5.
already sufficiently declared: Chap. 5. Sect. 7. and 8.
as also that the best remedies that natural men, though never so wise and
learned have been able to devise against the same, are of no force, nay that
they are rasher poisons then medicines. Let us now see what helps and comforts
Divinity and true religion will afford us again the same.

2 And first we must admit it for a ground that neither our selves, nor any
other like unto our selves, (that is, mere men) can remedy this matter; that
is, deliver us from sin. For both we and they are so captivated and
enthralled thereunto, that we cannot possibly free our selves from it, as has
been Chap. 2. Sect. 8.1 and Chap. 6. Sect 4.
before declared, whereunto we may add that golden speech of Bern. trac^ de
gratia and libero arbitrio.
Bernard, that although power were given to man's will to stand and not fall: yet
not a power to rise again, if it did fall. For it is not so easy for a man to
come out of a pit, as to fall into a pit. It is in vain then to seek help
either from our selves or others like unto our selves, in this case, namely
against sin.

3 Here man's state being both so miserable, and also so remediles, God steps in
to stelpe him, when he was not able to help himself, and after an
incomprehensible manner so tempered mercy and justice one with the other, that
neither sin should be simply pardoned, nor yet the sinner be condemned, but
that both the offense should be punished, and yet the offender absolved. This
may seem strange, and indeed is most strange, and therefore Rom 16. ver. 25.
and Colos. 1. verse, 20.
in the scriptures is called a mystery, yea a hidden mystery, yea a mystery
hidden from the beginning of the world until the fullness of time, that is,
until the time appointed by God in his infinite wisdom for the revelation
thereof. This mystery in few words is, that God sent his only son Jesus
Christ into the world to take upon him the nature of man in the womb, and of
the substance of the virgin* Mary, and in this nature to preach all truth and
to fulfill all righteousness in his life, and afterward to suffer a most
both ignominious and painful death upon the cross, that by his blood he might
wash away man's sins, and so reconcile to himself all those that by faith
embraced him as their redeemer, and applied to themselves that most glorious
and sovereign sacrifice of his death and passion. The sum whereof, Ioh. 3.16.
the Evangelist co^prehends in these few but golden words; So God loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten son, to the end that whosoever believed
in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting. For the better
understanding whereof we must observe that the humane nature in Christ is not a
distinct and several person by it self, as Peter, John, and such like: but so
united to the divine nature that did assume it, as they both make but one
person, so that all that is in it, is truly said to be Gods, and all that was
done by it; to be done by God; Act. 20.28.
his blood was Gods blood, his death Gods death, etc: which necessarily:
implies the perfection of all his actions, being the actions of him that was
God as well as man, and both God and man in one person. Secondly we must note
that all that he did or suffered in his humane nature thus united to the
divine, he did and suffered for us, that we might have the benefit of it: he
took our evils upon him, our sins and death due to our sins; and imparted
his good things to us, his innocence, obedience, holiness and righteousness,
and finally his sufferings partly in his life time, but principally at his
death upon the cross his humiliation is our exaltation, his condemnation our
absolution, his death our life.

4 This course was most effectual and availeable in this case, yea in the
apprehension of man only of force and possibility to remedy this branch of our
misery, namely our sins, and condemnation for sin. For first, Chrysostom. in
prior ep. ad Timoth. hom. 7.
he that is to reconcile persons that are at variance and difference one with
the other, must have interest in both; else is he unfit to reconcile them, and
bring them friends: wherefore God and man being at variance, it was requisite
that he which should reconcile them should be both God and man. Again man
having sinned, justice required that man should be punished, and having sinned
unto death should be punished with death; but now a mere ma^s death could not
salve the matter for as formerly has been showed, the death of one sinner
cannot pay the debt and death of another, every sinner owing a death for
himself. And besides, he that was to deliver others from the danger of penalty
and death was not only to suffer death, but also to vanquish and overco^e death
which a mere man could never have don God could not die, and man could not
recover himself, when he should die: wherefore the Mediator was to be man to
suffer death, and God to vanquish death Thus as Anse^m. tract cur Deus homo
a Divine of middle times sweetly says, Since such a satisfaction was requisite
as none but God could make, and none but man was bound to make: he that was to
make it, was to be both God and man. Thus our Christian religion only directs
us to the means wherein there is possibility of saving us from our sins, and
hence it is, Mat. 1. v. 2^
that Christ had the name of Jesus, that is, of a Savior, as he that only
could and would do this so great a work.

5 And that he as well would do it, as could do it, yea therefore only was
incarnated and suffered death that he might do it, is most evident. Cyp. de
Idolor. vanitate.
Christ was made that which man was, that man might be made that which Christ
was. And, as Bernard. in vigilia nativit. Domini.
Bernard says, why was the son of God made the son of man, but that the
sons of men might be made the sons of God? Surely Gregor. homi^ 34. in
^vangel.
this cannot but yield man boldness with God, that God himself is become man.
August in Psalm. 148.
There is no cause now why man should doubt of living for ever, since God has
died for him. For shall not he live for ever, for whom he died that lives for
ever? Verily it is nothing so strange that mortal man should live, as that ^he
immortal God should die, specially since this death of the son of God was
unjust and without cause in respect of himself, and therefore must needs be
available for some others, as August de temp. sermon. 101.
S. Augustine excelle^tly says, Death could not be conquered but by death,
therefore Christ suffered death that an unjust death might overcome just death,
and that he might deliver the guilty justly, by dying for them unjustly. And
thus August. de verbis Domini secund Luca^; and de temp. sermon. 141.
by taking upon him our punishment, without taking upon him our fault; he has
discharged us both of the punishment, and the fault. And that by good right,
Bernard. ad milites templi, c. 4.
since although because he was man he could die, yet because he was just, he
ought not to have died, and he that had no cause to die for himself, in reason
and equity should not die for others unprofitably. Neither surely did he, but
to greatest purpose, namely, that the son of God dying for the sons of men,
the sons of men might be made the sons of God, as we heard before out of S.
Bernard, yea that of bad servants men might be made good sons, as Aug. ser. 28
Saint Augustine speaks: and this glorious mystery of our Saviors
incarnation and passion must needs bring forth glorious effects, Ansel. in c
^. ep. ad Ephesians
this strange and unspeakable love of God that his only son should die for
us, that a Lord should die for servants, the creator for the creature, God for
man, this strange love I say, must needs be of strange operation, as it is
Bern. feria 4. heb dom. paenolae.
even to make of sinners just men, of slaves brethren, of captives fellow
heirs, and of banished persons kings.

6 Why then should our sins dismay us, if we be unfeignedly sorry for them,
and by faith have recourse unto Christ that has borne the punishment of them?
O let us think upon this comfortable change, August. m Psalm. 2^. c. narrat. 2.
that Christ made our faults his faults, that he might make his righteousness
our righteousness. Just. Martyr ad Diagnetum.
O sweet exchange, o unsearchable skill, that the unrighteousness of many should
be hidden in one that is righteous, and the rightteousnesse of one should
cause many that are unrighteous to be accounted righteous. Although we be not,
nor cannot be without sin, yet as long as our sins are not imputed to us,
they cannot hurr us. The princely prophet David as August. in Psalm. 32. c*
na^rat. 2.
S. Augustine well observes, says not they are happy that have no sin, but
whose sins are covered. Surely if God have covered our sins, he will not
see them; if he will not see them, he will not examine the^; if he will not
examine them, he will not punish them. August. in Psalm. 119.
According to the grounds of our Christian faith, they are accounted for no
sinners, to whom their sins are not imputed, and Idem de nuptiis and
concupise. cap 26*
not to be held guilty of sin is not to have sin, or, to be without sin.
Do we fail in our obedience to the law of God and many times break his
co^ma^deme^ts? Why Idem retract. lib 11* cap. 19.
all the comma^dements are the^ held to be kept, when all is pardoned that is
not kept. Bernard in Cantic. sermon 33 and in Annunciat Mariae sermon
It is the^ a sufficient righteousness to have our unrighteousness forgiven,
and to have him only favorable to us whom only we have offended. True it is
that that which is done cannot but be done, and yet not being imputed, it is
all one, as if it had not been done.

7 This plea must needs confou^d the Devil, and put him to silence. For Bernard.
if Adams sin could make us guilty shall not Christ's righteousness much more
make us innocent? Shall there be more virtue in the seed of the first Adam,
then in the blood of the second Adam? Doubtless the greatest force and
efficacy is ever in the greater and stronger agent, and therefore Christ is fat
more able to save then Adam to condemn, and why should not we have
righteousness from another, as well as we had guiltiness from another? 1. Corinthians. verse. 1.
specially since p. 190.
Christ was made righteousness unto us by God the father: and shall not that
righteousness be ours which was made over to us, and made over by God
himself? Carnal generation from Adam shall never be of such force to damn
us, as spiritual regeneration in Christ to save us. And if Satan say unto us
that a bad father soulde us, we may presently answer that a good brother has
ransomed us.

8 Finally, what could we wish more? An^elm. cur Deus homo lib* 2*
Being miserable creatures, and not able to free our selves from the bondage of
sin and Satan, God the father says unto every one of us, take my son and
give him for thee, and the son himself says, take me and redeem thy self
with me. Idem in meditat.
What sweeter entreatie can there be, then to entreat the father in the
sons name, yea for his only begotten and most dearly beloved sons sake? By
this kind of mediation many captives have been set free, many malefactors have
obtained their pardon, many that every hour looked for the stroke of death
have had their lives given them. O happy and thrice happy are they that are
allowed this favorable and gracious access unto the father in the name of his
son, and ca^ plead thus, O Lord remember what a good son has suffered, and
forget what a bad servant has done.

9 There remains yet another singular consolation against so great an evil,
to wit sin, and that is, that God in his infinite wisdom turns our very
sins themselves to our benefit and advantage, so far of is it that they
shall condemn us. Rom 8. verse. 28.
The Apostle says that all things work together for the good of those that
love God, Bernard. sermon. de falac praesentis vitae, and in Psalm. 15. sermon. 2.
which is so true, that eve^ the things which properly are not things but the
corruptions of things, as grief, sickness, death, and finally sin it self
do so. The latter may seem strange, and yet it is true, namely that even
sin works for the good of the faithful, yea sin is made a medicine for
sin. We know how foul a sin pride is, and how deeply it is rooted in our
corrupt nature, or rather incorporated into it, Hier. ep. 30
we had rather be without gold it self then without pride and self liking.
Bernard. ^pist* 143*
To do great works and have humble thoughts is far a harder matter then much
fasting, long watching, and other the like corporal afflictions. Nay to do any
good work be it never so mean and not to glory in it, is a virtue that is
found but in few, and yet to be proud of well doing, is little better then ill
doing. And August de tempor. sermon. 49.
some have ventured to affirm that an humble sinner is better the^ one that is
proud for doing good, and that God is more pleased with humility in ill doing,
then with pride in well doing. At least this we may be bold to say Gregor.
Moral. lib. 19 c, 12. and 13.
that pride marres the luster and grace of our best actions and makes them
merely unprofitable unto us, and they that overcome their vices, by being
proud of it, are overco^e by that which they had overcome, and foiled by their
own victory. We see then of what necessity humility is, without which all
virtues are no virtues, and how abominable pride is, that in a manner turns
all virtues into vices. Whence Aug. ep. 52
S. Augustine professes, that if he were demanded what were the first point of
Christianity, he would answer humility, if what were the second, he would
likewise say humility, if what the third, his answer also should be, humility,
Cie. de orat. lib. 3.
even as the Orator being asked what was the first, second and third point of
eloquence, answered still, utterance. Now there is nothing so effectual to
kill that monster of pride, and to breed this excellent virtue of humility, as
sin it self, when God gives us grace to be humbled with the consideration
thereof. August. ^e Civ. Dei. lib. 11. c. 14.
We may then be bold to say that it is profitable even for good men to fall
into some manifest sin that they might be displeased with themselves, who fell
by pleasing themselves. In a word the sin of pride cannot be cured but by
other sins which makes us ashamed of our selves, Ezech. 6. verse. 9. and 20.
verse. 43. and 36* verse, 31.
yea and even to loath our selves, and to blush to our selves, when sometimes
others commend and extol us, that are not privy to our faults. So by this
means we are preserved both from flattering our selves and also from applauding
to others when they flatter us, yea from taking pleasure in their just praises,
Hieron. ep 32. Aug. ep 64.
which is exceedingly dangerous, and yet almost impossible to be avoided
saving by this means. And as our sins and slippes keep us in humility, so
do they also teach us fear, care, and circumspection, that afterward we will
not so easily be overtaken again, so that we may well conclude with Bern. quo
supra lit. marg. g.
S. Bernard, Do not his sins turn to his good, that rises from his sins
more humble, more fearful, more careful and wary then he was before?
Doubtless his very fall is happy that is taken up by humility. This is the
unsearchable wisdom and inestimable goodness of God to cure sin by sin,
and to turn poison it self into a medicine.

CHAP. 9 Consolations against certain circumstances of sin, namely long
continuance therein, before our conversion; and relapse into it after our
conversion.
1 Thus we have heard what remedies Christian religion affords against sin,
in respect of the substance thereof. But now there are certain circumstances
of sin which do not a little aggravate the same, and wherewith the conscience
many times is much terrified. Which are principally two, late repentance for
sin, and relapse into sin after repentance.

2 Touching the former, to weete late repentance, there is no cause, why we
should be dismaide therewith. For first we are to consider, that although we
live an hundred years, yea many hundred years, if it could be, which without
extraordinary privilege never to be hoped for, cannot possibly be: yet the
distance of time between the day of our birth and the day of our death is
nothing unto God. Psalm. 90. v. 4. 2. Pet. 3. v. 8.
For as the Prophet says, and the Apostle from him repeates it, a thousand
years with the Lord are but as one day. Howsoever then to us things are said
to be done early or late: yet in respect of God nothing is sooner or later, no
time is long or short, nay no time is either past or to come, but al time is
present unto him. Let our care be that our repentance be unfeigned, and it
shall never be too late. Again for our farther comfort herein, let us observe,
Mat. 20. v. 1.3. etc.
that most divine parable of our Savior Christ touching the laborours hired by
an owner of a vineyarde to work therein, some of them early in the morning,
some at the third hour of the day, some at the ninth, some at the eleventh,
and yet when they came to receive their wages, they that were taken up last had
as much as they that were entertained first. which insinuats that so we be
brought to serve God truly and faithfully, our late coming to his service,
shall no way prejudice our comfort, but that we shall be as well accepted, as
they that began long hefore us. Epieur apud Laert,
The very heathen could say, that no man was too old to learn those things
which concerned the health of the mind: much more should we resolve that no
man is too old to learn and practice those things which pertain to his
eternal happiness, and welfare. Ioh. 11. verse. 32.
Christ raised Lazirus our of his grave; eve^ after he had lain so long there
that he stunke: and therefore can raise us out of the grave of sin, although
we have lain so long therein, that we seem past recoverie, as the sisters of
Lazarus imagined of their brother. Let us therefore assure our selves o that
while we be yet in this world, Cyp. cont. Demetrianu^
our repentance can never be too late, but that there is a passage from our
mortal stroke to immortality, Hier. ep. 7.
And that we should not despair in this regard, God has left us a notable
example Luc. 23. v. 40.41* 4^.43
in holy Scripture, where we read that the penitent thief found present
passage from the gibbet to heaven. Nay where God vouchsafes the grace to
repent truly, there may be a benefit in repenting lately, yea a double
benefit, namely fervencie and constancy in the worship and service of God
Fervency, because having lost so much time we should labor to fetch it up and
recover it by diligence and industry, and think we can never serve God
enough, because it was so long before we began to serve him, whom we should*
have served ever Seneca Not quaest. l. 3. in praef.
And herein we are to imitate travailers, which by reason of some impediments
and lets have staide behind their fellows: the later they set out, the faster
they travail, and by haste and speed make amends for their slownesse and
slacknes. So late conversion should not discourage us from serving of God: but
encourage us to serve him more fervently. The second advantage that may be
made of late repentance is constancy. And indeed this benefit does ordinarily
follow it. Many seem to repent for sin be fore they know what sin is, or at
least effectually apprehende the danger thereof, and therefore commonly are
soon drawn into sin again, and so drawn again into it, as they will never
after be drawn out of it, therefore never attaining to sound repentance,
because their repentance was too young, not repenting when they should,
because they repented before they truly could. But co^trarily they most loath
sin, that see their folly and madness in serving it so long, Luc. 7.47.
and the more and greater the wounds of a sinful soul are, the more and
greater will her love be to Christ her heavenly Physician. In a word Sen. ibid.
as the very heathen has well observed, The surest passage from vice to virtue
is by the bridge of repentance; and we then most constantly cleave to that
which is good, when we have been oftenest, and deep lie stung by evil. Thus
when God gives spiritual wisdom to the sinner, his late repentance shall
rather be adva^tageous, than damnable to him.

3 The second circumstance which makes sin to terrible in our apprehe^sion,
and indeed so dangerous in it self is relapse into the same sins after
repentance. How great an evil this is Chapt. 2. Sect. 9.
has already in part been declared. But we may further consider, that this is
a step and degree to the fearful state of those, of whom 2. Pet. ^.^2.
S. Peter speaks, the same is happened unto them which is used to be spoken
in the true proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow
that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire. We should with fear and
trembling think upon that, Mat 13, 43. etc.
which our Savior Christ delivers in the Gospel, that when the unclean
spirit is gone out of a man, if he return and enter into him again, he
brings seven other spirits with him worse tha^ himself, and takes stronger
possession in him tha^ he had before, so that the last state of that man is
worse tha^ the first.

4 But yet if through frailty we be overtaken even thus far also as to relapse
into the same offenses: yet must we not despair by and by, but there are some
comforts, and remedies left us against this so dangerous a temptation.

5 And first let us consider, that the worthiest servants of God were not all
together free from this relapse into the self same sins. Genesis 1^.8. etc. and
20.2. and^.
Abraham twice denied and disclaimed his own wife, there by greatly engaging
and endangering her chastity, and after a sort beco^ming a bawd unto her;
which proceeded from infidelity, for that he could not rest upon Gods
protection, but would provide for his safety by devises and shifts of his own.
And Mat. 26.6^. etc.
Peter denied his Master Christ not once, nor twice but thrice, and that every
time in worse so t than other, first by simple denial, secondly by oath,
thirdly by imprecation and cursing. Romans 7.15. and 1^.
The Apostle Paul when he says of himself, that which I do, I allow not: for
what I would that do I not, but what I hate, that do I, speaks not of some
one evil act, but of the whole course of his life, which argues not only his
doing, but his often doing of what he would not, and offending sundry times in
the same things. But more manifest is that which he testifies of himself 2
Cor* 12.7. etc.
in an other place, that he was vexed with a prick or sting in the flesh,
even the messenger of S^^a^ that buffeted him, as he speaks, and that he had
prayed thrice to have it taken away, but could not prevail in that his suit,
but yet received sufficient comfort against al danger thereof. Here it is
apparent that the Apostle oftentimes offended in the samething, although he do
not specify what it was, and it were fond curiosity in us to be inquisitiue
that way.

6 Furthermore most comfortable in this case is the doctrine of our Savior
Christ, M^t. 18. v. 21.22.
where being a^ked of Peter, how often he was to forgive his brother that
offended against him, whether until seven times or no, answeareth him, that
he was to do it not seven times, but seaventie times seven times. So Luke
17.4.
in an other place instructing his disciples in general touching the same point
he says. If thy brother sin against thee seven times in a day; and seven
times a day come again unto thee, and say, it repents me: thou shall
forgive him. Doubtless he that enioyneth us to be merciful one to another,
although we often commit the same offenses one against an other, upon
acknowledgement of the faults and sorrow for the same: will be merciful unto
us upon our repentance and submission, although we often offend him in the same
manner. He will not practice less mercy toward us, than he requires that we
should practice one toward another. Our mercy is but a sparckle of his
infused into us by his spirit: and shall a spark do more than the whole fire?
shall there be more in the stream then in the fountain, more in the river
than in the maine sea?

7 And here we are farther to note that the true nature of our justification
consists not only in a general pardon of sins past, but in a particular
application of the pardon of sin granted us in Christ to our particular
offenses committed in the whole course of our life, and that there is place not
only for our first repentance, but for daily repentance according to our daily
sins. And surely ^^^sat. 6* 1^.
Christ would not have commanded us to pray for daily forgiveness of sins, if
he would not daily forgive them, not often invite us to repentance, if he
would not pardon us upon our repentance, and as Ter^ul de paenit. ca. 5.
Tertullian pithily says God would not threaten him that does not repent: if
he would not pardon him that does repent. This is the state of a Christians
life August. de Temp ^erm. 47 and G^eg. in Cant. c. 4.
that notwithstanding their sins, they continue righteous through the daily
forgiveness of sin, and recaine their righteousness by beway ling their
unrighteousness, so it be under faith in Christ. Aug quest. Evang* ^ib. 2.
quae^t. 33,
S. Augustine is bold to say, that Christ is then slain to every man, when he
believes that be was slain. Thus says for often wounds has often salues, or
rather one and the selfsame salve, which being often applied is sufficient to
cure our often wounds. Wherefore let us not be ashamed to be beholden to this
remedy. Bernard. ep. 112.
Let us be ashamed that we ran away, but not ashamed to return into the field
again, and figh^ again after flying away. Tertul. d^ poenit. ca* 7.
Let it grieve us to offend again; but not to repent again: let it grieve us
to come in danger again but not to be delivered again. When we are in danger
let it g^^eu^ us to fall sick again; but not to be cured again. Indeed we
should desire and st^iue not to sin: but Cypri. ep. 33.
as the first degree of happiness is not to sin; so the second is to confesie
our sins, and to be sorry for them. And true sorrow for sin in a manner makes
sin to be no sin, as not only the Gentill says Sen. Agamemn. act 2
in the Poet. Quem poenitet pecaste pene est innocens.
He that is sorry that he has done evil is almost innocent: but also Tertull
ad Senator. Apo^tolat. Non erit in culpa quem poeniter ante fuisse.
an ancient Christian author sticks not to say; * He shall not be in fault,
that is sorry he has been in fault. Wherefore to conclude this point, let
this be our resolution Tertul. de poenit c. 7.
that how often so ever we have offended, yet there is place for
reconciliation, and that God not only may be pacified by ou^ submissio^ and
humiliation, but that he is very willing and desirous it should be so, and
that therefore Epiphan. haeres. 59. five lib. 2. Tom, 1.
While as yet we are in this wo^ld combatting with sin, there is a rising after
our falling, there is yet hope, as yet a salve, as yet time, for confession,
and pardon.

CHAP. 10. Of the greatness of Gods mercy, wherewith the greatness of sin
has no proportion.
1 IF yet we desire to be farther comforted and armed either against the
substance of sin, or those foresaid circumstances thereof, that so augment
the terror of it, we must lastly consider the infinite greatness of Gods mercy
and goodness, that needs must be of greater force to save us tha^ our sins can
be to condemn us. Here we are entering into a sea that has neither bo^tome,
nor shore. For as all other of Gods attributs are infinite, so is his mercy
also; which that we may the better know, it is to be noted, that there are no
qualities in God, but that all that is in him is his very essence. God then is
not accidentally just wise, merciful, and the like: but essentially, that is,
to speak properly he is not just, but justice it self; not wise, but
wiledome it self; not merciful, but mercy it self. This shows how great his
mercy is, or rather it shows it not, for what can show us that which is
incomprehensible? But yet this in part insinuates the greatness of Gods mercy,
namely that it is as great as himself, and that no mar^ veil, since it is
himself. But first let us hear what himself testifies of himself that way
that only is able perfectly to know himself.

2 The Lord, Psalm. 113. ver 8. and seq.
says David, is merciful and gracious, of long suffering, and pienteous with
goodness, he chideth not for ever, nor keeps his anger always, he deals
not with us according to our sins, nor rewards us according to our
iniquities, but as high as the heavens are above the earth, so much does his
mercy gue beyond them that fear him, as far as the East is from the w^st, so
far does he remove our sins from us, as a father has pity on his children,
so has the Lord pity on them that fear him; for he knows whereof we are
made, he remembers that we are but dust. Here we have not only a profession
of the greatness of Gods mercy in express words, but also a lively resemblance
thereof by most proper comparisons, yea most forcible arguments also and
reasons for proof thereof, as God vvilling, shall hereafter be observed. Esai
49. verse. 15.
Again says the Lord, Can the mother forget her young child, and not have
pity of the son of her womb? but be it that a mother may forget, yet will not
I forget thee says the Lord. And Esaias 55. v 7.^9.
in the same Prophet, to weete Esaias, Let the wicked forsake his evil ways,
and the ungodly his imaginations, and retur^e unto the Lord, and he will have
mercy on him, and to our God, for he is full of compassion. For my thoughts
are not as your thoughts nor my ways as your ways, but as high at the heavens
are above the earth, so high are my ways above your ways, and my thoughts
above your thoughts. And so ser. 3.^.
in Jeremy, If a man be divorced from his wife, and she departing from him
shall be married to an other, shall he take her again, should not the land be
defiled thereby? But thou have plaide the whore with many lovers, and yet
return to me, ^aith the Lord. And in Ezech 18. ver. 23 31.
Ezechiell he even mourns for the folly and obstinacy of his people, that
would not return unto him and live. Am I delighted with the death of a
sinner, says the Lord, and not rather with this that he should return from
his ways and live? Why will ye die o house of Israel? Out of these
Scriptures and the like we may gather many consolations whereby to be persuaded
of the forgiveness of our sins. And first let us consider that Gods love
infinitely exceeds any love that is to be found in the creatures, being as
far above it as the heavens are above the earth, or the utmost ends of the
world are distant one from an other. And yet we see that the love which is in
the creatures is of great force, and produces very strange effects; and
specially that love wherewith God here compares his, namely that of parents
toward their children, who love the^, yea tenderly love them, even when they
are unworthy of their love, and gladly embrace any submission from them. Teren.
Andr^a. Act. 5. scen. 3. Propeccato magno paulum ^upplicii satis est patri.
Even nature has taught men to plead this, * That a father is satis fied with
a little punishment for a great offense. Nay we see that fathers cannot but
love their stubborn children, that refuse to submit themselves. yea that stand
at open defiance with them, whereof the Scripture affords us a notable
example. 2. Sam. 15 ver. 1.2, etc.
Absalon most unnaturally rebelled against his father king David* after that
he had pardoned him for a cruel and odious murder; and sought to deprive him
both of crown and life. For ^in kings these both go together, who leave to
be men when they leave to be kings, and can no longer hold their lives than
they hold their soveraignety. He I say, unnaturally rebelled against so kind
a father, and was up in arms against him. And yet see how his father was
affected toward him Having raised an army to suppress him, Chap. 18.5. and
12.
he charge his two principal captains that they should deal gently with
Absalon for his sake. Verse. 31.32 33.
And when afterward he had news that he was slain, he made most pitiful
lame^tatio^ for him, crying out; My son Absalon, my son, my son Absalon, would
God I had dyed for thee, would God I were in thy steed, o Absalon my son, my
son. Thus nature forced him to love even a rebellious son. But most
memorable is that which happened in our age at Castillion upon Loing in France.
Bodin de repub. lib. 1. cap. 4.
A father offering to give his son a blow for some misdemeanor, the son ran
him through with his sword. Here the miserable father perceiving himself
wounded to death, never left crying after his son as long as he could cry,
that he should fly and shift for himself, least justice should take hold on
him. O admirable force of fatherly love, that the father should tender the
sons life that deprived the father of life. But God does not only compare his
love to a fathers love but also to a mothers love, which commonly is the more
tender of the two, that sex being passion arely indulgent And of what force a
mothers love is even toward wicked and ungracious children the same author in
the same place specifieth by the example of a woman of the same nation, who
having a son that used her most outragiously, reviled her, bear her, threw
her at his feet, and amongst many other indignities committed one against her
which I think unmeet to be mentioned in particular; yet would never complain
to authority of him: and when the magistrates of their own accord took notice
thereof* and holding the example into lerable, convented him before the^, and
gave sentence of death against him; the mother came crying and howling in most
pitiful sort, denying all the wrongs and outrage, he had done unto her. And no
marvel that the parents love of their children is so tender, and vehement,
since we see how strong and strange the affection of very beasts is toward
their young ones. The love of their young ones, Sen ep. 75
says Seneca, forces wild beasts to run upon the hunters iavelin or
spear; Not. Comes de venat. lib. 2.
and they usually either recover them or die in attempting to recover them.
Now these strong instincts of love in the creatures are derived from God, and
infused into them by him. I speak of the substance and soundness thereof. For
as for the irregularitie of it specially in men, it proceeds not from
creation, but from corruption and depravation. But I say, this love, yea this
fervency of love in the creatures comes from divine instinct. Now if God
himself infuse so much love into his creatures, how great is the love that is
in himself? Doubtless here that principle in Philosophy must needs be
verified, that that which makes another thing to be so or so, must needs be
more so it self. And therefore since God makes the creatures to love so
strongly, doubtless he himself does love more strongly, as we herd before
out of Esaias that the te^drest humane love was inferior to his, even the love
of a mother toward her child, and that although a mother might forget her
child, yet he would not forget his people. And no marvel that his love is so
great, he being love it self. For so we find in Scripture, not only that
God is loving, 1. Ioh. 4.^ 16.
but also that God is love. God says not that he is power, or justice,
although he might truly say so, but when he would define himself and tell
what he is, he makes choice of this attribute of love and says he is love,
which notably argues how great and strong his love is.

3 Furthermore we see by the former testimonies of Scripture, that his love is
transcendent, and above rule. He has limited man's love, and mercy, and there
are many cases wherein men may not show mercy. The husband as we heard out of
Jeremy, might not take his wife again, that had played the whore, and
departing from him had coupled her self to another man. 1 Samuel 2. v. 37. etc.
Elie the high Priest was severely punished for being too merciful to his
profane sons. Saul and Ahab both lost their kingdoms for showing mercy to
their prisoners contrary to Gods mind, 1. Sam. 15.
the former to Agag. 1 King ^0
the later to Benhadad: yea Deuteronomy 13. (...). 6 7 8.
God made a general law in express terms, that parents should not pity nor
spare their own natural children if they became Idolaters, and worshipped
strange Gods, nor brother the brother, nor husband the wife, no not his
tenderly beloved wife; that their eye should not spare them, but their hands
should be upon them first, to stone them to death. In these, and many other
cases me^ might not show mercy: and if they notwithstanding would be merciful
to others, they became cruel to themselves, pulling down Gods vengance upon
their own heads. Thus man's mercy is bounded, but Gods is boundles, and
transcendent, so that he can and does show mercy even in the cases that me^
may not. As appears by that before alleged out of Jeremy, that although the
husband might not take again his wife that had gone a who ring from him: yet
God was ready to receive his people although they had committed spiritual
whoredom, and that with many lovers, that is, had defiled themselves with many
sorts of Idolatry. And by this privilege of unlimited mercy God comfort
his Church and people Esaias 55. v. v. 7, 8, 9.
in Esaie, as we have heard, chiding them for their infidelity, that reasoned
thus, We have so grievously sinned against the Lord, that there is no returning
unto him, or hope of pardon. What? Says God, Will you measure my mercy by your
mercy? Why, there is as great odds between my ways, and your ways; my
thoughts and your thoughts, that it, between my mercy and your conceits of my
mercy: as there is distance between heaven and earth. O comfort more worth
the^ a thousand worlds if there were so many. The Lord does not say, that his
ways and thoughts of knowledge and wisdom, but his ways and thoughts of
mercy, are as far above ours, as the heavens are above the earth. And why then
should we doubt whether a mercy of such extent either could not, or would not
relieve our misery?

4 Besides this, let us weigh how the Lord inviteth us to return unto him,
speaking thus in effect to the sin full soul; I know thou have shamefully
straied from me; I know thou have given me too too many occasions utterly to
cast thee off, and to accept of no submission: but yet return to me and thou
shall be welcome. Thou have monstrously defiled and deformed thy self: yet
wash and purify thy self, nay suffer me to wash and purify thee, Esa. 1.18.
and if thy sins were as purple, they shall be made as white as snow; and if
they were as red as scarlet, they shall be as wool. Nether does God desire
only that we should return to him, but pittieth our obstinacy when we will
not return, as he says in Ezekiel, O house of Israel, why will ye die? Luke
19. verse. 41.42.
And so Christ in the Gospel bemoaneth the incorrigible perverseness and
frowardness of the Jews that would not embrace mercy when it was offered unto
them, even weeping for the same, Matthew 23. verse* 13.
and breaking out into an affectionate complaint, saying, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children, even as a hen
gathers her chicke^ under her wings. but ye would not? Now he that inviteth
us to return unto him, yea that lamenteth our folly and frowardnes, that we
will not return; will he not receive us when we do return? Yes doubtless.
For sure, Tertul. de poenit. c. 8.
as an ancient Divine pithilie and comfortably says, God would not threaten
him that repents not, except he would pardon him that does repent.

5 Moreover let us out of the same places of Scripture observe that God does
not only promise to be merciful, but also shows reasons, why he will be
merciful, nay in a sort he must be merciful. Besides that which has been
spoken hereof incidentally and as it were by the way, namely that his mercy is
not a quality in him but his very essence, and that there is no proportion
between man's tendrest mercy and his; it is more specially to be considered,
that he duly waigheth our case and frail state, namely that we cannot but
offend, and that if he should deal extremely with us, we must needs be
destroyed, but he graciously bears with our frailty, knowing of what brittle
mettle we are made, and promises Esaias. 57. v. 15* 16.
that although he be most high, and inhabit eternity, yet he will vouchsafe
to dwell with the humble and co^trite, that he will not always strive, nor be
angry for ever, because if he should, every spirit should be overwhelmed and
the souls which he had made. Thus he counts us no match for him, and thinks
it no conquest to destroy us, nay rather rekons this to be his honor and
glory to pardon and forgive, and to save where he has just cause to condemn.
In a word, as a man disdaines to show his strength upon a child: so God
disdaines to show his strength upon man. Which speeches and the like plainly
testify how easily God will accept of our submission, and what wrong we do
not only to our selves but also to him, when we imagine he is so severe and
righteous that he can not or will not pardon our sins, when we confess them
and are heartily sorry for them, whereas he even delights to do it, and takes
pleasure in it, Psalm. 51. v. 18.
according to that in the Psalmist, that a bruised spirit and a contrite heart
are a sacrifice to God. Thus God draws arguments both from our imperfection,
and his own perfection, to persuade us of his readiness to pardon, and to let
us see how easily it may be done.

6 To conclude looking back to the foundation of his mercy, namely the
incomprehensible mystery of the incarnation and passion of his son Jesus
Christ Chap. 8. throughout
before declared, we must needs see that his love toward mankind is
infinite, and because infinite, therefore greater then our greatest sins.
Cyprian. sermon de patientia.
Christ's blood washed even them that shed it, upon their repentance; and whom
then can it not wash? God would have his own and only son to die, that man
might live, and was content that his blood should be our ransom. Doubtlesle
the^, says Augustine. Ie^m. 10^.
Augustine, he that bought us with so great a price, will not have us cast
away. Let us then have refuge to this infinite mercy of God* and our sins will
vanish away as a bubble. Our sins, says Basil in. regul. contract quaest. ^3.
Basil, may both be measured and numbered; but it is impossible that Gods
goodness should be measured, or his mercies numbered. Let us then resolve,
Anselm. in Meditat.
that, although our offenses have deserved damnation, and our repentance be
not sufficient for satisfaction: yet Gods mercy is greater then all
transgression, yea that as far as God is superior to man, so far is our
wickedness inferior to his goodness. We may then with Bernard. feria 4.
hebdom. poenosae.
Bernard reason thus; What, shall mis^rie overcome mercy; and shall not mercy
rather conquer misery? Yes sure Chrysostom. proaem in E^ai.
our sickness has measure; but the medicine is without measure: and shall not
unlimited goodness prevail against limited wickedness? or shall not a salve
of infinite virtue, cure a soar of finite malignity? Gods mercy is a huge, yea
a boundless, and bottomless sea, and our sins compared thereunto are but as
a little sparkle: now, says Chrysostom, suppose that a little sparkle should
fall into the maine sea, could it abide there, would it not instantly be
extinguished, and never appear more? Doubtless so great a water must needs
out of hand quench so small a fire, yea a sparkle only of fire. Away then with
despair, and let us assure our selves, Gregor. Moral. lib. 3^ cap. 11.
as Gregory well says, that despair for sin is worse then sin it se^fe.

CHAP. 11. The Christians peculiar comfories against death and the terrors
thereof.
1 DEath being the greatest temporal punishment for sin, it may seem to
some that I should have spoken thereof Chap. 7. sect. 2. and se^
before, when I hanled the remedies against all temporary evils which we
suffer in this life. Notwithstanding I have purposely, reserved the handling
thereof unto this place; because it may be objected against our deliverance
from sin by Christ declared in the Chapter next before going, that for all
that the faith full die as well as other men, and cannot not possibly escape
death, but must be and are subject to the universal law of inevitable
mortality. Besides, the chief and sovereign remedy against this evil namely
death is our deliverance from sin, and therefore I thought good to speak of
that before, that so I might be the briefer here, referring the Reader to the
former chapter, for particularity, and co^tenting my self here with a
general repetition and application thereof.

2 First then as for death, we are to consider, that it is chiefly sin that
makes it so terrible unto us, and therefore 1 Corinthians. 15. verse. 56.
the Apostle says, that sin is the sling of death. Now, as we have seen at
large 8.9.10.
in some former chapters, we are so delivered from sin in Christ that it cannot
hurt us, nay is converted to our benefit and profit, and therefore Death having
her strength from sin is not to be feared, since sin which is her sting, is
overcome. What need we fear the snake that has lost her sting? Surely the
snake that has lost her sting can only hiss, and keep a noise, but cannot
hurt: and therefore we see that many having taken out the sting will carry the
snake in their very bosoms without any fear. Even so although we carry death
in our bodies, yea in our bosoms and bowels: yet sin which was her sting
being pulled out, she can only hiss and stir, she may, and ordinarily does
look black and grimme, but yet cannot any way annoy us.

3 Which will be the more manifest, if we weigh that Christ our head has
conquered and quelled this Giant; so that none that be his, need stand in
fear thereof Death 1. Corinthians 15. v. 55
says S. Paul, is swallowed up in victory; and, Revelat. 1. v. 18.
Christ was dead, but now he lives, and that forever, and has the keys of
hell and death, as he himself testifies of himself. Now he that has the
keys of a place has the command of it; it is as much then as if it had been
said he had the command of death, and power to dispose of death at his
pleasure. And will Christ that has such an enemy at his mercy let him annoy
his dear friends, nay his own members, and so in effect himself? No, no, he
conquered death for us not for himself, since death had no quarrel to him; by
his unjust death then he has vanquished our just death, as we heard Chap. 8.
Sect. 5.
before out of Augustine. Bernard. ad mi^i^es Templi sermon. 4.
The death of Christ is the death of our death, since he dyed that we might
live, and how can it be, but that they should live for whom life it self
dyed? Surely death by usurping upon the innocent fors^^ted her right to the
guilty, and Hieron ad Heliodor.
While she devoured wrongfully, was her self devoured.

4 Yea, in that Christ has vanquished death, we also may be truly said to
have vanquished it, he being our head, and we his members, for where the
head is a conqueror, the members cannot be captives. Tertul de resurre^t.
carms. ^. ^1.
Let us then rejoice, we have already seyzed upon heaven in Christ, who has
carried our flesh thither in his own person, as an earnest penny and pledge
of the whole sum that in time shall be brought thither. We may then boldly
say, Augustine. in Psalm, 148.
there is somewhat of ours above already; yea, the best part of us namely our
head, and are the members far from the head? Idem in Psa^. 88.
Yea, we may assure our selves, that, being members of such a head. yea body to
it, we are in ^ff^ct where ou^ head is For says Augustine, this body cannot be
beheaded: but if the head triumph forever, the members must needs triumph for
ever also. And that we have this benefit by Christ's ascension into heaven
before hand for us, Bern. sermon. de eo quod legitur a pud Job. in sex
tribulatio. nibus etc.
Bernard excelle^tly shows, Be it, says he, that only Christ is entered into
heaven: yet I trow, whole Christ must enter, and if whole Christ, then the
body as well as the head, yea every member of the body. For this head is not to
be found in the kingdom without his members. Hence it is that the Scripture
speaks of the faithful as already raised from the dead, and placed in heaven
with Christ, yea as of them that shall not, nor cannot die, as Ioh. 11. verse.
26.
He that lives and believes in me, shall never die. And Ioh 5. v. 24.
again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, whosoever hears my word, and
believes in him that sent me has eternal life, and shall not come into
judgment, but has passed from death to life. And, He says Ephesians. 2. v. 6.
S. Paul, has raised us up together, and has placed us together in heaven
with Christ. He says not, he will raise us up, he will place us in heaven
with Christ: but he has so raised and placed us, which is spoken both for the
certainty thereof, and also for the straight union between the head and the
body, by means whereof that which is already actually accomplished in the head,
is said to be so also in the body. In a word, the head being above water, the
body can never be drowned, although it be never so much beaten and tossed
with waves. And thus much for our first and principal defense against death,
the sum whereof is this, that it is not only a weakness, but also a shame
for the members to fear an enemy which the head has already conquered and
subdued.

5 There are also diverse other Christian comfortes against death, which I will
briefly touch. And first, as we heard Chap. 7. Sect. 2. and leq
before, that all other evils of pain are to a Christian changed into another
nature, and of punishments become favors and benefits: so is it also in this
of death. For now it is not a toke^ of Gods anger for sin, but an argument of
his love and mercy; it is not properly death, but a bridge by which we pass
to a better life, from corruption to incorruptio^, from mortality to
immortality, from earth to heaven, that is in a word, from vanity and misery,
to joy and felicity. And who would not willingly pass over this bridge whereby
he passes from all cares and sorrows, and passes to all delights and
pleasures; leaves all miseries behind him, and has all contentation and
happiness before him?

6 The Gentiles taking it for granted that after death either we should be
happy, or not be at all, and so concluding that at least death would free us
from all evil and misery, thereupon made little reckoning of death, nay many
times voluntarily procured their own death, and embraced it as a rich
treasure, as we have Chap. 4. Sect 3. and Chap. 5. Sect 3.
already heard. But how fowly they were mistaken herein, has withal been
sufficiently declared. It is the Christian only that enjoys this benefit by
death, namely the exemption from all cares and troubles, and an end of all
sorrows. Wherefore the death of the godly is called Esai. 57. verse. 2. Dan.
12. v. 2. 1. These. 4. verse. 13.14. Revel. 14. v. 13.
in Scripture by the names of bed, of rest, sleep* peace, and such like.
being all names of benefit and commodity. How sweet is peace to them that have
been vexed with wars and broiles; how pleasant is the bed, rest, and sleep
to the weary and those that are overwatched? The labourer is glad when his
days work is done; the traveller reioiceth when he is come to his ways end;
the mariner and passenger think themselves happy when they arrive in the
harbor; and all men shun pain and desire ease abhor danger and love
security. It were madness the^ for a Christian to fear so advantageous a
death; and to wish for continuance of so wretched a life. I conclude this
point with that elegant laying Tertul. de testim. animae. cap. 4.
of Tertullian; That is not to be feared which sets us free from all that is
to be feared. And indeed what weakness and folly is it to fear a superfedeas
against all the things which hear we do fear?

7 But the true Christian has yet a far greater benefit by death. For it
does not only put an end to the evils of pain, but also to the evils of fault;
not only to the punishments for sin, but to sin it self, Now we have often
heard before, that the evils of fault are far worse then the evils of pain;
yea, that the least sin is more to be abhord and shund, the^ the greatest
punishment for sin. H^w welcome then should death be unto us, that ends
not only our sorrows, but also our sins? As long as we live here, and bear
about us these earthly tabernacles, we daily multiply our rebellings against
God, and sustain a fierce conflict, and continual combat in our very bosoms,
while Galat. 5.17.
the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and
Romans 7.2^.
the law in our members rebelleth against the law of our mind, as S. Paul
speaks, and leads us captives to the law of sin which is in our members. O
bondage of all bondages, to be in bondage unto sin. Sen ep 37. and 39.
The Gentill that apprehended vice only as a moral evil, could say, that men
being in bondage to their lusts were more cruelly handled by them, than any
slaves were by the most cruel masters. How much more should we that feel
sin as al spiritual evil, and groan under the burden thereof, account the
bondage there of intolerable, and worse than subjection to the most barbarous
Tyrant in the world? And how welcome should he be that would set us free from
the same? Now it is death and only death that can do this for us, and indeed
does it for us. What great cause them have we with all willingness to embrace
it? Diogenes Laertius vit, Phil. l^^, 7.
Zeno the founder of the Stoicall sect held it lawful for them that had
loathsome diseases, which were incurable to kill themselves, that so they
might be rid of them and Con. Nepos in vita Titi Pomp. Attici. See also the
like of Tullius Marcellinus in Seneca ep. 78.
Pomponius Atticus, and others put it in practice. If they counted it a
benefit to be delivered from a loathsome disease of the body by an unlawful
and wicked death: we have reason to think it a benefit, yea a singular
benefit to be rid of a loathsome and incurable disease of the soul, namely
sin, by a lawful death, which it pleases God to send unto us.

8 But death does more for us than all this. For it does not only free us from
all evils, and from that evil of evils, sin; but puts us into actual
possession of all good things, yea of such good things as our eyes have not
seen, our ears have not heard, neither are our hearts able to conceive; and
brings us to that place, where if there were place for any passion, we should
be angry with death for not bringing us thither sooner. But I reserve a more
particular declaration of that point, unto the thirteenth and last chapter.

CHAP. 12. Consolations against the terrors of the general judgment.
1 THERE is yet an other thing which considered in it self is a greater branch
and part of man's misery in regard of passive evils, than all the rest; namely,
the last and general judgment, where all flesh shall be arraigned before Gods
Tribunal bar to give an account of all they have done, and to receive their
recompense accordingly. The terror whereof I had rather express in Anselm. in
libro medita tionum.
Anselmes words, than in mine own O hard distress, says he, on one side will
be our sins accusing us, on the other side justice terrifying us; under us
the gulf of hell gaping, above us the judge frowning; within us a conscience
stinging, without us the world burning. Which way then shall the sianer thus
surprised turn himself? To hide our selves will be impossible; to appear
will be intolerable. Wherewithal then shall miserable man arm himself against
this so great terror, and danger? Surely our Christian profession affords
munitio^ against this assault also.

2 And first that which has been spoken against the fear of death in the
former chapter, serves also here against the fear of the last judgment. For
that which made the first death so terrible and dangerous, the same makes the
second death also so to be, namely sin: and as deliverance from sin does,
as we there heard, free us from al annoyance by the first death; so does it
also from all annoyance by the second death, that is, eternal comdemnation at
the last judgment. They that in Christ are co^querers over the first death;
shall not, nor cannot be conquered by the second death: and Rev. 2c. 6.
on those that have their part in the first resurrection; the second death
shall have no power, says the spirit. That is, condemnation cannot take hold
on those whom God has graciously called to the knowledge and love of his
saving truth reveiled by the Gospel.

3 But to come to more peculiar comforts against this matter of terror and
amazement, let us farther consider that Christ had mercy on us when we were
mere strangers to him, nay even, when we were his enemies, as Romans 5. v.
8.9.10.
S. Paul well urges, God herein, says he, commended his love toward us, that
when we were sinners Christ dyed for us: being the^ now justified by his blood;
much more shall we be saved by him from that wrath. Note that he says, from
that wrath, that is, from the wrath of the last judgment. For if, says he,
when we were enemies, we were reconciled unto God, by the death of his son:
much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. We may easily
perceive the force of the Apostles comfortable reasoning: to wit, that since
Christ died for us when we were sinners, that is, nothing but sin; surely he
will save us being now righteous in him: if we were pardoned through his
death, when we were enemies; we shall much more be saved by his life, now
that we are friends. For how incredible is it, nay rather, how impossible,
that he which pardons an enemy, should condemn a friend? He loved us, when
we bare the image of the devil: and will he not much more love us now since
he has in part repaired his fathers image in us, and confirmed us to
himself. We were dear to him, when there was no jot of goodness in us: and
can he reject us now that we have some good things in us, although but
weak, specially he himself being the author and former of them by the grace
of his holy spirit? And so Bernard. epist. 190.
Bernard reasons. For having spoken of our calling unto the grace of the
Gospel, he inferres this; being thus pulled out of the power of darkness, I
will not now fear to be rejected by the father of light, being justified
freely in the blood of his son. Why it is he that justifies, and who is it
that shall condemn? Surely he will not condemn the just, that had mercy on
a sinner, etc. Thus we see he reasons from that which GOD has done for us
already, to that which he will do; yea, in a sort, must do for us here after.
And we must all reason after the same manner, and say every one to his own
soul with Augustine. in Psalm. 96.
Saint Augustine, Thou wast wicked, and he dyed for thee; thou art now
justified, and will he forsake th^e?

4 Moreover, to take away the terror of the last judgment, consider who shall
be the Judge: even Christ himself that was thy redeemer. And how can we
fear such a judge? How happy in our case, that he must be our judge, that was
himself judged for us? He is our husband and we his wife; and by who^ would
the wife choose to be judged, but by the husband, specially by so kind a
husband as we have Chapt. 10. Sect. 2. marginal. letter d.
before heard him to be, who shows that favor that no husband does: yea he
is our head, and we are his members, and will the head give sentence of
conde^natio^ against his own members? This in effect were to give sentence
against himself He is our advocat and Proctor, and how happy would we think our
selves if in causes touching this life our own attorney might be our judge? He
is now thine advocate, August. in Psalm. 51.
says Augustine that hereafter shall be thy judge. Let us then assure our
selves, he will not condemn us, that has already been, condemned for us.

5 Yea, so far of is it, that the last and general judgment should be
terrible unto us, that it should rather minister matter of great joy and
comfort unto us. And therefore our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ having set
down the chief signs and tokens that should go before the day of judgment,
says to the faithful, Luc. 21.28
When ye see these things begin to come to pass, look up, and lift up your
heads, for your redemption draws near. So that by Christ's own exhortation
in this place, when we think upon the last judgment, we have cause to
rejoice, not to fear; to lift up our heads, not to hang them down. And that
for sundry reasons, but I will specify one or two that are most material, and
fittest to clear this truth.

6 And first, for as much as the dissolving of the world is for our full
deliveraunce from the bondage of the world, the manner of dissolving it must
needs be comfortable unto us, although in it self otherwise terrible. We
see that in particular humane judgments, the things that are terrible to
malefact ours, are comfortable to good subjects; and that which amaseth the
thief, reviveth the true man. The majesty of the judges, their scarlet robes,
whose very color threate^s death, their guard that environ them with
holdbards, yea the gibbet, and the hangman are pleasing sightes to the good who
know that all this is for their maintenance, and sauegard, although they
miserably terrify the wicked, for whose destruction they are prepared. Even so
the coming of Christ in majesty and glory, the troop and train of Angels
that attend on him, the shrill sound of the trumpet summoning all flesh to
appear are before his judgment seat, at this great and general assizes, and
all other solemnities belonging to the pomp and magnificence thereof. will
cheer up the faithful; knowing that all this is to do them justice touching
all the wrongs and oppressions which they have sustained at the hands of the
wicked, and terrify and daunt the wicked only, that now must come to an
account for all their enormities and outrages. And as it fares with them that
are narrowly besieged in a strong castle, when a puissant army is raised to
rescue them, and draws near to the place, and is come within sight, the
neighing and trampling of the horses, the glitring of the armor, the clashing
together of the weapons, the noise of drum and trumpet are most pleasing unto
them, yea the very roaring of the canon is the sweetest music that ever they
heard because they know that all this is to raise the siege, and set them
free: even so the faithful, being straightly besieged in this world as in an
impregnable fort, by the flesh, sin and the devil, when Christ shall come in
the clouds with power and majesty, when the glorious army of Angels shall march
onward with him as their general, when the last trumpet shall be sounded, yea
when the earth shall tremble, the sea roar, the sun shall be darkened, the
moon turned into blood the stars fall from heaven, in a word the elements
dissolved, and the heavens shall melt, and be shriveled up like a scroale of
parchment, the faithful shall reiolce at the sight, as knowing that all this is
but to raise the long and grievous siege which they endured in this world, and
to set them at liberty for ever; yea to put them in possession of a heavenly
kingdom where they shall reign for ever in unspeakable bliss.

7 Finally, that we may see what folly it is to be afraid of this judgment,
we must remember, that we our selves shall be judges there. So Christ tells
Peter, Mat. 19.39.
that he and the rest that had followed him in the regeneration, that is, at
the last judgment, when the world should be refined. should sit upon twelve
throans, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel: which being somewhat obscurely
uttered, Christ there alluding to the present state of things, the number of
the twelve tribes of Israel, and of his twelve Apostles, 1. Cotin^^ c. v. 2.3.
S. Paul expresses more clearly, applying it in general to all the faithful
under the new Testament, affirming that the Saints shall judge the world yea
the Angels, that is to say, wicked men and wicked spirits. And hence Tertul.
exhortat. ad Martyrs cap. 2.
Tertullian notably comfort and encourages the Martyrs that were in durance
daily expecting the Judges coming, and to receive sentence of death. Perhaps,
says he, the Judge is look for; yea but you shall judge your judges
themselves. Were it not then great folly to fear that judgment, wherein we
our selves shall sit as judges, judges, as I have said, of all wicked both men
and spirits, that is, of all our enemies that have oppressed us? For although
Christ our head principally and properly shall be the judge: yet we that are
his members, shall have a branch of his authority, and shall be as it were,
joined in commission with him. Let us not the^ fear this last and general
judgment: the bench, not the bar, is our place there.

CHAP. 13. The ioies of heaven, and glorious state of the faithful after death.
1 BUT that which most of all should comfort us against our misery and
mortality here, and the terror either of particular judgment by death, or
universal judgment at the last day, is this, that not only all these cannot
hurt us, nay are made many ways profitable unto us in this world, but that
through them we pass to a most happy state in the world to come, the
excellency whereof requires the tongue and pen rather of Angels then of men
to describe it, or rather cannot be perfectly expressed by Angels themselves. I
must be content then darkly to shadow it out, since lively representation of it
is merely impossible.

2 And first the benefits and comforts of this life although miserable, as we
have heard, do argue that a far better state is reserved for us in heaven. We
see that God even here on earth notwithstanding our sins, whereby we daily
offend him, vouchsafes us many pleasures, and furnishes us not only with
matters of necessity, but also of delight. There is Pas^ 10^^
a whole Psalm spent only on this matter, a Psalm worthy to be written in
letters of gold in papers, walls, and windows, but specially to be imprinted
in every godly heart for the admirable excellency thereof. God canseth,
Cyprian. de patienti^
says S. Cyprian, the sun to rise and set in order, the seasons to obey us,
the elements to serve us, the winds to blow, the springs to flow, corn to
grow, fruits to ripen, gardens and orchards to fructify and aboud, woods to
rustle with leaves, meaddowes to shine with flowers etc. And Chry^o^st. de
compu^ct cordis, lib. 2.
Chrysostom excellently handling the same point, further shows that God has
in a sort made the night more beutifull then the day by infinite variety of
bright, and glittering stars, that he has been more merciful to man then
man would have been to himself, who of greediness would have overtoiled
himself, but that God made the night of purpose for his rest; in a word he
says, and truly says even of these earthly benefits and commodities, that
although we were never so virtuous, nay if we should die a thousand deaths we
should not be worthy of them. And Silv. Italic lib. 15.
the very heathen Poet considering this, could not chule but break out into
admiration, saying Quantas ^pse Deus ^^^tos generavit in vsus Res homini
plenaque dedit bona, gaudia de^tra
O how many things has God created for man's delight, and heaped ioies upon him
with a bounteful hand? And all this has God done, as Cyprian says in the
place before alleged, to good and bad, to the harmless and harmefull, to
the just and unjust, to the religious and profane, finally to the thankful
and unthankful. Whence we may well reason thus, that if God deal so
graciously with us on earth, he will do much more to us in heaven; if he
bestow such benefits upon strangers, nay upon enemies, he has better things
for his friends; if he deal so bountifully with slaves, he will be more
bountiful toward his sons. For who ever used his slaves as well as his
children?

3 Again the excellency of his creatures argues a greater, yea incomparably
greater excellency in the Creator, Bernard. in festo omniu^ ^^^vorum
as Bernard well observes: Thou wondrest, says he, at brightness in the
sun, beauty in flowers, savory relish in bread, fertility in the earth; now
consider that all these are the gifts of God, and there is no doubt, but he
has reserved much more to himself, the^ he has communicated and imparted to
the creatures. Therefore when we meet with any thing that is excellent in the
creatures we may say to our selves, how much more excellent is he that gave
them this excellency; when we find admirable wisdom in men, Seneca de
beneficiis lib. 2. cap. ^9
how they rule al creatu^es, by cunning overcome them that are far stronger
then themselves, overtake them that are swifter then themselves, out run the
sun and moon in discourse, telling many years before hand what courses they
must hold when they shall be eclipsed, etc. let us say to our selves, how wise
is that God that gave such wisdom unto men? When we see any thing strong, as
the Elephant, the Whale, wind, Thunder, and the like, let us say, how strong
is that God that made them so strong; when we see rare beauty in men or
women, or most glorious colors in flowers, birds, and other creatures, let us
say, how fair is that God that made these so fair; when we taste things that
are exceeding sweet and comfortable, let us say how sweet is that God that
gave them this sweetness? And from al these let us conclude, that if the
creatures can afford us such delight, what will the creator himself do, when
we shall immediately enjoy his presence in the world to come. Surely this
world compared to the world to come, is but the gate house or porters lodge to
the most magnificent palace, and if the gatehouse be so fair, how fair and
glorious is the palace it self.

4 Moreover consider what odd^s there is between Gods mediate presence and his
immediate presence, to enioie him in the creatures, and to enjoy him in
himself. The creatures, yea the most excellent creatures, are as it were a
veil or curtain drawn between God and us. Now then when this curtain
shall be drawn aside, and we shall see God face to face, how glorious will
that sight be? We are here, says Bernard. de consid.
Divine Bernard, beholden to the creatures, yea to the creatures inferior to
our selves: For the very sun, moon, and slartes although they be superior
to us in place, yet are they our inferiors in dignity, and it is a kind of
disgrace for the superior to stand in need of the inferior, and yet from
this need are none of the sons of men free, until they be brought into the
gracious liberty of the sons of God. Then indeed shall the glorified person be
no more beholden to the creatures. For what need is there of any stairs to
ascend by, when he is now set in the throane, there he sees the word, and in
the word all things made by the word, neither needs to beg of the things
that are made, the knowledge of him by whom they were made. Yea not only this
curtain of the creatures shall be taken away, but also that of the word and
sacraments; For Corinth. 13. v. 8.
as the blessed Apostle says, prophecy shall cease and tongues shall fail,
and knowledge shall be abolished, that is to say, knowledge gotten by outward
instruction, and the ministry of men, yea faith and hope shall resign their
offices, neither shall we have any more use of them, we shall have both
immediate knowledge and actual fruition of all good things, yea of God who is
goodness it self, and who there shall be all in all to us. Ibid.
We see here in a glass, and as it were in a mist or fogge, but there we
shall see face to face, we know here but in part, but there we shall know
perfectly. The Apostle is bold to lay that all the knowledge we have here is
as the knowledge and stuttering of a young child, yea that his own knowledge
too was such, although he were an Apostle, and a principal Apostle, and
thereby insinuates that our knowledge here is as far inferior to the knowledge
which we shall have there, as the knowledge of a child that stuttereth, and
cannot yet speak plain is to the knowledge of the greatest clerk in the
world. Plate in Phaed.
The very heathen thought this to be one great benefit, that men, specially
wise men had by death, that their knowledge was perfected in the other world,
and that none could possibly attain to perfect wisdom until they came
thither. How much more should we count this an inestimable benefit, that in
the life to come we shall have the perfect knowledge of heavenly things?
Doubtless as far as this wide world exceedes for light and comfort the
narrow and dark womb of the mother wherein the child was wrapped before it
was borne, so much does that other world whereinto the faithful after this
life are received, exceed this world; and consider then how great and glorious
this alteration and change will be. There shall be tranquillity without
storm, liberty without restraint, society without loathsomeness, serenity
without cloud, joy without interruption, eternity without cessation. Revel.
2^. verse. 23.
This heavenly city shall have no need of the light either of sun or moon,
for the glory of God illuminates it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. And
here, 1. Corin^. 15. v. 28.
as the Apostle says, God shall be all in all: meat to our taste, beauty to
our eyes, perfumes to our smell, music to our ears. what shall I say more,
Psalm 87 verse. 3.
glorious things are spoken of this city of God but all that can be spoken
thereof is under truth, and 1. King. 10 v 7.
as the Queen of Saba said of Salomons court, much more will the faithful say
of the Court of heaven when they come there, that the one half of the
excellency and glory thereof was not told unto them. To the which place God
for his Christ's sake bring us, to whom with the holy Ghost, three persons and
one God be ascribed all glory, honor, and praise for ever and ever. Amen.

Christianus Ouranopolitanus.


