THE COMMON-VVELTH OF ENGLAND, AND MANNER OF GOVERNMENT THEREOF.

Compiled by the honorable Sir Thomas Smith, Knight, Doctor of both laws, and
one of the principal Secretaries unto two most worthy Princes, King EDWARD,
and Queen ELIZABETH: With new additions of the chief Courts in England, the
offices thereof, and their several functions, by the said Author: Never before
published.

Seen and allowed.

INVIDIA SIBI ET ALIIS VENEMVM



AT LONDON Imprinted by John Windet for Gregory Seton, and are to be sold at
his shop under Aldersgate. 1589.

To the Reader.
TO conceal the graces inspired by God, or the gifts ingraffed by nature, or
the virtues achieved unto our selves by industry, in all ages, and of all
wise men was accounted vnduetifulnes, unkindness and impiety unto that
Commonwealth, in the which, and unto the which vvare both bread and borne:
but to suppress the vvorthie works of any Author, may justly be judged not
only injury to the person, but even envy at the whole world. Wherefore,
chauncing upon this short discourse, compiled by the honorable Knight Sir
Thomas Smith, and considering that the same could not but be a great light
unto the ignorant, and no less delight unto the learned in the laws and
policy of sundry Regiments: I thought it part of my duty, as well for
reviving of the fame of so notable a man, as for the public imparting of so
pithie a Treatise, to present the same unto thy indifferent and discreet
judgment. Wherein although the errors and rashness of Scribes, appearing in the
contrariety, and corruption of copies, happening both by the length of time
since the first making, as also by the often transcripting, might justly have
been mine excuse, or rather discourage: yet vveighing the authority of the
Author together with the gravity of the matter, I made no doubt but that the
reverence due unto the one, and the recompense deserved by the other would
easily counteruaile all faults committed by a Clarke and writer. And whereas
some terms or other matters may seem to dissent from the usual phrase of the
common laws of this Realm: notvvithstanding, to him that will consider that
the profession of the maker was principally in the civil laws, and
therefore not to be expected as one excellent in both, and also that the
finishing of this work was in France far from his Library, and in an
embassage even in the midst of weight affairs, it cannot nor ought not
without great ingratitude be displeasant or in any sort disliking. Wherefore
(gentle Reader) accept in good part my zeal and this honorable man's travail,
assuring thy self that the same framed by an expert vvorkemaster, and forged
of pure and excellent metal, will not fail in proving to be a right
commodious instrument.

Vale.
THE MANNER OF GOVERNMENT OR POLICY OF THE REALM OF ENGLAND.
Of the diversities of common Wealths or government. Chapter 1.
THey that have written heretofore of Commonwealthes, have brought them into
three most simple and special kinds or fashions of government. The first,
where one alone does govern, is called of the Greeks (...), the second,
Monarchia.
where the smaller number, commonly called of them (...), and the third where
the multitude Aristocratia. Democratia.
does rule (...). To rule, is understood to have the highest and supreme
authority of commandment. That part or member of the common wealth is said
to rule which does controwle, correct, and direct all other members of the
common wealth. That part which does rule, define and command according to the
form of the government, is taken in every common wealth to be just and law:
As a rule is always to be understood to be straight, and to which all works
be to be conformed, and by it to be judged: I do not mean the Lesbians rule,
which is conformed to the stone: but ye right rule whereby the Artificer and
the Architect do judge the straightnes of every man's work, he to be reckoned
to make his work perfectest, who goes nearest to the straightness.

What is just or Law in every Common wealth or government. CHAP. 2.
NOw it does appear, that it is profitable to every common wealth (as it is
to every thing generally and particularly) to be kept in her most perfect
estate. Then if that part which does bear the rule, do command that which
is profitable to it, and the commandment of that part which does rule on that
sort, is to be accepted in every Common wealth respectively to be just (as we
have said before:) it must needs follow, that the definition which
Thrasimachus did make, that to be Just.
just, which is the profit of the ruling and most strong part (if it be meant
of the City or Common wealth, is not so far out of the way, (if it be
ciuilly understood) as Plato would make it. But as there is profitable, and
likelihode of profit, so there is right, and likelyhode of right. And as well
may the ruling and sovereign part command that which is not his profit, as
the just man may offend (notwithstanding his just and true meaning) when he
would amend that which is amiss, and help the Common wealth, and do good
unto it. For in as much as he attempteth to do contrary to the Law which is
already put, he therefore by the law is justly to be condemned, because his
doing is contrary to the law, and the ordinance of that part which does
command.

Another division of Commonwealthes. CHAP. 3.
BUt this matter yet takes an other doubt: for of these manner of rulings by
one, by the fewer part, and by the multitude or greater number, they which have
more methodically, and more distinctly and perfectly written upon them, do
make a subdiuision: and dividing each into two, make the one good and just, and
the other evil and unjust: as, where one rules, the one they call a king, or
(...), the other (...), a tyrant: where the fewer number, the one they name a
governing of ye best men (...), or Remp. optimatum, the other of the usurping
of a few Gentlemen, or a few of the richer and stronger sort (...), or Paucorum
potestatem: and where the multitude does govern, the one they call a
Commonwealth by the general name (...), or the rule of the people (...), the
other, the rule or the usurping of the popular, or rascal and viler sort,
because they be mo in number, (...).

Example of changes in the manner of Government. CHAP. 4.
IN Commonwealths which have had long continuance, the diversities of times
have made all these manners of ruling or government to be seen: As in Rome,
kings, Romulus, Numa, Seruius: tyrants, Tarquinius, Sylla, Caesar: the rule of
best men, as in time when the first Consuls were: and the usurping of a few, as
of the Senators after the death of Tarquinius, and before the succession of the
Tribunate, and manifestly in the Decemuirate, but more perniciouslie in the
Triumuirate of Caesar, Crassus, and Pompeius: and and afterward in the
Triumuirate of Octauius, Antonius, and Lepidus: The commonwealth and rule of
the people, as in the expulsing of the Decemuiri, and long after, especially
after ye law was made, either by Horatius, or (as some would have it)
Hortentius, quod plebs sciuerit, idpopulum teneat: And the ruling and usurping
of the popular and rascal, as a little before Sylla his reign, and a little
before Caius Caesar's reign. For the usurping of the rascalitie can never long
endure, but necessarily breeds, and quickly brings forth a tyrant. Of this
has Athens, Syracuse, Lacedemon, and other old ancient ruling Cities had
experience, and a man need not doubt but that other common wealths have
followed the same rate. For the nature of man is never to stand still in one
manner of estate, but to grow from the less to the more, and decay from the
more again to the less, till it come to the fatal end and destruction, with
many turns and turmoyles of sickness and recovering, seldom standing in a
perfect health neither of a man's body it self, nor of the politic body which
is compact of the same.

Of the question what is right and just in every common wealth. CHAP. 5.
SO when the common wealth is evil governed by an evil ruler and unjust (as
in the three last named which be rather a sickness of the politic body, than
perfect and good estates) if the laws be made, as most like they be always to
maintain that estate: the question remains, whether the obedience of them be
just, and the disobedience wrong? the profit and conservation of that estate
right and justice, or the dissolution? and whether a good and upright man, and
lover of his Country ought to maintain and obey them, or to seek by all
means to abolish them? which great and hauty courages have often attempted: as
Dion to rise up against Dionysius, Thrasibulus against the xxx. tyrants, Brutus
and Cassius against Caesar, which has bin cause of many commotions in common
wealths, whereof the judgment of the common people is according to the event
and success: of them which be learned, according to the purpose of the doers,
and the estate of the time then present* Certain it is that it is always a
doubtful and hasardous matter to meddle with the changing of the laws and
government, or to disobey the orders of the rule or government, which a man
does find already established.

That common vvealths or governments are not most commonly simple, but mixed.
CHAP. 6.
NOw although the governments of common wealths be thus divided into three,
and cutting each into two, so into six: yet you must not take, that ye shall
find any common wealth or government simple, pure and absolute in his sort and
kind, but as wise men have divided for understandings sake, and fantasied four
simple bodies which they call elements: as fire, air, water, earth, and in a
man's body four complections or temperatures, as choleric, sanguine,
phlegmatique, and melancholic: not that ye shall find the one utterly perfect
without mixtion of the other, for that nature almost will not suffer: but
understanding does discern each nature as in his sincerity: so seldom or
never shall you find common wealths or government, which is absolutely and
sincerely made of any of them above named, but always mixed with another, and
has the name of that which is more, and ouerruleth the other always or for
the most part.

The definition of a king and of a tyrant. CHAP. 7.
WHere one person bears the rule, they define that to be the state of a king,
who by succession or election, comes with the good will of the people, to
that government, and does administer the Commonwealth by the laws of the
same, and by equity, and does seek Rex.
the profit of the people as much as his own. A tyrant they name him, who by
force comes to the monarchy against the will of the people, breaks laws
already made, at his pleasure, makes other without the advice Tyrannus.
and consent of the people, and regards not the wealth of his Commons, but
the advancement of himself, his faction and kindred. These definitions do
contain three differences: the obteyning of the authority, the manner of
administration thereof, and the butte or mark whereunto it does tend and
shoot. So as one may be a tyrant by his entry and getting of the government,
and a king in the administration thereof. As a man may think of Octanius, and
peradventure of Sylla. For they both conming by tyranny and violence to that
state, did same to travail very much for the better order of the commonwealth:
how be it either of them after a diverse manner. Another may be a king by entry,
and a tyrant by administration, as Nero, Domitian, and Commodus: for the Empire
came to them by succession, but their administration was utterly tyrannical,
of Nero after five years, of Domitian and Commodus very shortly upon their new
honor. Some both in the coming to their Empire, and in the butte which they
shoot at, be kings, but the manner of their ruling is tyrannical: as many
Emperors after Caesar and Octauius, and many Popes of Rome. The Emperors claim
this tyrannical power by pretense of that Rogation or Plebiscitum, which Caius
Caesar, or Octauius obtained, by which all ye people of Rome did confer their
power and authority unto Caesar wholly.

The Pope groundeth his from Christ ( cui omnis potestas data est in coelo and
in terra) whose successor he prete^deth to be: yet the general Councels make a
strife with him, to make the Popes power either Aristocratian, or at the least
legitimum regnum, and would feign bridle that absolutam potestatem. Some men do
judge the same of the Kings of France and certain Princes of Italy and other
places, because they make and abrogate laws and edictes, lay on tributes and
impositions of their own will, or by the private counsel and advise of their
friends and favorers only, without the consent of the people. The people I
call that which the word Populus does signify, the whole body, and the three
estates of ye Common wealth: and they blame Jews the xi. for bringing the
administration royal of France, from the lawful and regulate reign, to the
absolute and tyrannical power and government. He himself was wont to glory
and say, he had brought the crown of France, horse de page, as one would say,
out of Wardship.

Of the absolute king. CHAP. 8.
OTher do call that kind of administration which the Greeks do call (...),
not tyranny, but the absolute power of a king, which they would pretend that
every king has, if he would use the same. The other they call (...) or the
Royal power, regulate by laws: of this I will not dispute at this time. But
as such absolute administration in time of war when all is in arms, and when
laws hold their peace because they cannot be heard, is most necessary: so in
time of peace the same is very dangerous, as well to him that does use it, and
much more to the people upon whom it is used: whereof the cause is the frailty
of man's nature, which (as Plato says) can not abide or bear long that
absolute and uncontrolled authority, without swelling into too much pride and
insolency. And therefore the Romans did wisely, who would not suffer any man
to keep the Dictatorship above six months, because the Dictators (for that
time) had this absolute power, which some Greeks named a lawful tyranny for
a time. As I remember, Aristotle, (who of all writers has most absolutely and
methodically treated of the division and natures of common wealths.) makes
this sort of government to be one kind of kings. But all comes to one effect:
for at the first, all kings ruled absolutely, as they who were either the heads
and most ancient of their families, derived out of their own bodies, as Adam,
Noa, Abraham, Jacob* Esau, reigning absolutely over their own children and
bondemen, as reason was: or else in the rude world amongst barbarous and
ignorant people, some one then whom God had endued with singular wisdom to
invent things necessary for the nourishing and defense of the multitude, and
to administer justice, did so far excel other, that all the rest were but
beasts in comparison of him; and for that excellency willingly had this
authority given him of the multitude, and of the Gentiles when he was dead,
and almost when he was yet living, was taken for a God, of others for a
Prophet. Such among the Jews were Moses, Joshua, and the other Judges, as
Samuel, etc. Romulus and Numa amongst the Romans, Lycurgus and Solon and
diverse other among the Greeks, Zamolxis among the Thracians, Mahomet among the
Arabians: And this kind of rule among the Greeks is called (...) which of it
self at the first was not a name odious: But because they who had such rule, at
the first, did for the most part abuse the same, waxed insolent and proud,
unjust and not regarding the common wealth, committed such acts as were
horrible and odious: as, killing me^ without cause, abusing their wives and
daughters, taking and spoiling all men's goods at their pleasures, and were not
shepherds as they ought to be, but rather robbers and deuourers of the people,
whereof some were co^temners of God, as Dionysius, other while they lived like
devils, and would yet be adored and accounted for Gods: as Caius Caligula, and
Domitian: that kind of administration, and manner also, at the first not evil,
has taken the signification and definition of the vice of the abusers, so that
now both in Greek, Latin, and English, a tyrant is counted he, who is an evil
king, and who has no regard to the wealth of his people, but seeks only to
magnify himself and his, and to satisfy his vicious and cruel appetite,
without respect of God, of right, or of the law: because that for the most
part, they who have had that absolute power, have been such.

Of the name of king, and thadministration of England. CHAP. 9.
THat which we call in one syllable king in English, the old Englishmen, and the
Saxons, from whom our tongue is derived, to this day call in two sillables,
cyning, which whether it comes of cen or ken, which betokens to know and
understand, or can, which betokens to be able, or to have power, I cannot
tell. The participle absolute of the one we use yet, as when we say, a cunning
man, Vir prudens, aut sciens: the verb of the other, as I can do this, possum
hoc facere. By old and ancient histories that I have red, I do not understand
that our nation has used any other general authority in this realm neither
Aristocratical, nor Democratical, but only the royal and Kingly majesty
which at the first was divided into many and sundry kings, each absolutely
reigning in his Country, not under the subjection of other, till by fighting
the one with the other, the ouercommed always falling to the augmentation of
the vanquisher and ouercommer: at the last the Realm of England grew into one
Monarchy. Neither any one of those kings, neither he who first had all, took
any inuestiture at the hands of the Emperor of Rome, or of any other superior
or foreign Prince, but held of God to him self, and by his sword, his people
and crown, acknowledging no Prince in earth his superior, and so it is kept
and holden at this day. Although king John (by the rebellion of the Nobility,
aided with the Daulphin of France his power) to appease the Pope, who at that
time possessing the consciences of his Subjects, was then also his enemy, and
his most grievous torment (as some histories do witness) did resign the crown
to his Legate Pandulphus, and took it again from him, as from the Pope, by
faith and homage, and a certain tribute yearly. But that act being neither
approved by his people, nor established by Act of Parliament, was forthwith,
and ever since taken for nothing, either to bind the king, his successors or
Subjects.

What is a Common wealth, and the parts thereof. CHAP. 10.
TO be better understood hereafter, it is necessary yet Respublica.
to make a third division of the Common wealth by the parts thereof. A Common
wealth is called a society or common doing of a multitude of free men,
collected together, and united by common accord and covenants among themselves,
for the conservation of themselves as well in peace as in war For properly an
host of me^ is not called a common wealth, but abusiuely, because they are
collected but for a time, and for a fact: which done, each deuideth himself from
others as they were before. And if one man had, as some of the old Romans had
(if it be true that is written) five thousand, or ten thousand bondmen whom
he ruled well, though they dwelled all in one City, or were distributed into
diverse villages, yet that were no common wealth: for the bondsman has no
communion with his master, the wealth of the Lord is only sought for, and not
the profit of the slave or bondeman. For as they who write of these things have
defined, a bondsman or slave is as it were (saving life and humane reason) but
the instrument of his Lord, as the axe, the saw, the chessyll and gowge is of
the Carpenter. Truth it is, the Carpenter looks diligently to save, correct
and amend all these: but it is for his own profit, and in consideration of
him self, not for the instruments sake. And as these be instruments of the
Carpenter, so the plow, the cart, the horse, ox or ass, be instruments of the
husbandman: and though one husbandman had a great number of all those, and
looked well to them, it made no common wealth, nor could not so be called. For
the private wealth of the husbandman is only regarded, and there is no
mutual society or portion, no law or pleading between the one and the other.
And (as he says) what reason has the pot to say to the Potter, why made
thou me thus? or why do thou break me after thou have made me? even so is
the bondsman or slave which is bought for money: for he is but a reasonable and
living instrument, the possession of his Lord and master, reckoned among his
goods, not otherwise admitted to the society civil, or Common wealth, but is
part of the possession and goods of his Lord. Wherefore, except there be other
orders and administrations amongst the Turks, if the prince of the Turks (as
it is written of him) do repute all other his bondmen and slaves (him self
and his sons only freemen) a man may doubt whether his administration be to
be accounted a common wealth, or a kingdom, or he rather to be reputed only
as one that has under him an infinite number of slaves or bondmen, among whom
there is no right, law, nor Commonwealth compact, but only the will of the
Lord and Segnior. Surely none of the old Greeks would call this fashion of
government, Remp. or (...) for the reasons which I have declared before.

The first sort, or beginning of an house or Family, called (...). CHAP. 11.
THen if this be a society, and consists only of freemen, the least part
thereof must be of two. The naturalest, and first conjunction of two, toward the
making of a further society of continuance, is of the husband and of the wife,
after a diverse sort, each having care of the family: the man to get, to
travail abroad, to defend: the wife, to save that which is gotten, to tarry
at home, to distribute that which comes of the husbands labor, for the
nutriture of the children, and family of them both, and to keep all at home
neat and clean. So nature has forged each part to his office: the man stern,
strong, bold, aduenturous, negligent of his beauty, and spending. The women
weak, fearful, fair, curious of her beauty, and saving. Either of them
excelling other in wit and wisdom, to conduct those things which appertain
to their office, and therefore where their wisdom does excel, therein it is
reason that each should govern. And without this society of man and woman, the
kind of man could not long endure. And to this society men are so naturally
borne, that the Prince of all Philosophers, in consideration of natures, was
not afraid to say, that a man by nature is rather desirous to fellow himself
to another, and so to live in couple, than to adherd himself with many.
Although of all things, or living creatures, a man does show him self most
politic, yet can he not well live without the society and fellowship civil.
He that can live alone, says Aristotle, is either a wild beast in a man's
likeness, or else a god rather than a man. So in the house and family is the
first and most natural (but private) appearance of one of the best kinds of a
common wealth, that is called Aristocratia, where a few, and the best do
govern, and where not one always: but sometime, and in some thing one, and
sometime and in some thing another does bear the rule. Which to maintain for
his part, God has given to the man great wit, bigger strength, and more
courage, to compel the woman to obey by reason, or force: and to the woman
beauty, fair countenance, and sweet words, to make the man to obey her
again for love. Thus each obeys and commands other, and Domus, seu familia.
they two together rule the house. The house I call here the man, the woman,
their children, their servants (...) and free, their cattle, their
housholdstuffe, and all other things which are reckoned in their possession, so
long as all these remain together in one, yet this cannot be called
Aristocratia, but Metaphorice, for it is but an house, and a little spark
resembling as it were that government.

The first and natural beginning of a kingdom, in Greek (...). CHAP. 12.
BUt for so much as it is the nature of all things to increase or decrease:
this house thus increasing and multiplying by generation, so that it cannot well
be comprehended in one habitation, and the children waxing bigger, stronger,
wiser, and thereupon naturally desirous Prouining, or propagation, is when a
man lays a bra^ch of a Vine or Osier, or any other tree into the ground, so
that it takes root of it self, and may live though it be cut clean from the
first root or stock. Pagus. Oppidum. Ciuitas. Regnum.
to rule, the father and mother sends them out in couples as it were by
prouining or propagation. And the child by marriage begins as it were to
root toward the making of a new stock, and thereupon another house or
family. So by this propagation or prouining first of one, and then another,
and so from one to another, in space of time, of many houses was made a street
or village: of many streets and villages joined together, a City or Borough.
And when many cities, boroughs and villages, were by common and mutual consent
for their conservation ruled by that one and first father of them all, it was
called a nation or kingdom. And this seems the first and most natural
beginning and source of cities, towns, nations, kingdoms, and of all civil
societies. For so long as the great grandfather was alive and able to rule, it
was unnatural for any of his sons or offspring to strive with him for the
superiority, or to go about to govern, or any wise to dishonor him, from
whom he had received life and being. And therefore such a one does bear the
first and natural example of an absolute and perfect king. For he loved them
as his own children and nephews, cared for them as members of his own body,
provided for them as one having by long time more experience then any one, or
all of them. They again honored him as their father of whose body they came,
obeyed him for his great wisdom and forecast, went to him in doubtful cases as
to an Oracle of God, feared his curse and malediction as proceeding from Gods
own mouth. He again used noriture: for each pain put upon them, he esteemed
as laid upon himself.

The first and natural beginning of the rule of a few of the best men, called
in Greek (...). CHAP. 13.
BUt when that great Grandfather was dead, the sons of him, and brethren
among themselves, not having that reverence to any, nor confidence of wisdom
in any one of them, nor that trust the one to the other, between whom (as many
times it fares with brethren) some strifes and brawlinges had before arisen:
To defend themselves yet from them which were Walsh and strangers,
necessarily agreed among themselves to consult in common, and to bear rule
for a time in order, now one, now another: so that no one might bear always
the rule, nor any one be neglected. And by this means, if any one failed
during his year or time by ignorance, the next (being either wyser of
himself, or else by his brothers error and fault) amended it. And in the mean
while, at diverse and most times when urgent necessity did occur, they
consulted all those heads of families together within themselves, how to
demean and order their matters best for the conservation of themselves, and
each of their families, generally and particularly. Thus a few, being heads,
and the chief of their families, equal in birth and nobility, and not much
different in riches, governed their own houses, and the descendents of them
particularly, and consulted in common upon public causes, agreeing also upon
certain laws and orders to be kept amongst them. So the best, chiefest, and
sagest did rule, and the other part had no cause to strive with them, nor had
no cause nor appearance to compare with any of them, neither for age nor
discretion, nor for riches or nobility. The rulers sought each to keep and
maintain their posterity, as their sons and nephews, and such as should
succeed them, and carry their names when they were dead, and so render them
being mortal by nature, immortal by their fame and succession of posterity:
having most earnest care to maintain still this their cousinage and common
family, as well against foreign and barbarous nations, which were not of their
progeny, tongue, or religion, as against wild and savage beasts. This
seems the natural sourse, and beginning or image of that rule of the fewer
number, which is called of the Greeks (...), and of the Latins optimatum
respublica.

The first original, or beginning of the rule of the multitude called (...) or
(...) CHAP. 14.
NNow, as time brings an end of all things, these brethren being all dead,
and their offspring increasing daily to a great multitude, and the reverence due
to the old fathers in such and so great number of equals failing by the reason
of the death or doting of the Elders: each owing their merits of education
apart to their Fathers and Grandfathers, and so many arising, and such
equality among them, it was not possible that they should be content to be
governed by a few. For two things being such as for the which men in society
and league do most strive, that is, honor and profit, no man of free courage
can be contented to be neglected therein, so that they were feign of necessity
to come to that, that the more part should bear the price away in election of
Magistrates and Rulers. So that either by course or by lot each man in turn
might be received to bear rule, and have his part of the honor: and (if any
were) of the profit which came by administration of the commonwealth. For
whosoever came of that old great Grandfathers race, he accounted himself as
good of birth as any other. For service to the commonwelth, all, or such a
number had done it, as they could not be accounted few. And if a few would
take upon them to usurp over the rest, the rest conspiring together would
soon be masters over them, and ruinate them wholly. Whereupon necessarily it
came to pass, that the common wealth must turn and alter as before from one
to a few, so now from a few, to many and the most part, each of these yet
willing to save the politic body, to conserve the authority of their
nation, to defend themselves against all other, their strife being only for
empire and rule, and who should do best for the common wealth, whereof they
would have experience made by bearing office and being magistrates. This I take
for the first and natural beginning of the rule of the multitude which the
Greeks called (...): the Latins some Respublica by the general name, some
populi potestas, some census potestas, I cannot tell how latinely.

That the common Wealth or policy must be according to the nature of the
people. CHAP. 15.
BY this process and discourse it does appear that the mutations and changes
of fashions of government in common wealths be natural, and do not always
come of ambition or malice: And that according to the nature of the people, so
the common wealth is to it fit and proper. And as all these iii. kinds of
common wealths are natural, so when to each party or espece and kind of the
people that is applied which best agrees, like a garment to the body or shoe
to the foot, then the body politic is in quiet, and finds ease, pleasure
and profit. But if a contrary form be given to a contrary manner of people,
as when the shoe is too little or too great for the foot, it does hurt and
encomber the convenient use thereof, so the free people of nature tyrannized or
ruled by one against their wills, were he never so good, either fail of
courage and wexe servile, or never rest until they either destroy their King and
them that would subdue them, or be destroyed themselves. And again, another
sort there is, which without being ruled by one Prince, but set at liberty
cannot tell what they should do, but either through insolency, pride, and
idleness, will fall to robbery and all mischief, and to scatter and dissolve
themselves, Graeci. Romani Samnits. Vandali. Dani. Norwegi. Sueti.
or with foolish ambition and private strife consume one another, and bring
themselves to nothing. Of both these two we have histories inow to bear
witness* as the Greeks, Romans, Samnites, Danes, Uandalles, and others. Yet
must you not think that all common wealths, administrations and rulings, began
on this sort, by prouining or propagation, as is before written: but many times
after a great battle and long war, the Captain who led a multitude of
people, gathered peradventure of diverse nations and languages, liking the place
which he has by force conquered, tarieth there, and begins a common wealth
after this manner, and for the most part a kingdom. As the Goths and Lumbardes
in Italy, the Frenchmen in Gaul, the Sarasins in Spain and part of France,
the Saxons in great Britain, which is now called England: of which, when that
one and chief Prince is dead, the nobler sort consult among themselves, and
either choose another head and king, or divide it into more heads and rulers,
so did the Lumbards in Italy, and the Saxons in England: or take at the first
a common rule and popular estate, as the Zwitzers did in their cantons, and do
yet at this day, or else admit the rule of a certain few, excluding the
multitude and communaltie, as the Paduans, Ueronenses, and Uenetians have
accustomed.

The division of the parts and persons of the Commonwealth. CHAP. 16.
TO make all things yet clear before, as we shall go, there aryseth another
division of the parts of the common wealth. For it is not enough to say that
it consists of a multitude of houses and families, which make streets and
villages, and the multitude of the streets and villages make towns, and the
multitude of towns the realm, and that freemen be considered only in this
behalf, as subjects and citizens of the commonwealth, and not bondmen, who can
bear no rule nor jurisdiction over freemen, as they who be taken but as
instruments and the goods and possessions of others. In which consideration
also we do reject women, as those whom nature has made to keep home and to
nourish their family and children, and not to meddle with matters abroad, nor
to bear office in a city or commonwealth no more than children and infants:
except it be in such cases as the authority is annexed to the blood and
progeny, as the crown, a duchy, or an erledome; for there the blood is
respected, not the age nor the sex. Whereby an absolute Queen, an absolute
Duchess or Countess, those I call absolute, which have the name, not by being
married to a king, duke, or earl, but by being the true, right and next
successors in the dignity, and upon whom by right of the blood that title is
descended: These I say have the same authority although they be women or
children in that kingdom, duchy or erledome, as they should have had if they
had bin men of full age. For the right and honor of the blood, and the
quietness and suertie of the realm, is more to be considered, than either the
tender age as yet impotent to rule, or the s^re not accustomed (otherwise) to
intermeddle with public affairs, being by common intendment understood, that
such personages never do lack the counsel of such grave and discreet men as
be able to supply all other defectes. This (as I said) is not enough: But the
division of these which be participant of the commonwealth is one way of them
that bear office, the other of them that bear none: the first are called
magistrates, the second private men. Another the like was among the Romans of
Patrity and plebei, the one striving with the other a long time, the patrity
many years excluding the plebei from bearing rule, until at last all
magistrates were made common between them: yet was there another division of
the Romans, into senatores, equites and plebs: the Greeks had also (...). The
French have also at this day, les nobles, and la populaire, or gentiles homes
and villainies: we in, England divide our men commonly into four sorts,
Gentlemen, Citizens, yeomen, artifiters, and laborers. Of gentlemen the first
and chief are the king, the prince, dukes, marquifes, earls, bicountes,
barrens, and these are called (...) the nobility, and all these are called
Lords and noblemen: next to these be knights, esquires and simple gentlemen.

Of the first part of Gentlemen of England, called Nobilitas mayor. CHAP. 17.
DUkes, marquises, earls, vicounts, and barons, either Nobilitas mayor. Eldest
sons of dukes are not earls by birth, but lords and take their place above
earls; and so are earls eldest sons in respect o^ barons.
be created by the Prince, or come to that honor by being the eldest sons, as
highest and next in succession to their Parents. For the eldest of Dukes sons
during his fathers life is called an Earl: an Earls son is called by the
name of a Uicount or Baron, or else according as the creation is. The creation I
call the first donation and condition of the honor (given by the Prince for
good service done by him, and advancement that the Prince will bestow upon
him) which with the title of that honor is commonly (but not always) given to
him and to his heirs, males only: Esquires of honor, or Lords.
the rest of the sons of the Nobility, by the rigor of the law be but
Esquires, yet in common speech, all Dukes and Marquises sons, and the eldest
son of an Earl be called Lords. The which name commonly does agree to none
of lower degree than Barons, excepting such only, as be thereunto by some
special office called. The Baronny or degree of Lords does answer to the
dignity of the Senators of Rome, and the title of our Nobility to their
patricii: when patricii did betoken senatores, aut Senatorum filios. Census
Senatorum was in Rome, at diverse times diverse, and in England no man is created
a Baron, except he may dispend of yearly revenue one thousand pounds, or one
thousand marks at the least. Uicounts, Earls, Marquises and Dukes more,
according to the proportion of the degree and honor, but though by chance he
or his son have less, he keeps his degree: but if they decay by excess,
and be not able to maintain the honor (as Senatores Romani were amoti Senatu)
so sometimes they are not admitted the upper house in the Parliament, although
they keep the name of Lord still.

Of the second sort of Gentlemen, which may be called Nobilitas minor, and
first of Knights. CHAP. 18.
NO man is a knight by succession, not the King or prince. And the name of
prince in England (...) betokens the kings eldest son or prince of Wales:
although the King himself, his eldest son, and all Dukes be called by
general name Princes. But as in France the kings eldest son has the title
of the Daulphine, and he, or the next heir apparent to the Crown is Monsire,
so in England the kings eldest son is called (...) the Prince. Knights
therefore be not borne but made, either before the battle to encourage them
the more to adventure their lives, or after the conflict, as advancement for
their hardiness and manhood already showed: or out of the war for some
great service done, or some good hope through the virtues which do appear in
them. And they are made either by the king himself, or by his commission and
royal authority given for the same purpose, or by his Lieutenant in the
wars, who has his royal and absolute power committed to him for that time.
And that order seems to answer in part to that which the Romans called
Equites Romans, differing in some points, and agreeing in other, as their
common wealth and ours do differ and agree: for never in all points one common
wealth does agree with another, no nor long time any one common wealth with it
self. For all changes continually to more or less, and still to diverse and
diverse orders, as the diversity of times do present occasion, and the
inutabilitie of men's wits does invent and assaye new ways, to reform and
amend that wherein they do find fault. Equites Romani, were chosen ex censu,
that is, according to their substance and riches. So be knights in England
most commonly, according to the yearly revenue of their lands, being able to
maintain that estate: yet all they that had Equestrem censum, non legebantur
Equites. No more are all made knights in England that may dispende a knights
land or fee, but they only whom the king will so honor. The number of Equites
was uncertain, and so it is of knights, at the pleasure of the Prince. Equites
Romani had equum publicum. The knights of England have not so, but find their
own horse themselves in peace time, and most usually in wars.

Census Equester was among the Romans at diverse times of diverse value: but in
England whosoever may dispende of his free lands forty pounds sterling of
yearly revenue, by an old law of England, either at the coronation of the
king, or marriage of his daughter, or at the dubbing of the Prince knight, or
some such great occasion, may be by the king compelled to take that order and
honor, or to pay a fine, which many not so desirous of honor as of riches, had
rather disburse: Some, who for causes are not thought worthy of that honor
and yet have ability, neither be made knights, though they would, and yet pay
the fine of xl. l. sterling, at that time when this order began, which makes
now Cxx. l of current money of England: as I have more at large declared in my
book of the diversity of standards, or the valor of moneys.

When the Romans did write Senatus populusque Romanus, they seemed to make but
two orders, that is, of the Senate, and of the people of Rome, and so in the
name of people they contained Equites and plebem: so when we in England do say
the Lords and the Commons: the knights, esquires, and other gentlemen, with
citizens, burgesses and yomen, be accounted to make the Commons, In ordayning
of laws, the Senate of Lords of England is one house, where the Archbishoppes
and Bishops also be, and the King or Queen for the time being as chief, the
knights and all the rest of the Gentlemen, Citizens and Burgesses which be
admitted to consult upon the greatest affairs of the Realm, be in another
house by themselves, and that is called ye house of the Commons, as we shall
more clearly describe when we speak of the Parliament. Whereupon this word
knight is derived, and whether it do betoken no more but that which miles
does in latin, which is a Soldier, might be moved as a question. The word
Soldier now seems rather to come of sold and paime^t, and more to betoken a
waged or hired man to fight, than otherwise, yet Caesar in his commentaries
called soldures in the tongue gallois, men who devoted and swore themselves in
a certain band or oath one to another, and to the Captain: which order if the
Almains did follow, it may be that they who were not hired, but being of the
Nation, upon their own charges, and for their advancement, and by such common
oath or band that did follow the wars, were (possibly) (...) called knights or
milites, and now among the Almaines some are called Lanceknights, as soldiers
of their band not hired, although at this day they be for the most part
hirelings. Or peradventure it may be that they which were next about the
Prince, as his guarde and servants, picked or chosen men out of the rest, being
called in the Almaine language knighten, which is as much to say as servants:
these men being found of good service, the word afterward was taken for an
honor, and for him who makes profession of arms. Our language is so changed,
that I dare make no judgment thereof. Now we call him knight in English, that
the French calls cheualier, and the Latin equitem, or equestris ordinis.

And when any man is made a knight, he kneeling down is stricken of the Prince,
with his sword naked, upon the back or shoulder, the Prince saying, sus or sois
chiualier au nom de Dieu, and (in times past) they added S, George, and at his
arising the Prince says, auau^cer. This is the manner of dubbing of knights at
this present: and that term dubbing, was the old term in this point, and not
creation. At the coronation of a king or Queen, there be knights of the bath
made, with long and more curious ceremonies. Knights bannerets are made in the
field, with the ceremony of cutting off the point of his standert, and making
it as it were a baner: he being before a bacheler knight, is now of a greater
degree, allowed to display his arms in a baner as Barons do. But this order is
almost grown out of use in England. But how soever one be dubbed or made a
knight, his wife is by and by called a Lady, as well as a Barons wife: he
himself is not called Lord, but has to his name in common appellation added
this syllable, Sir, as if he before were named Thomas, William, John or
Richard, afterward he is always called Sir Thomas, Sir William, Sir John, Sir
Richard, and that is the title which men give to Knights in England. This may
suffice at this time, to declare the order of knighthoode, yet there is an
other order of Knights in England which be called the Knights of the Garter.
King Edward the third, after he had obtained many notable victories, King John
of France, King James of Scotland, being both prisoners in the tower of London
at one time, and king Henry of Castle the bastard expulsed out of his realm,
and Don Petro restored unto it by the prince of Wales and Duke of Aquitaine
called the black prince, invented a society of honor, and made a choice out
of his own realm and dominions, and all Christendom: and the best and most
excellent renoumed persons in virtues and honor, he did adorn with that title
to be knights of his order, gave them a garter decked with gold, pearl and
precious stones, with the buckle of gold, to wear daily on the left leg
only, a kirtle, gown, cloak, chaperon, collar, and other august and
magnificall apparel both of stuff and fashion exquisite and heroical, to
wear at high feasts, as to so high and princely an order was meet: of which
order he and his successors Kings and Queens of England to be the sovereign,
and the rest by certain statutes and laws among themselves, be taken as
brethren and fellows in that order, to the number of xxvi. But because this is
rather an ornament of the realm than any policy or government thereof, I
leave to speak any further of it.

Of Esquiers. CHAP. 19.
EScuier or esquier (which we call commonly squire) is a French word, and
betokens Scutigerum or Armigerum, and be all those which bear arms (as we
call them) or armories (as they term them in French) which to bear is a
testimony of the nobility or race from whence they do come. These be taken
for no distinct order of the Commonwealth, but do go with the residue of the
Gentlemen: save that (as I take it) they be those who bear arms, testimonies
(as I have said) of their race, and therefore have neither creation nor
dubbing: or else they were at the first costerels or the bearers of the arms of
Lords or Knights, and by that had their name for a dignity and honor given
to distinguish them from a common Soldier called in Latin Gregarius miles.

Of Gentlemen. CHAP. 20.
GEntlemen be those whom their blood and race does make noble and known,
(...) in Greek, the Latins call them all Nobiles, as the French Nobles, (...)
or Nobilitas in Latin is defined, honor or title given, for that the ancestor
has been notable in riches or virtues, or (in fewer words) old riches or
prowes remaining in one stock. Which if the successors do keep and follow,
they be vere nobiles, and (...): if they do not, yet the fame and wealth of
their ancestors serve to cover the^ so long as it can, as a thing once gilted
though it be copper within, till the gilt be worn away. This has his reason,
for the Etimologie of the name served the efficacy of the word. Gens in
Latin betokens the race and surname, so the Romans had Cornelios, Sergios,
Appios, Fabios, Armilios, Pisones, Iulios, Brutos, Valerios, of which who were
Agnati, and therefore kept the name, were also Gentiles: and remaining the
memory of the glory of their progenitors fame, were* Gentlemen of that or
that race. This matter made a great strife among the Romans, when those which
were noui homines, were more allowed, for their virtues new and newly shown,
than the old smell of ancient race newly defaced by the cowardice and evil
life of their nephews and discendants could make the other to be. Thus the
Cicerones, Gatones, and Marij had much a do with those ancients, and therefore
said Iuuenalis:

Malo pater tibi sit Thersites, dummodo tu sis
Aeacidi similis vulcaniaque arma capessas,
Quam te Thersiti similem producat Achilles.
But as other Common wealths were feign to do, so must all Princes
necessarily follow: that is, where virtue is, to honor it. And although
virtue of ancient race be easier to be obtained, as well by the example of the
progenitors, which encourages, as also through ability of education and
bringing up, which enableth, and the lastly enraced love of tenants and
neighbors to such noblemen and Gentlemen, of whom they hold, and by whom they
do dwell, which prieketh forward to ensue in their fathers steps. So if all
this do fail (as it were great pity it should) yet such is the nature of all
human things, and so the world is subject to mutabilitie, that it does many
times fail: but when it does, the prince and commonwealth have the same power
that their predecessors had, and as the husbandman has to plant a new tree
where the old fails, so has the Prince to honor virtue where he does find
it, to make gentlemen, esquires, knights, barons, earls, marquises and dukes,
where he sees virtue able to bear that honor or merits, and deserves it, and
so it has always been used among us. But ordinarily the K. does only make
knights, and create barons, or higher degrees: for as for gentlemen, they be
made good cheap in England. For who soever studieth the laws of the realm,
who studieth in the Uniuersities, who professes liberal Sciences: and to be
short, who can live idly, and without manual labor, and will bear the port,
charge and countenance of a Gentleman, he shall be called master, for that is
the title which men give to esquires and other gentlemen, and shall be taken
for a Gentleman. For true it is with us as is said, Tanti eris aliis, quanti
tibi feceris: And (if need be) a king of Herauldes shall also give him for
money arms newly made and invented, the title whereof shall pretend to have
been found by the said Herald in perusing and vewing of old Registers, where
his Ancestors in times past had been recorded to bear the same. Or if he will
do it more truly, and of better faith, he will write that for the merits of
that man, and certain qualities which he does see in him, and for sundry
noble acts which he has performed, he by the authority which he has, as
king of Heralds and arms, gives to him his heirs these and these arms,
which being done, I think he may be called a Squire, for he bears ever
after those arms. Such men are called sometime in scorn, gentlemen of the
first head.

Whether the manner of England in making Gentlemen so easily, is to be allowed.
CHAP. 21.
A Man may make doubt and question, whether this manner of making gentlemen is
to be allowed or no, and for my part I am of that opinion that it is not
amiss. For first the prince loses nothing by it, as he should do if it were
as in France: for the yeoman or husbandman is no more subject to tail or tax
in England than the gentleman: no, in every payment to the King the gentleman
is more charged, which he bears the gladlier, and dares not gainesay, for to
save and keep his honor and reputation. In any show or muster, or other
particular charge of the town where he is, he must open his purse wyder, and
augment his portion above others, or else he does diminish his reputation. As
for their outward show, a gentleman (if he will be so accounted) must go like a
gentleman, a yeoman like a yeoman, and a rascal like a rascal: and if he be
called to the wars, he must and will (what soever it cost him) array
himself, and arm him according to the vocation which he pretends: he must
show also a more manly courage, and tokens of better education, higher
stomach, and bountifuller liberality than others, and keep about him idle
servant, who shall do nothing but wait upon him. So that no man has hurt
by it but he himself, who hereby perchance will bear a bigger sail than he
is able to maintain. For as touching the policy and government of the
Commonwelth it is not those that have to do with it which will magnify
themselves, and go in higher buskins than their estate will bear: but they
which are to be appointed, are persons tried and well known, as shall be
declared hereafter.

Of Citizens and Burgesses. CHAP. 22.
NExt Gentlemen be appointed Citizens and Burgesses, such as not only be free,
and received as officers within the Cities, but also be of some substance to
hear the charges. But these Citizens and Burgesses, be to serve the common
wealth, in their cities and burrowes, or in corporate towns where they dwell.
Generally in the shires they be of none account, save only in the common
assembly of the Realm to make laws, which is called the Parliament. The
ancient cities appoint four, and each borow two, to have voices in it, and to
give their consent or dissent, in the name of the city or borough for which
they be appointed.

Of Yeomen. CHAP. 23.
THose whom we call yeomen, next unto the nobility, knights and Squires, have
the greatest charge and doings in the common wealth, or rather are more
trauayled to serve in it than all the rest: as shall appear hereafter. I call
him a yeoman whom our laws do call Legalem hominem, a word familiar in
writtes and enquestes, which is a freeman borne English, and may dispende of
his own free land in yearly revenue to the sum of xl. s. sterling. This
makes (if the just value were taken now to the proportion of moneys) vi. l. of
our current money at this present. This sort of people confess themselves to
be no gentlemen, but give the honor to all which be or take upon them to be
Gentlemen, and yet they have a certain pre-eminence and more estimation than
laborers and artificers, and commonly live wealthily, keep good houses, and
do their business, and travail to acquire riches: these be (for the most part)
farmors unto gentlemen, which with grasing, frequenting of markettes and
keeping servant not idle as the gentleman does, but such as get both their
own living and part of their masters, and by these means do come to such
wealth, that they are able and daily do buy the lands of unthrifty gentlemen,
and after setting their sons to the school at the Uniuersities, to the laws
of the Realm, or otherwise leaving them sufficient lands whereon they may
live without labor, do make their said sons by those means Gentlemen*
These be not called masters, for that (as I said) pertains to Gentlemen
only. But to their surnames men add Goodman: as if the surname be Luter,
Finch, White, Brown, they are called goodman Luter, goodman White, goodman
Finch, goodman Brown, amongst their neighbors, I mean not in matters of
importance, or in law. But in matters of law and for distinction, if one were
a knight, they would write him (for example sake) Sir John Finch knight, so if
he be an Esquire, John Finch Esquire or Gentleman, if he be no Gentleman, John
Finch yeoman. For amongst the Gentlemen they which claim no higher degree, and
yet be to be exempted out of the number of the lowest sort thereof, be written
Esquires. So amongst the husbandmen, laborers, lowest and rascal sort of the
people, such as be exempted out of the number of the rascabilitie of the
popular be called and written yeomen, as in the degree nxet unto Gentlemen.
These are they which old Cato calls Aratores, and optimos ciues in Republica,
and such as of whom the writers of commonwealths praise to have many in it.
Aristoteles namely recites (...), these tend their own business, come not
to meddle in public matters and judgments but when they are called, and glad
when they are delivered thereof, are obedient to the gentlemen and rulers, and
in war can abide travail and labor, as men used to fight for their Lords of
whom they hold their lands, for their wives and children, for their country
and nation, for praise and honor against they come home, and to have the love
of their Lord and his children, to be continned toward them and their
children, which have adventured their lives to and with him and his. These are
they which in the old world gat that honor to England, not that either for
wit, conduction, or for power they are or were ever to be compared to the
gentlemen, but because they be so many in number, so obedient at the Lords
call, so strong of body, so hard to endure pain, so courageous to adventure
with their Lord or Captain going with, or before them, for else they be not
hasty nor never were, as making no profession of knowledge of war. These
were the good archers in times past, and the stable troop of footmen that
affraide all France, that would rather die all, than once abandon the knight or
gentleman their captain, who at those days commonly was their Lord, and
whose tenauntes they were, ready (besides perpetual shame) to be in danger of
undoing of themselves, and all theirs if they should show any singe of
cowardice or abandon the Lord, Knight or Gentleman of whom they held their
living. And this they have amongst them from their forefathers told one to an
other. The gentlemen of France and the yeomen of England are renowned, because
in battle of horsemen France was many times too good for us, as we again
always for them on foot. And Gentlemen for the most part be men at arms and
horsemen, and yeomen commonly on foot: howsoever it was, yet the gentlemen had
always the conduction of the yeomen, and as their captains were either a
foot or upon a little nagge with them, and the Kings of England in foughten
battles remaining always among the footmen, as the French Kings among their
horsemen. Each Prince Geman in the Saxon is a married man, and hereof comes
our yeoman, for after marriage men are accounted settled members in the common
wealth, but not before. A yonker comes of young heir which is a son and heir
to a gentleman or a young gentleman.
thereby, as a man may guess, did show where he thought his strength did
consist. What a yeoman is I have declared, but from whence the word is derived
it is hard to say: it cannot be thought that yeoman should be said a young man,
for commonly we do not call any a yeoman till he be married, and have
children, and as it were, have some authority among his neighbors. Yonker in
low Dutch betokens a mean gentleman, or a gay fellow. Possible our yeomen
not being so bold as to name themselves gentlemen, when they came home, were
content when they had heard by frequentation with low Dutchmen, of some small
Gentleman (but yet that would be counted so) to be called amongst them, yonker
man, they calling so in wars by mockage or in sport the one an other, when
they came home, yonker man, and so yeoman: which word now signifies among
us, a man well at ease, and having honestly to live, and yet not a Gentleman;
whatsoever that word yonker man, yonke man, or yeoman does more or less
signify to the Dutchmen.

Of the fourth sort of men which do not rule. CHAP. 21.
THe fourth sort or class amongst us, is of those which the old Romans
called capite censii proletary or operae, day laborers, poor husbandmen, yea
merchants, or retaylers which have no free land, copiholders, and all
Artificers, as Taylers, Shoomakers, Carpenters, Brickmakers, Bricklayers,
Masons, etc. These have no voice nor authority in our Commonwealth, and no
account is made of them but only to be ruled, not to rule other, and yet they
be not altogether neglected. For in Cities and corporate towns for default of
yeomen, enquestes and Juries are impaneled of such manner of people. And in
Uillages they be commonly made Churchwardens, Alecunners, and many times
Constables, which office touches more the Commonwealth, and at the first was
not employed upon such low and base persons. Wherefore generally to speak of
the Common wealth, or policy of England, it is governed, administered, and
manured by three sorts of persons, the Prince, Monarch, and head Gouerner,
which is called the King, or* if the crown fall to a woman, the Queen
absolute, as I have heretofore said: In whose name and by whose authority al
things are administered. The gentlemen, which be divided into two parts, the
Baronie or estate of Lords containing barons and all that be above the degree
of a baron, (as I have declared before:) and those which be no Lords, as
knights, Esquires, and simply Gentletlemen.

The third and last forte of persons is named the yeomanrie: Each of these
has his part and administration in judgments, corrections of defaults, in
election of offices, in appointing and collection of tributes and subsidies, or
in making laws, as shall appear hereafter.

THE SECOND BOOK.
The division and definition of the Laws of this Realm in general. CHAP. 1.
THe laws of England consist in two points. Judgment and Practice.

In Judgeme^t are considered the Persons. Place. Matter, and Manner.

The persons in judgment are the Judges in their courts. Sergeantes and
Counselors.

In practice are considered the Persons, and their Office.

The persons are Protonotharies. Sollicitors, and Atturneyes.

Their office is to prepare the matter, and to make it ready for the Judges to
determine.

The Protonotharies are the Clerks in the Court which do record the matters
hanging in judgment, and do frame the pleading, enter the rules and orders of
the Court, the verdites and judgments given in the same.

Solicitors are such, as being learned in the laws, and informed of their
masters cause, do inform and instruct the Counselors in the same.

Atturneis are such as by experience have learned, and do know the orders and
manner of proceeding in every Court where they serve, and do purchase out writs
and process belonging to their Clients cause. They see to his suits, that he
be not hindered by negligence. They pay the fees belonging to the Courts, and
prepare the cause for judgment.

The places for judgment are the courts where sentence is given, and the Laws
made: as, the Parliament, Chancerie, Kings bench, the Common Pleas, the
Exchequer, the court of Wards, the Star Chamber, the Court of Requests, and
the Duchy Court of Lancaster.

The matter of the Law is Justice. and Equity.

The manner of their several proceedings, follows.

Of the Parliament, and the authority thereof. CHAP. 2.
THe most high and absolute power of the Realm of England consists in the
Parliament. For as in war, where the king himself in person, the Nobility,
the rest of the gentilitie, and the yeomanrie are, is the force and power of
England: So in peace and consultation where the Prince is to give life, and the
last and hig^^^ commandment, the Barronnie for the Nobility and higher: the
Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen and Commo^s for the lower part of the
commonwealth, the Bishops for the Clergy be present to advertise, consult and
show what is good and necessary for the Common wealth, and to consult
together, and upon mature deliberation, every bill or law being thrice read and
disputed upon in either house, the other two parts first each a part, and after
the Prince himself in presence of both the parties, does consent unto and
allows. That is the Princes and whole Realms deed: whereupon justly no man
can complain, but must accommodate himself to find it good, and obey it.

That which is done by this consent is called firm, stable and sanctum, and
is taken for law. The Parliament abrogateth old laws, makes new, gives
order for things past, and for things hereafter to be followed, changes
rightes and possessions of private men, legitimateth bastardes, establishes
forms of Religion, alters waightes and measures, gives forms of succession
to the Crown, defines of doubtful rights, whereof is no law already made,
appoints subsidies, tails, taxes, and impositio^s, gives most free pardons
and absolutions, restores in blood and name, as the highest Court, condemns
or absolueth them whom the Prince will put to (...) trial. And to be short,
all that ever the people of Ro^^ might do, either in Centuriatis comitijs, or
tributis, the same may be done by the Parliament of England, which represents,
and has the power Alias Tribunitiis.
of the whole Realm, both the head and the body. For every Englishman is
intended to be there present, either in person, or by procuratio^ and attorney,
of what pre-eminence, state, dignity, or quality soever he be, from the
Prince (be he king or Queen) to the lowest person of England. And the consent
of the Parl^^^^nt is taken to be every man's consent.

The Judges in Parliament are the king (...)mes Majesty, the Lords temporal
and spiritual, the Commons represented by the Knights and Burgesses of every
Shire and Borough Town. These all, or the greater part of them, and that with
the consent of the Prince for the time being, must agree to the making of Laws.

The officers in Parliament are the Speakers, two Clerks, the one for the
higher house, the other for the lower, and the Committies.

The Speaker is he that does commend and prefer the bills exhibited into the
Parliament, and is ye mouth of the Parliament. He is commonly appointed by the
King or Queen, though accepted by the assent of the house.

The Clerks are the keepers of the Parliament Rolls and Records, and of the
Statutes made, and have the custody of the private Statutes not printed.

The Committies are such as either the Lords in the higher house, or Burgesses
in the lower house, do choose to frame the Laws upon such bills as are
agreed upon, and afterward to be ratified by the said houses.

The form of holding the Parliament. CHAP. 3.
THe Prince sends forth his rescripts or writtes to every duke marquis,
baron, and every other Lord temporal or spiritual who has voice in the
Parliament, to be at his great counsel of Parliament such a day (the space from
the date of the writ is commonly at the least forty days:) he sends also
writtes to the Sherifes of every shire, to admonish the whole shire to choose
two knights of the Parliament in the name of the shire, to hear and reason, and
to give their advise and consent in the name of the Shire, and to be present
at that day: likewise to every city and town, which of auncientie has been
wont to find burgesses of the parliament, so to make election, that they might
be present there at the first day of the Parliament. The Knights of the shire
be chosen by all the Gentlemen and yeomen of the shire, present at the day
assigned for the election: the voice of any absent can be counted for none.
Yeome^ I call here (as before) that may dispende at the least xl. s. of yearly
rent of free land of his own. These meeting at one day, the two who have the
more of their voices be chosen knights of the shire for that Parliament:
likewise by the plurality of the voices of the citizens and burgesses, be the
burgesses elected. The first day of the Parliament the Prince and all the Lords
in their robes of Parliament do meet in the higher house, where, after prayers
made, they that be present are written, and they that be absent upon sickness,
or some other reasonable cause (which the Prince will allow) do constitute
under their hand and seal some one of those who be present, as their procurer,
or attorney, to give voice for them, so that by presence or attorney and proxey
they be all there, all the princes and Barons, and all Archbishops and bishops,
and (when Abbots were) so many abbots as had voice in Parliament. The place
where the assembly is, is richly tapessed and hanged, a princely and royal
throne as appertains to a king, set in the midst of the higher place
thereof. Next under the prince sits the Chancellor, who is the voice and
Orator of the Prince. On the one side of that house or chamber sits the
archbishops and bishops, each in his rank, on the other side the dukes and
barons. In the midst thereof upon woolsackes sits the Judges of the
realm, the master of the roules, and the secretaries of estate. But these
that sit on the woolsackes have no voice in the house, but only sit there to
answer their knowledge in the law, when they be asked, if any doubt arise
among the Lords, The secretaries do answer of such letters or things passed
in counsel, whereof they have the custody and knowledge: and this is called
the upper house, whose consent and dissent is given by each man severally and by
himself, first for himself, and then severally for so many as he has
letters and proxies, when it comes to the question, saying only content or
not content, without further reasoning or replying. In this mean time the
knights of the shires and burgesses of the parliament (for so they are called
that have voice in parliament, and are chosen as I have said before, to the
number betwixt iij. C. and iiij. C.) are called by such as it pleases the
Prince to appoint, into an other great house or Chamber by name, to which they
answer: and declaring for what shire or town they answer then they are
willed to choose an able and discreet man to be as it were the mouth of them
al, and to speak for and in the name of them, and to present him so chosen by
them to the Prince: which done they coming all with him to a bar, which is
at the nether end of the upper house, there he first praises the Prince, then
makes his excuse of inability, and prays the Prince that he would command
the commons to choose another. The Chancellor in the Princes name does so much
declare him able, as he did declare himself unable, and thanketh the commons
for choosing so wise, discreet and eloquent a man, and wills them to go and
consult of laws for the common wealth. Then the speaker makes certain
requests to the Prince in the name of the commons, first that his majesty
would be content that they may use and enjoy all their liberties and
privileges that the common house was wont to enjoy.

Secondly that they might franckly and freely say their minds in disputing of
such matters as may come in question, and that without offense to his Majesty.

Thirdly that if any should chance of that lower house to offend, or not to do
or say as should become him, or if any should offend any of them being called
to that his highness court, that they themselves might (according to the ancient
custom) have the punishment of them. And fourthly, that if there came any
doubt, whereupon they shall desire to have the advice or conference with his
Malestie or with any of the Lords, that they might do it: all which he
promises in the Commons names, that they shall not abuse, but have such
regard as most faithful, true and loving subjects ought to have to their
Prince.

The Chauncelor answers in the Princes name, as apperteineth. And this is all
that is done for one day, and sometime two. Besides the Chauncelor, there is
one in the upper house who is called Clarke of the Parliament, who reads the
bills. For all that comes in consultation either in the upper house or in
the nether house, is put in writing first in paper, which being once read, he
that will, rises up and speaks with it or against it: and so one after
another so long as they shall think good. That done they go to another, and so
another bill. After it has bin once or twice read, and does appear that it is
somewhat liked as reasonable, with such amendment in words and peradventure
some sentences as by disputation seems to be amended: in the upper house the
Chauncelor asks if they will have it engrossed, that is to say, put into
parchment: which done, and read the third time, and that eftsoons if any be
disposed to object disputed again among them, the Chauncelor asks if they
will go to the question: and if they agree to go the question, then he says,
here is such a law or act concerning such a matter, which has bin thrice read
here in this house, are ye content that it be enacted or no? If the not
contents be more, then the bill is dashed, that is to say the law is
annihilated, and goes no further. If the contents be ye more, then the Clarke
writes underneath: Soit baille aux commons. And so when they see time, they
send such bills as they have approved by two or three of those which do sit
on the woolsackes to the commons: who asking license, and coming into the
house, with due reverence, says to the speaker: Master speaker, my Lords of
the upper house have passed among them and think good, that there should be
enacted by Parliament such an act, and such an act, and so reads the titles
of that act or acts. They pray you to consider of them, and show them your
advise, which done they go their way. They being gone, and the door again
shut, the speaker rehearses to the house what they said. And if they be not
busy disputing at that time in an other bill, he asks them straight way if
they will have that bill or (if there be more) one of them.

In like manner in the lower house the speaker sitting in a seat or chair for
that purpose some what higher, that he may see and be seen of them all, has
before him in a lower seat his Clarke, who reads such bills as be first
propounded in the lower house, or be sent down from the Lords. For in that
point each house has equal authority, to propound what they think meet,
either for the abrogating of some law made before, or for making of a new.
All bills be thrice in three diverse days read and disputed upon, before they
come to the question. In the disputing is a marvelous good order used in the
lower House. He that stands up bareheaded is understood that he will
speak to the bill. If mo stand up, who that first is judged to arise, is first
heard, though the one do praise the law, the other dissuade it, yet there is no
alteration. For every man speaks as to the speaker, not as one to another,
for that is against the order of the house. It is also taken against the order,
to name him whom ye do confute, but by circumlocution, as he that speaks
with the bill, or he that spoke against the bill, and gave this and this
reason. And so with perpetual Oration not with altercation, he goes through
till he do make an end. He that once has spoken in a bil, though he be
confuted straight, that day may not reply, no though he would change his
opinion. So that to one bill in one day one may not in that house speak twice,
for else one or two with altercation would spend all the time. The next day he
may, but then also but once.

No reuiling or nipping words must be used. For then all the house will cry,
it is against the order: and if any speak irreverently or seditiously against
the Prince or the privy Counsel, I have seen them not only interrupted, but
it has bin moved after to the house, and they have sent them to the Tower. So
that in such a multitude, and in such diversity of minds, and opinions, there
is the greatest modesty and temperance of speech that can be used.
Nevertheless with much doulce and gentle terms, they make their reasons as
violent and as vehement the one against the other as they may ordinarily,
except it be for urgent causes and hasting of time. At the afternoon they
keep no parliament. The speaker has no voice in the house, nor they will not
suffer him to speak in any bill to move or dissuade it. But when any bill is
read, the speakers office is, as briefly and as plainly as he may to declare
the effect thereof to the house. If the commons do assent to such bills as be
sent to them first agreed upon from the Lords thus subscribed, Les commo^s ont
assentus, so if the Lords do agree to such bills as be first agreed upon by
the Commons, they send them down to the speaker thus subscribed, Les
Seigneurs ont assentns, If they cannot agree, the two houses (for every bill
from whence so ever it does come is thrice read in each of the howses) if it
be understood that there is any sticking, sometimes the Lords to the
Commons, sometime the Commons to the Lords do require that a certain of each
house may meet together, and so each part to be informed of others meaning, and
this is always granted. After which meeting for the most part, not always
either part agrees to others bills.

In the upper house they give their assent and dissent each man severally and
by himself, first for himself, and then for so many as he has proxy. When
the Chaunceller has demanded of them whether they will go to the question
after the bill has bin thrice read, they saying only content or not content,
without further reasoning or replying: and as the more number does agree, so it
is agreed on, or dashed.

In the nether house none of them that is elected either Knight or Burges can
give his voice to an other, nor his consent or dissent by proxy. The more part
of them that be present only makes the consent or dissent. After the bill
has bin twice read, and then engrossed and eftsoons read and disputed on
enough as is thought, the speaker asks if they will go to the question. And
if they agree he holds the bill up in his hand and says, as many as will
have this bill go forward, which is concerning such a matter, say yea. Then
they which allow the bill cry yea, and as many as will not, say no: as the
cry of yea or no is bigger, so the bill is allowed* or dashed. If it be a
doubt which cry is the bigger, they divide the house, the speaker saying, as
many as do allow the bill go down with the bill, and as many as do not sit
still. So they divide themselves, and being so divided they are numbered who
make the more part, and so the bill does speed. It chances sometime that some
part of the bill is allowed, some other part has much contrariety and doubt
made of it: and it is thought if it were amended it would go forward. Then
they choose certain committees of them who have spoken with the bil and
against it, to amend it, and bring it in again so amended, as they amongst
them shall think meet: and this is before it is engrossed, yea and some time
after. But ye agreement of these committees is no prejudice to the house. For
at the last question they will either accept it or dash it, as it shall seem
good, notwithstanding that whatsoever the committees have done.

Thus no bill is an act of Parliament, ordinance, or edict of law, until
both the houses severally have agreed unto it after the order aforesaid, no nor
then neither. But the last day of that parliament or session the Prince comes
in person in his Parliament robes, and sits in his state: all the upper
house sits about the Prince in their states and order in their robes. The
speaker with all the common house comes to the bar, and there after
thanksgiving first in the Lords name by the Chauncelor etc. and in the
commons name by the spaeker to the Prince, for that he has so great care of
the good government of his people, and for calling them together to advise of
such things as should be for the reformation, establishing and ornament of the
common wealth: the Chaunceller in the Princes name gives thanks to the Lords
and commons for their pains and travails taken, which he says the Prince will
remember and recompense when time and occasion shall serve, and that he for
his part is ready to declare his pleasure concerning their proceedinges,
whereby ye same may have perfect life and accomplishment by his Princely
authority, and so have the whole consent of the realm. Then one reads the
Titles of every act which has passed at that session, but only in this
fashion: An act concerning such a thing etc. It is marked there what the Prince
does allow, and to such he says: Le roy, or la Royne le veult. And those be
taken now as perfect laws and ordinances of the realm of England and none
other, and as shortly as may be put in print, except it be some private cause
or law made for the benefit or prejudice of some private man, which the Romans
were wont to call priuilegia, These be only exemplified under the seal of the
Parliament, and for the most part not printed. To those which the Prince likes
not, he answers, Le Roy or la Royne saduisera, and those be accounted
utterly dashed and of none effect.

This is the order and form of the highest and most authentical court of
England, by virtue whereof all those things be established whereof I spoke
before, and no other means accounted auailable to make any new forfaiture of
life, member, or lands of any English man, where there was no law ordained
for it before. Now let us speak of the said parts when they be several.

Of the Monarch, King or Queen of England. CHAP. 4.
THe Prince whom I now call (as I have often before) the Monarch of England,
King or Queen, has absolutely in his power the anctoritie of war and peace,
to defy what Prince it shall please him, and to bid him war, and again to
reconcile himself and enter into league or truce with him at his pleasure or
the advice only of his privy Counsel. His privy counsel be chosen also at
the Princes pleasure out of the nobility or baronie, and of the Knights, and
Esquires, such and so many as he shall think good, who does consult daily, or
when need is of the weighty matters of the Realm, to give therein to their
Prince their best advice they can. The Prince does participate to them al, or
so many of them as he shall think good, such legations and messages as come
from foreign Princes, such letters or occurrentes as be sent to himself or to
his secretaries, and keeps so many ambassades and letters sent unto him
secret as he will, although these have a particular oath of a counceller
touching faith and secrets administered unto them when they be first admitted
into that company. To that herein the kingdom of England is far more
absolute than either the Dukedom of Uenice is, or the kingdom of the
Lacedaemonians was. In war time, and in the field the Prince has also
absolute power, so that his word is a law, he may put to death, or to other
bodily punishment, whom he shall think so to deserve, without process of law
or form of judgment. This has bin sometime used within the Realm before any
open war, in sudden insurrections and rebellions, but that not allowed of
wise and grave men, who in that their iudgemment had consideration of the
consequence and example, as much as of the present necessity, especially, when
by any means the punishment might have bin done by order of law. This
absolute power is called martial law, and ever was and necessarily must be
used in all camps and hosts of men, where the time nor place do suffer the
tarriance of pleading and process, be it never so short, and the important
necessity requires speedy execution, that with more awe the Soldier might
be kept in more strait obedience, without which never captain can do any
thing vaileable in the wars.

The Prince uses also absolute power in crying and decreeing the money of the
Realm by his proclamation only. The money is always stamped with ye princes
image and title. The form, fashion, manner, weight, finenesse and baseness
thereof, is at the discretion of the Prince. For whom should the people trust
more in that matter than their Prince, seeing the coin is only to certify
the goodness of the metal and the weight, which is affirmed by the Princes
image and mark? But if the Prince will deceive them, and give the^ copper for
silver or gold, or enhaunce his coin more than it is worth, he is deceived
himself, as well as he does go about to deceive his Subjects. For in the
same sort they pay the Prince his rents and customs. And in time they will
make him pay ratablie or more for meat, drink, and victualles for him and
his, and for their labor: which experience does teach us now in our days to
be done in all Regions. For there ever has been, and ever will be a certain
proportion between the scarcity and plenty of other things, with gold and
silver. For all other measures and weights, as well of dry things as of wet,
they have accustomed to be established or altered by the parliament, and not by
the princes proclamation only.

The Prince uses also to dispense with laws made, whereas equity requires a
moderation to be had, and with pains for transgression of Laws, where the
pain of the Law is applied only to the Prince. But where the forfaite (as in
popular actions it chances many times) is part to the Prince, the other part
to the declarator, detector or informer, there the Prince does dispense for his
own part only. Where the criminal action is intended by inquisition (that
manner is called with us at the Princes suite) the Prince gives absolution or
pardon, yet with a clause, modo stet rectus in curia, that is to say, that no
man object against the offender. Whereby notwithstanding that he has the
princes pardon if the person offended will take upon him the accusation (which
in our language is called the appeal) in cases where it lies, the princes
pardon does not serve the offender.

The prince gives all the chief and highest offices or magistracies of the
realm, be it of judgment or dignity, temporal or spiritual, and has the
tenthes and first fruits of all Ecclesiastical promotions, except in the
Uniuersities, and certain Colleges which be exempt.

All writtes, executions and commandments, be done in the Princes name. We
do say in England, the life and member of the kings Subjects are the kings
only, that is to say, no man has hault nor moyenne justice but the king, nor
can hold plea thereof. And therefore all those pleas which touch the life or
the mutilation of man, be called pleas of the crown, nor can be done in the
name of any inferior person than he or she that holds the Crown of England.
And like wise no man can give pardon thereof but the Prince only: although in
times past there were certain County Palatines, as Chester, Durham, and Elie,
which were hault Justicers, and writtes went in their name, and also some Lord
Marchers of Wales, which claymed like privilege: al these are now worn away.
The supreme justice is done in the kings name, and by his authority only.

The Prince has the wardshippe and first marriage of all those that hold
land of him in chief. And also the government of all fools natural, or such
as be mad by adventure of sickness, and so continue, if they be landed. This
being once grounded by act of Parliament (although some inconvenience has
been thought to grow thereof, and since that time it has been thought very
unreasonable) yet once annexed to the crown, who ought to go about to take the
club out of Hercules hand? And being governed justly and rightly, I see not so
much inconvenience in it, as some men would make of it: diverse other rights and
preheminences the prince has, which be called prerogatives royals, or the
prerogative of the king, which he declared particularly in the books of the
common laws of England.

To be short, the prince is the life, the head, and the authority of all
things that be done in the realm of England. And to no prince is done more
honor and reverence, than to the king and Queen of England: no man speaks to
the prince, nor serves at the table, but in adoration and kneeling, all
persons of the realm be bare headed before him: in so much that in the chamber
of presence where the cloth of estate is set, no man dare walk, yea though the
prince be not there, no man dare tarry there but bareheaded. This is
understood of the subjects of the realm, for all strangers be suffered there
and in all places to use the manner of their Country: such is the civility of
our Nation.

The chief points wherein one Common wealth does differ from another. CHAP. 5.
NOw that we have spoken of the Parliament (which is the whole, universal, and
general consent and authority as well of the prince, as of the nobility and
commons, that is to say, of the whole head and body of the realm of England)
and also of the prince, (which is the head, life and gouerner of this
commonwealth:) there remains to show, how this head does distribute his
authority and power to the rest of the members for the government of his
realm, and the common wealth of the politic body of England. And whereas all
commonwealths and gouernme^ts be most occupied, and be most diverse in the
fashion of five things: In making of laws and ordinances, for their own
government: in making of battle and peace, or truce with foreign nations, in
providing of money for the maintenance of themselves within themselves, and
defense of themselves against their enemies, in choosing and election of the
chief officers and magistrates: and fistly, in the administration of justice.
The first and third we have showed is done by ye prince in parliament. The
second and fourth by ye prince himself* the fifth remains to be declared.

Of three manners and forms of trialles or judgments in England. CHAP. 6.
BY order and usage of England there be three ways and manners whereby absolute
and definite judgment is given; by parliament, which is the highest and most
absolute; by battle, and by the great assise.

Trial or judgment by Parliament. CHAP. 7.
THe manner of giving judgment by Parliament between private and private men,
or between the Prince and any private man, be it in matters criminal or
civil, for land or for heritage, does not differ from the order which I have
prescribed, but it proceeds by bill thrice read in each house, and assented
to as I have said before, and at the last day confirmed and allowed by the
prince. Howbeit such bills be seldom received, because that great counsel
being enough occupied with the public affairs of the Realm, will not gladly
intermedle it self with private quarrels and questions.

Trial of judgment by battle. CHAP. 8.
THis is at this time not much used, partly because of long time the Pope and
the clergy, to whom in time past we were much subject, always cried against it
as a thing damnable and unlawful: and partly because in all common wealths, as
to the tongue, so to the manners fashions, habites, yea and kinds of trials and
judgments, and to all other things that is therein used, time and space of
years brings a change. But I could not yet learn that it was ever abrogated.
So that it remains in force, whenever it be demanded. The manner of it is
described in Briton.

The trial by assise or twelve men, and first of the three parts which be
necessary in judgment. CHAP. 9.
THe two first judgments be absolute, supreme and without appeal, and so is
also the judgment by the great assise. And because our manner of judgments in
England is in may things different from the fashion used either in France or in
Italy, or in any other place the Emperors laws and constitutions (called the
civil laws) be put in use, it will be necessary here to make a little
digression, to the intent, that that which shall be said hereafter, may be better
understood. All pursuites and actions (we call them in our English tongue
pleas) and in barbarous (but now usual) latin, placita, taking that name
abusiue of the definitive sentence, which may well be called placitum, or (...).
The French uses the same, calling in their language, the sentence of their
judges areste or arest: in which words notwithstanding after their custom they
do not sound the s. But we call placitum the action, not the sentence, and
placitare barbarously, for to plead in English, agere, or litigare. Now in all
judgments being two parties, the first we call the impleader, suitor,
demaunder or demaundant, and plaintiff. In criminal causes, if he profess to
be an accuser, we call him appellant, or appellour, and so, accusation we call
appeal. The other we call the defendant, and in criminal causes, prisoner, for
he cannot answer in causes criminal before he do render himself, or be
rendered prisoner.

Iudex, is of us called Judge, but our fashion is so diners, that they which
give the deadly stroke, and either condemn or acquit the man for guilty or
not guilty, are not called Judges, but the twelve me^. And the same order
as well is in civil matters and pecuniarie, as in matters criminal.

Of pleas or actions. CHAP. 10.
PLeas or Actions criminal be in English called pleas of the crown, which be
all those which tend to take away a man's life or any member of him, for his
evil deserving against the prince and commonwealth.

And this name is given not without a cause. For taking this for a principle,
that the life and member of an Englishman is in the power only of the prince
and his laws, when any of his Subjects is spoiled either of life or member,
the Prince is endammaged thereby, and has good cause to ask account how his
Subjects should come to that mischief. And again, for so much as the Prince
who governs the scepter, and holds ye crown of England, has this in his
care and charge, to see the Realm well governed, the life, members and
possessions of his Subjects kept in peace and assurance: he that Saving in
appeals, and upon a special plea. Actio, is the parties whole suite: Breue, is
the kings precept.
by violence shall attempt to break that peace and assurance, has forfaited
against the Scepter and crown of England: and therefore not without a cause
in all inquisitions and indictments, if any be found by the xij. men to have
offended in that behalf, straight the prince is said to be party, and he that
shall speak for the Prisoner shall be rebuked, as speaking against the prince.
Nevertheless, it is never defended, but the prisoner, and party defendant, in
any cause may allege for him all the reasons, means, and defenses that he
can, and shall be peaceably heard and quietly. But in those pleas and
pursuites of the Crown, Procuror or Advocate he gets none, which in civil
and pecuniarie matters (be it for land, rent, right, or possession, although
he plead against the Prince him self) he is never denied.

Pleas civil be either personal or real: personal, as contracts or for
injuries: real, be either possessorie, to ask, or to keep the possession: or
in rem, which we call a writ of right. For that which in the civil law is
called actio, or formula, we call writ in English: so the Greeks called it
word for word (...) and in our barbarous latin we name it breue.

And as the old Romans had their actions some ex iure civilly, and some ex
iure praetorio, and ordinarily praetor dabat actiones, and formulas actionum:
so in England we retain still this and have some writtes out of the
Chauncerie, other out of the common pleas, or the kings bench.

Of the chief Tribunals, Benches, or Courts of England. CHAP. 11.
IN times past (as may appear to him that shall with judgment read the
Histories and antiquities of England) the courts and benches followed the
king and his Court wheresoever he went, especially shortly after the conquest.
Which thing being found very cumber some, painful, and chargeable to the
people, it was agreed by Parliament that there should be a standing place where
judgment should be given. And it has long time been used in Westminster
hall, which king William Rufus builded for the hall of his own house. In that
hall be ordinarily seen three Tribunals, or Judges seats. At the entry on the
right hand the common pleas, where civil matters are to be pleaded, specially
such as touch lands or contractes. At the upper end of the hall, on the right
hand, the kings bench, where pleas of the crown have their place. And on the
left hand sits the Chancellor accompanied with the master of the Rolls,
who in latin may be called custos archiuorum Regis, and certain men learned in
the civil law* called Masters of the Chauncery, in Latin they may be called
Assessores.

Of the times of pleading called Terms and of the Chauncellor and Chauncerie.
CHAP. 12.
TWo things may be moved in question here, how all England* (being so long and
so large, and having so many shires and provinces therein) can be answered of
justice in one place, and in 3. benches, be they never so great? Another
(whereas the Kings Bench is exercised in criminal causes, and in all pleas of
the crown, and the common place in all civil causes, real, and personal) what
place then has the Chauncerie?

The first question will seem more marvelous, and have more occasion of
doubt, when I shall also tell that the Law is not open at all times, no not the
third part of the year. But where all other: Cities and common wealths had
all the year pleas, suites and judgments, except for certain holy days and
harvest, and vintage, or when for some urgent cause the Law was commanded to
be stopped, which is called Iustitium: Contrary in ours it is but few times
open. That is only four times in the year, which they call Terms. After
Michaelmas about ten days, during five or six weeks at the least. After
Christmas about a month, enduring by the space of three weeks. Then from
xvij. days after Easter by the space of three weeks and od days. Likewise
from the sixth or seventh day after Trinity sunday, during two weeks and odd
days. All the rest of the year there is no pleading, entering nor pursuing of
actions. This small time, and all that but in one place may seem very
injurious to the people, who must be feign to suffer much wrong for lack of
Justice and of place and time to plead: but unto that hereafter I intend to
answer more fully, and in the mean while that shall suffice which the wise
Cato answered to one who moved that the pleading place in Rome might be
covered over with canuas as their theaters were, to the intent that the
plaintifs and defendantes that were there might plead their matters more at
ease, and not be in so much danger of their health by the heat of the Sun
striking full and open upon their heads, which was no small grief and
disease, specially at Rome. Nay (says Cato) for my part I had rather wish that
all the ways to the place of pleading were cast over with Galthrops, that the
feet of such as love so well pleading, should feel so much pain of those
pricks in going thither as their heads do of the Sun in tarrying there: he
meant that they were but idle, whot heads, busy bodies, and troublesome men in
the Common wealth that did so nourish pleading: good laborers and quiet men
could be content to end their matters at home by judgment of their neighbors
and kinsfolk without spending so their money upon Procurers and Advocates
whom we call Atturneis, Counselors, Sergeantes, and generallye men of law.
Those he accounted profitable citizens, who attend their honest labor and
business at home, and stand not waiting and gaping upon their Rolls and
process in the law: as for the other, by his judgment, it was no matter what
mischief they suffered. To the other question of the chancerie, this I answer:
That our law which is called of us the common law, as ye would say Ius
civil, is and stands upon (...), that is Ius summum: and their maximees be
taken so straightly that they may not depart from the tenor of the words, even
as the old civil law was. And therefore as that lacked the help of a Praetor
(which might moderari illud ius summum, give actions where none was, mitigate
the exactnes and rigor of the law written, give exceptions, as metus, doli
mali, minoris aetatis, etc. for remedies, and maintain always aequum bonum:)
the same order and rank holds our chauncerie, and the chauncellor has the
very authority herein as had the Praetor in the old civil law before the
time of the Emperors. So he that puts up his bill in the chauncerie, after
that he has declared the mischief wherein he is, has relief as in the
solemn Forum. And for so much as in this case he is without remedy in the
common law, therefore he requires the chauncellor according to equity and
reason to provide for him, and to take such order as to good conscience shall
appertain. And the court of the Chauncerie is called of the common people the
court of conscience, because that the Chauncelor is not strained by rigor or
form of words of law to judge but ex aequo and bono, and according to
conscience as I have said. And in this court the usual and proper form of
pleading of England is not used, but the form of pleading by writing, which is
used in other countries according to the civil law: and the trial is not by
xij. men, but by the examination of witness as in other courts of the civil
law.

Out of this Court, as from the person of the Prince come all manner of
original writtes. The declaration of writtes is at large set down in the
register of writs, and in the Natura breuium. Out of this Court come most
commonly Commissions, Patentes, Licenses, Inquisitions, etc.

The Judges of this Court are the Lord Chauncellor of England, Assistants, the
master of the Rolls, and six Masters of the Chauncerie, which are commonly
Doctors of the civil law.

Officers are the six Clerks of the Chauncerie, the Clark of the Crown
general, the Register, the Comptroller of the Seal, two examiners, the Clarke
of the hampier, the three Clerks of the petty bag; the Cursiters, the
Sergeant of the mace.

The Lord Chauncelor is the keeper of the great Seal, and has it carried with
him whersoeuer he goes.

The Master of the Rolls is the keeper of the Records, Judgementes and
sentences given in the court of Chauncery.

The six Masters are assistantes to the court, to show what is the equity of
the civil law, and what is Conscience.

The Clarke of the Crown is the chief Guardian of all the matters of the
Crown: what are Crown matters and pleas of the Crown, see in the learned
book of Stanford, called the Pleas of the Crown.

The six Clerks are the Atturneis as well for the Plaintiff, as Defendant in
every suite in this Court.

The Register is the engrosser and keeper of the decrees, publications orders
and injunctions issuing out of this court.

The two Examiners are such as take the examination of the witnesses brought to
prove or reprove any thing suite in this Court, and to put their depositions
and answers made to their interrogatories in writing.

The Comptroller of the Seal is to see and allow of all the writtes made in
this court.

The Clarke of the Hamper is he that does receive the fines due for every writ
sealed in this Court.

The three Clerks of the Petie bag are they that receive the offices that
are found in the Court of Wards.

The Cursiters are Clerks appointed to their several shires which do write
original writtes that belong to this Court, or the Common place.

The Sergeant carries the Mace before the Lord Chauncellor, and is to call any
man before him at his commandment.

The Process in the Chauncerie is a Sub paena, which is but to call the party
before him upon a pain, as upon pain of lx. l. etc. And this is the way used
to bring in the party, or else by the Sergeant as before.

The punishment is, if the party will not come in, or coming in, will not obey
the order of the Court, imprisonment during the pleasure of the Lord
Chauncellor.

The order of proceeding is by Iniuuctions, decrees and orders which are to
bind the party, and if he resistt his punishment is imprisonment.

The matters in this court are all causes wherein equity and extremity of law
do strive, and where the rigor of laws have no remedy, but conscience and
the moderation of Summumius has sufficient.

And here is to be noted, that conscience is so regarded in this court, that
the laws are not neglected, but they must both join and meet in a third,
that is in a moderation of extremity.

The Court is called of some Officina Iuris Ciuilis Anglorum, because out of
this Court issue al manner of process which give the party his cause of action
in other Courts.

Of Judges in the common Law of England, and the manner of trial and
pleading there. CHAP. 13.
THe Prince out of the numbers of those who have bin Counselors or Sergeantes
at the Law, which be those who in Latin are called causidici or aduocati,
chooses two of the most approved for learning, age, discretion and exercise,
of whom the one is called chief Justice of the Kings bench, or simply chief
Justice, the other, chief Justice of the common place, and others to the
number of six or more, which have each an ordinary fee or stipend of the
Prince.

These do sit at such days as be term, which may be called Dies legitimi
iuriditi, or fasti, in their distinct places, as I have said before. There they
hear the pleading of all matters which do come before them: and in civil
matters where the pleading is for money, or land, or possession, part by
writing, and part by declaration and altercation of the advocates the one with
the other, it does so proceed before them till it do come to the issue, which
the Latins do call statum causae, I do not mean contestationem litis, but as
the Rhetoritians do call statum, we do most properly call it the issue, for
there is the place where the debate and strife remains (as a water held in a
close and dark vessel issues out, is voided and emptied) and no where else:
that stroke well stricken is the the departing of all the quarrels. Issues or
status in our Law be ordinarily two, facti and iuris.

Of the Kings Bench. CHAP. 13.
THe Kings Bench is the Kings court, so called because usually the Kings have
sitten there, and also because that therein are all causes handled which
appertain to the Crown: and such causes as wherein the King or Queen is a
party, if they properly apperteine not to some other court.

The Judges of the Kings Bench are the Lord chief Justice of England, with
other his companions assistant in giving judgment.

The Sergeantes and Counselors do debate the cause.

The sentence is given by the chief Justice, the others all or the most part
assenting, as it shall appear to be in other Courts likewise. If they can
not agree, then is the matter referred to a demurre in the Exchequer chamber
before all the Justices of both the benches, viz. the Kings Bench, and the
common pleas, and the Lord chief Barron of the Exchequer.

The officers in the Kings Bench are, the chief Protonotharie, the Secondarie,
the Clarke of the Crown, the Clarke of the Exigentes, the Clarke of the
Papers, the Custos Breuium, and Custos Sigilli.

The Protonotharie is he, that records all judgments, orders, and rules in
this court, and all verdicts given, being not of Crown matters.

The Secondarie is the Protonotharies deputy, for the said causes, and he is
the keeper and maker up of these records in books.

The Clarke of ye Crown, is to frame al inditements offelonie, treason,
murder, etc. all manner of appeals, and after to record them, and enter the
verdicte, and to make and keep the Records touching these matters.

The Clarke of the Exigentes is to frame all manner of Processes of Exigi
facias, which do issue out of that Court to outlawe any man, and to record the
outlawry.

The Clarke of the Papers is he that keeps al rolls, scriptes, and
pleadinges, and other things in writing which are not of record.

The Custos breuium is he which fileth all the writs indiciall and original,
after the Sheriff has returned them, he is chargeable if any be embeseled or
privily conveyed away from the file.

The Custos Sigilli is he that does keep the Seal, and seeks all judicial
writtes, and all Patentes, lycenses issuing out of this Court, and takes the
fee due for them, and thereof is to make his acccompt.

There are certain Atturneis belonging to this Court in number as the
Protonothorie shall appoint: those are for Plaintifs and defendantes in every
cause, and they frame and make the pleadinges.

The manner of proceeding in this court is by Latitat, arrest, and Bill.

The Latitat is to bring the party in when he is not to be found, or will not
appear and answer.

Arrest is when the party is arrested, and then is driven to find bail. viz.
two sufficient sureties or more as the case shall need.

By Bill the suite is when the party is in Custodia Mareschalli and is from
thence brought to answer.

The Matters in this Court are properly all matters of the Crown, whereof see
Stanfordes book aforesaid.

In these they proceed by Inditementes, verdict, appeal, Improperly all
suites wherein the King is a party, or may have any loss. Such are
Conspiracies, Champarties, Imbrasier, Maintenance, Decies tantum maymes,
Slanders, actions sur le cas: of these see Natura breuium.

Of the court of common pleas. CHAP. 14.
THe court of common pleas is the kings court, wherein are holden all common
pleas between Subject and Subject, of all matters of Common law: so called,
for that it serves for the exact and precise administration of the common law.

The Judges in this Court are, Lord chief Justice of the common pleas, three
other his associates. The Sergea^t at the law, whose number is sometime more,
sometimes less, at the pleasure of the prince. These all are sworn to serve
the turn of the common law at this bar.

Two of them are always appointed to serve the Princes turn in what Court
soever, and are called the Q. Sergeants.

The officers of this Court are the Custos Breuiu^, three Protonotharies, the
Clarke of the warrants, the Clarke of the Essoynes, diverse Atturneyes,
Fillisers for every shire, Exigenters for every shire, the Clark of the Juries,
the Cirographer for fines, the Clarke of the Queens silver for errors in this
Court committed, the Clarke of the seal, as before for the kings bench.

The Custos breuium is chief Clarke in the court, and he has the custody of
all the writtes whatsoever, returnable into this court, come they in either at
the day of the return, or after the day, which is called Post diem.

The Protonotharies are they which after the parties have appeared in Court,
do enter the matters in suite, and make the pleadings, and enter them.

The Fillisers are they which make up all mean process upon the original
writtes, and the same writtes returned by the sheriff, are by the atturneyes
delivered to the Custos breuium to file or string, there to remain of record.

The Exigenters are such as make out the exigents and writs of proclamation
into every County, where the parties are, that upon the measne process or
summo^s will not appear.

The Clarke of the warrants is he which does take the warrants of an Attorney,
which shall prosecute for the plaintiff or defendant: and is he that enrolleth
all deeds acknowledged before the Justices of the same Court.

The Clarke of the Essoynes is he which does essoyne the defendants in every
action, before the day of his appearance.

An essoyne is an ordinary delay by office of Court in action: and the officer
before whom the Clarke is to take these essoines, is the puny Justice in the
common pleas, who for that purpose sits three days before the Term.

The common Atturneyes are such as are allowed in this Court by the Lord
chief Justice of the common pleas, and his assistance, to prosecute or defend
according to the instructions of their Clients, for the plaintiff or defendant.

The Clarke of the iuries is he that does make the Venire facias, to the
sheriff to warn the Juries by.

The Cirographer is he that has the writ of covenant with the concord
brought unto him, and he makes Indentures tripartite, whereof two are
delivered to the party for whose use the fine is acknowledged. And the third
part is reserved with him. And all the proclamations of the same fine,
according to the statutes made, are endorced on the third part remaining, and
it is commonly called the foot of the fine.

The Clarke of the Queens silver is a distinct Office of the fines, and is he
who sets down the money that her Majesty is to have for the fine,
according to the yearly value of the land confessed, known, deposed, or agreed
upon.

All errors in this court committed, are reformed in the kings bench, before
the Lord chief Justice, and other Justices there assistant, by writ of error.

There is also the Clarke of the outlawries, who is the kings Attorney
general, and he enters the outlawrie for the Queen, after the exigent
delivered: and he makes all the writtes of outlawrie, and none are to be made
but by him.

The matters of the common pleas are all suites of common law commenced by any
writ, original, real, or personal.

Real are such as touch the inheritance, or fee of any man.

Personal are such as touch tra^sitory things, as goods, chattels, personal
wrongs, etc.

The difference between a writ original, and a writ judicial, is this:
the original says in the end of it (in the person of the king or Queen)
test meipso, or meipsa, apud Westmonasterium. The judicial writ says in
the end, Test Christophoro Wray, or Test Iacobo Dier, or such other as shall be
Lord chief Justice of either of those benches.

The order of processes how they follow the one after the other. In this court
is first a summoneas in some action, then an Attachias, but in most a Capias,
then a Capias pluries then Exigi facies, and a proclamation into the County
where the defendant dwells.

The Summoneas is the original, and goes out of the Chancerie, and is directed
to the sheriff, to bring the party by a day.

The sherifes order in serving this writ, is to go himself, or his Baylife,
to the land, and there to garnish the party, by sticking up a stick on his
land, which done, the sheriff returns two common pledges, Ioha^nes Do, and
Richardus To, and two Summonees, Richardus Den, Henricus Fen. After the
summonees, if the party come not in, issues out an Attacheas, in nature of a
precept, to authorize the sheriff to go to his land or house, and there to
take a pledge for his appearance.

But if the party plaintiff mean to outlaw the defendant, he gets a
Summoneas out of the Chancery to the sheriff to warn the party, who returns
nihil habet, etc. Then the plaintiff gets a Capias to take his body, and
then a Lias capias, then a pluries capias, to all which the sheriff returns
in order as they be given out, Non est inuentus. After which if the party
appear not, goes out to the sheriff the Exigi facias, and a proclamation to
proclayme the party in five several County days: after which proclamations
if he do not appear, he is returned Quinto exactus, and non comparuit, and
ideo vtlagatu, unless he do first purchase a Supersedeas, to the Court to
surcease. The Supersedeas is granted at the suite of the plaintiff, to stay
the outlawrie, and is an appearance to the suite, for the defendant suggesting
to the court, that his erige^t improuide emanavit, showing that the defendant
was always ready to appear by his Attorney. This done, the plaintise
declares the defendant answers, if the answer be issuable they proceed to
trial. The manner of proceeding is either to ioyn issue, and so to pass to
verdict, or else to demurre. The trial is by verdict, when the question is made
de facto, as, where the matter was done, when, by whom, etc.

Of the two manner of issues. CHAP. 15.
IF the question be of the law, that is, if both the parties do agree upon
the fact, and each do claim that by law he ought to have it, and will still
in that sort maintain their right, then it was called a demurrer But sometimes
it is determined by the same court only.
in law: where if in the law the case seem to the Judges that sit,
doubtful, it is called a checker chamber case, and all the Judges will meet
together, and what they shall pronounce to be the law, that is held for right,
and the other party loses his action or land for ever. If the Sergeants or
Counselors do stand upon any point in the law which is not so doubtful, the
Judges This should be meant of a respondes ouster, when the opinion is against
him that takes an exception which is not peremptory. He may deny it by
protestation.
who be taken for most expert, biddes him go forward, and if he has no
other to say, but stands upon that point of the law, that bidding go
forward is taken that he loses his action, and the defendant is licensed to
depart without a day: and this is where the issue or question is of the law or
Iuris. So is that case where the law is not doubtful, according to the matter
contained in the declaration, answer, replication, reioynder, or triplication,
the Judge out of hand decideth it. And it is the manner that ethe party must
agree to the other still in ye fact which he cannot deny. For if he once come to
deny any deed as not done, not his writing, that the man by whom the
adversary claymeth, was not the adversaries auncestor, or the evidence which
his adversary brings is not true, or that his gift was former, or any such
like exception which is auailable to abate the action, or bar the party: and
the other joins in the affirmative, and will auerre and prove the same, this
is called the issue, and immediately all question of the law cease, as agreed
by both the parties, that there is no question in the law. The^ as that issue
facti is found by the twelve men of whom we shall speak hereafter, so the one
party or other loses his cause and action: so that contrary to the manner of
the civil law, where first the fact is examined by witnesses indices,
torments, and such like probations, to find out the truth thereof, and that
done, the advocates do dispute of the law, to make of it what they can:
saying, exfacto ius oritur Here the Sergeants or Counselors before the Judges
do in passing forward with their pleading determine and agree upon the law,
and for the most part, and in manner all actions, as well criminal as civil,
come to the issue and state of some fact which is deniedof the one party, and
auerred of the other: which fact being tried by the twelve men, as they find,
so the action is won or lost. And if a man have many peremptory exceptions
(peremptory exceptio^s I call only those which can make the state and issue)
because the twelve men be commonly rude and ignorant, the party shall be
compelled to choose one exception whereupon to found his issue, which chosen,
if he fail in that by the verdicte of twelve men, he loses his action and
cause, and the rest can serve him for nothing.

Having seen both in France and other places many deuyses, edicts and
ordinances, how to abridge process, and to find how that long suites in law
might be made shorter, I have not perceived nor read as yet, so wise, so just,
and so well devised a mean found out as this, by any man among us in Europe.

Truth it is, that where this fashion has not been used, and to them to whom
it is new, it will not be so easily understood, and therefore they may
peradventure be of contrary judgment: but the more they do weigh and
consider it, the more reasonable they shall find it.

How the issue, question, or status iuris is decided, I have told: now I will
show how it is tried when it does come to the question, stats, or issue of the
deed or fact. And first I must speak more largely of the manner of proceeding
in the process, and of such persons as be necessary for the execution thereof.

Of the sheriff of the shire, and of the Court of Exchequer. CHAP. 16.
THe Romans had to execute the commandments of the magistrates, Lictores,
Viatores, Accensos. The civil law since that time has other names, terms,
and officers. The execution of the commandments of the magistrates in
England, is ordinarily done by the sherifes. The sheriff (which is as much to
say as the Reeue or Baylie of the shire) is properly word for word Questor
Scats in ancient Saxon is that which we by a borrowed term call tresure,
whereof is derived Scaccariu^ signifying a court dealing with the kings
treasure or revenues, and also escaetor that is an officer which imploieth the
kings profit.
prouinciae, it is he which gathers up, and accounts for the profits of
the shire, that come to the Exchequer. The Exchequer (which is Fiscus
principis, or aerarium publicum, and I cannot tell in what language it is
called Scaccarium, some think that it was first called statarium, because that
there was the stable place to account for the revenues of the crown, as well ye
which came of the patrimony, which we call the demeasnes, as that which
comes of other incident acquisitions, be they rents, customs, tenths,
quinziesmes, taxes, subsidies, wheresoever the Prince or his Court be,
according to the time and occasion) was a place stable, continual, and
appointed for to reckon and account. The hearers of the account (who in Latin
may be called tribuni aerarii) have Auditors under them, which the Latins do
call Rationales, but they are the chief for the accounts of the prince, and
may be called iuridici rationales, in English we call them Barons of ye
Exchequer, whereof is one who is called the chief Baron, as Tribunus, or
Iuridicus rationalis primus, or princeps, with others to the^ assistant: the
Chanceller of the Exchequer, two Chamberlaines, and Attorney general. The
cheef of all is called high treasurer of England, as you would say in latin,
Supremus aerarii anglici quaestot, or Tribunus aerarius maximus.

He has the charge and keeping of the king or Queens treasure, and many
officers are at his sole appointment and to him accountant, as well in the
tower, exchequer, as elsewhere: as, Auditors in the mint, Auditors and tellers
in the Exchequer, Receivers, etc.

The Chanceller is the under treasurer, and is gouerner of the Court, under the
high treasorer. Many officers also are at his appointment.

The chief Baron is the judge in law cases incident to this Court, the three
other Barons are assistants.

The Attorney is the attorney general, to defend the Queens right, and to
peruse all grauntes, particulars, suites, and causes handled in this Court.
There are common atturneis besides, which serve for the suitors of this Court.

The other Officers are two Remembrancers, two Clerks of the Pipe, two of the
first fruits and tenthes.

The Remembrancers are those which keep all the Recdrdes of the Exchequer
between the Queen and her subjects, and enter the Rules and orders there
made, the one is for the Prince, the other for the Lord Treasurer.

The Clerks of the Pype are those that make leases upon particulars, and
receive, the Shirifes accomptes, those receive also the bonds and titles of
other assurances

In the office of the first fruits are received all first fruits due to her
Majesty by Bishops, Deanes, and all ecclesiastical persons, answerable by
order of the Law.

Other officers are Tellers, Auditors, Collectors, rent gatherers, tail
makers, etc.

The matters of this court are all penal punishment, as intrusions,
alienations without license, penal forfeitures upon popular actions (a popular
action is while the one part is given to the informer, the rest to the Prince.)
Of these see the whole body of the Statutes at large, or in Rastalles
collection.

In this Court are handled all paymentes, accounts, expenses of the Queens
renenues.

The usual Process of this Court is a Sub paena out of this Court, or a
messenger to call the party.

In this court be heard Quadruplatores, which we call promoters, which be
those that in popular and penal actions be delatores, having thereby part of
the profit by the law assigned. In this court if any question be, it is
determined after the order of the common law of England by the twelve men, as I
have said: and al customers which were in Latin called Publicani, in Greek
(...) do account in this office.

The sheriff of the shire is called in our common Latin Vicecomes, as one
would say, vicarius comitis, or procomes, doing that service, to attend upon
the execution of the commandments of the Tribunals or judges, which the Earl
or County should do: which Earl or County for the most part was atte^ding
upon the prince in the wars, or otherwise about the prince, as ye word
bears, comes principis: whereby it may appear, that the chief office of the
County or Earl, was to see the Kings justice to have course, and to be well
executed in the shire or County, and the Princes revenues well answered, and
brought in aerarium Principis, which is called of us the treasury.

If any fines or amerciaments, which in latin be called mulctae, be levied in
any of the said Courts upon any man, or any arrerages of accounts by the
latins called reliqua, of such things as is of customs, taxes, subsidies, or
any other such occasions, the same the sheriff of the shire does gather, and
is respondent therefore in the Exchequer. As for other ordinary rents of
patrimoniall lands, and most commonly for the taxes, customs and subsidies,
there be particular receivers and collectors, which do answer it into the
Exchequer. The sheriff has under him an under sheriff at his charge and
appointment, learned somewhat in the law, especially if he be not learned
himself, and diverse bailifes which be called errants, whom he makes at his
pleasure, who can know each land and person in the shire, and their ability
to go upon enquestes, either to distraine, or to summon him to appear whom
the Sheriff shall appoint: and for this cause to the sherifes as to the
minister most proper of the law the writtes be directed.

When any thing comes to an issue of the deed or fact, there is a writ or
writing directed to the sheriff of the shire where the land is, whereupon the
controversy is, or where the man dwells of whom the money is demanded,
which writ is called venire facias. Then after the same effect an alias,
pluries or distringas according to the nature of the action to the return of
the shirife. And if for any disobedience of not coming and appearing there be
a fine (which the Latins do call Mulcta) set upon any jurors head, the sheriff
is charged with it, and takes the distresses which in Latin be called Pignora,
and answers therefore to the exchequer. The sheriff also is ready by
himself or by his vndersherife to serve as well the Justices of peace in their
quarter sessions as the Justices called Itinerantes in their great assizes,
when they come into the shire, which is twice in the year, to dispatch and
void actions criminal and civil depending at the common law, and which be
come now to the issue. He has also the charge of all the prisoners committed
to the prison which we call the goal, and when any is condemned to die, it is
his charge to see the sentence executed. To be short, he is as it were the
general minister and highest for execution of such commandments according
to the law as the Judges do ordain, and this is enough for the sheriff.

Of the xij men. CHAP. 17.
OF what manner and order of men in the commonwealth the xij men be I have
already declared. The sheriff always warns xxiiij. to appear, least
peradventure any might be sick or have a just cause of absence: and if there
be not enowe to make an enquest, the absentes be amersed. For although they be
called xij. men, as a man would say duodecim viri, yet if they be xvi. xx. or
the whole number of xxiiij. that is no matter, xij. they must be at the least
to make an enquest, or as some call it a quest. An enquest or quest is called
this lawefull kind of trial by xij. men. In actions civil which is either of
contractes or for land, or possession when so many of those which be warned
appear at the call as be able to make an enquest, which as I said before be no
less then xij, either part when they be come takes their chalenges against so
many of them as they will, which be that he may not spend so much land a
year, he is alied, feed, or servant to his adverse party, he is his enemy,
etc. And two of the whole number do try, and allow or disalow the rest.

If after exceptions there be so many rejected, that there is not a full
enquest, in some cases that day is lost, in some the enquest is filled ex
circumstantibus: when the quest is full, they be sworn to declare the truth
of that issue, according to the evidence and their conscience. Then the
Sergeants of either side declare the issue, and each for his clyent says as
much as he can. Evidences of writings be showed, witnesses be sworn, and heard
before them, not after the fashion of the civil law, but openly, that not
only the twelve, but the Judges, ye parties, and as many as be present may
hear what each witness does say: The adverse party, or his aduocats which
we call Counselors and Sergeants, interrogateth sometime the witnesses, and
drives them out of countenance.

Although this may seem strange to our Ciuilians now, yet who reads Cicero
and Quintilian, well shall see, that there was no other order and manner of
examining witnesses, or deposing, among the Romans in their time. When it is
thought that it is enough pleaded before them, and the witnesses have said what
they can, one of the Judges with a brief and pithie recapitulation, recites
to the twelve in sum the arguments of the Sergeants of either side, that
which the witnesses have declared, and the chief points of the evidence showed
in writing, and once again puts them in mind of the issue, and sometime
gives it them in writing, delivering to them the evidence which is showed on
either part, if any be, (evidence here is called writings of contractes
autenticall, after the manner of England, that is to say, written, sealed, and
delivered) and bids them go together.

Then there is a Baylife charged with them, to keep them in a chamber not
far off, without bread, drink, light or fire, until they be agreed: that
is, till they all agree upon one verdict concerning the same issue, and upon
one among them, who shall speak for them all when they be agreed: for it goes
not by the most part, but each man must agree. They return, and in so few
words as may be, they give their determination: few I call six, seven, or
eight words at the most, (for commonly the issue is brought so narrow, that
such number of words may be enough to affirm or to deny it,) which done, they
are dismissed to go whether they will. The party with whom they have given
their sentence, gives the enquest their dinner that day most commonly, and
this is all that they have for their labor, notwithstanding that they come,
some xx. some xxx. or xl. miles or more, to the place where they give their
verdict all, the rest is of their own charge. And necessarily all the whole
xij. must be of the shire, and iiij. of them of ye hundred where the land lies
which is in controversy, or where the party dwells who is the defendant.

Of parties of Shires called Hundreds, Lathes, Rapes, Wapentakes. CHAP. 18.
AN Hundred, or Lath, Rape, or Wapentake, be called of the divisions or parts
of shires in diverse countries diversely named, after the manner and language of
each Country. For the shires be divided, some into x. xij. xiij. xvj. xx. or
xxx. Hundreds, more or less, either that they were at the first C. Towns and
Uillages in each hundred: and although now they be but xvj. xx. xxx. xl. l. lx.
more or less, yet it is still called an hundred, or else there were but so many
at the first as be now, or a few more or less, and they did find the King to
his wars an hundredth able men. Lath, and rape I take to be names of service,
for that so many towns in old time, and in the first poverty of the Realm
did meet together in one day to carry the Lords corn into his barn, which
is called in old English a Lath. Or that they met at commandment of the
Lord to reap his corn.

Wapentake I suppose came of the Danes, or peradventure Or as some say, because
in such places the subjects had their armor appointed them, and there did take
their weapons.
of the Saxons. For that so many towns came by their orders then, to one
place, where was taken a muster of their armor and weapons, in which place
from them that could not find sufficient pledges for their good abearing,
their weapons were taken away: weapen or wapen in old English do signify all
arms offensive, as sword, dagger, spear, lance, bill, bows, arrows.

Of the place where the musters were taken, or where the said services were
done, the hundreds Lathes, Rapes, and Wapentakes, had and have yet their names,
which be most commonly good towns, and it is to be thought at the first they
were all such. But sometime now in places whereof the hundred has the name, no
mention nor memore of a Town remains: such mutation time brings with it of
all who things A hundredth has one or two high co^stables, has some authority
over all the lower and particular Constables. Those high Constables be made by
the Justices of the peace of the shire, and each hundred has his bailife, who
is made by the Lord, if any has that liberty, or else by the shirife of the
shire for the time being.

Of the court Baron. CHAP. 19.
IT may appear strange that of xxxvi. shires, whereof each shire is divided
into diverse hundreds, each hundred containing diverse parishes, all pleading
should be but in one place, that is in Westminster hall, and that but in
certain times of the year, making little more than one quarter of the year
in the whole. And one would think that there should be much lack of Justice
and right, and much wrong taken without redress. But it is not so: The people
being accustomed to live in such an equality of Justice, and that in such sort
that the rich has no more advantage therein than the poor, the process, and
proceedinges to the judgment being so short, and judgments also being
peremptory and without appellation: Yet to help for small matters, where no
great sum is in question there are other courts. In every shire from three
weeks to three weeks, the sheriff for small things not passing xl. s^. and
in certain hundreds and liberties the bailie likewise from three weeks to
three weeks holds plea. And whosoever is possessioner and owner of a manor,
may hold from three weeks to three weeks, or at his pleasure of his
tennantes and amongst his tenauntes a court cslled a court Baron. And there
his tenauntes being sworn make a Jurie which is not called the enquest, but
the homage. These princip allie do enquire of the copy holders, and other
free holders that be dead since the last court, and bring in their heirs, and
next successors, and likewise of incrochment or intrusion of any of the
tenauntes against the Lord, or among themselves. They make orders and laws
amongst themselves, the pain of them if they be after broken, comes to the
Lord. And if any small matter be in controversy, it is put to them, and
commonly they do end it. But these courts do serve rather for men that can
be content to be ordered by their neighbors and which love their quiet and
profit in their husbandry, more than to be busy in the law. For whether party
soever will, may procure a writ out of the higher Court, to remove the plea to
Westminster.

In cities and other great towns there be diverse liberties to hold plea for a
bigger sum, which do determine as well as the common law, and after the same
manner, and yet for them that will, it may be removed to Westminster hall.

King Henry the eight ordained first a President, Counselors and Judges, one
for the Marches of Wales, at Ludlow, or elsewhere: another for the North parts
of England, at York, where be many causes determined. These two are as be
Parlements in France. But yet if there be any matters of great consequence, the
party may move it at the first, or remove it afterward to Westminster Hall,
and to the ordinary Judges of the Realm, or to the Chaunceller, as the matter
is.

These two Courts do hear matters before them, part after the common law of
England, and part after the fashion of the Chauncerie.

Of the Leete, or Law day. CHAP. 20.
LEete, or Law day is not incident to every Manor, but to those only which by
special grant, or long prescription, have such liberty. This was, as it may
appears first a special trust and confidence and commission given to a few put
in trust by the Prince, as is now to the Justices of peace, to see men sworn
to the Prince, to take pledges and suerties in that manner of one for another
to answer for obedience and truth, to enquire of privy conspiracies, fraies,
murders, and bloudsheddes, and to this was added the oversight of bread and
ale, and other measures. Many times they that be out of the homage and Court
Baron of that manor and Lordship, be nevertheless astreined and answerable to
come to the Leete. This Leete is ordinarily kept but twice in the year, and
that at terms and times prescribed.

The Leete and Law day is al one, and betokens word for word, legitimum or
iuridicum diem. Law the old Saxons called lantor lag, and so by corruption and
changing of Language from Lant to Leete, understanding Day, they which* keep
our full English term, call it yet law day.

Of the proceedinges of causes criminal, and first of the Justices of the
Peace. CHAP. 21.
BEfore the manner of proceeding in causes criminal Justices of peace.
can be well understood, it will be necessary to speak of three persons, the
Justices of peace, the Coroners, and the Constables. The Justices of peace be
men elected out of the nobility, higher and lower, that is the Dukes,
Marquises, Barons, knights, Esquiers, and Gentlemen, and of such as be learned
in the Laws, such, and in such number as the Prince shall think meet, and in
whom for wisdom and discretion he puts his trust, inhabitants within the
county: saving that some of the high Nobility and chief Magistrates for
honors sake are put in all or in the most of the commissions of all the shires
of England. These have no time of their rule limited but by commission from
the Prince alterable at pleasure.

At the first they were bnt 4. after 8* now they come commonly to 30. or 40. in
every shire, either by increase of riches, learning, or actiuitie in policy
and government. So many more being found, which have either will, or power, or
both, are not to many to handle the affairs of the Common wealth in this
behalf. Of Justices of Quorum.
these in the same commission be certain named, which be called of the
Quorum, in whom is especial trust reposed, that where the commission is given
to forty or thirty, and so at the last it comes to four or three, it is
necessary for the performance of many affairs to have likewise diverse of the
Quorum. The words of the commission be such, Quorum vos AB. CD. OF. vnum esse
volumus.

The Justices of the peace be those in whom at this time for the repressing of
robbers, thieves, and vagabounds, of privy complots and conspiracies, of
riotes, and violences, and all other misdemeanors in the common wealth, the
Prince puts his special trust. Each of them has authority upon complaint
to him made of any theft, robbery, manslaughter, murder, violence, complots,
riotes, unlawful games, or any such disturbance of the peace, and quiet of the
Realm, to commit the persons whom he supposes offenders, to the prison, and
to charge the Constable or sheriff to bring them thither, the Jailer to
receive them and keep them till he and his fellows do meet. A few lines
signed with his hand is enough for that purpose: these do meet four times in
the year, that is in each quarter once, to enquire of all the misdemeanors
aforesaid: at which days the shirife, or his vndershirife with his This is not
always and in all places observed, but only concerning the graund enquest.
bailifes be there to attend upon him, who must prepare against that time
four enquestes of xxiiij. yeomen a piece of diverse hundreds in the shire, and
besides one which is called the great enquest out of the body of the shire
mingled with all. These five enquests are sworn before them to enquire of all
heretics, traitors, theftes, murders, manslaughters, rapes, false moniers,
extortioners, riottes, routes, forcible entries, unlawful games, and all such
things as be contrary to the peace and good order of the Realm, and to
bring in their verdict. If they among themselves upon their own knowledge do
find any culpable, they cause one of the clerks to make the bill. And if any
be there to complain upon any man for these faults, he puts in his bill,
which bill is presented first to the Justices sitting upon the bench, to see
if it be conceived in form of law, which done ye complainant does deliver it
to one of these enquestes, and after the complainant is sworn, he declares to
the^ what he can, for ye proof of it. And if they find it true they do nothing
but write on the backeside of it, billavera, as ye would say, scriptum Verum:
or accusatio iusta, or reus est qui accusatur: Then he who is there named is
called indicted. The manner of the bill is such, Inquiratur pro domino rege.

If they do not find it true, they write on the backside ignoramus, and so
deliver it to the Justices, of whom it is rent into pieces immediately: he that
is indicted is accounted a lawful prisoner, and after that time looked more
streitly unto. For this indictment is no conviction: and if he be indicted,
and be not already in Prison, the Sheriff if he can find him, brings him
into prison: if he cannot find him, process is made out against him, to
render himself prisoner, or else he shall be outlawed. So he is called three
times in diverse county days to render himself to the Law. The The use of
Capias and exigens upon inditementes is otherwise.
fourth is called the exigent, by which he is outlawed not rendering himself,
as ye would say: exactus or actus in exilium. The outlaw loses all his goods
to the King for his disobedience. But if after he will render himself to
answer to the law, and show some reasonable cause of his absence, many times
of grace his outlawrie is pardoned. These meetinges of the Justices of peace
four times in the year, be called quarter They are put to fines.
sessions, or sessions of inquiry, because that nothing is there determined
touching the malefactors, but only the custody of them: and this kind of
proceeding which is by inquisition of the xij. men within themselves, and their
own consciences, or by denunciation of him that puts in his bill to the
xij. is called at the Kings suite: and the King is reckoned the one party, and
the prisoner the other. The Justices of the peace do meet also at other times
by commandment of the Prince upon suspicion of war, to take order for the
safety of the shire, sometimes to take musters of harness and able men, and
sometime to take orders for the excessive wages of servants and laborers; for
excess of apparel, for unlawful games, for conuenticles and evil orders in
alehouses, and tauernes for punishment of idle and vagabound persons, and
generally, as I have said, for the good government of the shire, the Prince
puts his confidence in them. And commonly every ear, or each second year
in the beginning of Somer or afterward, (for in the warm time the people for
the most part be more unruly) even in the calm time of peace, the Prince
with his Counsel chooses out certain articles out of penal Laws already
made for to repress the pride and evil rule of the popular, and sends them
down to the Justices willing them to look upon those points, and after they
have met together, and consulted among themselves how to order that matter
most wisely and circu^spectly, whereby the people might be kept in good order
and obedience after the law, they divide themselves by three or four: and so
each in his quarter takes order for the execution of the said articles.

And then within certain space they meet again and certify the Prince or
his privy Council, how they do find the shire in rule and order touching
those points and all other disorders. There was never in any common wealth
devised a more wise, a more dulce and gentle, nor a more certain way to rule
the people, whereby they are kept always as it were in a bridle of good order,
and sooner looked unto that they should not offend, than punished when they
have offended. For seeing the chief amongst them, their rulers to have this
special charge, and do call upon it, and if occasion so do present, one or two
presently either punished, or sent to prison for disobedience to those old
orders and laws, they take a fear within themselves, they amend, and do
promise more amendment. So that it is as a new forbushing of the good laws of
the Realm, and a continual repressing of disorders, which do naturally rest
among men.

But as the invention of this, and the use and execution thereof is the most
benefit that can be devised for ye commonwealth of England: so when it shall be
misused, dissembled with, or be contemned, and be done pro forma ta^tum, and as
they term it in France, par mainere d'acquit only, it will be the present ruin
(though not at the first perceived) of ye commonwealth. Of which the fault may
be as well in the commanders for not making good choice, what and how they
command, as in the commanded, for not executing that which is commanded.

Of hue and cry and recognisaunce taken upon them that may give evidence.
CHAP. 22.
BY the old law of England, if any theft, or robbery be done, if he that is
robbed, or he that sees or perceives that any man is robbed do levy hue and
cry, that is to say, do cry and call for aid, and say that a theft or
robbery is done contrary to the Princes peace and assurance: the Constable of
the village to whom he does come, and so make that cry, ought to raise the
parish to aid him and seek the thief, and if the thief be not found in that
parish, to go to the next and raise that Constable, and so still by the
Constables and them of the Parish one after another. This hue and cry from
parish to parish is carried, till the thief or robber be found. That parish
which does not his duty, but lets by their negligence the thief to depart,
does not only pay a fine to the king, but must repay to the party robbed his
damages. So that every English man is a sergeant to take the thief, and who
shows himself negligent therein, does not only incur evil opinion
therefore, but hardly shall escape punishment: what is done with the thief or
robber when he is taken, I shall show you hereafter. The same manner is
followed if any man be slain, for straight the Murderer is pursued of every
man til he be taken. So soon as any is brought to the Justices of peace by
this hue or cry, by the Constable or any other who does pursue the malefactor,
he does examine the malefactor, and writes the examination and his
confession: then he does bind the party that is robbed, or him that sueth,
and the Constable, and so many as can give evidence against the malefactor to
be at the next sessions of jail delivery, to give their evidence for the
Queen. He binds them in recognisance of x. pound, xx. pound, xxx. pound, xl.
pound, or C. pound, according to his discretion, and the quality of the
crime: which certified* under his hand, is levied upon the recognizance, if
they fail of being there.

Of the Coroner. CHAP. 23.
BUt if any man, woman, or child, be violently slain, the murderer not
known, no man ought or dare bury the body before the Coroner has seen it.
The Coroner is one chosen by the Prince of the meaner sort of gentlemen, and
for the most part a man seen in the laws of the Realm, to execute that
office. And if the person slain, (slain I call here, whosoever he be, man,
woman or Child that violently comes to his death, whether it be be by knife,
poison, cord, drowning, burning, suffocation, or otherwise, be it by his own
fault or default, or by any other) if (I say) the person slain be buried
before the Coroner do come (which for the most part men dare not do) he does
cause the body to be taken up again, and to be searched, and upon the sight
of the body so violently come to his death he does empanell an enquest of
twelve men or mo, of those which come next by, be they strangers or
inhabitants, which upon their oaths, and by the sight or view of the body,
and by such informations as they can take, must search how the person slain
came to his death, and by whom as the doer or causer thereof. These are not
enclosed into a streit place, (as I told before of other enquestes) but are
suffered to go at large, and take a day, sometime after xx. or xxx. days,
more or less, as the fact is more evident, or more kept close, to give their
evidence, at which day they must appear there again before the said Coroner
to give their verdict. So sometime ye person to have slain himself, sometime
the brother, the husband, the wife, the sister, some of acquaintance or
stranger, such as God will have reueiled, be taken. For whosoever they do find
as guilty of the murder, he is straight committed to prison, and this is
against him in the nature of an indictment, which is not a full condemnation,
as ye shall see hereafter.

The empanelling of this enquest, and the view of the body, and the giving of
the verdict, is commonly in the street in an open place, and in Corona populi:
but I take rather that this name comes because that the death of every
subject by violence is accounted to touch the Crown of the Prince, and to be a
detriment unto it, the Prince accounting that his strength, power, and Crown
does stand and consist in the force of his people, and the maintenance of them
in security and peace.

Of the Constables. CHAP. 24.
THese men are called in the elder books of our laws of the realm Custodes
pacis, and were at the first in greater reputation than they be now. It may
appear that there was a credit given unto them not altogether unlike to that
which is now given to the Justices of peace. To this day if any affraie chance
to be made, the Constables ought and will charge them that be at debate, to
keep the Princes peace, and whosoever refuses to obey the Constable therein,
all the people will set straight upon him, and by force make him to render
himself to be ordered. Likewise if any be suspected of theft, or receiving, or
of murder, or of manslaughter, the Constable may take such persons, yea enter
into any man's house with sufficient power to search for such men till he
find them: and if he see cause, keep the suspected persons in the stocks,
or custody, till he bring them before a Justice of the peace to be examined.
But for so much as every little Uillage has commonly two Constables, and many
times artificers, laborers, and men of small ability be chosen One or two
constables, hedborowes: or tithingmen
unto that office, who have no great experience, nor knowledge, nor authority,
the Constables at this present (although this they may do upon their own
authority) yet they seem rather to be as it were the executors of the
commandment of the Justices of peace. For the Justice of peace as soon as he
understands by complaint that any man has stolen, robbed, slain, or any
servant, or labourer without license, has departed out of his masters service,
or any yt lives idle and suspectly, knowing once in what parish he is, he
writes to the Constable of the Parish, commanding him in the Princes name, to
bring that man before him: The Constable dares not disobey. The man is brought
and examined by the Justice, and if the Justice do find cause, he commiteth
him to the same Constable to conueye him further to the Princes jail, where
the party must lie till the Justices of peace do meet either at their
quarter sessions, or at their jail delivery, and that the law has either
condemned or acquitted him. These Constables are called in some places
Headborowes, in some places Tithingmen, and be like to them, who are called
Consuls in many towns and villages in France. The Constables are commonly made
and sworn at the Leetes of the Lords, chosen thereto by the homage, and they
keep that office sometime two, three, or four years, more or less.
Kinningstable is Regia virgula, the Kings rod or wand, signifying the Kings
power or authority, a representation whereof is the use of maces and white
staves by officers in the commonwealth.
as the parish does agree. What headborough does betoken it is easily known,
our language does declare him as the head or chief of the borowe or village:
likewise tithingman is the chief of the tithing. Constable seems to me to
come of our old english word Kinning, which is Kinningstable, as ye would say,
a man established by the king, for such things as appertain to pleas of the
crown, and conservation of the kings peace, and as I said at the first, were
in some more reputation, approaching to that authority which the Justices of
peace now do hold.

Of the Sessions of Jail delivery, and the definitive proceedings in causes
criminal. CHAP. 5.
How thieves and murderers and other malefactors against the crown and the
peace are taken and brought into hold to answer to justice, partly by hue and
cry, partly by information, and partly by the diligence of the Justices of
peace and the Constables: and how at the quarter Sessions they be indicted,
or else by the Coroners, ye have heard before. Enditement (as ye may perceive
by that which is also gone before) is but a former judgment of xij. men which
be called enquirers, and no definitive sentence, but that which in latin is
called praeiudicium, it does but show what opinion the country has of the
malefactor: and therefore commonly men be indicted absent, not called to it,
nor knowing of it. For though a man be endicted, yet if when he come to the
araynement, there be no man to pursue further, nor no evidence of witness or
other trial and indices against him, he is without difficulty acquitted. No
man that is once indicted can be delivered without arainement, For as twelve
have given a prejudice against him, so twelve again must acquit or condemn
him. But if the prisoner be not indicted, but sent to prison upon some
suspicion or suspicious behavior, and none do pursue him to the enditement,
first being proclaimed thus, A. B. prisoner stands here at the bar, if any
man can say any thing against him, let him now speak, for the prisoner
stands at his deliverance: if no man do then come. he is delivered without
any further process or trouble, agreeing first with the jailer for his fees.
And these be called acquitted by proclamation. Twice in every year, the one is
commonly in lent what time there is vacation from pleading in Westminster hall,
the other is in the vacation in summer, the Prince does send down into
every shire of England certain of his Judges of Westminster hall, and some
Sergeantes at the law with commission to hear and determine jointly with the
Justices of the peace all matters criminal and all prisoners which be in the
gaoles. These Judges do go from shire to shire till they have done their
circuit of so many shires as be appointed to them for that year: at the end
of the term going before their circuit, it is written and set up in
Westminster hall on what day and in what place they will be. That day there
meets all the Justices of the peace of that shire, the sheriff of that shire,
who for that time bears their charges, and asks after allowance for it in
the Exchequer.

The sheriff has ready for criminal causes (as I writ before at the
Sessions of inquiry) four, five or six enquestes ready warned to appear that
day to serve the Prince, and so many more as he is commanded to have ready
to go in civil matters betwixt private me^, which they call Nisi prius,
because that word is in the writ.

In the town house, or in some open or common place, there is a tribunal or
place of judgment, made aloft upon the highest bench, there sits the two
Judges, which be sent down in commission, in the midst. Next them on each side
sit the Justices of peace, according to their estate and degree. On a lower
bench before them, the rest of the Justices of peace, and some other Gentlemen
or their Clerks. Before these Judges and Justices there is a table set
beneath, at which sits the Custos Rotulorum, or keeper of writs, Thexchetor,
the vndersherife, and such clerks as do write. At the end of that table
there is a bar made with a space for the enquestes, and twelve men to come in
when they are called, behind that space another bar, and there stand the
prisoners which be brought thither by the Gayler, all chayned one to another.
Then the Crier cries, and commands silence. One of the Judges briefly
tells the cause of their coming, and gives a good lesson to the people.
Then the prisoners are called for by name, and bidden to answer to their
names. And when the Custos rotulorum has brought forth their endictments, the
Judges do name one or two, or three of the prisoners that are indicted, whom
they will have arraigned. There the clarke speaks first to one of the
prisoners: A. B. come to the bar, hold up thy hand. The Clarke goes on: A.
B. thou by the name of A. B. of such a town, in such a county, art endicted,
that such a day, in such a place, thou have stolen with force and arms an
horse, which was such ones, of such color, to such a valor, and carried him
away feloniouslie, and contrary to the peace of our sovereign Lady the
Queen. What say thou to it, art thou guilty or not guilty? If he will not
answer, or not answer directly guilty or not guilty, after he has been
once or twice so interrogated, he is judged mute, that is, dumme by contumacie,
and his condemnation is to be pressed to death, which is one of the cruellest
deaths that may be: he is laid upon a table, and an other upon him, and so
much weight of stones or lead laid upon that table, while as his body be
crushed, and his life by that violence taken from him. This death some strong
and stout hearted man does choose, for being not condemned of felony, his
blood is not corrupted, his lands nor goods confiscate to the Prince, which in
all cases of felony are commonly lost from him and his heirs, if he be
foreiudged, that is, condemned for a felon by the law. If he confess the
Indictment to be true, then when he is arraigned, no twelve men go upon him,
there rests but the Judges sentence, of the pain of death.

If he plead not guilty, as commonly all thieves, robbers and murderers do,
though they have confessed the fact before the Justice of the peace that
examined them, though they be taken with the manner, which in Latin they call
in flagranti crimine, howsoever it be, if he plead there not guilty, the
Clarke asks him how he will be tried, and tells him he must say, by God and
the Country, for these be the words formal of his trial after indictment,
and where the Prince is party: if the prisoner do say so, I will be tried by
God and the Country, then the Clarke replyeth, Thou have been indicted of
such a crime, etc. Thou have pleaded not guilty: being asked how thou will be
tried, thou have answered by God and by the Country. Lo these honest men
that be come here, be in the place and stead of the Country: and if thou have
any thing to say to any of them, look upon them well and now speak, for thou
stand upon thy life and death. Then calls he in the first Juror. B. C.
come to the book, and so gives him an oath to go vprightlie betwixt the
Prince and the prisoner, etc. If the prisoner obiecteth nothing against him, he
calls an other, and so an other, till there be xij. or above: and for the
most part the prisoner can say nothing against them, for they are chosen but
for that day, and are unknown to him, nor they know not him, as I said being
substantial yeomen, that dwell about the place, or at the least in the
hundred, or near where the felony is supposed to be committed, men acquainted
with daily labor and travail, and not with such idle persons as be ready to
do such mischiefs.

When the enquest is full, and the prisoner has objected nothing against them,
as in deed seldom he does, for the cause above rehearsed: The clarke says
to the crier, countes, (in French as ye would say reckon) and so names all
those that be on the quest. The crier at every name cries aloude, one, then
two, three, four, and so till the number be full of twelve or more, and then
says good men and true: and then says aloude: If any can give evidence, or
can say any thing against the prisoner, let him come now, for he stands upon
his deliverance. If no man come in, then the Judge asks who sent him to
prison, who is commonly one of the Justices of peace: he (if he be there)
delivers up the examination which he took of him and underneath the names of
those whom he has bound to give evidence: although the malefactor has
confessed the crime to the Justice of the peace, and that appear by his hand
and confirmation, the twelve men will acquit the prisoner, but they which
should give evidence pay their recognizaunce. Howbeit this does seldom
chance, except it be in small matters, and where the Justice of peace, who
sent the prisoner to the jail, is away. If they which be bound to give
evidence come in, first is read the examination, which the Justice of peace
does give in: then is heard (if he be there) the man robbed what he can say,
being first sworn to say truth, and after the Constable, and as many as were
at the apprehension of the malefactor: and so many as can say any thing, being
sworn one after an other to say truth. These be set in such a place as they
may see the Judges and the Justices, the enquest and the prisoner, and hear
them, and be heard of them all. The Judge after they be sworn, asks first
the party robbed, if he know the prisoner, and bids him look upon him: he
says yea, the prisoner sometime says nay. The party pursuiuaunt gives good
ensigns, verbi gratia, I know thee well enough, thou robbedst me in such a
place, thou beatedst me, thou tookest my horse from me, and my purse, thou
had then such a coat and such a man in thy company: the thief will say no,
and so they stand a while in altercation, then he tells all that he can say:
after him likewise all those who were at the apprehension of the prisoner, or
who can give any indices or tokens which we call in our language evidence
against the malefactor. When the Judge has heard them say enough, he asks
if they can say any more: if they say no, then he turns his speech to the
enquest. Good men (says he) ye of the enquest, ye have heard what these men
say against the prisoner, you have also heard what the prisoner can say for
himself, have an eye to your oath, and to your duty, and do that which God
shall put in your minds to the discharge of your consciences, and mark well
what is said. Thus sometime with one enquest is passed to the number of ij. or
three prisoners: For if they should be charged with more, the inquest will say,
my Lord, we pray you charge us with no more, it is enough for our memory.
Many times they are charged but with one or two. At their departing, they have
in writing nothing given them, but the enditement, the clarke repeating to them
the effect of it, and showing more, that if they find him guilty, they shall
enquire what goods, lands, and tenementes the said person had at the time of
the felony committed: and if they find any, they shall bring it in: if no,
they shall say so. If they find him not guilty, they shall enquire whether he
fled for the felony or no.

And there is a Bailife to wait upon them, and to see that no man do speak
with them, and that they have neither bread, drink, meat, nor fire brought to
them, but there to remain in a chamber together till they agree. If they be in
doubt of any thing that is said, or would hear again some of them that give
evidence, to interrogate them more at full, or if any that can give evidence
come late: it is permitted that any that is sworn to say the truth, may be
interrogated of them to inform their consciences. This is to be understood,
although it will seem strange to all nations that do use the civil Law of
the Roman Emperors, that for life and death there is nothing put in writing
but the enditement only. All the rest is done openly in the presence of the
Judges, the Justices, the enquest, the prisoner, and so many as will or can
come so near as to hear it, and all depositions and witnesses given aloude,
that all men may hear from the mouth of the depositors and witnesses what is
said. As of this, so is it of all other prisoners after ye same sort. By that
time that the enquestes for the prisoners be dispatched, it is commonly dinner
time, the Judges and Justices go to dinner, and after dinner return to the
same place: if the enquest be not ready for the prisoners, they go to some
other enquests of Nisiprius, which be civil matters and private, to drive out
the time. The enquestes have no sooner agreed upon their charge one way or
other, but they tell the Baylife, and pray to be heard, and considering that
they be themselves all this while as prisoners as I said before, it is no
marvel, though they make expedition. The prisoners be sent for again to the
bar, the enquest which has agreed, is called for each one of the Jurie by
his name, to which he answers. Then the Clarke asks if they be agreed, and
who shall speak for them. One or mo says yea. He that speaks for them all
is called the foreman, and commonly it is he that is first sworn: then the
prisoner is bidden to hold up his hand. The clarke says unto him, Thou art
endicted by the name of A. of such a place, etc. being therefore arraigned thou
pleadest thereto not guilty, being asked how thou would be tried, thou saydst
by God and thy country. These honest men were given to thee by God and thy
Prince for thy Country: Hearken what they say. Then he asks of the enquest,
what say you? Is he guilty or not guilty? The foreman makes answer in one
word, guilty, or in two, not guilty: the one is deadly, the other acquiteth
the prisoner. So that neither Judge nor Justice has to do, or can reuerse,
alter or change that matter, if they say guilty. The Clarke asks what
lands, tenementes, or goods, the prisoner had at the time of the felony
committed, or at any time after. Commonly it is answered, that they know
not, nor it shall not greatly need, for the Sheriff is diligent enough to
enquire of that, for the Princes and his own advantage, and so is the
excheator also.

Of him whom the twelve men pronounce guilty, the Judge asks what he can say
forhimselfe: if he can read, he demands his Clargie. For in many felonies,
as in theft of Oxen, Sheep, Money, or other such things, which be no open
robberies by the high way side, nor assaulting one by night in his house,
putting him that is there in fear, such is the favor of our Law, that for
the first fault the felon shall be admitted to his Clargie, for which purpose the
Bishop must send one with authority under his seal to be Judge in that matter
at every jail delivery. If the condemned man demands to be admitted to his
book, the judge commonly gives him a Psalter, and turns to what place he
will. The prisoner reads as well as he can (God knows sometime very
slenderly:) then he asks of the Bishops commissarie, legit vt clericus? The
Commissarie must say legit or non legit, for these be words formal, and our
men of Law be very precise in their words formal. If he say legit, the Judge
proceeds no further to sentence of death: if he say non the Judge forth
with, or the next day proceeds to sentence, which is done by word of mouth
only: Thou A. have bin endicted of such a felony, and thereof arraigned, thou
have pleaded not guilty, and put thy self upon God and thy Country, they
have found thee guilty, thou have nothing to say for thy self, Law is, thou
shall first return to the place from whence thou came, from thence thou
shall go to the place of execution, there thou shall hang till thou be dead.
Then he says to the Sheriff, Sheriff do execution: he that claims his
Clargie, is burned forthwith in the presence of the Judges in the brawne of his
hand with a hot iron marked with the letter T. for a thief, or M. for a
manslear, in cases where Clargie is admitted, and is delivered to the Bishops
officer to be kept in the Bishops prison, from whence after a The delivery to
the Bishops prison, and the purgation is taken away by statute.
certain time by an other enquest of Clerks he is delivered and let at large:
but if he be taken and condemned the second time, and his mark espied, he
goes to hanging. He whom the enquest pronounces not guilty is acquitted
forthwith and discharged of prison, paying the gaolers fees: and if he know
any private man who purchased his indictement, and is able to pursue it, he may
have an action of conspiracy against They must be two at the least that
conspired.
him, and a large amends: but that case chances seldom.

Certain orders peculiar to England, touching punishments of malefactors.
CHAP. 26.
FOr any felony, manslaughter, robbery, murder, rape, and such capital
crimes as touch not treason, and laesam maiestatem, we have by the Law of
England no other punishment, but to hang til they be dead: when they be dead,
every man may bury them that will, as commonly they be. Heading, tormenting,
dismembring, either arm or leg, breaking upon the wheel, empaciling, and
such cruel torments, as be used in other nations by the order of the law, we
have not: and yet as few murders committed as any where: nor it is not in the
Judges or the Justices power, to aggrauate or mitigate the punishment of the
Law, but in the Prince only and his privy Counsel, which is marvelous
seldom done. Yet notable murderers many times by the Princes commandment,
after they be hanged with cord till they be dead, be hanged with chains while
they rotte in the air. If the wife kill her husband, she shall be burned alive.
If the servant kill his master, he shall be drawn on a hurdle to the place of
execution: it is called petit treason. Impoysoners, if the person die thereof,
by a new law made in king Henry the eights time, shall be boiled to death: but
this mischief is rare, and almost unknown Quaere.
in England. Attempting to impoyson a man, or laying awayt to kill a man, though
he wound him dangerously, yet if death follow not, is no felony by the law of
England, for the Prince has lost no man, and life ought to be given we say,
but for life only.

And again, when a man is murdered, all be principals, and shall die, even he
that does but hold the candle to give light to the murderers. For mitigation
and moderation of pains, is but corruption of Judges, as we think. Likewise,
torment or question, which is used by the order of the civil law, and custom
of other countreies, to put a malefactor to excessive pain, to make him
confess of himself, or of his fellows, or accomplices, is not used in England,
it is taken for servile. For what can he serve the commonwealth after as a
freema^, who has his body so haled and tormented, if he be not found guilty,
and what amends can be made him? And if he must die, what cruelty is it so to
torment him before? Likewise, confession by torment is esteemed for nothing,
for if he confess at the judgment, the trial of the twelve goes not upon
him: if he deny the fact, that which he said before; hinders him not. The
nature of Englishmen is to neglect death, to abide no torment: And therefore he
will confess rather to have done any thing, yea to have killed his own
father, than to suffer torment: for death our nation does not so much esteem
as a mean torment. In no place shall you see malefactors go more constantly,
more assuredly, and with less lamentation to their death, than in England.

Again, the people not accustomed to see such cruel torments, will pity the
person tormented, and abhor the Prince and the Judges, who should bring in
such cruelty amongst them, and the twelve men the rather absolve him. There
is an old law of England, that if any jailer shall put any prisoner being in
his custody to any torment, to the intent to make him an approuer, that is to
say, an accuser, or Index of his accomplices, the Jailer shall die therefore as a
felon. And to say the truth, to what purpose is it to use torment? For whether
the malefactor confess or no, and whatsoever he says, if the enquest of
twelve do find him guilty, he dies therefore without delay. And the
malefactor, seeing there is no remedy, and that they be his Country men, and
such as he has himself agreed unto it, do find him worthy death, yeeldes
for the most part unto it, and does not repine, but does accommodate himself
to ask mercy of God.

The nature of our Nation is free, stout, hault, prodigal of life and blood:
but contumely, beatings, servitude and servile torment, and punishment, it will
not abide. So in this nature and fashion, our ancient princes, and Legislators
have nourished them, as to make them stout hearted, courageous, and soldiers,
not villains and slaves, and that is the scope almost of all our policy.

The twelve as soon as they have given their verdict are dismissed to go
whether they will, and have no manner commodity and profit of their labor and
verdict, but only do service to the Prince and Common wealth.

Of treason, and the trial which is used for the higher nobility and Barons.
CHAP. 27.
THe same order touching trial by enquest of twelve men, is taken in treason,
but the pain is more cruel. First to be hanged, taken down alive, his bowels
taken out, and burned before his face, then to be beheaded, and quartered, and
those set up in diverse places. If any Duke, Marquis, or any other of the degree
of a Baron, or above, Lord of the Parliament be appeached of treason, or any
other capital crime, he is judged by his peers and equals: that is, the
yeomanrie does not go upon him, but an enquest of the Lords of the Parliament,
and they give their voice, not one for all, but each severally as they do in
Parliament, beginning at the youngest Lord. And for Judge one Lord sits, who
is Or rather, high steward of England.
Constable of England for that day. The judgment once given, he breaks his
staff, and abdicateth his office. In ye rest there is no difference from that
above written.

THE THIRD BOOK.
Of that which in other Countries is called Appellation, or Provocation, to
amend the judgment, or sentence definitive, which is thought unjustly given in
causes criminal. CHAP. 1.
IF the enquest of xij. men do seem to the Judges and the Justices to have gone
too violently against the evidence geeuen in matters criminal, either it is
that upon slender evidence they have pronounced him guilty, whom the Judges and
most part of the Justices thinks by the evidence not fully proved guilty, or
for some other cause, do think the person rather worthy to live than to die.
The enquest is nevertheless dismissed: but when the Judges should pronounce
the sentence of death upon the person found guilty, he will defer it, which
is called, to repriue the prisoner, (that is to say, to send him again to
prison) and so declare the matter to the Prince, and obteyneth after a time for
the prisoner his pardon: and as for provocation or appeal, which is used so
much in other countries, it has no place in England, after sentence given by
the twelve, whereby the person is found guilty or not guilty: but without
that repriuing, the sentence is straight put in execution by the sheriff.

And if they either escape, or die another death, the sheriff escapes not to
pay a great fine and ransom at the princes mercy: if having pregnant
evidence nevertheless, the twelve do acquit the malefactor, which they will
do sometime, and especially if they perceive either one of the Justices or o^f
the Judges, or some other man to pursue too much, and too maliciously the death
of the prisoner, and do suspect some subornation of the witness, or of them
which do give evidence, and sometime if they perceive the Judge would have ye
prisoner escape, and in repeating the evidence do give them thereof some
watchword. But if they do (as I have said) pronounce not guilty upon the
prisoner, against whom manifest witness is brought in, the prisoner escapes:
but the twelve not only be rebuked by the judges, but also threatened of
punishment, and many times commanded to appear in the Starrechamber, or
before the privy counsel for the matter. But this threatening chances
oftener than the execution thereof, and the twelve answer with most gentle
words, they did it according to their consciences, and pray the Judges to be
good unto them, they did as they thought right, and as they accorded all, and
so it passes away for the most part. Yet I have seen in my time (but not in
the reign of the Queen now) that an enquest for pronouncing one not guilty
of treason contrary to such evidence as was brought in, were not only
imprisoned for a space, but an houge fine set upon their heads, which they were
feign to pay: An other enquest for acquiting an other, beside paying a fine of
money, put to open ignominy and shame. But those doings were even then of
many accounted very violent, tyrannical, and contrary to the liberty and
custom of the realm of England. Wherefore it comes very seldom in use,
yet so much at a time the enquest may be corrupted, that the Prince may have
cause with justice to punish them: For they are men, and subject to corruption
and parcialitie, as others be.

What remedy is, if the sentence be thought unjustly given. CHAP. 2.
IN causes civil there is another order: for if after the matter be pleaded to
the issue, and the twelve men thervppon impaneled, the evidence brought and
pleaded before them on both the parties, the twelve seem to be partial, and
to have given sentence contrary to the evidence showed unto them: the party
grieved may bring against them, and the party for whom the sentence is given,
a writ of attaint: and whereas before upon the first quest commonly they all
be yeomen, now upon this attaint must go xxiiij. gentlemen dwelling within the
shire, and twelve at the least of the hundredth where the land lies. The matter
is pleaded again before the same Judges. The party defendant is not only now
he who claims the land, but also all and every of the yeomen, who by their
verdict did give it him.

There must in the attaint no more evidence be brought in, but only that which
was brought in and alleged before the first enquest. And if this second
enquest No more evidence on the behalf of the plaintiff but of the defendant
there ^^y.
of four and twenty gentlemen do adiudge as the first did, the plaintiff
shall not only loose the land, but also pay a fine to the Prince, and damages
to the party. If this second enquest do find that the first enquest has
gone partially, and against the evidence brought in before them, the first
enquest is called attainted, and accounted as perjured and infamed. The Prince
The statute of 23, Henry 8. does not abolish common law, but gives a more
profitable for the plaintiff.
had before the waste of all their lands and possessions with other
punishments, which at this present by a law made by Parliament in the time of
King Henry the eight is abolished, and now by that law or act of Parliament,
beside other punishment; each of the quest attainted pays unto the Prince and
Party five pound, if it be under forty pounds: and if above, then twenty
pounds. Attaints be very seldom put in ure, partly because the gentlemen will
not meet to slander and deface the honest yeomen their neighbors: so that of
a long time, they had rather pay a mean fine than to appear and make the
enquest. And in the mean time they will entreat so much as in them lies the
parties to come to some composition and agreement among the^ selves, as lightly
they do, except either the corruption of the enquest be too evident, or the one
party is too obstiuate and headstrong. And if the gentlemen do appear,
gladlier they will confirm the first sentence, for the causes which I have
said, than go against it. But if the corruption be too much evident, they will
not stick to attaint the first enquest: yet after the gentlemen have attainted
the yeomen, if before the sentence be given by the Judge (which ordinarily for
a time is differred) the parties be agreed, or one of them be dead, the attaint
cease.

If at any time before the sentence be given or put in execution, there be
found some such error in the writ, in the process, or form (as our lawiers
be very precise and curious of their forms) that it may be reuocable, it is
brought afresh to the disputation by a writ of error, and all that is done
reuersed. But that is common to all other Countries, where the civil law is
used, which they call de ^^llitate processus, and serves both in England and
in other places as well in causes criminal, as civil. Other kind of
appellation to revoke processes, and to make them of short, long, of long,
infinite, which is used by the civil law, we have not in our common law of
England. By supplication to the Prince and complaint to the Chauncelor upon
supposal of loss or lack of evidence, or too much favor in the country, and
power of the aduersarye, there is in our country as well as theirs both
stopping and prolonging of Justice. For what will not busy heads and lovers
of trouble never being satisfied, invent in any Country to have their desire,
which is to vex their neighbors, and to live always in disquiet? Men even
permitted of God like flies, and lise, and other vermin to disquiet them who
would imploye themselves upon better business and more necessary for the
Common wealth: these men are hated, and feared of their Neighbors, loved and
aided of them which gain by process, and wax fat by the expense and trouble
of other. But as these men ordinarily spend their own thrift, and make others
against their wills to spend theirs: so sometime being thoroughly known, they do
not only live by the loss like evil husbands, but beside rebuke and shame,
by the equity of the Prince and Courts sovereign, they come to be
extraordinarily punished, both corporally, and by their purse, which thing in
my mind is as royal and princely an act, and so beneficial to the Common
wealth, as in so small a matter a King or Queen can do, for the repos and
good education of their subjects.

Of that which in England is called appeal, in other places accusation. CHAP.
3.
IF any man has killed my father, my son, my wife, my brother, or next
kinsman, I have choice to cause him to be indicted, by giving information to
the enquest of inquiry, (although he chance to escape the Constable or
Justices hands, and therefore not to be apprehended) and thereupon to procure
him to be outlawed, or else within a year and a day I may enter my appeal,
that is mine accusation against him. If I began first to pursue him by
information or denunciation to enditement, I am now no party but the Prince,
who for his duty to God and his common wealth and subjects, must see justice
executed against all malefactors and offenders against the peace, which is
called Gods and his, and does in such manner as I have said before. If I leave
that and will appeal, which is; profer my accusation against him who has done
to me this injury, the defendant has this advantage, to put himself to the
Jurie, which is to that which before is said to have that issue and trial by
God and his country, whereof the fashion I have at large declared: In appeal
the battle is tried by the parties only, and in writs of right by cha^pions.
or to demand the trial by battle; wherein both the parties must either
themselves in person, or else find other for them, who be called in our Law
Champions or Campions, some does interpret them (...), because they be men
chosen, fat, lusty, fit to the feat, or as the French do term them adroicts
aux arms, which shall fight it out by (...), or as now they do call it
duellum, or the Camp, which shall have all things equal: but according as
Mars gives the victory, so the Law is judged, the one as peractus reus, the
other is calumniator to suffer the pain of death. So that by the great assise
there is no appellation but death or life to the defendant, but this is more
dangerous and equal, for the one or the other must die. So it is not in the
graund assise, for the reus or defendant is only in danger of death. Short it
is, from day to sun set, the quarrel is ended, or sooner who has the better
fortune. This seems very military (as in manner all our policy of England)
and to have as small to do with Lawyers as with Physicians, quickly to
dispatche, and for the rest to return, each man to his business, to serve the
Common wealth in his vocation. The Popes of Rome, and men of the Church who of
long time have had dominion in our consciences, and would bring things to a
more moderation, have much detested this kind of trial and judgment, as
reason is every man misliketh that which is not like to his education, and colo
reasoning by Theology and Philosophy: they I say much mislike many things
done necessarily in whot policy. At the least a common wealth military must
adventure many things to keep it in quiet, which cannot seem so precisely
good to them which dispute thereof in the shadow and in their studies.
Howsoever it be, this kind of trial of long time has not bin used. So that
at this time we may rather seek the experience of it out of our histories of
time passed, than of any view or sight thereof, of them which are now alive.
Nevertheless the Law remains still, and is not abolished, and if it shall
chance the murderer or manslear (the one we call him that lies in wait, and
as they term it in French de guet appendant kills the man, the other who by
casual fallinge out and sudden debate and choler does the same which way
soever it be done) if he that has slain the man, has his pardon of the
Prince, as occasion or the favor of the Prince may so present that he may have
it, yet the party The battle or Jury is at the election of the defendant.
grieved has these two remedies, I say to require justice by grand assise, or
battle upon his appeal and private revenge, which is not denied him. And if
the defendant either by great assise or by battle be convinced upon that
appeal, he shall die, notwithstanding the Princes pardon. So much favorable
our Princes be, and the Law of our Realm to justice and to the punishment of
blood violently shed.

Of the court of Star Chamber. CHAP. 4.
THere is yet in England an other Court, of the which that I can understand
there is not the like in any other country. In the Term time (the Term time as
I have heretofore showed, I call the time and those days when the Law is
exercised in Westminster hall, which as I have said, is but at certain times
and Terms) every week once at the least (which is commonly on Fridaies, and
Wednesdaies, and the next day after that the Term does end) the Lord
Chauncellor, and the Lords, and other of the privy Counsel, so many as will,
and other Lords and Barons which be not of the privy Counsel, and be in the
town, and the Judges of England, specially the two chief Judges, from ix, of
the clock til it be xj. do sit in a place which is called the star chamber,
either because it is full of windows, or because at the first all the roof
thereof was decked with images of stars gilted. There is plaintes heard of
riots. Riot is called in our English term or speech, where any number is
assembled with force to do any thing: and it had the beginning, because that
our being much accustostomed either in foreign wars, in France, Scotland, or
Irelande, or being euermuch excercised with civil wars within the Realm
(which is the fault that falls ordinarily amongst bellicous nations) whereby
men of war, Captains and Soldiers become plentiful: which when they have
no externe service wherewith to occupy their busy heads and hands accustomed
to fight and quarrel, must needs seek quarrels and contentions amongst
themselves, and become so ready to oppress right among their Neighbors, as
they were wont before with praise of manhood to be in resisting injury
offered by their enemies. So that our Nation used hereunto, and upon that more
insolent at home, and not easy to be governed by Law and politic order, men
of power beginning many frayes, and the stronger by factions and parties
offering too much injury to the weaker, were occasions of making good Laws.
First of reteiners, that no man should have above a number in his Liuerie or
retinue: then of the inquiry of routes and riots at every Sessions, and of
the law whereby it is provided that if any by force or by riot enter upon any
possessions, the Justices of the peace shall assemble themselves and remove
the force, and within certain time enquire thereof. And further, because such
things are not commonly done by mean men, but such as be of power and force,
and be not to be dealt withal of every man, nor of mean Gentlemen: if the
riot be found and certified to the Kings Connsell, or if otherwise it be
complained of, the Sent for by Sub poena.
party is sent for, and he must appear in this star chamber, seeing
(except, the presence of the Prince only) as it were the majesty of the whole
Realm before him, being never so stout, he will be abashed: and being called
to answer (as he must come of what degree soever he be) he shall be so
charged with such gravity, with such reason and remonstrance, and of those
chief personages of England, one after another handeling him on that sort,
that what courage soever he has, his heart will fall to the ground, and so
much the more, when if he make not his answer the better, as seldom he can so
in open violence, he shall be commanded to the Fleet, where he shall be kept
in prison in such sort as these Judges shall apppoint him, lie there till he be
weary as well of the restraint of his liberty, as of the great expenses, which
he must there sustain, and for a time be forgotten, whiles after long suite
of his friends, he will be glad to be ordered by reason. Sometime as his
deserts be, he pays a great fine to the Prince, besides great costs and
damages to the party, and yet the matter wherefore he attempteth this riot
and violence is remitted to the common Law. For that is the effect of this
Court to bridle such stout noble men, or Gentlemen which would offer wrong by
force to any manner men, and can not be content to demand or defend the right
by order of Law. This court began long before, but took great augmentation
and authority at that time that Cardinal Wolsey Archbishop of York was
Chauncelor of England, who of some was thought to have first devised yc Court,
because that he after same intermission by negligence of time, augmented the
authority of it, which was at that time marvelous necessary to do, to
repress the insolency of the noble men and Gentlemen of the North parts of
England, who being far from the King and the seat of justice made almost as
it were an ordinary war among themselves, and made their force their Law,
banding themselves with their tenantes and servants to do or revenge injury
one against an other as they listed. This thing seemed not supportable to the
noble prince King Henry the eight: and sending for them one after another to
his Court to answer before the persons before named, after they had had
remonstrance showed them of their evil demeanor, and bin well disciplined as
well by words, as by fleeting a while, and thereby their purse and courage
somewhat assuaged, they began to range themselves in order, and to understand
that they had a Prince who would rule his subjects by his laws and obedience.
Since that time this court has bin in more estimation, and is continued to this
day in manner as I have said before.

The Judges of this Court are the Lord Chauncellor, the Lord Treasorer, al of
the Queens Majesty's Counsel, the Barons of this land.

The officers therein, are a Clarke, three Atturneis, an Examinor.

The Clarke keeps the records, rules, entries, orders, and decrees, made in
this Court.

The three Atturneis are for the plaintiff, and for the defendant to frame
their complaints, and answers, and make their mattter apt to be heard for the
Lords.

The Examinor takes the depositions of the witnesses of both sides to the
proof or disproofe of the cause.

The order of proceeding to judgment is by assent of voices, and open yielding
their mind in court, the mayor part being preferred for sentence.

The punishment most usual, is imprisonment, pillorye, a fine, and many times
both fine and imprisonment.

The process is a subpena, an attachment, a proclamation of rebellion, and a
commission of rebellion.

The subpena is in manner pf a libell or precept.

The Proclamation and commission of rebellion serves when the party is
stubborn, having made concontempt, and comes not in by the former process.

The Messengers of this court are the warden of the Fleet: or the Sergeants at
arms.

The Matters belonging most commonly, are by statutes, as is taking away of
Maids within age against their parents or gardians will. See Anno 4 and 5.
Phil. and Mariae cap. 18. All notable forgeries, counterfeiting letters or
privy tokens. See Hen. 8. Anno 33. cap. 1. Anno 5. Eliz. cap. 11. slandering
of nobles, and sedicious news. See R. 2. anno 2. Cap. 5. anno 1. and 2. Phil.
and Mariae Cap. 3. anno. 2. 3. Eliz. Cap. 7. All notable Riots and unlawful
assemblies. See Anno 1. Eliz. cap. 17. And all the titles of Riottes in Rastals
abridgement, all notable deceiptes, and all kind of cousenage etc.

Of the Courts of Wards and Liueryes. CHAP. 5.
HE whom we call a ward in England, is called in Latin pupillus, and in Greek
(...). The guardian is called in Latin tutor, in Greek (...). A ward or
infant is taken for a child in base age, whose father is dead. The Romans
made two distinctions pupillum and minorem, the one to xiiij. year old, the
other was accounted from thence to xxv. And as pupillus had tutorem, so minor
had curatorem till he came to the age of xxv. These tutors or curators were
accountable for the revenues of the pupils minors lands, and great provision
and many laws and orders be made for them in the books of the civil law, for
rendering just and true accounts. So that to be a guardian or tutor was
accounted among them to be a charge or trouble, a thing subject to much
encumbrance and small profit, so that diverse means were sought for, to excuse
men from it. With us this is clean contrary, for it is reckoned a profit to
have a ward. For the Lord of whom the Ward does hold the land, so soon as by
the death of the father the Child falls Ward unto him, he seyseth upon
the body of the Ward, and his lands, of which (so that he does nourish the
Ward) he takes the profit without accounts, and beside that, offering to his
Ward couenable marriage without dispergment before the age of xxj. years if it
be a man, of fourteen if it be a woman. If the Ward refuse to take that
marriage, he or she must pay the value of the marriage, which is commonly rated
according to the profit of his lands. All this while I speak of that which
is called in French guard noble, that is of such as hold lands of other by
knight service, Guardian in Chivalry, and guardian in Socage.
for that is an other kind of service which we call in French guard returier, we
call it guard in socage, that is of such as do not hold by knight service, but
by tenure of the plough. This wardship falls to him who is next of the kin,
and cannot inherit the land of the Ward, as the uncle by the mothers side,
if the land do descend by the father, and of the fathers side, if the land
descend by the mother. This guardian is accountable for the revenues and
profits of the land, as the tutor by the civil Law to the ward or pupil so
soon as he is of full age.

The man is not out of wardshippe by our Law till xxj. year old, from thence
he is reckoned of full age, as well as in the Roman Laws at xxv. The woman at
xiiij. is out of ward, for she may have an husband able to do Knights
service, say our Books. And because our wives be in the power (as I shall tell
you hereafter) of their husbands, it is no reason, she should be in two diverse
gards.

Many men do esteem this wardship by Knights service very vnreasonabie and
unjust, and contrary to nature, that a Freeman and Gentleman should be bought
and sold like an horse or an ox, and so change gardians as masters and
Lords: at whose government not only his body but his lands and his houses
should be, to be wasted and spent without accounts, and the^ to marie at the
will of him, who is his natural lord, or his will who has bought him to such as
he like not peradventure, or else to pay so great a ransom. This is the
occasion they say, why many gentlemen be so evil brought up touching virtue
and learning, and but only in deintinesse and in pleasure: and why they be
married very young, and before they be wise, and many times do not greatly
love their wives. For when the father is dead, who has the natural care of
his Child, not the mother, nor the uncle, nor the next of kin, who by all
reason would have most natural care to the bringing up of the infant and
minor, but the Lord of whom he holds his land in knights service, be if the
King or Queen, Duke, Marquis, or any other, has the government of his body,
and marriage, or else who that bought him at the first, second, or third hand.
The Prince as having so many, must needs give or sell his wards away to
other, and so he does. Other do but seek which way they may make most
advantage of him, as of an Ox, or other Beast. These all (say they) have no
natural care of the Infant, but of their own gain, and especially the buyar
will not suffer his ward to take any great pains, either in study, or any
other hardness, least he should be sick and die, before he has married his
daughter, sister, or cousin, for whose sake he bought him: and then all his
money which he paid for him should be lost. So he who had a Father, which
kept a good But the Lord shall be punished for the wast, by loss of the ward:
or treble damages, if that suffice not.
house, and had all things in order to maintain it, shall come to his own,
after he is out of wardshippe, woods decayed, houses fallen down, stock
wasted and gone, Land let forth and plowed to the baren, and to make amends,
shall pay yet one years rent for relief, and sue ouster le main, beside other
charges, so that not of many years, and peradventure never he shall be able
to recover, and come to the estate where his father left it. This as it is
thought was first granted upon a great extremity to king Henry the 3. for a
time upon the war which he had with the Barons, and afterward increased, and
multiplied to more and more persons and grieuances, and will be the decay of
the nobility and liberty of England. Other again say, the ward has no
wrong, for either his father purchased the land, or it did descend unto him
from his ancestors with this charge. And because he holds by knights
service, which is in arms and defense, seeing that by age he cannot do that
whereto he is bound by his land, it is reason he answer that profit to the
Lord, whereby he may have as able a man to do the service. The first knights
in Rome, those that were chosen equitts Romani had equum publicum on which they
served, and that was at the charge of Widows and Wards, as appears by Titus
Liuius, because that those persons could not do bodily service to the Common
wealth. Wherefore this is no new thing, but thought reasonable in that most
wise common wealth, and to the prudent King Seruius Tullius, As for the
education of our common wealth, it was at the first militaire, and almost in
all things the scope and deseigne thereof is militaire. Yet was it thought
most like, that noble men, good knights, and great captains would bring up
their wards in their own feats and virtues, and then marie them into like
raze and stock where they may find and make friends who can better look to the
education or better skill of the bringing up of a Gentleman, than he who for
his higher nobility has such a one to hold of him by knights service, or
would do it better than he that looks or may claim such service of his
ward, when age and years will make him able to do it. That which is said that
this manner of Wardshippe began in the time of King Henry the third, cannot
seem true. For in Normandy and other places of France the same order is.

And that Statute made in King Henry the thirds time touching wards, to him
that will wey it well, may seem rather a qualification of that matter, and an
argument that the fashion of wardship was long before: but of this matter an
other time shall be more convenient to dispute. This may suffice to declare
the manner of it.

The Judge in this Court is the master of the Wards.

Officers are the Attorney of the Wards for the Queen.

The Surueyor, the Auditor, the Treasorer, the Clarke, two common Attourneies,
inferior officers, also messengers, and Pursuyuantes.

The Attorney for the Wards is always for the Queens right, and assistant
with the master of the Wards.

The Surueior is he that has the allowing of every Livery that is sued out.

The Auditor takes the account and causes process to be made.

The Treasorer receaueth the money due to her Majesty.

The Clarke is writer of the records, and writer of the decrees, processes and
orders of the Court.

The matters of this court are all benefits that may come unto her Majesty,
by guard, by marriage, preuueer seison and relief.

The general process in this court is a commission, a process in manner of a
proclamation, warning the party or parties to appear before the master of ye
wards. More special process belonging to this Court, are a Diem clausit
exttemum, a Deuenerunt, a melius inquirendum, a Datum est nobis intelligi, a
Quae plura. Of the nature of these, see Stanfordes book of the kings
prerogative.

Out of this Court are the Liueries sued, and committed to the Clerks of the
petty bag, officers in the Chauncerie.

When the heir has proved his age, and sued his livery, then he must do
homage to that is the Deputy of the Prince for that purpose, and then must pay
a fine or fee to the Lord privy Seal.

The Duchy Court. CHAP. 6.
THe Duchy Court of Lancaster is also the Queens court of Record. In it are
holden all pleas real and personal which concern any of the Duchy Lands, now
in her Majesty's hands and parcel of her crown: but severed in Court and
jurisdiction.

The Judge in this Court is the Chauncelor assisted by the Attorney of the
Duchy for the Queen, ye Clarke of the Court, diverse Surueyors, two common
Atturneies, diverse auditors, two assistantes, the Sergeant of her Majesty.

The Chauncelor is a Judge of the Court to see justice administered between her
majesty and her subjects, and between party and party.

The Attorney is to maintain the Queens right, and is assistant to the
Chauncelor, and shows him what the law is,

The Clarke keeps the Rolls and records, and makes the process.

The Surueiors are diverse, one more principal: they survey the Queens lands
within the Duchy.

The Auditors are diverse: one more principal, they are to account and make the
order of ye receiptes within the Duchy.

The common Atturneis are for the suitors that have cause in action within the
court.

The Assistantes are two Judges at the Common law that are to aid them in
difficult points of the law.

The Sergeant for the Queen, is a learned Counselor appointed to be of her
Majesty's Counsel for her right.

There is also belonging to this court a Uice-chauncelor, that serves for the
County Palatine of Lancaster, he makes all original processes within his
liberty, as does the Lord Chauncelor of England for the Chauncerie.

The process of the County Pallatine, is a Sub paena, as in the Chauncery.

The Court of requests. CHAP. 7.
THis Court is the Court wherein all suites made to her Majesty by way of
supplication or petition are heard and ended, neither should it hold plea of
any other matters then such. And this is called the poor man's court, because
there he should have right without paying any money: and it is called also the
Court of Conscience.

The Judges in this court are the master of Requests, one for the common
laws, the other for the civil laws.

The Officers in this court, are the Register, the Examinor, three Atturneis,
one messenger or Pursuiuant.

The Examinor is he that apposeth the witnesses by oath and records their
depositions.

The Atturneis serve for the plaintiff and defendant to frame their complaints
and answers.

The Pursuiuant is an officer in this Court, to bring any man before the Judges
whom they shall name.

The matters in this Court at this day, are almost all suites that by color of
equity or supplication made to the Prince, may be brought before them:
properly al poor men's suites which are made to her Majesty by supplication.

The Processes in this court, are a privy seal, proclamation of rebellion.
The nature of these processes is as was said before in the Court of Star
chamber.

Of wives and marriages. CHAP. 8.
THe wives in England be as I said in potestate maritorum, not that the
husband has vitae ac necis potestatem, as the Romans had in the old time of
their Children, for that is only in the power of the Prince, and his laws, as
I have said before, but that whatsoever they have before marriage, as soon as
marriage is solemnised, is their husbands, I mean of money, plate, iuelles,
cattaile, and generally all moueables. For as for land and heritage follows
the succession, and is ordered by the Law as I shall say hereafter: and
whatsoever they get after marriage, they get to their husbands. They neither
can give nor sell any thing either of their husbands, or their own. Theirs no
moveable thing is by the law of England constanti matrimonio, but as peculium
serui aut filq familias: and yet in moueables at the death of her husband she
can claim nothing, but according as he shall will by his Testament, no more
than his son can: all the rest is in the disposition of the executors, if he
die testate. Yet in London and other great cities they have that Law and
custom, that when a man dies, his goods be divided into three parts. One
third is employed upon the burial and the bequestes which the testator makes
in his Testament. An other third part the wife has as her right, and the third
third part is the dew and right of his children, equally to be divided among
them. So that a man there can make testament but of one third of his goods: if
he die intestate, the funerals deducted the goods be equally divided between
the wife and the children.

By the common Law of England if a man die intestate, the Ordinary (which is
the Bishop by common intendment) sometime the Archdeacon, Deane, or Prebendarie
by privilege and prescription, does commit the administration of the goods to
the widow or the child, or next kinsman of the dead, appointing out portions
to such as naturally it belongs unto, and the Ordinary by common
understanding has such gravity and discretion as shall be meet for so absolute
an authority for the most part, following such division as is used in London,
either by thirdes or halfes. Tur forefathers newly converted to the Christian
faith had, such confidence in their pastors and instructors, and took them to
be men of such conscience that they committed that matter to their discretion,
and belike at the first they were such as would seek no private profit to
themselves thereby, that being once so ordained has still so continued. The
abuse which has followed was in part redressed by certain acts of Parliament
made in the time of King Henry the eight, touching the probate of Testaments,
committing of administration and mortuaries. But to turn to the matter which
we now have in hand, the wife is so much in the powar of her husband, that not
only her goods by marriage are straight made her, husbands, and she loses
all her administration which she had of them: but also where all English men
have name and surname, as the Romans had, Marcus Tullius, Caius Pompeius, Caius
Julius, whereof the name is given to us at the Font, the surname is the name of
the gentilitie and stock which the son does take of the father always, as
the old Romans did, our daughters so soon as they be married loose the surname
of their father, and of the family and stock whereof they do come, and take
the surname of their husbands, as transplanted from their family into
another. So that if my wife was called before Philippe Wilford by her own name
and her fathers surname, so soon as she is married to me she is no more called
Philippe Wilford, but Philip Smith, and so must she write and sign: and as she
changes husbands, so she changes surnames, called always by the surname
of her last husband. Yet if a woman once marie a Lord or a Knight, by which
occasion she is called my Lady, with the surname of her husband, if he dye,
and she take a husband of a meaner estate Yet she is no Lady by the common
law, although so called of courtesy.
by whom she shall not be called Lady (such is the honor we do give to women)
she shall still be called Lady with the surname of her first husband and not
of the second.

I think among the old Romans' those marriages which were made per coemptionem
in manum, and per e^ and libram made the wife in manu and potestate viri,
whereof also we had in our old law and ceremonies of marriage, a certain
memory as a view and vestigium. For the woman at the Church door was given of
the Father, or some other man of the next of her kin into the hands of the
husband, and he laid down gold and silver for her upon the book, as though
he did buy her, the Priest belike was in steed of Lipripeus: our marriages be
esteemed perfect by the law of England, when they be solemnised in the Church
or Chapel, in the presence of the Priest and other witnesses. And this only
makes both the husband and the wife capable of all the benefits which our
law does give unto them and their lawful Children. In so much that if I marie
the Widow of one lately dead, which at the time of her husbands death was
with child, if the child be borne after marriage solemnised with me, this
Child shall be my heir, and is accounted my lawful Son, not his whose child
it is indeed, so precisely we do take the letter where *it is said, pater
est quem nuptiae It is auoidable after the
demonstrant. Those ways and means which Justinian does declare to make
bastards to be lawful children, muliers or rather melieurs (for such a Term
our law uses for them which be lawful Children) be of no effect in England:
neither the Pope nor Emperor nor the Prince himself never could there
legitimate a bastard to enjoy any benefit of our Law, the Parliament has
only that power.

Although the wife be (as I have written before in manu and potestate mariti,
by our Law, yet they be not kept so streit as in mew, and with a guard as they
be in Italy and Spain, but have almost as much liberty as in France, and
they have for the most part all the charge of the house and household (as it may
appear by Aristotle and Plato, the wives of the Greeks had in their time)
which is indeed the natural occupation, exercise, office and part of a wife.
The husband to meddle with the defense either by law or force, and with all
foreign matters which is the natural part and office of the man, as I have
written before. And although our Law may seem somewhat rigorous toward the
wives, yet for the most part they can handle their husbands so well and so
dulcly, and specially when their husbands be sick, that where the Law gives
them nothing, their husbands at their death of their good will give them all.
And few there be that be not made at the death of their husbands either sole
or chief executrices of his last will and testament, and have for the most part
the government of the Children and their portions: except it be in London,
where a peculiar order is taken by the City much after the fashion of the
civil Law.

All this while I have spoken only of moveable goods. If the wife be an
enheritrix and bring land with her to the marriage: that land descends to her
eldest It is auoidable after the husbands death, except it be for xxj. years
or three lives according to the statute, or except they levy a fine.
son, or is divided among her daughters. Also the manner is, that the land
which the wife brings to the marriage, or purchases afterward, the husband
can not sell nor alienate the same, no not with her consent, nor she herself
during the marriage, except that she be sole examined by a Judge at the common
law: and if he have no child by her and she die, the land goes to her next
heirs at the common law: but if in the marriage he have a child by her, which
is heard once to cry, whether the child live or die, the husband shall have
the vsufruite of her lands, (that is the profit of them during his life) and
that is called the courtisie of England.

Likewise if the husband have any land either by inheritance descended or
purchased and bought, if he die before the wife, she shall have the vsufruite
of one third part of his lands. That is, she shall hold the one third part
of his lands during her life as her dowry, whether he has child by her or
no. If he has any children, the rest descends straight to the eldest: if he
has none, to the next heir at the common law: and if she mislike the
division, she shall ask to be endowed of the fairest of his lands to the third
part.

This which I have written touching marriage and the right in moueables and
vnmoueables which comes thereby, is to be understood by the common law when
no private contract is more particularly made. If there be any private pactes,
covenants, and contracts made before the marriage betwixt the husband and the
wife, by themselves, by their parents, or their friends, those have force and
be kept according to the sirmitie and strength in which they are made, And this
is enough of wives and marriage.

Of Children. CHAP. 9.
OUr Children be not in potestate parentum, as the children of the Romans were:
but as soon as they be puberes, which we call the age of discretion, before
that time nature does tell they be but as it were parts parentum. That which
is theirs they may give or sell, and purchase to themselves either lands and
other moueables the father having nothing to do therewith. And therefore
emancipatio is clean superfluous, we know not what it is. Likewise sui
haeredes complaints, de inofficioso testamento or praeteritorum liberorum non
emancipatorum have no effect nor use in our law, nor we have no manner to make
lawful Children but by marriage, and therefore we know not what is adoptio, nor
arrogatio. The testator disposes in his last will his moveable goods freely as
he thinks meet and convenient without controlement of wife or children. And
our Testamentes for goods moveable be not subject to the ceremonies of the
civil law, but made with all liberty and freedom, and iure militari. Of
lands, as ye have understood before, there is difference: for when the owner
dies, his land discendeth only to his eldest son, all the rest both sons
and daughters have nothing by the common law, but must serve their eldest
brother if they will, or make what other shift they can to live: except that
the father in life time do make some conueiance and estates of part of his
land, to their use, or else by devise, which word amongst our lawiers does
betoken a Testament written, sealed and delivered in the life time of the
testator before witness: for without those ceremonies a bequest of lands is
not auailable. But by the common Law, if he that dies had no sons but
daughters, the land is equally divided among them, which portion is made by
agreement or by lotte. Although (as I have said) ordinarily and by the common
law, the eldest son inheriteth all the lands, yet in some countries all the
sons have equal portion, and that is called gauelkind, and is in many places
in Kent. In some places the youngest is sole heir: and in some places after an
other fashion. But these being but particular customs of certain places and
out of the rule of the common law, do little appertain to the disputation of
the policy of the whole Realm, and may be infinite. The common wealth is
judged by that which is most ordinarily and commonly done through the whole
Realm.

Of Bondage and Bondmen. CHAP. 10.
AFter that we have spoken of all the sorts of freemen according to the
diversity of their estates and persons, it rests to say somewhat of bondmen,
which were called serui, which kind of people and the disposition of them and
about them does occupy the most part of Justinians Digestes, and Code. The
Romans had two kinds of bondmen, the one which were called serui, and they
were either which were bought for money, taken in war, left by succession, or
purchased by other kind and lawful acquisition, or else borne of their bond
women and called vernae: all those kind of bondmen be called in our law
villayns in gross, as ye would say immediately bond to the person and his
heirs. An other they had (as appears in Justinians time) which they called
adscriptitij glebae or agri censiti. These were not bond to the person, but to
the manor or place, and did follow him who had the manors, and in our law are
called villains regardantes, for because they be as members, or belonging to
the manor or place. Neither of the one sort nor of the other have we any
number in England. And of the first I never knew any in the Realm in my time:
of the second so few there be, that it is not almost worth the speaking, but
our law does acknowledge them in both those sorts.

Manumission of all kind of villains or bondemen in England, is used and done
after diverse sorts, and by other, and more light and easy means than is
prescribed in the Civil law, and being once manumitted, he is not libertus
manumittentis, but simply liber, howbeit, since our Realm has received the
christian religion, which makes us all the Christ brethren, and in respect of
God and Christ, conseruos, men began to have conscience to hold in captivity,
and such extreme bondage, him whom they must acknowledge to be his brother, and
as we use to term him, Christian, that is, who looks in Christ, and by
Christ to have equal portion with them in the Gospel and salvation.

Upon this scruple, in continuance of time, and by long succession, the holy
fathers, Munkes and Friars, in their confession, and sperially in their
extreme and deadly sicknesses, burdened the consciences of them whom they had
under their hands: so that temporal men by little and little, by reason of
that terror in their conscience, were glad to manumitte all their villains:
but the said holy Fathers, with the Abbots and Priors, did not in like sort by
theirs, for they had also conscience to empouerish and dispoyle the Churches so
much as to manumit such as were bond to their Churches, or to the manors which
the Church had gotten, and so kept theirs still. The same did the Bishops also,
till at the last, and now of late, some Bishops (to make a piece of money)
manumitted theirs, partly for argent, partly for slanders, that they seemed
more cruel than the te^poraltie: after the Monasteries coming into temporal
men's hands, have been occasion that now they be almost all manumitted. The
most part of bondemen when they were, yet were not used with us so cruelly nor
in that sort as the bondmen at the Roman civil law, as appears by their
comedies: nor as in Greece, as appears by theirs: but they were suffered to
enjoy copihold land, to gain and get as other serves, that now and then their
Lords might fleese them, and take a piece of money of them, as in France the
Lords do tail them whom they call their subjects, at their pleasure, and
cause them to pay such sums of money as they list to put upon them. I think
both in France and England, the change of religion, to a more gentle, humane,
and more equal sort, (as the Christian religion is in respect of the
Gentiles,) caused this old kind of servile servitude and slavery, to be
brought into that moderation, for necessity first to villains regardants, and
after to servitude of lands and tenures, and by little and little finding out
more civil and gentle means, and more equal to have that done which in time
of heathenesse, servitude or bondage did, they almost extinguished the whole.
For although all persons Christians be brethren by baptism in Jesu Christ and
therefore may appear equally free, yet some were, and still might be
christened being bond and serve, and whom as the baptism did find, so it did
leave them, for it changes not civil laws nor compacts amongst men which be
not contrary to Gods laws, but rather maintains them by obedience.

Which seeing men of good conscience having that scruple whereof I wrote
before, have by little and little found means to have and obtain the profit
of servitude and bondage which gentilitie did use, and is used to this day
amongst Christians on the one part, and Turks and Gentiles on the other part,
when war is betwixt them upon those whom they take in battle. Turks and
Gentiles I call them, which using not our Law the one believes in one God,
the other in many Gods, of whom they make images. For the law of Jews is
well enough known, and at this day so far as I ca^ learn, amongst all
people Jews be holden as it were in a common servitude, and have no rule nor
dominion as their own prophesies do tell, that they should not have, after
that Christ promised to them, was of them refused: for when they would not
acknowledge him, obstinately forsaking their help in soul for the life to
come, and honor in this world for the time present, not taking the good
tidings, news, and Euangell brought to them by the great grace of God, and by
the promise of the Prophets fructified in us which be Gentiles, and brought
forth this humanity, gentleness, honor, and godly knowledge which is seen
at this present. But to return to the purpose.

This persuasion I say of Christians, not to make nor keep his brother in
Christ, servile, bond and underling for ever unto him, as a beast rather than
as a man, and the humanity which the Christian Religion does teach, has
engendered through Realms (not near to Turks and Barbarians) a doubt, a
conscience and scruple to have servants and bondmen: yet necessity on both
sides, of the one to have help, on the other to have service, has kept a
figure or fashion thereof. So that some would not have bondmen, but
adscripticii glebae, and villains regardant to the ground, to the intent their
service might be furnished, and that the country being evil, unwholesome, and
otherwise barren, should not be desolate. Others afterward found out the
ways and means, that not the men, but the land should be bound, and bring
with it such bondage and service to him that occupies it, as to carry Lords
dung unto the fields, to plowe his ground at certain days, sow, reap, come
to his Court, swear faith unto him, and in the end to hold the land but by
copy of the Lords Court roll, and at the will of the Lord.

This tenure is called also in our law, villayne, bond, or servile tenure,
yet to consider more deeply all land, even that which is called most free land,
has a bondage annexed unto it, not as naturally the lower ground must suffer
and receive the water and filth which falls from the higher ground, nor such
as Justinian speaks of, de seruitudinibus praediorum rusticorum and
vrbanorum, but the land does bring a certain kind of servitude to the
possessor. For no man holds land simply free in England, but he or she that
holds the crown of England: all others hold their land in fee, that is, upon
a faith or trust, and some service to be done to another Lord of a manor, as
his superior, and he again of an higher Lord, till it come to the prince, and
him that holds the crown.

So that if a man die, and it be found that he has land which he holds,
but of whom no man can tell, this is understood to be holden of the crown,
and in capite, which is much like to knights service, and draws unto it three
services, homage, ward, and marriage: that is, he shall swear to be his man,
and to be true unto him of whom he holds the land, His son who holds the
land after the death of his father, shall be married where it pleases the Lord.
He y^holdeth the land must freely of a temporal man (for frank almose and
frank marriage has another cause and nature) holds by fealty only, which
is, he shall swear to be true to the Lord, and do such service as
appertains for the land which he holds of the Lord.

So that all free land in England is holden in fee, or feodo, which is as much
to say, as in fide, or fiducia. That is, in trust and confidence, that he shall
be true to the Lord of whom he holds it, pay such rents, do such service, and
observe such conditions as were annexed to the first donation. Thus all saving
the Prince be not very domini, but rather fiduciarii domini, and possessores,

This is a more likely interpretation then yt which Litleton does put in his
book, who says that feodum, idem est quod haereditas, which it does betoken
in no language. This happens many times to them who be of great wit and
learning, yet not seen in many tongues, or mark not the deduction of words
Littleton did not interpret the word feodu^ simplex, but rather define or
describe the nature thereof.
which time does alter. Fides in latin the Goths coming into Italy, and
corrupting the language, was turned first into feed, and at this day in Italy
they will say in fide, en feed, or ala fe. And some vncu^ning Lawyers that would
make a new barbarous latin word, to betoken land given in fidem, or as the
Italian says, in feed, or fe made it in feudum, or feodum. The nature of the
word appears more evident in those which we call to fef, feoff, or feoffees,
the one be fiduciarii possessores, or fidei co^missarii, ye other is, dare in
fiduciam, or fidei commissum, or more latinely, fidei committere.

The same Litleton was as much deceived in withernam, and diverse other old
words. This withernam is he interprets vetitum namium, in what language I
know not: whereas in truth it is in plain Dutche, and in our old Saxon
language, wyther nempt, alterum accipere, or vicissim rapere, a word that
betokens that which in barbarous Latin is called represalia, when one taking
of me a distress, which in Latin is called pignus, or any other thing, and
carrying it away out of the jurisdiction wherein I dwell, I take by order of
him that has jurisdiction, another of him again or of some other of that
jurisdiction, and do bring it into the jurisdiction wherein I dwell, that by
equal wrong I may come to have equal right. The manner of represalia, and that
we call withernam, is not altogether one: but the nature of them both is as I
have described, and the proper signification of the words do not much differ.

But to return thither where we did digress: ye see that where the persons
be free, and the bodies at full liberty, and maxim ingenui, yet by annexing a
condition to the land, there is means to bring the owners and possessors
thereof into a certain servitude, or rather libertinitie: That the Tenants
beside paying the rent accustomed, shall owe to the Lord a certain faith,
duty, trust, obedience, and (as we term it) certain service, as Libertus,
or Cliens patrono: which because it does not consist in the persons, for the
respect in them does not make them bond, but in the land and occupation
thereof, it is more properly expressed in calling ye one tenant, the other Lord
of ye fee, then either libertus or cliens can do the one, or patronus the
other: for these words touch rather ye persons, and the office and duty
between the^ than the possessions. But in our case leaving the possession and
land, all the obligation of servitude and service is gone.

An other kind of servitude or bondage is used in England for the necessity
thereof, which is called apprenticehood. But this is only by covenant, and for
a time, and during the time it is vera seruitus. For whatsoever the apprentice
gets of his own labor, or of his masters occupation or stock, he
gets to him whose apprentice he is, he must not lie forth of his masters
doors, he must not occupy any stock of his own, nor mary without his
masters license, and he must do all servile offices about the house, and be
obedient to all his masters commandments, and shall suffer such correction
as his master shall think meet, and is at his masters clothing and
nourishing, his master being bound only to this which I have said, and to
teach him his occupation, and for that he serves, some for seven or eight
years, some nine or ten years, as the masters and the friends of the young
man shall think meet, or can agree: altogether (as Polidore has noted) quasi
pro emptitio seruo: nevertheless that neither was the cause of the name
Apprentise, neither yet does the word betoken that which Polidore supposes,
but it is a French word, and betokens a learner or scholar.

Apprendre in French is to learn, and Apprentise is as much to say in French
(of which tongue we borrowed this word, and many more other,) as discipulus
in Latin: Likewise he to whom he is bound, is not called his Lord, but his
master, as ye would say, his Teacher. And the pactions agreed upon, be put in
writing, signed and sealed by the parties, and registered for more assurance:
without being such an Apprentice in London, and serving out such a servitude in
the same City for the number of years agreed upon, by order of the City
amongst them, no man being never so much borne in London, and of parents
Londoners, is admitted to be a Citizen or free man of London: the like is used
in other great Cities of England. Besides apprentises, others be hired for
wages, and be called servants, or serving men and women The sons of freemen
of London are also free by birth, according to the custom.
throughout the whole Realm, which be not in such bondage as apprentises, but
serve for the time for daily ministry, as serui and ancillae did in the time
of gentilitie, and be for other matters in liberty as full free men and women.

But all servants, laborers, and others not married, must serve by the year:
and if he be in covenant, he may not depart out of his service without his
masters license, and he must give his master warning that he will depart, one
quarter of a year before the term of ye year expireth, or else he shall be
compelled to serve out another year. And if any young man unmarried be without
service, he shall be compelled to get him a master, whom he must serve for that
year, or else he shall be punished with stocks and whipping, as an idle
vagabond. And if any man, married or unmarried, not having rent or living
sufficient to maintain himself, do live so idly, he is enquired of, and
sometime sent to the jail, sometime otherwise punished as a sturdie vagabond:
so much our policy does abhor idleness. This is one of the chief charges of
the Justices of peace in every shire. It is taken for ungentleness and dishonor,
and a show of enmity, if any gentleman do take another gentleman's servant
(although his master has put him away) without some certificate from his
master, either by word or writing, that he has discharged him of his service.
That which is spoken of men servants, the same is also spoken of women
servants. So that all youth that has not sufficient revenues to maintain it
self, must needs with us serve, and y^ after an order as I have written. Thus
necessity and want of bondmen has made men to use free men as bondmen to al
servile services: but yet more liberally and freely, and with a more equality
and moderation, than in time of gentilitie slaves and bondmen were wont to be
used, as I have said before. This first and latter fashion of temporal
servitude, and upon paction is used in such countries, as have left off the old
accustomed manner of servants, slaves, bondmen, and bondwomen, which was in
use before they had received the Christian faith. Some after one sort, and some
either more or less rigorously, according as the nature of the people is
inclined, or has devised amongst themselves for the necessity of service.

Of the court which is Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, and in the book of Law,
Court Christian, Curia Christianitatis. CHAP. 11.
THe Archbishops and Bishops have a certain peculiar jurisdiction unto them
especially in four manner of causes: Testamentes and legations, Tithes and
mortuaries, marriage and adultery or fornication, and also of such things as
appertain to orders amongst themselves and matters concerning religion. For
as it does appear, our ancestors having the commonwealth before ordained and
set in frame, when they did agree to receive the true and Christian religion,
that which was established before, and concerned externe policy (which their
Apostles, Doctors, and Preachers did allow) they held and kept still with
that which they brought in of new. And those things in keeping whereof they
made conscience, they committed to them to be ordered and governed as such
things of which they had no skill, and as to men in whom for the holiness of
their life and good conscience, they had a great and sure confidence. So these
matters be ordered in their Courts, and after the fashion and manner of the law
civil or rather common by citation. libell, contestationem litis, examination
of witnesses privily, by exceptions, replications apart and in writing,
allegations, matters by sentences given in writing, by appellations from one to
an other as well a grauamine as a sententia definitiua, and so they have other
names, as Proctor, Advocates, Assessors, Ordinaries, and Commissaries, etc.
far from the manner of our order in the common law of England, and from that
fashion which I have showed you before. Wherefore if I say the Testament is
false and forged, I must sue in the spiritual Law, so also if I demand a
legacy: but if I sue the Executor or Administrator, which is he in our Law,
who is in the civil Law haeres, or bonorum mobilium possessor ab intestato)
for a debt which the dead ought me, I must sue in the temporal Court. These
two courts the Temporal and the Spiritual, be so divided, that whosoever
sueth for any thing to Rome or in any spiritual court for that cause or action
which may be pleaded in the temporal Court of the Realm, by an old law of
England he falls into a praemunire, that is, he forfetteth all his goods to
the Prince, and his body to remain in Prison during the Princes pleasure: and
not that only, but the Judge, the Scribe, the Procurer and Assessor which
receives and does maintain that usurped pleading, does incur the same
danger. Whether the word premuniri does betoken that the authority and
jurisdiction of the Realm is provided for before, and defended by that Law,
and therefore it has that name praemunire or praemuniri, or because that by
that Law such an attemptor has had warning given before to him of the danger
into which he falls by such attempt, and then praemunire is barbarously
written for praemonere, praemoneri (as some men have held opinion) I will not
define, the effect is as I have declared: and the Law was first made in king
Richard the secondes time, and is the remedy which is used when the spiritual
jurisdiction will go about to encroach any thing upon the temporal courts.
Because this court or form which is called curia christianitatis, is yet taken
as appears for an externe and foreign court, and differs from the policy
and manner of government of the Realm, and is an other court (as appears by
the act and writ of praemunire,) than curia regis aut reginae: Yet at this
present this court as well as others, has her force, power, authority, rule
and jurisdiction, from the royal majesty, and the crown of England, and from
no other foreign potentate or power under God, which being granted (as in
deed it is true) it may now appear thy some reason that the first statute of
praemunire whereof I have spoken, has now no place in England, seeing there is
no pleading alibi quam in curia regis ac reginae.

I have declared summarilie as it were in a chart or map, or as Aristotle
terms it (...) the form and manner of government of England and the
policy thereof, and set before your eyes the principal points wherein it
does differ from the policy or government at this time used in France,
Italy, Spain, Germany and all other Countries, which do follow the civil
Law of the Romans compyled by Justinian into his pandectes and code: not in
that sort as Plato made his common wealth, or Xenophon his kingdom of Persia,
nor as Sir Thomas More his vtopia being feigned commonwealths, such as never was
nor never shall be, vain imaginations, fantasies of Philosophers to occupy
the time, and to exercise their wits: but so as England stands, and is
governed at this day the xxviij. of March Anno 1565. in the vij. year of the
reign and administration thereof by the most virtuous and noble Queen
Elizabeth, daughter to King Henry the eight, and in the one and fifteeth year
of mine age, when I was ambassador for her majesty in the Court of France,
the scepter whereof at that time the noble Prince and of great hope Charles
Maximilian did hold, having then reigned four years. So that whether I writ
true or not, it is easy to be seen with eyes (as a man would say) and felt
with hands. Wherefore this being as a project or table of a common wealth
truly laid before you, not fained by putting a case: let us compare it with
common wealths, which be at this day in esse, or do remain described in true
histories, especially in such points wherein the one differs from the other,
to see who has taken righter, truer, and more commodious way to govern the
people as well in war as in peace* This will be no illiberall occupation for
him that is a Philosopher, and has a delight in disputing, nor unprofitable
for him who has to do and has good will to serve the Prince and the common
wealth in giving counsel for the better administration thereof.

Thomas Smith.


