THE CHARACTER OF THE BEAST OR THE FALSE CONSTITVTION OF THE CHVRCH.Discovered
IN CERTAIN PASSAGES BETWIXT Mr. R. CLIFTON and John Smyth, concerning true
Christian baptism of New Creatures, or Newborn Babes in Christ: andnd false
Baptism of infants borne after the flesh.

Referred to two Propositions. 1. That infants are not to be Baptized. 2. That
Antichristians converted are to be admitted into the true Church by baptism.


Revelat. 13.16. And he made all both small and great, rich and poor, free and
bond, to receave a mark in their right hand or in their foreheads.

Revelat. 14.9.10. If any man receave the mark in his forehead, or in his hand,
the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God.

Revelat. 21.5. And he that sat upon the Throne said: behold: and make all
things new.

Printed. 160^.

TO EVERY ONE THAT LOVES THE Truth in sincerity Salutations.
It may be thought most straung, that a man should often times chandg his
Religion: and it cannot be accounted a commendable quality in any man to make
many alterations and chandges in such weighty matters, as are the cases of
conscience: but if constancy be comme^dable in any thing, it is most
commendable in the best things which is Religion: and it inconstancy be worthy
reproof in matters of inferior estimation, it is much more blameable in matters
of Salvation: In respect whereof the wisest and most Religions men have been
always most constant in there profession and faith: and inconstant persons
cannot escape the deserved imputatio^ of folly or weakness of judgment therein.

This must needs be true, (and we confess it) if one condition be admitted,
that the Religon which a man chandgeth be the truth: For otherwise to chandge a
false Religion is commendable, and to retain a false Religion is damnable. For
a man of a Turk to become a Jew, of a Jew to become a Papist, of a Papist to
become a Protestant are al commendable chandges though they al of them befall
one and the same person in one year, nay, if it were in one month: So that not
to chandg Religion is evil simply: and therefore that we should fall from the
profession of Puritanisme to Brownisme, and from Brownisme to true Christian
baptism, is not simply evil or reprovable in it self, except it be proved that
we have fallen from true Religion: If we therefore being formerly deceaved in
the way of Pedobaptistry, now do embrace the truth in the true Christian
Apostolic baptism: Then let no man impute this as a fault unto us: This
therefore is the question: whither the baptism of infants be lawful, yea or nay:
and whither persons baptized being infants must not renounce that false
baptism, and assume the true baptism of Chr: which is to be administered upon
persons confessing their faith and their sins: This being the controversy now
betwixt us, and the Separation commonly called Brownists: For the glory of God,
the manifesting of the truth to our own nation, and the destruction of the man
of sin, we have thought good to publish this present treatise, wherein the
whole cause is handled: Let the indifferent reader jud^ of the whole and give
sentence without partiality: and I doubt not but he shall be const^ayned to give
glory to God in acknowledging the error of baptising infants, to have been a
cheef point of Antichristianisme, and the very essence and constitution of the
false Church, as is clearly discovered in this treatise: Now happily some man
will wish that the controversy had been with the Rabbyes of the Separation, and
not with Mr. Clifton whom thy calu^niate to be a weak man, unable to deal in
so great a controversy well, let the Reader take notice, that although it be Mr.
Cliftons p^n, yet it is not only Mr. Cliftons cause and defense, but his
allegations and reasons are the best p^ea of the greatest Rabbyes themselves:
and if they think that they can say better they may now speak, for by
publishing an^wer to their reasons: we do challendg all the Separation in
special to the combat. Be it known therefore to all the Separation that we
account them in respect of their constitution to be as very an h^^^ot as
either her Mother England, or her grandmother Rome is, out of whose loins she
came: and although once in our ignorance we have acknowledged her a true Chu.
yet now being better informed we revoke that our erroneous judgment and protest
against her, as well for her false constitution, as for her false ministry,
worship, and government: The true constitution of the Chu. is of a new creature
baptized into the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: The false constitution
is of infants baptized: we profess therefore that al those Churches that baptize
infants are of the same false constitution: and al those Chu. that baptize the
new creature, those that are made Disciples by teaching, men conse^ing their
faith and their sins, are of one true constitution: and therefore the Chu. of
the Separation being of the same constitution with England and Rome, is a most
unnatural daughter to her mother England, and her grandmother Rome, who being
of the self fame genealogy and generation, (that of the prophet being true of
her, as is the Mother so is the daughter) she dare notwithstanding most
impudently wipe her own mouth, and call her mother and grandmother adulteresses.
He in therefore we do acknowledge our error, that we retayning the baptism of
England which gave us our constitution, did call our mother England an harlot,
and upon a false ground made our Separation from her: For although it be
necessary that we Separate from England, yet no man can Separate from England
as from a false Chu. except he also do Separate from the baptism of England,
which gives England her constitution: and whosoever does retain the baptism
of England does with all retain the constitution of England, and cannot without
sin call England an harlot as we have done: and this we desire may be well
minded of all that Separate from England: For if they retain the baptism of
England, viz the baptism of infants as true baptism, they cannot Separate
from England as from a false Chu. though they may Separate for corruptions* and
whosoever does Separate from England as from a false Church, must needs
Separate from the baptism of England, as from false baptism: For the baptism
of England cannot be true and to be retained, and the Chu. of England false and
to de rejected: neither can the Chu. of England possibly be false except the
baptism be false, unless a true constitution could be in a false Chu. which
is as impossible as for light to have fellowship with darkness: It is impossible
that contraryes or contradictions should be both true: and so it is impossible
that a false Chur. should have a true constitution or a true baptism: To say
thus: England has a false constitution. England has a true baptism, is as
much as to say thus. England has a true constitution. England has a true
constitution, which is to contradict:


But the Separation they say England has a false constitution, and is a false
Chu. and to be Separated from: and yet they say also: England has a true
baptism (that is a true constitution) which is not to be Separated from: For a
true constitution and true baptism are one and the same: So is a false
constitution and a false baptism: So that the speeches and actions of the
Separation are co^tradictory in this particular. Finaly, they that defend the
baptism of infants cannot with any truth or good conscience Separate from
England as from a false Chu. though they may separate for coruptions: and they
that do Separate from England as from a false Chu. must of snecessity Separate
from the baptism of England, and account the baptism of England false, and so
account the baptism of infants false baptism: Therefore the Separation must
either go back to England, or go forward to true baptism: and all that shall in
time to come Separate from England must Separate from the baptism of England,
and if they will not Separate from the baptism of England their is no reason
why they should separate from England as from a false Church: and this is more
at large proved in the second question of this discourse, whither the Reader is
to be referred. Now concerning this point of baptising infants we do profess
before the L. and before al men in sincerity and truth that it seems unto us
the most unreasonable heresy of al Antichristianisme: for considering what
baptism is, an infa^t is no more capable of baptism then is any unreasonable
or insensible creature: For baptism is not washing with water: but it is the
baptism of the Spirit, the confession of the mouth, and the washing with
water: how then can any man without great folly wash with water which is the
least and last of baptism, one that is not baptized with the Spirit, and
cannot confess with the mouth: or how is it baptism if one be so washed: Now
that an infant cannot be baptized with the Spirit is plain, 1. Pet. 3:21. where
the Apostle says that the baptism of the Spirit is the question of a good
conscience into God, and Heb. 10.22. where the baptism which is inward is caled
the sprinkling of the heart from an evil conscience: seeing therefore infants
neither have an evil conscience, nor the question of a good conscience, nor the
purging of the heart, for all these are proper to actual sinners: hence it
follows that infants baptism is folly and nothing. Again: John's baptism
was the baptism of repentance: infants have not repentance: and therefore cannot
have the baptism of repentance. That infants cannot have repentance is
evident, seeing repentance is knowledge of sin by the Law, sorrow for sin by
the gospel, mortification of sin and new obedience, al which are as much in the
basen of water, as in the infant baptized. Now I confess the Pedobaptists have
many shows of reason for the maintenance of their heresy, and one man shapeth
them into one form, another man into an other, as every man's wit and learning
teaches him, but indeed they are al built upon the self same sandy fondacions,
the wresting of some places of Scripture: al which (in a manner) are discovered
in some measure in this treatise: whereby the reader may perceave the manifest
perventing of the scriptures from their true sense: Now because men call for
antiquity, and except they see antiquity they will not beleve, though the
Scriptures be the most ancient, I have thought good therefore to propound two
pregnant testimonies of Antiquity (besides that which is alleged in the page
30. and 31. of this treatise) against baptism of infants: that men may know
that this truth also has her footsteps among the Fathers.

Tertullianus lib. de baptismo adversus Quintillam. has these words: Then
which nothing is more plain. Itaque pro cujusque personae condition,
dispositione, etiam aetate cunctatio baptismi vtilior est precipue tamen circa
parvulos: Quid enim necesse est, si non tam necesse, sponsores etiam periculo
ingeri? qui and ipsi per mortalitatem destituere promissiones suas possunt, and
proventu malae indolis falli. Ait quidem dominus. Nolite illos pro hibere ad me
venire: veniant ergo dum adolescunt: veniant, dum discunt, dum quo veniant
docentur: Fiant Christiani cum Christum nosse potuerint. Quid festinat
innocensaetas ad remissione^ peccatoru^. Cautius agitur in secularibus vt cui
substantia terrena non creditur, divina credatur. Norint petere salutem, vt
p^tenti dedisse videaris.

That is to say in English. Therefore to defere and not to hasten baptism is
more profitable for the condition, disposition and age of every person: but
especialy as concerning young children: For what necessity is there to bring
suertyes into danger for the baptising of infants, if there be no such
necessity of hastening the baptising of infants: Seeing the suerties ofttymes are
disabled to perform their promise both by reason of mortality, and of the evil
disposition of some children when they come to years, for wh^me they promised
in baptism. Indeed the L. says, forbid them not to come unto me: Therefore let
them come to Chr. but let them come when they are grown, when they learn, and
when they are taught to what they come. Let them by baptism be made Christians
when they can know Chr. by instruction: why does the innocent age hasten to the
remission of sins: we deal more safely in worldly matters: Shall we commit
heavenly things to young children unto whom we dare not commit our earthly
substance? let the^ first know how to ask salvation that so we may seem to give
to him that asks.

Eusebius. Ecclest. Hist. Lib. 10. Chap. 15. Athanasius his baptising of children
in spirit that answered according to the custom of the Catechumeni, is aproved
by Alex. lib. of Alexa. and his Clerks: whence it is to be noted that these
children baptized by Athanasius were unbaptized, and yet knew the manner of
baptism, as being children borne in the Chu. So that by this place and al
other places of the Eclesi. Hist. where like mention is made of the children of
Christians first Catechized and then baptized, it may easily be discerned that
baptism of infants was not yet vniversaly received, but by little and little
prevailed, as other Antich heresies have done: in respect whereof Origin,
August. Cip^ian, and all the Papists with one consent acknowledge it a tradition
of the Church.

And thus much for the Testimonies of Antiquity which hereafter shall be produced
more plentifully upon further occasion offered: if the Separation or any other
dare adventure the trial of the matter out of Antiquity: but there is one, and
indeed but one argument which the separation principaly stand upon, and that is
the covenant which say they if it be a^swered they must ned^ yield unto the
truth: now although this Argument be answered in this writing even to the
satisfaction of every indifferently minded man that ^oveth and seke^^ the
knowledge of the truth more then the defense and justification of error: yet
seeing many things are variably alleged concerning the covenants made with
Abrah. and his feeds, and concerning Abrah. Fatherhood and concerning
circumcision which is called a se^le of the righteousness of Faith: I have
thought God to refer these particulars to moreful discourse entertained upon
occasion with another of the Mrs. of the sep^ration, not doubting but very
shortly through Gods goodness that treatise also shall be published, wherein the
reader shall find larger instraction and satisfaction c^ncerning the forsaid
particulars of the covenants or Test. and other matters thereto aperteyning. In
the mean t^me I desire the reader to make use of this writing and to read
without prejudice or pa tiality, and I doubt not but that through Gods mercy
much light of truth shall shine in his ^art even by this present discourse: and
for the separation who are the sti^^est and most obs^inate adversaries of this
truth of the ^. I could wish as the Tyrant wished concerning the people o^
Rome, that al their he^ds were joined into one, and al their strength comprised
into one writing, that with the sword of the Spirit it might be smiten of at
once, that so we might have an end of this controversy, and that we might not
be troubled and charged with the writing and printing of many books: Howsoever
it be, we profess our readiness to employ our time and cost for the
manifestation of the truth, and we desire the Sep. that they will not in
craftines withdraw from the combat, as hitherto they have done in the matter of
the translation, wors. and the Presbitery: but we require them in the fear of
the L. that seeing they have suffered so much for so much truth as they
profess, they would not now subtily (being guilty in their consciences of
their dishability to defend their errors) draw back, and pretend excuses as
they do: but we require them, nay we chardg them, yea we challendg them to the
defense of their errors: Lo: we protest against the^, to be a false Chu.
falsely constituted in the bap. of infants, and their own unbaptized estate:
we protest against them to have a false wors, of reading books: we protest
against them to have a false govern^ (...) protest against them to have a false
Minist. of Doctor Teachers: Finally, we protest against them that seeing their
constitution in is false, therefore there is no one ordinance of the L. true among
them: These things we have published, and of these things we require answer.
For we proclaim against them as they proclaim against their own mother
England: That the Separation the youngest and the fairest daughter of Rome, is
an harlot: For as is the mother so is the daughter: Now furthermore we desire
the Sepera. and al men that they would not impute unto us untruths, and
condemn the innocent without cause: For we disclayme the errors commonly, but
most slanderously imputed unto us: we are indeed traduced by the world as
Atheists by denying the old Testament and the Lords day: as Trayters to
Magistrates in denying Magistracy: and as Heretics in denying the humanity of
Christ: Be it known therefore to al men, first that we deny not the Scriptures
of the Old Testament, but with the Apo: acknowledge them to be inspired of God
and that we have a sure word of the Prophets whereunto we ought to atend as
unto a light shining in a dark place: and that whatsoever it written aforetyme
is written for our instruction, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope: and that we ought as Christ counsels to search
the Scriptures of the Old Testament, as the men of Berza did, because that in
them we may find everlasting life, and that they do testify of Christ: This
we believe according to these Scriptures. John. 5.39. Act. 17.11. Roman. 15.4^
2. Timoth. 3.16. 2. Pet. 1.19. yet nevertheless we affirm all the ordinances
of the Old Testament, viz: The Church, Ministry, Worship, and Government of
the Old Testament, to be abolished al which were Types and shadows of Gods
things to come, but the body is in Christ. Col. 2.14.17.20.

Secondly we acknowledge that according to the president of Chapter Disciples and
the primitive Churches, the Saints ought upon the first day of the week which
is caled the Lords day, Revel. 1.10. to assemble together to pray prophecy,
praise God, and break bread, and perform other parts of Spiritual Communion
for the worship of God, there own mutual edification, and the preservation of
true Religion and piety in the Church and that we might be better enabled to
the forsaid duties we ought to Separate our selves from the labors of our
callings which might hinder us thereto, and that according to these Scriptures,
Ioh. 20.19. Act. 2.1.41.42. and 20.7. 1. Cor. 16.1.

Thirdly, concerning Magistrates, we acknowledge them to be the ordinance of the
L. that every soul ought to be subject unto the^: that they are the ministers
of God for our wealth: that we ought to be subject unto them for conscience
sake: that they are the ministers of God to take vengeance on them that do
evil: that we ought to pray for the^ that are in authority: that we ought not
to speak evil of the^ that are in dignity: nor to despise government: but to
pay tribute, tol, custom, etc. and that acording to these Scriptures, Romans
13.1-7. 1. Tim. 2.2. 1. Pet. 2.13-15. 2. Pet. 2.10. Iud. us. 8. but of
Magistrates converted to the Faith and admitted into the Chu. by baptism, there
may many questions be made, which to answer (...) can (...) if we would: when
such things fall out, the L. we doubt not will direct us into the truth
concerning that matter, in the mean time we are assured acording to the Scrip.
that the Kings of the Earth shall at the length bring their glory and honor to
the visible Church, Revel. 21, 24.

Finally, concerning the Flesh of Chr. we do beleve that Chr, is the seed of
Abra^. Isaac, and Jacob, and of David, according to the Prophecyes of the
Scriptures, and that he is the Son of Mary his Mother, made of her substance,
the holy Ghost over shadowing her: So have other children there bodyly substance
from their parents: also that Chr. is one person in two distinct natures, the
Godhead and manhood, and we detestg the contrary errors: our grounds of
Scripture are these: Genesis 22.18. and 26.4. and 28.14. Psalm. 13.2.11. compared
with Act. 2.30. Romans 1.3.4. Heb. 1.8. -- 10. and 2.11.14.16

Breefly to conclude let the Separation be advertized: That whereas they do so
confidently through their self love and self conceit, fill there mouths with
heresy and heretics, as if thereby they would fear babes: That herein they
tread in the steps of all the Antichristians their predecessors: do not the
Papists call the Protestants heretics, and call for fire and faggot? do not the
Protestants proclaim the Separation Schismatiques and Heretics, and judge
them worthy the gibbet? not the affirmation of me^ without proof, but the
evidence of wilful obstinacy in error makes men heretics: And let them take
heed that they notwithstanding their Syrenes songs prove ne^ cages full of most
ougly and deformed Antichristian Heretics: Thus desiring the Separation not
to be wise in their own eyes through pride, but to become fools that they may
be made wise through humility, and desiring the forwardest preachers and
professors of the English nation well to weigh what is the true constitution of
the Church, and what is the subject of true Christian baptism, and accordingly
to measure a true and a false Church, I cease: wishing the light and love of
the truth to every ^^e that Reads.

JOHN SMYTH.

CERTAIN REASONS PROPOVNDED TO Mr. Rich. Clifton: concerning the two
propositions following.
1. That infants are not to be baptized. 1. Because there is neither precept
nor example in the new Testament of any infan^s that were baptized, by John or
Christ's Disciples: Only they that did confess their sins, and confess their
Faith were baptized. Marc. 1.4.5. Act. 8.37. 2.Because Christ commands to
make Disciples by teaching them: and then to baptize them: Mat. 28, 19. Ion,
4.1. but infants cannot by doctrine become Christ's Disciples: and so cannot by
the rule of Christ be baptized. 3. Because if infants be baptized; the carnal
seed is baptized: and so the seal of the covenant is administered to them unto
whom the covenant aperteyneth not. Romans 9.8. which is a profanation.
2. That Antichristians converted are to be admitted into the true Church by
Baptism. 1. Because Churches are so to be constituted now after the defection
of Antichrist, as they were first erected by the Apostles: But in the
constitution of Churches the Apostles received in the members by baptism: go:
So must we do now. 2. Because true baptism is but one: but the baptism of
Antichrist is not true baptism, and so not that one baptism of Christ: but
all members of Christ must have true baptism. 3. Because as the false Church
is rejected and the true erected: the false ministry forsaken, and the true
received: So false worship, (and by consequent baptism) must be renounced, and
the true baptism assumed.

John Smyth

Mr. Rich Clifton.

AN ANSWER TO TWO ANABAPTISTICAL opinions: viz. 1. That Infants are not to be
baptized. 2. That Antichristians converted are to be admitted into the true
Church by baptism.

ALthough with great sorrow I am forced to undertake this business against him
that was dear unto me: yet being thereunto provoked by the sending to me these
two positions with certain reasons annexed under the Authors own hand: I
thought it my part (although the vnablest of many) to contend for the
maintenance of the faith which was once given to the Saints. Iud. 3. And by the
help of God to put a brieffe answer to these opinions, which by the Churches
in all ages have been and are condemned for heretical: the practice whereof I
could will he might never have be^allen to any of mine own country, especially
to them that were partakers with me of the afflictions of Christ for the
witnessing of his truth. And ch^efly unto him, to whose charge both I and
diverse others had once purposed to have committed our souls had he not besides
these broached some former opinions, both erroneous and offensive, whereby the
truth (for which we suffer) is like to be the more blasphemed of the wicked and
many hindered in our own country, that shall hear thereof, of whom we had
great hope that they would have walked in the same faith with us. Not
withstanding for as much as I am informed, that the author has promised upon
the sight of his errors to confess the same, I do the more willingly take upon
me this labor, praying the Lord to give a good issue, to his glory, for hi^
mercyes sake Amen. Now I will come to answer the positions with the reasons
thereof, and first concerning the former, which is this.

John. Smyth.

A REPLY MADE IN DEFENSE OF TWO truths, viz: 1. That infants are not to be
baptized. 2. That Antichristians co^verted are to be admitted into the true
church by baptism.

These two truths are by you, Sir; in your answer entitled Anabaptistical,
which reproach I do no more account of the^ you do of the imputatio^ of
Brownisme, nor then Paul did of Heresy: but rather as Paul professed himself
joyful in susteyning that blasphemy for the truth, and you rejoice in that you
for the truths you profess, are calumniated with such undeserved imputations:
even so do I bless God that I am accounted worthy to suffer rebuke for Christ
his truth: but know you, Si^, for your humiliation that your reproach shall
light upon your own head, and that Christ and his truth are by you evil
spoken of.

In your preface you avouch that you are provoked to write, I mervayle you
should so speak: seeing your conscience tells you, that you did make the first
request or motion to Mrs. By water: and I could do no less then I did, for if
I had refused the motion, it would have been thought that I distrusted the
cause: and whereas you alledg, Iud. 3. for justifying your course in answering,
I say you pervert the Scripture: for although you are to contend for the
mayntenance of the faith which was once given to the Saints, yet you are
neither to plead for Baal, but to let him plead for himself, neither are you
to contend for defense of Antichristian errors, but rather as you have in a
very good degree rased the Temple of Antichrist, even so you should now proceed
to undermine the very foundation, and to blow it wholly up at once: which is
done by entertayning the baptism of Christ to be administered upon persons
confessing their sins, and confessing their faith: neither will it help you
to say that these two truths have been condemned for heresy by the churches in all ages, for if the Apostles age aford contrary to the succeeding ages, I say
that which is most ancient is the truth: and you know that many of your truths
whereto you are come, have been condemned for heriticall in as many ages as
these truths which I defend.

Again, whereas you affirm that by the broaching of these opinions and some
former erroneous and offensive, the truth is like more to be blasphemed, and
therefore you could wish that we your comtrymen and friends had never fallen
into them: I answer, that although I shall not rejoice that any truth be evil
spoken of, yet if it shall fall out by occasion of publishing the truth that
wicked men blaspheme, let them know that Christ is a rock of offense, and a
stone to stumble at: and if any be hindered from the truth by publishing the
truth, it will be their corruption and sin, and the truth or the publishing of
the truth is not in fault: but if you fear hereby that your Antichristian
Church will fall to the ground, I say, it is that which is appointed to
perdition, and to perdition let it go: I will never use means to support it.
Finally although I have professed my readiness publicly and privately, to
forsake my errors upon their discovery. (and as I have already practiced for
the which I am reproached among your brethren) yet I never professed my
readiness to be perverted from the truth, which you call heresy: and therefore if
you did undertake to write upon this ground, you might well have spared your
pains, and saved your self from so greevous a sin as you are fallen into by
pleading for Antichristian corruptions, and by praying the Lord to overthrow
his own truth, by blessing your labors in opugning at: and this breefly shall
suffice for your preface general.

Mr. Rich. Clifton.

1. That infants are not to be Baptized. Answer.
Touching this first position, that Infants are not to be baptized, I read that
Auxentius one of the Arrians sect with his adherents was one of the first that
denied the baptism of Infants, and next after him Pelagius the heretic,
against whom Augustine and others of the ancient Fathers have opposed and
condemned for heresy, and that according to the Scriptures, which by Gods grace
we shall together with them also f^rther manifest, and prove by sound reasons
out of the word the lawfulnes of baptising infants, which first I will
undertake, and then answer the reasons to the contrary.

Genesis 17.20. God made his covenant to Abraham and to his seed: from whence I
reason thus.

2. That covenant which God made with Abraham he commanded to be sealed to
him and to al his seed, yea even to infants.

But the covenant that we under the gospel do receive is the very same that
was made to Abraham, etc.

Therefore that is commanded to be fealed to us etc to our seed, yea even to
our infants, for so was that to Abraham's.

The Major can not be denied, see Genesis 17.10.11.12.

The Minor is likewise as true, for the Apostle speaking of this covenant, Act.
2.39 says, the promise is made to you and to your children, and to all that are
a far of, as many as the Lord our God shall call. In which words it plainly
appears that this is the very same covenant and promise that was made to
Abraham, which they that were a far of, that is the Gentiles believing, do
receive and were baptized into. And therefore is Abraham called the Father of
many nations, Genesis 17.4. also Gal. 3.13.4. Christ is said to redemne us from
the curse of the Law, that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles
through Ies. Chr. that we might receive the promise of the Spirit, see verse.
8.9. Now then if we be partakers of the same covenant (for otherwise Abraham's
covenant should not be an everlasting covenant, Genesis 17.7. seeing his posterity
after the flesh is cut of for a time, Romans 11, 15.17.20.) it must follow that
the same must be sealed to us, and to our infants, (else is it not the same) and
that by the commandment of God. For the abolishing of circumcision, and the
bringing in of baptism under the gospel, does not abrogate or disanulle the
commandment of sealing the covenant to the believing parents with their
infants, which was once commanded to Abraham, but only shows a changing of
the outward sign. And therefore as the covenant belongs to the Gentiles
believing so does the seal thereof to them and to their seed, as that did to
Abraham and to his seed: The outward ceremony only changed.

John Smyth.

Now in the next place you make a special preface to the first point, affirming
that baptism of infants was denied by Auxentius the Arrian, and by Pelagius
whom Augustine and others refuted and condemned for heresy, and that by
Scripture: I say that one heretic condemned another contrary to the
Scriptures for the truths sake and whereas you bring in the Fathers in this
particular point in your 6. page I answer I can prove that Augustine, Cyrill,
Ciprian, Origin, Nazianzen, Ambrose, and many others were almost as gross
heretics (if he be an heretic that holds an heresy) as Auxentius and
Pelagius, and you your selves account the^ all Antichristians: and therefore the
ancient practice of pedobaptistry in ancient antichristian Churches is no
more to be respected then the ancient practice of the Prelacy and read prayer
in the fame: but these are but Florishes: let us hear your arguments from the
Scripture proving. 1. That infants are to be baptized,

Your first argument is taken from Genesis 17.10. and is framed thus:

That covenant which God made with Abraham, he commanded to be sealed to him,
and to al his seed, yea even to infants.

But the covenant that we under the gospel do receave is the very same that was
made to Abraham, etc.

Therefore it is commanded to be sealed to us, and to our seed, yea eve^ to our
infa^ts for so was it to Abraham's.

To this argument I make answer thus: first distinguishing the two covenants or
testaments (for a covenant and testament is al one in the originals though the
English words are two): one covenant was made with Abraham and his carnal seed
and of that covenant was circumcision a seal: another covenant made with
Abraham and his Spiritual seed, and of that covenant the holy Spirit of promise
is the seal: for the carnal covenant had a carnal seal upon the carnal
seed: the Spiritual covenant had a Spiritual seal upon the Spiritual seed:
For things must be made proportionable, and circumcision which was a carnal
seal, could not seal up the Spiritual covenant to the Spiritual seed, for to
say so, is to leap over the hedge and to make a disproportion betwixt the type
and the truth.

These things being thus distinguished let the^ be remembered and applied
orderly and the argument will appear of no value: for the major is thus to be
understood if it be true that the carnal covenant which God made with Abraham
and his carnal seed, was to be sealed up to his infants with a carnal seal,
viz: circumcision: if it be not so understood it is false: Now the minor, if it
be assumed out of the major, (as it must be, else it is a Sophisme) is very
false and flatly contradictory to the Scripture: for we under the gospel do not
receave that carnal covenant which was made to Abraham and his carnal seed,
whereof circumcision was the carnal seal: but that carnal covenant and seal
together with the subject of that seal, viz: a male of 8. days old is taken
away by Christ's cross: and in the rome thereof we have the Spiritual covenant
typed by that carnal covenant, and the Spiritual seal viz: the holy Spirit of
promise signified by that carnal seal, and the Spiritual infant, viz: a newborn babe in Christ, in whom Christ typed by the male is newly formed,
signified by that carnal infant.

That al these particulars are so: I prove unto you plainly by these places of
Scripture.

1. There are two Testaments made with Abraham, Gal. 4.24. For Agar that is the
old Testament, and Sara that is the new Testament, were both married to Abraham,
and Abraham had them both.

2. There are two seeds: Ismaell (of Abraham and Hagar) who typed the carnal
seed borne after the Flesh: and Isaac (of Abraham and Sara) who typed the
Spiritual seed borne by promise verse. 23.

There are two seals: Circumcision a seal of the carnal covenant upon the
carnal children: Genesis 17.11. and the Holy Spirit of promise a seal of the
Spiritual covenant upon the Spiritual seed, 2. Cor. 1.22. Ephesians. 1.13. and as
circumcision was a seal from God to the carnal seed of the promise and from
the carnal seed to God in obedience: So the Spirit of promise is a seal from
God to the Spiritual seed of the promise, and from the Spiritual seed to the
Lord in obedience, Ephesians. 1.13. Ioh. 3.33. these things are evident: but now you,
I am persuaded of mere ignorance, mistaking the covenant, do make circumcision
a seal of the everlasting Spiritual covenant, which is an error, and
therevppon you build all your false building of pedobaptistry which is as a
house built upon the sand by the foolish builders.

Now for your places of Scripture I expound them in order.

Genesis 17.10.11.12. this place proves that circumcision was a seal of the
carnal covenant made with the carnal seed, and not a seal of the Spiritual
covenant made with the Faithful: For the Spirit is the seal thereof, who is
therefore called the Spirit of promise, and the seal. Ephesians. 1.13. and if the
place of the Romans 4.11. be objected to prove that circumcision sealed the
righteousness of Faith to Abraham: I answer, that is not the scope of the place:
but this: viz: that circumcision had one specialty in Abraham differing from al
other, that by circumcision he was sealed up to be the Father of all the
Faithful as concerning the matter of their justificatio^, namely, that as he
was justified by his actual Faith so should all the believers be justified by
their actual Faith whither they believed in their uncircumcision or in their
circumcision.

Act. 2.39. the promise is offered to the impenitent Jews, and to their
posterity, and to the Gentiles a far of: and it was exhibited only to so many as
yielded obedience to the Faith: and whereas in rehearsing the Apostles speech,
you say, the promise is made I say, therein you ad to the text. For if you
intend that the promise of the Spirit was exhibited to all the Jews and their
infants, and to the Gentiles believing and their infants and that this place
afordeth it, I say the place does not intend any such thing but only an offer
of the Spiritual covenant, to the carnal Jews and their children, according to
the Flesh, and also the Gentiles: but a true conferring or exhibiting of it to
so many as should be effectually called by the offer of it in the preaching of
the Gospel.

Further whereas you seem to assume that seeing the covenant was made to Abraham
and his infants, it is therefore made to us and our infants. I deny that ever the
covenant Spiritual was made that is conferred to al Abraham's infants according
to the Flesh: neither therefore is it made that is conferred to al our infants:
this you should prove, but it is undone: I confess the promise was offered to
all Abraham's carnal seed under that carnal covenant of the Old Testament, and
so it is offered now to all our carnal children by the preaching of the gospel
in the new Testament: but as the Spiritual covenant was only exhibited to the
Faithful, the true seed of Abraham, so is it now only exhibited to the Faithful
which are the only true seed of Abraham, who is the Father of us al, and we al
his children, and justified by actual Faith as he was: in respect whereof
infants wanting actual Faith cannot be truly said the Children of Abraham but
are that they are in secreat to the Lord whatsoever they are.

Thus much for the Scriptures by you alleged in your first argument: From that
which I have answered I reason against pedobaptistry thus.

1. As it was with Abraham the Father of the Faithful, so must it be with the
Children of Abraham, Romans 4.11 But Abraham the Father of the Faithful first
believed actually, and being sealed with the Spirit of promise, afterward
received the sign of circumcision. Ergo: The Children of Abraham the believing
Gentiles, must first believe actually, and be sealed with the Spirit of promise,
and then receave the baptism of water.
2. As in the Old Testament, the carnal children were carnally circumcised and
so admitted into that Church of the Old Testament: So in the New Testament the
spiritual children must be Spiritually circumcised, that is in heart, and then
be admitted by baptism into the Church of the New Testament. But the first was
signified by type: Ergo the second is verified in the truth.
3. As in the Old Testament carnal infants were carnally begotten and borne by
the mortal seed of generation by their carnal parents, and then were carnally
circumcised, and received into the carnal covenant. So in the new Testament
Spiritual infa^ts newborn babes in Christ, must be Spiritually begotten and
borne by the immortal seed of regeneration, by the Spiritual parents, and then
being Spiritually circumcised they shall by baptism with water be received into
the New Testame But the first was signified by type: Ergo the second is
verified in the truth.
4. If the carnal infants in the Old Testament were circumcised, then the
carnal infants in the New Testament must not be baptized: because that as
circumcision is abolished which was the sign or seal, so the infant is
abolished which is the subject of that sign or seal, and a proportionable
infant introduced: which is one regenerate by the Spirit and the word. But the
carnal infants in the old Testament were circumcised. Ergo the carnal infants
are not now in the New Testament to be baptized.
5. As in the Old Testament when the male appeared the 8. day, there was a
painful circumcising and mortifying of the superfluous forskinne when the party
was received into the covenant actually: So in the new Testament when the Lord
Ies. Chapter (typed by the male) appears: and when there is a painful circumcising
and mortifying of the superfluous forskinne of the heart, the party so qualified
shall be by baptism received into the new Testament actually. But the first was
signified by type: Ergo the second is verified in truth.
And this shall suffice for answer to your first argument.

Mr. Rich. Clifton.

Col. 2.11.12.
If circumcision belonged to Faithful Abraham and his seed, yea to such as were
but infants, then does baptism also appertain to al believers and to their
feed being infants.

But the first is ^^ue, Genesis 17.10. Ergo the second.

The consequent will ^^llow, seeing baptism comes in place of circumcision
sea^ling up unto us and ^^ ou^ seed the same promises that circumcision did to
Abraham and to his seed, Coll. 2.11.12. and that in as large and ample manner
(if not more ample) then to the Israelits, for of them only were the males
circumcised, but by baptism are both males and females sealed. And this must
follow necessarily, or else the covenant by the coming of Ie. Chr. should be
more restrained, ^hen it was under the law, who came to ratify and confirm
that wholly, as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 1. 20. The promises of God are in
him, yea and Amen, etc. For God gave it with the seal thereof, to Abraham and
his infants. and if Christ should give it unto us only and not to our infants,
this were to lessen and infringe the covenant, and not to con^^^^ all, but to
take away part of that which God before had given.

John Smyth.

Your second argument follows: from Coll. 2.11.12. which is framed thus.

If circumcision belonged to Faithful Abraham and his seed, yea to such as were
but infants: then does baptism also aperteyne to all believers and to their
seed being infants. But the first is true, Genesis 17.10. Ergo the second.
The reason of the consequent is double: 1. for that baptism comes in place
of circumcision as a seal of the same promises to us and our seed: Col.
2.11.12. 2. For that the covenant must be as largely sealed up to us as to
the^, therefore to our females as well as males, and infants as well as persons of
years: For the covenant in Christ is not lessened but of as larg extent now as
then: 2. Cor. 1.20. Seeing in Christ all the promises of God are yea and amen.

I answer that this argument is built upon the same false ground with the
former a mere mistaking of the covenant, and seal, and seed: and their is
manifest violence committed upon the Scripture by perverting and wresting it
to false consequents: first therefore I deny the consequence and I give reasons
of my denial.

1. Because circumcision did not aperteyne to Abraham and his infants as a
seal of the everlasting covenant of life and Salvation, but of the external
temporary covenant of the land of Canaan, and of obedience to the Law of Moses:
and therefore though circumcision aperteyned to Abraham and his carnal infants as
a seal of the external covenant yet it does not follow that baptism belongs
to the Faithful and their carnal infants as a seal of the Spiritual covenant
of the New Testament made in respect of Christ.

2. Secondly because the believers do not occupy Abraham's place in the covenant
of the New Testament, because Abraham is the Father of all the Faithful, but
no man though never so Holy has that perrogative to be the Father of the
Faithful: Therefore Abraham receaveth the Faithful into his bosom. Luke
^6.23.

3. Thirdly, because the infants of the faithful do not possess the place of
the true children of Abraham the Father of the Faithful: but possess the place
of the typical children of Abraham according to the Flesh, and therefore the
disproportion being in all these particulars the consequence of the argument is
weak and insufficient,

But if you will make true consequents you must reason from the type to the
truth proportionably, and not from the type to the type as this argument
imports: neither must you confound the covenants and seals as you do: but
must make al things distinct and proportionable the one to the other as thus.

Abraham the Father of the carnal infants: Abraham the Father of the Faithful:
Carnal Abraham and his carnal seed, carnally circumcised: So Faithful Abraham
and his Faithful Children, Spiritually circumcised. The carnal infants of the
old Testament carnally circumcised: The Spiritual infa^ts of the new Testament,
that is, men regenerate baptized.

Thus you se the disproportion of your argument, and the true proportion that
you ought to have made if your argument had been good.

But let us see the reasons of your consequence, and the Scriptures you do
produce for the confirmation of them: you say that baptism comes in the ^ome
of circumcision as a seal of the same promises to us and our seed: I utterly
deny it: and I prove the contrary unto you: Seeing that the circumcision of the
heart succeeds in the place of circumcising the flesh: Ro^. 2.29. and
circumcision made without hands comes in the place of circumcision made with
hands, Col. 2.11. compared with Ephesians. 2.11. and circumcision the seal of the
flesh, has the H. Spirit of promise which is the Spiritual seal to succeed
in place thereof, Ephesians. 1.13.14. which seal of the Spirit is the earnest of our
inheritance, as circumcision of the flesh was an earnest of the inheritance of
the land of Canaan to the carnal Israelites: and I desire to be informed in all
the Scriptures where baptism is called a seal, for I deny that the baptism
of water is the seal of the new Testament, though I cannot deny that the
baptism of the holy ghost is the seal.

I say therefore that the seal of the Spirit must go before the baptism of
water: and as all the ordinances of the new Testament are Spiritual, and yet
visible, so is the seal of the new Testament Spiritual, and yet visible: and
thervppon men being visibly sealed with the Spirit as Cornelius company was.
Act. 10.47. may challendg the baptism with water, as Peter there teaches:
this visible seal of the new Testament is confession: as in the old Testament
circumcision was their confession: and baptism is not a seal but a
manifestation of the seal. You see therefore that baptism is not the seal of
the new Testament, and that circumcision did not seal up the everlasting
covenant to Abraham, and al his carnal seed: now the place of Col. 2.11.12.
which you produce to prove that baptism comes in the rome of circumcision, is
not so to be construed, but the Apostle teaches the virtue of Chr.
circumcision and baptism, which is mortifying and burying of sin and
resurection from sin: and the Apost. does not intend to teach that in the new
Testament baptism succeeds for circumcision: but he teaches the virtue of
Chapter circumcision and baptism in the Faithful: so that seeing circumcision was a
seal of the promises of the old Testament to the carnal seed, and that the
Spirit is the seal of the promises of the new Testament to the faithful seed
of Abraham, therefore neither does baptism of water succeed circumcision,
neither does baptism with water seal up any promises to the Faithful, but
only does visibly declare what promises they already are partakers of, viz: of
the Spirit of promise.

Again: in your second reason you would infinuate a restraynt in the new
Testament, 1. baptism be not due to infants seeing circumcision was due to
infants in the Old Testament: I answer many ways: 1. Seeing that baptism does
not succeed circumcision, this alegation is nothing to the purpose: 2. Seeing
baptism is both to male and female it is larger then circumcision which was
only upon the male: 3. seeing that baptism is both to Jew and Gentil, therefore
more larg then circumcision: but these things are almost nothing to the
purpose: Therefore I say more pertinently, That the covenant made with Abraham in
respect of Christ is now as larg as ever it was. For that was never made with
Abraham and al his carnal children, but only with Abraham and the Faithful, and
so it continues in the same tenor still: and it is enlarged now since Christ's
coming only in respect of the cleerer, and more universal publication o^ it:
for then the covenant made with Abraham in respect of Christ was shadowed out
darkly in types, now since Christ it is preached plainly: then it was only to
the Jews, now to al nations, Mat. 28.19. besides I affirm that circumcision
was never a seal of that covenant that God made with Abraham in respect of
Christ, for the Holy Spirit of promise is the seal of it: but circumcision
only was a seal of the external covenant: and the seal of the Spirit is as
large as the seal of the Flesh For all the carnal Israelites were carnally
sealed, all the true believers are sealed by the S^^ri^al the males were
carnally sealed, all that have the male Christ formed in them (whither men or
weomen) are sealed by the Spirit: For in Christ there is neither male nor female
Gal. 3.28. all the carnal seed were carnally sealed whither young or old, so all
the Spiritual seed are Spiritually sealed whither newborn babes in Christ, or
perfect men that are come to the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ:
and so the covenant is not lessened, taking things in their due proportion, and
not perverting them. and whereas you say in Christ all the promises of God are
yea and amen, 2. Cor. 1.20. thereby insinuating that in the new Testament the
covenant must be as large as in the old, I confess it to be as larg, but this
place is strayned to the proving thereof: For the meaning of it is that unto
the Faithful all the Lords promises are verefied, but his promise was never
that al their carnal seed should have baptism as a seal of life and
salvation, but that all the believers should have the Spirit of promise which is
the new Testaments seal.

From that which I have answered to your second argument I reason thus.

1. If all the carnal infants of Abraham were never actually under the
everlasting covenant in respect of the actual possession of it, then they
never had title to the seal of the everlasting covenant. But all the carnal
infants of Abraham were never actually under the everlasting covenant in
respect of the actual possession of it: Seeing that Abraham's children according
to his actual Faith were only under it, Romans 4.11. Ergo: all the carnal infants
of Abraham never had title to the seal of the everlasting covenant, and
therefore not to baptism.
2. If baptism does not succeed circumcision, then baptism does not pertain
to carnal infants though circumcision perteyned to carnal infants. But baptism
does not succeed circumcision, because the seal of the Spirit is
correspondent to the typical seal of the Flesh, and baptism with water is
only the manifestation of the seal. Ergo, baptism does not aperteyne to the
carnal infants.
3. If circumcision did not seal up the everlasting covenant to Abraham and
all his carnal infants: then (by your proportion) baptism does not seal up
the everlasting covenant to the Faithful and their carnal infants. But
circumcision did not seal up the everlasting covenant to Abraham and all his
carnal infants. Ergo: (by your proportion) baptism does not seal up the
everlasting covenant to the Faithful and their carnal infants.
4. If believing parents do not stand in Abraham's rome to conveigh the covenant
to their infants, then though they be baptized themselves, yet their children
shall not. But the believers do not stand in Abraham's rome, to conveigh the
covenant to their infants: For no man is the Father of the Faithful as Abraham
was, and he did never conveigh the everlasting covenant to his carnal infants.
Ergo: though believing parents be baptized themselves, yet there infants shall
not be baptized.
5. If infants of the Faithful do not occupy the place of the true children of
Abraham, but only occupy the place of the carnal children: then though the true
children of Abraham, 1. the actual believers be baptized, yet the infants shall
not which cannot actually believe. But the infants of the Faithful do not
occupy the place of the true children of Abraham, seeing the children of Abraham
do the Works of Abraham, Ioh. 8.34. which infants cannot do. Ergo though
actual believers be baptized, yet infants shall not.
And thus much may suffice for answer of this second argument which you see is
as weak as the first being built upon the same sand.

Mr. Rich. Clifton.

Marc. 10.13.14. and Mat. 19.13.14.
3. They that are of the Kingdom of God have right and title to all the Holy
things thereto belonging, and may perticipate of so many of them as they are
capable to receave.

But the infants of believing parents are of the Kingdom of God.

Therefore the infants of believing parents have right and title to all the holy
things thereto belonging, and may participate of so many of them, etc. And
consequently of baptism, seeing they are capable of that.

The major proposition I think will not be denied, it is written 1. Cor.
3.21.22. Al things are yours, etc. Romans 9.4.

The assumption is Mat. 19, 13-17. For of such is the Kingdom of God, meaning
that this Kingdom stood not only of such as being of years that believed, but
also of their infants. And this he declares not only in this saing, but also
by his displeasure against his Disciples for hindering their coming unto him:
by commanding to suffer them to come, and by putting his hands upon them, and
blessing them. Mat. 19.13.14.15. For would Christ have blessed them that were
not of his Kingdom? or do not the blessings apperteyne only to the children of
the Kingdom, even to the seed of Abraham, Gal. 3.8.18.

If it be objected that children are not capable of baptism. I answer, they
are as capable thereof as the infants of Israel were of circumcision, being
both pertakers of the same promises with them. and in all respects as capable of
the outward seals of the covenant, as they were. And therefore the infants of
believers are to be baptized.

John Smyth.

Your third argument follows, from Marc. 10.13.14. Mat. 19.13.14.

They that are of the Kingdom of God, have right and title to all the holy
things the^to belonging, and may participate of so many of them as they are
capable to receave. But the infants of believing parents are of the Kingdom of
God. Ergo, the infants of believing parents have right and title to all the holy
things thereto belonging, and may participate of so many of them etc. and
consequently of baptism, seeing they are capable of it.
The major you say is written, 1. Cor, 3.21.22. Romans 9.4.

The assumption is proved Mat. 19.13.14,

To this argument of yours I make answer diversely: first you have not proved
that the visible Chur. and all the ordinances thereof perteyne to infants of the
faithful: For the infants of the Jews that were presented to Chr. were not
infants of belevers for ought that I see: neither can it be proved that they
were infants of the Jews, but their is some likelihood to the contrary: seeing
the disciples repelled the^ that brought the^: it may be they were the children
of some of the Roman soldiers, or some Cananitish persons: but suppose they
were children of the Jews, how is it proved that their parents were belevers?
seeing that the people of the Jews were for the most part stifnecked and
uncircumcised in heart. and if they had bee^ the children of beleving Jews that
were baptized by Ioh. or Chr. disciples- (by your doctrine the infants were
already baptized) what need was there to bring the^ to Chr. except it were for
popish confirmation? and so hence you cannot conclude baptism. I avouch
consta^tly against you that either they were not the children of Jews: or that
they were not the infants of beleving Jews or if their parents beleved, yet it
follows not that therefore these infants were of the Kingdom of God, or to be
baptized: for Chr^ does not say, of these, but, of such is the Kingdom of God:
and so he does expound himself Mat. 18 3-6. besides how can you prove that by
the Kingdom of God Chr. understands the visible church of the new Test. or
how can you prove that Chr. blesses none but members of the visible Chur? or
how can you prove that the blessing of Abraham aperteyneth only to the members
of the visible church? or that from this particular of Chr. praying for infants
Mat. 18.13. baptising of infants follows? or how ca^ you prove that Christ
obtained for them, and prayed for remission of sins, the H, ghost, faith,
everlasting life? for many were brought to Chr. for releef of bodily
infirmityes.

Secondly: I deny that, because Christ blessed some of the infants of the Jews
or Gentiles upon special entreaty, therefore it may hence be concluded that
generaly the covenant and seals of the covenant (as you call baptism) does
aperteyne to them: for there is not the same reason of al infants, as of some
specialy blessed: as of John Baptist, Jeremy, Sampson.

Thirdly if baptism does aperteyne to infants because Chr. blesses some
particular infants, and because Chr. says the Kingdom of God does aperteyne to
such, then the L. supper also: for if you say, they are not capable of the L.
supper in two respects: 1. for that they cannot eat it, 2. for that they
cannot examine themselves: I answer they must have it as soon as they can eat
it: and they cannot confess their sins and faith, and so cannot be baptized.

Fourthly: I would know why the Apo. put infants back, and why Chr. did not
command them to be baptized: Surely, if they had been the infants of belevers,
or if the Apo. had known Chr. mind for baptism of infants he having so fit an
opportunity would have put it in practice: but the deep silence of baptism in
this place where there is so just an occasion does instruct us evidently that
Chr. either did not deal faithfully which to say were blasphemy, or th^^ he
never purposed the baptism of infants.

You see therefore by that which has bee^ answered that both your major and
minor are weak and the Scriptutes alleged by you do not confirm them: for the
place 1. Cor. 3.21.22. declares that al things are yours: that is theirs that
actually believe and are baptized: and all the ordinances of the visible church
are theirs both in title use and possession: So that hence you must needs prove
if your arg be good that infants must have the use of al: only your caution
helps you, viz: that they may partake so many means as they are capable of:
but where is this caution expressed in all the scriptures do you think that the
members of the Church are not capable of all the means of salvation? but I
avouch unto you that this place perteyneth only to baptized persons not to
persons unbaptized, and therefore it fitteth not your purpose.

Romans 9.4. The covenants and promises perteyne to the Israelites: I deny the
word aperteyneth, it is put into the Text, and perverteth the meaning of the
Apo. For Paull intends not to prove that the carnal Israelites were al
actually within the covenant of grace and salvation by Chr. being really
possessed of it, but that under the outward covenant and promise whereof they
were really seized, the Spiritual covenant and promise was offered and
presented unto them, the one preaching the other, the law being a scholemr. to
Christ.

Lastly, whereas in the answer of an objection you intimate that infants now are
as capable of baptism as infants were of circumcision, being both equaly
capable of the covenant and seals, I answer: that baptism is not the seal of
the covenant of the new Test. as circumcision was the seal of the old Test.
and that infants of the old Testa. were capable of circumcision absolutely
seeing that to be circumcised there was nothing required but a foreskinne apt to
be cut of: but to baptism in the new Test. there is required actual says and
repentance confessed by the mouth, Mat. 3.6. Act. 4.37. and 10.47.

From this answer I collect arguments against pedobaptistry thus.

1. They that are not members of the visible Church, have no title to the holy
things of God, and therefore are incapable of them: and so of baptism. Infants
of the Faithful are not actually members of the visible Church: For these
places. Marc. 10.13.14. Mat. 19.13.14. do not prove that the parents of these
infants were believing Jews, or if they were believers their infants were
already baptized with their parents according to your doctrine, and so Christ
cannot intend baptism to aperteyne to them, but the rest of the ordinances.
Ergo: Infants of the Faithful have no title to the Holy things of God, and so
are incapable of them, and by consequent incapable off Baptism.
2. If the Apostles by putting back infants presented to Christ declare plainly
that infants were not to be brought to be baptized of Christ: then infants
were not baptized by Christ, nor commanded to be baptized by him. But the
first is true: that the Disciples put back infants presented to Chr. etc. Ergo:
The latter is true: that infants were not baptized or commanded to be baptized
by Christ.
3. If the persons presenting infants to Christ to be blessed and prayed for:
do not desire baptism for them: then they knew no such custom used by Christ
to baptize them. But the first is true: that persons presenting infants to
Christ to be blessed and prayed for, do not desire baptism for them. Ergo:
they knew no such custom used by Chr. of baptising infants.
4. If Christ receaving infants, praying for them, blessing them, does neither
baptize them, nor command his Disciples to baptize them: then either Christ's
pleasure was they should not be baptized, or else he forgatt his duty, in not
Teaching baptism off infants upon so just an occasion. But Christ receaving
infants, praying for them, blessing them, does neither baptize them, nor
command his Disciples to baptize them: neither did forgett his duty in not
teaching baptism of infants occasioned. Ergo: Christ's pleasure was (and is)
that infants should not be baptized.
5. They that are not actualy possessed of the promises or covenant, are not
actually to be invested with baptism. Infants are not actually possessed with
the covenant: Seeing they perform not the condition, viz: confession of their
sins and their Faith actually. Ergo: infants are not to be invested with
baptism.
This shall suffice for answer of your third argument.

Mr. Rich. Clifton.

1. Corinthians. 7.14.
If the children of believing parents be holy, then are they with in the
covenant off Abraham, and so consequently have right to the seal thereoff. But
the first is true, 1. Cor. 7.14. Ergo the second.
Touching the former proposition. I take it, that none will affirm holiness in
any that are not of the covenant, for in that respect, Israel was called a holy
nation. Exo. 19.6.1. Pet. 2.9. and al others unclean, Act. 11.3. and 10.15.
that were without. If infants be within the covenant, then can not the seal be
denied to such, seeing the Lo. has joined the promise and seal together, Genesis
17.10. which no man may or ought to Separate, Mat. 19.6.

What can be objected against the assumption, I see not, seeing the Apostle
plainly affirms, but now are your children holy. Unless it may be said, as of
some I have heard, that as the unbelieving wife is sanctified to the husband,
so are the children viz: to the use of their Father: but this to affirm is a
great abusing of the Scripture. For the Apostle in that place answering an
objection that the Faithful is defiled by the society of the unfaithful:
proves that the faithful husband may with good conscience use the vessel of
his unfaithful wife, by an argument from the effects, namely because their
children, which are borne of them, are accounted holy or within the promise,
God having said to all the Faithful, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed.
As for that other strange exposition, that the Children of a believing Father
are no otherwise sanctified then the unbelieving wife is unto her husband, viz:
to their Fathers use only, that cannot stand with the meaning and purpose of
the Apost. For so much may be said of an unbelieving serva^t, that he is for
the use of his master to do him service: if children be no more holy then so,
then have they no prerogative in being the children of a believing Father,
neither is the objection removed by this answer.

If it be further pressed that the vnbeleving wife is said to be holy, as well
as the children, yet is she not within the covenant. I answer, that she indeed
is not holy, as be her children, for she being an infidel is without Gods
covenant, and therefore she is said to be sanctified in her husband, the Apostle
respecting their marriage, which though it was contracted before either party
believed, yet stands firm and not dissolved when either of them is called to
the Faith, so that the believing husband may lawfully use her as his wife, if
she be content to dwell with him, 1. Cor. 7.12. Now the children cannot be
sanctified or Separate to such use to their Father, as the wise is to her
husband. And therefore are the children called holy, because they are the seed of
a believing Father.

John Smyth.

Your sourth argument is from 1. Cor. 7.14. thus.

If the Children of believing parents be holy: then are they within the
covenant of Abraham, and so consequently have right to the seal thereof. But
the first is true: 1. Cor. 7.14. Ergo the second.
I answer: First denying your majors consequent: Seeing that all the nation of
the Jews were holy, and yet not within the covenant of Abraham, I mean as you
do of the everlasting covenant in respect of Christ: that they were not al
within that covenant is plain, Romans 9.6. al they are not Israel which are of
Israel: us. 7. neither are they al Children because they are the seed of
Abraham, us. 12. God revealed, that the Elder should serve the younger, Act.
7.51. ye have always resisted the holy ghost, as your foreFathers have done
so do you: if it be objected that the place of the Romans is spoken in respect
of Gods secreat election, and not of man's knowledge, I answer, the us. 12. is
plain of that which was revealed unto the Church, and yet Esaw was holy and
circumcized when he was borne, being not under the covenant of Abraham in
respect of Christ: and for proof of this point that the whole Church of the
Jews was not under the possession of the everlasting covenant made with
Abraham in respect of Christ: but only under the offer of it, I use these
reasons.

1. First: The condition or obedience of the matter or members of the New
Testament is not the condition or obedience of the matter or members off the
old Testament. Faith and repentance is the condition and obedience of the
matter or members of the new Testament, Marc. 1.15. Ergo: Faith and repentance
is not the condition or obedience of the matter or members of the old
Testament.
The reason of the major is evident, seeing that as the ministry, worship, and
government of the Church of the old Testament was of another nature then the
ministry worship, and government of the new Testament is, so the constitution,
viz: the matter and Form of the Church of the old Testament was of another
nature, then the constitution that is the matter and form of the new Testament
is: Seeing therefore that the ministry, worship, and government of the old
Testament was carnal, the constitution must also be carnal: Therefore the matter
and form must be carnal: Therefore Faith and repentance was not required to the
matter of the old Testament, but only a carnal holiness, viz: The circumcision
of the foreskinne, whereby the carnal form, that is the carnal covenant or
commandment was induced upon them, and whereto they were tied in obedience,
Heb. 7.16. Gal. 5.3.

2. Secondly. The type, shadow, figure, similitude of a thing is not the truth,
the substance, the thing it self: True is nature and reason. The constitution,
viz: the matter and form of the Church of the old Testament is the type, etc.
The constitution or the matter and form of the church of the new Testament is
the truth, etc. Heb. 10.1. and 9.19.23. Ergo: The constitution, viz the matter
and form of the Church of the old Testament, (that is the members, and
covenant) is not the truth: that is the members are not truly holy, but
ceremonialy holy, the covenant is not the everlasting covenant, but the typical
carnal covenant or commandment: and so true holiness that is Faith and
repentance was not required to the members or matter of the Church of the old
Testament.
3. Thirdly, that which was not nor could not be accomplished, performed,
effected or produced by the walking or communion of the Church off the old
Testament, was not required, or exacted, or presupposed to the constitution of
the Church of the Old Testament. Justification and Faith, Sanctification and
repentance, were not effected, performed, accomplished, or produced by the
walking or communion of the Church of the Old Testament, Heb. 9.9. Gal.
2.15.16. Ergo: justification and Faith, Sanctification and repentance were not
required to the constitution of the Church of the old Testament: and so by
consequent, the members of the Church of the Old Testament were not truly holy
in their constitution.
4. That which brought not perfection and life to the members, presupposed not
Faith and repentance to the members: and so not real or true holiness. But the
Old Testament, the Law, and the obedience of the Law brought not perfection and
life to the members of the Church of the old Testament, Heb. 7.19. Gal. 3.21.
Ergo: The Old Testament, or the Law, or the Church of the old Testament did not
presuppose, Faith, Repentance, or true Holiness in the members.
5. That which was a Schoolmr. only to teach Christ, did not presuppose that
the Scholars had already learned Christ or put on Christ, which is only done
by Faith and repentance. The law or old Testament was a Schoolmr. only to teach
Chr: Gal. 3.14. Romans 10.3.4. Ergo, The Law or Old Testament did not presuppose
that the Scholars had learned Christ or put on Christ, which is only done by
Faith and Repentance.
6. That which was hidden, kept secreat was a Mystery, and not revealed the
members of the Church of the old Testament, in their constitution were not
endued withal. Faith, or obedience to the gospel was a mystery, and not
revealed, but kept secreat from the beginning. Gal. 3.23. Romans 16.25. Ergo, The
members of the Church of the Old Testament were not endued with Faith or
obedience to the gospel in their constitution.
7. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, Romans 8.1. There is
condemnation to them that are under the Law, Gal. 3.10. For it is the Ministry
of death or condemnation, 2. Cor. 3.7. Ergo: The Law or old Testament does not
presuppose Christ: or they that are under the Law are not in Christ: and so the
members of the church of the old Testament were not truly holy.
Finally, the whole disputation of Paul to the Romans and Galatians concerning
justification by Faith in Christ without the works of the Law does evidently
confirm this excellent truth. Teaching that seeing the utmost obedience of the
Law did not effect or produce justification, therefore of necessity it follows
that the Law or old Testament did not presuppose it, or true holiness in the
members thereof: For it had been a vanity to have given them a Law which should
not or could not preserve and produce that which was in them in there first
constitution: wherefore I do bouldly defend against all men, that the Church of
the Old Testament in the matter or constitution of it was not really Holy, but
only Typically: and therefore the members thereof admitted in by circumcision were
not truly holy or sanctified, or in actual possession of that everlasting
covenant which God made with Abraham in respect of Christ: but only under the
offer of it in that typical Testament given to Abraham, and afterward assumed
written and amplified by Moses, Ioh. 7.19-23. compared with Heb. 8.8.9.

Having sufficiently confirmed this truth, I return in particular to answer
your objections saying still that the nation of the Jews was holy, not truly
but typically and that their holiness was this, that by that external covenant
whereinto they were by circumcision admitted, they were trained up, or Schooled
to Christ, being by all the ceremonial law and old Testament, or carnal
commandment, as it were by so many means consecrated or dedicated to that
holy cad and purpose, which was tiped and shadowed by those figures and
similitudes of heavenly things. Therefore as the word sanctifying or hallowying
is usually taken in the old Testament for the setting of any thing apart to a
holy use: so were the people of Israel holy: even an holy nation above all the
nations of the Earth, See: Exodus 19.10.14.15. Job. 1.5. Deu. 14.1-4. compared
with Act. 21.28. and for the place which you aledg, Ex. 19.6. to prove the
Israelites an holy nation, I say, that either the meaning is that they were
typically, holy, trained up to holiness, or that they by attayning the end of
the law should attain true holiness in Christ: So that this place is nothing to
your purpose of the holiness of the eternal covenant which God made with
Abraham: So that though infants be under offer of the covenant made with
Abraham in respect of Christ, yet shall not baptism be administered upon them,
as your consequent does import, because that in the old Testament none were
circumcised but those that were actually feased upon that external covenant:
and therefore none in the New Testament shall be baptized but those that are
actually possessed of the covenant of the New Testament: but the actual
possession of the promise is by obedience to the Faith: For by Faith (says the
Apostle. Gal. 3.14.) we receave the promise of the Spirit, and we receave the
Spirit by the hearing of Faith preached, Gal. 3.2. and Faith comes by hearing
of the word preached, Romans 10.17.

Secondly, I answer concerning the consequent of your Majors consequent that it
shall not follow that because children are under the covenant (as you suppose,
but we deny) that therefore they thal have the outward sign or seal thereof: for
you know under the law the females were actually under the covenant of the old
Testament, and yet were not signed with the seal: and before the law was given
all that were actualy under the covenant until the time of Abraham had no
external sign or seal thereof. if you say in opposition to the circumcision of
the female that she was incapable of it: I answer the L. had abundance of
Spirit, and if it had been his will that al under the covenant should be
pertakers of the sign or the seal thereof, he could in wisdom and would
undoubtedly have appointed such an external sign or seal that might have been
administered upon al under the covenant, but seeing the L. chose out the male
only for circumcision, the by he purposed to teach in a type that only the male
(that is, one that is in Christ) shall be sealed with the Spirit of promise under
the new Test. But if you say in oposition to that before the Law, that there was
no seal or sign appointed by God for them under the covenant, because the L.
thought it not meet or needful. I say that herby it apeareth that, to be under
the covenant, was not the cause of title to the seal, but the particular
express commandment or will of God: and so the insufficiency of your
consequent appears, which imports that to be under the covenant is reason
sufficient to prove a party to be entitled to the seal or sign of the
covenant: and this excellent truth herby is manifested, that if it should be
granted that infants were actualy under the covenant yet it could not follow
thervppon that therefore they should have the sign of seal of the covenant,
which you say is baptism, except it could be proved by express commandment
otherwise: for this argument you see proves it not: Hence therefore apeareth the
weakness of your argument, viz: that if infants were holy, and so under the
covenant, yet it does not follow that therefore they shall have the sign or
seal of the covenant which (you say, but we deny) is baptism.

But I pass unto your assumption: which you say is evide^t, 1. cor. 7.14. but
now are your children holy: you affirm that infants of one of the parents
Faithful are holy: I except many things here first: I desire that you expound
unto me what this holiness is which the Ap. here mentions: happily you will say
it is to be under the covenant, then I demand what it is to be under the
covenant? prehaps you will say (though this be to run in a circle) it is to be
justified by imputation of Chr. righteosnes. The^ I demand which of these
three, viz. to be holy, to be under the covenant, to have Chapter righteousness
imputed, is first in nature? happily you will say: First, they are under the
covenant. Secondly, they are justified by the imputed righteousness of Chr.
Thirdly they are sanctified or holy. Then I proceed, and demand when do
infants come under the covenant: when they are conceaved: or when they are
borne? or when the parents are converted being already borne? It will be
answered: That these infants that are begotten of Faithful parents come under
the covenant in their conception: and these infants that are already borne come
under the covenant when their parents are regenerate: hereby then it appears
that the covenant is conveyed to the children from the parents by generation,
and by filial relation: hereunto add that if it be true that some say, that
children under the government of the faithful also are under the covenant, that
the covenant is conveyed also by pupilship or adoption and if bondslaves or
servants being infants be under the covenant because of their beleving Mrs.
then servitude is also a means or instrument of conveigning the covenant from
Mr. to Servants: this being propounded then as the truth you hold, that plead
for Pedebaptisme, then you maintain, that ^^g generation, filial relation,
pupilship, adoption and servitude are means to bring infants under the
covenant, then they are means to bring infants under justification, and under
sanctification: So that it follows that we must account all the infants of
believing parents that are children by nature and by adoption, al infants of
believing Mrs. that are borne in slavery or servitude to be justified and
Sanctified, because the covenant is communicated unto them by the foresaid
relation: Then I proceed and demand why may not all the infants borne under
one King, if his subjects, be all his Servants and Vassals (as they say) be
by that relation brought under the covenant, and so be accounted justified and
sanctified: For relation of a King and a subject borne so is as near as the
relation of a Mr, and Servant, or an adopted Child: And then I demand, seeing
the relation of a man and a wife is nearer a great deal then any relation of
adoption or set vitude, why the wife shall not be under the covenant for the
relation of marriage: happily it will be said the wife being of years cannot
be admitted because of her vnbeleefe^: and I say that infants of parents and
Mrs. cannot be admitted, because of their want of Faith being under years:
but it wilbee said that the covenant with Abraham was with him and his seed
only: I say, that it was made (by your confession) with him and his adopted
infants, with him and his pupils being infants, with him and his Servants being
infants: and therefore not only with him and his seed: and seeing some not of his
seed may be admitted into the covenant, and those that are further of, why
shall not those that are nearer as his wife: but you will say because infants do
not refuse the covenant, they may be admitted to baptism, though adopted
children, though pupils, though Servants: but wives refusing the covenant may
not: I further insist that as infants do not resist, so they do not consent:
and that all the Children, Servants, and Wives, that do not resist, may be
admitted, though they cannot make declaration of their Faith and repentance: if
you say: not so: because that in them that are of years Faith and repentance is
required, but of infants no such thing is required: I answer, first show that
by Scripture, and then I say there is no reason why Faith and repentance should
be required of one to make him capable of the covenant of justification, and
Sanctification more then of another, except you will say that God is accepter of
persons: and further the covenant is only with Abraham and his seed, not with
his adopted Children, not with his pupils, not with his Servants, and therefore
in the^ Faith and repentance must necessarily be had, and so they cannot be
baptized til they show their Faith and repentance which is contrary to your
doctrine: besides you cannot show in all the Scriptures that persons may be said
to be partakers of the covenant actually, except actually they fulfill the
condition of the covenant: and if you say that infants being under the
covenant, justified, and sanctified, therefore they have Faith and the graces of
God in them, I say that is contrary to the Scriptures which say that Faith
comes by hearing: and that the word is the immortal seed of regeneration,
whereby newborn babes under the gospel are regenerate: and if it be said that
infants have a kind of Faith wrought in them invisibly, and after an hidden
manner: I say what God works invisibly, and secreatly we dispute not nor
regard, but what he works visibly and to our knowledge, and by the means
appointed for the communion of the Church: For there is but one Faith, which is
the common Faith of the members of the Church, which is visibly seen by
speaking and confession, according as it written I believed and therefore I
speak, Tit. 1.4. and if it be objected that then we do condemn al infants
dying before they be converted: I say No: we pronounce nothing of infants, but
leave the secreat of them to the Lord, who has reserved secreat things to
himself: Hence then I conclude that seeing you cannot declare what this holiness
is which infants have, seeing they cannot have actual holiness: Seeing you cannot
declare that they have Faith or justification, seeing they cannot have actual
Faith: Therefore you cannot declare that they are actually under the covenant, by
actual Faith and holiness: and so if they be not actually under it, but under
the offer of it only, that is it which we affirm, and which will help you
nothing to baptism of infants.

Secondly, I desire that you would prove unto me by Scripture, that in this
place. 1. Cor. 7.14. Holiness signifies true sanctification, or to be actually
under the covevenant, having it really invested upon them, You endeavor to
declare it out of the text: For you say Paul answers an objection, viz, that
the faithful are defiled with the Society of the unfaithful, and proves that
the Faithful husband may use the vessel of his unfaithful wise with a good
conscience by an argument drawn from the effects, namely, because their
Children are holy, and under the covenant: God having said to the Faithful I
will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. Well, let us see the force of your
reason: your fourth argument was this.

If infants be holy then are they under the covenant. Infants are holy: Ergo
infants are under the covenant.
Your proof that infants are holy is this.

If infants be under the covenant, then infants are holy. Infants are under the
covenant. Ergo infants are holy.
I ask you Sir, in good sooth, is this circular reasoning sound: you say
infants are Holy, because they are under the covenant, and you say they are
under the covenant because they are holy: Let al men judge whither you have
proved infants Holy or not.

Thirdly I answer that (Holy) does not so signify as you expound, neither is
the argument taken from the effects, but from the greater to the less after
this manner.

If your children (in your own judgment) be holy, and you do not put them away
when you are converted to the faith, but use the^ still as your Children to al
those uses whereto children are appointed, the relation natural of Father and
son remaining, though you beleve: then much more the relation of man and wife
remains, and you may use your wives, they being of a nearer natural bond then
your children. But the first is true by your own confession, and by the light
of nature. Ergo the second is true by the light of nature much more.
And whereas you say that by this exposition an vnbeleving servant is in as
good an estate, and as holy as children in respect of the covenant, I confess
it to be so: and you that plead for pedobaptisme say so likewise, seeing that
you will have servants under the covenant by their Mrs. Faith: but I would know
whither the Apostle speaks only of infants or of al Children generally: if
generally of al Children, then all the Children of the Faithful are holy, yea
even those that are unbelievers and then would I know how unbelieving children
can be holy, if not as the vnbeleving wife is holy: that is to the use of their
parents in the relative duties of children and parents. If the Apostle speaks
only of infants, then he speaks not so generally as God speak to Abraham
saying I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, for in that speech you say all the seed is comprehended whither of years or under years, yea servants,
pupils, children by adoption, etc. So that expound it as you will, it cannot be
understood of holiness in respect of the covenant as you pretend: but you will
say they are to be esteemed Holy and under the covenant til they manifest the
contrary: and I say, that they must manifest that they are Holy before they can
be esteemed Holy: and that you cannot prove that assertion from the Scripture:
and the people of the Jews Abraham's carnal Children were Holy when they
declared the contrary by their sins, Exo. 19.6. compared with Exodus 32.9. and
33.3.5, so are the children of the Faithful holy though they be unbelievers as
the wife is holy though an unbeliever.

Finally you say: God has said to all the Faithful, I will be thy God and the
God of thy seed: I deny it utterly: God said that only to Abtaham, Genes. 17.7.
and whither you expound it literally, or Spiritually, I avouch confidently
against you and al men that the meaning of it is not, that God made his
covenant with the faithful man, or the Faithful woman and their infants
begotten of their Bodies: but that literally the meaning is, I willbe God unto
thee Abraham and thy seed according to the Flesh to give them the Land of
Canaan: and so it is expounded Genes. 17.8. Or Spiritually the meaning is, I
will give unto Abraham the Father of the Faithful, and all that are his Spiritual
seed, everlasting life, which is the true Land of Canaan: The latter which is
the truth being signified by the former which is the type: and show me in all
the Scriptures that God said to every Faithful man and woman (for you must
prove it spoken of women as well as men) that he will be God unto them and their
seed: For I would feign know why the covenant should pass unto the infants of
the Faithful: it will be said because of the Fathers Faith: this is false
doctrine: For the Prophet teaches that every man shall live by his own faith
and that one man's faith cannot conveigh the covenant of justificatio^ to
another neither can one man's sin cut of another from the covenant as this
doctrine imports: but the soul that sins it shall dye.

Neither will it avayle to plead that the covenant made with Abraham was an
everlasting covenant. For berith gnolam in the original does not import a
covenant of everlasting continuance, but a covenant that does continue his
proper time: For gnolam signifies any hidden time, or any set time of any
length, as 50. years the time of the jubilee: But let it be granted that the
covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17.7. was the everlasting covenant made with
Abraham in respect of Christ, (which yet I do not see proved) what then shall it
follow that because it was with Abraham and the Faithful whither Jews or
Gentiles believing actually as Abraham the Father did: Therefore it is made with
the Faithful men who is the child of Abraham: and with his children begotten of
his body which have not Abraham's actual Faith, and so are not the children of
Abraham: I deny it utterly: For the Apostle says the seed is but one to whom
the promises were made, viz: Christ or the actual believers: For Christ
dwells in the hearts of men by Faith only. Gal. 3.16. Ephesians. 3.17. But if it
be made with the Faithful who believe actualy which is one seed whither Jew or
Gentil, and the infants of the Faithful carnally begotten of their body, which
is another seed, (for they are not begotten of the immortal seed of
regeneration:) then the covenant is made with the seeds which are many: and
that is directly contrary the Apostles words, Gall, 3.16. Therefore the one
seed is persons actually believing, and actually justified by the righteousness
of Faith, as Abraham the Father of all the Faithful was, Roman. 4.11. whence
this Argument may be framed.

Abraham is the Father of al them that actually believe. Infants do not
actually believe. Ergo, Abraham is not the Father of infants: and so infants
are not under the covenant of Abraham.
Again Abraham's covenant was only to Abraham's one seed, that is only to the
believers. Infants are not actual believers. Ergo, Abraham's covenant is not to
infants: and so infants are not under the everlasting covenant of Abraham.
Again. They that are the children of Abraham, do the works of Abraham.
Infants cannot do the works of Abraham. Ergo infants are not the children of
Abraham: and so not under the covenant of Abraham.
Again. I reason thus:

They that are not under the everlasting covenant made with Abraham shall not be
baptized. Infants are not under the everlasting covenant of Abraham. Ergo:
infants are not to be baptized.
These and many other such Arguments may be colected out of the answer to this
fourth Argument of yours: but these shall suffice.

Mr. Rich. Clifton.

1. Corinthians. 10.1.2.
If the infants of the Israelites were baptized in the cloud and in the sea, as
well as their parents, what lets the infants of believing parents under the
gospel, to be likewise partakers of baptisma as well as they?

The former the Apostle affirms, 1. Cor. 10.1.2. and therefore good warrant
must be showed, that our infants are cut of from this privilege that the Jews
Children had. And if the former Baptism of the Jews was a Type of our
Baptism, then must there be an agreement between the Type, and the thing
Typed, which is not, if our Children be not baptized, as well as theirs.

The depriving of our Children of the Sacrament, is to shorten the Lords bounty
toward his people of the New Testament, that being denied to their children,
which God gave to his people, and to their infants under the Law, is to deny
them (in regard of their seed) the like assurance and comfort, which the
Israelites had of theirs. And so to make our estate worse and more
uncomfortable then theirs was: and yet the Prophets prophesied of the grace
that should come to us, and did inquire and seach after the same. 1, Pet. 1.10.

Glad tidings were preached to Abraham and his seed to infants of eight days
old Gal. 3.8. And this before Christ came in the Flesh, therefore much more he
being come, is joyful trydings brought unto us and our infants and so are we to
beleve that the grace of God is not lessened either toward us or our children,
but enlarged by his coming.

John Smyth.

Your 5. argument is taken from 1. Cor. 10.1.2. framed thus.

If the infa^ts of the Israelites were baptized in the cloud and in the sea,
as well as their parents, what lets the infants of beleving parents under the
gospel to be likewise partakers of baptism as well as they?

The former the Apostle affirms, 1. Cor. 10.1.2. and therefore good warant must
be showed that our infants are cut of from this privilege that the Jews
children had: that baptism being a type of our baptism,

To this argument I make answer: by framing the like argument.

If their infants did eat the same Spiritual meat and drink which the parents
did eat: then why may not our infants being able to eat and drinck, eat and
drinck the Lords Supper?

The former the Apostle affirms, 1. Cor. 10.1.2. and therefore good warrant
must be showed that our infants are cut of from the privilege: and those
sacraments were types of our Sacraments.

Again, I answer more properly thus: That there shall be a proportion betwixt the
Type and the truth, that baptism of the cloud and sea, and our baptism, viz:
that as young and old carnal Israelites were baptized in the cloud and sea, so
young and old Spiritual true Israelites shall be baptized by the baptism of
repentance: and as the carnal parents with their carnal children were baptized
in type: So Spiritual parents with their Spiritual children, that is such as
are regenerate by the word and Spirit, shall be baptized with the baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins, which is baptism in truth.

Further I say: That our infants shall have a privilege fair greater then the
infants of the Israelites had in that typical baptism: For they by it were
only baptized into Moses and the Law: That by it they might learn Moses, and
in Moses the truth in Chr. as it were under a vele: but our infants under the
gospel shall have the daily institution and education of Faithful parents, which
is infinitely superior to that dark pedagogical baptism, and all the baptismes
and ordinances of the old Testament: Seeing that with open face they may in the
preaching of the gospel see Christ Jesus, and not under the vele of Moses.

Moreover I deny that the baptism of the cloud and sea was a type of the
external baptism of the new Testament, in the abstract: but it was a type of
our baptism in the concrete: that is the baptism of the cloud did Type out
our baptism in the 3. parts thereof, viz. 1. The baptism of the Spirit, 2. The
declaration of Faith and repentance the antecedent of baptism with water, 3.
The outward washing with water a manifestation of the foresaid particulars: and
all these to be conferred upon infants proportionable to those infants, that
is, Newborn babes in Christ.

And whereas you further alledg that if your infants be not baptized, the
Lords bounty is shortened to us and our infants: our confort is diminished in
respect of our infants which they had in respect of theirs: and the gospel is
not preached to our infants as it was to theirs: I answer that Gods bounty, our
confort in respect of our infants, and the preaching of the glad tidings of the
gospel is as large and ample every way to our infants as to theirs: For Gods
bounty of the actual exhibiting and fealing the everlasting covenant to Abraham
and al his carnal infants was never extant in the Old Testament: Neither were
the parents in circumcising their infants comforted in the assured conferring
of it upon their infants: and circumcision did not so plainly preach Christ
then as he is preached now to infants: but what could the preaching of Christ
profit infants either then in types or now in truth? Neither do I think that
the Lord ever intended to teach the infant any thing at that instant, but
afterward he was to learn that which the Schoolemr. circumcision upon his
Flesh taught him: viz: the circumcision of the heart: and if you say that so
infants baptized are to be instructed, I answer, that in the New Testament by
baptism we manifest what we have, namely, the inward baptism, whereas in
the Old Testament by circumcision they learned what they had not but ought to
have, viz: The inward circumcision of the heart, and mortification of the
sinful Flesh.

Mr. Rich. Clifton.

Mat. 28.19.
If Christ gave a commandment for the publishing of his covenant and
administering of baptism the seal thereof to al nations: then are the beleving
Ge^tils and their infants to receave the same. But the first is true, Mat.
28.19, Ergo the latter also is true, Act. 13.48. and 16.14.15.32.33.
It will be objected against the Major, that if follows not, that the infants
are any more bound to receave baptism, then they are bound why lest they are
infants to receave the word, but the word they cannot receave, ergo. I answer,
that the commandments is general to al nations, and therefore as Abraham if he
should not have obeyed to the Lord commanding him to circumcise himself, and
al his family, yea the infants, he should grevously have rebelled against God:
So whosoever of the Gentiles shall not beleve and be baptized both himself and
his seed, shall have no part ^or portion in the inheritance of Christ: Seeing he
cuts himself of and his seed from the covenant of God, Genesis 17.14.

And though infants be not capable of the preaching of the covenant, (which
not withstanding they are bound unto, as they shall come to years of
discretion) yet are they capable of the seal, as before is showed, and
therefore by virtue of this general commandment. Mat. 28.19. are to be
Baptized.

John Smyth.

Your 6. Argument from Mat. 28.1^ is framed thus.

If Christ gave a commandment for the publishing of his covenant and
administering of baptism the seal thereof to al nations: then are the
believing gentiles and then infants to receave the same. But the first is true.
Mat. 28.19. Ergo the latter also is true, Act. 13.48. and 16.14.15.32.33.
The errors of this argument I will discover in order: First I deny that
baptism is the seal of the covenant of the new Testament. Secondly I deny
that circumcision was the seal of that everlasting covenant that was made with
Abraham in respect of Christ: Thirdly, baptism therefore does not succeed in the
place of circumcision, there being only a chandg of the ceremony (as you
pretend) the covenant being the same, these three particulars are already
proved. Fourthly I deny, that though Abraham who had a special commandment,
did circumcise his male infants, therefore Christians upon this general
commandment, Mat. 28.19. shall baptize their infants Fifthly, I say rather
the contrary is hence proved, because Christ commands to baptize only those
that are by teaching made Disciples (for so the word matheteusate signifies)
therefore infants are by express prohibition excluded, and it is as if Chr.
should say, I will have you make them Disciples and baptize them that are made
Disciples by teaching and no other: and so Christ expressly excludes infants.
Lastly, I deny that infants are capable of baptism, for they cannot confess
their faith and their sins, neither declare that they are baptized inwardly
with the Spirit, and so cannot outwardly by the baptism with water declare the
same, but are in every respect unable thereto, and incapable thereof.

Hence therefore I reason against baptising infants.

1. They only are to be baptized that are made Disciples by teaching. Infants
cannot be made Disciples by teaching. Ergo, Infants are not to be baptized.
Secondly I reason thus.
2. Every precept affirmative contevneth a negative under it. Make Disciples by
teaching and baptize them, is an affirmative containing under it, baptize not
those that are not made Disciples by teaching. Ergo, those that are not by
teaching made Disciples, are by Christ forbidden to be baptized: and so infants
are not to be baptized.
3. Thirdly I reason thus.

They that are incapable of baptism are not to be baptized. Infants are
incapable of baptism: Seeing baptism confisting of the inward baptism of the
Spirit, expressed by confession in word, and washing with water in action:
infants are incapable of the two former parts of baptism. Ergo infants are not
to be baptized with water which is the latter.
4. If the new Testament be as clear and perspicuous as the old, and Christ the
Mediator of the new Testament as faithful as Moses the Mediator of the old
Testament: then the persons to be baptized, and the condition of baptism, and
the time of baptism are as clearly and faithfully described in the institution
of baptism, as the person, condition and time of circumcision. But for
pedobaptisme there is no express description of the person, condition, or ^y^e
of their baptism (...) for true baptism: there is most evidently, and
faithfully set down the persons, condition, and time of administering it, viz:
persons confesting their sins, Mat. 3.6. whereas persons impenitent were put
by, Mat. 3.7-12. compared with Luke 7. us. 29-30. Persons believing. Act.
8.12.13. and us. 36-38. persons that had received the holy Ghost, and expressed
the same by prophesying, Act. 10.46-4^ persons penitent, Act. 2.38. persons
that are by teaching made Disciples, Mat. 28.19. Ioh. 4.1. persons borne again
Ioh. 3.3. Therefore such persons are to be baptized who are thus particularly
described, wherein the new Testament is as clear as the Old, and Christ the
Mediator as Faithful as Moses: and no other but these: For if others be, then
is not the New Testament so clear as the Old, nor Christ as Faithful as Moses,
which to say is to blaspheme.
Mr. Rich. Clifton.

Lastly, the Apostles practice is our instruction, but they baptized not only
the master of the family which believed, but al his howsehold. Act. 16.15.33.
Therefore now also the like is to be done: and so consequently the infants are
to be baptized, for they are 2 part of the family. and that infants are of the
family, see Genesis 45.18. where Joseph bad his brethren, take their Father, and
their howsehoolds, and come to him, now in chap. 46.5.7. it is said they carried
their Children and wives in charets, nothing hereby, that children were of the
howsehold, else had they no commandment to have carried them into Egypt, see
also us. 27. and Exo. 1.21. it is said, because the Midwyves feared God,
therefore he made them howses, in 1. Tim. 5.^. the Apostle says, he that
provideth not for his own, and namely for them of his household, he denies the
faith, etc. Now I would ask if children be exempted from the howshold in any
of these places, or in any other where is mention made of a particular
howshold. Therefore this argument will prove that children were baptized, unless
it can be showed that they were specially exempted. and if the holy ghost have
not exempted them, who dare do it against a general commandment of baptising
al nations.

John Smyth.

Your 7. argument is taken from Act. 16.15.33. framed thus.

The Apostles practice is our instruction. But they baptized not only the Mr.
of the Family which beleved, but al his howshold Act. 16.15.33. Therefore now
also the like is to be done: and so consequently infants are to be baptized,
for they are a part of the family.
I make answer to this argument confessing it wholly, but yet denying the
consequent of your conclusion: For it does not follow because all the howshold
of Lydia and the Gaylor were baptized, that therefore infants were baptized: you
shall (...) what exceptions I take.

First, I say though infants are a part of the family when the family has
infants in it, yet it does not follow that whersoever there is mention made of a
Family, that therefore that Family had infants in it: except therefore it be
proved that the f^mily of Lyd^, and the family of the Gaylor had infants in it,
this allegatio^ is nothing.

Secondly, by this reason you might prove that Lydias Husband, and the Gaylors
wife, and their children of 40 years old, and their Servants of 60. years
old, were baptized. For all these are parts of a Family, yet I supose you will
not say they were al of them baptized, except you can prove, that Lydia had a
Husband, or the Gaylor had a wife, or children of 40. and servants of 60.
years old: your argument therefore is weak presupposing the thing that is in
question.

Thirdly, if it were yielded that there were infants in Lydias Family, and in
the Gaylors, does it therefore follow that they were baptized? nothing less: and
that I will declare thus.

1. You say that to the baptising of the Gaylors wife, and children of years
of discretion there was necessarily required Faith and repentance, or else they
were not baptized: So say, I that because infants cannot believe and repent,
though they were in the Family yet shall they not be baptized: For there is one
condition required for all persons to be baptized.

2. I say: that although it be said that all that perteyned to the Gaylor were
baptized, yet it is also said us. 32. That the word was preached to all that
were in his house: and us. 34. That al his howsehold believed, and how came
their faith but by the word preached us. 32. Seeing therefore that all that were
baptized in the Gaylors hows believed by the preaching of the word: infants
that could not believe by the preaching of the word, were not baptized if he
had any: besides it was a mervailous distempered time at midnight to wake
children, and to bring them before the Apostles for baptism.

3. I say: That for Lydias Family it is not said that all her howsehold was
baptized: or if it had been so said, yet it follows not that every particular
person off her Family was baptized. For Mat. 3, 5.6. it is said that al Judea
went out to John and were baptized of him, confessing their sins: yet hence
it cannot be concluded that all and every one that went out were baptized: or
that all and every one went out to be baptized: no more can it be proved that
because it is said that Lydias Family was baptized, that therefore all and
every particular person was baptized, but as Mat. 3.6. only they that confessed
there sins: and as Act. 16.32-34. onley they that believed by the word
preached were baptized, so was it with them of Lydias Family that were
baptized: For the Apostles I doubt not kept one order, and required the same
conditions in all that they baptized: So that by that which has been said the
vanity of this argument is manifested: and it is proved plainly that none were
baptized in the Gaylors Family, but only they that beleved after the word
preached and so infants specially are exempted, if he had any in his family
which yet is not manifested.

Hence therefore I reason thus against baptising infants.

1. The Apostles practice is our instruction. But the Apostles in baptising
howseholds, first preached the word to all that were in the Family, Act. 16.32.
and then the believing were baptized, us. 34.33. Ergo: They only that by the
preaching of the word were converted and believed were baptized. Again I
reason thus.
2. That which the Apostles practiced in one Family, they practiced in all
Familyes that they baptized. But in the Gaylors Family, according to Christ's
commission, Mat. 28.19. They first made them Disciples by preaching the Word:
Act. 16.32-34, Ergo: So they practiced in all Familyes: and therefore in the
Family of Lydia, of Crispus, Act. 18.8. of the Ruler: John, 4.43. and so no
infants were baptized.
And this shall suffice for answer to your arguments.

Mr. Rich. Mr.

Hereunto I will adjoyne some testimonies of the Fathers, not to prove that
children ought to be baptized, which is to be done, and is by the Scriptures
already proved; but to show the practice hereof in ancient Churches. Augustine
(as I find alleged) writing to Jerome, Epist. 28. chap. 5. Says Cyprian not
making any new decree, but firmly observing the Faith of the Church, judged
with his fellow Bishops, that as soon as one was borne, he might Lawfully be
baptized. See Cyprian Epist. to Fidus. And writing against the Donatists, Lib.
4. Chap. 23. and 24. says, that the baptism of infants was not deryved from
the authority of man, neither of counsels, but from the tradition or doctrine
of the Apostles. Civil: upon Lev: Chap. 8. approves the baptism off infants,
and condemns the iteration of baptism. Origin upon the Roman says, that
the Church received baptism of infants from the Apostles. Nazianzenus in Orat.
in S. Lavacrum. 3. says: That baptism agrees to every age, to every
condition of life, to all men, if thou have an infant, that is Sanctified from
his infancy, yea from the finger ends it is consecrated. After he faith: Some
man will say, what say thou of infants which neither know what grace is nor
pain, what shall we baptize those? and he Answers, yea verily. Amb: Lib. 2.
de Abrah. Chap. 11. Speaking of baptism, faith, nether Old man nor prosolite,
nor infant is to be excepted, because every age js guilty of sin, and
therefore stands need of the Sacrament These and many others of the Fathers do
bear witness according to the Scriptures of the Lawfullnes of the baptising
of insents.

John Smyth.

And here for a conclusion you produce the Fathers: I say that the producing of
Fathers who al of them held plenty of Antichristian heresies, shall avayle you
nothing in your cause: and you that deny the testimony of Fathers contrary to
the scriptures, how can you with any color of equity produce Fathers against us
in a case contrary to the Scripture, is it not to set darkness against light?
do not you know that all the Fathers even every one of them brought his stone
to the building of the Temple of Antichrist: but I know your drift in the
producing of Fathers, viz: First to set a gloze upon your Antichristian heresy
of baptising infants. Secondly to draw the world into dislike of the L. truth:
but if a man should produce testimonies of Fathers against your Separation,
against you in the case of Presacy, Preisthood, and Deaconry, ^ead prayer, and
other parts of your cause, what would you answer? would not you say, that they
were testimonies of men living in corupt times, contrary to the Scriptures,
etc. Even so say I to you: but you say that you do not bring testimony of the
Fathers, to prove any thing: well then: you confess they prove nothing:
remember that, and let al men take notice that you produce testimonies that you
say prove nothing: but why do you produce testimonies of the Fathers: Forsooth,
to show the practice of ancient Churches: but al those Churches were
Antichristian by your own confession: and what does antiquity Antichristian,
or universality antichristian help you against the truth? Therefore I say: The
truth needs not the testimony of Antichrist: and old universal antichristian
errors shall not prevayle against the truth: I have showed you that from the
beginning it was not thus: go; baptism of infants is a Novelty: but let us
show you some footsteps of the bringing in of baptising infants, and that out
of the Fathers.

Henricus Pantaleon: Chronolog. fol. 16. says: Victor Apher in the year 193.
ordained: that at Easter baptism should be indifferently administered to al
hence then it follows that before his time only such as were Catechized in
the Faith were baptized: For he would not decree that heathen should be
baptized.

Eusebius. Eccles. Histor. Lib. 7, Chap. 8. says that Novatus rejected the
Holy baptism, and overthrew the Faith and confession which was accustomed
before baptism: whereby it appears that Faith and confession were required
before baptism, and therefore the rudiments thereof still remain, that in
baptising of infants, a confession of sin, and Faith is required of the
suretyes or parents.

The same Eusebius. Lib. 10. Chap. 15. reports the story of Athanasius baptising
children in sport: which baptism was approved (though done in sport) by
Alexander Bb, of Alexandria, after that he by examination had found that the
children had questioned and answered according to the manner of the Catechumeni
in baptism: whereby it appears that then only persons by confession of their
Faith and sins were admitted to baptism in Alexandria.

Hosius: Petricoviensi confess. de fide. chap. 27. says that these two are
Aposticall traditions, which the Scripture teaches not: viz: that there are;
persons and one God: and that Dionisius and Origin do testify baptism of
infants to be an Apostical tradition: Now you know that their Aposticall
traditions were antichristian inventions.

Polydor. Virg. Lib. 4. Chap. 4 de inventoribus reru^. says thus: It was in
use with the ancients, that persons of years (sere) in a manner should be
baptized clad with white garments: Lactantius.

Candidus egredit^^ nitidis exercitus vndis:
Atque vetus vitium purgat in amne novo.
And this was performed at Easter and whitsontide except in necessity: in the
mean time til the Feasts of Easter and whitsontyde came they were catechized:
this testimony is of good instruction.

Ludovicus Vives, writing upon the first book of August: de Civitate dei.
chap. 27. says: that in ancient times no man was baptized but persons of
years, who could understand what the mystical water signified, and required
baptism ofter then once: and therefore now the infant to be baptized is
demanded three times, if he will be baptized, for whom the suertyes answer,
yea.

Erasmus Rotrodamus in his annotations upon the fifth of the Roman. says,
that in Paulls time it was not received, that infants should be Baptized.

Thus have I thought good to show you testimonies of men and so by setting man
against man, to lead you and us al from m^n to the holy Scriptures, which is
the rock whereupon we may safely build: which as you have heard flatly
forbids the baptising of infants, who cannot be made Disciples by teaching.
Mat, 28.19. John. 4.1.

Mr. Rich. Clifton.

Now let us come to considet of the reasons alleged to the contrary, the first
of them is this.

2. Because there is neither precept nor example in the New Testament of any
infants that were Baptized by John, or Christ's Disciples, only they that did
confess their sins, and confess their Faith, were baptized, Marc. 1.4.5.
Act. 8.37.

Answer.

First, this reason being brought into form will be wray the weakness of it:
For suppose that should be granted that there were nether a special
commandment or example in the practice of John or Ch^^ Disciples, for the
baptising of infants, yet may it notwithstanding be lawful to baptize them,
namely, if by some consequence it may be gathered out of the Scripture. And
this may be done by good warrant from the example of our Savior Christ, Mat.
22.31.32. where reasoning against the Saduces concerning the resurrection,
proves it by an argument necessarily drawn from Exo. 3^6. where no such thing
was expressly mentioned. And thus he taught usually and refuted his
adversaries, as the History of the Gospel witnesses. After the same manner
does Paul in his Epist. to the Romans and Gal. prove justification by Faith
only without works of the law this he did not prove by alleging any place in all the old Testament in plain terms affirming so much, but by conclusions of
necessary consequence from the Scriptures. and to this purpose might diverse
other instances be aledged. So likewise if we prove the baptising of infants by
unanswerable arguments out of the Old and New Testament (though we cannot show
any plain precept or example,) yet may we upon warrant thereof, not fear to
baptize them. For the author of this reason him self cannot deny, that both he
and we must beleve diverse things which we gather out of the Scriptures by
necessary consequence, that we shall not find in express words. As that there
be three persons in on^ Godhead, that the son is Homousios, that is of the
same substance with the Father: Now such express words cannot be showed in
the Scripture, and many such like.

2. Secondly, also if this argument be sufficient to bar children from the
Sacrament of baptism, then is it as sufficient to keep back women from the
Lords Supper, for there is no special precept, nor yet example that Women
should partake of the Lords Supper, but the Lawfullnes there of is only proved
by consequence, because they are within the covenant, and are pertakers of the
Sacrament of baptism, thus the weakness of this reason being manifested, I
will thirdly answer unto it.

3. Thirdly, that there is both precept by Christ and example by his Disciples
for the baptising of infants as has been proved by my two last reasons
alleged to prove the Lawfullnes of baptising of infants: Commandment, I say,
Mat. 28.19. Go teach al nations, baptising them, where is no exception of the
children of faithful parents: and therefore there being a Law once given, that the
covenant should be sealed to the infants as well as to the believing parents, the
same Law of sealiug the covenant must stand still in force to the parties
(though the outward sign be changed) except the Law maker do repeal it, or
have set down some ground for the repeal thereof which must be showed: or else
this commandment does b^nd us and our infants to receave this seal of the
covenant. And as for examples we read that the Apostle baptized Lydia and her
howshold. Act. 16.15, and the Keeper, and all that belonged unto him, us. 33.
both which seming to be great Families, it is not likely that they were without
children, though the Evang: mention them not.

But the exception is that only such as did confess their sins, and confess
their Faith, were baptized. I desire that to be proved that only such and no
others were to be baptized. Concerning John, indeed he was sent to call the
people to repentance, and so to prepare the way of the L. Mat. 3.3. and so many
as did repent and confess their sins he baptized, but did John refuse their
children if they brought them to him? but it will be said, there is no mention
made that he did baptize the^, no more say I, is there that they were offered
unto him. There is no mention that the Disciples of Chr. were baptized, and yet
it were to bold a part, and no doubt very false to affirm that they were not
baptized: Not al things that John did, not yet that Chr. did, in the
particulars, are written Ioh. 20.30. but the sum thereof. and therefore to gather
an argument from hence, because there is no mention that children were baptized
by John, therefore they ought not to be baptized is a larger conclusion, then the
premisse will bear. and so the reason taken from the baptising of the Eunuch,
(Philip baptized no children, when he baptized the Eunuch) is of no weight, to
prove that therefore children ought not to be baptized. Was not the Eunuch a
stranger far from his country, now in jorney homeward and therefore not likely
that he should have children with him specially in such a tedious jorney, and
not knowing of this accident.

John Smvth.

Now in the next place you proceed to make answer to my three arguments against
baptising of infants: In answer to the first argument you say that if it be
brought into form it will bewray the weakness of it: Well I will bring it into
form, and then let us streng then it where it is weak: as thus

That which has neither precept nor example, is not to be done. Baptising of
infants has neither precept nor example. Ergo, baptism of infants is not to
be done.
Again another part of my Argument may be brought into form thus.

That which has precept and example must be practiced. Baptising of persons
confessing there sins and their Faith is commanded, and was practiced by
Christ, John, and the Apostles. Ergo, those persons are the persons to be
baptized.
My Argument therefore consisting of an affirmative which includes a negative
is as, I take it a forcible Argument: Let us see your answer and ^ceptions.

First, you say that a consequence necessarily drawn from the Scripture is
sufficient to prove the baptising of infants, though there were no special
commandment or example: as Christ proves the resurrection, Mat. 22.31.32,
out of Exodus 3.6. by necessary consequent and as Paul in the Epistles to the
Romans and Gal. proves justification by Faith only without works, by necessary
consequents: and we believe many things that are not expressed in words: as 3.
persons in one Godhead, and that Christ is coessential or consubstantial to the
Father: this is your answer or exception: where to I reply thus.

Although a necessary consequence in all cases shall prevayle, yet I say the Lord
cannot leave (...) in this particular to necessary consequence he dealing
plainly and Faithfully with us: For seeing the new Testament is more manifest
then the old, the Gospel being with open face, the Law being hid under the
vele: and seeing Christ is as Faithful, yea much more faithful then al men, and
therefore is called Amen, the Faithful and true witness: and so has as
faithfully prescribed all the ordinances of the new Testament as Moses did the
ordinances of the old Testament: and seeing Moses has set down distinctly and
most plainly, the persons with their qualifications to be circumcised, and the
circumstance of the time when circumcision was to be administered: either Christ
has as plainly and fully set down these particulars in the new Testament, or
else the new Testament is not so plain as the old, and Christ is not as
Faithful a^ Moses: For it had been easily said, go teach, make Disciples, and
baptize them, and if they have any infants baptize them without teaching them
or thus? baptize me of years when they confess their sins and their faith,
but baptize all the infants of the faithful, though they cannot confess at al
their sins and says, or it had bee^ easily said: John baptized them that
confess their sins and there young children also: but to say that Christ,
John, and the Apostles leaves direction for this maine matter, only by dark
obscure, far fetched, probable conjectures and consequents from the old
Testament which was only typical, and is abolished in respect of the Types, and
that (...) has not left evident and undeniable ground for it distinctly and
expressly in all the foresaid particulars, is to say that Christ is not so plain
and Faithful in his office prophe^^cal, as Moses was, who has taught al these
particulars so distinctly as nothing is more plain: and therefore though I must
needs yield that necessary consequents are true, yet I deny that in this case
the Lord has left us to consequents, and it is against his truth, his
Faythfulnes, and the evidence of the new Testament, so to do,

More over seeing that the new Testament was wrapped up and p^eached obscurely in
the old Testament, and the types thereof, it was necessary that Christ should
out of the old Testament prove the resurrection, and Paul out of the old
Testament prove justification by faith without work: for the Jews would not
believe any thing contrary to the law or without warrant of the law: and the
Gentiles, namely the Galatians especially, being seduced by them of the
circumcision, Act. 15.1. must needs have their mouths stepped by the law: and
there were no Scriptures but the old Testament, and the ordinances of the new
Testament could not be so plainly drawn out of the old Testament without
consequents but new the new Testament being written, and all the ordinances
thereof plainly taught by Christ and his Apostles: why shall we be sent to
obscurityes, and conjectural consequents, seeing that we may with open face
look into the glory of Christ, as it were into a glass, and therein see all the
beauty of the new Jerusalem as clear as Crystal, Revel. 21.11. 2. Cor. 3.18.
and whereas you would fetch arguments from the old Testament to prove the
baptism of infants, we having the clear light of the new Testament, you therein
set us to School to the rudiments of the world, and put aside the light of the
sun at noone, and set up a candle as the Papists do in their funerals: for
although it be meet that we attend unto the Prophets as unto a light shining in
a dark place, yet seeing the day star is come, and the sun of righteousness is
risen upon us, let us walk in this clear light, and use the other when we want
light, as with the Jews who deny the new Testament: and in other like
occasions.

Besides the trinity of persons, and unity of essence in the Godhead is proved
by plain words, 1. John. 5.7. and hereby the Homoiousia of Arrius is confuted:
as also: Phil. 2.6. and for the word person it is, Heb. 1.3. and the word
Godhead is Roman. 1.20. So that hereby you get nothing: but I say still that
whatsoever cannot be plainly showed in the New Testament, is not needful for
us to know in the New Testament, if it be an ordinance of the New Testament as
baptism is: but the trinity and unity is no part of the New Testament more
then of the Old Testament, and being common to both may be sought out of both,
and so any other common truth.

Finally, I say show me any necessary consequence for baptizing infants,
either out of the Old Testament or New Testament, and I yield: but I desire it
may well be observed, first, that you are driven to consequents for this
matter, and therein simple witted people may easily be mislead by a Logician:
Secondly, that the Gospel of Christ is for babes: Mat. 11.25. and therefore the
most simple person is, capable of it: and so there shall need no obscure
consequents out of it for they are not able to comprehend them: and lastly,
that the consequents that are brought I avouch to be mere hallucinatious and
sophismes, as I have already declared and shall do hereafter more fully as they
shall be produced.

Your second answer and exception is, that if want of Special precept and
example, bar infants from baptism, it shall also bar weomen from the Lords
Supper: I deny it, for in plain terms it is said: 1. Corinthians. 11.28. Let
Anthropos, viz: either man or woman eat after examination: and Gal. 3.28. There
is neither male nor female in Christ Jesus, but al are one, and 1. Corinthians.
10.17. we that a^e many are one bread, and one body, being al pertakers of one
bread, and 1. Corinthians. 12.13. whee have been al made to drink into one Spirit,
and Dorcas is a Disciple: Act 9.36. and the Disciples meet together to break
bread, Act. 20.7. and the Disciples continned in breaking bread: Act. 2.41.42.
being first 3000. then 5000. amongst whom there was Sapphyra, and the Widows
of the Grecians, Act. 2.41. and 5.1. and 6.1. and so this exception is nothing
to the purpose.

Your third answer and exception follows, wherein you do affirm that there
is both precept and example for baptising infants, the Commandment is, Mat,
18.19. The example is of the infants of Lydra, and the Keeper of the prison:
Act. 16.15.33. To these I have already given answer in the 6. and 7. reasons
going before, and therefore hold it needles to repeat it here again: only one
thing is here to be answered that you object. viz: That the Law once given of
sealing the infants as well as parents, must be retained, except a repeal can
be showed: I answer, (besides that baptism is not the seal of the New
Testament, but the Spirit: and that circumcision was not a seal of the
everlasting covenant made with Abraham in respect of Christ but of the Old
Testament) that when Princes and common wealths make Laws to endure but for a
time, when the time is expired then they are repealed if they be not
reestablished: So, though it were granted that infants of the Old Testament
were by circumcision sealed to the covenant made in respect of Chr. which I
peremptorily deny, yet seeing the time of circumcision is exspired therefore
infants are not now to be sealed (as you say) by baptism: for the exspiring of
the time is the repealing of the Law: therefore until you can show that baptism
of infants male and female is in the new Testament established: I will desend
that they are not to be baptized especialy the female infants which were never
appointed to be circumcised: but I count these but slender exceptions.

In the last place you require proof that only persons that confessed their
sins and their faith were to be baptized: I prove it unto you thus.

1. They only were to be baptized that Christ commanded to be baptized.
Persons made Disciples by teaching, were only commanded to be baptized by
Christ, Mat. 28.19. Ergo: persons made Disciples by teaching, were only to be
baptized.
The minor of this argument is evident, Mat. 28.10. where this being the
affirmative you shall make then Disciples by teaching them, and then baptize
the^: this must needs be the negative, you shall not baptize them til you have
made them Discip^es by teaching: and so persons taught were baptized and they
only.

2. Again: considering that in every affirmative there is included a negative:
therefore whersoever an example is that persons confessing the r sins and their
faith were bapti^ed, the^ is signified that those that did not confess their
sins and their Faith, were (...) baptized: For we must know that the body is
one: and the Faith is one, and the Spirit one, and the baptism one, and the
seed one: and that there is not two in Christ but one: For in the new Testament
they know God from the least unto the greatest, Heb. 8.11. and they are al
taugit of God, Ioh. 6.45. and the least in the Kingdom of heaven is greater
then John. Mat. 11.11. and this do I take to be a plain proof of the point
which you desire.

You say further that the reason why John baptized no children, is for that
they offered them not. well: I say that his preaching was such as peremptorily
excluded infants: For it was the baptism of repentance for the remission of
sins: Marc. 1.4. and he required confession of sins, and repentance of them
that he baptized, Mat. 3.6-11 compared with Luke 7.29.30. otherwise he would
not baptize them: and therefore Chr doctrine is the same with John's, Mar. 1.15.
both thereby signified unto their hearers. that whosoever would be baptized and
enter into the Kingdom of God, must repent and believe the gospel: For being
not regenerate (though they were Jews, and begotten of Faithful parents) yet
they could not enter into the Kingdom of God, Ioh. 3.3.5. and here it would
be considered unto whom Christ and John Baptist preached: did he not preach
unto the Jews the Lords own holy people: and yet he said repent and believe:
and required of them amendment of life: Now if they had been truly regenerate
in their comunion as is pleaded, John needed not thus have preached, nor Christ
have required such conditions of them, but only they might in few words have
said: come you Faithful and believing Jews, you and all your infants be
baptized at once: For baptism is for circumcision: but John says, think not
to say you have Abraham to your Father: and Christ says, you are of your
Father the Devil: and John says, the Lord will purge his floor: whereby it is
evident that the Jews were not Faithful in their communion: and that they
perceaved plainly that seeing repentance and Faith were required by John and
Christ particularly, which must be declared by confession, therefore it was in
vain for them to offer their infants whom they knew John and Christ would not
baptize, but excluded from baptism by their doctrine.

Again, whereas you say there is no mention made that Christ's Disciples were
baptized, and yet it were boldness to affirm they were not baptized: and so al
Christ's and John's actions are not written but only the sum: and therefore
though it be not mentioned that infants were baptized, yet in the sum it may
be collected they were: I answer, for the Disciples of Christ it is plain
they were baptized, Ioh. 4.1. and Ioh. 1.35.40. and for the summing and
particularizing of al John Baptists or Christ's actions, I say it was not
needful to set down the particulars but the kinds: and if there had been any
commandment or example of baptizing any one infant, it had been sufficient,
though it had not been mentioned how many particular infants: but as it fell out
in circumcision that one particular precept was sufficient, though it were not
written how many thousand were circumcised, so likewise of baptism.

Finaly, for that you say of the Eunuch, though I intend it not as you answer
i^ me thinks that some mention should be made of Philip to the Eunuch, or of
the Eunuch to Philip, his infants or children being at home far of concerning
infants: or at least of some other that had infants, or did baptis^ persons
that had infants, and that after this manner: What have you any infants? Let
them be brought to baptism as well as your selves: For they have title to it
through your Faith, or thus, I have infants I pray you let them be baptized
as well as my self: or thus, do you repent and you shall be baptized and your
infants: but the deep silence of infants baptism, yea the exclusive condition
of believing and repenting necessary to the Kingdom of God, yea and the
confession of sins and confession of Faith performed by persons baptized, yea
and Christ's commandment of making Disciples before baptism, all these and
many mo are strong profes unanswerable against baptism of infants.

Mr, Rich. Clifton.

The next reason is this.

2, Because Christ commanded to make Disciples by teaching them and then to
baptize them, Matthew. 28.19. John. 4.1. But infants can not by Doctrine become
Christ's Disciples. And so can not by the rule of Christ be baptized.

Answer.

1. The Apostles were indeed commanded to make Disciples, and to call unto the
Faith and fellowship of the Gospel, not only the Jews, but the Gentiles
through out the world, Mat. 28, 19. and gave them power to preach the Gospel,
which before had been preached to Abraham, Gal. 3.8. and to baptize all that did
receive it: and thus we grant that faith must go before baptism, in all such
as are to be made Disciples, and brought into the covenant of God: So went
Faith before circumcision, Abraham first believed, and after was circumcised,
and likewise must al they which with Abraham enter into Gods covenant, first
believe and then be baptized as the Eunuch, Act. 8.37. Lydia. Act. 16.13. and
the Keeper of the prison, Act. 16.33. But when such have received the Faith,
then are their infants and howshold capable also of baptism as Abraham's Family
was of circumcision, he believing the promises, Genesis 17. and therefore it is
written, that when God opened the heart of Lydia, that she did atend to the
Word that Paul preached, and believed, not only the her self, but al her
howshold were baptized, and yet is there no mention of the Faith of any of them,
save of Lydias only. and so the Kep believing al his received baptism, and
this is proportionable to the example of Abraham, whose Faith we find
sufficient to interest al his seed in the covenant, and make them capable of
the seal.

2. Secondly, Christ takes the same course (in giving out this commission to
his Disciples, Mat. 28.19.) in bringing the Gentiles into Gods covenant, that
the L. took with Abraham, for making his covenant with him, that he should be
the Father of many nations, etc. He did not first command him to be
circumcised, but preached to him the gospel or covenant. Genesis 17.1-8. and he
beleev^ng was circumcised and his howshold So here is a commandment, first,
for the publishing of the Gospel to them that were not in Christ, and then for
baptising such as believed with their Familyes, for that is included in this
Commandment, else had not the Apostle baptized the Familyes of Lydia, and of
the Kep. as before has been: noted.

1. Thirdly, if children shall be excluded from baptism because they cannot be
made Disciples by teaching, and so believe, then by as good reason may they be
excluded from salvation, for he that says, he that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved, says also, he that believes not shall be damned, Mar. 16.16. if
therefore want of faith be sufficient to exclude infants from baptism: then
likewise the want of Faith is sufficient to exclude them from Salvation, for if
the former be held to be the meaning of Christ, then must the latter also be
granted, a thought whereof is to be abhord.

Lastly, general rules must be taken with their sense and meaning. It is a
general rule given by the Apostle: 2 Thessalonians. 3.19. That if any would not work
he shousd not eat: yet if any should gather from hence that the impotent and
infants should not eat, because they do not work, this were to offer
violence, and to wrest the Apostles doctrine: So Christ giving a general rule
for the making of Disciples, and baptising them, now to deprive the infants of
believing parents of baptism, because they cannot receive instruction, which
is intended only of them that be capable thereof and unconverted, is to
diminishe the commandment of Christ, even like as he that should say,
infants cannot believe, and therefore cannot be saved.

Again, that can never be the true meaning of a Scripture when it is expounded
so as it contradicts other Scriptures, or any sound conclusion gathered out
of the Scriptures, as this exposition of the Anabaptists upon this place of
Mat. 28.19. does, as my formet reasons for the baptising of infants, do
plainly manifest.

John Smyth.

Next follows your Answer to my second reason: which reason of mine is
framed thus.

They that cannot by Teaching be made Christ's Cisciples, ought to be baptized.
Infants by teaching cannot be made Chr. Disciples, Mat. 28.19. Ioh. 4.1. Ergo
infants ought not to be baptized.
Your answer to this argument of mine consists in 4. particulars.

First, you say, that as Abraham first believed, and then was circumcised, and
then al his household received circumcision with him: So all the beleving gentiles
must first be baptized, and then through there faith al there howshold must be
baptized as in the example of Lydia, and the Gaylors family: of whose faith
there is no mention made, as neither of the faith of Abraham's family.

To this first particular of your answer I say, that you err mistaking the
Scriptures For Abraham's faith did not go before his circumcision as a necessary
antecedent to establish him a member of the Church of the old Testament, but as
a necessary president, example, type, or pattern of justification: and
circumcision in Abraham was not a seal of his justification, or of the
everlasting covenant God made with him in respect of Christ, thereby to
establish him into Christ, (for he was in Christ and sealed in Christ many
years before, by the seal of the Spirit:) but Abraham's justification in
uncircumcision, was a type of the justification of the Gentiles who are
uncircumcised: and Abraham's circumcision alter his justification sealed him up
to be the Father of all the believers circumcised: and so circumcision had a
triple use in Abraham one general and two special and particular: the two
special are these:

First circumcision sealed up Abrah. form of justification to be a pattern to
all the believers in uncircumcision: that the believing gentiles should be al
justified by actual faith, as he was.

Secondly, circumcision sealed up Abrah. form of justification to be a
pattern to all the believers in circumcision, that the beleving Jews should be
al justified by actual faith as he was.

The general use of Abrah. circumcision was common with him to Ismael and all the persons of his family. and all the carnal Israelites, viz: to seal him up
to the old Testament, and to the observation of the whole Law, whereby Chr. in
that vele of the old Testament was preached unto the Jews, it being there
Schoolmr. to teach them Christ.

Now for the place. Romans 4.11. which I am assured you will ground your assertion
upon, I say, it is both falsely translated, and expounded: for (tes en te
acrobustia) is usually translated which Abrah. had when he was uncircumcised:
and this I say is a false translation: For this is the true translation, viz:
which (is or was or shall be) in the uncircumcision: meaning that circumcision
upon Abrah. the Father of all the beleving Gentiles was a seal of justification
to all the uncircumcision that believe: and the end of his circumcision is his
Fatherhood of the Faithful: and the righteousness of faith is not sealed up to
Abrah. particular person, but to the uncircumcised that beleve. and that which
was sealed up in special to Abrah. was his Fatherhood or presidentship of
justification: So that circumcision in Abrah. was to establish him the Father
of the Faithful Gentiles, and his circumcision does teach the Gentiles that if
they will partake Chr. they must by their actual faith apprehend Christ's
righteousness, as Abrah. their Father did, otherwise they cannot be justified,
and so Paul's intent is plainly proved, namely, that al men must be justified by
faith without the works of the law: and this do I confidently affirm to be the
true translation and exposition, and that the common acceptance and
translation of the place is the mother of this heresy of pedobapistry.

Again, all the persons of Abrah Family were not circumcised, because of Abrah.
says, but the males, al and only the males, were circumcised because of the
special commandment of God: Genesis 17.10. the males being assumed as types for
to teach the^ figuratively the male Chapter and circumcision of the heart by him and
the females were uncircumcised as they were also put out from being the matter
of the burnt-offring (for the males only were offered in burnt-offring) to
signify that those that had not the male Chr. in them were not fit either to
be members of the church of the new Testament, or to be sacrificed unto the L.
Mal. 1.14. but if Chapter the male were in the^ whither male or female in Chr. it
was nothing: they were accepted, Gal. 3.28.

Further you say that as it was with Abrah. and his family in circumcision, so
was it with Lydia and the Gaylor, and their familyes in baptism that is not
so: I show the difference in diverse particular.

1. They of Abraham's Family were circuncised upon particular precept in
obedience of the Commandment: Genes. 17.23. you cannot prove that the infants
of Lydias and the Gaylors family were baptized upon particular precept, but
only you say it, and endeavor to justify it by the example of Abra. family:
but if Abra. family be an example then you must bring a particular precept (as
he had) for baptising infants.

2. They that were males only were circumcised, but you will have both males and
females baptized: this is another difference.

3. They that were circumcised of Abrah. Family, were all the males being of
years, though they were never so lewd and wicked persons: So were not all the
persons of Lydias and the Gaylors family, but only the believers being of
years according to your opinion.

4. As Faith did not entitle the female to circumcision, and as infidelity did
not deprive the male of circumcision in Abraham's Family: So faith did entitle
the female to baptism in the Family of the Gaylor and Lydia: and infidelity in
the male did exclude him from baptism: you see therefore that the proportion is
not alike betwixt baptism and circumcision.

The second particular in your Answer to this Arg. is, that the same order is
kept in Chr. commission, Mat. 18.19. in bringing the gentiles into Gods covenant,
as was kept with Abtah: he and al his Family were brought in by circumcision,
after the gospel preached to him. Genes. 17.1-8. so Lydia and the Gaylor were
brought into the covenant with all there Family, and were baptized after the
Gospel preached to them.

I answer, that in this particular there are differences betwixt the one act of
Abrah. and the other of Lydia and the Gaylor, according to the commission of
Chr. Mat. 28.19.

First, Abrah. and al his family by the Lords commandment, came under the
covenant of the Old Testament actually, and the males only were circumcised:
but Chr. does not command all persons of a Family in the New Testament to be
baptized, but only such as are made Disciples, and al them though they be
weomen as Lydia was.

Secondly: The gospel was only preached to Abrah. own person by the L. but in
the Gaylors case Paul preached the gospel to all that were in his house. Act.
16.32. and so Chr. commands to make them Disciples by preaching: So were not
Abrah. Family, who being first circumcised afterward were taught the Law being
a School (...) to teach Christ.

Thirdly, the gospel was not preached to Abrah. thereby to prepare him to
circumcision, as if thereby it should follow that circumcision was a seal of
the Gospel or New Testament: for it is not so as I have already manifested but
Chr. in the new Testament commands the gospel to be preached to every
creature, that is to every particular person, that is to be admitted into the
Church by baptism (...) and so Paul did to the Gaylors Family, and this is
another difference.

The third particular in your answer to this argument is ^ if infants be
excluded from baptism for want of faith by hearing the word, then they shall
also be excluded from salvation by that reason: Marc. 16.16. I deny it utterly:
For Christ speaks only of such as to whom the gospel may be preached, which
only are men of years For when he says go preach the Gospel to every
creature, he does not bid them preach to beasts, byrds, Fishes, or infants,
which have no ears to hear, but he bids them preach the Gospe^ to every
creature that has an care to hear, that is, to all that are of a docible age
and nature: and then he adds, whosoever (o^ them that have ears to hear) do
believe, and upon their faith be baptized shall be saved, whosoever (of me^ that
have ears to hear) do not beleve (though they be baptized) shall be damned: now
I pray you Sir, how does this sentence include infants to baptism, or exclude
them from Salvation ^or how does your consequent follow: and for infants I say
that either they are al saved, though they cannot come to faith by hearing, or
that they are one of the L. secrets, and so not to be searched into: and that
the Scripture does speak only to and o^ the^ that have ears to hear, and o^
things visible and known, and not of things invisible and secreat: therefore this
particular of your answer is vain.

Your last particular in the answer to my arg. is, that general rules must be
taken with there sense: as 2. These. 3.10. that as infa^ts or impotent persons
though they cannot work yet may eat, because that speech is not directed to
infants, etc. so Mat. ^^.19. though infants cannot be made Disciples, yet they
may be baptized, seeing that speech is not directed for infants: and such an
exposition of that place must be given as does not contradict other Scriptures
or necessary consequents from Scriptures.

Well Sir: I answer you, that first you confess here that this place of Mat.
28.19. is not uttered of Christ in respect of infants that they should be
taught, and then I say he never intended that by this place you should gather
that they should be baptized as you have done in your 6. arg. and here you do
evidently contradict your self as you see: and let that be remembered of you well.

Next I say, that general rules shall be expounded with there senses: and as
impotent persons and infants shall eat though they cannot work seeing that is
spoken of these that are able to work: so infants shall be saved though they
cannot be baptized, seeing they cannot by teaching be made disciples: and this
is not to diminish the commandment of Christ o^ wrest it from the sense: but
to make the commandment of baptising larger then the commandment of
teaching (as you do that will have the infants baptized that cannot be taught)
is to separate those things that Chr. has joined, and to wrack the command:
of Chr. out of joint, and to break the^ in pieces: and woe be to the^ that so
do without repe^ta^ce. Finally, I confess that it is not the true sense of a
place that contradicts either Scriptupe or true conseque^t: but this truth of
the L. which you blaspheme with your title of Anabaptistry, does not contradict
either Scripture or sound conclusion from Scripture: but is agreeable to the
constant and most evide^t practice of Ioh. Chr. and the Apo. (for you cannot
produce an insta^ce of an infant baptized by any of them, and most agreeable to
all the precepts of the Ap Chr. and Ioh. for baptising persons confessing their
faith and their sins: and you are driven to most miserable shifts, and most
narrow straights for your pedobaptistry, which you see cannot stand without
scraping together all the wrestings and pervertings of Scriptures which you
have heaped together in your answ: your principal foundation being a sandy
molehil fetched from the old Test: even a false ground, that circumcision was a
seal of the new Testament, and that the covenant made with Abrah. in respect
of Chr. was made with all his carnal infants, who were al in Chr. Jesus visibly
in their birth and conception by virtue of the covenant: which I have proved to
be manifest untruths, and so you see your building tottereth and will never be
able to endure the storm.

Mr. Rich. Clifton.

Now follows the third reason.

3. Because if infants be baptized, the carnal seed is baptized, and so the
seal of the covenant is administered to them, unto whom the covenant aperteyneth
not, Romans ^.8. which is a profanation.

Answer.

1. This reason seems to imply, that the seed of the faithful is part carnal,
and part Spiritual, (for I cannot imagine that the Author holds all the seed
of the faithful to be carnal. and that the covenant aperteynes not unto any of
them, seeing so to affirm contradicts. Act. 2.39.) and therefore because the
Spiritual seed is not discerned until it manifest it self by outward
profession, therefore may not be baptized, lest in baptising them, the seal
should be set also vpoon the carnal seed, unto whom belo^gs not the covenant.
To affirm this first is to deny that which is due to the seed to whom the
promise belongs, for the wickeds sake, and so to injury them. Secondly, this
reason also serves as well against the circumcision of the infants of the
Israelites, seeing at eight days of Age they could not be discerned, whether
they were of the carnal or Spiritual seed, and so the seal of the covenant not
to be administered to the^, to whom the covenant did not belong. But as then the
not discerning hereof, did nothing hinder circumcision to be administered to
all the infants of the Israelites, no more now can the not knowing of the
Spiritual seed from the carnal, hinder baptism.

2. Touching the seed of the faithful, thus I conceive thereof that it is
carnal and Spiritual in diverse respects, carnal as they do naturally descend
of their parents, so are they al alike in sin, Psalm. 51.3. Spiritual, in
respect of the covenant wherein they are comprehended with their parents. Genesis
17.7. Act. 2.39. in which regard also, all the children of the Faithful are said
to be holy, 1. Cor. 7.14. and thus considered I deny the children of the
faithful to be carnal seed, and do affirm that to such belongs the covenant
and the seal thereof. and though some of them in the right of God be known for
none of his, yet to us it suffices for the administration of baptism, that
they be the seed of the faithful: and therefore as the Israelites circumcised all
their children, (though some of them proved to be carnal afterward, as Ismael,
Esau, etc.) so are we to baptize al our infants, leaving secreete things to
God, Deuteron. 29.29.

3, If this be sufficient to clear us from profaning of the Sacrament if we
baptize them that make confession of their faith, because they so do, though
they be not the children of God, as S. Magus, Act. 8, 13. then is it not
simply a profaning of baptis^, to administer it to them unto whom belongs not
the covenant, but to ^ne it to them which plainly appear to us to be without:
Therefore, if no man dare take upon him to say this or that infant is carnal
and without the covenant of grace, it shall be no profanation of the Sacrament,
if it be administered unto such, seeing we ought to hold the seed of the
faithful, holy, 1. cor. 7.14. If it be objected (as some have done to me, that
all the seed of the faithful are carnal, and so to beheld until they believe and
make confession of their faith. I answer, first, if they take carnal, as it is
opposed to the children of promise in Romans 9.8. I vterly deny it, for the
children of the Flesh can never be the children of promise, Romans 9.8.13. These
two seeds are made so opposite by the Apostle, as that the one can never be the
other. Secondly, if by carnal they mean nothing else, but that natural
corruption wherein we are borne: That hinders infants no more from baptism,
then it does those that can give an account of their faith, seeing natural
corruption remains still in the purest professor, Romans 7.23 and if it be
replied, that their natural corruption is not imputed to them that believe, no
more (say I) is it to infants, else Christ dyed not for them, neither could they
be saved, dying whilst they be young.

Lastly, if Abrah. knowing that God would establish his covenant to Isaac
Genes. 17, 19. yet circumcised Ismael, us. 24. and Isaac knowing that God had
chosen his younger son, Genesis 25.23. with 27.33. yet circumcised Esau as well as
Jacob, and in so doing neither of them profaned the Sacrament: much less is
baptism profaned, when it is administered to the seed of the faithful to whom
belongs the promise, Act. 2.39. And thus having showed the weakness of these
3. reasons against the baptising of infants, let us come to the second
position, which is this.

John Smyth.

In the next place follows your answer to my third Argum: which Argum: of
mine may be framed into this form.

The carnal seed is not to be baptized: For the covenant, perteyneth not to
them. Infants are the carnal seed, Romans 9.8. Ergo infants are not to be
baptized.
To this Argument you make Answer also in 4. particulars.

First, you expound my meaning, but I can expound mine own words best: and
therefore by the carnal seed? I understand al children borne by carnal
generation, whatsoever though they afterward do believe: For they are carnal
visibly to me whosoever they be that do not show their Faith by their
works, that do not the works of Abrah. yea though they dye in their infancy,
and are saved with the Lord: For I must judge according to that which I see, and
which is manifested: and I call them carnal as Paul calls himself carnal,
Rom, 7.14. and the Corinthians carnal, 1. Cor. 3.1.3. and as in opposition to
the Spiritual seed, that one seed of Abrah. unto whom the promise was made:
Gal. 3.16. and the Phrase is taken from Romans 9.8. where the children of the
Jews are called the children of the Flesh: and Gal. ^.23. where Ismael is said
to be borne after the Flesh, and Heb. 7.16. the commandment is called
carnal: So children borne of their parents naturally are carnal, such were all the Jews infants who were after the manner of Ismael. Gal. 4.23. Such are al
our infants, for our infants are in no better estate then the infants of the
Jews: They were al borne according to the Flesh (except Isaac who was in type
burn after the Spirit) Gal. 4.24.25.28. and I say that the covenant made with
Abraham in respect of Christ did not actually fease upon any infant of the
Jews in deed and truth: and the place Act. 2.39 does not prove that it did:
For that place is to be understood of the offer: of Christ and the New
Testament to all he carnal Jews and their children, but of the real exhibiting
^t to all that are called only: and therefore I say that to baptize infants is
to baptize the carnal seed, for all infants are carnal, being conceaved (...)
borne in since, being the Children or wrath, until the Lord work his work in
them, which when he does I know not: when I see it wrought in them by the
fruits according as it is written, s^ew me thy Faith by thy works, then dare
I pronounce them the Spiritual seed of Abrah, for they that are of Faith, are
blessed with Faithful Abraham: Therefore I affirm that infants are not to be
esteemed actually under the possession of the new Testament, which new
Testament is visible in the visible ordinances the of: why then they are damned
you will say: God forbid: do you condemn all the men that are not of your
Faith: and yet they are nearer condemnation in ^^e judgment of the Scripture to
you then infants: for Chr. says that he that beleveth (...) (speaking of them
that hear the gospel and do not beleve) shall be condem^^^ but the Scripture
teaches us nothing concerning the final estate of infants, except it, b^^ the
sal^ation of them al: This is my exposition.

Now according to your exposition, I should intend that because it is not
discerned which children are Spiritual seed which the carnal, therefore both of
them must be deprived of baptism, lest by giving baptism (which you falsely
call a seal, and I therein speak according to your opinion) to al, it should be
profaned by the carnal seed well suppose that this were my meaning what then
you except against this exposition two things: one that the Spiritual seed
should be injuried by denying baptism to it for the carnal seeds sake (...)
and I reply by giving baptism to all indifferently, we should injury baptism
that is to be administered only upon them that confess their Faith and
sins, and that are made Disciples by teaching: another thing you except is
that this reason should avayle against circumcision seeing the m^^es of 8. days
could not be discerned to be the Spiritual seed: and I insist that it was not
then needful that they should be discerned to be the Spiritual seed for that
carnal seal of the carnal covenant: it was enough for investing of them with
that carnal and typical seal, that they were the carnal and typical seed, and
that they were male Israelites or Proselytes: and show me in all the old
Testament, but especially in the institution of circumcision that the Lord
required any thing of any person to be circumcised, but to be a male: but now
in the new Testament we having the truths of those types, it is plainly taught
unto us, first that Christ the male must be in us, and ^. that the^r must be
circumcision of the heart, and mortification of the Flesh, and 3. we must
attain to and learn all that the Schoolm. of the Old Testament could teach us
before we can be baptized, for John and Chr. expressly require Faith and
repentance in them that are to be baptized: and I do infinitely wonder at you
and at my (...) and at the whose Earth, that we should not see so evident a
truth all this time.

The second particular you bring in answer to my reason is a distinction of the
respects of the seed of the Faithful: For you say as they are borne of their
parents they are carnal and sinful: Psalm. 51.5. as they are under the covenant
they are Spiritual, Genesis 17.7. and are called Holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. and so are not
the carnal seed: and so they may be baptized as well as the Jews infants were
circumcised though some of them prove wicked afterward, as Ismael and Esaw,
etc. I answer: First, your distinction is without warrant of Scripture: and I
deny that infants of the Faithful are to be considered in these two respects:
and whereas you bring two places Genesis 17.7. and 1. Cor. 7.14. to prove the
latter part of the distinction I have answered these two places already showing
your false exposition of them, and that the infants of Abraham were not in
their birth under the actual possession of the everlasting covenant made in
respect of Chr. but only under the offer of it, and that the infants and all the
children of the faithful are holy only as the wife that is an unbeliever is
holy: and so this exception of yours is frivolous.

The third particular you bring in answer to my reason, is, that it is not
simply a profaning of the covenant to administer the seal of it to them to
whom it belongs not as to Simon Magus, Act. 8.13. but it is then profaned
when it is administered to them that are wicked, etc: I answer, the Sacrament of
baptism is profaned when it is administered upon a wrong subject whatsoever it
be: as to give the Lords Supper to an infant of two year old So to baptize an
infant is a profanation. For as profession and confession of Faith shall
entitle any man to all the ordinances of the Chur. and first to baptism: So
absence of confession of Faith shall debar every one from all the ordinances
of the Church in communion: and although I will not say that Children are
damned, yet I dare say that they are borne and dead in trespasses and sins,
and that they do not nor cannot show any spark of grace to me, and therefore
although I dare not say this or that infant is not under the election of God,
yet I dare say that never an infant in the Earth is actually seized of the New
Testament which is only atteyned by confession of sin and Faith: For so
says Christ: the time is fulfilled, the Kingdom of God is at hand: repent and
believe the gospel: Marc. 1.15. and except a man be borne again he cannot
see the Kingdom of God. John, 3.3. and Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith,
Ephesians. 3.17. and as I cannot deny but that many infants are elected, yet I cannot
say which infants shall believe and confess their sins and Faith, and so I
know not upon which to administer baptism and I must be assured that they do
beleve before I can baptize them, for whatsoever is not of Faith is sin, and
to know nothing to the contrary, but that they do bele^ve is not sufficient
warrant for baptism: yea and I do know certainly that ^eing Faith comes by
hearing, therefore they do not beleve to me, yea though they could here and did
believe that is nothing to me except they can show me their Faith by their
confession. I say therefore that al infants are carnal to me. Romans 9.8. For the
Apost. v^: 5 says plainly that to be borne of Abrah. acording to the Flesh is
not to be borne according to promise, or to be as you say Spiritual, for your
distinction before was that every infant of Abrah. and so of the faithful was
borne Spiritual as well as carnal: but here the Apostle says directly contrary
to your assertion that they are not all Children of the promise and covenant,
because they are the Children that lineally descend of Abrah. and you say
peremptorily that all that lineally descend of Abrah. and the Faithful man are
children of the promise and covenant, and so to be baptized: I desire you with all your knowledge reconcile these contradictions: and whereas you say the
Children of the Flesh are so opposed, that they can never be the Children of
the promise, and that therefore the Children of the Faithful cannot be so called
carnal: I answer that all the children of the Jews Church were borne according
to the Flesh, Gal. 4.23-25. and so were carnal, and so are the Children of the
faithful: and yet as many of the Jews were afterward regenerate, and children
of the promise though al at the first children of the Flesh, so many of the
infants of the Faithful may prove Children of the promise by Faith; though at
the first al are the children of the Flesh that is carnal: but I confess
indeed that Esaw can never be Jacob: and one so carnal can never be Spiritual:
and whereas you say, that carnal corruption does not hinder infants from
baptism, no more then men of years that make confession of their Faith, I
answer yes: For men of years confessing their sins and their Faith, declare
the mortification of sin and regeneration by the Spirit, infants being borne
in sin, cannot nor do not declare their regeneration at al to us: and so
with them we have nothing to do: and whereas you say natural corruption is
not imputed to infants no more then to men believing, let it be so, and yet
you cannot defend that without the opinion of universal redemption, and then I
say, that if the infants of the Faithful being delivered from their natural
corruption may therefore be baptized, then al infants shall be baptized who are
pertakers of the same benefit, eve^ the infants of Turks: if you say no: Seeing
the infants of the Faithful are only redeemed and under the covenant, then you
condemn all the infants that dye who are not borne of Faithful parents: and yet
you cannot prove that the infants of the Faithful are under the actual
possession of the covenant, which is only by Faith, and so the scruple still
remains unloosed.

The fourth particular you bring in answer to my reason, is, that Abrah.
circumcised Ismael, and Isaac circumcised Esaw, and yet they knew that the Lord
would establish his covenant with neither of them: much more may infants be
baptized to whom the covenant belongs, Act. 2.39. I answer: that the external
seal of that external covenant was particularly enjoined by God to every male,
and the knowledge of the reprobation of Esaw and Ismael did not hinder that
carnal seal: nor disanul the precedent express commandment of circumcising
every male of 8, days old: but now seeing we have no express commandment
for baptising infants, but an express commandment and many examples to the
contrary, that only persons made Disciples by teaching, confessing their Faith
and their sins, are to be baptized: and considering that infants borne of
Faithful parents are the children of the Flesh, Romans 9.7. Gal. 4.23. and are
not actually under the possession of the everlasting New Testament, therefore
baptism which you call the seal, can not be administered upon them, and the
place Act. 2.39. has o^ times receeved Answer.

Mr. Rich. Clifton

The Second Position.

1. That Antichristians converted are to be admitted into the true Church by
baptism.

Answer.

As the former position denied the baptising of infants, so does this
annihillate that baptism which we have received in the Apostate Church, and
establishes rebaptisation and this also I will show to be an error by proving
the contrary, and then answer the reasons hereunto annexed.

That the baptism administered in the Apostate Churches of Antichrist, is
baptism not to be reiterated, thus I prove it.

If the Apostasy of Israel did not so pollute circumcision that it ceased to
be the seal of Gods covenant to so many of them as repented: no more does the
Apostasy of our fore Elders, so pollute baptism that it cease to be a
Sacrament to so many of them as repented. But the first is true, 2. Chron.
30.11.18.21. else could not so many of Israel as came to Ierushalem have eaten
the Passover, seeing no uncircumcised might eat thereof. Ergo, the second.
If it be objected that the Apostasy is not alike, then let it be showed, that
the Apostasy under Antichrist did make a nullity of baptism, and not the
Apostasy of Israel of circumcision: For Israel played the harlot so deeply,
that the Lord denied her to be his wise, or him self to be her Husband: Hos.
2.2.

John Smyth.

And thus having showed the vanity of your answers to my reasons against
pedobaptiestery ^. let us come to your answer made to my second position: which
is this.

2. That Antichristians converted are to be admitted into the true Church by
baptism. The first thing that in your Answer you intend to prove, is, that the
baptism administered in the Apostate Churches of Antichrist is not to be
reiterated.

And for this purpose you produce 6. Arguments.

Your first Argument is framed thus,

If the Apostasy of Israel did not so pollute circumcision that it ceased to
be the seal of Gods covenant to so many of them as repented: no more does the
Apostasy of our forefathers so pollute baptism that it cease to be a
Sacrament to so many of them as repented. But the first is true, 2. Chron.
30.11.18.21. Ergo the second.
I Answer that the Apostasy of Antichrist is deeper then the Apostasy of
Israel, for first Antichristians are not called Israelites, but Babylonia^s,
Egyptians, Sodomites Gentiles in the Revelation, whereby the holy Spirit of
wisdom gives us to conceave that he does account the Apostasy of Antichrist
equal to Paganism it self: yea to the very worst kind of Paganism.

Secondly, I declare plainly the differences betwixt the Apostasy of Antichrist
and Israel, in this, that Isreal's Apostasy did not destroy the true
constitution of the chur: But Antichrists Apostasy did raze the true
Apostolic constitution: For the true constitution of the Church of the old
Testament was of carnal Israelites or Proselites circumcised: Genesis ^7.10-14.
Exodus 12.48.49. and so long as they retained circumcision in the Land of
Canaan, they retained a true constitution, though their Apostasy was never so
great in the worship, ministry, and Government, as is to be seen Hos.
4.6.8.12. therefore Abijah does not chardg the Israelites with a false
constitution, but declares unto them their false Government, 2 Chronicles. 13. us.
8. Their false ministry us. 9. Their false worship, us. 8. and declares the
true government, ministry, and worship of Judah. But it is manifest that
Antichrist has not only set up a false Government of Prelacy, a false
ministry of Preisthood, and a false worship of reading, but also has set up a
false constitution of the Church: For whereas the true Apostolic constitution
was of baptized Disciples that confessed their Faith and then sins he has
foysted in a false matter of the Church, viz: infants: and persons unbaptized:
and so a false form: for infants are no more capable of baptism then is a
fool o^ ^^d man or Pagan: neithe^ can they express any more repentance o^
Faith then such persons do: and seeing the true form of the Church is a
covenant betwixt God and the Faithful made in baptism in which Christ is
visibly put on: and that infants cannot receave the covenant which is only done
by actual visible Faith, nor cannot seal back unto the Lord that he is true,
Ioh. 3.33 as God seals unto them his truth by his Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13. For the
covenant is this, I will be their God. 2. Cor. 6.16. and they shall be al taught of
God, Ioh. 6.45. and shall al know God from the least unto the greatest: Heb.
8.11. and the covenant is this: I will be their Father, 2. Cor. 6:18. and we
shall be his sons calling him Father by the Spirit, whereby we are sealed, Gal.
4.6. Hence it follows that the Church of Antichrist being constituted of a
false matter, viz: infants incapable of baptism, and of a false son, viz:
infants unable to enter into the New Testament by sealing back the covenant
unto the Lord, and consenting unto the contract, therefore they can have no
title to Christ or any of his ordinances, but are as pagans or Gentiles in the
Lords account. Circumcision therefore in the Israelites Apostasy was true
circumcision, because it was performed upon carnal Israelites or Proselytes
the eigth day: but baptism in Popery is false baptism, and so in the Lords
account no better then Pagan washing, being administered upon infants a subject
that God never appointed to baptism: a subject that is as incapable of
baptism as an infidel, a mad man, a natural fo^le, or any other subject that
cannot confess their Faith or sins, or be made Disciples by destruction.

Thirdly I declare that Israel was the true Church of God, or a member or part
of the true Church of God though infinitely corrupt as well as Judah in the days
of her Apostasy, see Ezechiel 3. toto. and Ezech. 16. toto: and Ezech.
20.28-31. and therefore if Judah retained true circumcision in her Apostasy when
the L. calls her a harlot Ezech. 16.35. and the Apostasy of Judah is worse in
the L. account then that of Israel Ezech. 16.47-53. Surely the circumcision of
Israel was also true, and Israel a true part of the Church as well as Indah: and
for the bil of divorce which some plead was given to Israel by Hosea: Hos. 2.2.
I say that was after the passover of Hezechiah which was in the first year of
his reign, 2. Chron. 29.3.17. and 30.2. and the bil of divorce was given the
sixth year of his reign, 2. King. 17.23. compared with 2. King. 18.10. yet
nevertheless Hosea calls Israel the Lords people after he had prophesied of
the bil of divorce to be given, Hos. 4.6.8.12. and when the bil of divorce was
given, diverse of Israel I doubt not, kept themselves pure from Samaritanisme,
and retained circumcision, and came up yearly to Jerusalem even til the days
of Josiah, 2. Chron. 35.18. compared with 2. Chron. 34.6.7.3-33. So that hereby
it is most manifest that no manner of sin made the Church of the old
Testament a false Church, so long as they retained circumcision in the Land of
Canaan, yea if they retained circumcision though in Babylon, wherevppo^ I am
persuaded that if the Papucy, or England, or the Greek Churches did only
baptize men confessing their Faith and their sins into Chr, the Son of God,
or into the Trinity, though they retained their false ministry, worship and
Government, and other there abominations yet the baptism was true and not to
be repeated: as their circumcision was good notwithstanding al their
abominations and horrible Idolatryes, and fearful Apostasy in Israel.

Mr. Rich. Clifton.

Babylon in Chaldea (which was a type of Spiritual Babylon, Apoc. 18.2.) though
they did abuse and profan the vessels of the L. Dan. 5.3. yet did not that make
a nullity of them that they ceased any more to be the vessels of the house of
the Lor. but were brought up with them of the captivity that came up from Babel
to Jerusalem Ezra. 1.11. Even so although Spiritual Babylon have profaned the
Holy things of God, as baptism and the rest, yet remain they still Gods
ordinances to al them that come out of her, Apoc. 18.4. and return to the
celestial Jerusalem. and as these vessels of the house of the L. need not to be
new cast, because of Babels polluting them: no more is baptism to be
reiterated to the people of God, because it passed through the polluted hands of
the Papists.

If it be objected, that they that administered baptism in Babylon, were
Idolaters, and had no calling thereto.

I answer: That they which circumcised in the Apostasy of Israel were
Idolaters, and so standing in that estate could not be fit Ministers of Gods
holy ordinances. and that the wanting of a lawful calling to administer the
Sacrament makes not a nullity thereof, the circumcising of Moses Son by his
mother Zippora, Exodus 4.25. does plainly teach. For as the Lord makes effectual
his word to his people, though coming unto them, by the hands of a false
ministry, so does he baptism to all that be his, though administered by them
that have not a Lawful calling thereunto. The sin of the minister makes not a
nullity either of the word or Sacraments, else thould the efficacy of the word
and Sacraments, depend upon him that administreth the^, which is not so, for
both have their effect from the Lord.

If again it be objected, that baptism was not administered in the Apostate
Chur. of Antichrist to a fit subject I answer that the children in the Apostasy
were as fit subjects to receave baptism, as the infants of Israel in the
days of Jeroboam and Ahab, were to receave circumcision: Seeing the covenant of
Abraham (after the coming of Christ) belonged as properly to the Gentiles, Gal.
3.14. as before it did to the Israelites,

John Smyth.

Your second argument follows which is this in effect.

As the Babilonians abuse of the vessels of the L. house did not make a nullity
of them, but they were used after the captivity, Ezra. 1.11. so the
Antichristian abuse of baptism cannot disanul it, but it may be retained when
men come to the Faith: and it needs not to be reiterated, no more then the
vessels of the house of the Lord be new cast,

I answer many things: First, this arg. is an excellent arg. for the retayning
of idol Temples, the worship, government, ministry of the ecclesiastical
assemblies of England: if it be said they were never appointed by God, so say^,
that baptism of theirs was never appointed by God: but is the devise of
Antichrist.

Secondly, I answer, that the vessels of the Lords house were his own
ordinances, and therefore need not to be new cast: but the baptism of Antichr.
is not the L. own ordinance who never ordained it: for you must distinguish
them thus: The vessels of the L. house were substances framed by art into
particular shapes at the L. apointement but the baptism of the L. is a
compound or concrete ordinance or action limited in certain essential
particulars: not being a substance but an accident in definition now if Antic
had retained the essential parts of baptism, I confess it needed not to be
repeated, no more then the vessels of the L, house need to be new cast after
the abuse of the Babilonians: but seeing baptism in popery and
Antichristianisme, is not the L. ordinance in the definition of it, but Antich.
invention: Therefore though the vessels of the L. house may be retained, yet
baptism may not: That baptism is Antichr. invention in the definition of it,
I manifest thus: The matter of baptism, and the form of baptism is invented
by Antich. go: it is an invention of antichrist in the definition: The matter
of antichristian baptism is a carnal infant: The form is, washing one into
the covenant that cannot consent to the covenant: or baptising without a
contract and sealing the covena^ts on both parts for the L. does not seal to
the infant, and the infant cannot seal to the Lord: As I have manifested
already in the answer to the former argum. of yours: Therefore the baptism of
antichr. is in the definition of it the mere devise of antichr. For the
Scripture describes true baptism which is the Lords own ordinance thus: The
matter must be one that confesses his Faith and his sins, one that is
regenerate and borne again: The form must be a voluntary delivering up of
the party baptized into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, by
washing with water, Mat. 28.19. Mat. 3.6. John. ^.1. Act. 2.41. and 8.36.37.
compared with Roman 6.17. and Mat. 28. 20. and 18.20. and Gal. 3.27. and Roman.
6.2-6. Wherein there must be a mutual consent of both persons contracting
together: and that this is so, the form of baptism retained in popery yet,
teaches plainly: where they say. Credis? Credo: Abrenunti^s? abrenuntio: which
other persons speak for the infant that cannot speak, thereby declaring that
there must needs be a mutual contract of both the parties contracting: This
ordinance of the L. therefore is abolished both in the matter and form, and an
other strange invention of man is in the rome thereof substituted, which is not
the L. and therefore a nullity, and as if the Babylonians should have framed a
Temple altar, arck, or candlestick, after their devise, and given them to the
people of the Jews, they could not have retained them and used them to
Worship God withal: So cannot true Christians retain Antichristian baptism
which is devised in the definition of it.

Thirdly, I answer, that if the Antichristians had baptized persons confessing
their sins and their Faith into the name of the Son of God, and the
Trinity, it had then been true baptism though in the hands of the
Antichristians, as the vessels of the L. house, in the hands or the Caldees,
and therefore needed no repetition, as these vessels needed no new casting:
Therefore we keep the Scriptures still though they abuse them, and the Church,
ministry, worship, and government taught in the Scriptures though they have
poluted the^: but their devised word, that is their Apocrypha writings and
false doctrine, and their devised church consisting of carnal infants and
persons unbaptized, and their devised worship of the mass, and their devised
ministry of the sacrificing Preisthood, and their devised government of the
Prelacy we abhor, and utterly reject, as the very devised Idols of antic. and
we will no more retain the^ the^ the Shrines of Diana, then the Jews would the
wedg of Acha^: so say we of his baptism.

And here you answer two objections.

First, that though the Antichristians that administer baptism be Idolaters,
yet it may be true baptism as well as circumcision true by the Israelites that
were Idolaters: and that the efficacy of the word and Sacraments depends not
upon the worth of the minister: as circumcision by Zipporah declares, Exodus
4-5. I answer: First, what say you to Ciprian the ancient Fathers, and all the
counsel of leaned Bbs. who concluded that the baptism of Heretics was a
nullity and decreed rebaptising.

Secondly I say that the Israelites circumcision was in a true church and
antich. baptism is in a false Church and that is a dissimilitude.

Thirdly, I know nothing ^o the contrary, but Zipporah might circumcise her
Son, her husband commanding her (for where is it said in all the Old
Testament that a woman shall not circumcise) for Moses indeed did circumcise
though Zipporah was the hand of Moses in the action, as it is the Kings action
if the L. Chauncellor of the judge of an assise do it. Fourthly I yee'd that the
Minister shall not prejudice baptism, if the baptism be the Lords own
ordinance, that is, if a person be invested with baptism true in the
definition: and yet you know that the baptiswe of weomen is strongly
questioned, and I believe it would trouble you to satisfy a doubt made of a
midwifes baptism in England, that it ought not to be repeated, or of a Child
baptising others as Athanasius did in sport, (which Alexander Bb. of Alexandria
with his Clerks did approve) whither it ought to be repeated yea or nay: but
I leave this point as being but off small importance.

The second objection you answer is, that although baptism be administered in a
false Church of Antichrist upon an unfit subject, yet it shall not be repeated,
no more then circumcision in the days of Jeroboam and Ahab, it being
administered upon an unfit subject: I say, as I have said diverse times, that
the Israelites infants in their defection were the subject that God commanded
to be circumcised, viz: the seed of Abrah. males of 8. days age. So are not
the infants in Antichristianisme, both for that they are 1. infants, 2. members
of a false Church, 3. The seed of vnbelevers which by your own confession have
no title to baptism: and whereas you say that the covenant of Abrah. in
respect of Chr. did as truly belong to the Gentiles after the coming of Chr. as
it did to the Israelites though both in defection: I deny it: For the carnal
covenant belonged to the Israelites the carnal seed of Abrah. even in their
parents Apostasy, and the Spiritual covenant made with Abrah. in respect of
Chr. did never aperteyne to the 1. Apostate parents, 2. much less to the
infants of them in their Apostasy, 3. no nor to the infants of the faithful as
I have already proved, and Gal. 2.14. is not to be understood of the blessing
of Abrah. to come upon any of the Gentiles in their Apostasy, but only being in
Christ, as the words are, also us. 7. and 9. but the external Covenant was
made with Abraham and the carnal Israelites only upon the condition of
circumcision carnally upon the males of eigt days old, Genesis 17.10.

Mr. Rich. Clifton.

If the word of God passing through the false ministry of Antichrist, was of
force to convert Gods elect in Babylon, the^ is baptism passing likewise
through their false ministry of force to seal up Gods covenant unto them, and
so consequently not to be reiterated. But the first is true Apoc. 18.4. For in
Babylon were Gods people converted, other ordinary Ministry was there none, but
that false Ministry of the Papists: and therefore it is apparent that God made
thereby his word effectual to all them that believe. Ergo etc.
If it be objected, that if God should convert his people by an Antichristian
ministry, it were to give approbation to a false ministry, and to teach that
men might lawfully use it, which is absurd: I answer, for us to use a false
Ministry is unlawful, but it is no more absurd or yet any approbation of a
false ministry, for God to work thereby the good of his own people, then it
was his approving of the evil service of Joseph's brethren selling him into
Egypt, because he used their Ministry, for the saving of Jacob and his
household, for God can work good by an evil instrument.

If it be still urged, that the Antichristian Ministers had no calling to
baptize, I say no more had the Jews to put Christ to death; yet was his
suffering awayleable to save all that believe: and so is the Sacrament to al
Gods people awayleable to seal up salvation unto them.

John Smyth.

Your third Argument follows which is this in effect.

The word in the false Ministry of Antichrist is avayleable to convert: Ergo:
The baptism is also avayleable to seal up the covenant to the converted, and
so need not be repeated.

I answer: First the word converteth none visibly to me particularly known: So
ca^ baptism seal up none visibly to me: what they do both in secreat the L.
knows and what the word does generally I know by that place Rev. 18.4. Also
what the baptism does specially I know, for God says plainly whosoever
receaveth the mark of the beast in his forehead shall perish, Rev. 14.9-11. this
mark is undoubtedly baptism whereby they are initiated into Antichrist, and
receave his mark, as Christ's Servants in baptism receave his seal upon them:
(remember I call baptism a seal in the concrete, or according to your opinion.
For otherwise I deny it to be a seal) so that Antichristian Baptism is rather
a seal of perdition to the Antichristians, then of the covenant or Salvation
by Christ: and therefore it is to be renounced.

Secondly, Antichrists baptism false (as I have said) in the difinitio^ is
none of Gods ordinance no not in the hands of the most faithful minister of the
world: but Gods word is the Lords ordinance, though in the mouth of the most
vile Judas or Antichristian in the world, yea though it be in the mixture of a
1000 heresies: So that in this respect also it follows not that though Gods
word may convert in popery, therefore Antichrists baptism may seal: but still
you build upon a false fondacion as you see, assuming that which is the
question, viz: That baptism in popery is the Lords.

Thirdly, I answer again, that if Antichrist had retained the L. true
baptism, as I have described true I say in the definition, viz: That he had
baptized persons confessing their sins and faith into the Trinity, or into
Jesus Christ, it should not have been repeated: but seeing he intends in
baptism, to set an indelible character upon them which is the mark of the
beast, to confer grace ex opere operato to the infants which he washes,
another promising and answering for them Credo and Abrenuntio which the party
baptized should himself perform, hence I conclude that he has set up his own
idol of abomination, and cast the L. holy ordinance away, having essentialy
destroyed the primitive Apostolic baptism go his baptism is a nullity or
rather a seal of perdition to them that retain it.

The amplification which you bring to this Argument I omit as a thing not
denied, but yielded unto that God can work by a false Ministry, evil
instruments, and bad means, but hence it will not follow that we may retain
the mark of the beast, no more then we may retain the ministry of Antichrist,
the Church of Antichrist, the Government of Antichrist.

Mr. Rich. Clifton.

Those Holy things which God by his merciful providence has preserved for his
people through the hands of profane persons, are not to be rejected for the
Authors sake, Ezra. 1.11.

But the Scriptures and baptism has God preserved in the popish assemblies
for the benefit of his people.

Therefore not to be rejected for the Authors sake.

If it be objected against the minor, it is not true baptism but false, that
is administered in the assemblies of Antichr. I answer, though it may be said to
be false, in regard of some humane devises used in the administration thereof
yet is it true baptism in respect of the matter, form, and Author thereof,
which causes it to have a true being.

John Smyth.

Your fourth Argument follows, which is this.

These Holy things which God by his merciful providence has preserved for his
people, though the hands of profane persons, are not to be rejected for the
Authors sake, Ezra. 1.11.

But the Scriptures and baptism has God preserved in the popish assemblies
for the benefit of his people.

Therefore not to be rejected for the Authors sake.

The minor you prove thus, saying the baptism though false in respect of
humane devises used in the ministration thereof, yet is true in respect of the
matter, form and Author thereof: and in your answer to my second Arg. you say:
the author of baptism in the Kingdom of Antichr. is Chr. the matter water: the
form washing with water into the Trinity.

I answer directely, that if it could be proved that baptism in the Kingdom
of Antichrist is appointed by Christ, and that water is the true matter of
baptism, and the true form is washing into the Trinity, I would yield unto
you: but this you have not proved, and I have already proved the contrary: but
yet to deal something more fully in this point which is the main pillar and
cheef corner Stone of the fondacion, I say: 1. Water is not the matter of
baptism, but only the instrument of baptism: For as fire is the instrument
of burning, so is Water of washing: the matter of burning is the fuel that is
burnt, So the matter of washing is the party washed: For as we say accident is
esse est inesse: and the subject is all the matter of an accident: and as the
matter of the Church are the Disciples of Saints: The matter of the Ministry
are the Prophets, so the matter of baptism is the persons, upon whom
baptism is conferred, and on whom it is. It is false therefore which you
affirm that water is the matter of baptism. 2. I say that washing into the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is not the form of Baptism: For to
wash a Turk, Jew, Fool, mad Man, or infant into the Trinity is not ^^ne
baptism: but it were so, if simply to baptize into the Trinity were the form
of baptism: Therefore to baptize the true matter into the true Faith, or into
Christ, or the New Testament, or the Trinity, or into the true body, is the
true form of baptism: So that the true matter of baptism is a new creature:
one regenerate: a confessor. As the true matter of circumcision was a male of
eigt days old either lineally descending of Abraham, or a Proselite: So the
true matter of baptism is a person that is of the Faith of Abraham, one that
has the male Christ formed in him: The true form of baptism consists in
three things, (1.) washing with water, (2.) a new Creature, (3.) into the Name
of Chr. or into the Trinity, for I think we are not tied to form of words.
and so if antichr. has washed any, I say, I will never consent that they shall be
rebaptized, but hold that Anabaptistery true heresy.

But if an infant that is not the matter of baptism, or a wicked man, mad man,
fool, Turk, or Jew, or any Pagan be washed with water into the Trinity, I say
there is neither true matter nor form of baptism, and Christ is not the author
thereof: and therefore the baptism of antichrist is not Christ's, but his own,
and so all infants baptized by antichrist are either unbaptized or have the
mark of the beast, and so are to renounce it, and to receave Christ's mark of
baptism, or else woe be to them: and when they shall manifest a new creature,
and Christ the male is formed in them, and they confess with their mouth and
then be baptized into the Trinity, this is not anabaptistery, but the true
primitive Apostolic Baptism, and so Christ, John, Christ's Apostles were
anabaptists with you Sir: For they baptized men that had been washed before a
thousand times with the Jews baptismes, Heb. 9.10. which baptismes were also
into the Messiah (no doubt) in those that saw the end off those Figures: But if
it be blasphemy to say that Christ, John, and the Apostles were Anabaptists,
though they were of times some of them baptized into the Messiah in Type,
because they were only once baptized truly and indeed: So shall it be
blasphemy in all them that call the true Christians anabaptists, that baptize
new Creatures once only into Christ, though baptized before by antichrist in
their infancy when they knew not the right hand from the left, or what a new
creature, or the New Testament, or Christ, or Baptism, or any thing else was:
hence therefore I conclude vndenyably that seeing Popish baptism has a false
matter, and a false form, therefore it is antichrists Idol as much as a false
Ministry, and a false Church is: and so the Lord is not the author of it: and
therevppon though the Scriptures and Gods word be retained by Gods providence
and in the word all the Holy things of God, through Popery: yet in the Popish
Churches there is no true Church, Ministry, Worship, or Government, nor true
Baptism, but all false and Antichristian: and so to be rejected, and the
truth to be assumed out of the Scriptures: and so this argument off yours is
answered.

Mr. Rich. Clifton.

If antichrist be not the author of baptism, but of some humane devises
annexed, unto in the administration thereof: then are we not to pluck up the
whea^e with the ^ares, Mat. 13.29. And to cast away that which is Christ's with
Antichr. but to Separate from that which is man's invention, and still to retain
that which is of God. But to baptize with water into the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. is from heaven, and not
from Antichrist. Ergo, we ought not to cast it away, but those traditions where
with Antichrist has polluted it: as for example, King Josias and before him K.
Ezechias, when both the Land and Temple were poluted) 2. King. 21.7. and 23.7.
did not pull down the Temple but appointed the Priests to cleanse it, who did
so, and brought out all the uncleanness that they had found in the house of God,
2. Chro. 29.16.17.18. and 34.8. For in reformacion of things, difference must
be put between those things, whereof God is the Author, and such as are devised
by man: The former is to be purged from all profanation, and the things still
to be retained, the other to be quyte abolished. This rule in all reformation
off Religion ought to be followed.
John Smyth.

The fifth Argument follows, which is this in effect.

We must not pluck up the wheat with the tares, Mat. 13.29. nor cast away that
which is Christ's, when we cast away that which is Antichrists. But to Baptize
with Water into the Name of the Trinity is Christ's and not Antichrists. Ergo,
we ought not to cast that away, but only the traditions of Antichrist.
So did Josiah and Hezechiah, 2. King. 21.7. and 23.4. and 2. Chron. 29.16-18.
and 34.8. not pull down the Temple, but cleanse it, etc. that whereof God is the
Author must be kept, and the corruption or pollution put away: that whereof man
is the Author, is quite to be abolished: This is your reason.

I answer: That as when the Babylonians had utterly destroyed the Temple, the
Jews built it again: So when Antichrist has utterly destroyed the true
Temple, the true Church, then must we build it up again, and when Antichrist
has destroyed the true baptism, then must we rear it up again: Wherefore
seeing as is showed before Antichrist has abolished the true baptism of Chr. in
the definition or in the matter and form thereof, and has reared a baptism of
his own, it must therefore be abolished: and as when we do renounce the false
Church or Ministry, we do not renounce that which is true in the false Church
or Ministry, but only the falsehood so in rejecting the false baptism of
Antichr. we do not renounce that which is true in it as to wash with water into
the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost: but only the falsehood: And yet
as when we retain the truth in a false Church, or Ministry, we reject the
Falsehood in them both, and erect both a new true Church and Ministry: So when
we retain the truth of a false baptism, we reject the Falsehood and erect a
true new baptism: and this is evident if you consider it well.

Again, seeing in the false baptism, church, and ministry, the corruptions
are essential, and the truth only accidental: and truth and falsehood are so
intermingled as we can not divide them asunder, assuming the one and leaving
the other, but we must needs in renouncing the essential corruptions reserve
the accidental truths and iterate or repeat the accidental truths if we will
have the essential truth which Antichrist had abolished: Therefore necessarily we
must for having true baptism repeat washing in to the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, which are but accidentals (for a Turck so washed is not
baptized) and once only wash a newborn babe in Christ, into the truth which
is true essential baptism which Antichrist had abolished, and which we only
restore and nothing else: and so your argument is answered.

Mr. Rich. Clifton.

As God has made an everlasting covenant with Abraham and his seed, Genesis 17.7
which through the malice of Satan and al his instruments shall never be cut of:
so has he preserved, both in the Apostasy under the Law and gospel, the seals
thereof, for the comfort of the Faithful.

And therefore the Anabaptists in rejecting that baptism of Christ, whereof they
were pertakers in the Apostate Church: and devising a new, do bring in a new
covenant and a new gospel, taking upon them to baptize themselves without
warrant from the word: For I am sure it cannot be showed, that any did ever
baptize himself without special commandment from God, as Abrah. had for
circumcision, Genesis 17.9. or John for baptism, Marc. 1.3. nor yet any others
without ordinary or extraordinary calling. Ioh. 4.2. Mat. 3.6. Act. 8.38. and
9.18. and 10-48.

If it be said the times be extraordinary. I answer, the Lord has left
either example or rule, or ground of rule, whereby we may in extraordinary
times have a sure warrant out of the word, to inform us in any thing that we
ought to do.

John Smyth.

Your 6. argument is thus much in effect.

That seeing the covenant made with Abraham in respect of Christ, is
everlasting: Genes. 17.7. and cannot by the malice of Satan be cut of: no
more can the malice of Satan abolish the seals of that covenant under the Law
or gospel, viz: circumcision and baptism.

I answer by an argument of like nature, from Mat. 16.18. framed thus.

If the gates of Hell (...) never pervaile against the Church then there has
always been a true Church, and Antichrist could never make the church false:
and so you of the Separation have sinned most shamefully in calling the Church
of Antichrist false: Verum primum. Ergo secundum.

If my argument be not good against you of the Separation for erecting a new
Church, no more is yours good against us for erecting new baptism: This is to
answer as they say regerendo: But I answer more properly solvendo thus: That
the covenant is said to be everlasting not in respect of the visible real
existence in the world in an established Church, but in respect of the
stability and firmenes of it in regard of Satan's malice which should not so
abolish it, that it should never be recovered again: For otherwise the Church
went into the wilderness: Revel. 12.14. and al nations were made drunck with the
cup of the fornication of the whore of Babylon, Revel. 18.^. and there was no
true Church in the depth of Antichristianisme, and so no true baptism, for can
any thing be true in a false Church, but the Scriptures and the truths
contained therein? I deny therefore, that the covenant, Church or baptism was
visible always: For it was invisible when the Church went into the wilderness:
and therefore as you when there was not a true Church in the world, took upon you
to set up a true Church (as you say, but we say a false Church) renouncing the
Church of Antichr, and yet will not be said to bring in a new covenant and a
new Gospel (for you in your false conceitednes will reject them for heretics,
if there be any that dare say so of you forsooth): So the anabaptists (as you
call them) do not set up a new covenant and Gospel, though they set up a new or
rather the old Apostolic baptism which Antichrist had overthrown: and
whereas you say they have no warrant to baptism themselves, I say, as much as
you have to set up a true Church, yea fully as much: For if a true Church may
be erected which is the most noble ordinance of the New Testament, then much
more baptism: and if a true Church can not be erected without baptism, for
baptism is the visible form of the Church, as Disciples are the matter: Mat.
28.19. John. 4.1. Then seeing you confess that a true Church may be erected,
you cannot deny (though you do deny it in opposing the truth) that baptism
may also be recovered: and seeing when all Christ's visible ordinances are lost,
either men must recover them again, or must let them alone: if they let them
alone til extraordinary men come with miracles and tongs, as the Apostles did,
then men are same lists (for that is their opinion) or if they must recover
them, men must begin so to do, and then two men joining together may make a
Church (as you say): Why may they not baptize seeing they cannot conjoyne into
Christ but by baptism, Mat. 28.19. compared with Mat. 18.10. Gallat. ^.27. but
it is evident that all Christ's Commandments must be obeyed, Ergo, this
commandment of having and using the communion of the Church, Ministry,
Worship and Government, those Holy means of Salvation which the Lord of his
mercy has given us with his covenant, and commanded us to use: and therefore
if all the commandments of God must be obeyed, then this of baptism, and
this warrant is sufficient for assuming baptism: Now for baptising a man's self
there is as good warrant, as for a man Churching himself: For two men singly are
no Church, jointly they are a Church, and they both of them put a Church upon
themselves, so may two men put baptism upon themselves: For as both those
persons vnchurched, yet have power to assume the Church each of them for
himself with others in communion: So each of them unbaptized has power to
assume baptism for himself with others in communion: And as Abraham and John
Baptist, and all the Proselites af^^r Abraham's example, Exodus 12.48, did
administer the Sacrament upon themselves: So may any man raised up after the
Apostasy of Antichrist, in the recovering of the Church by baptism, administer
it upon himself in communion with others: So we see the Lords Supper is
administered to a man's self in communion with others, so is Prayer, Prophesy,
Praising of God uttered for a man's self as well as for others. And as in the Old
Testament: every man that was unclean washed himself: every Priest going to
Sacrifice washed himself in the Laver at the door of the Tabernacle of the
congregation: which was a type of baptism, the door of the Church, Tit. 2.5.
Every Mr. of a Family administered the Passover to himself and all of his
Family: The Priest daily Sacrificed for himself and others: a man cannot
baptize others into the Church, himself being out of the Church: Therefore it
is Lawful for a man to baptize himself together with others in communion, and
this warrant is a plerophory for the practice of that which is done by us: Thus
are your 6. weak reasons answered.

Mr. Rich. Clifton.

Thus having set down some reasons to prove that Apostates or Antichristians
converted are not to be rebaptized, let us come to the examination of the
reasons alleged to the contrary, the first whereof is this.

1. Because Churches are to be constituted now after the defection of
Antichrist, as they were first erected by the Apostles: But in the constitution
off Churches the Apostles received in the members by baptism. Ergo, so must
we do now.
Answer.

1. The estate and condition of people now is not alike to the estate of the
Gentiles or Jews in the Apostles times, they differ in diverse respects: First,
all the people then both of Jews and Gentiles never had been themselves, nor
were ever of the posterity of those that had been members of the Church of
Christ under the gospel, seeing then was the first planting of Evangelical
Churches* but we are now the posterity of such parents as were members of the
Chu. planted by the Apo. else could we not have Apostated.

Secondly, that people, which the Apo. gathered in to Churches were never
baptized, and baptism coming in the steed of circumcision, and being a seal
of our entering into Gods covenant, it was fit, that they which beleved and
became the seed of Abraham should so enter into the covenant, they and their
seed, as he and his seed entered, that is, as he and his were received in by
circumcision: So they and there is should be receved in by baptism, Act. 2.38.41,
and 8.38. but we are a people that are already baptized, and the seed of the^
that were baptized, and had receved the gospel, and (although through Antichr.
deceaveablenes, both we and they were tainted with many corruptions) yet had
they or might have in that Apostasy, (and so we also) so much faith, as thereby
both we and they might become the people of God, Apoc. 18.4.

And concerning the constitution of the Churches, here it is to be noted, that
the constitution of Churches set down by the Apostles was by the immediate
direction of the Holy Ghost, and so serves for a continual rule of
establishing Churches to the end of the world, which form or frame laid down
by them, no man has power to alter or change, 1. Cor. 4.14. 1. Tim 3.11. But
the constituting of Chur. now after the defection of Antich. may more properly
be called a repayring, then a constituting of Churches, which through Apostasy
have been ruinated, or a gathering together of the dispersed, hepe of Israel
into such forms or shapes of visible Churches (the pate^ne whereof is showed
unto us in the word) for (as before has been noted) our state is not as theirs
was that were the first constituted Churches, and so it will not follow (as it
is alleged) that the receiving in of members into our Churches necessarily
must be by baptism, as in the p^imitive time it was, except only of such
persons as have not been baptized before.

And herein I take it, lies the deceyte of this arg. that it puts no
difference between the people of God coming out of Babylon, and them that came
to the faith from amongst the Gentiles, equalizing Antichristianisme with
Gentilisme, the one being an Apostate Church, the other no Church: The one
partaker of the word and Sacram: (though with much coruptio^) the other
partaker of neither at all, the one professing Christ and Teaching many truths
of God, and so many as the elect thereby might come to faith, Apoc. 18.4. The
other neither professing Christ, nor teaching any truth of God, whereby any
might be converted to Christ, and become Gods people in the estate of
Gentilisme.

And thus having made plain the different estate of the first planted Churches
and ours in Apostasy. I answer fi st: That Churches now are to be constituted
(if repairing be not a fitter spe^ch) as in the Apostles times, and that al
such as are recea^ed in as members, being unbaptized, must be received in by
baptism, but for such as were baptized in Apostate Chu^che, their repentance
is sufficient without rebaptisatio^, as it was to the Apostate Israelites, who
upon their repentance and returning to Jerusalem were received of the Church
without any new circumcision, and therefore to add a second baptism, with the
Anabaptists, is to Apostate from Chr. and not to enter into his covenant.

And in that the Apostles received in members by baptism, they could do no
otherwise, seeing the whole world was unbaptized, but if they had met with any
that before had been baptized into the name of Chr. as they that received the
baptism of John, and as we are, I make no question, they did not, nor would
not have rebaptized them, and the^for the conclusion will not follow, that we
are now to receave in by baptism, them that are already baptized.

John Smyth.

The next thing in your answer is a solution of the arguments brought by me to
prove the truth: viz.

That Antichristians converted are to be admitted into the true Church by
baptism. This truth of the Lords I have proved unto you by three reasons: The
first ^hereof may be framed thus.

So are Churches to be restored or constituted after the defection of Antichr.
as they were erected by the Apostles at the first. But the Churches were at the
first erected by baptism in their primitive institution by John, Chr. and the
Apostles. Ergo: so are they now to be restored: and therefore the members are to
be received in by baptism as they were then.
As in the former point for baptising of infants you were compelled to run to
the old Testament, and from thence to fetch the cheef corner stone of your
building viz. from circumcision: So in this second point you utterly forsake
the new Testam. of Chr. and the true constitution Apostolic of the Church of
the new Testament, and set us again to School to Moses, as if Chr. had not
bee^ faithful enough to teach us his new Test* but we must go learn the new
Test* of the old Testament: Chr. of Moses: The Gospel of the Law.

And first I would know why we may not as well with the Papists and Prelates go
fetch one high Priest from Moses, a sacrificing Preisthood from Moses,
succession in the ministry from Moses, and a succession in the Church from
Moses, as a succession in baptism from Moses: and in effect you do fetch a
succession of the Church from Rome: For in fetching a succession of baptism
from Rome which is the form of the Church: and in fetching a succession of the
matter of the Church which is the seed of the parents baptized you of necessity
make the Church of Rome a true Church: For if infants of the Church of Rom^
have true title to baptism by reason of the Faith of some of their auncesters
o^ forfathers that were Faithful, then are they the true visible matter of the
Church: and if by reason of that title to baptism, they receave true baptism
in substance as you say in the Church of Rome then they have the true visible
form of the Church, for they that have the true matter and form of a true
Church upon them are the true Chu^^^ and so are the infants of the Church of
Rome a true visible Church in the constitution and essential causes thereof: and
so as in the old Testament the Church came by succession of genealogy in
respect whereof they made so much account of genealogies carnal, Philip. 3.3-5.
1. Timoth. 1.4. So in the New Testament the Church comes by succession of
carnal Genealogy through the Church of Rome to our days: and then as the
matter of the Church, viz infants descending of baptized parents is by
Genealogy, and the form of the church viz baptism upon these infants is by
descent: and therefore the Church is by succession: I demand why may not the
ministry be by descent and succession as well as the Church? and then why is not
the Church of Rome or England a true Church, the ministry of the Church of
Rome or England a true Ministry* and so why may not you return back again
into England, and take up your former ministry, and renounce your Schism
which you have made? and so I hear that some are minded to do: and truly for
my part I hold it as lawful to retain the Church and Ministry of England, as
to retain the baptism: and when I shall yield to the truth of the baptism of
England I will yield to the truth of the Church and ministry of England: and I
will confess I have been a Schismatique, and return and acknowledge my error:
but because I know the ministry and Church of England is false, therefore it
must needs be that the baptism which is the form of the Church is false
essentially: and therefore having Separated justly from the Church and
Ministry of England for the falsehood of them, I must needs also Separate
from the baptism which is false, for the Church is false because baptism the
form of the Church is false: and if baptism the form of the Church of
England be true, the Church of England is true also: You are to know therefore
(and so I wish you and all the Separation to mind it well, and the Lord give
you eyes to see, and hearts to understand) that all the old Testament was carnal
taken from the Elements of the World, thereby to type out and to teach them
heavenly things: and therefore their Church was carnal to type to us in the New
Testament a Spiritual Church: The matter of their Church was a carnal
Israelite: the matter of the Church of the New Testament is a true Israelite in
whom there is no guile: The form of their Church was carnal circumcision a
carnal seal. Genes. 17.10-14. The form of the Church of the New Testament is
the circumcision of the heart, a new Creature, the Holy Spirit of promise
whereby we are sealed, which is manifested by confession and baptism in
water: Act. 10.47. Ephesians. 1.13. Gallat. 3.27. and 6.15. John 3.5. Matthew. 3.6.
Roman. 10.9. Act. 8.36.37. Their carnal Church in the matter and form came by
carnal Genealogy, and so they all of them were gendred unto bondage under the
rudimentes off the World under the carnal Testament or covenant: Gallat.
4.24.25. our Spiritual Church in the matter and form thereof is by Spiritual
Genealogy, that is the Genealogy of the Faith of Abraham the Father of us all
under the Spiritual New Testament, Gallat. 3.7.9.14. Roman. 4.10.11. Their
parents in the carnal Church was carnal Abraham and carnal Hagar, and all
their carnal parents who according to the Flesh with carnal seed begat
carnal Ismaell the type of the carnal Israelites: our parents in our Spiritual
Church is Abrah. Spiritual, (and al our Spiritual parents) who by the word of
God and by faith begat Spiritual Isaac the type of the children of promise
after whose manner we are, Gal. 4.22-28. Romans 4 19-21. Heb. 11.11.12. 1. Pet.
1.23. Their ministry was a carnal ministry by carnal genealogy of the line
of Aaron Sacrificing Priests: our ministry is by Spiritual genealogy of the
election of the true Church that is Spiritual.

Thus if you would compare the Type and the Truth together, you should easily
discern the sandy Fondation of your false Church ruinated and your false
baptism quite abandoned: who continue a Church by succession of a carnal
line, and a baptism by succession upon the carnal Line through Popery:
Whereas the true Church is only by the Spiritual Line of Faith, and true
baptism by the Spiritual succession upon that Spiritual Line of Faithful
men confessing their Faith and their sins, which was typed by that carnal
Line of the Old Testament: you therefore that introduce a carnal Line into the
Church to be baptized, viz: all your Children according to the Flesh and that
by succession fetch baptism upon that carnal Line through the Church of Rome
into your Church (following the president of the Old Testament in that carnal
circumcision by succession of Genealogy) do therein unawares make Rome a true
Church, your selves Schismatiques, and set up Iudaisme in the New Testament,
and so are fallen from Christ, and are become a new second image of the Beast
never heard of before in the World: For such are you of the Separation.

This being premised as a ground which I earnestly in treat you (even in my
best love unto you) and all the Separation, especialy the leaders of them, well
to weigh and ponder, and not to be ashamed to learn of their inferiors and
juniors: I come to answer the exceptions which you take at my first Argument.

The sum of your exception is this: That seeing we are the posterity of
baptized persons, and the Jews and Gentiles in the Apostles times were not so:
Therefore we need not assume baptism in our entrance into the Church, which
we had in our Apostasy, but we may enter into the Church without rebaptizing
as the Apostate Israelites did without recircumcising: and so we must not in
the new Test. be framed according to the pattern taught in the new Test. in
entering in by baptism, but according to the pattern of the old Testam. and
the Apostate Israelites therein, etc.

I answer diverse things: First, I say that the New Testament is as sufficient
for the direction of all the affairs and occasions that befall in the time of
the New Testament, as the Old Testament was for the occurrences that befell
under the Old Testament: Seeing Christ is as Faithful as Moses: and the New
Testament as perfect as the Old. Gal. 3.15. and therefore if the Lord had
intended to put a difference betwixt the Apostolic constitution of Churches,
and our constituting of them in respect of the persons to be admitted into the
Church, and in respect of baptiting and not baptising or rebaptising of them he
could and would have done it: but seeing it is not done in the New Testament,
but left in silence: and seeing the New Testament of Chr. is perfect and sealed
with his blood, you that put this difference add to the new Testament, and
bring in a new Christ, a new covenant, a new Gospel, a new Church, and new
baptism: and woe be to them that ad to the word, Rev. 22.18. and as they were
accursed that added to the old Test. Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32. So much more shall
they be subject to the cause that add to the new Test. of Chr. Heb. 12.25. in
this respect there for your answer is insufficient.

Secondly, I affirm that (as the Holy Ghost says) the Antichristians are in
condition equal to Pagans, and therefore as I have said they are not called
Israelites or Samaritanes, but Babylonians, Egyptians, Sodomites, Gentills: but
the Holy Ghost knows what and how to speak: And therefore as the Babylonians,
Egyptians, Sodomites, Gentiles washings were nothing, no more is the baptism of
Antichristians any thing: For the Holy Ghost foreseeing that the Antichristians
would abolish the true baptism of Christ by baptising infants, and so by
admitting into the Church the carnal seed of the Flesh, would disanul that Holy
ordinance of baptism, and so abolish the true constitution of the Church, in
heavenly wisdom for our instruction calls persons Apostating from the true
constitution of the Church Babylonians, Egyptians, Sodomites, Gentiles, thereby
teaching us that he esteems no otherwise of their Church or baptism, then of
the Synagogues of Babylon; then of the washings of Egypt, then of the worship
of Sodom and the Pagans: and these comparisons will fit you well against the
assemblies and Temples of Antichrist, and I know no reason that they thould not
fit us as well against your Babylonish, Egyptians, Sodomitish, and Paganish
washings of infants which which though it be done into the name of Chr. yet is
no more avayleable in the Holy Ghosts testimony then washing of Pagans,
Babylonians, Egyptians, Sodomies Children.

Thirdly, whereas you say that repayring the Church now after the Apostasy of
Antichr. is a fitter speech then constituting: herein do you both tax your
selves off the use of that word constitution: and plainly signify that you
incline to maintain the Churches of England and Rome to be true Churches,
wherein whither you do not forsake your first faith, and turn with the dog to
the vomit look you unto it, and let al indifferent men judge: but your writings
are against you sufficient witnesses in this case.

Fourthly, I say that the Jews that were converted to the Faith and new
Testament of Chr. by Chr. John, and the Apostles in your account were in a far
better estate the^ Antichr. For they (as you say) were of the same body with
the Church of the New Testament, and their circumcision was a seal of the new
Testament (as you say) and they were in Chr. Jesus (as you say) and were washed
I doubt not many of them into the Messiah whose blood they typically saw in
their manifold baptismes and purifications with water: and al of the^ had been
partakers of the word and Sacraments in the Chur. of the Jews, and why might
not they by Christ, John, or the Apo. be admitted into the Church without
baptism: if therefore Chr. John. and the Apo. would needs baptize them, and so
by baptism constitute them into the new Testament that had all these
perogatives in your judgment, much more will they have us to constitute Antichr.
converted into the true Church by baptism: neither can you say without great
indignity to the L. ordinances in the old Test. that they were inferior to the
baptism of Antichrist.

Again you will needs have this to be a great privilege to the antichr. to be
the carnal seed of them that has sometime been members of the Church of Chr. in
the new Testament, and therefore you say that in there parents or ancestors they
had title to baptism: I deny that ever the English nation of any one of our
predecessors were of the Faith of Chr. show it if you can: but we came of a
Pagan race til Rome the mother came and put upon us her false baptism: and
therefore although the Roma. might plead this, yet England cannot plead it: and
so your dissimilitude cannot hold in that thing: and our case is simply
Paganish.

Further, you say that the repentance of Apostate Churches is sufficient for
their admittance into the true Church without rebaptization, as repentance was
for Israel without recircumcision: I deny it, for the Churches of Antichr. are
false, and the Church of the Israelites was not false: The Churches of Antichr.
were false because they consisted of the carnal seed baptized which was not
that one seed unto which the promise was made, that is the Faithful: The Church
of the Israelites was true because it did consist of the carnal seed carnally
circumcised, which was the true constitution of the Church of the old
Testament: For otherwise if Israel had been false because of their Apostasy and
Idolatry then Judah was as false who had in wickedness justified Samaria and
Sodom, Ezech. 16.51. but indeed they were neither of them false so long as they
circumcised the males of 8. days old, but the Churches of Antichr. growing
false by baptising the carnal seed (which was not the true seed of Abraham's
faith) therefore are to be baptized when they come to the truth, and cannot
have Isreal's Apostasy for the president: wherefore an Edomite or Israelite
coming to be a proselite of the Jews Church that had omitted circumcision is
a true President of the Antichristian Apostasy: For as they omitting the
circumcision of the males though of the Posterity of Abraham, yet being
Proselites were entered into the Jews Church by circumcision: So is it in the
Apostasy of Antichrist, with the Proselytes of Antichristianisme: for so I take
it the Proselytes were types of Antichristians, converted to the Faith, and
admitted into the true Church: and the Israelites were not so.

Moreover whereas you say that if the Apostles had met with such as we are they
would have received us into the Church upon repentance without baptism: I
answer, if such an example had been left us we would then have rested
satisfied, but seeing the Apo. have left no such example nor precept therefore you
are yet in your Apostasy, and having not repented of nor forsaken your Egyptian
baptism are still vnseperated, do still retain the mark of the beast, and are
subject to the woe that the aungel threatens to persons so marked.

Mr. Rich. Clifton.

Now let us come to the second reason which is this.

2. Because true baptism is but one, but the baptism of Antichrist is not
true baptism, and so not that one baptism of Chr. but all the members of Chr.
must have true Baptism.

Answer.

2. There is but one Faith and one baptism, Ephesians. 4 4. and therefore is it
sufficient to be once baptized, as it was to be once circumcised: Secondly,
That the baptism of Antichrist is not true baptism I grant, and do also
affirm that al members of Christ must have true baptism, and what then must
it follow that now such as are baptized must be rebaptized, else cannot be
members of a visible Church: I deny it and do further answer, 1. That the
baptism which we received in the Apostate Church is no more Antichrists then
the word that we received therein: For Antichrist did never ordain a new kind
of baptism, but did only pollute (with his inventions) the Holy ordinance of
Chr: and therefore if this baptism that we have received be called the
baptism of Antichr. that is to affirm an untruth, seeing the institution
thereof was by Jesus Chr. who commanded his Apo. to baptize al nations with
water in the name of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. and
the same baptism for substance is still retained in the Apostate churches and
none other. Secondly, this baptism may also in some respect be called true
baptism, as before I have noted in my fifth reason against rebaptization: For
1. it has Chr. for the Author, 2. it has the true matter outward sign or
element which is water, 3. the true form of administering the same, which is,
baptising into the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, al
which is practiced in the Popish Church, neither is any baptized into the name
or faith of Antich. but unto the faith and possession of Christ. and therefore
our baptism is the baptism of Chr. and to us that repent true baptism, and
so consequently not to be reiterated.

John Smyth.

In the next place you make answer to my second arg. which may be framed thus

All the members of Chr. must have that one true baptism of Chr. taught in the
new Testament. The baptism of antich. is not that one true baptism, taught by
Chr. in the new Testament. Ergo: The members of Christ must not have the
baptism of Antichrist, but must take the true baptism of Christ, when they
come into the true Church.
The sum of your answer is: That the baptism we received in the false Chur.
is not Antichr. but Christ's: I make answer, that seeing infants are baptized
which is the false matter of baptism, and seeing in them there is not the
question of a good conscience unto God, 1. Pet. 3.21. Nor the have sprinkled
from an evil conscience, Heb. 10 22. which is the form: Seeing they cannot
express credis? Credo: Abrenuntias? Abrenuncio: which is the form of baptism
even the mutual contract betwixt God and the party baptized expressed visibly
in confession: therefore the baptism is not Chr. but Antichrists, not from
heaven but of man: and all that you object in this particular is already
sufficiently taken away in answer to your 4. reason: whither I translated that
which is here answered by you upon occasion there intertayned.

Mr. Rich. Clifton.

The third reason.

Because as the false Church is rejected and the true erected, the false
ministry forsaken, and the true received: so false worship (and by consequence
baptism) must be renounced, and the true baptism assumed.

Answer.

First. I grant, that we ought to Separate from al false or apostate Chur.
Apo. 18.4 and to adjoyne our selves to a true Chu. reformed according to the
pattern of the Apostles, 2. also every false ministry is to be forsaken, Mat.
7.15.2 Io. 10. gal. 1.8. and the true ministers of God to be received, Ier.
3.14.15. So did the faithful in Israel forsake the false Priests set up by
Ieroboa^, and returned to the Priests of the L to Jerusalem, 2. Chro. 30.11.3.
it is our duty likewise to renounce al false worcester. 2. Cor. 6.14-17 Esa. 30.22.
and to worship the L, as he taught us in his word: and thus far do I approve of
this reason, but the consequence I must deny, viz: that because false worship
is to be renounced, therefore baptism also. For 1. we are to consider in that
baptism received in apostate Churches two things, first, that which is of God
therein. 2. that which is of man, that which is of God, is the substance of
baptism, as before is observed, viz: the same matter and form that the L.
instituted, and likewise the same end which is the profession of the faith of
Christ, and this is not false worship, and so consequently not to be renounced.

Again, that which in the administration of baptism is devised by man, are
those unwarrantable ceremonies of crossing, breathing, annoynting, etc. these
are to be renounced as vain worship, Mat. 15.4. Now the ordinances of God are
to be purged from the pollutions of men, and not with their pollutions to be
renounced, for if polution might warrant men to cast away with it, that which
is ordained of God, then might not the holy vessels polluted in Babylon have
been brought again to Ierusa: nor yet the Temple it self, that was so greatly
profaned in the days of the Idolatrous Kings have any more been used as a
place of worsh. to the L. Secondly, I answer that we have received a true
baptism in the apostate Chu. as the people of God did circumcision amongst the
ten trybes: and therefore we may no more renounce it, and assume a new, then they
that returned to Ierus. 2. Chro. 30.11. might renounce their c^rcumcision, and
be recircumcised,

It is objected of some, that this comparison houlds not, for Israel was a true
Chu. and therefore their circumcision was true: but Apostate Churches have
nothing true, neither are the members thereof capable either of the covenant or
seal in that standing, and it is not true baptism to such.

This objection in part I have answered before, and now answer further, 1. that
the Israelites in their Apostasy were not a true Church, but false: seeing they
Separated from Ierus. the true and only Chu. in the world, and erected a new
Church and comunio^ amongst themselves, joining together in a false worcester. and
under a false ministry, 1. King. 12.30-33.20. and 18.19 -- ^1. and so became
an harlot, Hos. 2.2. Secondly in the apostate Chur. there be some things true in
the substance as the word and baptism, though corupted in the administration
thereof by false ministers, and humane devises. Thirdly the members of an
apostate Chu. are to be considered two ways, 1. as they stand members of such
a Chur. Secondly, as they are the seed and posterity of their forfathers which
received the covenant for themselves and for their seed: and though in regard
of the former estate, they have nether right to baptism or the covenant (for
the holy things of God belongs not properly to false Chu. nor to the members
thereof considered in that estate) yet even to such members considered apart
from such standing and as they are the seed of their forfathers, so are they
capable of the covenant and Sacra. and the same is avayleable to them upon
their repentance: For in apostate Churches God has his people which are
beloved for their Fathers sakes, Romans 11.28. and this apeareth in that he
says, come out of her my people, Apo. 18.4. and to such it cannot be denied,
but that to them belongs the covenant, yea whiles they are in Spiritual
Babylon, as it did to the Jews that were in Babylon of Chaldea: bondage
hinders not Cods grace.

But some may reply, that they whose Fathers were Idolaters and unbelievers
cold have no right to the covenant to be baptized through the Faith of their
Fathers. I answer, the right that children have to Gods covenant depends not
only upon their immediate parents, but title thereto descends unto them, from
their ancestors Exo. 20. if we respect herein Gods mercy, even as men's
inheritance do from their former Fathers: neither do the members of an
Apostate Church cast of al profession of faith, for such beleve the Scriptures,
and in Chapter etc. though with all they profess diverse errors, and worship the
true God in a false manner.

If question be made how it can be proved that the members of an Apostate Chu.
had forfathers that beleved. I answer, it cannot be denied, seeing that an
Apostate Church arises not out of a company of infidels (for then could it not
be called Apostate seeing that to apostate must be in regard of the truth) but
is the ruins of a true Church, and therefore it must needs follow that their
forfathers were belevers, and had received the covenant.

And thus have I briefly answered these two Anabaptistical positions with
their reasons, as the Lor. has enabled me for the present, wishing this
labor might have been taken in hand by such as could better perform it. and
further I do entreat, that the truth (which I contend for), may not, through
my weak defense, bear any reproach, but that which is falt worthy, let it
return upon my head. and do also earnestly pray that he that has thus
written, and both he and they that so practice, may seriously consider of that
which is done, and glorify God by their repentance. March. 14. 1608.

Rich. Clifton.

John Smyth.

In the next place you make answer to my last argument, which may be framed
into this form.

As the false Church and ministry are rejected, and the contrary true Church
and ministry assumed: So the false worship, and so by consequent the false
baptism must be renounced, and the true baptism assumed. Verum primum. Ergo
secundum.
The sum of your answer is, that we must renounce indeed the false Church,
ministry, and worship, and yet may retain the baptism received in the false
Church, which (you say) is true in author, matter, form, and end: Though
corrupt in circumstance, as oyling, crossing, breathing, etc. repenting of
those coruptions, and not casting away the true substance with the corrupted
circumstances devised by man, and annexed thereto, etc.

Although all that is mentioned here is already taken away in the former
discourse yet it shall not be amiss to annexe some thing for further clearing
of the point.

First, I deny the popish baptism to be true in the 4. causes thereof as you
affirm: 1. The L. never instituted that infant^ should be baptized, 2. he
never ordained that Pagans should be baptized, 3. he never instituted that the
carnal seed of the faithful should be baptized: Therefore seeing infants that are
not the seed of the faithful, but the seed of Babylonians, are baptized by
Antich. the matter of baptism is false, ^ the L. never appointed that the
party should be baptized without his own confession and consent to the
contract that the L. makes in baptism: and therefore the Apo. Peter says that
in baptism there is the question of a good conscience into God: and Paull says
that when the body is washed with pure water, the heart must be sprinkled from
an evil conscience, 1. Pet. 3.21. Heb. 10.22. therefore infants are baptized
which cannot Stipulate or contract themselves unto the L. therefore the L. does
not contract with them, for Chr. the husband of the Church will not contract in
marriage with a bride or a spowse that is under age, Gal. 4.1-4.3. the L. did
never appoint that baptism should seal up his new Testament to infants, or
that infants should by his baptism be admitted into the body of Antich. and
into the Church, ministry, worship, and government of Antich. or that his
baptism should set a character indelible upon parties baptized, or should give
grace ex opere operato, al which or most of which are done in Antich. baptism:
but the end of Chr. baptism is to manifest visibly that the party confessing
his faith and sins is sealed by the Spirit unto the day of redemption, that
he has visibly put on Chr. that he is mortified, crucified, dead, and buried,
risen again, and ascended with Chr. Romans 6.1-6. and Col. 2.12. Gal. 3.27. Col.
3.1-5. these are the true ends of baptism instituted by Chr.: Seeing therefore
the matter, form, and end of baptism in the false Church is from man even
from Antich. the for the L. is not the author of this baptism, but the
baptism is antic. wholly: and although he uses the words, In nomine Patris,
Filij, and Sp. Sancti amen: as the papists do in sprinckling holy water, in
baptising their bells, and as conjurers do in their charms, yet this cannot
make true baptism, but rather is a most notable profanatio^ of the holy
Scripture, even as it is profaned in there Sermons and daily worship performed
by them. I affirm therefore again and again that the baptism received in the
false Church is none of the L. ordinance, but antichr. devise, essentially
corrupted, in matter, form, and end or use: and therefore wholly to be rejected
with the oynting, breathing, and crossing, etc.

Here you endeavor to prove that Israel was a false Church, because it
Separated from Judah, and because they joined together in a new Church and
communion, under a false ministry and worship, and became a harlot whereto I
answer that so was Judah a false Ch: when they worshipped Idols under every
gree^ tree, and in the high places: and if you so understand a false Church,
viz: meetings, or companyes of men assembled together in a wrong place, and to
a wrong worship, under a wrong Preisthood, I yield Israel so to be a false
Church, but I deny that to be the true definition of a false Chu. for a false
Church is contrary to a true Church: now a true Church is descerned in the true
causes essential: and so a false Church is known by the want of those true
causes essential: the true essential causes of the Chu. of the old Test was the
posterity of Abrah. or proselytes circumcised: the want of these things only
made a false Chur: So long as the Israelites retained circumcision, they were
the true carnal constituted Church of the old Test: and Israel and Judah are
called harlots, not for that they were a false Church, but for the worshipping
of God in Idols, as before the calves at Dan and Bethel, or the Idols in Judah,
this is plain enough in the History. So that I conclude against you that
Israel was no false Church in the constitution, but had a true matter and
form, viz: circumcised Israelites though under a false ministry, worship, and
government, as I have already showed in the former treatise.

Lastly, you bring us in a double respect or consideration of members of the
Chur. of Antich. 1. as they are members of those false Chu: 2. as they are the
children of believing progenitors who received the covenant for themselves and
their posterity: in (...) first respect they are not under the covenant or
seal thereof in the second respect they are under both, for the Fathers sake
Romans 11.28. and so their repentance shall serve their turn when they come to
the true Church without rebaptising.

I answer diverse things: first, I do not deny but that me^ may be considered
two ways visibly as members of Antich. body, invisibly as aperteyning to the
L. election, and that is the meaning of the A p. Romans 11.28. but I deny that
hence it follows, that when they come from their invisible being in Chapter to a
visible being in the true visible Chu. they shall enter in any way but by the
door which is baptism: For whereas you intimate that a man being invisibly
elect and beloved of God, and invisibly having th^se to the covenant and holy
things of God, may therevppon first visibly enter into the false Chu. by false
baptism, and then upon his repentance come to the true Chu. and enter
therinto not by baptism, but that the door of Antich. Chur. shall open him the
way into Chr. Church long before he come into Chr. Church, whereas I say you
intimate unto us so much, you do herby teach contrary to our Savior Chr. who
says that we must go in by the door, and not climb up by the window, and that
we must first be taught and made Disc. and the^ baptized into Chr. but you in
the Kingdom of Antic. are first baptized falsely and then made Disciples flat
contrary to Christ's commaundem.

Secondly I say that no man is under the covenant or under baptism for the
parents sake: and that is not the meaning of the Ap. To. 11.28. but his meaning
is that the elect of the Israelites are beloved for the promise God made to
Abrah. Isaac, and Jacob, in respect of Chr: not for that the children shall be
pertakers of that covenant, because of their parents faith, or because of Gods
covenant made with the parents and there carnal infants, but because the L.
elected them and predestined them in Chr. to life and salvation invisibly:
and therefore I do confidently deny, and you are never able to prove that the
carnal infants are actually possessed of the everlasting covenant God made with
Abrah. for their parents sakes: do you indeed think that God loves any man for
an other man's sake or do you think that God loves not al men of his mere
mercy: or for Chr. sake: neither is it the carnal line that is beloved of God
for his mercy sake or for Chr sake: but it is the Spiritual line of Abrah. the
faithful only and elect that are beloved for the ^^hers, that is for the
covenant made with Abrah. Isaac, and Jacob, our Fathers in the faith: and so it
is true that God loves men in the false Chu. of An. for Abrah. Isaac, and
Jacob, that is for his merciful promise made to them: but what is this to prove
that Antic. are beloved, and under the covenant, for their carnal line
descending from a beleving auncestor? or if that were granted how does it
follow that the baptism visibly received in the Antich. false Chu. is true
baptism sealing up the covenant to them that the L. converteth in the false
Chu. No: we have already proved that the baptism is essentially false and none
of Chr. and therefore it is the character or mark of the beast, openly retained
in the forhead of all the subjects of Antic. who professing themselves to be of
that baptism do profess themselves to be of that body for of that body they
are of whose baptism they are, and of that baptism they are of whose body
they are, 1. Cor. 12.13. Ephesians. 4.4. Gal. 3.27. and we have also proved that the
L. true baptism does not aperteyne to the carnal line, but only to them that
are of Abrah. faith, that is actually believing to justification, and showing
the faith of Abraham by the works of Abrah. Lastly, whereas you fetch the title
to the covenant (...) to baptism, for infants in the false Chu. from some
auncestor beleving 40. generations happily before acording to that Exo. 20.
that the L. shows mercy to 1000. generations of them that love him I answer
3. things, 1. you must prove that some off our predecessors had true actual
says and were members of true Chapter and this you must prove for every member you
receave in without baptism thereby to assure you that he had title to the
covenant and to baptism by his carnal line: 2. you must by the same reason
receave by baptism into the true Chu. (if you can come by the^) all the infants
of the Thessalonians, the Ephesians, the Galatians, the Colossians, the
Philippians, and the Chu. of Asia that did sometime beleve, 3. I deny that you
expound the place Exo. 22. truly: For the L. directly does require that they
upon whom he shows mercy should fear him and keep his commaundem: and I do
utterly deny that ever the Forefathers of the English nation beleved, and you
can never prove it. For that which you say that seeing we are Apostates, therefore
it follows that sometime we or our auncesters had the truth, I wonder at you
for so saying: for we are departed from the faith of the Scriptures, not from
the faith of our ancestors, who never a one of them at any time beleved
visibly in a true constituted Chu. Thus through Gods providence and blessing I
am come to a happy end of answering your writing: wherein I praise the L. for
his mercy I have receved such assurance of the truth as that you and all the
earth shall never be able to wring it out of my heart and hands, and therefore I
desire you Sir, and all the leaders of the Separation to weigh seriously even
betwixt the L. and their own hearts upon their beds this which is written, I
doubt not but I may err in particulars, and I have resolved to be vile before
men in confessing my erors, but for the maine points in controversy, and the
cause I defend it is the most undoubted and most evident ^oth that ever was
revealed to me: and therefore as you love the L. and his truth, and the people
that depend upon you, seek it out and embrace it, and resist it not, but if we
be in error, show it unto us, why? shall we perish through your default? will
not the L. require our blood at your hand? are we not your countrymen al of us?
in exile for the common truths, we hold out against Antich. Answer we beseech
you in the L: nay we adjure you in the Lord: if we be in error it is
ignorantly, and of a desire to see the truth and to fear the L: Thus hoping
speedily either to hear an answer to this writing, or to see you yield to the
truth which I unfeignedly ask of the Lo: for you my countrymen, I end writing
this 24. of March. 1608.

John Smyth.

Rich. Clifton. If you reply, show your strength, that we may make an end of
these uncomfortable oppositions, for if I see not weight in your reasons, I will
bestow no more labor.

Ioh. Smyth. Sir: there may be weight in my reasons, and you happily either
cannot through prejudice or will not through some sinister respect se the weight
of them: I pray you be not charmed by evil counsel, but either show me my
error, or yield to the truth I would be glad to be an instrument of showing you
this truth also: at least you by showing us our error shall discharg a good
conscience: If you do not answer among you al: I proclayme you are subtly
blind, and lead the blind after you into the ditch.

FINIS.

