THE EVNVCHE'S CONVERSION.

A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, the second of February. 1617

By Charles Sonnibank, Doctor of Divinity, and Canon of Windsor.

COR VNVM VIA VNA printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Richard Fleming; and are to be sold at his Shop
at the great South door of Paul's, on the right hand going up the steps. 1617.

To the Right Worshipful, my worthy Friend, William Allen, Esquire, Son and
Heir to the Right Worshipful Sir William Allen, Knight, sometimes Lord Mayor
of the Honorable City of London, C. S. wishes all the blessings of this, and
of the better life.
THis mean labor and work of mine (Right Worshipful, and my worthy Friend)
framed only for the Pulpit, not for the Press, and intended only to the
ears, not to the eyes of men, had not at this time, in this shape and form,
presented it self to your view, If either I could have satisfied the
importunity of many of my Friends, which did earnestly solicit me to print
the same, or could have prevented the purpose of others, whom without breach of
charity I may in some sense term my Foes, who (as I had a watchword given
me) were minded, in case I could not be thereunto entreated; to set forth in
print those broken and imperfect notes, which they took from my mouth, at the
time when I delivered this Sermon.

And here, I confess, I was brought into a strait, by my Friends on the one
side, and my Foes on the other: So that although I had long since put on a
settled purpose, to publish no Pamphlets, in this Scribbling Age, wherein so
much paper is blotted, and wherein so many, as soon as they have but laid an
egg, do presently cackle, and bewray an itching humor of being in print; yet
as one that had forgot himself, I have relapsed, and by a kind of constraint
have fallen (as you see) from my first and best resolution; and so by pleasing
others, have displeased my self.

But, howsoever; I rest assured, your love to me, will excuse me, and will
take in good part this Paper-Present, which reaches out the hand unto you,
for acceptance: the rather, for that in one part and passage thereof, it
puts you and others of your rank in mind of that which You seldom forget,
namely, that as God has been very gracious to you, in blessing you, not only
with great abundance of temporal blessings, nor only with a wise and
understanding, but with a pious and religious heart, and in these respects has
made you great; so you should strive by all means to bless and honor him, from
whom you have your greatness: as also for that it comes from such a one,
whose desire is, that all they who vouchsafe to read these lines should know,
that the Author of them, is one of those many, which honor your Virtues, and
love your Person.

Yours, in all Christian offices of love, CHARLES SONNIBANK.

The Authors Postscript.
In page 114. line 14. these words, (1. Effect; He believed) would have been
placed in page 112. immediately before the last line.

Faults of the Press in some few Copies.
Page. Line. 26. 10. and 11. For comforth, read comfort. 32. 1. For their, read
in their. 33. 17. For way, read may. 94. 1. For came, read ran. 108. 5. For
on-, read only.

THE EVNVCH'S Conversion.
Acts 8.26.27.28. etc. 26. Then the Angel of the Lord spoke unto Philip,
saying, Arise, and go toward the South: unto the way that goes down from
Jerusalem unto Gaza, which is waste.

27. And he arose and went on: and behold, a certain Eunuch of Aethiopia,
Candaces the Queen of the Aethiopians chief governor, who had the rule of
all her treasure, and came to Jerusalem to worship.

28. And as he returned sitting in his chariot, he read Esaias the Prophet. etc.


AS we may clearly see and behold with the eyes of our bodies the power and
goodness of God, in the creation of the world by his Son, by whom he made
the world. Hebr. 1.2. So may we with the eyes of our souls, much more
clearly see and behold, his more powerful omnipotency and goodness, in the
recreating, and new making thereof, by the same his Son; by whom he remade,
that is to say, he redeemed the world. John. 3.16.

In the former, Dixit and formata sunt omnia, He spoke the word, and all
things were formed; in the later, passus est Christus, and reformata sunt
omnia, Christ suffered, and all things were made anew and reformed.

In the former, he showed digitum potentiae, the finger of his power; in the
later, he showed manum misericordiae, his whole hand of mercy.

In the former, he breathed into the world the breath of life: in the later, it
pleased him that his Son should expirare, should breathe out his own breath,
and lay down his own life for the world, that so it might have eternal life.
Thereby verefying unto us, the comfortable truth of that assertion, which
reverend and Christian antiquity has from age, to age, commended unto us; to
wit, that God has showed himself more glorious in redeeming, than in making
the world and mankind.

Now, that this great work of mercy wrought by God, in the person of Christ,
for the salvation of man, might be made known to all men; it pleased God to
make that great persecution mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, to be a
very effectual means.

For whereas the godly and faithful believers in Christ, were all gathered
together in Jerusalem, as it were so many Bees in one Hiue; God being pleased
that the honey and sweetness of his saving truth, and the knowledge of his
Son, should be no longer shut up in that one Hiue, but should be imparted
to others, both men and nations, suffered them to be scattered and dispersed,
in similitudinem granorum seminis, vt ex ipsis magna seges fidei
multiplicaretur, that so, of their sowing the seeds of faith, and of the
knowledge of Christ, there might follow a great harvest of believers unto God.
Which thing did accordingly fall out, Nam vt ex grano spica, as of one grain
comes a whole ear, and sometimes many ears of corn: so was it in them, for
many times one of their Sermons did beget and bring forth a multitude of
faithful believers.

Among those faithful believers, which by reason of this great persecution,
were driven from Jerusalem, and being scattered abroad, went to and fro,
preaching the word, as appears in the fourth and fifth verses of this chapter,
Philip was one: not that Philippe which was one of the twelve Apostles, for
they all as appears in the first verse of this chapter, stayed still at
Jerusalem; but it was that Philip which is the second in the Catalogue of the
seven Deacons, Act. 6.5.

And this Philip, after that he had preached, and converted the City of
Samaria, as it is set down in the former part of this chapter, was employed
and used as you see in the words of my Text, for the conversion of this Eunuch.

The maine scope and principal drift of the Spirit of God in this Scripture,
and history, which I have read unto you, is to show and shadow out unto us,
the large extent of the doctrine of the Gospel, and the kingdom of Christ, and
how the same is by the counsel and merciful purpose of God, to be propagated
and extended to the utmost borders of the earth.

And therefore in this present history, which I have chosen at this time to
treat of, you may be pleased to behold, how God vouchsafed to pour upon the
head of this Honorable Eunuch, the precious ointment of the saving knowledge of
Christ: that like as the sweet and precious ointment that was powered on the
head of Aaron, ran down from his head, and beard, to the skirts of his
garments; so also this fragrant and sweet ointment, might stream down, and
flow to the skirts as it were of his clothing, to the utmost borders of his
Country; and first to open to him the fountain of life, and to let him drink
thereof; and then by him, as it were by a conduit pipe, to derive and convey
the sweet streams and waters thereof, to his countrie-men that dwelt a far
off, even to the people and inhabitants of Aethiopia. Which thing came
accordingly to pass: for he, being converted, converted many brethren, and as
we receive it by tradition, brought many of his own nation to the knowledge
of Christ.

The chief and principal points which I observe in this Scripture, and
whereof I purpose by Gods assistance to speak at this time, are these: 1. An
Angel disposes of Philip, and assigns him a place for his employment. ver.
26. 2. Who, and what he was, to whom, by the direction of the Angel, Philip
was sent. First, he was of Aethiopia. Secondly, he was an honorable
Personage chief Governor to the Queen of that country, and had the rule of
all, her treasure. Thirdly, he came or he traveled to Jerusalem to worship.
ver. 27. 3. In the third place, we will consider how this noble Eunuch was
busied and employed in his return homeward: as he returned sitting in his
chariot, he read Esaias the Prophet. ver. 28. 4. The fourth thing that I intend
to speak of, is Philips performance of that duty, and service, to which he was
appointed. ver. 30. 5. Fifthly and lastly, the effects which his own reading
and Philips preaching of Christ, wrought in this Eunuch; and they are three:
first, he believed: secondly, he was baptized: and thirdly, after he believed
and was baptized, he went homeward rejoicing.
In the first place, in that an Angel is appointed by God, to warn Philip to
hasten and meet the Eunuch for his conversion, it may teach us, how gracious
and merciful God is to the sons of men; who for their sakes and for their
good, will have his Angels to be serviceable and helpful unto them.

By the help of Angels, Lot was delivered, and preserved in the destruction of
Sodom. ver. 19.

An Angel of God went before the host of Israel and behind the host, and did
deliver them, and defend them from the Egyptians. Exodus 14.19.

An Angel of the Lord opened the prison doors by night, and brought forth the
Apostles, and set them at liberty. Acts 5.19.

An Angel directed Cornelius to send for Peter: and here an Angel is sent to
warn Philip to join himself to the Chariot of this Eunuch, and to expound
the Scripture unto him.

So true is that of the Apostle Saint Paul, Angels are ministering spirits, sent
forth to minister for their sakes which shall be heirs of salvation. Heb. 1.
last.

Happy are they, who by the blessing of God, do make a wise and gracious use
of the ministration of Angels; who by the cleanness of their life, and holy
conversation, make glad those holy and blessed spirits, which are beholders and
eyewitnesses of all their actions; and by their unfeigned repentance, give them
cause of rejoicing: For there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God, for
a sinner that co^uerteth. Luke 15.10.

Which thing if we shall do, then shall those Angels which rejoice in our
wel-dooing, and are by Gods appointment content to love us, and to minister
unto us here in sterquilinio mundi, in this du^ghill of the world, much more
honor and love us, in aula coeli, in the Palace and kingdom of heaven; and
being glad of our conversion in this life, will be more glad of our
assumption and salvation in heaven.

1.
In the second or next place, we have to consider the person, to whom by the
direction of the Angel, Philip was sent; and he is here said, first, to be a
man of Aethiopia.

If any man shall vvonder how any spark of the knowledge and true worship of
God, should give light, and shine in Aethiopia, by the light whereof this great
and noble man might attain to any glimse of the knowledge of God, and thereby
be brought to desire to perform any service and worship to him, and that in
the place principally appointed thereunto; namely, in his holy Temple, at
Jerusalem; especially seeing that howsoever the Commission of preaching the
Gospel to all Nations, though it were given and sealed to the Apostles and
Disciples, yet it was not yet sped, or as yet executed:

If any man, I say, shall wonder hereat; he must know, that although the light
of the Gospel did not as yet shine, either in Aethiopia, or in the remote and
utmost kingdoms of the earth: yet besides that knowledge which men might have
by nature, and by the beholding of the creatures, and the frame of the world;
the light of the law, and the knowledge of God, did in some proportion, either
more or less, shine or shimmer forth to all Nations, singulis generum, though
not generibus singulorum, as the School speaks: to some of all Nations,
though not to all particulars of every Nation.

God has not left himself without witnesses in any place; but has left in
all the Nations of the world, some prints and footsteps of his knowledge, of
his power, and goodness.

And although it might be said, in regard of the eminency thereof, that in
Jury God was well known, and that his tabernacle was in Salem; yet was he
known in other Nations also, and he made his Name glorious in all the quarters
of the world.

The prayer or wish of Noah, that Iaphet might dwell in the Tents of Shem, was
in some measure in all succeeding ages, heard, and granted.

Gedeons fleece was not only and alone watered, but the whole threshing
floor: the Land of Jury was not alone bedeawed and moistened, with the heavenly
deaw of the knowledge of God, but the whole earth, with the Nations that were
far removed, even to the utmost bounds thereof.

Some part of this heavenly deaw, might light upon this Eunuch's head; and with
some part of this holy ointment, his heart might be anointed.

The books of Moses, and of the Prophets, came into the hands, and Schools of
many of the Gentiles: and not only Plato, and many other of the more
intelligent, and better sort of Philosophers, but Poets also, as Iustine Martyr
writes, saw them: and became as he speaks, Fures Mosis, and Prophetarum,
thieves of Moses, and of the Prophets.

And, howsoever the Apostle Saint Paul affirms in the ninth to the Romans,
that to the Israelites pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the
covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God; yet did it also
please the Lord, that the knowledge of his law, and the manner of his holy
worship and service, should in some degree and proportion, and that many times
by diverse accidents and strange means, be derived and communicated in all
ages, to Heathen men and Gentiles.

So in the old Testament, by reason of the two great Captiuities of the
Israelits, the one into Egypt, the other into Babylon, the knowledge of God was
spread in those Nations: and from thence, both the Grecians and the Romans,
fetched a great part of their best, and most mystical, and diuiner kind of
learning. And though the Israelites spoiled the Egyptians of their jewels, and
other costly raiments, yet the Egyptians spoiled the Israelites, of a far more
precious jewel, even the knowledge of the true God.

Thus you see, how by all, or by some of these means, some glimse, or portion
of the knowledge of GOD, might come into Aethiopia.

To conclude this point. It was promised to Abraham, it was prayed for by
Solomon, it was prophesied by Esaias, and foretold by David, that strange
Nations should know the Lord, and should be made his sons, and worship him
in his holy Temple.

It was promised to Abraham, In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be
blessed. Gene. 26.4.

It was prayed for by Solomon (and mark I pray you, how Salomons prayer
reaches, and fitteth the person of this Eunuch) Touching the Stranger, says
Solomon, that is not of thy people Israel, who shall come out of a far Country,
for thy Names sake, and shall come and pray in this House, (meaning the Temple)
hear thou in Heaven, and do according to all that the Stranger calls for
unto thee. 3 Kings, 8.41.42.43.

It was prophesied by Esaias, The Gentiles shall walk in thy light, and Kings at
the brightness of thy rising up: thy sons shall come from far. Esaias 60.3.4.

And David more plainly and particularly, points at this Eunuch's Country,
and says; Aethiopia shall haste to stretch her hand to God. Psalm. 68.31.

2
Secondly, he is said to have been an honorable Personage; chief Governor
and Treasurer to the Queen of that Country of Aethiopia.

This shows, that Nobility may stand with Christianity; and that honor and
greatness, riches and wealth, do not in themselves hinder men, either from the
knowledge, or from the worship and service of God.

Although Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 1.26. that not many noble men, not many
mighty men, not many wise men after the flesh, are called: yet he does not
exclude all noble men, all mighty men all wise men after the flesh, from
being called to the knowledge and service of God.

For if all things come to pass by the direction and appointment of God; so
that without him, not a sparrovv lights on the ground. Math. 10.29. If every
good gift come from above, from the Father of lights, Iam. 1.17. If preferment
come neither from the East, nor from the West, but it is God that makes low,
and makes high, Psalm. 75.6.7,

Then to sit at the stearn of Commonwealths, and to guide Kingdoms, to be
borne of royal blood, and to come from the loins of Princes, to sit on seats
of judgment, and from thence to minister justice to the people, to be advanced
to the highest, or to the subordinate and inferior places of power, and
authority, to be rich, and to have this worlds goods in great abundance; even
all of these, and the like, they come not by chance, nor happen at adventure;
nor is it Catch that catch may, among the sons of men: but it is the
providence and hand of God, that dispenses them at his own pleasure, many
times to them, to whom, with them, he gives grace to use them to his glory, to
the protection and defense of his Church, and to the behoof and comfort of his
Saints and servants.

Domini est terra, et plenitudo eius, The earth is the Lords, and the fullness
thereof; whether it be the fullness of sovereign authority and princely
dignity, or the fullness of honor, and worldly prosperity, or the fullness of
wealth, of riches, or temporal abundance: all these, and the like, as they
come from God, and are in themselves, rich graces, excellent ornaments, and
evident arguments of Gods gracious goodness and favor to them, whom before, and
above others, he therewith blesses: so are they also, if in the use of them,
they be sanctified to the owners of them excellent means of doing good, and of
glorifying God, in the gracious use, and employment of them.

He was a noble man, he was chief Treasurer to a Queen, a very great man in
his country, and yet he was also the servant of God. Nay, as he was so are all
such as are noble, and great, and rich me^, in that they are noble, and great
and rich, the better fitted, and the more bound to be the servants of God.

The better fitted. For gold and silver are metals far more fit to be wrought,
and to have precious stones set and placed in them, than lead, or iron: so are
the minds of noble, and great, and rich men, for the most part more fit to
receive into them, the rich and precious graces and the gifts of God, than
those that are vulgar men, and of mean condition.

And as they are for the most part better fitted than others; so are they more
bound than others, to the service, and worship of God.

In a civil life this is the greatest comfort, Meus sum, I am mine own man,
and at liberty: but in a Christian life this is the greatest comfort, even of
the most noble and greatest persons, Non sum meus, I am not mine own man, but
Jesus Christ's, who has bought me with a price, and has therefore bound me,
to glorify and to serve him.

It is a true saying, that Mayor must be Melior; the greater must be the
better: and to whom God gives most, at his hands he will require most.

As therefore mortal men, are most bound to honor God most, because they are
the excellentest of all mortal creatures: so those amongst mortal men, who
are noble, or rich, or great men, either by birth, or by employment, or by
their endeauours in the places where they live, are most bound to serve God
most, because they are most excellent among mortal men.

Nobilitas ad virtutem obligat, nobility binds men as it were in an
obligation, to be virtuous: and he that has lost his virtue, has broken his
bond, has lost his nobility, argentum suum in scoriam conuertit; he has
changed his silver into dross.

The chiefest honor of a Noble, or great man, is virtue: and the chiefest
virtue, is religion; without the which, how great soever he be at home, or
abroad, and how noble soever he may seem in his own eyes, yet is he base,
and vile in the eyes of God.

In the second of Jeremy, after that the people had forsaken God, the Prophet
says, They have changed their glory, for that which does not profit: as though
the glory of a people, were indeed the service of the true God; and the ceasing
so to serve him, were the ceasing, or loosing of their glory.

The fear of the Lord, says the wise son of Sirach, in his first chapter,
is a glory to a man, and a joyful crown unto his head.

A King may be a King: but if he want this fear, he is a King, but without a
crown. A noble man may be noble: but without this fear, he shall want his
glory. A great man may be great, either in his own, or other men's eyes: but if
he want the fear of God, his greatness is but as the swelling of a bladder puffed
up with wind, which shall quickly vanish, and come to nothing. A rich man may be
rich, and may abound and even wallow in wealth: yet if he be not rich in the
Lord, and walk not in his fear, his riches are but as the varnish upon a
rotten post: he is painted indeed with gold, but his root is rottenness, his
life is sinful, and his end inglorious.

For the richest crown, and chiefest glory to great men, in what kind soever
they be great, is the fear and worship of God: their greatest prerogative is to
be of the household of faith: their greatest freedom is to be the servants of
God: their greatest nobility is their new birth in Christ: and their greatest
riches, are the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit in them.

At the top of the scepter, and of all greatness, sits Honor, and at the foot
of the scepter, and of all greatness, sits Care; not only the care of
performing such duties as belong to the places of such as are any way great,
but especially the care of serving and fearing God, from whom they have their
greatness: without which care, honor is but as a bundle of painted flowers,
that yield no true sweetness; and greatness is but as a bunch upon the back
of a deformed creature, which makes him the more misshapen, and loathsome in the
eyes of God.

David's glory, was the Lord. Thou, O Lord (says he) art my buckler, the
lifter up of my head, and my glory. Psalm. 3.3.

And Theodosius the Emperor hold it a greater honor unto himself that he was
Membrum Ecclesiae, than that he was Caput Imperij; that he was a member of
the Church, and thereby the servant of God, than that he was the head, and
Commander of the whole Empire.

And I am verily persuaded, that our most Christian and princely Theodosius,
does more rejoice, and does herein take more comfort, that he is Defensor
fidei, Defender of the true, ancient, truly Catholic and Apostolic says,
than that he is Magnae Britaniae Rex, the sole Monarch, and great Commander of
Great Britain.

And surely heerin consists our happiness, and for this we have great cause
to praise GOD, for that our noblest plants, both root, and branches, planted by
the Lords own right hand, in the best and fattest grounds of our country, who
have the best title and greatest interest among us to true nobility and
greatness, do like unto the fruitful trees of Paradise, bring forth among us,
not only much hope, but much fruit also of holiness, and religious piety,
to the glory of God that here has planted them.

And as they for their parts, so it is farther also to be wished, that all they
which are great, in a subordinate, and inferior degree of greatness unto
them, the greater they are, the more they also would acknowledge themselves
bound, and the more they would strive to worship and serve God, who has made
them great; that so it might be truly said in our Church, and this
Commonwealth, that not only Terra dat fructu^ suum, the earth brings forth
her increase, when poor men do gladly serve God, but also that even Coeli
enarrant gloriam Dei, and astra matutina laudant eum: that is, the heavens set
forth the glory of God, and the morning stars praise him; when our greatest
Grandoes, our noblest, and our chiefest great-ones, are careful to serve, and
to fear the Lord.

And here me thinks, I have a very fit and just occasion offered me, without
straining, or offering violence to my Text, to speak unto you Right
Honorable, whether you sit on the one, or the other bench, and to you Right
Worshipful, wheresoever you are seated, and howsoever you be ranked, that
hear me this day, even to as many of you, as either for your honor, your
office, or your wealth, have prime and principal places in this our
Commonwealth; and first, by the example of this honorable and rich Eunuch, to
tell you for your comforth, that your greatness and plenty, may stand with the
service of God, and Christianity; and next, for your better remembering thereof,
to put you all in mind, that by how much the more God has been bountiful to
you above other men, by so much the more you ought and are bound above other
men, to be dutiful, and serviceable unto him, because that from the sea of his
bounty, you have received all your waters, from the torch-light of his
goodness, you have lighted all your candles, from the fountain of his favor,
you have filled all your pitchers, and from the Mine of his treasures, you have
received all your riches.

And therefore let me speak unto you, that are mighty and rich, and great men
in this assembly, as David did to the great men in his time, Psalm. 29.1.1. Give
unto the Lord, O ye mighty, give unto the Lord, glory, and strength, give unto
the Lord, the glory due unto his name.

Now seeing you cannot give any actual and real service, any actual and
real works of bounty, or requital, to the person of God himself, both for
that he is in heaven, and needs nothing that is yours; yet do them to the
support of Gods truth, and the furtherance of religion, do them to the
maintenance of study, and increase of learning, do them to Christ's needy
Saints and poor children; and then know it, and remember it to your comfort,
that what you do to them, you do to Christ himself, Matthew. 25.40. who will
not leave you unrewarded.

David, when he could not be kind, nor show his love to Jonathan his dearest
friend, he showed it to poor and lame Mephibosheth the son of Jonathan: so
seeing you cannot show kindness to your Lord and Savior, Jesus himself, show
it to his lame Mephibosheth's, his lame, his poor, his indigent, and needy
Saints, and servants.

Some write, that although the gold, myrrh, and frankincense, which were
offered by the Wise men, to our Savior Christ, were not received by him into
his own hands, because he was an Infant, but into the hands of his Mother;
that yet nevertheless, he gave unto the Wise men that offered him those gifts,
Pro auro fidem, pro myrrha spem, pro thure charitate^: for the gift of gold,
the virtue of faith; for the gift of myrrh, the virtue of hope; and for the
gift of frankincense, the virtue of charity. And why may not we likewise say,
that although those temporal blessings, which by honorable, or rich, or great
men, are offered to Jesus Christ himself, in his poor members, or are
bestowed to pious and good uses, that though they be received only by the
hand of their Mother, the Church; yet for all that, Christ Jesus himself will
graciously and plentifully, reward the giuers of them.

3
The third, or the next thing, which I noted in the person of this noble Eunuch
is, that he came from his own Country to Jerusalem, to worship.

He might have stayed at home, and so have saved himself a great journey, he
might have sacrificed to the Gods of his own Nation, and there have had other
Noblemen of his own rank, to associate him.

He might have worshipped in Meroe, the chief and Metropolitan City of
Aethiopia, and needed not to travel so far as Jerusalem, the chief and mother
City of Iudaea.

But he could not so satisfy himself, the Spirit of God wrought another effect
in him: and that light of knowledge, which he had by the operation of the same
Spirit, which now had changed him into another man, did to affect him, and
work with him, that now no Country but the Country of Iudaea, no Hill but the
Hill of Sion, no Place but the Temple, no City but the City of Jerusalem, no
God but the God of Israel, could contain the large extent of his devotion,
could fill the desires of his heart, and satisfy his soul with comfort.

It was not contentment enough for him, to wish with the Prophet David, O that
I might ascend into the house of the Lord, and come again unto Jerusalem,
there to pay my vows to the Almighty, and so to go thither in conceit only.

It did not sufficiently content him, with the Prophet Daniel, to set open
those his windows which were toward the holy City, and looking toward
Jerusalem, to direct his prayers to the Almighty.

It could not sufficiently content him, to make a proxy, to send gifts, and
to visit Jerusalem by his deputy: but though the journey were long, the way
dangerous, and the expenses great; yet would he undertake the journey, and go
his own self in person thither. He went up to Jerusalem to worship.

And although it could not choose, but prove a matter of hatred at the least,
if not of danger, and disgrace, to this noble Eunuch, to entertain a new form
of Gods worship, different from that which was used by his own Nation, to
renounce the superstitions of his Countie-men, to single himself from the
multitude, and to refuse to communicate with his Ancestors and forefathers,
their heathenish and idolatrous serving of God: Yet did he more esteem the
favor of God, then he feared the malice, or disgrace of men: and therefore the
reverence and love which he did bear inwardly in his heart toward the law, and
truth of God, and his holy worship, he showed it outwardly in his actions, and
openly professed the same before men:

He went up to Jerusalem to worship.

An excellent example, and worthy imitation, not only of great men, and noble
personages, but of all men, of what degree, or calling soever they be; In the
matter of religion, and the service and worship of God, not to tie themselves
to tread in the steps of others, not to be swayed by a multitude, nor to
follow their Ancestors and Forefathers in their errors and superstitions; but
most humbly and most willingly, to embrace the true knowledge, and sincere
worship of God, whenever, and by whom soever it is truly taught, and
brought unto them.

A lesson not unfit for these times, and this Age, wherein we live, in which
our adversaries the Papists do so commonly urge, and so strongly enforce the
example of our Ancestors and Forefathers, against us; thereby concluding, that
because they were borne and brought up lived, and died (as they speak) in the
Romish religion, that therefore we ought not to dissent from them; and that
without the blot and imputation of Schism and heresy, we ^ay in no wise
separate our selves from their communion, or profess any other faith, than
that which they professed.

And to speak a truth, I am hereof verily persuaded, that by this, as by their
most powerful and potent charm, they do bewitch, and enchant more souls,
especially, of the weaker sort, than by all their other sorceries whatsoever:
and by this, as by their strongest argument, they do much prevail, and draw
many from Iewry to Italy, from Jerusalem to Rome, from Christ to Antichrist.

By this motive especially, it comes to pass, that here in this our Land
(as it may be observed) great and whole Families, great and whole Kindreds
almost, have been, and do continue Popish, because their Ancestors and
Forefathers were so before them, and because it were great presumption in them,
as they are made believe, to think themselves wiser, than They were.

But if this were an universal, absolute, and certain truth, that fathers
must be patterns, and rules for their children to serve God by, so that in no
wise they may differ from them, in matters of Gods worship; then how is it that
our Savior says, in the 14. of Luke the 26. that He, that will not leave his
father, and his mother, for Christ's sake, should not be his disciple.

When all the Tribes revolted together, says Tobit, and the house of my father
Nepththali, sacrificed to the heifer Baal, I alone went often to Jerusalem, at
the feasts, as it was ordained unto all the people of Israel. Tobit 1.5.6

Gedeon was commanded by the Lord, to throw down the Altar of Baal which his
father had made, and to cut down the Grove that was by it. Judge. 6.25.

And some of the Kings of Judah are commended, because they walked not in the
Idolatry of their Forefathers.

Saint Paul was the son of a Pharisie, and the scholar of a Pharisie, and
yet neither Father, nor Master, could make him continue in the superstition of
the Pharisees, after that he was once illuminated, and instructed in the truth.

It is a wise, and and a godly speech of Seneca, Epist. 117. when we cannot
dissentire salua gratia, nor consentire salua conscientia, when we cannot
dissent from others, without their displeasure, nor consent unto them, without
wounding or offending our own conscience, Let us prefer conscience before
favor.

And it is a golden rule, which Divines have resolved on, and delivered, Where
God and man speak both one thing, there harken unto both: but where God
speaks one thing, and man another, there harken to God.

It is a most Christian, and worthy answer, fitting this present purpose,
worthy of all your attention and observation, which was given by Valentinian
the Emperor, to Symmachus, which is recorded in the fifth book of Saint
Ambrose his Epist. Symmachus a heathen man, and in all likelihood, an excellent
Orator, such a one as was Tertullus, of whom there is mention, Acts 24. having
penned an eloquent speech, the scope and purpose whereof, was, to persuade the
Emperor that embraced the Christian religion himself, and was resolved to
have the same received, and professed in his Empire, that he would be pleased,
to permit the ancient City of Rome, to hold her old form, and to keep and
use the old manner of serving her heathenish Gods; thus he tuned his pipes,
and thus he bespake the Emperor.

Regard says Rome mine age, which have now stood a thousand years, and shall
I now at the last, be checked and controuled, in my old days? This religion
which we now seek for, and sue for at thy hands, O Emperor, was that, which
won to Rome the sovereignty of the earth, which repelled and beat back that
cruel Hannibal, from scaling of our walls, which preserved our goodly Capitol
out of the French men's hands: And now it were a reproach after so long time,
and so many Ages, to have it quite reuersed. Much more was spoken, all very
suiteable and like, if you mark it, to the discourses, and speeches of our
Papists: but for an vp-shoot, and for a concluding argument, that was at last
brought in, that his own Father before him, had suffered them to enjoy that
form and manner of serving their Gods, and never disallowed it, and therefore
it was his part to permit it so likewise.

But the worthy Emperor, as Ambrose says, in his funeral Sermon upon him,
being resolutely addicted to the defense, and maintenance of Christ's glory,
made this answer; Let Rome my Mother entreat any thing else at my hands, and
ask what else she will of me: I owe unto her I confess a very great duty,
and affection, because she is my Mother, but I do owe a greater to God my
Father, who is the author of my salvation.

This was a worthy answer, of a worthy Prince: from whence we may learn
this instruction, In matters which concern the glory and service of God, not
to stand upon the will or words of men, but only on this only point, Sic dicit
Dominus, thus says the Lord, and with thankfulness to receive his truth,
whenever it is brought unto us.

And surely, if our ancient Fathers, the old and first Christened Gentiles, of
this our Island of Great Britanne, and other faithless at the first, and
Heathenish Kingdoms, had not held this rule, and kept this course, when it
pleased God in great mercy, that the Gospel of his Son Christ, and his
saving truth was first brought unto them; then might they, and we, still have
remained in our ignorance and infidelity; then should they, and we, have
continued aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, strangers to the covenants
of grace, bondslaues to sin and Satan, not only deprived of that glorious
name, by which we are called Christians, of Christ, but also debarred from
having any part or portion in that great work of mercy, and redemption, which
was wrought by Christ.

For, they might have replied to them, that were the first messengers and
preachers, which first brought unto them the glad tidings of the Gospel, and
have said unto them, as the Athenians did to Saint Paul, Act. 17.18. What will
this babbler say? he seems to be a setter forth of strange gods, in that he
preaches unto us Jesus, and the resurrection.

They might have said unto them, Our Fathers worshipped the Queen of heaven,
they believed on Jupiter, and Apollo, they sacrificed to Mars and Venus, they
worshipped the Moon, and the Stars, and so did their Fathers, and great
Grandfathers and Ancestors, some thousands of years before them: and shall we
now begin to listen to a new and vp-start Religion; and renouncing those
ancient Gods, that they so long served, control their judgment, and so admit
of a newfound doctrine, and worship newfound Gods?

But it pleased God to move their hearts, to receive with meekness that
truth; and so by succession, to derive unto us that truth, which was, and is
able, to save both theirs, and our souls.

You see, Right honorable, Right worshipful, and beloved in the lover of your
souls, Christ Jesus, to what issue this point is brought, and what it is that
I aim at: namely, that as this noble Eunuch renounced the Idolatry of his
Country, and the superstitions of his Ancestors and Forefathers; not suffering
them to be a rule, or making them a president to himself, either for his
faith, or for his manner of serving God, but went up to Jerusalem, there to
worship him in his holy Temple: so it is the duty of all men, to renounce all
false and superstitious worship of God, and to entertain his holy truth,
whenever, and by whomsoever it is revealed, and brought unto them, how many
soever, or how mighty soever, or how near or dear soever they be unto them,
that do discountenance and withstand the same.

Now, although this be a most undoubted truth, and that our Adversaries do
know it in their consciences so to be, yet do they never give over to object,
and with a full mouth to exclaim against us, filling the air, and the ears
of men, with these, and the like frequent questions, and demands; What? were
all our Ancestors and Forefathers deceived? lived they all in error? did they
all of them miss, and mistake the means which lead unto salvation, and by
consequent did they all miss the end? Did so many millions of them perish, and
were they all damned?

In answer of which their demands, which they so willingly and frequently make,
and by which they have inthralled many souls, especially of the simpler sort,
and such as are unlearned, carrying them away captive, and making them
bondslaues to the man of sin, the Antichrist of Rome, I will lay down these
three propositions.

1. Proposition.
First: They were not all Papists that lived in the time of Popery; and so by
consequent, all our Ancestors and Forefathers were not Papists.

Secondly: They did not all die Papists that in their life time were Papists.

Thirdly: Some that both lived, and died Papists in many points, yet holding
the principal, and fundamental parts of Gods blessed, and holy truth, might
be, and were also saved.

And first, not to speak of the first six or seven hundred years after
Christ, which were the purer times of the primitive Church, in which neither
the name of Pope, nor the doctrine and points of Popery, as now they are held,
had any being or footing in the Church: if we shall descend to the lower and
later ages and times, wherein Popery, or the religion of Rome, grew strong, and
held her head at the highest; we shall find, if with a single eye and without
partiality we enquire thereinto, that as in the former times, so in all
succeeding ages and times, even to this of ours, there was a Church of our
Religion.

And although the Professors thereof could not possess whole Nations, or
Countries, or Cities, wherein they might freely and openly profess their faith,
by reason of the great height and tyranny of the church of Rome, which not
only obscured them, but did also cruelly persecute them:

Yet were there few Nations, fevv Countries, few Cities, wherein there were
not some from time to time, yea and that also in the very bosom and midst of
the Church of Rome, that did learnedly and zealously, and with the loss many
times of their lives, profess the same.

If any man shall here call upon us to make a particular and precise bed-roll
or catalogue of their names, and ask us who they were that so have done: I
answer, that besides all those which living in former ages, and in the times
of Popery, who either could not, by reason they were unlearned, be known
publicly, and to the world, but only to God, and to their own consciences,
to be professors of our Religion; or if they were learned, did yet commit
nothing to writing, whereby the same might be known of them: I say besides all
those, whose number no doubt was infinite, great is the number of those godly
and learned men, of those faithful witnesses, which from time to time, both by
writing, by preaching, and by dying, have showed to the world, that they groned
under the burden of Popery, that they wished a reformation, and that they were
of our Church, and professed our Religion.

The names of which men, with the times in which they lived, together with
those passages, and parts of their books and writings, in which they witness
that which I have affirmed of them, are collected together, and set down by
many learned men of our part; and therefore I will spare my self the labor of
naming them unto you at this time.

If any man shall further except and say, They are but few that are named, in
comparison of the rest; and that their number is small: let such a one know,
that the number is not small; and if it were, yet that it is no marvel that so
few are named: it is rather a marvel that so many are named; seeing that the
Church of Rome has in all ages and times, so earnestly labored to blot out,
and to deface the memory of all, both men, and matters, which might speak for
us, or bear witness unto us.

For, if at this day, our Adversaries wipe our very names out of books, and
command that no man shall name us but in contempt; we may well assure our
selves, that their Ancestors have done the like in former ages, to the men of
our Religion: and hence it comes, that so few are mentioned and named in
ancient stories.

The practice of the Papists at this day with us, defacing our names, belying
our opinions, burying our memory corrupting our books, suppressing the truth of
things, purging and razing all manner of Evidence, by that devilish device of
their Indices expurgatorij, their purging tables, makes us assure our selves,
that in the same manner our Ancestors were used. And this is a principal
reason why we yield not so perfect a catalogue as else we might do.

2. Proposition.
My second proposition which I delivered, was this; that They did not all die
Papists, which in their life time, and in outward profession were Papists.

For, seeing it pleases God sometimes, even at the eleventh hour, to call men
to the knowledge of himself, and to repentance; and seeing Gods mercy is not
bounded, or confined to any times; but that as he will have mercy, on whom he
will have mercy; so also he will show mercy, at what time it pleases him to
show mercy; Who can tell but that many of our Ancestors and forefathers,
being touched in conscience, and renouncing themselves, and all humane
satisfactions, have at the time of their dissolution, and the approaching of
death, changed their minds; and so in that faith and religion which we
profess, yielded up their souls into the hands of God.

A thing the more probable, and like to be true, because in these our days,
many Papists have bin by most certain and true experience, observed to have
done, and to do the like: who in articulo mortis, being at the brink and point
of death, have been content, not only to suspect, and fear, but to renounce
their own merits, and their own works, to disclaim the whole body of humane
satisfactions, and to cleave only and alone, to the mercy of God in Christ,
for their salvation; and so, though they lived Papists, have died Protestants.

And no marvel though many Papists have so done, and do so daily: for alas,
what comfort or consolation can a wounded conscience, and a soul laden with
sin, now ready to depart the world, and to appear before the majesty of
GOD (in whose presence the Cherubins are polluted, the Angels are unholy, and
the heavens are unclean) there to answer the justice of God, and to give an
account for all things that it has done in the body; I say what comfort or
consolation can such a sinful and dying soul find, in reflecting it self
upon it self, in the works of it own hands, in the worth of it own merits,
in the fruits of it own labors, in crosses, crucifixes, Saints, Agnus Dei's,
blessed grains, holy relics, pilgrimages, extreme unction, dirges,
trentalls, masses, in Priests absolutions, in Bishops blessings, in Popes
pardons, or in all, or any of these, or other the trash and trumpery of Rome?

Will such Figge-leaues cover our shame? will such sacrifices satisfy for
sin? or can such stubble and straw endure the fiery trial of Gods justice,
and yet not be consumed?

Foolish Semele, great was thy folly (and thou art worthily taxed, and branded
with a mark of folly and dangerous indiscretion, eue^ by Poets themselves) for
desiring that Jupiter would in the selfsame manner visit thee at his next
coming, in which he used to visit Juno: by which means it came to pass,
that thou wast not only amazed at his brightness, but also by the lightning and
thunder which attended him, when he was in his majesty, wast burnt up quick,
and quite consumed: So may I truly say, and it is no poetical fiction, but an
undoubted truth, which I am about to utter to all proud Papists, proud
Pharisees, and Iusticiaries whatsoever, which gird themselves with their own
righteousness, and arm themselves with their own good deseruings and
merits, as it were with armor of proof, and coats of steel: Foolish Papist,
great is thy folly, and thou art woorthily taxed, and branded with a mark of
folly, and dangerous indiscretion, who puffed up with the wind of thine own
worth, and being tickled in thine own heart, with the wanton conceit of I wot
not what proportionable agreement, between thine own proper inherent
righteousness, and the justice of God, dare to meet God in the face, and to
confront his very justice; and art so indifferent, that thou do not much
reckon, or greatly regard, whether God, that is the Lord of glory, do come unto
thee in majesty, or in mercy, in the Law, or in the Gospel, in equity and
justice, or in pity and compassion, to judge thy good works, in some of you,
works of Supererogation; and to give sentence of thy righteousness, which in
many of you so abounds, that as you believe, and teach others, they may
reserve enough for themselves, and yet spare some for others, to make them also
righteous.

And what marvel is it, if being but dust and ashes, sinful flesh, yea
stubble and straw, fuel quickly kindled, his majesty amaze thee, and the fire
of his justice and judgment, do fearfully consume thee?

Beloved in the Lord, it is dangerous building on the sand. They build on the
sand, that make flesh their arm; that put any confidence in their own works.
It is safe building on a Rock: they build on a rock, which build on Christ; The
Rock is Christ.

And, as Extra Arcam, without the Arc, the Dove found no rest for the soale of
her foot: so likewise, Extra Christum, without Christ, the soul of a sinner
can find no comfort.

And be it spoken to the glory of God, and to the honor of that truth, and
that religion which we profess, This is that powerful motive, and the very
true cause, why so many that are professed Papists in their life, do
notwithstanding at the approaching of death, and the very point of their
dissolution, die Protestants, renouncing themselves wholly, and laying fast
hold only upon Christ.

I will trouble you but with two instances or examples for the clearing of
this point: the one, ancient; the other, modern, and of later time.

When Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester lay sick, Doctor Day, Bishop of
Chichester, coming to visit him, began to comfort him, repeating to him some
such places of Scripture, as did express and import the free justification of
repentant sinners, in the blood of Christ. Whereunto Winchester replied; What,
my Lord (quoth he) will you open that gap now? then farewell all together: To
me, and such other in my case, you may speak it; but, open this window unto
the people, and then farewell all together.

When those two unholy and traiterous Priests, Watson, and Clark, suffered
condign punishment for the treasonable practices whereof they were convicted
at Winchester, some few years since; the one of them immediately, before he
was ready to ascend the ladder, disposing himself to private prayer, was by
two very reverend and eminent men of our Church (as one of them has diverse
times related it in my hearing) ouerheard to have used these or the like words;
O Lord (said he) I have not any thing to offer up unto thee, that is worthy
thy acceptance: I have nothing but a corruptible carcass, and a sinful soul
to present unto thee.

At his uttering of which words, one of those reverend Divines calling to the
other; Harken, I pray you, harken (said he) how he disableth himself, and
renounceth his own merits. Which words when the Priest heard, he breaking off
the course of his prayer, made this reply to those grave Divines; Though (said
he) I have no merits to offer up unto God, yet it may be that many other of
our religion have merits, which both they may offer unto God, and for which,
his Majesty may be graciously pleased to be merciful unto them.

See, I pray you, how the truth of God prevailed with both these men, when
their end drew near, and when death approached: and observe, I pray you
farther, how they did in some sort, disclaiming all confidence in themselves,
and their own merits, bear witness to the truth of God, for the free
justification of sinners only by Christ. But whether or not, by their farther
answers and replies, they labored to hide that truth, and to put out that
candle after it was lighted in them, I take not upon me to judge, but do
leave that to God.

3. Proposition.
My third proposition which I delivered, by occasion of our Adversaries
demands, was this; All our Ancestors perished not; neither were all our
Forefathers, that lived in the time of Popery, damned.

For first, some of them, which both lived and died Papists, in many points;
yet holding the principal and fundamental parts, of Gods blessed and holy
truth, might be, and were also (as in the judgment of charity, we may well
think) partakers of salvation.

Secondly, it is one thing to hold an error obstinately, and wilfully, joining
the holding and professing thereof, with the hatred and persecution of the
truth: and another thing to err ignorantly, being seduced by such as are
Pastors and Teachers, with a mind notwithstanding always ready to embrace the
truth, whenever men shall be further enlightened: And in this later kind,
many of our Ancestors and Forefathers erred, carrying a mind always ready,
and willing to be taught, though the stream of the Times carried them away.

Now as of the former sort of these our Ancestors, and Forefathers, which not
only erred in the capital and fundamental parts of Gods truth, but erred
wilfully, and obstinately, hating and presecuting the truth unto their death,
we say, as Saint Paul says, They perished, because they received not the love
of the truth, that they might be saved. 2. These. 2.10:

So in respect of the later sort of them, we are far from pronouncing the
Sentence of damnation against them: we are not the Authors of any such
uncharitable, and peremptory assertions, we utterly disclaim all such black,
and bloody conclusions.

Genesis 37.33. Jacob seeing the coat of Joseph rent, torn, and bloody, cried
out and said, that Fera pessima deuorauit eum, Some evil beast has devoured
him; yet God provided for Joseph, and he was safe: So although the religion of
our Forefathers, like the garment of Joseph, seems rent, torn, and bloody
unto us, and we in probability may cry and say, that Fera pessima deuorauit
eos, yet we must not rashly condemn them; because God has as well
extraordinary means to save, as ordinary.

True it is, that many of our Forefathers relied upon the opinion of merit;
and therefore were like to the brethren of Joseph, who took money in their
sacks, when they went to Egypt for corn. But as Joseph returned them their
money again, and gave them corn for nothing: so who can tell, but that God,
giving them grace at the last, to change their opinions, and refusing their
merits, yet gave them corn for nothing, accepting them in his beloved; and
Christ, as Joseph receiving them as his brethren into eternal life.

As in charity we are forbidden to think, that none of the Israelites entered
into heaven, who entered not into the holy Land, or into the Land of Canaan, but
died in the Wilderness: so we are not to think, that all those our
Forefathers perished, which lived in the time of ignorance: but that, as many
among us, living in the light of the Gospel, descend notwithstanding, into the
darkness of hell; so there were many living in the darkness of Popery, who
ascended up to the place of light, to the kingdom of heaven, and were
partakers of eternal blessedness.

To conclude this point: Let us not rashly enter into the judgments of God:
for he says, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy.

Sometimes God refuses the father, and chooses the son; as in Solomon to
build the Temple, and not David: Sometimes he shows his judgments on the
sons, and mercy on the father; as in the children of Job: Sometimes he
cutteth off both the father, and the sons; as he did Elie and his children:
Sometimes he saves both the father and his children; as Noah and his children
in the Arc: and this he does, to the end that be we fathers, or be we
children, be we many, or be we few, we should learn to submit our selves to
him, and rather be careful to obtain our own salvation, than to be curious
in the disputing of the salvation of others.

I will close and shut up this point, with a saying of Ciprian, in his 3. Epi.
If any that went before us, either of ignorance, or of simplicity, has not
observed that which the Lord commanded, his simplicity through the Lords
indulgence may be pardoned; but we, whom the Lord has taught, and instructed,
cannot be pardoned.

3
In the third place of my first general division, I thought it fit, that we
should consider how this noble Eunuch was busied, and employed in his return
homewarde: and that is set down in the 28. verse. And as he returned sitting
in his chariot, he read Esaias the Prophet.

The Lord having touched the heart of this noble Eunuch, and finding that he
desired to taste of the bread of life, resolved in great mercy to feed him
plentifully therewith: and finding him to have a holy thirst after the water of
life, was pleased to set open unto him, the very fountain, or conduits
thereof, and provided that he should be fed, with the very marow, and fatness
of his holy truth, and that he should drink de torrente voluptatis, at the
very wellhead, the water of life, and the sweet wine of the saving knowledge
of his Son Christ.

He provided in his gracious providence, that the book of the Prophecy of
Esaias, should come to his hands: which he joyfully received, reverently
accounted of, making it (as Alexander did Homer) his companion in his journey,
and diligently read the same. He read Esaias the Prophet.

And what followed thereof? The Lord, who, as the blessed Virgin speaks,
fills the hungry with good things, did fill his hungry soul with the best
things, and verefied in him that saying of Solomon, Non perdet Dominus animam
iusti fame, The Lord will not famish the soul of a righteous man with hunger,
but will feed it: for he fed him with the richest, and most precious cates and
iunkets of his most holy and heavenly truth.

Neither did it only please God that the Book and Prophecy of Esaias should
only and alone come to the hands and sight of this noble Personage: but
herein also did Gods gracious goodness and rich mercy plainly appear unto
him, in that not by chance, or at adventure, but by the providence of God, his
hand was turned, and his eye directed to the reading of such a part and portion
of that Prophecy, as contained in it the sum and substance of the Gospel;
and from whence, Philip might have a good ground, and take just occasion,
beginning (as he did) at that Scripture, to open and expound unto him the
whole mystery of Gods mercy in Christ, and man's salvation by Christ.

The words of the place he read, are these, ver. 32. and 33. He was led as a
sheep to the slaughter, etc.

In which words, the Prophet shows the manner and order which it pleased God
to use in the redeeming of his Church; namely, by the death of Christ, as of a
Lamb slain as a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of mankind. That as a
sheep he was led to the slaughter, and like a lamb dumb before his shearer,
he opened not his mouth; etc. Whereby is signified, that he willingly offered
up himself, as a voluntary sacrifice, or free will offering for man's
redemption unto God.

More briefly and in a word, for I purpose not at this time to make any stay in
the interpretation of these words in my Text (howsoever they be most worthy to
be largely entreated of) more briefly I say, and in a word, In these words of
Esaias, which the Ennuch was now in reading, when Philip came and spoke unto him,
two things especially are mystically and prophetically delivered, concerning
the person of Christ: the first, his Humiliation and Passion; the second, his
Exaltation, or Glorification, and that not for himself only, but for us also.

Which words being a prophecy, or prediction of a thing then to come when
they were written by Esaias, are in effect repeated by Saint Paul, who speaks
thereof, as of a thing done and past, and now performed: He was delivered to
death for our sins, and is risen again for our justification. Romans, 4.25.

And both of these appear most plainly, in the 53. of Esaias, through that
whole chapter.

Of this argument or of this matter, Esaias speaks as a Prophet, Saint Paul as
an Evangelist: the one speaks de futuro, the other de praeterito; the one of
that which should come to pass, the other of that which is come to pass: and
yet which is worthy your marking, Esaias, though he speak thereof as of a thing
long to come, yet he speaks of it in the Preterperfect-tense, or in the time
past, to show the certainty thereof.

You see how this noble Eunuch was busied: and you see also what end the Lord
made, and what course he took with him.

He went up to Jerusalem to worship, and in his return he read the Prophet
Esaias: and it pleased God that being so busied and employed, the foundation and
groundwork of the saving truth, and knowledge of God in Christ, should be laid
and built in his soul to his eternal comfort and salvation, Jesus Christ
being the chief cornerstone of that holy and blessed building.

Tu vade and fac similiter, Go thou and do the like, go thou whosoever thou
art that hear me this day, and do the like, go up to Jerusalem, that is,
worship God in his holy Temple, read the Prophecy of Esaias, or some other part
of the book of God, read it when thou art at home, read it when thou art
abroad, read it early, read it late, read it with reverence, read it with
diligence, read it with an humble mind, read it with an hungry appetite,
read it with a devout desire to understand it; to conclude, read it with the
like mind with which this noble Eunuch read it, and thou shall be partaker of
the like blessing.

And although it be not enough, only to read the book, or word of God, but
that there be more required at our hands, even to believe it, and to frame our
lives according to the prescript form and rules thereof; yet shall we find
by Gods blessing, that the frequent and diligent reading thereof, shall be in
good time the beginning of better things unto us.

A small wedge, though it cannot cleave great logges, and such as be hard and
knotty; yet may it, and does it often serve, to make way for greater and
stronger wedges, by which they may be cloven: So your often reading of the
word only, may make way in you, to some greater and more powerful operation of
Gods Spirit, by which your knotty and hard hearts may be cloven asunder, and
so made wood fit for sacrifice, fit to be laid and used upon the Lords Altar.

I know right well, that Cathedram habet in coelo qui docet corda in terris;
that he has his seat in heaven, which teaches men's hearts on earth:

That it is our Savior Christ that opened the understanding of his disciples,
that they might understand the Scriptures. Luke 24.45:

That of him, and of him only it is said, Revel. 5.9. Thou art worthy to take
the book and to open the seals thereof:

That he and he only, has the key of of David, which opens and no man
shuts, and shuts, and no man opens. Revel. 3.7:

And therefore except he open the door of the Scriptures, they shall be shut
unto you, notwithstanding you do often read them.

Yet if you do often read them, you do stare in via, qua tra^sit Dominus, you
do stand in the way by which the Lord passes: and if you do but stand in the
way by which the Lord often passes, it may be he will at one time or other,
turn in unto you, as he did to Abraham, and Lot, as they stood in the way by
which he passed.

And as the Prophet Elisha turned into the the house of the Shunamite, when she
had prepared a chamber for him, and a bed, and a table, and a stool, 4. King.
4.10.11:

So I say, if the Lord shall see that you stand in the way by which he passes,
and that by your often reading his most sacred word, you have prepared a
chamber in your hearts, with convenient furniture therein to receive him, and
to entertain him, it may be he will turn in unto you, and so open unto you
the hidden mysteries of those Scriptures which you read, to your everlasting
comfort,

And as here to this noble Eunuch, after he had worshipped God, at Jerusalem,
and was now in his return home-warde, reading of the Prophet Esaias, the Lord
sent Philip; who joined himself to his Chariot, expounded that Scripture, and
preached Jesus unto him, baptized him, and so left him a most faithful, and
most joyful servant and professor of Christ: So if we frequently read the
word, and meditate therein, though therein we meet with many things we
understand not, the Lord in his good time will send some Philip that shall
join himself unto us, some godly and faithful Pastor and Minister, that
shall open and expound either privately, or publicly, so much thereof unto us,
as shall beget a lively and true faith in us, and shall be needful and
helpful to our salvation.

But here exception may be taken, and it may be objected, that as he read the
Prophecy of Esaias, but understood it not, and Legere, and non intelligere,
negligere est; so, to read, as we do not understand, is but in vain, and
lost labor.

The answer may be, that although the Prophet Esaias has the same place, and be
the same in respect of other Prophets, as Saint John is in respect of the other
Evangelists, like an Eagle that flies an high pitch, and soareth, and
pearcheth above the other birds; that is, be full of high and heavenly
mysteries, which the eye of reason, and natural understanding cannot pierce,
or attain unto;

Yet are there many things both in Esaias, and so also in the whole body and all
the several parts of the holy Scripture, that are plain and easy to be
understood, in which are contained and expressed, the power, the wisdom, the
goodness of God, together with that duty and obedience, that fear and
reverence, which all creatures do owe and ought to perform to his most
heavenly Majesty, as also such things as inuit men to faith, and exhort to
holiness of life. And these things, and the like, this Eunuch did, without
doubt, both often read, and well understood.

Howsoever; he does most freely and ingenuously confess, that he could not
understand that place or passage of the Prophet which he then read, which was
prophetically and mystically delivered concerning the person of Christ, and the
salvation of mankind by his death and passion: which is indeed a mystery,
which no eye but the eye of faith, can pearce and look into.

And from hence we may learn this point of Christian wisdom; Not to neglect,
or carelessly to pass by, those parts and passages of holy Scripture, which
when we read, we do not understand: as if they either appertained not unto
us, or it concerned us not at all, to search out the sense and meaning thereof;
whereas by often reading, searious meditating, and frequent and devout praying,
we might many times with comfort understand the same.

Chrysostom upon the 16. of Luke has this saying; Etiamsi non intelligas
illic recondita, etc. Although thou understand not the mysteries that are
hidden in the Scripture; yet of the very reading of them great holiness
grows.

And Ierom in his fourth book upon Esaias, and eleventh chapter, says,
Frequenter euenit, etc. It comes often to pass, that lay men being ignorant
of the mystical sense, are yet fed with the plain and simple reading of the
Scriptures.

To this exhortation of mine for the frequent reading of holy Scripture, and by
the example of this noble Eunuch for the reading of the^, though perhaps some
part of them be not understood by us, to this exhortation (I say) give me leave
I pray you, before I shut up this point, to add or use a reprehension also.

I love not, I confess, to be full of reprehensions; I delight not in public
reproves; neither take I pleasure in searching the wounds, or ripping up the
soars and faults of others: and yet that vvoe which the Prophet Esaias
denounces against them, that call good evil, and evil good, makes me
afraid to acquire offenders; and makes me also bold to call error by it own
name, and to tell them plainly which miss the right path, that they are out of
the way, and are deceived.

Let not my meaning be misconstrued: neither let that which is well meant, be
ill taken. The testimony of mine own conscience shall sufficiently witness,
to my self, my good meaning: and the judgment of charity, should hold you
from misconceiuing or misreporting of that, which shall be by me truly and
charitablie delivered.

There is utterly a fault among us; to wit, the great neglect of reading the
word of GOD, both privately in houses, and publicly also in the Church and
congregation.

The matter were not so great, and the fault were less, if it were only to be
found in private houses, and had not also set foot within the Sanctuary. And
pity it is, that Laymen only are not herein faulty; but some of them also,
who are Pastors, and Ministers of Gods Church.

It is the custom and practice of many Ministers, who are otherwise some of
them, zealous, and good men, In the time appointed to divine service, in the
Church and public Congregation, to curtall and shorten, and sometime to omit
the reading of such parts and portions of holy Scripture, as are appointed to
be read publicly in the Church; And in stead thereof, after a few prayers,
and sometime none at all, to sing a Psalm, and so presently to go to their
Sermons; as if preaching were only necessary, and there were either none, or
very small use, either of public reading, or public praying, in the
public Congregation:

Whereas these ought to be joined, and to go together; first, in respect of
God himself, who is in some degree as well glorified in the reading, as in the
expounding of his holy word. Secondly, in respect of that decent and comely
order, established in our Church. And thirdly, in respect of the profit which
comes thereof; in that, reading and praying going before, in Gods house, which
by an excellency is called the House of prayer, they make preaching, which
follows after, more fruitful unto us.

And surely, I think, the greatest cause why preaching does so little good,
is for that we are now adays so little acquainted with public reading, and
praying in the Church.

And therefore it were not amiss, that many men, if they will needs be
mincing, and shortning, and curtalling, would mince, and curtall, and shorten
their Sermons; that so the Lyturgie, and manner of serving of God in the
Church, which consists as well in reading, and praying, as it does in
preaching, might have it due time, and due respect among us.

And as some Ministers are herein faulty: so are many men and women, their
Auditors, very much to be blamed, who think they come time enough to the
Church, if they come but to the beginning of the Sermon; making little account
of joining with the Congregation in praying: which both in nature, in time, and
in order, should go before preaching. And as for hearing the Scriptures read,
the chapters, the first, and second lessons, the Epistles, and Gospels; they
think that, a matter not only needless, but some, seeing it so omitted by
their own and other Pastors, hold it to be a matter of needless formality;
and some, of superstition.

I am no Patron of an unlearned Ministry; neither come I hither to plead the
cause of such as are ignorant and only reading Ministers; if the Land could be
without them, it were no matter if there were none of the^: but as I bless
God for those places which are already furnished; so do I with my soul wish to
all places and Parishes that want them, such Pastors and Ministers, as know how
to divide the word of God aright, to break the childrens bread, and to give to
every of them his portion in due season. I am no enemy to preaching; which I
acknowledge to be the ordinary and most effectual means of man's salvation: I
envy not to the people of God, the blessed benefit and fruit of preaching; but
yet withal, and together with preaching, I wish also that public praying,
and frequent reading of Gods word, were more used than they are.

For although preaching be a more excellent way to win souls to God, and
although the word preached, be incomparably a more effectual and powerful
means, for our new birth, and conversion to God, than it is when it is only
read, and not opened, and expounded unto us; yet has the bare reading, and
hearing thereof, when it is read, many excellent uses, and does many times
leave a blessing behind it.

We must so prefer or commend the preaching of the word, before the bare
reading thereof, that we do not disgrace the one, in commending the other.

We prefer preaching before reading, not as if we preferred a good thing
before that which is evil; but as a thing which is more good, to a good thing,
that is less good: for both of them are good. They are therefore too blame,
that in praising the one, labor to disparage the other; for by both of them
the soul may be edified.

Faith comes by hearing, hearing by the word of God; which whether it be
read, or preached, never works in vain; but like fire, takes hold of all
matter which is apt to nourish it, and to be inflamed by it.

Christ commands us to search the Scriptures; not because they stand upon
the Preachers authority, or warrant, but for that themselves in their own
heavenly strength, bear witness, and have a clear and powerful record of him.

And that testimony of David in the 119. Psalm, Thy word, O Lord, is a
lantern to my feet, and a light to my steps, is not to be limited and
restrained only to the word when it is preached and expounded, but is
verefied also of the word of God in general: and therefore of it also, even
then when it is but read by us, or unto us.

It is with the Scriptures as with sweet Spices; they smell most sweetly when
they are beaten, or grated, or pounded in a mortar: yet are they not void of
all sweetness, when they are but gently rubbed, and bruised, or handled with
the hand: so though they are indeed most sweet and fragrant when they are
divided, and expounded by preaching, yet must we not deny them simply to have
any sweetness or fragancie in them, when they are but read unto us.

For Gods truth is in the Scriptures, not as the kernel is in the nut, which
by no means can be come-by till the shell be broken, for some parts thereof
have no shell at all: they are plain; and the sweet kernel, the true sense of
the^, may be tasted, or attained unto, by the serious and diligent reading of
them only; although some other parts thereof be inuolued, and wrapped about
with shells of difficulty and obscurity, which must be broken by learned
exposition and interpretation.

If it be objected, that this our Eunuch could not understand what he read
(for, says he, How should I vnderderstand without an Interpreter, or unless
I had a guide?) so ignorant men can take little profit in reading, or hearing
the word read, unless it be expounded unto them:

My answer thereunto is, that though he understood not that part, or those
words of the Prophet Esaias, which he then read, which did indeed contain in
them such a mystery, as no eye but the eye of faith could pearce into, as I
said before; yet might he understand many other parts of that prophecy: and
so his bare or only reading thereof, was not in vain, or unprofitable unto him.

And farther I answer, that there is great difference between such as have
never heard of Christ, of faith, or of the word of God (such as are heathen
people and Infidels, who indeed without an Interpreter cannot much profit by
reading) and between such, who being borne of Christian Parents, have (as it
were) sucked religion with the milk of their mothers; and therefore by
continual exhortation of their Parents, and by their good example, by being
catechized in the principles of Christian religion, and in some sort instructed
even of children, as they are among us, Gods Name be therefore glorified; I say
between Infidel and heathen people, and us, the case is diverse: for we may
even by reading only of the Scriptures, or hearing them read, in some measure
profit in the knowledge of the truth.

To conclude this point, against their exceptions that speak against reading,
without learned exposition; it is most certain, that Scripture read, and
Scripture expounded, chapters read, and chapters expounded, sentences read, and
sentences preached on, and expounded, have all of them, one and the same
passage to the soul, outwardly by the sense of hearing, and inwardly by the
assent of the judgment and understanding: the text is one and the same, that
is, the word of God; the Schoolmaster is the same, the Spirit of instruction;
the means the same, that is, attention; the helps the same, which are godly
motions; the fruit the same, that is, peace of conscience; and the end, though
not in degree, yet in some proportion, the same, that is, edification.

4
In the fourth place, I am now to speak of Philips performance of that duty,
and service, to which he was appointed by the Angel: ver. 30. And Philip came
thither, and heard him read the Prophet Esaias. And, ver. 35. He opened his
mouth, and began at the same Scripture, and preached unto him Jesus.

In which words, we may observe three circumstances.

1. First, Gods ordinance; who was pleased to use the preaching of Philip, and
not the help of the Angel, for this Eunuch's conversion.

2. Secondly, I observe Philips readiness, and godly discretion; who took the
present occasion, beginning at that Scripture which the Eunuch then read, of
opening his mouth, and preaching unto him.

3. Thirdly, I consider what it was that he spoke and uttered when he opened
his mouth. He preached unto him Jesus.

For the first; Philip opened his mouth and preached Jesus. Not the Angel, but
Philip.

In the building of the Church, it pleases God to prefer the service of men
before the service of Angels; and to choose, that his holy and heavenly truth,
contained in his word, should rather be manifested and made known by earthly
and sinful men, than by celestial and holy Angels.

And therefore, although our Savior had the Angels at command, so that he
could have commanded and employed whole legions of them, if he had listed, in
that service; yet in the business of preaching his Gospel, and the divulgation
of his holy and saving truth unto the sons of men, he chose rather to use the
help and ministry of men, than of Angels; of his Disciples and Apostles, than
of those holy and blessed spirits.

Paul was converted, not by the instruction and ministry of an Angel, but by
the preaching of Ananias. Cornelius was won to the faith, not by an Angel,
but by the preaching of Peter. The whole world afterward was brought to
believe in Christ, not by Angels, but by men. And here this noble Eunuch is
converted, not by the Angel, but by the preaching of Philip. Philip opened his
mouth, etc.

A reason whereof may be this: As our Redemption was to be wrought, and was
performed, only in the nature of man, and not of Angels; no more was the
preaching of the said Redemption to be declared by an Angel, or any other
creature, save only by man.

And this reason the Apostle seems to use, 2 Cor. 5.18. when he says, All
things are of God, which has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Christ, and
has given unto us the ministry of reconciliation.

From hence we may and must learn this lesson: Seeing it is the proper and
peculiar duty of the Minister to expound Scripture, That although it be most
true, that God who is almighty, and therefore can do all things, and that in
such sort, and after such manner as he lists, either by order, or by miracle,
by means, or without means; Yet in the course of our conversion, and the work
of our regeneration, we must not expect when God will send an angel from heaven
to instruct us, or when he will immediately and miraculously call us, and work
our conversion unto him; but must content our selves, and make our best use of
those means, which God in mercy offers us, by the ministry and preaching of
such, as he has by his own dispensation and holy designment, appointed to
wait upon his Altar, to attend his service and by preaching of his word, to
beget sons and daughters unto him.

And therefore, if we desire either to know, or to believe in God, we must
attain to that knowledge, and to that faith, by the only effectual means of
the word of God, and by the Ministry and help of such men, as God has set
aparte for the work of the Ministry, and for the gathering together of the
Saints, which is the institution and holy ordinance of God himself.

For this is Gods own appointment, and his own holy ordinance, That as
children should expect and receive, from their corporal Parents and Fathers of
their bodies, such corporal food as is needful for the nourishment of their
bodies; So they should likewise expect, and receive from their Pastors and
spiritual Fathers, such as are appointed by God to beget them in Christ
through the Gospel, such spiritual food of knowledge, and instruction, as is
needful for the spiritual nourishment of their souls, and consciences.

And this was the manner and custom, in former and ancient times, they were
wont to go to the Prophets, and men of God, for resolution of their doubts, and
for comfort in their heaviness.

For resolution in their doubts. The Priests lips should preserve knowledge,
and they should seek the law at his mouth, Mala. 2.7. So does the Eunuch, in
this place, desire Philip that he would tell him the meaning of these words of
the Prophet, which without an interpreter or a guide, he acknowledges that he
could not understand.

For comfort in their heauiness. One example for many, The Shunamite traveled
to mount Carmell, to Elisha the Prophet, when her soul was full of heaviness
for the death of her only son; and she was comforted. 4. King. 4.

The reason, why both in former, and later times, and indeed why in all times,
men and women should repair to the Prophets and Ministers of God, both for the
resolution of their doubts, and for comfort in their heaviness, is, because

They have, or should have, a tongue of the learned, and should know to
minister a word in due time to him that is weary:

They have, or should have the balm of Gilead, wherewith the sores, and wounds
of Gods people should be cured, and healed:

They have, or should have in store Vinum merentibus, the wine of comfort and
consolation, for them that mourn and are heavy hearted.

And therefore to end this point, my exhortation shall be this unto you; When
you read any thing that is hard, which you desire to understand, but cannot:

When any great and grievous cross and calamity befalls you, and you are
ignorant of the means, and know not how to be eased:

When you groan under the burden of your sins, and find the hand of God
heavy upon you, so that you find not in your selves, the grounds of sound
comfort:

When any great and violent temptation which you cannot encounter, takes fast
hold upon you, so that you find it too strong for you:

To conclude, when fear and anguish afflict your souls, and your consciences
be troubled, so that you know not how to lay your selves down in peace:

Then desire some Philip that he will come and sit with you, desire some of
Gods learned and faithful Ministers, that they will abide with you, and
confer with you, that so they may resolve your doubts, and ease your griefs.

But here I might take up a just complaint, and lament the state of these
times, wherein there is so little, or almost no use at all of conference,
either in secular learning, wherein men are loath to confer with such as are
more learned then themselves, least they should bewray their own ignorance; or
in points of faith, and cases of conscience, with Gods Ministers, least they
should thereby discover to them their errors, and imperfections. But this
complaint may sooner be made, than it can be remedied.

The second thing I noted in these later words, is Philips readiness, and his
godly discretion: his readiness, in that he presently followed the direction
and appointment of the Spirit, in respect whereof, it is here said, that he
came to his chariot.

His godly discretion, in that he took the present occasion, and began at
that very Scripture which the Eunuch then read, and preached Christ unto him.

From hence, we that are Ministers, may learn this lesson; To take all
occasions that are offered unto us, speedily to do good, to cut off long and
unnecessary prefaces, and discourses, and to go roundly and directly to the
matter, not to hold our Auditors in the Church porch, when we should bring
them into the Church it self, not to stay them in atrio templi, in the
outward court of the Temple, but speedily to lead them in sanctum sanctorum,
into the holiest of holies, where the Mercy seat stands; not to lead them
along, by tedious and wearisome paths, but to bring them the straightest and
nearest way to Christ, to take all opportunities of doing them good.

And you also that are Auditors, may from hence learn, with the like
alacrity and speed, to hear, and to receive those good tidings and doctrines
which are preached unto you, and to strive even at the first hearing of them,
to embrace and lay hold of them, with the hand of faith, as here this Eunuch
did.

The third thing I noted in these later words, is, what it was that he uttered
and spoke, when he opened his mouth: He preached unto him Jesus.

In these words I observe two things: first, here is not set down at large
the Sermon which Philip made to this Eunuch, neither are the words of that
discourse which Philip had with him at that time, here mentioned.

Indeed it is true, that all the Sermons and exhortations of the Apostles, and
disciples of Christ, are not verbatim, word for word, set down in the
Scripture, but only per summa capita, the chief points only; and such
general and chief heads, as the Spirit of God thought meet, they are
remembered, and set down unto us.

Paul and Silas preached to the keeper of the prison, and to all his
househould, the word of the Lord, Act. 16.32. but his Sermon is not set down at
large: but the sum and substance of it, is set down in the verse going
before, namely, the 30. verse, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall
be saved, and thine household.

In the 2. of the Acts, when they mocked, and said that the Apostles were full
of new wine, what time they being full of the holy Ghost, began to speak
with diverse tongues; Peter, when he had reproved them, and instructed them
what they should think of that miracle, and exhorted them to have a care of
themselves, and their own souls, so that they began to be pricked in their
hearts, and said, Men and brethren, what shall we do; then he said unto them,
Amend your lives, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sins.

And then it follows, verse 40. And with many other words he besought and
exhorted them: Which many other words, are not set down in that place, or
there mentioned; yet the sum and substance, the principal scope of them, and
the maine drift of Saint Peter, is set down and contained in these few words
which go immediately before, Amend your lives, and be baptized every one of
you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins.

And so in this place it is said, that Philip preached to this Eunuch: the
words of which Sermon, with all the parts and passages thereof, are not set
down; as may be evidently discerned, in that no mention being made in this
chapter of baptism, or of water, yet this noble Eunuch when he saw water,
said to Philip; See, here is water, what does hinder me to be baptized.

And yet this proves not the Scriptures to be maimed, or imperfect, as our
Adversaries would willingly have the world believe; forasmuch as there is so
much set down in Scripture, as is any way needful and necessary for our
salvation.

So that although we have not all the Sermons, which the Prophets, and Apostles
of Christ preached, word by word, and at large set down and delivered unto us
in Gods book: yet it may and ought to suffice us to know, that God in his
wisdom has so disposed, that so much of their heavenly discourses and
Sermons is set down unto us, as might serve to direct us in the knowledge and
worship of God, and might further Gods glory in us, and our salvation.

And therefore there is no cause at all, why we should listen to the
enchantments of Rome, or give any care of credit and belief, to our
Adversaries the Papists, when they tell us, that in some things the Scriptures
come short, in some things they are silent and say nothing, in many things they
are doubtful and uncertain, and in most things hard, and full of obscurity.

With all which, and many more the like imputations, and slanders, they do
load the sacred Scriptures, only to this end, to make way for their own
devises, and to establish their unwritten traditions; which they are not
ashamed to match and equal with the word of God.

But let us learn, as it becomes us, to put as great difference between the
sacred and written word of God, and the unwritten doctrines and traditions of
men, as there is between gold and brass, between silver and the dust of the
earth.

And howsoever there was a time, wherein our Forefathers and Ancetors were
gulled, and deceived with the fopperies, and delusions of unwritten verities
and traditions, yet let not us be so deluded.

For want of bread made of wheat, men are content to eat bread made of rye; and
for want of bread made of rye, to eat oaten-cakes: but yet it does not follow,
that the one is as wholesome as the other; and when you may have of the best,
that you should choose the worst. So it is between the word of God, and
traditions of men: when bread of wheat, that is, the word of God, was kept
away from our fathers, in an unknown tongue, then was bread of rye and oats
sauorie to their hungry souls; for the soul is like the stomach, it must be
fed, and it evermore desires somewhat that belongs to religion and
salvation: but now seeing bread of pure wheat, that is, the word of God, is by
Gods mercy set before us, let us not inuentis frugibus glandibus vesci, eat
acornes when we may eat wheat; and forsaking the holy and wholesome written
word of God, basely feed upon the unsavory, unwholesome, unwritten traditions,
of inconstant, and corruptible men.

But rather as it is said, Act. 19. Paul I know, and Jesus I know, but who are
ye? So let us say to Traditions, the old Testament we know, and the new
Testament we know, but who are ye?

We know the old Testament, and the new; the Law and the Gospel to be those
two dugges or breasts, which yield milk sufficient for the nourishment of any
that are babes, and children in Christ.

We know the old Testament, and the new, the Law and the Gospel, to be those
two pence, spoken of, Luke 10.35. which are able to pay for, and to discharge
any surgerie, and physic, which our sick souls may need, and to heal all
the wounds, all the sins and transgressions thereof.

We know the old Testament and the new, the Law and the Gospel, to be those
two swords, spoken of, Luke 22.38. of which our Savior there said, They are
enough: for indeed they are enough, both for the assaulting of whatsoever
enemies, and for the defense of our selves.

And therefore, let them speak as gloriously as they can of their unwritten
traditions, and magnify them as they list; we will only build our faith upon
the holy and written word of God: this shall be our only guide in matters of
faith, Sic dicit Dominus, thus says the Lord.

And yet we do not contemn the voice of Antiquity, we scorn not either
the writings or opinions of the Fathers, but gladly use them, and reverently
esteem of them, and give unto them, as much credit, as themselves desire
should be given unto them: that is, as far forth as they agree with Gods
word, we reverence them, and subscribe unto them, and no further; because we
dare not under their banner fight against God, or under their countenance
outface his truth.

This is a good rule, In the writings of the Fathers, that which is proved out
of the Scriptures, is Vox Dei, the voice of God; that which is probably spoken
and delivered, is Vox hominis, the voice of man; that which is affirmed falsely,
is Vox serpe^tis, the voice of the Serpent. And as we are to stop our ears,
and to deny all consent to that which is falsely delivered; so are we not to
open our ears, or to give any farther consent, to those things which are
probably delivered in the case of Religion, and matters of Faith, than as they
may be either directly proved, or necessarily, and strongly collected, and
deduced, out of the written word of God.

In the 3. of King. 1. when contention was between Adoniah and Solomon, who
should be King after David; with Adoniah stood Abiathar the Priest, and Ioab
the Captain; with Solomon stood Zadock the Priest, and the mighty men, which
were with David: Here were Priests, against Priests; mighty men, against mighty
men: Bathsheba the mother of Solomon seeing this contention knew not what to
do. Nathan the Prophet therefore said unto her, Come I will give thee counsel
to save thy life, and the life of thy son Solomon: so he willed her to go
to David the King, and of himself to learn his pleasure in that business.

Thus the case stands with Relion at this day; Adoniah stands against
Solomon, Antichrist against Christ; Ioab the Captain, and Abiathar the Priest
are on the one side, and Zadock the Priest, and the mighty men of David on the
other side, mighty men against mighty men, Priests against Priests, great men
on both sides. You therefore, like Bathsheba are divided in your opinions, and
distracted in your judgment: harken therefore to Nathan the Prophet, who does
give you counsel to save your lives, and the lives of your sons and daughters;
In these matters of controversy, in these matters of faith, go to David
himself, go to God himself, look and observe what he has set down in his
holy word, and what he has decreed touching matters of faith, and and hold
that fast; and as for unwritten traditions, and unwritten verities, let them
pass, for they are not of necessity to be believed, they bind not your
consciences.

He preached unto him Jesus.

Secondly, by occasion of these words, I observe, that the sum and substance
of Philips Sermon to this Eunuch, is contained in this one word, Jesus.

It is most true indeed, that the sum and substance, the marrow and pith, the
power and life of all our Sermons and preaching unto you, is grounded and
contained in this one word Jesus, the second person in Trinity, the Son of God.

For, as all the lines which either are, or may be drawn in a round or circular
figure, though they be infinite, yet all of them have terminum suum in centro,
they all meet, and are terminated in the middle point or center of the circle:
so all the lines and rules of faith, and of religion, and all the parts of Gods
holy and divine truth, though they be otherwise, and in themselves, infinite;
yet all of them have terminum suum in centro, they all meet, and are terminated
in Christ Jesus, who is the very center and foundation of all truth.

And as all the Axioms and precepts of every Art and Science, if they be
rightly and duly delivered, have relationem ad subiectum, a true dependence, or
necessary reference to the Subject of every the said Arts and Sciences: so all
the axioms of piety and godliness, all the precepts and rules of religion,
and all the directions and counsels which in our Sermons and preaching either
are, or can be delivered unto you, they have all of them relationem ad
subiectum, a most direct aspect, and necessary reference to Jesus Christ, who
is primum et primarium subiectum Euangelij, the first and primarie subject of
the Gospel.

Saint Paul, as he esteemed to know nothing save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. and as he rejoiced in nothing else but only in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world was crucified to him, and he
to the world, Gala. 6.14: so in substance and in effect, he preached nothing
but Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

Super hanc Petram, upon this Rock, that is, upon Christ, The Rock is Christ,
says S. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.4. Upon this Rock, I say, did it please God not onto
build his whole Church, but also every particular, every true and living member
of his Church.

We are Gods laborers, says S. Paul, and you are Gods building: and
according to the grace of God given unto us, some of us as skillful
Master Builders, others less skillful, we lay the foundation, that is, we
build you upon Christ.

For other foundation can no man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. Who is rightly termed a foundation, because he
supporteth and bears up all the building.

As in a great house or building, the roof thereof is supported and borne up
by the walls, the walls by the beams and timber thereof; and both roof, and
walls, and beams, and timber, and all other parts, are borne up and supported
by the foundation: so in the spiritual building up of our souls into a holy
temple to God, the roof, the walls, the beams, and timber of that building,
our faith, our hope, our adoption, the remission of our sins, and lastly, the
beautiful and glorious roof and covering of all this building, to wit, the
decking, the covering, and crowning of our souls with salvation in heaven,
even all of these, are supported and borne up by the foundation, which is
Christ, Jesus.

Excellent, and to this purpose most pregnant, is the beginning of the first
chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians; where the Apostle most plainly
shows, that our election, our adoption, our redemption, the remission of our
sins, and our benediction and blessing in spiritual gifts and graces, that
all of these are founded and grounded upon the person of Christ.

For our election; Blessed be GOD, that has chosen us in Christ before the
foundation of the world. ver. 4.

For our adoption; to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself. v. 5.

For our redemption; by whom we have redemption. ver. 7.

For the remission of our sins; by whose blood we have the forgiveness of
our sins. ver. 7.

For our benediction and blessing in spiritual gifts and graces; Blessed be
God, which has blessed us in all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in
Christ. ver. 3.

Christ is made unto us, says the same Apostle, wisdom, and righteousness,
and sanctification, and redemption. 1 Cor. 1.30.

Run (if you please) through the whole volume of Gods book, take a view and
survey of the whole sum and substance of our salvation, and of all those
spiritual graces that further the same; and you shall find all and every of
them, wholly and only in the person of Christ.

If we seek for innocence, it is to be found in his Nativity.

If for purity, it is to be found in his Conception.

If for freedom from the Curse, it is to be found in his Cross.

If for satisfaction, it is to be found in his Sacrifice.

If for absolution, it is in his Condemnation.

If for purgation, it is in his Blood.

If for redemption, it is in his Passion.

If for mortification, it is in his Burial.

If for newness of life, it is in his Resurrection.

If for an inheritance in heaven, it is in his Ascension.

If for security and safety at the day of Judgment, to him the Father has
committed all judgment.

Lastly, if for salvation, it is in Christ; in whom who-soeuer believes, shall
not perish, but have everlasting life.

In Christ, by Christ, for Christ, through Christ; so runs the whole current
and stream of the holy Scriptures.

So do we confirm and strengthen our faith; so do we back and fortify all
our hopes; so do we season and sweeten all our comforts; so do we intermix
and conclude all our prayers.

5
In the fifth or last place, we have to consider the effects which this Eunuch's
own reading, and Philips preaching of Jesus, wrought in him.

And they are three: 1. He believed. 2. He was baptized. 3. He rejoiced; or he
went on his way rejoicing.

That he believed appears by his answer to Philip: for when Philip told him,
that If he believed he might be baptized; he answered and said, I believe
that Jesus Christ is the son of GOD. ver. 37.

Prima vox Christiani, est Credo. The first word that ever any Christian man or
woman speaks, or utters as a Christian, is, Credo, I believe: and till that
word, with the matter and substance thereof be bred, and begotten in the soul,
and brought forth and uttered by the mouth and tongue of man, no man is or can
be rightly termed a Christian man.

Till such time as we believe, Christ is not formed in us: and till such time
as Christ be formed in us, we have no part or portion in him; we have no title
to the covenant of God; we have no interest in the promises of grace; we can
lay no claim to Gods mercy.

Oleum misericordiae, nisi in vase fiduciae, Deus non ponit. Ber. in vigilia
natalis do. Ser. 5.

Fides est porta aurea, per quam Rex gloriae mentem nostram ingreditur, Faith
is that goulden gate, by which the King of glory enters into our souls.

By this gate it was that the King of glory entered into the heart and soul of
this noble Eunuch: and if ever he enter into us, and our souls, by this gate
he must enter.

Let me therefore use the words of David unto you, Lift up your heads, ye
gates; and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come
in.

1. Effect; He believed.
Faithful and blessed Prince, faithful and blessed Eunuch! great in thy
birth, and thy nobility, but far greater in thy regeneration and new birth in
Christ; great in the favor and countenance of thy Queen and Mistress, being
her chief Steward, but far greater in the favor and countenance of thy
heavenly King, thy Master and Savior; great in the employments of thy place
and office, as being chief ruler and disposer of a Queens treasure, but
far greater in being of of Christ's family, and entrusted with the treasures
of heaven;

How do thou, as one placed in some high and eminent seat above us, and
advanced to the highest honor, and now made a Saint in heaven, preach unto us
silly creatures on the earth! and how powerfully do thou school us, and
teach us by thy example, to go up to Jerusalem to worship God, to read, not
Esaias the Prophet only, but even the whole book of God! that so using those,
and all such other gracious means which God offers unto us, for the
illumination of our dark hearts, by faith, as thou here did, we might also
with thee in time be enriched with that precious and inestimable treasure of a
true faith; That so as the Spirit of God witnesses of thee, that thou did
believe that Jesus Christ was the Son of God; so the same Spirit might bear
witness to our spirits, that we also believe.

But herein especially does he school us; and in schooling us, reprove us; and
in reproouing us, shame us.

For first, if he that had so few means, to lead him to the knowledge and
worship of God, do yet notwithstanding out-goe us in his service and
worship, who do abound with all gracious and needful helps that may lead us
thereunto, how can it but be a shame unto us?

Secondly, if he that dwelt so far off, as Aethiopia was from Jerusalem,
refused not to undertake so long and so tedious a journey, to travel thither,
there to worship God; How can it choose but be a shame to us, who will many of
us, scarce go out of doors, or wet our foot in traveling to the house of
the Lord, to hear his word, and to worship him in his holy Temple?

Thirdly, if he, at one only Sermon of Philip, were brought to know, and to
believe in Christ; what a shame is it for us, that after so many years
enjoying the word of God pulickely taught and expounded unto us, and after so
many and almost infinite Sermons that have bin preached amongst us, there
should yet be so many of us, that are not won to the service of God, and
faith in Christ!

The Lord our God as much desires our good, as he did the good of this
Eunuch: The word of God is as mighty in operation now, as in former times: the
Spirit of God works with the word preached, effectually now as in former
times.

The industry, and desire of Gods Ministers, though they be not equal to the
Apostles, and first Fathers of the Faith, who because the Church was then newly
to be planted, had Primitias spiritus sancti, the first fruits, and the more
eminent and powerful graces of Gods Spirit; yet are they such, as might in
some degree of proportion, serve to beget faith now, as in former times: and
yet for all this, they are but few, in comparison of the multitude, that
profit in faith, and godliness by our labors.

The cause why we cannot write upon the water, is not the want of skill, nor
the fault of the pen; but the unfitness and indisposition of the water: So the
reason why Gods Spirit prevails not in us, is neither any default in God, or
defect in his Spirit, or weakness in his word, or disability in his
Ministers; but only in men and women themselves, who are not disposed, and
fitted to receive such stamps, and impressions, as they all would otherwise
imprint, and leave in them.

For surely, were men so willing, and so prepared, as this noble Eunuch was, to
entertain the Lord Jesus in their hearts, and to receive him into their souls
by faith, when we preach him unto them, then would our preaching bring forth in
them the like precious effect; and many more of them, than now do, would by
our preaching of Jesus unto them, be brought with this Eunuch to believe in
him, and to be his servants.

But alas, the more is the pity, many of us may truly say, with Peter, We have
launched out into the deep, and have let fall our nets to make a draught, we
have traveled all the night, and labored hard, and yet have taken nothing.

Many of us, like candles, do waste and consume our selves, by studying, and
preaching, to give you light; and yet many of you, for all that, do still
continue, and remain in darkness.

Many of us, like busy silk worms, weaue out our own bowels as they do in
making of silk, that you may be clothed in silk, and apparelled with the
precious roabes of Christ's righteousness; and yet, for all that, many of you
choose rather to be clothed with your own rags, and with the garments which
are spotted with sin, and stained and defiled with iniquity.

What can the husbandman do more, than till his land, and sow his seed? what
can the gardener do more to his fig tree, than ditch round about it, and dung
it? what can the dresser or planter of a vineyard do more for it, than place
it in a fruitful hill, and hedge it, and gather out the stones, and plant it
with the best plants? what can we do more, than preach Jesus unto you?

Nullus doctor est dator boni, quod docuerit, says Bar. We can teach you good
things, we cannot give you good things; we may be doctores gratiae, but not
datores, we may be teachers, but we are not giuers of grace.

The Angel in the 5. of John, did but stir the waters of the poole Bethesda,
and troubled the waters thereof; he thrust no man into the poole; that was a
work to be performed by themselves that would be healed: We that are the
Ministers of God, we open and expound the Scriptures unto you; and by our
dividing the word of God, and expounding the same unto you, we move, and we
stir the water of life that flows in them: you must be careful to step
into them your selves, etc.

And surely, the very true reason, why after so much stirring and troubling of
these waters, after so much preaching and teaching, there are yet so many, both
men and women, that lie diseased, full of soars and sins, by this poole, and
by these waters, not only for the space of 38 years, but some for more
years, and all their whole life long, never once offering to step in, much
less to thrust themselves thereinto, when the waters thereof are stirred:

I say, the very true reason hereof, is either their infidelity that they
cannot, or their laziness and idleness that they will not, or their pride,
which suffers them not, to humble their hearts, and to subject their wills,
to the will and word of God.

They consult their own sense and understanding, and suffer themselves to be
carried away with the stream of their own natural reason, and corrupt
affections: whereas if they would submit themselves, and captiuate their
understanding and their wills, to the will and word of God, and be wholly led
and directed thereby, they might, as here this noble Eunuch did, attain to
some good proportion, and comfortable measure of true faith.

But that which the Comicall Poet spoke of hands, in his time, I may say of our
hearts in these days, Corda nostra sunt oculata, non credunt nisi quod vident,
Our hearts are full of eyes, they believe nothing but what they see: whereas
faith has indeed no greater enemy than sense.

Gregory, in his fourth book of Dialogues and first chapter, compares him
that will not believe Christ, or his Ministers preaching and telling him of the
joys of heaven, because he seeeth them not, unto a child borne of his mother
in a dark prison, and there brought up, whom she tells that abroad there is
great light, a Sun, and a Moon, and stars, men, beasts, trees, rivers, and
such like things, but he belieueth none of these, because he seeeth none of
these; which things, howsoever he thinks they are not, yet they are so indeed
as his mother informed him: So although they that have no faith, think there
is no heaven, no Christ, no Angels, no joys, because they themselves are
included and shut up in a dark prison of ignorance, and infidelity, and
therefore see them not; yet it does not follow, but that it is so, and our
Mother the Church that so teaches us, does not lie, but speaks the truth, and
happy are all they that believe her, etc.

My exhortation, for co^cluding this point, shall be this;

As here you see, how this nobleman, lent not only his outward ear of
hearing, but his inward ear also of obeying, and believing, to that which
Philip preached unto him: so ought we also to do, as often as we hear the
word preached unto us, etc.

And if it happen, while we are so busied and employed, either in the reading,
or in the hearing of Gods word preached, and expounded unto us, that we feel
any good motions of Gods Spirit moving us to faith, let us account of them, as
the Wise men did of the Star that appeared unto them in the East, Math. 2.
And as they followed the Star, so let us follow those motions and inuitations
of Gods Spirit to faith: for, as they following the Star, were brought at last
even to the house where Christ was; so if we follow the motions and callings
of Gods holy Spirit, they will bring us at the last, to the house and place
where he is, even to the kingdom of heaven, etc.

2. Effect; He was baptized.
First, he believed: and secondly, or after he had professed his faith, and
believed, he was baptized.

This is Christ's own ordinance to his Apostles; Go ye into all the world,
and preach the Gospel to every creature: He that shall believe, and be
baptized, shall be saved. Mark 16.15.

So was it in this Eunuch: He first believed, and after was baptized. So must
it be in all that are adulti, grown to full age, or come to years of
discretion: before they come to baptism, they must openly profess their faith.

It is the ordinance of Christ himself, who first instituted Baptism, and did
himself first sanctify the element of water, to that holy work or business,
that water should be used in Baptism: To signify thereby, that as water
cleanses the outward filthiness of the body; so by the operation of Gods
Spirit, which works both mightily and graciously with the outward element of
water, and with the word, the original guilt and uncleanness of our souls,
should be purged and cleansed.

Vessels unclean, are unfit to have precious liquors put into them: they be
therefore first to be cleansed. What liquors can be more precious than the
graces of God? What vessels can be more unclean, than our unregenerate and
unbaptized souls? We are brought to Baptism therefore, to be cleansed, that
our souls may be made the fitter to receive graces from above.

For, as in worldly things, we cannot be partakers of them, unless we be
borne; so neither can we be partakers of spiritual things, except we be
baptized and borne anew.

We come to Baptism, the sons of Adam, sinners, and accursed: we return
from Baptism, the sons of God, and blessed.

Saint Peter in his first Epistle, third chapter, and later part of the
chapter, compares Baptism to the Arc; yet there is great difference: for,
that creature which entered into the Arc a Lion, was nothing altered, but came
forth a Lion; that creature which entered into the Arc a Wolf, was nothing
altered, but came forth a Wolf; that bird which entered into the Arc a Crow,
was nothing altered, but came forth a Crow, etc. But it is far otherwise in
Baptism; for, he that before Baptism, enters into the Church a Lion,
returns from thence, after Baptism, a Lamb; he that before Baptism,
enters into the Church a Wolf, returns from thence, after Baptism, a Kid;
he that before Baptism, enters into the Church a Crow, returns from
thence, after Baptism, a Dove.

So this Eunuch, came from home, a stranger to the covenant of grace; but
returned home, a son, and of the household of faith: he came to Jerusalem an
Ethiopian, but returned a true Israelite.

This is the happy fruit, and blessed benefit, which redoundeth to all, both
men, and Nations, to whom the Lord is pleased in mercy to reveal himself, in
the power and might of his word, and in the grace and efficacy of this
Sacrament: by which, as by a stamp, or mark set upon our flesh by our Savior
Christ Jesus his own hand and institution, like to the mark of Circumcision,
which was set upon the flesh of Abraham, and of his seed, we are not only
distinguished from other Infidels, and heathen people, but are also known and
acknowledged by God himself to be of his household, and to belong to his
covenant.

But as for others which have not this seal or mark, and are not washed in
this Lauer of Regeneration, it is not so with them; but the corruption of their
nature, and the filthiness and guilt of sin, cleave as close to their souls,
as their skin does to their flesh.

Many excellent things are spoken of Naaman the Syrian; that he was a great
man, honorable in the sight of his Lord, mighty and valiant: yet it is added,
that he was a Leper, and therefore to be washed: So although many excellent
things may be spoken, either of the nature of man in general, or of many
excellent men in particular, which either were, or are, mere natural men,
unbaptized, and unregenerate; yet the conclusion must be, It is a Leper, and
they all are Lepers, and must be washed in the water of Baptism.

And till such time as they be so cleansed, and so washed, the Lord seeeth
nothing in them, but that which he disliketh, and sets not his heart or his
love upon them.

All the Patriarchs were the sons of Jacob; yet he loved none of them so
well, as Joseph and Benjamin, who were the sons of Rachel, whom he deerly
loved: So, all men are the sons of God by creation, but he loves none so
well as his regenerate and baptized sons; because they are the sons of
Rachell, the sons of his Church, which he most deerly loves.

The 3. effect; He rejoiced, or he went on his way rejoicing.
The doctrine or preaching of Christ, is rightly termed Euangelium; a joyful
Message, or gladsome tidings. So spoke the Angel to the Shepherds; Be not
afraid, for behold, I bring you tidings of great joy, that shall be to all the
people: that is, that unto you is borne this day, in the City of David, a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Luke 2.10.11. Which most heavenly, most
sweet, and comfortable doctrine, when Philip had once taught, and preached to
this noble Eunuch, it was no marvel though as a man full of gladness, he went
on his way rejoicing.

For if liberty be grateful to him that has long been captive; if to be made
a freeman, be a cause of joy and rejoicing to him that has long been a
bondslaue; if to be eased of a heavy burden; if to be cured of a dangerous
disease; if to be brought forth of a dark dungeon into the clear light; to
conclude, if to be raised from the death of sin, to the life of grace, and to
have our part and portion in the communion of Saints; if all, and every of
these, be blessings much to be esteemed of, and true causes of rejoicing: The^,
to be brought into the glorious liberty of the sons of God; to be made the
Lords Freemen; to be eased of the heavy burden of sin; to be cured of the
infectious diseases which arise from humane corruption; to be enlightened by
the Spirit of God; to live unto the Lord, the life of righteousness; and to have
our names written in the book of life; all which were offered and exhibited by
Philip to this noble Eunuch, in his preaching of Jesus unto him: these things,
I say, could not choose but much affect him, and be great causes of great joy
and rejoicing unto him.

And as Philips preaching of Jesus, was to this honorable Eunuch a cause of
much rejoicing: so also should the preaching of the same Jesus, be a cause of
joy and rejoicing to as many of us, as are by the mercy of God, and the labor
of his faithful Ministers, made the happy hearers and partakers thereof.

For, look, what plenty is to men that have long lived in penury; what health
is to men that have been long visited and wearied with sickness; what meat is to
them that have been long pinched, and almost starued with hunger; the same and
more, is the publishing and preaching of the comfortable assurance of Gods love
and favor toward us in Christ Jesus.

In whom, though the traitor Judas found no excellency above the value of
thirty pieces of silver; yet his godly and faithful children, can, and do
find in him, all the treasures of wisdom, of justification, of redemption,
and salvation.

When Samson in the time of his extreme thirsting and faintnes (even then when
he cried out and said, Give me water, or I die for thirst) had tasted of that
water which God miraculously sent unto him, his spirit came again, and he was
revived. Judge. 15.19. When Jonathan had tasted a little honey, his eyes were
opened, his spirits comforted, and his body strengthened. 1. Sa. 14. Yet
neither was the water which Samson drank of, nor the honey which Jonathan
tasted of, half so sweet and comfortable to them, as the preaching of Christ
Jesus is to the fainting and dying souls of true Believers.

Great is the joy, and unspeakable are the comforts which the preaching of
Jesus affords to the children of men: the savor of which comforts is sweeter
in the Church of GOD, than the savor of Libanon; and the joy thereof, like unto
the dropping of milk and honey upon their souls.

Samson found a swarm of Bees and honey in a dead Lion: Hic est favus qui ex
ore Leonis mortui exiuit; Out of the mouth, out of the word, out of the
preaching of Jesus Christ, which is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, which was
dead, but is alive, and lives for ever, comes such sweetness as cannot be
uttered or conceived. Nemo nouit, nisi qui accipit. This is such a joy, as is
not like worldly joy, which may be taken away. Your joy shall no man take from
you. John 16.22.

Christ, like a royal King, never enters any city, any town, any village,
any private house, or into the soul or mind of any private man, but he gives
gifts. And it also pleases him of his fullness to give to his Apostles, his
Disciples, his Ministres, power, and grace also, and to make them able
whersoeuer they come, and wheresoever they preach him, and publish his truth
(as here Philip did to this Eunuch) to give great gifts to the sons of men,
to instruct them in the knowledge of God; and so to fill their hearts with
sweet joys and heavenly comforts.

The publishing of the word of God, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, is (as
Chrysostom speaks, in his 5. Homily upon Gene.) a casting of spiritual
treasures into the laps or bosoms of men.

The L. God grant, that my preaching of Jesus at this time, may be a casting or
sowing of such spiritual treasures and heavenly seed, as may bring forth in
you all, much fruit of good living, to eternal life. Amen.

FINIS.

