AN EPISTLE OF COMFORT, TO THE REVEREND PRIESTS, and TO THE HONORABLE,
Worshipful, and other of the Lay sort restrained in Durance for the Catholic
Faith.

Matt. 11 Regnum coelorum vim patitur, et violenti, rapiunt illud.

The Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent bear it away.

Deus tibi se, Tu te Deo.

IMPRINTED AT PARIS.

TO THE READER.
Having written this Epistle of comfort to an espeaciall friend of mine, and
not thincking at the first to let it pass any farther, not only the time,
to which it principallye serves, but the entreatye of diverse, enforced me so
far, that I could not but condescende to the publishing of the same, though it
cost me no small labor in altering the style. Accept therefore (gentle reader)
my good will, and hartye desire of thy comfort: And albeit (as thou will
easelye by the reading perceive) neither the style, nor the conceipte,
answers to the wayt and importance of the subject: Yet I hope, that thou
shall not find it so barren, and fruitelesse, but that therein thou may
gleane some ears of comfort, and pick some few cru^mes for thy spiritual
repast. And if through thy good disposition, and tenderness of mind, thou
find any farther contentment thereby, then of it self it would yield;
whatsoever thou demest praise worthy, attribute it to the spirit of that body,
whereof I am an unworthy member, and to which next unto God I owe what good
soever is in me. But if any thing be a miss, impute that to mine own error,
or ignorance. Thus wishinge thee, the full effect which by reading hereof thou
desire, I cease to with hold thee with any longer preface.

THE PRINCIPAL CHAPTERS ENTREATED IN THIS Epistle.
The First cause of comfort in tribulation is, that it is a great
presumption, that we are out of the devils power. Cap. 1. The Second, that it
shows us to be Gods children, tenderlye beloved of him. Cap. 2. The Third,
that we are moved to suffer tribulation willinglye, both by the president of
Christ, and the title of a Christian. Cap. 3. The Fourth, that tribulation best
agrees with the estate, and condition of our life. Cap. 4. The Fifte, that we
suffer little in respect of our deserts. Cap. 5. The Sixte, that the cause, we
suffer for, is the true Catholic faith. Cap. 6. The Seventh, that the estate
of the persecuted in a good cause is honorable. Cap. 7. The Eight, is the
honor of imprisonment for the Catholic faith. Cap. 8. The Nyneth, that death
in it self to the good, is comfortable. Cap. 9. The tenth, that torments in a
good cause are tolerable. Cap. 10. The Eleventh, that Martyrdom is glorious in
it self, most profitable to the Church, and honorable to the Martyrs. Cap. 11.
The unhappiness of the lapsed, and Schismatickes, and comfortes against their
example. Cap. 12. That Heretics can not be Martyrs. Cap. 13. The Twelft
comfort, is the glory due unto Martyrs in the next world. Cap. 14. A Warning
to the persecutors. Cap. 15. The Conclusion. Cap. 16.
AN EPISTLE OF COMFORT TO THE REVERENDE PRIESTS, AND TO THE Honorable,
Worshipful, and other of the layesorte, restrained in Dura^ce for the
Catholic Faith.
IT has been always a laudable custom in Gods Church, for such, as were
afflicted in time of persecution, not only, by continual prayer, and good
works, but also by letters, and books, to comfort one an other. And although
^he estate of imprisoned Confessors, or, as the Fathers call them, designed
Martyrs, Tertul. li. ad Martires.
has been so honorable, and they euermor^ presumed, to be so especially
lightened, and assisted by the holy Ghost, that the fountain of spiritual
delights, was thought always to lie open unto them: yet because inward helps
are nothing prejudiced, yea rather abettered by external motives, I thought it
no presumption to show my reverent affection toward Gods prisoners, by
presenting unto the^ this epistle of comfort. And though others have largely
entreated of the same subject, and that in very forcible sort: yet because
where the same calamities are still continued, the remedies against them, can
not be to often repeated, I deemed it not unprofitable in this heat and
seueritye of molestations, to employe some labor, in a thing of the like
tenor. For as to the wayfaring pilgrim, wandering in the dark, and mistye
night, every light, though never so little, is comfortable: and to the stranger,
that traueyleth in a land of diverse language, any that can (though it be but
brokenlye) speak his contrye tongue, does not a little rejoice him: So
peradventure in this foggye night of heresy, and the confusion of tongues,
which it has here in our Island procured, this di^me light, which I shall set
forth before you, and these my Catholic, though broken speeches, which I
shall use unto you will not be altogether unpleasant. And though I may say
with Tertullian, Tertull. Li. de ^atien.
that as the sickest are most willing to talk of health, not for that they
enjoy it, but because they desire it: So I exhort you to patience, rather as
one, that would have it: then as one that possesses it: yet because sometimes a
diseased Phisician may prescribe helthsome physic, and a deformed engrauer
carue a fair image, I hope no man will blame me, if for my own good and your
comfort, I have taken upon me to address unto you this short treatise. Wherein
I will enlarge my self but in a few points: which seem unto me the
principal causes of consolation, to those that suffer in Gods quarrel.

Cap. 1. CaP. 1. The first cause of comfort in Tribulation is that it s^eweth
us to be out of the devils power.

ANd first it must needs be a great comfort to those that either reclaimed from
schism, or heresy, or from dissolute life to the constant profession of the
Catholic faith, are for that ca^se by the devil and his instruments,
persecuted: for that it is a very great sign that they are delivered out of
his power, and by him accounted for sheep of Gods flock, saying that
otherwise he would never so heauilye pursue them. The poor creple had lain
long at the pond upon Probatica, Io^. 5
and none would say a word of rebuke unto him, but so soon as he was by
Christ cured both in body and in soul, and began joyfully to execute his
commandment, they streyte reproved him, for carrying his bed on a sabbath
day. The like we read, Io^^. 8
of that selye blind man, who so long as he continued in his blindness, was
never called in question, but so sone as his eyes were opened, not only he
himself, but his parents also were presentlye conue^ted. Luc: 7
When Mary Magdalen came to wash Christ's feet with tears, and anoint them
with precious oyntmente, there was a Simon to murmur at her, for the one, and a
Judas to reprehend the other, who notwithstanding spoke not against her, while
she held on her lewd and damnable course. The devil desires allidere
paruulos ad petram, Psalm. 136
to dash our little ones against the rock, that is, to blast virtue in the
budd, before it grow either to fruit or flower. So began he with Eve in
paradise, in so much, Gene. 3
that the forbidden aple, is thought by the Fathers to have been the very
first, that she tasted of. So did Pharao procure to root out the Hebrews,
EXO: 1 Matt. 2
by killing their babes: as Herod also thought to do with Christ, when he
murdered the Innocents. The devil has his mastiues to guard his fold, that
if any escape out they may presently bark and byte him with detractious
slanders; and if that will not serve, with heavier afflictions. Of these the
Scripture says, Psalm. 56
Filij hominum, dentes little arma et sagittae, et lingua eorum gladius acutus.
The children of men their teeth are like swords, and arrows, and their tongue
a sharp blade. And though they be very vglye monsters, that in steed of
teeth, and tongue, carye such murdering weapons, yett such are the devils
instruments, to persecute those, that recoyle from his service. These men S.
Ciprian well describes in the person of Nouatian, Cipri. Ep. 1^ ad Cornel.
saying, that a man of that office, is Desertor Ecclesiae, misericordiae
hostis, interfector paenitentiae, doctor superbiae, veritatis corruptor,
perditor charitatis. A forsaker of the Church, an enimye of mercy, a murderer
of penance a preacher of pride, a corruptor of the truth, and a spoyler of
charity. But they that leave their journey, for such, are like horses that
are frighted with shadows, seeing they fear the pains, and troubles of this
world which in deed are but shadows, Chris^st. hom. 2^. ad heb.
in respect of those of the world to come. Illic trepidauerunt timore, Psalm. 5^
vbi non erat timor. They there tre^bled for fear where there was no just
occasion thereof. It is not for us to regard the slanders of men, or to
abandon the service of God for them, seeing that it is but a very slender
excuse, to allege the fear of words of a vassal, as a just impediment of
not performing our duetye toward our sovereign. The frindshipp of this
world is an enemy to God, Iaco. 4
and S. Paul him self said, that if he would have pleased men, Gala. 1
he could not have been the servant of god. It were a great follye for the
blind, to reuyle, or scorn others, because they see, or for the lame, to
contemn those that are sound of lymmes: and much more sottishness were it,
for a man that sees to go blyndfolde, or to put out his eyes for the blind
wretches scoffinge, or to lympe or mayme him self for the creples sayings.
Ambulans recto itinere, Pro^ 30
and timens Deum, despicitur ab eo qui infami graditur via. He that walks an
upright way, and fears God, is despised of him that treads infamous
paths. Psalm. ^
But qui habitat in coelis irridebit eos. He that dwells in the heavens shall
laugh such to scorn, knowinge how much better they deserve it, then those,
whom they make their stales. It is no disgrace to the sun to be hated of the
Ousell, and night birds, nor to the jewel to be trodden on, and not esteemed
of the beasts. And so Aristippus, when one told him, that men despised him,
answered, so do the bests them, making as little account of their contempt, as
they did to be contemned of the bestes. Job. 16
Ecce in eoelo testis meus, and conscius meus in excelsis. Lo my witness
(says Job) is in heaven, and in the highest he, that is priuye to my doings.
We must not esteem, how we are judged of men, but how acceptable we are unto
God, who is the only vmpeere, of whom we must look for the final verdicte
upon all our actions. S. Bernard compares such as are carried with the words
of men's mouths, Sermon. de natiuitate Ioa^. Baptist.
unto the moon; which because it has but a borrowed light, sometimes waxes and
sometimes weyneth, and other whiles is not seen at all. So says he they that
rely their consciences in other men's lips, are sometimes of great,
otherwhiles of little, and full often of no account, as it pleases the
flattering tongues, to set forth, or suppress their praise. But he that with
the sun, caryeth his light within him, and may say with S. Paul Gloria
nostra, 1 Cor. 1
testimoniu^ conscientiae nostrae. Our glory is the testimonye of our
conscience, howsoever he may with a cloud of disgrace, and malicious slau^ders,
be covered from men's eyes, yet can his light be never so darkened, but that
Pater, Matt. 6
qui videt in abscondito, reddet illi: Our father, which sees in secrett will
reward him, and in the day of judgment shall he shine like the su^ne it self,
in the view of the whole world, agreablye to that saying, Sap. 3
Fulgebant iusti sicut sol. The just like the su^ne shall blaze out their
brightness. You must not think, when you are come out of the Whales bellye,
Ion. 4
to set with Jonas in the shadow, but that you shall have some envious worm,
to gnaw the Iuye root asunder. And if you be altered from a thorn, or bryer,
to be an odoriferous Cedar, the worm, that can not breed in you, will be
gnarring about you. It is the propertye of the devil, and his instruments, to
feed like storkes, upon the venomous and evil actions of men, and they only
take pleasure to see us in sin, and rejoice (if we amend) at our calamityes.
And as Vultures, or ravens, though they strayte smell a dead cors, when it is
corrupted, and draw, unto it by the unsavory stench, in which their delight
is: yet the sound bodies, they neither sent, not seek out: So the wicked are
ready to flock about us while we are in the stench of sin, and corrupted
with vice, because they them selves delight therein: Yet if we be sound and
hole, and have cast from us, that carryon, whereof they were eagre, they neither
smell us nor seek us, yea rather avoid us and hate us. The savor of virtue
strikes them dead, and though in the winter when the vine was bare, they could
lie under it, yett in the spring when it begins to flower, they like
serpents are stricken dead with the sent thereof: and therefore no marvel, though
they mortally hate it. In our storm is their time of singing, as to the Sirens
is usual, and they are most sadd in our calm, and sorye in our welfare. And
as the shipp, while it is upon the maigne sea, is in a manner a Castle or
common wealth by it self, and having all the sails hoysed up, and swollen
with the wind, and the banners displayed with a very loftye show daunceth
upon the waves, and allureth every eye to behold the pride thereof: But when
it is comen into the haven, it is strayte ransacked by the Searcher, forced to
pay custom, and the sails being gathred, the banners taken in, the anchers
cast, it lies quietlye at rode and is little regarded: So they, that while they
sailed upon the surges of worldly vanities, and followed the tide of a
consciencelesse course, might range uncontrolled, and having the favorable
gale of authority to waf^e them forward, and honors and pomp to set them
forth, were admired of the people: if they chance by Gods calling to retire
them selves into the port of true faith, and virtuous life, to work their
salvation, they are streyte serched, and sacked, their sails gathered, the
accustomed wind ^et, their glory disgraced, and they little or nothing
esteemed. Si de mundo essetis, mundus, quod suum est diligeret: Joan. 19.
sed quia ego elegi vos de mundo, ideo odit vos mundus. If you were of the
world, the world, would love you, but because I have chosen you out of it,
Basil in al^quot scrip. lohom. at.
it bears you malice. Saint Basil recou^teth of his own experience, that
the Libard bears such a furious hatred unto man, that it suddenly at the
sight of him, flies in his face, and to avoid the rage thereof, the custom is
to show unto it a man's picture, in a paper, which it presently rendeth and
teareth asunder, showing therbye, how eagrelye it is bent against man him
self, whose image it can not abyd. Even so is it in the devil and his
followers, who not being able to wreacke their malice against almightye God,
whom they especyally hate, they turn their spite against gods image, that is
man's soul, and so much the more enuiouslye seek the overthrow of it, the more
they see it to wax like unto God, not only in nature, but also in goodness.
When we come to the service of Christ we come to a rough profession, that is
bound to have continual defiance and enimtye, with the pleasures, vanities,
and praises of this world, and therefore can we look for nothing else at
their hands, that are friends to the same, but only trouble, hatred, and
persecution. Accedens quisque ad seruitutem Dei, August. in Psa. ^3.
(says Saint Augustine) ad torcularia sevenisse cognoscat, contribulabitur,
conteretur, comprimetur, non vt in hoc seculo pereat, sed vt in apothecas dei
defluat. Let every one, that comes to the service of God persuade him self,
that he is come like a grape to the winepresse, he shal-be crushed, squeysed,
and pressed, not so much to procure his death, to the world, as his
reservation in gods seller. The thief as S. Chrysostom observes, Chrisost.
L. 2. de P^id. Dei.
when he enters into a house to rob, he first puts out the lights,
according to that, Qui male agit, odit lucem. Joan. 3.
He that does evil hates the light, and therefore the devil and his Impes,
seeing those, that were once darkness, ^Phes. 5.
now to become light in our Lord, they seek to disgrace, and blemish their
virtues, that they may the more freelye contriue their wicked purposes.
Circumueniamus iustum, contrarius est enim operibus nostris. SaP.
Let us circu^uent the righteous, (say the wicked) because he is contrary to
our works. Origin. L. 7. cont. Celsion.
But as it were says Origines a disprayse and abasement, for one, to be
honored, and praised by the impious only: so is it a great honor, to be
persecuted, and disgraced by them, because it is a pregnant proof, that we are
enemies to their lewd behavior. Howsoever the dogs bark, yet dogs
remain they, and we men: So remain the bad, wicked, and we for all their
slanders no whitt the less virtuous. The more the waves, and billows, how
boisterous soever they be, beat against a stonye rock, the more are they
broken, and turned into a vain some, and froth, and yet the rock nothing the
weaker. Let the malicious fume, and frett against us, our rock is impregnable,
if we cleave unto it, hurt them selves they may, but harm us they can not. So
it appears in Steuens persecutors, of whom it is written that Dissecabantur
cordibus suis, Act. 7.
et studebant in eum. They were cut in their hearts, and they gnashed with
their teeth at him. and yet he nothing moved, or terrefied with their furious
spite. Whose example may be unto us a pattern of consta^cye, and teach us to
make the same account of the obliquyes of our adversaries, that he did of the
malice of the Jews. For how can it move any of gods servants, to be evil
spoken of, especially by heretics Quasi (says S. Ciprian) apud lapsos,
Cip. Ep. 66
et prophanos, et extra ecclesiam positos, de quoru pectoribus excesserit
spiritus sanctus, esse aliud possit, nisi men's praua, et fallax lingua, et odia
venenata, et sacrilega me^dacia, quibus, qui credit, cum illis necesse est
inueniatur, cu^ indicy dies uenerit. As though amongst the lapsed, and
profane persons, that are out of the church, out of whose breasts the holy
ghost is departed, there could be other looked for, then a depraved mind, a
deceyptfull tongue, cancred hatreds, and sacrilegious lies, to which, whosoever
gives creditt, must needs be numbered with them, in the day of judgment.
Wherefore whosoever have entered a virtuous course, let them prepare their
minds to all kind of tentation, both by words, and wicked endeavors of the
bad, seeing that assuredly we know, that the devil will never agree with
those, that in gods cause are his enemies, howsoever he fawned upon them, while
they were in his power. As long as the lion has the pray in his paws, he can
dallye and play with it, but if he see any offer of escaping from him, he
forthwith fixes his claws in the flesh. Pharao never so fiercely did
persecute the Israelytes, Exodus 14.
as when they were going out of Aegipte. Genesis 31.
Laban never pursued Jacob, till he departed from him: so little cares the
devil to byte or barcke at those, that are his ^ousehold servants, until
such time, as they begin to wax strangers unto him. Of this the scripture
gives us warninge, Esa. 59.
Qui recessit a malo praedaepatuit. He which forsook wickedness, lay open to
the spoil. And S. Gregorye to the same effect says Hostis noster, Greg. ho. 2
in Euang.
quanto magis nos sibi rebellare conspicit, tanto amplius expugnare contendit:
eos enim pulsare negligit, quos quieto iure se possidere sentit. Our enemy the
more he sees us to rebel against him, the more endeuoreth he to overcome us,
For such he little cares to molest, of whom he finds him self in quiet
possession. So may we understand the words of Holofernes unto Judith. Nunquam
nocui viro, Iudit. 11.
qui voluit seruire Regi Nabuchodonozor. I never did harm to any that was
content to serve my King Nabuchodonozor. young Tobias, Tobi. 6.
so long, as he walked in the mire, and dirt, went quietlye, and was never
troubled: but when he went to wash his feet in the clear river, there was
presently a fish ready to devour him. The Pirates, while they know the shipp
to be emptye, let it quietlye pass, but when it comes laden with rich
merchandise, their manner is to assault it with all violence: So says S.
Chrysostom, Chrisost. Hom 31. in g^n.
while men are void of virtue, the devil lets not their voyage, but when
they are enriched with grace, and have taken in their freyght of the gifts of
gods spirit, he strayte gives the onsett with tribulation. He comes not
into styes, and kenels to seek his pray, for he knows, that there is
nothing to be found, but mire and filth: but his haunt is to the rich cofers,
and chestes of Jewels, and plate. Those that have nothing in them, but sin
and wickedness, lie always open unto him, and well he knows, that they are
not worth the rob bing: but those that begi^n to fill their cofers, with the
Jewels of virtue, and cleanse their souls from vice, to give room to gods
heavenly treasures, are a pray that he longs to get, as the same saint
observes. He well knows, that such as are out of gods favor, may be
won with out strokes, and he is able with every push, Hom. 1. ad. Pop.
Antioch
to lay the^ grouelinge in what sin he lists. But when he finds one
returned into grace and armed with godliness against his encounters, upon him
he comes with sadd blows, and by all sleyghtes and violence endeuoreth to
overcome him. A paper wall he breaks with one knock, but when he finds a
strong rampire, or bulwark, he strayte planteth his batterye, and uses all
possible engines to overthrow it. But alas his force is but feeble, Chrisost.
hom. 25. in Matt.
his engines weak, to batter down the adamante rock of virtue, and therefore
as S. Chrysostom. says therein he does but spurn against a thorn, and while
he seeks to hyde the fire in his garments, he does but burn him self, Hom.
5. in Matt.
and give the fire matter to work upon, and show it self the more. God will
always defend a Moses, and praise him most, Number. 12.
when Aaron and Marye murmur against him: and Christ will take upon him the
patronage of a Magdalen, what Judas soever control her good works, yea if men
oppress them, the very senseless and unreasonable creatures, will fight in
their defense, and witness their innocencye. The sea will honor a true
Israelite, by giving dry passage. Exodus 14. Dani. 6. 3. Reg. 17 Dan. 3.
The hungrye Lio^s will be lambs to a Daniel, the crows will feed an Elias,
and the flames of fire with-holde their force, CaP. 2.
from burninge a Sidrac, The second cause of comfort in tribulation is, that
it shows us to be gods children tenderly loved of him. Heb: 12.
Misaac, or Abdenago.

CaP. 2.
Another cause, why we should willingly suffer tribulation, is, because Quem
diligit dominus castigat, flagellat autem omnem filium quem recipit. Whom God
loves, he chastises, and scourges every child, that he receives: And S.
Paul^, calls those that are extra disciplinam, Ibid.
from under correction, base borne, and not true children of Christ. When
David was reviled of Semei, he acknowledged it from God, that used him like his
child: 2. Reg. 16.
Praecepit illi dominus vt maledicat mihi. Our Lord has commanded him to
rail at me. God knows how easelye in the vanities of this life, we reuolte
from him, and therefore restrayneth our licentious humor with the snafle of
affliction, and with trouble curbeth our affections. The falconer that has a
hawk on his fist of great price, be he never so fond of it feedinge it him
self, and taking his whole delight in it, yet will he not let it loose, yea
the more he loves it, the more care he has to keep it hooded, to have good
Iesses at the legs, and to hold it fast: So dealt God with David, whom
though he aduau^ced to succeed Saul in his kingdom, and gave him not only
the victory over Golias, but bound unto him the good wills of Saul^s son and
familye, yea of the whole people: yet put he iesses to his legs, unwilling to
leese so choice a piece, and therefore was he so persecuted by Saul, that he
was miserablye tossed, and tormoyled, and suffered famyne, thirst and other
great distresses. S. Paul a great favorite of God soared so hye, that he
came to the third heaven, and some deuines, and Fathers hold, that he had the
view of the very essence of God, and yet had he his iesses: Ne magnitudo
reuelationum extollat me, ^ Cor. 1^.
datus est mihi Angelus satanae, qui me colaphizet. Le^t the greatness of
revelations, should puff me up, there is allotted unto me, an Angel of Satan
to buffet me. Genesis 44.
Benjamin of all the brothers was most tenderly loved of Joseph, and therefore
was Joseph's cup found in Beniamins sack: So is the chalice which Christ
droncke of, that is the chalice of tribulation found in their sackes, whom
Christ most loves: The new pieces are tried, whether they be good by fire and
gonnpowder, which if they can bear, without breakinge, they are much esteemed.
God is very joyce, whom he adopteth for his child, and his inheritance is so
great, that he means to give it to such only, as shall well deserve it, and
therefore not only beginners are tried to the proof, before he make any
reckoning of the^, but even those to whom he has given honorable
entertaynment in his service, and makes great account of, ar putt to
continual proof of their perseverance. EXO. ^.
So when Abraham seemed to be most in gods favor, he was tempted, and bidde^
to offer his own son. When God him self praised Job, Job. ^.
he was strayte assaulted with most grievous te^tations: Yea and Christ after
that voice Hic est filius meus dilectus, this is my beloved son, Matt. 3.4.
was presentlye ledd of the spirit into the deserte, to be tried with
tentation. And it was said to Tobye: Tob. 1^
Quia acceptus eras Deo, necesse fuit vt tentatio probaret te, because thou
werte acceptable unto God, it was necessary that tentatio^ should prove thee.
Greg. L. 2^ moral.
Such Patients, (says S. Gregorye,) as be not past cure, God gives bitter
medicines unto, because he minds to restore the^ to perfect health, but such
as are so far gonne, that by ordinarye course of physic, they are not
likelye to be recovered, he suffers to do what best likes their fantasy,
without controlment. When David numbered his people, 2. Reg. 2^
god scourged him with a great mortalitye: but Augustus committed the same
sin, yea and a greater, making all to pay tribute, yet was not once
touched. When Jonas fledd by sea from going to Niniue, (...). 1.
doubtless in the shipp were diverse greuouser sinners then he, being all
gentiles: and yet when it came to trial, for whose sin the tempest was
raised, the lot fell upon Jonas: and when he was cast into the sea, the storm
ceased: which is a token, that the wicked though they be full freyght with
sin, shall sail with a calm tide, and prosperous gale: but those whom god
loves, for that little which they have offended, shall have their storms, and
be cast into a sea of afflictions. This language of the holy ghost, is not
understood of the worplings, who like fleshwormes, only feed upon the
pleasures of this life, and dream of no other felicity. Alas poor wretches
full little understand they their own misery, carrying under the names of
Christians, the hearts of Pagans, preferringe pleasure, and the future pains
due unto it, before the Cross of Christ, and the eternal felicity ensuing
after it. But such carye their sins to hell to be punished with everlasting
torments, and the afflicted souls being purged here, shall after their
decease, enjoy their heavenly inheritance. This is signified in Leuiticus:
Leui. 24
Qui maledixerit Deo, portabit peccatum suum, qui autem assumpserit nomen Dei,
morte morietur. He that blasphemeth God, shall carye his sin, but he that
takes his name in vain shall dye the death. In respect of blaspheminge God
or reuiling him, it is but little to take his name in vain: and yet is this
punished in this life, with present death, the other not: for why as Origines
understands it, the other is so great, as it deserves a more grievous
revenge, and therefore shall the offender carye it with him into hell. So befell
it in the rich glotton, Lax. 16.
whose offenses not being purged with any tribulation, were reserved to the
flames of hell, wherein he was buried: whereas Lazarus in life full of miseries
went without any stopp into the bosom of Abraham. The like end did the
Machabees foretell Antiochus of, when he put them to death. 2. Mac. 7
Nos propter nosmetipsos haec patimur, peccantes in deum nostrum, tu autem ne
impune existimes futurum, quod contra Deum tentaueris pugnare, tibi enim
resurrectio ad vitam non erit. We for our own faults suffer this, offending
our God, but think not thou that it shall pass unrevenged, that thou have
presumed to fight against God, for to thee shall be no resurrection unto life.
And this manner and fatherlye kind of proceedinge used Paul with that sinful
Corinthian of whom he said. Quem tradidi Satanae in interitum carnis, 1. Cor. ^
vt spiritus saluus fiat. Whom I have given over to Satan, for the destruction
of his flesh, that his soul may be saved. And in truth it is a most rufull
scourge of God, and a token of a reprobate soul, to be suffered to enjoy
continuallye all sorts of delighte, and to have no cross to trauerse our
comfortes. This scourge did God threaten upon the people of Hierus^lem, when
reckoning the enormities by them committed, he surioyneth presentlye. Propter
quod, Hier. 6.^.
non visitabo super filias vestras, cum maechantur. For which I will not
chastise your daughters, for their fornications. As who would say, this
shal-be part of your punishment for this, Basil. in Cap. ^ Esaias.
S. Basil expoundinge those words of Esaie, I will leave my vineyarde
desolate, it shall neither be pruned, nor dug, understands them of the
soul that sins without scourge, which thereby waxes wild, fruitless, and
full of weeds. A more plain saying for this purpose we have in the second of
the Machabees, where the holy ghost in these words warns us of it. 2. Mac. ^.
Obsecro autem eos, qui hunc libru^ lecturi sunt, ne abhorrescant propter
aduersos casus, sed reputent ea, quae acciderunt, non ad interitum, sed ad
correctione^ esse generis nostri. Etenim multo tempore, non sinere peccatoribus
ex sententia viuere, sed statim vltiones adhibere, magni beneficy est indicium.
I beseech the^ that shall read this book, that they be not terified, by
these adversities, but rather deem those things which have happened, to be
rather to the amendme^t, then destruction of our nation: for it is a token of a
great benefit, not to suffer sinners to have long time their designementes,
but strayte to send them reuenges: for God deals not with us, as with other
nations, whose sins he leaves to the last day, to be punished together,
but though he never remove his mercy from us, he chastisinge never forsakes
us, in our troubles. Well therefore says S. Augustine: August. in Psa. 99
Vnde plangis? quod pateris medicina est, non paena: castigatio, non damnatio:
Noli repellire flagellum, si non vis repelli ab haereditate: noli attendere,
quam paenam habeas in flagello, sed quem locum in testamento. Why weepest thou?
that which thou suffer is a medicine, not a punishment, it is a correction,
not a condemnation: Reiecte not the whippe, if thou will not be rejected from
the inheritance, regard not what pain thou suffer in the scourge, but what
place thou have in thy fathers will. The calves or oxen (as S. Grgorye notes)
that are designed to the slaughterhouse, Greg. Li. 21. moral.
are suffered to ru^ne, and range at their will in pleasant pastures: but
those that are appointed to live, are put in the plough, yoked, tyered, and
whipped. Of this S. Augustine uses these words: Quot sunt, qui lasciuijs vt
boues, et vaccae ad iugulum tendunt, August. in Psalm. 72.
and canentes, et saltantes parant iter ad infernum? How many be there. that
runn dalyinge like oxen to the stall, and prepare their way to hell with
singing and dau^sing. Dimisit eos, (says David) secundu^ desideria cordis
eorum, Psalm. 30.
ibunt ad inuentionibus suis. He has given them over to their own hearts
desires, they shall go on their own devises. But howsoever they prosper here
in all their attempts, and worldelye ways, portant peccatum suum, they carry
their sin with them, and in them is that saying of Job verified. Ducunt in
bonis dies suos, 10 B. 21
and in puncto ad inferna descendunt. They pass their days in iollitye, and
in a moment they tumble into hell. PSa. 72.
In this life true it is, they are not partakers of the toils of other men,
and they shall not be scourged with them, and therefore were they puffed up with
pride, and overwhelmed in their own sin and impietye. But sure it is
Comedent fructus viae suae, Pro. 1
they shall feed on the fruits of their own way, in the world to come.
Which fruits are thus described in Deutronomie, vua eorum vua fellis, Deutro.
^^
and botri amarissimi. Fell Draconum vinum eorum, and venenum aspidum
insanabile. Their grape is full of gall, and their clusters extreme bitter,
the gall of dragons is their wine, and the incurable poison of Cocatrices.
The thieves (says S. Chrysostom) till they come before the Judge, Chrisost.
hom 1. de risurrect.
live in delights, and of other men's spoil and calamitye enjoy abundance,
and plentye of all pleasure: So the wordlings till their time of account
come: but then shall they be thrown into fluddes of fire. And as S. Augustine
warns. Veniet iudicium, vt arescant peccatores, Aug. in ps. 93
and virescant fideles. There shall come a Judgment, that shall make the wicked
wyther, and the faithful florishe. Better therefore it is to be chastised here
with Gods children, then spared and pampered with the vassals of Satan: better
to be dashed, with the fruitful plants, the^ without touching to florishe
with barren trees, and in the end be quite cut down to make fuel for hell
fire. For aecording to the saying of S. Augustine. August. ibide^.
Boni laborant, qui flagellantur, vt filij: mali exultant, quia damnantur vt
alieni. The good toil because they are scourged as children, the bad triumph,
because they are condemned as aliantes. Greg. in Ezech.
And (as S. Gregorye observes) Peccantes quosque tu^ putemus amplius miseros,
cum eos conspicimus in culpa sua sine flagello derelictos. Let us then
account sinners most miserable, when we see them left in their sins
without correction. Psa. 1.43
There is a people (says David) whose sons are like flourishing young
spyres, their daughters decked, and trimmed like temples, their granaries and
sellers full of provision, their sheep and cattle fatt and fertile, no ruins
in their howses, no noise nor cry in their streets: But for all this, do
not you say Beatus populus, cui haec sunt, Blessed is the people, that has
these things. The oak is stately of grouth, full of fair leaves and casts a
pleasante shadow, but the fruit thereof serves for nothing, but for swine to
feed upon. And Clemens Alexandrinus compares such to the profane temples of
the Egiptians, Clem. Alex^^ L. 2. Padagog. ca. 2
on which if you look, you shall first se^ very sumptuous, and stately
buildings, garnished about with varietye of marbles, portraytures, and curious
works: with in the first rooms adorned, and decked with gorgeous furniture,
and great majesty: But if you go into the secretest Chapels to view the God
for whose honor all this solemnitye and preparation is used, you shall find
some vglye viper, or crocodyle, or some other venomous serpent. So is it with
those that enjoy prosperity in this world. If you consider their houses,
they are costlye and glorious, if you mark their attire, it is fair and
precious, if you view their bodies, they are personable and comelye. But if
you enter into their inmoste room, and consider what is harbored in all this
brauerye, you shall not find a clean image of God, but in place thereof, a
monstrous, vglye, and sinful soul, in the state of damnation, and therefore be
not deceived wtth their vain external gloss. Though you see the fish merelye
catch the bayte, and with fleetinge and turning to and fro, to seem to rejoice
at it, marvel not (says S. Augustine) neither deem it happy, August. in
Psa. 91
the fisher has not yet pulled the thread, the hook is not yet fastened in the
fishes guilles, but surely it will be one day verefied in such: Eccl^. 9
Sicut pisces capiuntur hamo, and aues laqueo, sic capiuntur homines in tempore
malo. As the fishes are catched with the hook, and the birds with the snare,
so are men taken in time of misery. And in the end how-soeuer they now
dalye, and play in pleasure, the fisher as Abachuc foretold Totum in hamo
subleuabit, Abac. 1.
and trahet illud in sagena sua, et congregabit in rete suum: He shall draw
all up with his hook, and shall hale and gather it into his nett. And then
alas for their liberty, they shall reap restraynte, and for one daintye
bitt, be an eternal pray of the woroing and deuouringe helhoundes. And for
this cause does God chastise his children in this life, and if they can not be
won with easier remedies, whom he sees redye to ru^n astraye, he holds
back with a hard bitt of aduersitye, and hedgeth the^ in with the thorns of
tribulation. Ose. 2
I will hedge in thy way with thorns says God, to the sinful soul, and I
will enclose it with a wall. First like a most faithful paramour of our soul,
hangi^^ in most rufull manner naked, wounded, and redye to dye upon the Cross,
he has often sent us em bassyes of love, Cant. 2
saying Dicite dilecto meo, quia amore langueo. Tell my beloved, that I
languishe for love. And we most vngratefullye have refused his messengers. He
has showed us his feet nailed to attend our coming, August. L. de ^^rginis.
his side open to give us entrance, his arms stretched forth ready to embrace
us, his head inclined to afford us the kiss of peace, his eyes shutt to all
our offenses, his ears unstopped to hear our petitions, his hands open to
enrich us with his gifts, finallye a multitude of bleeding wounds to show us
how entierlye he loved us, and how dearlye he bought us. But we like the
stifnecked Jews, nothing moved with his excessive love, have contemned all his
in uitings, yea when uttering his most ardent desire of our souls, ^oa^. 19
he said sitio: I thirst, we answered him with a drafte of eyfell and gall,
and when yelding up the ghost to conclude our redemption, he said Consummatum
est. It is co^summated: we with most brutish and savage hearts fought with his
dead cors, not sparing with one, yea with a thousand spears of our sins, to
wound him to a second, yea to many deaths. Yet has not all this
ungratefulness, altered his affection, but seeing that he can not move us with so
many griefs sustained in our behalf, he obscureth the son of our
comfortes, he sends earthquakes of tribulations, he makes the graves open,
and sets death before our eyes, to win in a manner by force, since by love
he could not, and to make us even amongst the mydst of his enemies, with the
Centurian to confess him, Matt. ^^
and say. Vere filius Dei erat iste. Undoubtedly this was the son of God.
The vanities of this world, cast the soul into such a delightsome frenzy,
and lull it so daungerouselye a sleep, that maynye in a frantic fit of
licentiousnes, run hedlong to perdition: Et dum letantur insaniunt. SaP. 14
And while they rejoice they rave. And other in a careless, and remiss kind
of life sleep them selves to death Sicut vulnerati dormientes in sepulchris,
PSa. ^^.
like wounded wretches sleepinge in their graves. And therefore God holds
over his children the rodd of tribulation, both to temper and stay to raging
mood of the frantic, and to rouse the dead sleepers out of their letargye.
And as it can of no reasonable man, be construed, but in good part, to bind
and keep in awe, yea to whipp and beat, the mad man, when he falls into his
rage, likewise to pynch, nipp, and wring, yea and with redd hott yrons to burn
the sick of a letargye, when he enters into his dead sleep: So for God, to
correct our former, or to prevent our future infirmities, by the scourges or
hott yrons of affliction, can not but be thought the part of a merciful and
provident father: for as (S. Augustine oteth) Non omnis, August. ser. 59 d^
verb. Dni^
qui parcit amicus est, nec omnis, qui verberat inimicus. Meliora sunt vulnera
amici, quam blanda oscula inimici. Melius est cum sinceritate diligere, quam
cum lenitate decipere, et qui phreneticum ligat, et letargicum excitat, ambobus
molestus ambos amat. Not every one that spares is our friend, nor every one
that strikes our enemy. Better are the wounds of a friend, then the
flattering kisses of a foe. Better it is to love with sincerity, then to
deceive with lenity: he that byndeth the frantic, or waketh the sick of the
letargye, though to both ttoublesome, yet to both is very friendlye. To weane
us from an unnatural nurce God anoynteth her teate with the bitterness of
tribulation, and as a mother desirous to affectionate her child, to her self
above all other, makes all of her householde, to use it curstly in show, that
finding good intreatye of none but her, it may the willinglyer repair unto
her: So God, (says S. Chrysostom) suffers us, Chrisost: hom. 14. ex variis
in Matt: loc.
of the world, flesh, and devil to be molested, that we may only
acknowledge him, and come unto him as onr chief succor and refuge. The Devil
kisseth where he means to kill, he gives us a draught of poison in a golden
cup, and in a sumptuous and statelye shipp wafteth his passengers upon the
rocks of eternal ruin: Eus^b: Emiss^ hom. 3 de Epipha:
Du^ per voluptates (says Eusebius Emisssenus) extrinsecus blanditur,
intrinsecus insidiatur: interficit spiritu^ du^ oblectat affectu^. While with
pleasures without he delights us, inwardlye he deceyueth us, and kills our
soul, while he flattereth our fancye. For when he moves us to labor our
wits, and settle our affection in these inferior things, what does he
persuade us, but with a golden hook, to fish in a filthye puddle, and sincke,
where nothing can be gotten but venomous and vnsauorye vermin. With Sirens
sweet notes he woeth us into the salt sea of perdition, with Crocodyles
tears, he endeuoreth to intrapp us, and when he shows a man's face, and
glorious locks adorned wrth a crown of gold, as the Locustes of the
Apocalips did, Apoc. 9.
then means he even like the same to byte us with his Lions teeth, and stynge
us with his Scorpions tail. For why all his favors and friendlye
countenances are but Oscula inimici, kisses of an enemy. Virus amaritudinis
obscurat fraud dulcedinis, Eusebius: Emiss ibidem.
prouocat prius odor poculi, sed praefocat infusus sapor in virus, mel est,
quod ascendit in labia, venenum et fell, quod descendit in viscera. He shrowdeth
his bitter poison, under a deceiptfull sweetness, the pleasant savor of the
cupp inuiteth, but the sweet taste of the poison choketh, it is honye that
comes up to our lips, but gall and poison, that goes down into our
bowels. And howsoever with a smoth flyghte, and an even winge the devil
houereth in the air, as though he wear an Egle, that delighted to view the
Son, and look toward heaven: yet bears he a raueninge mind, and in
truth is but a greedy kyte, that has his eyes always fixed on the Earth, and
makes only such a fair show in the air, the better to watch a fit time,
when he may best seyze upon his pray. For this Saint Basil compares him to
a thief, Basil: in hom. non esse adh^rendum reb^^ secularibus.
that when he can not by open violence catch his bootye, seeks by shrowding
him self in the valeys, bushes, and darkness of the night, to take the poor
traualour unprovided, and so to spoil him. For so the devil when he sees,
that by open pursuit he can not overthrow us, he couertlye cowcheth him self
in the shadows, and briars of worldly vanities, and delightsome allurementes,
thereby to intrapp us ere we preuente his traynes. Chrisost. hom* de auar. tem. ^
But God takes a contrary course. For as the husband man does lopp the vine,
least all the force be unprofitable spente in leaves, and the root being
therbye weackened, the fruit be neither so much, nor so pleasante as otherwise
it would: So God like a careful keeper of our soul, least our whole mind
should be employed in vain and superfluous pleasures, he cutteth them from
us, that our wits, which would in them with our profitt have been diffused,
being kept in compass by troubles, may be fitter to work, and bring forth
fruits of eternal salvation. Where God purposes to heal, he spares not to
lance, he ministers bitter sirroppes, to purge corrupt humors, and sends
embassies of death and revenge, where he means to afforde eternal life and
felicity. Good Raguell prepared a grave for young Tobias, Tob: ^.
and yet desired heart lie his long life. Joseph accused his brothers, as
spies, when he mente the^ left harm, and restreyned little Benjamin as guilty
of theft, Gen: 44
whom he knew fulwel to be a guiltless i^nocent. But these accusacions were
but like water in a smithes forge, to kindle not to quench, a rough entrance
to a most kind usage, and an outward show of suspicion, to utter the more his
entire affection. Eue^ so deals god with his children. We have passed through
fire and water (says David): Ps^ 65
but it follows, and he has led us out into comfort. Many go de carcere
and catenis out of prison and cheines, but their journeys end is, Eccle: 4.
ad regnu^. to a kingdom. Many be in a few things vexed, but they shall be
well considered for it in many. Sap: 3^
Many are tried like gold in the furnace, but at their time shall regard be
had unto them. If it be a grievous infirmitye, at the lest it makes the soul
sober. Eccle: 31.
And if god begin with aff^ixi te. I have afflicted thee, N^^: 1.
he will doubtless end with Non affligam te vltra. I will afflicte thee no
more. 2. Cor: 1
And finallye. Sicut socij passionum sumus, sic erimus and consolationis, si
commortui sumus, 2. T^^: ^.
and conuiuemus, sisustinemus, and conregnabimus. As we are fellows of his
passions, fo shall we be of his comfort, and if with him we dye, with him
shall we live, and if we suffer his Cross, we shall be partners of his Crown.
God wounds, but his wou^des be vulnera amici wounds of a frinde. He sent
Jonas to Niniue to threaten the^ an overthrow, Io^: 1.
but his intent was, to bring them to repentance, that he might continue
toward them his favor. 4. Reg. ^^.
He sent to Ezechias to tell him of his last day, but his meaning was to make
him sorye for his offense, that he might adiorne his life. Daniel. 6
He suffered Daniel to be thrown into the den of Lions, but it was to
advance him to greater credit. Genesis 39.17
He that had seen Joseph vndeseruedlye in prison, Iud. 10. Hester. 5. Dan. 13.
Judith in her enemies camp, Mardocheus in sackcloth with his gibbet before
his eyes, and innocent Susa^na going to be stoned, would have lamented their
case, and feared their farther misfortune. But had he known, that Iosephes
prison should end in a Prince dome, Iudiths hazard with a most happy victory,
Mardocheus peril, with royal preferment, and Susannas stoning with glory and
triumph, he would rather have thought the^ much beholdinge to god, for the
ensuinge felicity, the^ greatly to be pitied for their present distress. The
figtree has bitter and rugged leaves it bears no flowers, and yet brings
forth most daintye and sweet fruit. Clem. Alex L. 2. strom.
The Devil because in deed he has no fruit, is feign to feed his followers
with leaves that soon wither, and flowers, that soon fade, and all that he
gives is blown away with a blast. But god because he loves us sincerelye,
and not in show only, but in veritye, he gives us the fruit without flower
or leaf, that is, his gifts and graces without external, and vain solaces:
yea and sometimes he besetteth his fruits, not only with rugged and bitter
leaves, but also with sharp and pricking thorns, that the hardness to
attain them, may make them the more prysed, and the remembrance of former
adversity, may make the comfortes followinge more delightsome. The benefitt
of a calm weather is most desired, and best welcome after a boystrous
tempest. Health is never so much esteemed, as after a great sickness, and all
pleasure is most plesante to those, that have been least acquainted with it,
and most troubled with the contrary: according to that proverb of Solomon.
Proverb. ^^^
Anima saturata calcabit fauum, and anima esuriens etiam amarum pro dulci
sumet. A full stomach will loathe the honye comb, and one that is hungrye will
think the bitter sweet. But albeit god affords his final reward, only to
those, that have passed through many tribulations, yet when they are in
trouble or anguish he does not abandon or leave them desolate, but waters
their miseries with sundry comfortes. Egredietur fons de domo Domini, Joel: 3.
and irrigabit torrentem spinarum. There shall flow a fountain out of the
house of our Lord (says Joel) and water the torrent of thorns. And David to
the same effect Secundum multitudine^ dolorum meorum in cord meo, Psalm: 9 3
consolationes tuae laetificauerunt animam meam. According to the number of
the sorrows of my heart have thy solaces rejoiced my mind. Act. 7.
Stephen when he was stoned, saw heaven open, and Christ standing at the right
hand of his father. 4. Reg. 2.
When Elizeus was besett with the Assirians, he saw a hill of fierye chariotts
standinge in his defense. ^. Reg. 19
And when Elias was like to dye for hunger, he was fedd and comforted by an
Angel. And, it always falls out true, that as S. Paul notes. Sicut
abundant passiones Christi in nobis, 1. Cor. 1.
ita and per Christum abundant consolatio nostra. As the passions of Christ
abound in us, so also by Christ abounds our consolation. Chris. hom. 4 ad Pop
An^iochen.
And as the Musician neither streyneth the string of his instrument to hye, for
fear of breaking, nor letteh it to low for fear of distuning. So god (says
S. Chrysostom) will keep a mean neither suffering us to be carelesselye
secure, nor driving us for want of comfort to despair. Hilar. Ps. 2.
Which Hilarious fitlye expresses saying. Virga de radice Iesse storuit, vt
virgae seueritatem, floris suauitas temperaret. The rodd of the root of Iesse
flowred, that the swetnesse of the flower might mitigate the seueritye of the
rodd. For if the potter tempereth his furnace agreeablye to the vessel, that
he myndeth to frame, if the goldsmith use great care, not to have his fire to
great, or to little, for the quantitye of his metal, if the caryer has a
regard, not to load his beast, more then he is well able to bear: How much
more warye is god, Macar. Hom. 26.
(says S. Macarius) in not suffering us to be tempted above our force. Aug.
in. Ps. 61
For as S. Augustine well notes. Tantum admittitur Diabolus tentare, quantum
tibi prodest, vt exercearis, vt proberis, vt qui te nesciebas, a teipso
inueniaris. So much, is the Devil permitted to tempt thee, as is for thy
benefit, that thou may be exercised, proved, and come to knowledge of thy
self that knew not thy self before.

Cap. 3.
Cap. 3. The third cause of comfort in tribulation is that we are moved to
suffer it willingly both by the president of Christ and title of a Christian.
THirdlye one that understands the course of christian behoof, can not but
think it a most comfortable thing, to suffer aduersitye, for a good cause,
seeing it is not only the liuerye and cognizance of Christ, but the very
principal royal garment, which he chose to wear in this life. And therefore
can it not be taken of a soldier but well, to be cladd with his captains
harness, or of a disciple, to be like his master. Christiani nomen ille
frustra sortitur, (says S. Augustine) qui Christum minime imitatur. August de
vita Christia.
Quid enim tibi prodest vocari quod non es, and nomen vsurpare alienum. In
vain he claymeth the name of a christian, that does not imitate Christ, for
what does it avail thee to be called that, which thou art not, and to challenge
unto thee an other man's name. A man a most ambitious and haughtye minded man,
Hest: ^.
thought it the greatest honor that a prince could do to his subject, to
make him ride on his own palfrey, attyred in his most royal and statelye
robes. If therefore tribulation be the most precious garment, that Christ did
wear, and the Cross his palfrey, we are greatly honored, while he
aduau^ceth us to the same prerogatives. Of this did S. Paul greatly glory,
when he said Absit mihi gloriari nisi in cruce domini nastri Jesus Christi.
Gala: ^.
God forbidd that I should glory saving in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And in the same place. I bear the marks of our Lord Jesus in my
body. This S. James accounted a principalll cause of joy and comfort, when
he said Esteem it all joy, Iac: 1
when you shall fall into diverse temptations. It is noted in the scripture for
a singular proof of Ionathas goodwill to Dauide, 1: Reg: 1^
that he gave him his own cote and aparell. Elias departing from Eliseus, 4:
Reg: 2
in token of goodwill, cast him down his mantell, and S. Jerome writes of S.
Anthonye that he wore S. Paul the first Eremytes cote, Hierom: in vita Paul.
Er^m
upon high and solemn feasts for love and reverence thereof. And shall not we
acknowledge it for a singular favor, to be clad with Christ's attire, and to
wear the token of his goodwill toward us. Non consolantur (says S. Bernard)
panni Christi ambulantes in stolis, Bernard.
non consolantur stabulum and praesepe, amantes primas cathedras in sinagogis.
Christ's cloutes comfort not those that walk in robes, the stable and maunger
comfort not those, that love the highest rooms in the sinagoges. But those
only that rightlye iudgeinge of the manyfolde miseryes that they have
deserved, wear the morning weed of sorrow and repentance. He is an
undutiful child, that is ashamed to profess who is his father, and a most
maleperte servant, that refuses to wear his masters liuerye, but of all a
most ungrateful creature, that does not willinglye accept the liuerye of his
god, and maker. If we be Christians affliction is our cote, and the Cross our
cognizance. Of which it was said to Constantine, when he became a Christian.
In hoc signo vinces. In this sign shall thou conquer. When Iacobe saw the
cote of his son Joseph imbrued with blood, Genesis 37.
thincking that he had been devoured by a wild beast, as his brothers said.
He cut his garments, put on sackcloth, mourninge his son a long time. And
when his other children, that had betrayed Joseph went about to comfort him,
he refused to receive any consolation. Let us look on the sacred coat, not of
our son, but of our father and redeemer, of whose humanitye it is said.
Esaias. 63.
Quare rubrum est indumentum tuum, and vestimenta tua sicut calcantium in
torculari. Quis est iste qui venit de Edom tinctis vestibus? Why is thy garment
redd, and thy apparel like theirs, that tread in the winepresse: and who is
this that comes from Edome with stained attire? Let us cast our eyes upon
this cote, dyed in his own innocente blood, let us consider that not only one
beast devoured him, but that he was for our sins, a pray of many bloodye
and impious, helhoundes: and doubtless it can not seem much to us, patientlye
to wear the hearecloth of tribulation, to cut of the garments of our vain
pomp, and superfluities, and rather with Jacob to sit comfortless,
sorowinge, and lamentinge, then to receive any comfort at their hands, that
betrayed our father, that is the vanities, sins, and pleasures of this
world. Machab: 6
In the Machabees it is written, that when the Elephantes went to the field,
they showed them a bloodye colored juice, to sharpen and enrage them the more
to the battle. Behold to us beside the blood of infinite Martyrs, Christ our
Captain and King, hanging upon the Cross, opens five fountaynes, gushinge
out with his inocente blood, and shows us his whole body all goarye with
lashes, and shall not all this harten us constantly to encounter all
tribulation, and to wage battle against our vain desires, and appetytes, when
they draw from the Cross, to delight and pleasure? When we have a thorn in
our foot, much more if it be in our head, or heart, all the rest of our
body is so troubled, that no consolation seems sweet, and we wish rather
for the surgion to lance us, then for any pleasures to delighte us. Saying
therefore that we see our head which is Christ, to be stuck full and crowned with
thorns, how can it be, if we be true members of his body, but that we must
needs both care little for all comfort, and be more willinge to sorrow wi^h
our head, and be launced for his sake, then lean unto the worldly solaces,
which he contemned because as S. Bernarde says. Non decet sub spinoso capite
membrum esse delicatum. It is an indecent thing to have a dayntye member, under
a thornye head. Good Vrias, when Dauide bad him go lie in his own house,
wash his feet, and take his ease. He like a true Israelyte, answered again.
2. Reg: 1^
The Ark of god Israel, and Jude dwell but in tents, my Lord Ioab, and the
servants of my Lord lie upon the face of the earth, and shall I go into my
house to eat, drink, and have the company of my wife? By thy saftye O
King, and by the saf^ye of thy life I will not do it. He thought it, an
odious thing, to have better lodginge then the Ark of god, and his captain,
and fellow soldiers. He thought it a grate stayne, to sleep in a soft bed,
while they lay on the hard grownde, and therefore rather chose, to lie before
the kings gate, then once to enter into his own house. Lo our Arc lies not
in papilionibus, in tents, but in praesepio in the maunger. Our Captain lies
not on the hard ground, but hangs naked and nailed to a reproachful cross.
Our fellow soldiers are not only upon the face of the earth, but some have
been cast into dungeons, other into fyers, many amongst Lions, and raginge
beasts, finallye all have tasted of diverse and bitter afflictions. And can any
true Vrias, think it much to take like part with all these? Ion. 3.
When the king of Niniue mourned in sackcloth, and ashes, all his Peers and
people did the same. 1. Reg. 14.
When Ionathas ventured to clyme most craggye and dangerous rocks, and was
alone to set upon a whole troop of Philistians, his man said unto him. Perge
quo cupis, et ero tecum, vbicunque volueris. Go whether thou will, and I will
not fail to follow thee, 1. Reg. 31.
which way soever thou go. Yea one of Saules squiers, saying his King to
have runn upon his own sword and killed him self, presently, (though
wickedly) followed his example, chosing rather to spill his life with his
Prince, then to spare it for his enemies. Behold our King mourns in
sackcloth and ashes of diverse calamities. Our Ionathas clymeth up to the mount
Caluarie, laden with a heavy Cross upon his torn and wounded shoulders. He
alone encountereth the Devil, and all his impes, and offers him self to the
troop of his enemies, in the garden. Yea our Saul falls on the most
rigorous sword of his own justice, for our sakes. And shall we for whose
benefit all this is done, vngratfullye refuse to follow his example? Shall he
morn in sackecloth, and we bathe in pleasure? Shall he fightinge alone, in our
defense, be all in a goure blood with infinite wounds, and shall we disporte,
and solace our selves with fond and vain delights? Shall he be stricken
through with the sword of revenge, for us, and shall we be unwilling to
suffer for our selves? Alas we are they, that deserve rather to sit with Job
in the dunghill, then in sackcloth, only with the Ninevites. We are they that
deserve, with naked hands, and knees, to creep up, on the most ragged rock
of aduersitye. For us it were fitter in regard of our trespasses, to hazard
our lives among a thousand blades and torments. Finallye it were our behoof
with repe^tant hearts, and lothsomenes of our former life, to embrace the
sword of gods just revenge, and therwithall to kill in our selves old Adam,
that is veterem hominem cum vitijs, Galat: 5
and concupiscentijs suis. The old man with his vices, and concupiscences. O
most unnatural children, that having before their eyes, the most bloody
flaughter of their own father, yea being with his blood, like Pelicans
younglinges, revived and raised from death, will not yet learn the
excessiveness of his love, nor consider how much they ought to do and suffer
for them selves, who by their misdeedes have been cause of so intolerable
pains, unto their heavenly father. Far other effect took Christ's passion
in S. Paul, who being inflamed with the force of so unusual an example,
labored him self to be a perfect scholar in this doctrine, esteeminge it the
highest and most needful point of Christian knowledge, to understand the
value, necessitye, and manner, of patient sufferance. He would have no other
university but Jerusalem, no other schole bur mount Caluarye, no other
pulpitt but the Cross, no other reader but the Crucifixe, no other letters but
his Wounds, no other commaes but his Lashes, no other full points but his
Nails, no other book but his open side, and finallye no other lesson But
scire Iesum Christum and hunc crucifixum: 1. Cor: 2
to know Jesus Christ and him Crucified. In this schole should be our
chiefest study. Here should we learn by Christ's nakedness, how to clothe
us, by his crown of thorns, how to adorn us, by his vinagre and gall, how to
diet us, by his praying for his murderers how to revenge us, by his hanging on
the cross, how to repose us, and by his paynfull and bitter death, how to
esteem of the pleasures of this life. Here may we see the wounderfull
fruits, and miraculous sequels, ensuinge upon tribulation, patiently accepted:
which pass all natural reach, and have been set down unto us, as shores of
comfort, to uphold us in all our distresses. Here may we see, that death
reuiueth, that sores salve, that blood washes, that sorrow solaceth, that an
Eclipse lights, that the fast nailed guydeth, the thirsty gives drink, the
wearye refreshes, the diseased cures, the dead brings forth. Which albeit
they be principally the proper effects of Christ's only Passion, yet are they
through the merits thereof, now experienced to follow also the martirdomes of
Christ's servants, to whom all crosses are comfortable, and their bodilye
death cause of many a souls spiritual life. So that now we may truly
interpret Sampsons ridle. Iudic. 14.
De comedente exiuit cibus, and de forti egressa est dulcedo. Out of the
deuourer there came meat, and out of the strong issued sweetness. For since
that our sins like fierce Sampsons, most cruellye murdered that Lion of the
tribe of Judah, if our repentant thoughts, like bees, suck at the flowers of
his Passion, they may work a delicious comb of honye, and not only we our
selves, taste the sweetness thereof, but by our example move others, to feed
willingly of the same, shewinge them by our experience, that the eysell and
gall of our tribulations, in this Lions mouth, has been altered, from the
wonted bitterness to sweetness, and the lionishe rage, of persecutors,
accustomed to devour so many souls, does now rather minister to gods
servants, a most pleasant viand, yea and those rigorous judgments of god,
which have heretofore been so terrible unto us, Psa. 18.
are now become Desiderabilia super aurum and lapidem pretiosum ^ultum, and
dulciora super melet fauum. More to be desired then gold and precious stone,
and more sweet then honye and the honicombe. Bitter were the waters of
tribulation, and so untoothsome to man's taste, that few could endure the
annoyance thereof, and our queysie stomachs, were rather contented to want
health, then to procure it by such unsavory and loathsome physic. And for this
did our heavenly Phisician strain this bitter medicine, through the nectared
cloth of his sacrede humanitye, and left therein such a taste of sweetness,
that it has been since egrelye thirsted, which was before so warilye eschewed.
We need not now to cry Mors in olla Death is in the pott: 4. Reg 4^.
because the Prophet has seasoned it, not with a little flower or meal, but
with his own blood. We need not murmur at the waters of Mara: ^xod. 15
that is of ghostlye discomforte, as unable to be droncke, or fear to sincke
in the te^pesteous poole of bodilye vexation: for our Moses has sweetened the
one, with the sacred wood of his Cross, and since our Elizeus cast into the
other, 4. Reg. 6.
the wood of life, that is his blessed body, our Iron began to swim, where
before it had soncke, and the desolate that said, Infixus sum in limo profundi,
Psalm: 6^
and non est substantia. I am set fast in the depth of the mudd, and can find
on stedye footing: may begin to singe Eduxit me de lacu miseriae, Psa: 39.
and de luto faecis, et super aquam refectionis educauit me. He has ledd me
out of the lake of miserye, and the mire of filth, and has brought me upon
the waters of refection. Let us not therefore be afraid to say now to Christ.
Domine iube me venire ad te super aguas. Matt: 14
O Lord command me to come unto thee upon the waters. For be the surges
never so boystrous, the waters never so deep, the stormye winds never so
outrageous, if we run upon them toward Christ, they will either yield dry
passage, by diuidynge them selves, as the redd sea did to the Israelites, or
they will uphold us from perishinge as the waves did S. Peter. 1. Cor. ^3.
Fidelis enim deus qui non patietur vos tentari supra id, quod potestis. For
faithful is god, who will not suffer you to be tempted, more the^ you are able
to bear. And surely now is the time, that we are called by Christ through
fire and water, and now with open voice does he renew his old proclamation.
Whosoever loves father, Mat. 37
mother, wife, children, house or liuinges more then me, is not worthy of me
and he that takes not up his cross (and that) every day can not be my
disciple. We must not now seek Christ as our Lady did inter cognatos and
notos, L^c: ^.
amongst her kinsefolke and acquaintance: nor as the spouse did, that said,
In lcctulo meo per noctes, quaesiui quem diligit anima mea: Cant: ^^
In my bed have I in the nights, sought whom my heart best loved. Nor as the
Israelites did of whom O see speaks. In gregibus suis, et in arme^tis, Os^e.
5
vadent ad quaerendum dominu^. In their flocks, and herdes shall they go, to
seek our Lord. For as S. Anselme well notes: Ansel in ^^^ditat.
Non cubat in delitijs splendidi cubilis, nec inuenitur in terrasuauiter
viuentium. He lies not in the delicacye of a gorgeous bed, neither is he
found in the land of daynty livers. Moses did see him in the deserte, Exodus 3.
amid dest the fire and thorns, Exodus 19.
in the mount amongst lighteninges, thunderinges, and mistes: Dan. 7.
Daniel saw him in a fierye throne, and amongst fierye wheles, with a swifte
fierye sludd runninge before him. And shall we think to be more priuileged,
then our aunciente fathers? Think we to find in down and deyntinesse, him,
that to them appeared so terrible, and fearful. Do we think, that his rigor
and justice, signified by these terrible semblances, is so relented, that he
should show him self unto us, only in amiable and louelye countenances.
Surely we are greatly deceived, if we feed our selves with this vain
persuasion. For albeit the new testament be fuller of grace, yet is it no less
full of agonyes. Matt. 11.
Though Christ's service be sweet, and light, yet is it a yoke and a burden:
and though our champions, be of more courage, and our foes more enfeebled,
since our redemption, yet does the Kingdom of heaven still suffer violence,
Ibidem.
and the violent bear it away, 2. Timot. ^.
and none shall be crowned, but they that have lawfullye fought for it. If
Christ was seen transfigured in Mount Thabor in glorious manner, he was also
at the same time, heard talkinge de excessu of his bitter passion. Luc 9.
And even he that allured with glory, cried bonum est nos hic esse. It is good
for us to be here affrighted with the voice. Cecidit in faciem suam and timuit
valde. fell upon his face, and was in a great fear: If he were in pomp and
triumph, at his entrance into Jerusalem, Matt. 21.
his pomp was of small pleasure, and his triumph not without tears: Luc. 19.
and as fast as the children on the one side, did set forth his praises, so
fast did the Pharisees on the other side, repyne and murmur against him. There
is no reason, that Christ should show him self more favorable to us, that
have been his enemies, then to his own body, neither can we iustlye
complain, if ere we find him, he give us a sipp of that bitter chalice, of
which for our sakes he was content to drink so full a draught. Yea we may
be hartelye glad, if after long tears, and deep syghes, we may in the end
find him at all, whether it be in the pouertye of the cribb and mau^ger, or in
the agonyes of his bloodye sweat in the gardeyne, or in the midst of
blasphemies, reproaches, and false accusations at the tribunals, or in the
torments of a shameful death upon the Cross. And we must think our selves,
as much in his favor, for being preferred to be tried testimonies of of his
passion, as for being called to witness of his glorious transfiguratio^. Of
which to ascertayne us the more, the same Apostles, that in token of particular
love, he took with him to mount Thabor, Mar. 9. et 14.
he afterward in argument of the like goodwill, ledd with him to the heavy
conflicte of the gardeyne. Whereby it appears sieve foueat infirmos, Bern.
Epist. 2
sieve exerceat proucctos, sieve arguat inquietos, diuersis diuersa exhibens,
sicut filios diligit vniuersos. Whether he foster the weaklings, or exercise
the stronger, or check the unruly, giuinge diverse remedies to diverse persons,
he tendereth all as his own children. For as it is pleasant and glorious unto
men, to have their children resemble them, and then they are most delighted to
have bred new ofspringe, when they see therein expressed, the feature of their
own favor: How much more comfort is it to our heavenly father (says S.
Ciprian) when any is so borne to spiritual life, Ciprian. D^ Zelo et liu^r^.
that his divine prowess and generositye is set forth in his childre^s acts,
and praises. Nether does this comfort consiste, to see in us a shadow of his
beautye, a spark of his wisdom, or a resembla^ce of his might, riches, or
glory: but rather in saying in us, the scares, we^mes and werttes of his
vexations and pains: which the more they deface us in outward show, the more
they beautifye us in soul, and the more vglye and odious they make us in the
mistakinge of man's eye, the more amiable they render us, in the sight of god.
For as the scarre of a wound in the childs face, which he has suffered in
his fathers quarrel, though it make his countenance less eyesome, and
disfigure his favor, yet is it a more edginge whetstone, of fatherlye
affection in the parent, then if it were absent, because it yeldeth, a
perpetual testimonye of a dutiful and louinge mind. So god more desirous to
have us affectionate, then fortunate children, delights more to see our
torturings, rackinges, cheynes and imprisonments, for his sake, which are
assura^ces of our love, then to see us swim in his temporal guiftes, and
pryseth more the Niniuire in his sackcloth, and disfigured Job in his dunghill,
then either of them in all the pomp and glory of their riches. For as S.
Gregorye notes: Greg. in moral.
Amissio felicitatis interrogat vim dilectionis. Nec prosperitas quippe amicum
indicat, nec aduersitas inimicum cela^. The loss of felicitye, sercheth the
force of affection: for neither prosperitye proves a friend, nor aduersitye
concealeth an enemy: Cipr. L. de mortal.
And as S. Ciprian also says: Delicata iactatio est, cum periculum non est,
conflictatio in aduersis, probatio est veritatis. It is an effeminat bost, when
there is no peril, the combat in adversity is a trial of the truth. If
therefore our god be more delighted with our valor in conflicte, then with our
pleasure in peace, let us say with S. Peter: Luc. 22.
Tecum pa^atus sum in Carceres and in mortem ire: With thee I am ready to go
into prison, and to death it self. And with S. Thomas: Io^. 11.
Eamus and nos, and moriamur cum illo. Let us go also, and dye together with
him. We read in the book of kings, 2. Reg. ^.
that Ioab and Abneis servants to show their Captains disporte, entered into
so fierce and desperate game, that blood and wounds was the beginning, and
mutual murder the end of their pastime. And if they at a words warninge, to
so open hazard, ventured them selves, for a vain contentme^t of their
Captains, and in hope of a sorye reward, nothing comparable to their peril,
how much more ought we, being challenged to the field, by gods enemies, give
our heavenly Captain a proof of our loyaltye, and perfitt remonstrance, of
our serviceable minds, by waginge in spiritual battle with his foes, and
most readilye encountering them, in his quarrel, with what danger soever. we
see, that an enamored knight has no greater felicitye, then to do that, which
may be acceptable to his paramour, and the fadinge beautye, of a fair Ladies
countenance, is able to work so forceiblye in men's minds, that neither loss
of riches, danger of endurance, menacinges of torments, no not present death,
is able to withholde where she inuiteth, or make the bark ride at anchor that
is wafted in her streams. Every peril undertaken for her, seems pleasante,
every reproach honorable, all drudgery delightsome, yea the very wounds that
come from her, or are suffered for her, are void of smarte, and more rejoiced
is the wounded wretch, with hope that his hurt will purchase favor, then
agreeued that his body has received such a mayme. The colors that like her
seem fairest, the meat that fitteth her taste sweetest, the fashion agreeable
to her fancy comlyest, her faults are virtues, her sayings oracles, her
deeds paterns. Finallye whatsoever pleases her, beit never so vnpleasante
seems good, and whatsoever comes from her beit never so dear bought and of
little value, is deemed precious and a cheap peniworth. O unspeakable
blyndnesse of man's heart, that so easilye trayneth to senses lure, and is so
soon caught with the bewtye of an Image, and has not grace to remember whom
it resembles. I will not stay upon Christ's corporal seemlynesse, though in
deed he were Candidus et rubicundus, Can. 5.
electus ex millibus, et speciosus forma prae filijs hominum. Ps. 44.
White and ruddie a choice piece out of thousands, comlye in feature, above all the sons of men, and in that respect more amiable then any other: but I set
before the eyes of our faith, the glory, majesty, and beautye of his Godhed,
wherein whatsoever is in any creature, that may breed delight or contentment
either to our sense, or soul, is so perfectly united together, that there is no
more comparison between the delight that his presence yeldeth, and that which
any worldly thing can afforde, the^ between the fairest damsel in the world,
and her shadow, between the light of a sparkle, and of the sun, yea between
a most vglye leaper, and a most beutuous Angel: Which Saint Augustine
consideringe said Deus vera et summa vita, August. in soliloq.
in quo, et a quo, and per quem, bona sunt omnia, quae beata sunt. Deus a quo
auerti cadere, in quem conuertiresurgere, in quo manner consistere est. Deusa
quo exire mori, in quem redire reuiuiscere, in quo habitare viuere est. Deus
quem nemo amittit, nisi deceptus, nemo quaerit, nisi admonitus, nemo inuenit,
nisi purgatus: God is the true and chiefest life, in whom, from whom, and by
whom, are all good things, whatsoever they be, that are happy to enjoy. From
whom the reuolting is fallinge, to whom the returning is risinge, in whom the
stayinge is sure standinge. God from whom to depart, is to dye, to whom to
repair, is to revive, in whom to dwell is to live. God whom none leeseth, but
deceived, none seeks but admonished, none finds but the cleansed. If
therefore god be so perfectlye amiable, and the chiefest object of pleasure, why
do we not say with David Quid mihi est in coelo, Ps. 72.
and a te quid volui super terram? What have I in heaven, or what desired I in
earth, besides thee. why do we not cry out with S. Augustine Quicquid praeter
deum est, Aug. in Ps. 26
dulce non est. Quicquid vult dare dominus meus, auferat totu^, et se mihi det.
Whatsoever is not god is not pleasant, and whatsoever my Lord will vouchsafe
upon me, let him take away all, and give me him self. Shall the presence of
his picture, wherein he is but very rudelye expressed, make us lauishe of our
wealth, careless of our liberty, and prodigal of our lives? And shall not
he, whom the picture represents, woe us to as much readiness in his
affairs? Can we to please his shadow, delighte in danger, embrace dishonor,
triumph in our harms: And care so little for him, that casts it as not to
think him more worthy of the like affection? Are we so eagre, licorous, and
pliable, to those colors, eats, and fashions, that a base creature of his
likes: and shall not the favors, food, and attire, of our creator, be as
acceptable unto us? Finallye shall we take no exception, against the faults,
words, and deeds, of a frail, and faultye wretch: and not be as much moved,
with the virtues, sayings, and examples of an infallible truth. What is the
fairest creature in the world, but an imperfecte counterfaite, and only a
vain shadow of gods sovereign beutye, and majesty. If therefore with the
natural peyse of affection, we sincke so deep into the liking thereof,
according to that of S. Augustine Amor meus pondus meum, Aug. L. 13. Confess.
illo feror quocu^que feror. My love is my load, with that am I carried,
whether soever I am carried: Much more ought we to be deeply ravished, with
the love of god, and so settle our minds therein, that we think it our
chiefest happiness in this life, to embrace all hazardes, disgraces, and
misfortunes in his quarrel, and then to have most cause of comfort, when for
his glory, we are in most bitter panges. For as S. Gregorye notes. Gregor.
Amor dei otiosus non est, operatur enim magna, si est, si operari renuerit,
amor non est. The love of god is not idle, it works great effects, where it
is, if it refuse to work, love it is not. And so much the more ought we to
rejoice in our passions for Christ, in that we have been so tenderlye beloved
of him, that whatsoever we suffer for him, it is less then he suffered for us.
And whatsoever we spend in his behalf we restore him but his own, and are
never able to come out of debte, though we had as many lives to spend, as
drops of blood to shedd. For as S. Bernard says. Bernar. de d^ ligendo De^.
Si totum me debeo pro me facto, quid addam iam pro me refecto. Nec enim tam
facile refectus, quam factus. In primo opere, me mihi dedit, in sccundo se, and
vbi se dedit, me mihi reddidit. Datus ergo and redditus, me pro me debeo, and
bis deb^o. Sed quid domino pro se retribuam. Nam etsi me millies rependere
posse^, quid sum ad dominu^ meum. If I owe my self wholye for my first
making, what can I add more for my redeeminge, espeaciallye saying I was not
so easily redeemed, as I was made. In the first work he gave me my self, in
the second him self, and when he gave me him self, he restored unto me my
self. Therefore thus given and restored, I owe my self for my self, and I owe
my self twice. But now what am I able to repaye my Lord sor him self. For
though I could repaye my self a thousand times, what am I in comparison of
my Lord. O hard and stonye heart, that is not incensed, at the consideration
of so inflamed love, and being woed of so louinge a spouse, can reiecte this
offer, or be slack in recognisinge so unspeakable charity. For as S.
Augustine says. Nulla mayor est ad amorem inuitatio, August de cathechiz.
rudib.
quam praeuenire amantem, and nimis durus est animus, qui si dilectionem
nolebat impendere, nolit rependere. There is no greater entisement unto love,
then to preuente the lover, and to hard is that heart, that if it would not
request love is not content at the least to requite it. And where was ever
any, that either sought so much, or bought so dear, the love of any creature,
as Christ did ours: What has a man more then riches, honor, and life, and all
this did Christ spend in woinge our souls. As for his riches, he was borne and
dyed naked, concerning his honor, he was sorted, and executed with thieves,
touching his life, he was bereued thereof, by a most vylde and dispytefull
death. Let us but consider, the last tragical pageant of his Passion, wherein
he wo^ne us, and lost him self. And mark the excessive love showed therein,
which if any other then god had uttered, it would have been at the least
deemed a senseless dotage, waying by whom, and to whom it was intended. Let
us view him with the eyes of our heart, and and we shall (says S. Bernard)
discover a most lamentable sight: Bernard. I^ quodam sermon.
we shall see his head full of thorns, his ears full of blasphemies, his
eyes full of tears, his mouth full of gall, his body full of wounds, his
heart full of sorrow, and yet in all these torments, does he cry to man,
Ibidem.
says the same Saint. Magis aggrauant me vulnera peccati tui, quam vulnera
corporis mei. More am I payned with the wounds of thy sin, then with the
wounds of my own body, more sorowinge at man's ingratitude, then at his own
affliction. Where the Prince (says Cassiodorus) in so great agonye morneth,
Cassiodor in psa. 50.
who would not weep, when he weepeth, and sighe when he lamenteth: When in
steed of his royal crown, he is covered with dust, and his head is hoarye
with ashes, not with age. O work without example, grace without merit,
charity without measure. What would he have done, if we had been his
friends, that was contented to do so much for us being his enemies? what
will he do, when he knows we love him? that did all this, when he knew we
did hate him. O Christian, says S. Augustine. August. de catechiz. rudib.
Ama amore^ illius, qui amore tui amoris, descendit in vteru^ Virginis, vt ibi
amorem suum amori tuo copularet. Love the love of him, that for the love of thy
love, descended into the womb of a Virgin, and afterward ascended to the
ignominy of the Cross, that there he might couple his love, and thy love
together. What Christian heart, can think much to suffer, being moved with
this example, yea who would not glory with S. Paul, in his infirmities, and
take greatest comfort in his desolations, seeing the most louinge and
faithful spouse of our soul, has thus sweetened all our pains, with the
excess of his unspeakable charity, and given us such a presidente in
suffering for us, as it must needs seem little, whatsoever we suffer for him:
Shall the love of a mortal friend, not only a move us, but enforce us, to love
him again, and his perils for us, make us eagre of perils for him, because
therbye both our love to him, is best witnessed, and his love to us most
confirmed, and shall not this love of an imortall welwiller, who tendereth us
more then we our selves, and in all respects better deserves to have his love
counteruayled, shall it not I say be able to inflame us, with desire to suffer
for him, and to testifye our affection with continuinge the same in the midst
of our torments if need so require. We see a dog that is void of reason, by
only instinct of nature, ready for having received a bone, or a crust of
bread, to run upon the sword, in his masters defense. We think it the
duty of our servant, if we give him but fortye shillings in the year, to
hazard him self in our perils, to fight in our quarrels, and we condemn him
as an ungrateful miscreant, if he stand not between us and our enemies, as a
buckler of our blows, though the danger be never so apparent. And shall a
christian heart, be either more unnatural then a beast, or less tha^kfull
the^ a hired servant? shall a crust of bread prevail more with a brute thing,
or a little money with a hyrelinge, then with us the food of Angels, wherewith
Christ has fedd us, then his precious blood, wherewith he has bought us, then
eternal felicity, wherewith he will reward us? Yea and shall men be so ready
to serve the devil, that we see thousands every day, careless to cast away
both body and soul, in followinge his train, and shall we to serve our
omnipotent, and loving Lord, refuse to venture our goods, or bodies, with so
inestimable benefitt, and vantage of our souls? Ciprian. L. de ^pere et
elce^os.
S. Ciprian says. When Christ in the day of Judgment shall show him self,
and lay open to the world, the benefits which he has bestowed, the rewards
which he has promised, the torments and pains which he has suffered for
man, then shall the devil on the other side, most greeuouslye charge us, and
say unto god: Lo how much more right I have in man the^ thou. I never loved
him, and yet he served me. I never did him good turn, and yet he obeyed me.
Without woing or wages I easily wo^ne him. What I suggested, he performed,
whatsoever I proffered, he embraced. No perils could stopp, when I allured, no
fear, or love of thee could move him, to abandon and forsake me For obteyning
a vain pleasure, he has yielded to most seruyle drudgerye, to please an
appetite, he has contemned all gods and man's punishments, and has been
ready to venture liberty, living, creditt, yea life and limme, for the
atchiuinge a delighte, that I cast in his fantasy. And yet did he undoubtedly
believe, that in steed of thy love, I bare him implacable malice, in steed of
thy sufferinge torments for him, I desired to be his eternal tormentour, and
whereas thou did promise eternal felicity, I could afforde him, nor wish
him, any thing, but endless damnation. Yet could not this (though foreseen
and thought of) withdraw him from me, but still he was ready to be drawn
with my lore, and so soon as I set him any service to do, he forthwith putt
it in execution. On the other side, what have thou prevailed with the miseries
of thy poor natiuitye, with the grie^e and shame of thy paynfull circuncision,
with thy three and thirtye years pilgrimage, bestowed in his service? Has thy
fasting, or prayinge, thy whippinge, or crowninge, thy bloodye death, or
passion, been able to counteruayle my suggestions? Has not for all this, my
motions been sooner obeyed then thy precepts, and my will preferred before thy
commandments? If therefore I have ruled him, reason it is that I should
reward him: And if with me he contemned thy mercy, with me also, let him
feel thy seueritye. In this manner shall the devil accuse us, and happy is
he, that in this life has so testified his love, by his patience, in gods
cause, and willing sufferance of aduersitye, that he may either prevent the
accusation, or be provided of a sufficient answer. Consideringe therefore how
glorious, how decent, yea and necessary it is for a Christian, to take up his
cross with Christ, and tread the path of tribulation, which he has playned
unto us, by his own example: let us not be dismayde with these cross
adventures, that befall us, let not the crueltye of our enemies, the
sharpness of our miseries, the continuance of our afflictions, daunt our
courage in gods cause. We are not better then our master, who suffered far
more, nor wiser then god him self who judged and embraced the distresses of
this world, as fittest for the passengers thereof. Finally we are Christians,
whose captain is a crucifixe, whose stendard the Cross, whose armoure
patience, whose battle persecution, whose victory death, whose triumph
martyrdom.

Cap. 4. Cap. 4

But though this example of Christ, The fourth comfort in tribulation is that
it best agrees with the place and condition of this lyf^
and the title of a Christian, were not so forcible motives, to suffer
aduersitye, as they be, yet consideringe where we are, what state we stand in,
the dangers that hang over us, and our ordinarye misses and wantes: we shall
find, that our whole life is so necessarilye joined with sorrows, that it
might rather seem a madness to live in pleasure, the^ odious to live in
pain. Consider O man, (says S. Bernard) from whence thou come, and blushe
whether thou go, and fear where thou live, and lamente. We are begotten
in uncleanness, nourished in darkness, brought forth with throbbs and
throws. Our infancye is but a dream, our youth but a madness, our manhood a
combat, our age a sickness, our life miserye, our death horror. If we have
any thing that, delights us, it is in so many hazardes, that more is the
fear of leasinge it, then the joy of the use of it. If we have any thing
that annoyeth us, the agreuance thereof increases, with the doubt of as evil
or worse that may strayte ensue after it. Which way can we cast our eyes, but
that we shall find cause of complaynt, and heaviness. If we look up toward
heaven, from thence we are banished: If we look tawards earth, we are there
imprisoned: On the right hand we have the saints, whose steps we have not
followed: On the left hand, the wicked, whose course we have pursued: Before us
we have our death ready to de^oure us: Behind us our wicked life ready to
accuse us: Above us gods justice ready to condemn us: Under us hell fire
ready to swallowe us, into end less and everlasting torments. And therefore
S. Damascen most fitlye compares us, Damascen. hist de Barlaam. (...) Iosaphat.
to a man, that pursued by an enraged Unicorn, while he was swiftlye fleeinge
from it, fell into a well, and in the fallinge, got hold by a little tree,
and settled his feet on a weak stay, and thus thought him self very secure.
But looking a little better about him, he espied two myse, one white, and an
other black, that continually lay gnawing a sunder the root of the tree,
which he held bye, underneath him a terrible Dragon, with open jaws ready to
devour him, at the stay of his feet, he found four adders, that issued out
of the wall, and after all this lifting up his eye, he espied upon one of the
bows of the tree, a little honye: He therefore unmindful of all his dangers,
not remembringe that above the Unicorn waited to spoil him, that beneath the
fierye Dragon watched to swallowe him, that the tree was quicklye to be gnawen
asunder, that the stay of his feet, was slipperye, and not to trust unto: Not
remembering I say all these perils, he only thought, how he might come by that
little honye. The Unicorn is death, the pit the world, the tree, the measure
and time of our life, and white and black myse the day and night, the stop
borne up by four adders, our body framed of four brittle and contrary
elements, the Dragon the Devil, the honye worldly pleasure. Who therefore
would not think it a madness in so many dangers, rather to be eagre of
vain delight, then fearful and sadd with consideration of so manifold
perils. O blindness of worldlinges, that love vanitye, and seek lies, Ps. 4.
that rejoice when they have done evil, Prou ^.
and triumph in the baddest things, that have no fear of god before them. A
nation without counsel or prudence. O that they would be wise understand and
provide, Deuter. 32.
for their last things, lest it fare with them as Job says: Job. 2.^
They hold the drum and citherne, and rejoice at the sound of the organe,
they pass their days in pleasure, and in a moment they descend into hell.
Far otherwise ought we to do, that fore see these inconveniences, and rather
with sorrowful hearts cry, Ps. 119.
Hei mihi, quia incolatus meus prolongatus est. Woe unto me that my inhabitance
is prolo^ged. For upon the fluddes of Babylon, Ps. 1.^^
what cause have we, but layinge a side our mirth and music, to sit and
weep, remembringe our absence, out of our heavenly Sion: In the vassalage and
seruilitye of Egypt, where we are so daily oppressed with vncessante
afflictions, and filthy works, Luti et lateris of claye and brick, that is of
flesh and blood, what can we do, but with the Israelites ingemiscentes
propter opera vociferari, Exo. 1^
lamentinge our intolerable drudgery, cry out unto God. Who consideringe him
self a wandering stranger in this far, and foreyne country, and a drudge in
the mierye farm, of this world, enforced to feed the swyne of his earthlye
appetites and senses, and driven to so extreme exigents, as not to be suffered
implore ventrem, Luc. 15.
de siliquis, quas porci manducabant. To fill his bellye of the husks, that
the swyne did eat: Who I say considering this, would not with the prodigal
son, bitterlye morn, remembringe the abundance and plentye of his fathers
house, whereof he is depryued, and the most wretched plyghte, into which
through sin he is fallen. Ps. 62.
We are here in a deserte pathlesse, and waterlesse soil, in an obscure land,
covered with the fogge, Job. 10.
and shadow of death. We are here in a place of exile, in an hospital of
lazars, in a channel of ordure, in a dungeon of misery, in a sepulcher of dead
carcases, finallye in a vale of tears. And who could in such a place, live
without sorrow, and who would not say with the wise man. E^cles. ^.
Risum reputaui errorem, and gaudio dixi, quid frustra deciperis. I accounted
laughture error, and to joy I said, why art thou in vain deceived.
Proverb. 14.
For laughing shall be mingled with sorrow, and the endinge of our mirth, shall be
prevented with morninge. Happy is he that sits solitarye, and in the
peruse, of these miseries, lifts up himself, above him self, Thr^n. 3.
happy is he that carries the yoke, from his very youth, blessed are they,
that morn and understand, how much better it is to go to the house of
lamentatio^, E^cles. 7.
then of a bancker? What comfort, can a man reap, in a place that is
governed, by the prince of darcknesse, peopled with gods and our enemies, where
vice is advanced, virtue scorned, the badd rewarded, and the good oppressed?
What quiet or contentment of mind, can be enjoyed, where the pains be
infinite, common, and intolerable, the pleasures few, rare, and damnable,
where frindshipp breeds danger to the soul, enmitye vexation to the body,
where want is miserable, plentye full of peril, and a man on every side
assaulted, with unplacable adversaries. Bernard. C^^ 15. medita.
My flesh (says S. Bernard) is of earth, and therefore ministers earthlye,
and voluptuous: the world vain, and curious: the devil evil, and malicious,
thoughts: These three enemies, assail, and persecute me somtymes openly,
sometimes couertlye, but always malitiouslye. The devil trusts much upon the
help of the flesh, because a household enemy is apter to hurt. The flesh,
also has entered league with him, and conspired to my subversion, being
borne, and nourished in sin, defiled from her beginnynge, but much more
corrupted by evil custom. Hereuppon it is, that so egrelye she coueteth
against the spirit, that so daily she murmureth, impatiente of disciplyne,
that she suggesteth wickedness, disobeyeth reason, and is not rastrayned with
fear. The crooked serpente enemy of mankind, to her joins his force, her
he helps, her he uses, and he has no other desire, no other business, no
other study, but to cast away our souls. This is he that always endeuoreth
mischief, that speaks sub^ellye, prompteth cunninglye, and deceyueth
guylfullye. He insinuates evil motions, he inflameth venomous cogitations, he
stirs broils, he fostereth hatredes, he moves to glotonye, he procures
lust, he incenseth the desires of the flesh. He prepares occasions of sin,
and cease not with a thousand hurtful traynes, to assaye men's hearts. He
beats us with our own sta^fe, he byndeth us with our own gyrdle, labowring
that our flesh, which was given us as a help, might be rather cause of our
fall and ruin. A grievous combat, and great danger it is, to wrestle against
our domestical foe, especially we being strangers, and she a cityzen. For
she dwells here in her own country, whereas we are but pilgrims and exiled
persons. Great is also the hazard in susteyninge the often and continual
incou^ters, against the devils deceiptfull guyle, whom not only his subtle
nature, but also the long practice, and exercise of his malice, has made
crafty. By which words of S. Bernard, we may understand, how little cause we
have, to joy in this life, in which we have to struggle howerlye, with so
mighty, perverse, and malicious enemies, who can never be so overcome, or so
thoroughlye vanquished, but that after a little respitt, they turn to bydd us
new battle: And that with such varietye, and change of forcible
temptations, that they putt us in continual danger and anguishe of mind.
This does S. Ciprian well express. Ciprian. li. (...) mort.
Obsessa men's hominis, and vndique Diaboli infestatione vallata, vix occurrit
singulis, vix resistit. Si auaritia prosstrata sit, exurgit libido, Si libido
compressa, succedit ambitio, si ambitio contempta est, ira exasperat, inflat
superbia, vinolentia inuitat, Inuidia concordiam rumpit, Amicitiam Zelus
abscindit; cogeris maledicere, quod diuina lex prohibet, compelleris iurare
quod non licet. Tot persecutiones animus quo tidie patitur, tot periculis
pectus vrgetur, et delectat hic, inter Diaboli gladios diu stare? Man's mind
beseeged on every side, environed with the vexation of the devil, is scarce
able to prevent all temptations, yea scarce to resist them. If couetyse be
subdued, vpriseth lust, if lust be suppressed, there succeeds ambition, if
ambition be contemned, anger incenseth, pride puffs up, drunke^nes inuiteth,
Envy breaks peace, Ielosie sundereth frindshipp. Thou shall be constrained
to speak, that gods precepte forbyddeth, to swear that, which is unlawful.
So many persecutions daily does our mind suffer, with so many perils is our
breast assaulted, and can it delighte us to make long abode amongst these
swords of the devil? Moreover if we consider our body what it is, how britle,
how frail, how subject to corruption, how full of horrible diseases, stuffed
with loathsome excrementes, miserable in life, and abominable after death: how
can we take pleasure in a fountain of so much pain, or not find a
tediousnes, to serve, and of necessitye to feed, so noisome a thing. But of
all other miseryes, that deserve to be lamented, there is one that passes all the rest, and is of it self, though there were none but it, able to cross all
possible comfortes, and to make him that seems meriest, to spend day and
night in weepinge, and complaynte. We have but one poor and sillye soul, our
only treasure and Jewel, in whose custodye consists our welfare, with whose
loss ensues all our discomforte. A soul of noble substance, of exceedinge
beautye, inspired by God the Father, redeemed by the son, sanctified by the
holy Ghost, and endewed with the Image of the whole Trinitye. A soul created
to live with Angels, to enjoy the love and company of an eternal spouse, to
be a citizen of heaven, to enherite a kingdom, and triumph in royal
dignity. This soul I say, is not only exiled from her native cou^trye, like
a caytiue, fettered in a most filthye dungeon, like a forlorn and left widow
deprived of her spouses felowshipp, and in most lamentable sort debarred from
her kingdom: but is so perilouslye besett, with the fore-resited enemies, that
it stands in continual hazard, to increase her present miserye, with an
eternal loss, and in liew of all her honors, endowmentes, and dignityes,
that she was created unto, to reap everlasting horror, and punishment. O
fearful and uncomfortable case, of which there is no cure. O hard and heavy
danger, that receives no security, whose easiest and only remedy, is the
seueringe of soul and body asunder. Thryse happy are the Martirs, whose
bloodye agonyes, purchase assurance of happiness, and acquit them from all
peril of ensewing torments. And thryse unhappy is our estate, whose hope of
felicitye hangs, on so tickle and slipperye terms: For as S. Augustine
says Lubrica spes qua inter fomenta peccati saluari se sperat, Aug. lib. de
singula. clericor.
Incerta victoria est, inter hostilia arma pugnare: et impossibilis liberatio
est, flammis circundari, et non arderi. It is a slipperye hope, that amonestg
so many nourishmentes of sin, looks to be saved: uncertain is the
victory, when it is fought for amongst the enemies weapons, and impossible (in
a manner) is the delivery from burning, where we are compassed in with flames.
And as S. Bernard well notes, Bernar. in s^rm.
so long as in any creature there is power to sin, it is securee in no place,
Nec in coelo, nec in paradyso, multo minus in mundo. In coelo enim cecidit
Angelus, sub praesentia diuinitatis. In paradyso Adam de loco voluptatis. In
mundo Judas, de schola Saluatoris. Neither in heaven nor in paradyse, much
less in the world, for in heaven fell the Angel, even in Gods presence, in
paradyse fell Adam from the place of pleasure, in the world fell Judas from
the schole of our Savior. Neither is it certain in any, that, qui fieri
potuit ex deteriori melior, Aug. in (...).
non fiat etiam ex meliore deterior. as Saint. Augustine notes, that he which
of worse could become better, may not also of better become worse. For if S.
Paul said Nihil mihi conscius sum, 1. Cor. 4.
sed in hoc non sum iustificatus: My conscience accuses me of nothing and yet
in this am I not justified. If Job said I feared all my works, Job. ca. ^.
and though I be washed with the waters of snow, and my hands shine as though
they were most pure, yett will thou find me stained with uncleanness. If David
cried Enter not into iudgmente with thy servant, Ps. 141.
for not any living creature shall be justified in thy sight. And the wise man.
Eccl. 9.
No man knows whether he be worthy of love or hatred, Prouer. 2^^
and who can say clean is my heart, and pure I am from sin. If these men I
say stood in such fear of them selves, Philip. 2.
how much more ought we In tremblnge and fear to work our salvation and not
to be without fear even of our released sin. Eccl. 5.
But rather labor in our sorrow, and wash our bed with tears, Ps. 6.
and make them our bread, day and night, so long as it is daily said unto
us, Ps. 41.
where is your god, Ps 123.
and till such time as our soul is delivered like a sparrowe out of the
foulers snares. We read that the strumpet which came for judgment to Solomon,
1. Reg. 3.
when she hard him call for a sword, and command, that her little child
should be parted into two pieces, she presentlye fell into so vehement a
passion of sorrow, that Commota sunt viscera eius super filio, her bowels were
moved for pitye of her son. We read that Agar being driven out of Abraham's
house, Genesis 21.
and enforced to wander in the wilderness, with her ^ender sucklinge, seeinge
the infant for want of water ready to dye, and not fiyndinge wherwithall to
refresh it, nor having the heart to see her li^le innocent give up the ghost:
she withdrew her self a far of from it, and with pitiful moan and
lamentation lyfted up her voice to heaven, feedinge her pensive and timorous
thoughts, with the dolfull remembrance, and continual fear of her childs
departure. We see what cold and trembling agonyes, surpryse the poor wretch,
that pleads at the bar, while the Iurye deliberateth upon his final
sentence. We see how doubtfully the sick patient hangs in suspense, between
hope and fear, while the phisicians are in consultatio^, whether his disease
be mortal. Finallye if a young spouse tenderlye affected, and deeplye
enamoured upon her new husband, see him assaulted by fierce and cruel
enemies, or enforced to wage in a whote and dangerous battle, what a
multitude of frightfull passions oppress her, how variablye is she tossed up
and down, with cross and fearful surmises. Of every gunne that is
discharged, she fears that the pellett has hitt his body, ere the noise
came to her ears, at every word that is reported of any that are slain,
fear makes her doubt that her best-beloued is one. Every rumor costeth her
a tear, every suspicion a pange, and till she see the battle ended, and her
husband safely returned, she hangs between life and death, drawing every
thing to sorrowful constructions, and utterly refusing all kind of comfort. O
how hard and tough hearted are we, toward our own souls, that seeinge them
in all the rehearsed dangers, feel not in our selves, any motion of the like
affections. The sword of gods justice hangs over our souls, ready for our
sins to diuyde us from eternal bliss, and uncertain it is, whether he will
give not only a part, but the whole to the foul fiend, that has so often
through our iniquityes, stolen us from our mothers side, into his envious
hands, and shall not we be moved with pitye and grief. We are from paradyse
exiled with Agar, into this barren deserte, and can not certaynelye assure our
selves, that we have so much as one dropp of grace to slake and mitigate the
thirsting passions, which without it undoubtedly work the death of our
souls, and our final damnation. And can we seeinge not our child, but the
chief portion of our selves, in such a taking, with dry eyes and unnatural
hearts behold it, without sorrow? Are not we to stand at the bar in the
day of Judgment, where the devils, our consciences, and all creatures shall
give most strayte information against us? The twelve Apostles as our quest, and
Christ as our Judge, whom we have daily offended, shall pass their verdicte
in most rigorous sort upon us, and that about our eternal death, and
salvation: And can we until we here, what will become of us, do otherwise but
live in continual fear and perplexitye? Is not our soul in this body, as a
Lazar in deathbed, uncertain of life so long as it couched therein, yea in
apparent danger of an endless death, and shall not we till we hear the
judgment of our heavenly phisician, who can quicklye search, and only can
enter into our diseases, tremble, quake and fear a hard resolution? Finallye
is not our most beutiful and noble portion, of which the body has all the
seemlinesse, without which it strayte becomes vglye, and monstrous: Is it not
I say in the thronge and press of most powrable, subtle, and barbarous
enemies, having continual war, not only against flesh and blood, Ephesi.
6.
but also against the princes and powers, against the rulers of the world of
this darcknesse. Is it not also set the in reach of many occasions,
allurementes, and prouocations unto sin. And can we seeinge this do any
thing, but morn and live in continual anguish and pensiveness, until we see
the battle ended, and our soul safely delivered out of danger. O senseless
and benumbed hearts of ours, that at the consideration of so heavy and
lamentable points, can not find scope and field of sorrow. Let us at the
lest be sorye for our want of sorrow, and bewail our scarcitye of tears, lest
we fall into a careless securitye, and by not sorowing as we should, leave
considering for how great causes we ought. For as S. Gregorye notes. Greg. L.
8. mor
Saepe quod torpentes latuit, fletibus innotescit, and afflicta men's certius
inuenit malum, quod fecerat, et reatum suum cuius secura non meminit, hunc in
se co^mota depraehendit. Oftentimes that which we know not through our sloth,
we learn by tears, and an afflicted mind more certainly finds a committed
fault, and the guilt which in security it remembered not, being troubled it
espyeth. And seeing that on every side we have such urgent occasions to morn
and pass the days of this our paynfull pilgrimage in grief and heaviness,
we must rather content our selves in tribulation, then in repose, seeinge by
the first we are but invited to weeping and sorrow, which is the thing that we
should profess, and by the last to comfort and solace, which with reason the
eminent dangers and straytes that we stand in, will not comporte. Which both
of Christ and his saints has been so well understood, that Christ, though it
had been as easy for him, to have been borne an Emperor, and have had all the
pleasures that heaven and earth could yield, yet would he not in the vale of
tears, give so preposterous an example, of mirth. But as one that knew whether
he came, he entered into the world weepinge, and in time of his aboade with
us, lived like an outwayle, and morner, and in his death, took his leave with
tears and torments. What his Saints have done, let all antiquitye testify,
how like men that had no feelinge of worldly comfort, they roued in deserts,
lodged in desolate holtes, and caves, were clothed with hear and sackcloth,
fedd very little and groslye, chastised their bodies often and seuerelye:
endeuouringe to keep them selves always in remembrance, that they were
mourners: And therefore choosinge place, habyte, diet, and exercise, fittest for
that dolfull profession. The Saints knew, that heaven only was Terra
viuentium, Psalm. 14.
a land of the living, and that in this world we sit, In tenebris, Luc. 1.
et in vmbra mortis, in darkness, and the shadow of death, and therefore they
wyselye judged, that musica in luctu importuna, Eccles. 22
vnfittinge it is to have myrthe, and music, in time of sorrow. They saw (no
doubt) the tree of this life, laden with some alluringe and delicious fruits:
but consideringe that it grew in such a place, as the clyminge unto it, employed
manifest danger of falling into the bottomless pit of hell, they left it as
a pray for the raueninge foul of this world, contenting them selves with the
bitter fruits of aduersitye. They knew that only in the arrival to heaven,
Psalm. 123
In exultatione metent portantes manipulos suos, They shall reap in joy
bearing their handfuls, and therefore here all the way, Euntes ibant etflebant
mittentes semina sua, they went weepinge sowinge their seeds in sorrow. They
knew that who will keep the feast in heaven, must first keep the vigill and
the fast here. For otherwise he that will feast it here in ioconsye and
disporte, after this life, ad sepulchra ducetur et in congerie mortuorum
vigilabit. Job. ^^
He shall be led to the graves, and in the heap of the dead shall keep a
perpetual vigill in hell. Basil. in Gordian. Marti^^
They observed that as S. Basil says, the huge and noble cities furnished
with glory of munition, with aucthoritye of great personages, and all plenty
both at home and abroad, at the length show in the only ruins the signs of
their ancient nobilitye: The shipp also that has often escaped many
shipwrackes, and a thousand times crossed the seas with great advantage of the
shipme^, in the end iustled with a blast, is shattered in pieces. Mighty
armies that have often conquered in war, have afterward been made a miserable
and bloodye spectacle to their enemies. All nations and Islands enhaunced to
great power and swaye, have decayed in time, or changed their liberty, with
bondage. Finallye what havoc, loss, ruin, or miserye can be reckened,
whereof this wretched world has not showed some example? yea and that in the
life of the godly. All things therefore bendinge here to decay, and being
taynted with deaths consu^ption. The Saints in mourninge sort, agreablye to
dyinge and passing persons, lived in a continual farewell, as men that all
ways stood upon the departure from these earthlye solaces: little regardinge
the things, that they were to leave, and having their hearts settled upon the
felicity, that they tended unto. And as men, that at noone day, desire to see
the stars, go down into a deep and dark well, from thence the easier to
discrye them: so they desyring to have the eyes of their heart, perpetuallye
fixed upon the stars of heaven, that is the glory of the Saints, descended
in to that profounde, obscure, and base kind of life, sequestring them selves
from the light and pleasure of these inferior comfortes, yea and delyghtinge in
griefs, the better to conceive of future happynes. Job. 17.
Consider how low Job went when he cried. Putredini dixi pater meus es, matter
mea and soror mea vermibus. I said unto corruption, thou art my father, and to
the worms, you ar my mother and sister. Consider how low S. Paul went, 1 Cor.
4
when he said, Esurimus et sitimus, and nudi sumus, and colaphis cedimur,
tanquam purgame^ta huius mundi facti sumus omnium peripsema vsque ad huc. We
are hungrye, we thyrst, and we are naked, and beaten with buffets: yea and that
which is more, we are made the refuse of this world, and dross of all even
until now. How far went David when he said, Psalm. 21
Ego sum vermis and non homo, opprobrium hominum and abiectio plebis. I am a
worm and no man, the stale of men, and the castawaye of the people. They were
not ignorant, that every valley shall be filled, Luc. ^
and every mountain and hill humbled. They knew that the waters of grace
springing into life everlasting, Joan ^
rest not on the high and steep hills, Joan. 4.
but in the bottomes and low valleys, according to that. Qui emittit fontes
in conuallibus, inter medium montium pertransibunt aquae. Psalm. 103
Who lets out his fountains in the valleys, and his waters shall pass in
the midst between hills. They well understood, how convenient a thing it
is, and conformable to the state of this life, recumbere in nouissimo loco,
Luc. 14
to sit down in the last place as Christ counsayled. For as S. Augustine
says. August. super Joan.
Excelsa est patria, humilis via: ergo qui quaerit patriam, quid recusat viam?
Aloft is our country, but low is our way, who therefore seeks the cou^trye,
why shuneth he the way? O how much are the worldlinges deceived that walk,
in magnis and mirabilibus super se in great things and in marueyles above
them selves, Psalm. 130
that rejoice in the time of weepinge, and make their place of imprisonment, a
palace of pleasure, that think these examples of Saints follyes, and their
ends dishonorable, that think to go to heaven by the wide way, that only
leads to perdition. August. in psa 138
Well may we to these say with S. Augustine. Quo itis? peritis and nescitis,
non illac itur quo pergitis, quo peruenire desideratis. Nam vtique beati esse
desideratis: Sed misera sunt, and ad maiorem miseriam ducunt, itinera ista quae
curritis. Tam magnum bonum querere per mala nolite, si ad illud peruenire
velitis huc venite hac ite. Whether go you, you perish and you perceive it
not, that is not the way to the place you go unto, and to which you desire to
arryue: for your meaning is to be happy, but miserable are they, and to more
miserye lead they, those iorneyes which you run: seek not so great a good
by evil. If you mean to atchiue it, hither must you come, and this way must
you go. The path to heaven is narrow, rough, and full of weerisome and
tyeringe ascents, neither can it be trodden without great toil. And therefore
wrong is their way, gross their error, and assured their ruin, that after
the steps and testimonies of so many thousand Saints, will not learn
whereto settle their footinge. It were enough to have the example of Christ
only, who as S. Augustine notes cries always unto us. August.
Qua vis ire, ego sum via. Quo vis ire ego sum veritas. Vbi vis permanere, ego
sum vita. Which way will thou go, I am the way. Whether will thou go, I am
the truth. Where will thou stay, I am the life. And if this way lead us
through austere, and paynfull passages, if this truth teach us the trace of
humilitye, if this life be not atchiued without a doleful and dyinge
pilgrimage. Luc. 6
Then Vae vobis qui ridetis quia flebitis: and beati qui lugent quoniam ipsi
consolabuntur. Matt. 5
Woe be unto you, that laugh, for you shall weep, and happy are they that
morn, for they shall be comforted. For as S. Gregorye says. Greg. in mor.
Qui honoratur in via, in peruentione damnabitur: and quasi per amoena prata ad
carcerem peruenit, qui per praesentis vitae prospera ad interitum tendit. He
that is honored in his journey, shall be condemned at his iorneyes end: and he
comes as it were by pleasant meadows to his prison, that by the prosperitye
of this world runs to his ruin. For in truth the contentments of this
life, have true miserye, feigned felicitye, assured sorrow, doubtful delights,
rough storms, timorous rest, solace full of sadness, and hope full, of
hazard. They are like fair wether in winter, nothing durable, like a calm in
the sea, always uncertain. Like the stedines of the moon, that is over in
chaunginge. They resemble the Co^^^rices egg fair without and foul within:
Nabuchodonozors image, that had the face and head of gold, but earthen and
brittle feet, or the sweet river, that runs into the salt sea. Sordes
eius in pedibus eius and nouissima eius amara quasi ab sinthium. Thr^^. ^
Pro^er. 5.
Her filth is in her feet, and the last of her pleasures are as bitter
wormewoode. Seeing therefore, that all our troubles, penaltyes, restrayntes and
afflictions, be but means to remember us of our place, state, dangers, and
profession, and but seeds of comfort, and eternal glory, howsoever they
seem here covered and corrupted in earth. Let us solace our selves in hope of
our joyful harvest. We are but pilgrims, and have no city of aboade, Heb. 13
but seek a future place of rest. If the way had been besett with pleasures,
with true delyghtes, with vnfadinge and odoriferous flowers, we should have
easilye been slacked in our journey toward heaven, being drawn, and
with-helde, with the pleasant view and desire of these allurementes. And
therefore god has made our throughfare tedious, uncomfortable, and distresfull,
that we hasten toward our repose, and swyftly ru^ne over the cares of this
life: imitatinge the dogs of Aegipt, that of the river Nilus drink
runninge, lest if they stayed to take their full draughte at once, they should
be espied, and stunge by venomous serpents. Whereupon S. Peter warns us, 1.
Pet. 2
Tanquam aduenas, and peregrines abstinerenos a carnalibus desiderijs, quae
militant aduersus animam. Like strangers and pilgrimmes, to absteyne from
fleshlye desires, which fight against the spirit, remembering, that this world
is a deluge of miseries, and heaven only our arc of securitye, out of which
though the unclean crow, can upon carren and dead carcases find footing,
and little care to return: yet the clean and chaste dove, abhorring such a
loathsome abode, without this arc can not find any rest: but with the wings
of penitent heart, and longing desire, flickereth still at the wyndowe, until
it please our Noe to put out his merciful hand, and receive it into the Arc
of his heavenly felicitye.

Cap. 5. Cap. 5.

But suppose that the pleasures of this world, The fifte comfort in tribulation
is that our punishments are but easy in comparison of our deserts.
and place or state of our life, were such, that they rather invited us to
comfort and joy, then to sorrow and patient sufferance: yet if we consider,
what our life has been, what our sins are, what punishments thereby we have
deserved, we shall think god to deal most myldlye with us, and be most
joyful of our troubles, which be allotted us, in liew of most intolerable
chastisementes. What has our whole life been, but a continual defiance and
battle with God. Our senses so many swords to fight against him, our words
blows, and our works wounds. What have our eyes and ears ben, but open
gates, for the devil to send in loades of sin into our mind. What has our
sent, taste, and feelinge ben, but tinder and fuel, to feed and norishe the
fire of our concupiscence. Our body, that ought to have been a temple of the
holy ghost, a chaste and clean harbor of an unspotted soul, a bed of honor,
and a gardeyn of delyght, for him that said delitiae meae esse cum filijs
hominum. Prouer. ^.
My delyghte is to be with the children of men. What has it ben, but a haunt
of devils, a stews of an aduoultresse, and a filthye sepulcher of a corrupted
soul, as full of carrein, and venom, as any poysened carcas. What has it
ben, but a forge of Satan, wherein the fire of our passions, kindled with his
wicked instinctes, he has enflamed our soul, and made it so pliable to his
purposes, that upon the Anduyle of every pleasure, and sensual delighte, he
has wrought it to most vglye and detestable shapes. And as for the soul that
was betrothed and espoused to Christ in baptism, that was beutified with
grace, fedd with the repast of Angels, and a treasurye for all gods riches:
that was a receyte of the blessed Trinity, and ordained to the felowshipp of
Angels in eternal bliss. What has it ben, but a most ryetous, disloyal, and
ungrateful losell. Our understanding has been like a most lewd Priuado, to
prsent unto the will incentyues, and instruments of sin. Our will a most lewd
and common curtesan, coveting and lusting after every offer, that she aliked.
Our memory a register and record, of wicked and abominable sightes, sayings,
and deeds, for our sinful thoughts, and phansies to feed upon. Finallye
what parcel of our body, what power of our soul, whereof god has given us
the use, have we not abused to his dishonor: warring against him with his own
weapons, and employing our life, motion, and being, to the continual
incensynge of him, Act. 17.
In quo viuimus, mouemur and sumus. In whom we live, we move, and we are.
Seeing therefore we have not only been sinful, but even a lump, and mass of
sin, what think you was due unto us, if god had dealte with, us according to
his justice. Which the better to consider, let us call to mind, how odious a
thing unto God sin is, and then may we the better perceive, how mercifullye
we are dealt withal, to have our heinous faults rather chastised here, then
in hell: and how worthy we may think our selves, of all our heavy scourges.
Of God it is said, Sap. 10.
that nihil odisti eorum, quae fecisti. Thou have hated nothing of all that,
which thou have made. Only that nothing of which, as S. Augustine expounds
it the Gospel speaks sine ipso factum est nihil without him was made nothing
that is sin, I^^. 1.
this nothing I say, is the cause, that to some things he bears an
unplacable hatred. The devil in his nature is more amiable the^ man, being of
nobler substance, of higher excellencye, and endewed with higher prerogatives,
then we. Yett who knows not, how much God does hate him. We know what
tender affection God has always showed to mankind, for whose sake he has
made this world, and enriched and garnished it with so glorious ornaments,
besides other infinite tokens of a most tender love, howerlye showed unto us.
And yett it is said. Psalm. 5
Odisti omnes operantes iniquitatem. Thou have hated all, that work iniquitye.
And in the book of wisdom. Odio est deo impius, Sap. 14.
and impietas eius. Hateful is to God the impious, and his impiety. If
therefore both the wicked man, and the devil him self, is so deepelye of God
detested, and for no other cause but only for sin? How abominable must we
think that sin is. When we will make a comparison of a thing that is evil,
in the highest degree, we can find nothing to lyken it unto, worse then the
devil: And when we have named him, we think to have reckened the last, and
greatest evil, that can be imagined. For the which cause, Tertuli. de patient.
and alibi.
of Tertullian and the ancient fathers, he was called Malum the evil it
self: As who would say, that no other name was sufficient to express his
noughtinesse. And as badd, Tertuin Apolog^^.
odious, and detestable as he is, more odious and detestable is sin, which is
the only cause of his odiousness, of which if he were ridd, he were a more
glorious and louelye creature, then any mortal man. Saying therefore this most
monstrous and abominable sin was as well in us, as in the devil, we may
rather think our selves happy, that we are not chastised as he is, then
marueyle that we are afflicted as now we be; espeacially consideringe, that
which S. Ans^lme well notes, Ansel. ^. d^ casu. diab.
that sin in us, is more punishable, then in the devil him self. For his
sin was but one: ours infinite. His before the revenge of sin was known,
ours after notice, and experience thereof. He sinned created in inocency, we
restored to the same. He persisted in malice being of God rejected: but we
being of God recalled. He was harden^d against one, that punished him: we
against one, that allured, and tendered us. He against one, that sought not
him: we against one that dyed for us. And lo thus (says this Saint) I find
in my self a more horrible horror, then in him, whose very image I abhorred.
Moreover as it is a strange and most dreadful darkness, that no light can
illuminate; and an extreme cold, that no heat can rebate; So must it be a
most odious thing, that an infinite love hates, and the baddest thing that
can be that an infinite goodness detesteth, and a most vyld and execrable
thing that omnipotencye can not do. For if there were in it any spark or
iott of goodness, God could not otherwise do, but in some respect love it,
approve it, and be aucthor of it. And sith we so long have suffered this vglye
and filthye deformitye, to stick and fester in us, and consequently have been
most abominable, and loathsome in Gods eye, what rubbing, what rough intreatye,
or hard usage can we think to much, to scour out so canckred a corruption.
For as S. Bernard says. Bern. in quod. Sermon.
Qui perfect senserit onus peccati, aut parum sentiet, aut ex toto non sentiet
corporis paenam, nec magnum reputabit, quo pcecata nouerit deleri praeterita,
and caueri futura. He that perfectlye feels the burden of sin, and the
hurt of the soul, either shall little, or nothing at all, feel the punishment
of his body, nor esteem it much, whereby he knows his former offenses to be
canceled, and his future sins to be prevented. But because the consideration
of that, which our sins have deserved, is a most forcible motive, to digest
with patience what miserye soever, though otherwise very tedious: Let us call
unto mind, how God might justly have delte with us, what he might have laid
upon us, and yett not only not exceeded, the bond of his justice, but have
still showed himself of infinite mercy. It is a general Axiom, and an
approved veritye, ratified by the common consent of all fathers, and divines,
that as God rewards above the deserts of our merits, and in his eternal
recompense far exceeds the value of our good works, so on the other side,
does he chastise far underneath the rate of our mysdeedes, and his infinite
justice considered, his greatest punishment amounts not, to the exceeding
heynousnesse of the lest mortal sin. For the iniurye offered to so infinite
a majesty of one so far inferior, and so highlye beholding unto him, in so
opprobrious and despytefull wise, that as much as in the sinner lies, he quite
defeateth God of his godhead, and yeldeth it to that wherein he sins: This
iniurye (I say) is so great, that though God should double and treble all
punishments of sin, and lay the^ on one sinners back, for one on lie mortal
offense, yett might he justly double them of new, and as often as he thought
good, without doing any iniurye to the offender; yea and punishing him far
less, then his desert were. Let us now therefore consider, what rigorous
punishments God has used, in revenging him self upon sinners. First if we
mark what temporal miseryes common to all men, God has caused in the world,
for one only sin of Adam; They will seem so many, as might suffice yea and
exceed the just measure of the desert of that sin. For if man had perseuered
in the state of innocencye, nether should our bodies have been subject to any
diseases, nor the mind to any sorrow or disordred passions. The earth should
have been a place of pleasure, the air temperate, all creatures to man
obedient, finallye all things to our contentment, and nothing to our
annoyance. If therefore we consider now the miseryes of our bodies, as hunger,
thirst, nakedness, deformitye, sickness, and mortallitye; the troubles of
our mind, as phansies, fears, perplexityes, anguishes, and diverse
imperfections: likewise the general scourges of plagues, war, a thousand
hazardes and calamityes,: Finally all other incombrances, that in any respect
ar incident into this life, they are so many in number, so grievous in
qualitye, and so ordinary in experience to all, that who so well wayeth them,
might think them sufficient scourges, not only of one, but of all the sins
of mankind. Do but cast your eyes into one hospital of lazars. See what
cankers, fistuloes, ulcers, and rottings, what wolfes, sores, and festered
carbucles. Wey the miseries of the phrensye, palsy, letargy, falling
sickness, and lunasye. Consider the diseased of the eyes, ears, mouth,
throat, and every parcel of man's body. On the other side consider the
infirmityes of the mind, the furious rages, enuyes, rancours, and corrasiues,
the unplacable sorrows, and desperate passions, the continual hell, torments,
and remorse of conscience, and infinite other spritishe fittes, and agonyes.
Consider the displeasure of superiors, the malice and enmitye of our equalles,
the contempt, ignominy, and reproach, we receive of our inferiors, the fraud
and trecherye of all sorts and degrees. Go forward to the other ordinarye
molestations, by loss of goods, lymmes, liberty, frindes, wife, or children.
By dangers of fire, water, sword, beasts, and infinite of like qualitye. And
remembering that all these things, and the defeating of the commodityes and
pleasures contrary to the same, befell unto man by reason of one, and that in
show but a light sin; Let us not think much if we, whose offenses are most
grievous, and very many, suffer a few of these scourges, and those such, as
compared with diverse other before recyted, have in respect of them, scarce any
color or shadow of miserye. What sin have we committed, that may not be
deemed as exorbitant as the eating of an aple: and how many have we done, that
seem far more detestable? why then should we not, either look for the whole
heap of afflictions to light upon us, or at the lest, the most noisome and
grievous that are amongst them: which God of his mercy, not having permitted,
but laid a soft and easy hand upon us, more cause we have of thanks
giuinge, then of any just complaynte. But to pass to other particular
scourges, that God has sent in this life, for the diverse sins and offenses
of men, we shall find them so many, so terrible, and so intolerable, as the
very imagination of them without the experience, were able to affryght a right
courageous, and stout heart. In the scriptures what strange punishments
read we, of the deluge of Noe, Genesis 7. Genesis 19.
of the pouring down fire and brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrha: of the
opening of the earth, to swallow in Dathan and Abiron, Number. 16 Psalm. 105,
and a devouring fire to consume their confederates. How wonderful were the
plagues of Egypt, Exo. 7.8.9, 10.11.12.13.14
the turninge of the waters into blood, giving to their thirst, more punishing
remedies, then the punishment it self. The horror of scrauling froggs, leaving
no place nor person vnannoyed: the fierye stinging gnattes, encombringe like
clouds the air, as well within as without the howses: the most bitter and
viperous flies, that not contented to sting without, with extreme torment
gnawed them selves passage into the very intrayles, leauinge no part of the
sinner unrevenged. The sodeyne death of the cattle of all the Egiptians, the
mattering sores, and blistering byles, and botches, the wonderful hayle
myngled with fire, that killed man and beast wheresoever it fell. The clouds
of locustes that covered like sand all the earth, devouring the very roots
of the herbs, and plants that the hayle had spared. The fearful and palpable
darcknesse, the kylling all the first begotten, both of man and best, and
finally the drowning of Pharao, and his innumerable army in the redd sea. I
omit the slaughter and mortalitye of men; 1 Reg. ^
Of the Bethsanites for curioslye beholding the Arc, 1 Reg. 5.
of the Philistyns for robbing it from Gods people, of the Israelites for
David's numbringe of them. 2 Reg. 24
The devouring the disobedient Prophett by a Lion, 3 Reg 13 4 Reg. 2 4 Reg 1
the children that scoffed at Elizeus with wild bears, Achabs soldiers with
fire from heaven, The turninge Loath his wife into an image of salt: Genesis 1^
finally infinite other reckoned in the Scripture. I will come to the strange
reuenges of God, mentioned by other authors, first what intolerable usage has
there ben of diverse people by the rage and furye of Barbarous tyrants, what
spoil of their goods, shedding of their blood, oppressing of innocents,
persecutions of the Godly, deflowring of virgins, Abusing of matrones,
compulsion unto wickedness, and terrifyinge from all virtue. What
inconveniences and miseryes have insued by war, what alteration of estates,
subuersio^ of Kingdoms, slaughtering of men, destroying of cittyes, and
confusion of all order. Vide Egesippu^ et Iosephum
And to put one example what a tragical and strange vengeance, did God show
unto the Jews, for their horrible sin in murdering Christ, at the last
destruction of Jerusalem. To omit their rifling, and spoil by diverse roman
magistrates, their seruilitye under strangers, the surprising of other cittyes
of Iurye, and the driving all the inhabitants into that one cittye of
Jerusalem: the only taking of it was the occasion of such miseryes, that
were they not registered, by such authentical writers, it were almost
incredible, that so many and so strange calamityes, could befall in so
short a space. First the famine was so great, that not only they of the same
familye, were at weapons for a bitt of meat, but the soldiers, that like
hungrye wolves ranged about the cittye, if in any place they felt but the sent
of vittayle, they rushed in with drawn swords, and were ready to ripp open
the bellyes and bowels of their own citizens, to fetch out the meat which
they had eaten, and fedd upon that loathsome stuff so brutishlye gotten, and
imbrued in the blood of the first eater, as upon a deyntye and delicate dish.
The children were at defiance with their own parents, the brothers and
sisters mortal enemies, the father and mother at deadlye food, with their
own offspring, all ready to murder one an other, for every bitt that any of
them putt into their mouth; So far did the extremity of hunger, abolishe all
feelinge of natural affection: yea and that which is more, man was enforced to
chew beasts dunge, and after they had eaten up the flesh to take their
repast upon their most filthye excrementes. Others fishing and raking in the
sinckes and channels, from thence gatherd though for to think most detestable
and bestlye, yet to them in those terms not unpleasant food. Some fedd upon
the lether of their bucklers, and shoes: others on trampled and broken hay,
finallye men used to all varietye of viande, and delicious fare, were now
driven to so base and abominable dyett, as the brute beasts them selves by
nature would abhor. I leave it to your consideration what mortallity and
strange diseases this famine was likely to breed. But yet besid this, were there
at the same time such civil mutinies, such domestical vprores amongst the^
selves, that even Titus their mortal enemy, who lay in siege about their
city, hearing of their mutual slaughters, for all his unplacable enmitye, was
deeply moved with compassion, saying that they needed no foreyne enemies to
work their confusion, so bloodye were the tragedyes they raised among them
selves. Neither was this the greatest of their miseryes. For afterward beside
the unmerciful havoc, that the romans made of the Jews, when the city
was taken, there was found an other thing, that bred occasion of a greter and
most cruel massaker. For the Jews unwilling to enrich their enemies with
their treasure, and thincking to save somewhat from the general spoil,
swallowed into their bodies so much gold, perle, and prcious stone, as nature
would bear. which thing the Romans afterward fyndinge out by their
excrementes, they left rifeling their houses, and in most barbarous sort began
to ransacke their bodies and bowels: So that whereas they thought their bodies,
their surest coffers, they found by a rufull experience their own follye, who
when they might with their treasure have tedeemed their lives, they so horded
it up, that neither they could use it to their own profit, nor the enemy
spoil them of it without spillinge their lives. Finallye besides battering
down the walls, the defacinge of the city, the burninge of the temple; there
were as Josephus reports partly by famine, partly by the sword, put to death,
an eleven hundred thousand Jews, besides fourscore and ten thousand other the
relques and only remnant of that nation, that were scattered and most
miserablye dispersed in to diverse parts of the world. And the glory of the
temple after an eleven hundred years standinge, and the people of all other
most famous, strong, and glorious, after the honor of so many ages, ended in
this most shameful and opprobrious sort. Much like unto this was the
destruction of Carthage, which after seven hundred years glory and majesty,
was in the end overthrown, the walls were turned into duste, and the city
burning continuallye for the space of seuentene days together, had not only
the buildinges and treasures thereof consumed into ashes, but was also a
funeral pyle to the Queen and her two sons, and diverse other desperate
multitudes, that rather chose to be fuel of their country fire, then
captives of their f^reyne enemies. Oros. li. 5. C^^. 1
Of which Orosius says Nomssime miseris ciuibus passim (...) vltima
desperatione iactentibus, vnus regus tota ciuitas fuit: cui etiam nunc siti^
(...), moembus destitutae, pars miseriaru^ est, recordari quid f^^erit. In the
end the wretched citizens every where throwing them selves with a final
desperation into the fire, the whole city became a funeral fire, and being
now left small in situation, and bare of walls, it is a part of the misery
thereof to here what it has been. It were infinite to exemplifye the
desolations, ruins, and calamityes, that by war have fallen upon all
nations, and provinces, and every history and cronicle of former times, yea
the v^rye experience of our days gives so large proof and notice of them,
that none can be ignorant how terrible a scourge it is, having in it no small
resemblance of the eternal horror of hell. And thus it appears how man's
offense, by man has been revenged. Let us now see, how the whole world has
conspired to the just punishment of Gods enemies. And first to begin with
the earth what a terrible instrument of Gods justice has this element been?
Diodo. li ^^ Strab. li. ^
All Achaya was so strangelye shaken with an earthquake, that two cities Bura
and Helice, were swallowed up. An other also happened in Traians time, Eusebius.
in c^^.
which in Asia overthrew four cytyes, in Greece two, and three others in
Galatia. About the same time was great part of Antioch in like manner
overthrown. Xiphilinus in Traiano
In the nynth year of Titus and Vespasianus, Orosi li^. ca. 7
three cities of Ciprus were by the like accident destroyed. I omit the
earthquake of Constantinople, Orosi. li. 3 ca. 3 li. 4 ^ap 13^
Rhodus, and Caria, though all memorable for terrible effects. I will not
speak of the horrible breach, and gaping of the earth, that happened in Rome,
Aug. de ciuita te dei. li. 7 ca 20
out of which vamped so intolerable a stench, that the very birds that flew
over it fell down dead, which by no other means could be closed up, Li^.
li. 7
but by the deuouringe of a man, that voluntarilye leaped into it. I omit
diverse other wonderful calamityes, which the earth by Gods permission has
occasioned, to give us to understand, that we ought not to much to marueyle at
our present afflictions, as muse at Gods mercy, that we being attaynted with
the like crimes, we are not swallowed up quick, with our familyes, howses,
children, and goods, as the sinners of former ages were. Nether have fewer
vexations happened by means of the water. For to say nothing of Noe his
fludd, Genesis ^.
that left in the whole world no more but eight persons alive, destroying
cities, towns, men, and beasts. There have also since that time happened
other inudations, though not so general as that, yett doubtless such, as
testified sufficiently Gods deep and immortal hatred against sin. Aug.
deciui^. li: 18

Oro: li: 7 ca 1


Of Ogigius fludd we reed that it wasted all most all Achaia. Deucalions deluge
consumed greatest part of Thessalia. Diod: li: ^
And Diodorus writes of an Island in Egypt called Pharos, that was altogether
covered and drowned with a strange irruption of waters. I will not reckon the
ouerflowing of rivers, yea of little brooks, that by continual rain and
snow, swelled so hye, that they have drowned many cities, Oro: li: 4 ca ^^ de
Tiberi^
destroyed many towns, spoiled corn, and cattle, and left behind them most
rufull monumentes of Gods deserved indignation. How often also and how daily
see we, how by diverse alterations the air has been a mean to chastise men's
iniquityes. What wrack and havoc has been made by storms, and tempests,
what terrible and frightfull casualtyes, by thunder, what strange mortallitye by
pestiferous vapors, and exhalations, corrupting and infecting the air, and
breeding infinite diseases in men's bodies. Eusebius.
Eusebius writes that Aethiopia was so pestered with the plague, and
infectious diseases, that it was almost brought to utter desolation. Rome in L.
Genucius and Q. Seruilius consulshipp, Orosli. 3 ca. 4
by an infectious wind was two whole years consumed with so general a
pestilence, that all the inhabitants were either dead, or by extreme leanes
left in as good as deadly terms. Yea and in L. Cecilius Metellus and Q. Fabius
Maximus Seuerinus time, Iul Obsequens. Oros. li. 4 ca. 4
The infection and mortalltye was so great, that first there were not enough to
burye the dead, and in the end there were none at all. In so much that great
howses were void of living, and full of dead bodies, furnished with ample
patrimonyes, but without any to enjoy them: Yea the miserye grew to so
lamentable an issue, that not only, there could no man live in the city, but
not so much, as approach unto it, so intolerable was the stenche of the dead
carcases, rotting in their houses, and in their own beds. Neither was that
wonderful punishment of god, showed in M. Plautius Hipsaeas and M. Flaccus
days, of less terror. For when through out all Africa, there swarmed
innumerable multitudes of Locustes, which devoured, not only the corn,
fruits, herbs, leaves, and twigges; but even the bark of trees, and dry
wood being lifted al from the earth, with a sodeyne tempest, and gathered into
globes, they were carried in the air, a long time, and in the end drowned in
the African sea. Which afterward casting them by huge heaps upon the shoares,
there rotting, and putrefying, they breathed out so noisome and pernicious a
savor, that the very bestes and birds dying, and corrupting in the fields,
greatly increased the former annoyance. And as for men in Numidia where then
Micipsa raygned, there dyed eight hundred thousand, and about the sea costs,
toward Carthage, and Vtica two hundred thousand more and in Vtica it self
thirtye thousand soldiers. The death also was so sodeyne that in one day, and
by one only gate of this one city, there were carried out fiftene hundred of
the younger sort. And thus the multitude of vermyne, that could not alive have
been endured, was much less tolerable, when it was dead, and the perishing
thereof destroyed all things, which they could have consumed, if they had lived
longer. Which most detestable infections, being conceived, increased, and
fostered, in men's bodies, by breathing, and drawing in the corrupted air, we
see how severe a whipp, of Gods justice it has been, and that of Gods great
mercy it proceeds, that we living therein so long, have been thereby spared,
from part of like rigorous punishemente, our sins, being so grievous that
they deserved, not only this our present, and in comparison very small
aduersitye; but the most bitter portion of the forenamed vengeance. Now if we
consider, what desolate effects the fire has wrought, not only in hell and
purgatory, where the torment thereof is unspeakable, but in this very life we
shall find them, no less fearful arguments, of Gods justice, then have
been touched before. For to omit the ordinarye casualtyes, whereby many towns
and cities have been by Gods per missio^ utterly consumed. To omit also the
burning of Constantinople by fire descended from the element, O^os: li: 3 cap: 3

Oro: li: 4 ca: 4 Idem ca: 11


in Arcadius his time, The overthrow of great part of Rome walls by
lightening, The burning of many parts of the same city by sodeyne fire,
which no man knows from whence it issued; To omit the strange judgments of
God upon diverse Tirants, persecutors, and wicked persons by thunder flashes: I
will only set down some other extraordinary, and notorious declarations of
Gods seueritye showed, by fire in most terrible sort. Idem li: 4 cap: 4
In a place of Italye called Ager Calenus, with a sodeyne breach and opening of
the earth, there burst out a most horrible flame, burning continuallye for three
days, and three nights, turning many akers of ground and all that was in
them into ashes, not sparing so much as the very roots of the trees. How
often has Mount Aetna in Sicilia, not only belched out huge flakes and globes
of fire, throwing them on every side very far to the great ruin and
consuption of cattle, corn, towns, and villages, but also burst out with
whole f^ddes of fire, which turninge all things where they passed, into ashes,
have both terrified with their horrible sight and smoke, and made a most
lamentable waste and spoil, to the inhabitants utter undoing, besides the
inconvenience which they bredd farther of, by the filthye savor and inflaming
of the air. This scourge has the city Catana, and the adjoining places felt
so greeuouslye, and that more then once that all the houses thereof being
covered and oppressed with heaps of burning ashes, the Romans were contented
to release them ten years tribute, to repair the inestimable damages of one
such eruption. But of all other, that was most notorious, which Julius
Obsequens and Orosius write of the Island Lippara, Oros li. 5 ca: 10
where as though hell mouth had been open, not only the earth but even the sea
it self boiled, with such excessive heat, that even the very rocks were
burnt and dissolved, the pitch of the ships melted, and the bordes scorched,
the fishes turning up their bellyes, sodden in the same waters and seas,
wherein they were bredd. The men also that could not fly very far from that
place, styfled, and their bowelles burnt within them, so miraculouslye was the
air inflamed. And to pass from heat to cold, we read that four thousand
soldiers, who at the siege of Asculum fledd from Pompeius, were upon the topp
of a mountain frozen so styffe, that standing there in the snow with their
eyes open, and their teeth bare, no man could otherwise perceive they were
dead, but only by want of motion. It were to long to rehearse the invasions of
wild beasts, though as Diodorus writes, Diod. li. 4 ca. ^
diverse cities of Libia were dishabited by the continual incursions of Lions.
And Titus Liuius reports of a serpent of huge syse, that devoured a great
multitude, bare down and crushed, a number, and with the poysend breath
wrought the bane of diverse others; howbeit in the end it was by Regulus army
and engynes, after loss of many soldiers overcome. Which prodigious and
feafefull examples, ought to put us in mind of Gods singular mercy toward
us, that neither he now wantinge the like abundance of fire, cold, wild
beasts, and horrible monsters, nor we the like abomination of sins, no
less worthy to be in the same manner chastised, he is contented
notwithstanding, to abate our deserved hyre, and with a fatherlye pitye, rather
to give us a warninge not to offend hereafter, then a scourge for our former
trespasses. I will not enlarge my self, how the heavens by co^course of
planettes, and diverse pernicious influences, have caused no small miserye.
Amongst others let that only accident suffice, of the extraordinary broyling
and parching of the sun, Plato (...) Tim^^: Oro: li: 1 ca 11
through the whole world, mentioned by Plato which the vain Poets not
acknowledging as a work of Gods omnipotent hand, framed upon occasion
thereof, the ridiculous fable of Phaeton. I will not also stay to show how the
Angels both good and badd, have been executioners of Gods indignation. Of these
let the scripture suffice, of the good it says: Ps 14^
Exultationes Dei in gutture eoru^ and gladij ancipites in manibus eorum ad
faciendam vindicta^ in nationibus increpationes in populis. The praises of God
in their mouths and two edged swords in their hands to do vengeance upon
nations, and correction among the peoples. Examples of their actions in this
behalf, we have many. For who killed with the plague threescore and ten
thousand, 2 Reg. 24
for David's numbering of the people, who in one night slew a hundred fourscore
and five thousand Assyrians, 4 Reg. 19 2 Machab: 3
who whipped Heliodorus for robbinge the temple, Act: 1^
who struck into Herod that horrible disease, whereby he was eaten with
vermyne. Finallye who powered those scourges on the world, whereof S. Ihon
speaks in the Apocalips. But Angelus Domini the Angel of our Lord. Of the
badd Angels besides the diverse examples in the scriptures, of those that
tormented Saul, 1 Reg. 16 Job. ca. ^ Tobi: 6 Ps 14^, Ephesians. 6 1 P^t. ^
afflicted Job, choked the seven husbands of Sara. Of these that are called
spiritus procellarum, and Principes and Potestates tenebrarum harum, that like
roaring Lions go about seeking, whom they may devour: and for their diverse
mischiefs, that they work us, are called sometimes Dragons, sometime Lions,
Psalm. 9^
otherwhiles Serpents, Adders and Basiliskes, besides these I say, the daily
experience of possessed persons, of sorceries, witchcraftes, and
enchaunteme^ts, wrought by their means, give us sufficient intelligence, of
their manifold scourges: which had God permitted them, agreably to our
deserts, and their malice to have practiced upon us, we would have thought our
present distresses, favorable and gentle corrections, in respect of their
unmerciful and hellishe usage. But thus we see, how truly it is said in the
book of wisdom. Sapi. Cap. 5
His anger shall take harness, and arm all creatures to the revenge of his
enemies, he shall put on justice for his breastplate, and shall take for his
helmett certain judgment. He shall take equitye as an vnpregnable buckler.
He shall sharpen his dreadful wrath into a spear, and the world shall fight
with him against the senseless persons. His throws of thunderboltes shall go
directlye, and shall be driven as it were from a well b^nded bow, and shall hitt
at a certain place. From his stouye anger shall fall hayle shoures, the waters
of the sea shall be enraged against them, and the fluddes shall roughlye concur.
Against them shall the spirit of might stand, and like a whirlewynde shall
divide them, and shall bring all the land of their iniquitye, to a deserte,
and shall overthrow the seats of the mighty. Now therefore considering the
rehearsed penaltyes, and heavy scourges, and remembering that they were not
mere casualtyes, but permitted and procured by the omnipotent hand of God,
sovereign Moderatour of all creatures, and vmpyer of man's transgressions:
Consideringe on the other side that doubtless the lest mortal sin, that we
have committed, deserves not one, but all the said punishments, yea and a
thousand times more: Let us not think it much, that of so huge a heap of
miseryes, a least part thereof is happened to our lot, but rather let us rest
astonished, and merueyle at the secret judgments and mercyes of God, that he
being still of like justice, habilitye, and power; the creatures as much at his
commandment, rule and obedience; our sins as many, as horrible, and as
worthy of revenge: Nevertheless the same things are helps and comfortes unto
us, that were scourges and most cruel torturres to our forefathers. When two
guiltye wretches are conuented before the same judge, for crimes of lyk tenor,
and qualitye, if the one be condemned to endure the extremity of the law, has
not the other great cause to tremble and quake, yea and undoubtedly to look
for the same entreaty. But now if contrary to his deserts, the judge mitigate
his sentence, and in liew of a rigorous chastismente appoynte some far mor
easy, then that which to his fellow was allotted: Has not he rather great
cause, to be grateful to the judge, for the benefit of his deliuerye, then
any way to murmur or repyne at his verdict. How then can we having so many
examples of condemned persons, for the like sins whereof we are also guilty,
but highly praise the mildness of our heavenly judge, that having so hardlye
used others, he has mercifullye spared us, and relented the heavy hand of his
justice, to lay so easy a burden upon us. Yea when we either look up to
heaven, or down to earth, or on the air, fire, or water about us, remembering
how terrible they have been against others, how can we but muse how they have been with-helde from wreaking upon us the like indignation. The torment^ of
hell.
But to pass from preambles to the thing in deed, from shadows to the
truth, from gentle warninges to the penaltye it self: I will leave the
revenge of sin showed in this life, and come to that which is prepared in the
next, in respect whereof all the forme^tioned miseries, are but very small
resemblances, and forerunninge signs. This we may gather of Christ's own
words, who reckening all these calamityes, saying Nation shall rise against
nation and kingdom against kingdom and there shall be great earthquakes in
places, Mat: 24
and great pestilences, Luc: 21:
and famines, and terrors from heaven, and there shall be signs in the sun
moon and stars, and upon earth distress of nations, for the confusion of
the sound of the sea and waves, men wythering, for fear and expectation, what
shall come upon the whole world, for the powers of heaven shall be moved. Mat:
14
Having (I say) reckened all these, Marc 1^
he adds Initium autem dolorum haec, These are but a beginning of the
griefs, as who would say, these wonders, and strange euentes, are but
pronostications of things to come, as a smoke in respect of a terrible
ensuinge fire, and like a musteringe of soldiers before the sad battle.
What therefore will the pains be, that these beginninges portend, and how
rigorous a sentence, that has so fearful remonstrances before the judgment.
But lest I be to tedious, I will not stand to make a full declaration of the
torments of the next world, but only briefly touch so much thereof, as may
be enough for us to guess at the rest. And first not only these aforesaid
afflictions, or at the lest the terror and pain thereof, but all other
paynfull and unpleasant things, that are in this world scattered, and
dispersed in diverse places, and creatures, shall be there united and joined to
the revenge of sin. And that in such sort, that whereas here diverse of them,
are sufficient alone to work our temporal death, and he that has endured
one, is past fear of susteyning any other; there every sinner shall sustain
them all, in far more cruel manner, then any of them can here punish, and
besides them also infinite other panges proper and peculier to hell. So that
whatsoever there is in the whole world, or ever has been or shall be, that can
pain sight, hearing, sent, taste, or feeling, what disease or vexation so
ever, can here torment the heart, the head, ioints, bones, sinews, veins, or any
parcel or member of our body, whatsoever can most or lest trouble or annoye
our will, memory, or understanding or any pour of our mind: all these and a
thousand times more, shall ioyntlye at one instant, and that forever, most
unmercifully torment each sinner in every part of body and soul. And to
descend to some particulers. First if we consider the place the very names
thereof may give us to understand how miserable a thing it is to be thrust
into it. It is called a bottomless depth, APoc. ca ^^. and 14. Matt ^. APoc.
20. Ps. 54* Luc. 16. Ps. 20. Job. ca 10.
or pit, a profound lake of the wrath of God, outward darcknesse, A pond
burning with fire and brimstone, A well of perdition, a huge Chaos of
confusion, a prison, a furnace of fire, and is by Job thus described. An
obscure land, covered with the fogg of death, a land of miserye and
darcknesse, where the shadow of death, and no order but everlasting horror
inhabiteth. Nether (as S. Cirill notes) can any deliver him thence by flight,
Cirillus in Orat. de exitu ^nima.
nor provide any escape, because he is fast shutt up. The prison wall is
vnsuperable, the Gayle full of darcknesse, the fetters vnsoluble, the cheynes
able by no force to be vnfastened, finallye whatsoever can make any place
odious, and detestable, shall be all there united, to store that room with
furniture fittest for sinners deserts. Nether shall the comfortes of the
company, any whitt relieve the discomforte of the place. For first they shall
have the Devil and his Angels in most horrible and frightful shapes, Matt. 25
which how fearful they shall be may be gathered by the words and description
set down in Job. Who (says God) shall open the gates of his countenance
throughout the compass of his teeth appears fear. Job. 41
His body is like founded shieldes, compacted together with scales pressing
one an other, His neesing is like the blasing of fire, and his eyes like the
eye liddes of the morning. Out of his mouth come lamps like flaming torches of
fire. Out of his nostrills issues smoke as out of a kindled, boiling pott.
His breath makes the coals to burn, and flame goes out of his mouth. In his
neck shall remain his strength, and before his face goes needinesse. His
heart shall be hardened like a stone, and pressed hard together like the
hammerers anuyle. In hell says Cassianus dwell the hideous fiendes, Cassian.
in co^fes. Theo. par. ^.
whose arms are like Dragons heddes, whose eyes shoot out fierye darts,
whose teeth stick out like Elephantes tuskes, and sting to their tormente like
scorpions tails. Finallye whose sight strikes terror, dolor, and death
into the beholders. Of men out of this world they shall have as S. Ihon notes
the timorous, Apoc. 21.
incredulous, accursed, murderers, fornicatours, wiches, Idolaters, and liars,
to whom S. Paul adds adulterers, 1 Cor. 6
effeminate, sodomites, thieves, covetous persons, dronckerdes, raylers and
extortioners, the very rifraffe and dregs of mankind. Neither is here an
end of their number. The Prophet Esaye yett tells us of more: Isa. 13
there says he shall the bestes rest, and their howses shall be filled with
Dragons, There shall struthions dwell and the apes shall leap. There shall the
skrichoules give an Echo in the houses, and the Sirens in the temples of their
pleasure. O unhappy place and more unhappy company, what torments in this
life come near to any of these miseries, and yet how often alas have we
deserved them both, and a great deal more. But peradventure there is either
some pleasant sight, some comfortable talk, or music, some sweet odores, or
delitious iuncates, or other pleasurs of the body, that abate the horror of
the place and company. Alas and what are their sightes, but the devils in
hideous and monstrous forms, their most fearful and threatninge shapes,
their barbarous and spritishe crueltye, their unmerciful rending, worowing,
slaughtering, scourging, and torturing. The torments of others, and
espeaciallye their fellows in sin, above them an unplacable judge,
underneath them an unquenchable fire, about them vnfatigable tormenters, on
each side desperate and miserable company, every where inevitable and
endless torments. Finally as Isidorus says Ignis gehennae lumen habet ad
damnationem, Isidor. L. ^. de su^mo bo ca. 31
vt videant Impij vnd^ doleant, non habet ad consolationem ne videant vnde
gaudeant. The fire of hell has light to damnation, that the wicked may see
whereof to be sorye, but it has no light to their consolation, that they may
see whereof to besolaced. There shall be confusion of most frightfull noyses, for
their music there shall be the horrible terror of thunder, wyndes, storms,
and tempests, the raging of the seas, the horrible roaring of the devils, the
sparkling of the flames, the cursinge and blasphemies of the wicked, the
weeping and gnashinge of teeth, continual skriching, howling, sighing, and
sobbinge, continual hissing, barking, gurminge, and bellowinge, with all other
odious and fearful noyses. woe, vae and Alas, shall everlastingly fill their
ears, and this shall be their harmonye, to recompense the disordered abuse, of
their hearing in this life. Nether shall their sent be free from most noisome
savors. For besides the stench of the fire and brimstone, besides all the
filthe and corruption of this world, that in the later day shall (as some
hold) be voyded into hell, as the channel and sincke of all uncleanness: The
very bodies of the damned shall be more unsavory then any carryne, or dead
carcas, and being there so pestered and crammed together, that they shall lie
scralling upon one an other like heaps of froggs or toades mingled with
serpents, Basaliskes and other most vglye and unclean worms, and vermyne. We
may easelye guess what their torment shall be in that behalf. Now for their
taste, what comfort can it yield when the rehearsed annoyances be, yea what
discomfort shall it adioyne, to the former miseryes. And of this is set in
Job. Job. 10
His bredd in his bellye shall be turned into the gall of cocatrices, he shall
vomitt out the riches which he has devoured, and God shall pull them out of
his bellye, he shall suck the head of a cocatrice, and the tongue of the viper
shall kill him. Their mouth shall continually be stuffed, and farsed full of
abominable poison, and filth most bitter, sower, salt, and loathsome. Their
lips, roof, tongue, and gummes perpetuallye tormented with gnawinge venomous
worms, whose taste shall be as paynfull as their tearing. Finallye their whole
body now free, sing in snow, now broyling in fire, man gled by worms and
tearinge fiendes, whipped and harried by the devil, and perpetually tumbled in
fire and brimstone, amiddest that mass of carcases and monsters, what an
vnrestye bed and intolerable torment shall it feel in every part. And lo
if we remember, this very body of ours, that we now bear about us, and
whose present misery we so much lament and think so grievous, deserved to have been in all these unspeakable pains, since the time we committed the first
mortal sin, in all our life, until this instant and foreuermore. Yea and in
much more miserable torments of mind. For our imagination should have been in
continual frightes, and fears of the present terrors, and pains, The
understanding vexed with a desperate, and obstinate conceyte, of Gods
unplacable justice, of the eternitye of these pains, and of the loss of
everlasting felicitye. The memory also pestered, with remembrance of the joys
past, and sorrows present, comparing every senses pleasure, with the incumbent
pain, and the opportunity that was once offered to avoyde those punishme^tes,
of whose releasing there nether now is, nor ever will be any spark of hope. For
as S. Gregorye says, Greg. (...). 9 mor (...). 4^
the damned suffer an end without end, a death without death, a decay without
decay, because there death ever lives, their end always begins, and their
decay never cease. But they are always healed to be new wounded, always
repaired to be new devoured. They are ever dyinge and never dead, a perpetual
pray never consumed, eternallye broyling and never burnt up. Now therefore if
there be any man so innocent, that he may say Nihil mihi conscius sum, mundum
est cor meum. 1 Cor. 4
My conscience accuses me of nothing, clean is my heart, and so assured of
his integritye, that he may vaunte In tota vita mea non reprehendit me cor
meum. Job. 27
In my whole life my heart has not reprehended me: Such a one might marueyle
with some ground, why he should be so afflicted, though if he way how S.
Paul, who said the first, and Job who uttered the last words, were
tormoyled, he might think him self as well worthy of their troubles, as either
of them, how much more being one from his childhoode, fleshed and noseled in
sin, as most of us be, has he rather cause to marvel why he is not in hell,
the^ why he is in prison, why he is not rather condemned to the eternal loss
of heavenly treasure, then to the temporal loss of a few worldly goods,
finally why he is not adjudged to a death, that is an unhappy beginning, to a
more unhappy progress, and no ending, then to a death, that ending all
miserye, begins an endless felicitye.

Cap. 6. CaP. 6.

But now to come to the principal drift of this my discourse, The sixth come
fort in tribulation is that the cause we suffer in: is the true catholic faith
for a motive to comfort you in your tribulation, what more forcible thing can
I set before your eyes, the^ the cause of your persecution, the honor of your
present estate, and the future reward of your patiente and constant
sufferance. First the cause which you defend, is the only true and Catholic
religion, that which impugneth you, is erroneous, and blasphemous heresye. Our
weapons in this action, are prayer, fasting, exhortation and good example. We
defend that Church, which is by all antiquitye avouched, by the blood of
infinite Martirs confirmed, by the heretics of all ages gaynsayed, and by all
testimonies most undoubtedly approved. We defend that Church of Rome, Cip.
li. 1 Ep. ^
to which as S. Ciprian says, Perfidia non potest habere acc^ssum: Misbeliefe
can have no acce^se. Hiron. li. 3 Apolog: con. Ruffin
Whose faith Saint Hierome affirms Praestigias non recipere et etiamsi
angelus aliter annuntiet, quam semel praedicatum est, Pauli autoritate munitam
non posse mutari. To receive no forgerye, and though an Angel teach any
otherwise then has been once preached, guarded with S. Paul's authority, it
can not be changed. We defend that Church of Rome, (...). ^pud d: Thom. in cat
which as Cirillus says. Ab omni seductione et haeretica circumuentione manet
immaculata. Remains unspotted from all seducinge, Matt. 16
and heretical circumuention. Of which Theodoretus writes, that Semper
haeretici faetoris expers permansit. Theodo. Ep. ad Renatu^ pres. roma.

Ruffin. in ex^os. Simboli.


It has always been clear, from stench of heresye. We defend that Church of
which Ruffinus notes. In ecclesia vrbis Romae neque heresis vlla sumpsit
exordium, and mos ibi seruatur antiquus. In the Church of the city of Rome,
nether has any heresye taken the beginning, and the ancient custom is there
dulye observed. Of which also Gregorye Nazianzen observes, Greg. Nazian. in
^arm de vita sua.
that Vetus Roma ab antiquis temporibus habet rectam fidem, and semper eam
retinet, sicut decet vrbem, quae toti orbi praesidet, semper de Deo integram
fidem habere. In old Rome has the true faith even from the times of our
forefathers, ben kept, and it always retayneth it, as it is fit for a cittye,
that rules the whole world, to have evermore a sound faith of God. We defend
not a Church singled from others, not the dismembered Church of Arrius,
Berengarius, Luther, or Calvin, who as they have their several names, from
their several founders, so ar they known therbye, Lactan. li: 4 ca: 30

Hieron: con: Luciferan: in fine


as Lactantius and S. Hierome note, to be no longer members of Christ, but the
sinagoge of antichrist. But we defend the Catholic Church, whose name as S.
Augustine is witness, Aug: li: con: Epi: fun: ca: 4
no Heretic dares for shame claim as proper to his own sect, having of
all ages and persons, ben evermore accounted the known style of men of our
profession. We defend a Church founded by Christ, enlarged by his Apostles,
impugned by none but infidels and condemned heretics. Whose doctrine can be
derived from no late author, never convinced of noueltye, never touched with
variableness, change, or contrarietye in essential points of belief. This
Illiricus our professed enemy, Iliricus
has in his centurias sufficientlye showed, where from age to age he sets
down the sayings of the fathers that manifestly approve our faith, how beit
malicously he terms them, naeuos Patrum the wennes or wertes of the fathers.
And yett for his own doctrine, he can not find in all antiquitye so many
sound and unblemished places, as the werttes be which he finds for the
confirmation of ours. And therefore well says Vincentius Lirinensis, that our
religion imitateth the course of our bodies. For though there be great
difference between the flower of childhoode and the ripeness of old age, yet
is it the same man that was then young, and is now old, and though the parts
of childrens bodies, be nether so bigg nor strong, as they be in the full
grows: yett are they the very same, equal in number, and like in
proportion, and if any have altered shape, vnagreable to the former, or be
increased or diminished in nu^bre, the whole body either waxes monstrous, or
weak, or altogether dies. So ought it to be in Christian doctrine, that
though by years the same be strengthened, by time enlarged, and advanced by
age, yett always it remain unaltered, and uncorrupted. And though the wheat
cornell, which our forefathers have sown, by the husbandmans diligence has
spronge to a more ample form, has more distinction of parts, and is become an
ear of corn, yett let the proprietye of the wheat be retained, and no cokle
reaped where the wheat was sown. But now towching the Church that impugneth
us, as of all other heresies, we can bring forth the late beginner, his new
doctrine, either unheard of before, or condemned in other heretics, his first
adherentes, the general opposition against him, or counsels, universities and
Catholic Doctors, varietye and sodeyne change in doctrine, and division of
his disciples, as of Luther and Calvin the world knows, and of other
heretics all historyes do report. Tertul: li: de praescripti. Optatus li: 2
con: parmen. Aug. 3: con: dona: ca: 2
And thus did Tertullian Optatus Millenitanus and S, Augustine with other
fathers set down a note, to know them by the demanding the beginning of
their belief, the cause of their long lurkinge, the origin of their
cathedral seat. We defend that Church which notwithstanding the rage of the
Jews in her Infancye, the barbarous tirranye of Pagan Emperors in her
Childhoode. The outrageous persecutions of heretics in her ripe age, not
withstandinge all other bruntes, and encounters of Satan, and his impes, has
always remained vnpregnable, yea the more it has been lopped and pruned, the
more has it shot out, and flourished. The more it has been suppressed, the
better has it prospered, and like the ark of Noah with the swelling of the
waters, that have drowned all other sects, it was rather alofted and advanced
to the view of all nations. For as S. Leo notes. Leo: Ser: 1 d^ S S. Petro and
Paulo.
The Church is not diminished with persecutions, but increased, and our Lords
field is then always best furnished with most abundance of corn, when the
cornells that are single in their sowing, are multiplied in their grouthe.
Which surely could never be, unless it were of God miraculously maynteined.
For as Gamaliel said. Act: 5
If it were the counsel or work of men, it would have been dissolved, but
because it is the Church of God the gates of hell have not been able to
prevail against it, Matt: 16
being the firmament and pillar of truth as S. Paul calls it. 1 Timothy: 3
S. Chrysostom also upon the forerehersed words of S. Matthew, says, that
God only was able to make, that a church founded upon one fisher, and a base
person, should not fall being shaken with so boystrous tempests. For though
the Catholics have been temporallye so weak, their number in respect of
their enemies small, The princes that have impugned them most mighty, their
decrees, manacinges, and torments, to suppress them intolerable, yet because
they were built upon a sure rock not all this blusteringe of wyndes, nor
irruption of waters, have had power to over flow or to bear them down, but
that in the end, they have had and always shall have the upper hand of Gods
enemies. Nether can any say, that it is not our Church, but theirs that was
thus persecuted. For there is no tira^nical persecution, but has always been
most violentlye bent, against the sea of Rome, and against the Pope and his
followers, in so much that of the Popes them selves, there have been above
thirtye Martirs. Besides if we reed all antiquitye, we shall not find one,
that has suffered for any part of our adversaries religion, but only such,
as are by all ancient authors registered for damnable heretics. whereas we
can allege them diverse that hane died and ben persecuted for points of our
belief, who have ever been since their deaths honored, and acknowleged for
Saints, by all Christendom, until Luthers time. For how many virgins for
not breakinge their vow of virginitye, have been cruellye put to death which
if they would have consented to marriage might have easelye escaped as S. Agnes
so highlye praised by S. Ambrose and diverse others. Amb. ser. 90.
How many for cleaving unto the Pope and faith of Rome, have been by the Arrian
Emperors, banished and put to death. Did not S. Alban dye for receiving a
Clergy man, and S. Thomas of Canterburye for defendinge the liberty of the
Church against usurped authority. Were not diverse put to death in Coproninus
time for defendinge Images, finallye how many monckes, heremites, and
religious men, whom our adversaries disclayme from their religion, how many I
say have been martired for their faith as Palladius and S. Damascen write.
Pallad. in histor. Lansiaca. Damascen. in vita Barlaam et Iosophat.
Nether do I reckon these in particular to exclude all the other Martirs, for
dout less as by their historyes is apparent, in all persecutions none died
Martirs, but of our faith. But I cite these perticulers to show that those
generally in former ages have been accounted as Martirs, that have suffered for
these self same points, for the which we are now chieflye persecuted. So that
it sufficiently appears, that both all the general persecutions have been
raised against our church, and that not withstanding all their crueltye it
yett endures, and shall to the worlds end. But now on the other side, two
hundred archheretickes, brochers of new sects, that have been since Christ's
time, though they have for a season flourished, and preueyled, having
Emperors, Bishopes, and Potentates, to defend them, infinite books and
writings to diuulge their doctrine, and all temporal aids to set them
forward: Yet we see that their memory is quite abolished, their names
co^monlye unknown, their books perished, and no more mention of them the^
the condemnation and disproofe of their errors recorded by Catholic writers.
The same doubtless will be the end of Luthers noueltyes, which being but parcels
of their corruptions, revived and raked out of oblivion, as heretofore they
vanished with their prime deuisers, so will they now with their late reuiuers.
And we see this almost even already verified, seeing that among so many of
Luthers progenye, there are found scarce any, and peradventure none at all,
that dare aduouche or take upon him the patronage of all his articles: Yea and
his scholars are already so straungelye sondred into most contrarious and
diverse sects, that it is a most manifest token, and proof, that God is not
the author of their opinions, seeing he is only the God of peace, and not of
dissentio^. Lindanus (...) Dubi^ant.
For Lindanus long since, in his Dialogue named Dubitantius, reckeneth up
threescore and eyghtene diverse sects, sprung all since Luthers first
preachinge, and with those that are of later grouth, they are now well nere a
hundred all different from others, in essential points of faith, as in most
of them Prateolus shows. Which doubtless is the providence of almightye God,
in this as it has been in all other heresies, of former days, that the
vnconstancye, varietye, and sodeyne change, the dissension of doctrine and
division of scholars, both from their masters and among them selves, should
be a manifest argument, that their assertions proceeded of the spirit of
error, were maynteyned with the spirit of pride and obstinacye, and should be
quicklye ended by the spirit of discord and contradiction. This does Ireneus
observe of Simon Magus, Iren. l. 1. ca. 21 l. 1. cap. 5
and of Valentinus, Angust. l. 1 de bapt. ca. 6. l de 50. haeres. her. 46.
Epipha. l. 1 co^ haeritom: 3 l: a: tom: 1 Ruffin: l. 10 histor: ca: 25 Hillar.
l. ad Constant. Eua. l. 3 and 4 histor.
S. Augustine of the Donatistes and Maniches, Epiphan. of the Marcionites, and
Montanistes, Ruffinus and Hilarious of the Arrians, and Euagrius of the
Eutichians: who were scarce so soon sprung as they were spread into most
co^trarious branches, or as S. Austine speaks in minutissima frusta into very
small ma^mocks. For why, when they once swerve from the compass of the
Catholic Churches censure, only allowing and interpreting the scripture in
the sense, that their single spirit susgesteth, as they be of diverse fancyes
and humors, so fall they into diverse and sondrye persuasions, and then not
yeldinge to any vmpiershipp but their own, they are past all means and
possibillity of agreement. Whereupon Origines expoundinge the signification of
that act of Sampson, Orgen: hom. 4 in Cantic:
when he bound three hundred foxes by the tails, and tied fire in the midst,
and sent them to burn his enemies corn, so (says he) must the true
Catholic Doctor, take the repugnant opinions and contradictons of heretics,
and by conferring them together deduce thereby a conclusion against them, which
may serve as fire to burn up their own fruits. And in deed there is nothing
of more force, to show their madness, the^ this presumption upon their self
arbitrament, which is the cause of all their discord. For as S. Chrysostom
notes. Chrisost: ho^. in: 4 cor.
As we would judge one madd, that saying the smithe take a red hott iron with
his tongues, would adventure to take the same in his bare fingers, so may we
deem both of the Philosophers, that went about to compass our faith in their
bare reason, and of the heretics of our time, that adventure upon the
creditt of their single spirits, to decyde all controversies, and interpret
Gods word, which the cunningest smithes of all antiquitye, durst never handle
but by the tongues of the Catholic Churches censure. And therefore as one
taking the Kings image set forth with exquisite, conning, and with most
choice precious stones, by a rare workman, should change it from man's shape,
and the seemelye fashion that it had, to the likeness of a fox or dog, using
still the same metal, and the same precious jewels, though rudelye and
groslye disposed, and should then vaunt that this were the Kings true
portrature, so artificially wrought by the first worker deluding the ignorant
with the beautye and glisteringe of the precious stones: so do the heretics
says Ireneus. Ir^ne. l. 1. ca:
that changinge the faith of Gods Church into the fables of their own fancy,
seek to set forth their follyes, with the authorityes and sayings of Gods
word, applied and wrested by their perverse spirittes against the true
meaning, so the easier to blind the simple. And as the Pirates use in the
darcke night to set lights in the shallow places, and hidden rocks, that
the ships by that directinge their course, and thinckinge to find some sure
haven, may be thus guilfullye drawn to their own ruin, so the Devil says
Origines, Origin. l. 10. in ^p ad. Rom ca. 14
setting the light of the scripture and counterfaite pietye, upon the rocks
of heresies, allure the simple passengers of this life, to their own perdition
under color of truth. And therefore are we warned, not to believe every
spirit, whereupon Catholics the better to avoid this variance,
presumption, and malicious fraud of heretics, always standing to the verdict
of the Church, and her chief Pastor, to whom God has promised the infallible
assistance of his spirit, have evermore defended with one accord, one only
faith, agreeable to it self in all times, places, and persons, which is the
self same, which we now suffer persecution for. Whereof we call all ancient
writers to witness, who by their books and many by their blood, have before
us labored in the same quarrel and confirmed the same faith, though assaulted
by other kind of enemies. But if comparison with saints be not presumption,
this for our greater comfort may we say, that though the cause of religion
were always honorable, yett is it in us more worthelye defended, then of any
Martirs of former ages. For they defended it either against Epicures and
heathens or against the Jews and Rabbines, or against some one heretic and
his ofspringe. But we are now in a battle, not only against men o four
times, who are both Epicures in conditions, Jews in malice, and Heretics in
proud and obstinate spirittes: But against the whole rabble and generation of
all heretics, that since Christ's time have been, and in a manner with Satan the
father of lying, and his whole army. who albeit they be fast cheyned in hell,
and there reap the fruit of their blasphemies. yett have these companions of
theires borrowed all their weapons, and revived some of all their heresies. So
that encountering with these, we challenge all the old heretics into the
field, and must in one age sustain a multitude of enemies, ioyntlye
assaulting us, every one of the which, have in times past made work enough
for diverse Doctors, in several ages according as they did rise one after an
other. For we must defend that God is not author of sin against. Vincen. co^:
proph: her. nouit:
Simon Magus Iren. l. 1. ca. 29.
Cerdon L. co^. flori. apud Eusebius. l. 5 histor. c. 20.
and Florinus. We must defend that the whole Church can not err against.
Vincen. lit.
Nestorius, That tradtions are to be observed against Iren. l. 3. Tertul. de
prescript:
Cerdon Epiphen. her 69 Aug. l. 5. co^. Maxim.
Arrius Basilius de spi sanct. c. 27
Eunomius Epiph. her 75
Aerius Basil. Ancyr. crone habita in 7 sinodo
Nestorius and almost all heretics. That only faith suffiseth not against
Aug. her. 54 Clem. l. 5 recog. 49.11
Aetius. Eunomius and Simon. That good works are necessary against Iidem ibid.
the same, together with Valentinus. That man has free will against Clem. l. 5
recog.
Simon Aug: her 11
Valentinus and Aug: her: 49 Hieron pro logo dialog co^tra Pelag
Manicheus. That the fathers writings are of great authority, against Eusebius:
l: 7 histor c. 26.
Paulus Samosathenus Basilius: l. 1 in Eunom
Aetius and Eunomius. That sins are not alike, and Virginitye to be preferred
before Matrimonye, against Aug: her. 82 Hieron: l co^tra Iouiniatu^
Iouinian. That Baptism is ne-cessarye to salvation against Aug: her 49
Manicheus Theodor: l. 4 haret fab:
the Euchytes, and Gregor: l. 4 mora c 3
Philoponus. We must defend the Sacrament of the Altar against Theodor: dial.
3. circa medium
the Donatistes Theodor: dial. 3. circa medium
and Arrians that trodd it under thelr feet, and gave it to their dogs:
against Lanfrane l: con: Beren:
Berengarius and the Sinod: 7:
Ichonomachie, that made it but a figure of Christ's body. The Sacrifice of
the Mass, against August: her: 49:
Manicheus. The Priests or namentes against Hieron: 1: con: Pelaeg:
Pelagius, Purgatory against Greg: l: 4: dial: 34
the Armenians, Relics, chastity of Priests, voluntary pouertye, and
prayer for the dead against Hieron: con Vigilant:
Vigilantius and Epiphan her 55 Aug her 73
Aerius. The Vow of obedience against the Damasce l: de 102 her: haere:
Lampetians. Churches and Altares against the Socrat: l: 2 ca 33 Da: sup.
Eustachians and Socrat: l: 2 ca 33 Da: sup.
Euchites. We must defend confirmation against Theod l 3. de her fab
Nouatianus. Confession against.32. Mon tanus. Matrimonye against the Vide
Prate ^h^n:
Apostolici. The Sacrament of Order and Priesthood against the Epiphan her 49
Pepusites, that gave it to women. Lent and other appointed fastes against the
Tertulin scorpiaco
Gnostickes Socrat. l. 2 cap 33
Eustathians Epipha her 53:
Aerians and Hieron: l: 1 co^tra Iouini:
Iouinians. All which men are by Aug: de haeres: ad Quoauult deu^.
S. Augustine Epiphan de haeres.
Epiphanius, Ireneus, Tertullian and al antiquitye registered in the Catalogue
of condemned heretics. Finally we mnst defend in a manner all Catholic
truths, against all heretical innouations. I am ashamed to say, that we are
forced to defend that Christ is come against the Jews, that he is of the same
snbstance with his father, and Homoousios against the Arrians, yea and that
there is any Christ or God at all, against the Politiques and Atheistes. Yet
undoubtedly if ever there were any need, even when Epicurus sect most
flourished to prove a God, a hell, or a heaven, then surely is there now, when
heresye is grown so ripe, and the infinite sects and divisions so spread,
beside new daily vprisinge, that the varietye of religions, has abolished
almost all religion, and the vncertaintye which amongst so many is truest,
has made the greatest part of our country to believe none at all. Yea and we
see the lives, consciences, and dispositions of men in this behalf to be at
such a stay, that should the Prince but command them, to adore Mahomett or
renew the memory of the old Godds, and Goddesses, as Jupiter, Juno, Venus,
with the rest of that crew, there would be thousands, as ready to embrace
them, and seem as zealous in their service as now they be in a belief of they
can not tell what them selves. And this in truth is the end, and last stepp
that heresy brings men unto. Saying therefore that Peter's shipp now sayleth,
not against the wind of one evil spirit, or against the stream of one
fludde of heresye, but against all the pestilent spirittes, of former ages, and
against the maigne stream of all heresye: It is no less necessary then
glorious, for us to employe our last endeavors to the defense thereof. And
think our limbs happelye lost, our blood blessedlye bestowed, our lives
most honorablye spent in this so noble and in important a business. And how
beit it may seem much, for men of one age to fight with the enemies of so
many. for Catholics of one belief, to encounter with hoastes and armies of
all sundry sects: yett this comfort we have to encourage us, that first as
some medicines there be of such qualitye, that they are not only profitable
for this or that disease, but have a general and common force aganst all, so
says Hilarious, Hilar: l: 2. de Trinit.
the Catholic faith not only against every heresye, but against them all
has so universal a remedy, that nether the strange kind of the disease can
hinder it, nor the number overcome it, nor the varietye deceive it, but one
electuarye serves it against all heretical pestilences, which is the
infallible assistance of Gods spirit. Secondlye we fight against such as
derive their petegree from the offalles, and condemned castawayes of Gods
Chuche, whose weapons and wards having been seuerallye blunted, and broken,
by the Champions of former times, they are less able to offend us, or defend
their unhappy posteritye. Whereas on the other side, we are cou^tergarded
with the assistance of so vnui^cible aids, that as hitherto they could never
be discomfited, so is there no possibillitye that they should be hereafter. And
first what an assured defense of our cause have we, by that continual, and
never interrupted descent, and succession of Bishopps in the sea of Rome, of
whom from S. Peter's time until this day, we are able from time to time to
give a certain accounte, and to show of every one the same belief, that they
have from hand to hand delivered unto us, without change or alteration: as
against the impious obliquies of heretics of our time, Bellarminus learnedlye
shows in the fourth book of of his first Tome, and third controuersye. This
says Ireneus confounds all heretics, Iren l. 3 ca. ^
who were always them selves the first, and often times the last pretensed
Bishops, of their belief, nether laufullye descended from any Apostle, nor
orderlye installed in their cathedral seats, but intruded by them selves
without any usual creation. This same does S. Hierom S. Epiphanius and S.
Augustine, Hieron. in con (...) chron. (...) seb^. ^ pip^ her 27. Aug. Epis 165
oppose against sectaries for an vnco^querable engine, as in deed it is.
Especially if we consider, that after the decay of al other Patriarchal, and
Apostolical Seats, as of Antioch, Alexandria, and Jerusalem, after so many
alterations, and violent changes of the temporal state of Rom^, from
Emperoures to Kings of the Goths, from them to exarkes of the Greeks, and an
otherwhyle to Consuls, and of these some by right, some rayninge by usurped
authority, likewise after so many Massakers, sackinges, and overthrows of
the city it self: yet this succession has never failed the authority thereof
never decayed, but has always continued and perseuered as it shall do to the
end of the world. Secondlye, what an assured proof of our religion against
all the adversaries Cauils, has the Church of Rome, by the i^numerable
miracles whereby God has auerred the truth thereof, in diverse famous and holy
men, adherentes and defendours of the same. For albeit the devil may work
some feigned wonders, above man's reach, and yet in the compass of other
natural causes, though also by inueigling and deceyuing our sense, or
imagination, he may make that appear a miracle which in deed is none, yett
these things which surpass the habilitye of any creature, and are only in
the power of almightye God, nether the devil nor any other, can do by
natural means, but only as the instrument and agent of God, chiefest and
sovereign cause thereof: as to give sight to the blind, to restore a li^me to
the maimed, to raise the dead and such like, which men of our belief in all
ages since Christ have done. For to omit Christ and his Apostles, to omit
also others of the primitive Church, we find such as our adversaries can not
deny, to have been of our Church, to have wrought very extraordinarye
miracles. First those of Gregorye Thaumaturge, Basilde spiritu sanct: ca: 2^
Greg: in vita eius Hieron. de viris Ilust.
of which S. Basil, S. Hierom, and S. Gregory Nazianzen. The strange cures and
raysinge of the dead, by S. Anthonye Hillarion S. Martin and S. Nieholas, which
S. Athanasius S. Hierom Sulpitius and others write of. In vitis eroum
And yett it is well known that S. Anthonye and S. Hillario^ were professed
Eremites, and Monckes and consequentlye enemies to those, that condemn and
reprove Monastical life. After them we have these which S. Gregorye speaks
of in his Dialogues of which many were done by Monckes and other religious
persons. Greg. l. 3. c. 2: 3
And to come to our native examples, how many miracles wrought S. Austine and
his company in reclaymynge of our contrye, Greg l: 9. ep. 58 Bed. l: hist ca 31
as S. Bid and S. Gregorye report, to omit those of S. Cuthbert S. Ihon S.
Oswalde S. Dunston and diverse other registered by the same S. Bid, Beda. l
3.4.5 hist.
and our own cronicles. Which men's religion, it were a follye to call in
question, what it was, saying that by the testimonye of all writers it is as
appare^t that they were addicted to the Catholic Roman Church, as that there
were any such men at all. Now if we come to later times. Bern. in vita
Malachia.
Let S. Malachias so highly commended in S. Bernardes works, Let S. Bernardes
own life written by Gotfrye a man of the same time, let S. Francis miracles
registered by S. Bonauenture, S. Dominickes S. Thomas of Aquine Saint
Bonauentures own be testimonies whose faith is the trewest, saying that all
these were them selves monckes and friars, and first founders of diverse
religious orders, professors of perpetual pouertye, chastitye and obedience,
and vowed persons. All which points are condemned by our adversaries, and
maynteyned by us. Finally to come to saints yett fresh in memory, what
miraculous things have been wrought by S. Bernardin and S. Catherine of Siena,
of whom Saint Anthonine writes, by S. Anthonine him self of whom Surius
writes. And in our days since Luther vprist, by the reverend father Francis
Xauier of the societye of Jesus, in the Indies whose wonderful miracles are
not only certain by most diligent enquirye, and scrutinie made for the true
knowledge of them by the King of Portugal, but the miraculous conversion of
so many thousands, yea and so many Kingdoms, as by the same were turned
from infidelitye to the Roman faith, yeldeth an undoubted assurance thereof.
Seeing therefore that these men by our adversaries own confession, and by their
lives and writings, are manifestlye known for men of our religion; Seeing
also their miracles were such, as surmounted all power of coniuringe, sorcery,
or enchantment, as the fathers grant the giuinge light to the blind limbs to
those that want them, and reuiuinge the dead to be. Seeing finallye these
miracles have been wrought, either for testimony of their virtue, which can not
be true virtue without true faith, or for proof of their religion, which all
authors assure us was the same that ours, what greater certificat can we have
of the goodness and integrity of our quarrel, since we are sure that God the
only author of these supernatural effects, can not witness any kind of
untruth. And to doubt whether these miracles be true, or truly reported,
being written by so grave and authentical auctors is nothing else, but to
condemn all historyes, books, and registers of antiquitye, and only to allow
that whereof our own sight and sense does acerteine us, which is extreme
follye. Moreover if we consider both the sinceritye and sanctitye of our faith,
and the professors thereof, and the absurditye and corruption of our
adversaries belief, and behavior; by the fruits we shall soon know in whose
gardeyne the best tree grows. For as concerning our faith, the principles,
rules, and grounds thereof are such, that though they be above, yett are they
not against reason, neither yield they scope to such as live according to
their prescript, of licentiousness or riott, but keep them in awe and
compass of their duty toward God and man. Whereas the very articles of our
adversaries religion, are of such tenor, that in reason and pietye, they can
not be held for religious truths, nor being believed restrain men's
consciences to the limits of virtue, but rather open them a wide gate to
desperate and dissolute life. For he that affirms all the actions of man, even
the very best to be damnable sins, as Calvin and his followers auouche, and
therewith that all sins are of equal deformitye and heynousnes, touching
death and damnation, what heart or encouragement can he have, to follow
virtue, or what bridle can hold him from plunginge him self in the puddle of
all vice: saying the one is as great an offense, and as punishable before God
as the other, and the same faith which makes, that the sinfulness of a good
action is not imputed to the doer, is also of the same force and has the same
effect, in any other wicked work whatsoever. Again he that believes the
commandments of God to be impossible for man to keep, and withal that
howsoever he break them, it nether can nor ought to make him doubt of his
election, which depends only upon gods predestination, why should he not
think it follye to endeavor to observe Gods law being an impossibillitye:
yea and upon certaintye of his salvation, become careless to break any
commandemement, and to take what course most pleases his sensual appetyte.
Further he that makes God the author of sin, and as well the inforcer of man
to wicked and impious acts, as the directour to any virtue. and withal
knows that if he be damned it shall be for no other sin then such as by God
him self he was constrained to committ, must needs think his case most
miserable in being so dishabled, from auoydinge such an offense, and God a
most rigorous and unjust judge, that condemns a man for that fault, which he
forced him unto. The effect of which and such like principles, well appears
in the unchristian and irreligious behavior of sondrye estates, and
speaciallye of the protestant ministers, teachers, and defenders of the same,
who are known in most places to be so loose, and lewd, and so far disordred,
that their own sheep do greatly mislike their ungodly behauior. But now on the
other side for proof of the sincerity of our religion, I only appeal to the
common experience of Catholics lives, both in our and former ages. Let all
historyes witness their sincere dealing, plain words, simple attire, frugal
tables, unfeigned promises, assured love, and amity, and most intier and
friendlye conversation one with an other. Let us consider their large
hospitallity, in houskeeping: their liberallity toward the poor, their
readiness to al merciful and charitable acts. Let us remember their
assiduitye, and continual exercise of prayer, their strayte observation of
long fastes, their austeritye and rigor, in other chastisments of their
bodies, and we shall find what different manners, and fruits proceed from our
belief, and from the doctrine of our new doctors. Yea and the chiefest
things laid to our charge, by infidels, and heretics, are that we keep men
to much in awe, that we restrain them to much from carnal liberty, that we
have to much of the cross of Christ. Iudeis quidem scandalum, Gentibus autem
stultitiam. 1 Cor. 1
Scandal to the Jews, and follye to the Gentiles. So does Plinius report of
us in his epistles to Traian that we detest all vices, Plin. 2. l. 10. Ep.
and live most holylye, and that we have only twoe faults. The one is, that
we are to ready to spend our lives in Gods cause, the other, that we rise to
earlye before day to sing praises unto Christ. which faults our Gospellers of
all other take most heed of. So for the most part exceptinge those lies,
that the Heretics father upon us, the greatest complayntes they have against
us, are for prescribing fastes, forbidding flesh on certain days,
condemninge marriage of Priests, Monckes, and other vowed persons. For
prescribinge confession, satisfaction, and penance in this life for men sins.
For auouchinge prayer, fasting, almois, and other good works as necessary to
salvation. For requiringe an exact obedience, of the temporal to the
spiritual, and of all to Christ's Vicar here in earth. For condemninge the
arrogancye, of their self spirits, refusinge all other judgment in matters
of controuersye, and intelligence of the scripture besides their own, and
such like points that may any way bridle them, from full liberty of
followinge their carnal appetites. Yett for all they thus disalow our
doctrine, the truth it self enforces them somtymes, as of old it did the
very devils, to speak most reverently of our religion, and professors
thereof. Luther in his book against the Anabaptists, confesses that in the
Popdome there is most of christian goodness, ye al christian goodness, and that
from thence he and his received it. And rehersing that we have the true
scriptures, Baptism, Sacrament of the Altar, the true keys of jurisdiction,
the true office of preachinge, the true Cathechisme, our Lords prayer, the ten
commandementes, and the articles of faith. In the end he concludes with these
words. I auouche moreover (says he) that in the Popdome there is true
Christianitye, yea the very cornell of Christianitye, so that this cornell
being but one, according to that Vna fides Vnum baptisma, there is but one
faith and one baptism, either he must be of our religion or else by his own
confession, we having the true cornell, he has nothing but the husk and
shell for him and his disciples. Now concerning the professors of our faith,
S. Athanasius, S. Hierom and Sulpitius write that the infidels them selves,
bare very great reverence, and did much honor, to S. Anthonye, S.
Hillarion, and S. Martin. Totila an Arrian Prince honored highly S. Benedict.
Calvin called saint Bernarde a godly writer. Luther Melancton, and the
Augustan confession call Bernard Dominicke and Francis Saints. All which being
as is before said Monckes, Friars, and religious persons, are undoubtedly
known to have been far from the Protestants or Puritanes religion. And though
the Heretics said nothing, yett does all antiquity cry, and infinite
miracles yield certain warrant, of the holiness and virtue of the Catholyke
fathers. But we need not to range far for examples of good life. For God be
thancked, even our adversaries them selves, are so fullye persuaded of our good
behavior, that if a man in company be modest and grave in countenance, words
or demeanor, if he use no swearing, foul or unseemly speech, if he refuse
to join in lewd company, and dishonest actions, he is strayte suspected for
a Papist: And on the other side if there be any ruffianlye, quarellous, foul
spoaken, and lewdlye conditioned, he is never mistrusted for a Papist, but
taken for a very sound and undoubted Protestant. Let also the records of
ssises, and sessions be serched, and let it be but showed among so many
hundred Protestants, as are yearelye executed, for fellonyes, murders, rapes,
extortions, forgeryes, and such like crimes, how few recusantes, have been
ever in so many years, attached iustlye with such like offenses. Let but
the neighbors of Catholic and Protestant gentlemen, be witnesses who^ live
best, and are readyest to all good deeds and works of charity. Let the
Iaylours and keepers of prisons report, what difference they find, in the
lives of Catholic and Protestant prisoners. And if all these say as the
truth is, that we go beyond the other in Christian duty, then may we by
their own testimonies, auouche the tree of our religion to be good, seeing
that as Christ says an evil tree can not bring forth good fruit. Matt. 7
Whereby we may also infer that the religion of our adversaries is evil,
sith the fruits thereof are so extreme badd, as daily experience shows, that
even among heathens and infidels there is found more truth, honestye, and
conscience, then is now in the Protestant multitude, so well have they profited
in the licentious principles of their religion. Against whom we must remember
that the Apostles were not without cause called salt of the earth, and light
of the world, but for that their doctrine should have effects agreeable to the
propertyes of these things. For as the salt preserves flesh from the vermyn,
stenche, and corruption, and the light is a mean to discern the good from the
badd, the mierye from the clean way, our friend from our foe: So does the
true faith give remedies, against all stench and corruption of vice, and
shows the path of virtue and truth, from the dirtye way of sin and
error.

Cap. 7. Cap. 7 The seventh comfort in tribulation is that the state of the
persecuted in a good cause is honorable.

Now as concerning your estate, how can that be but honorable, where your
quarrel is so good: seeing the cause honoreth the combat, and assures you of
the final victory. Your counterpeeres are mighty, their force very great,
their vantage not unknown, their malice experienced, their torments to
flesh and blood intolerable: but your Captain has always conquered, your
cause has been always in the end advanced, your Predecessors never lost the
field, wherefore then should you have less hope of the victory. Christianity
is a warfare, and Christians spiritual Soldiers, their conflictes continual,
though their enemies be diverse. In the beginning our faith was planted in the
Pouertye, Infamye, Persecution, and Death of Christ. In the Progress, it was
watered, and dunghed, with the blood and slaughtered limbs of Gods Saints.
And it cannot come to the full grouthe, unless it be fostered with the
continual showers of Martirs wounds. You are the choice captains, whom God
has allotted to be chief actours in the conquest. Your veins are conduittes,
out of which he means to drive the streams, that shall water his Church: he
has placed you as the fairest and surest stones, in the forefront of his
building, to delighte his friends, and confound his enemies, with the beauty
and grace of your virtuous life and patient constancy. Now is the time come,
for the light of the world to blaze out beams of innocence: for the salt of
the earth to season the weak souls, bending to corruption. Yea and for the
good shepherd to spend his life, for the defense of his selye flock. Tempus
putationis aduenit. Can. ^
The loppinge time is come, and to the intent the tree of the Church may
sproute out more aboundantlye, with young twigges, the branches and bows of
full grouth, are lopped. Now is that time come of which Christ forewarned us.
Isa. 16
Erit, vt qui occiderit vos arbitretur se obsequiu^ praestare deo. It shall come
to pass that he that kileth you shall think he does god a good piece of
service. And as S. Ciprian says, Cipria^ de mortalitate.
fiunt ecce, quae dicta sunt et quando fiunt quae ante praedicta sunt,
sequentur et quaecunquae permissa sunt, Domino ipso pollicente, ac dicente:
Luc. 11
Cum autem videritis haec omnia fieri scitote quoniam in proximo est regnum
dei. Lo the things that were said, are now done and now since that it is
fulfilled that was fore told, that which was promised will be also performed:
Our Lord himself assuring it and saying, when you see all these things to
come to pass, then know you, that the Kingdom of heaven is near at hand.
When we see the flower we hope for the fruit, and take it as a presage of a
calm temperate, and pleasant season. Our flowers that foreshew the happy
calm of our felicitye, grow out of these thorns, and of these briars must we
reap our fruit. If the stalk wou^d, the flower heals, if the reapinge be
troubleso^e, the fruit is the more delight some. Let no man deny the sea to
be deep says S. Ambrose, because the shores be shallowe, nor heaven to be
clear, because it is sometimes cloudy, nor the earth to be fertile, because it
is some where unfruitful, nor the cropp of corn to be good, because it is
mixed with barren otes: So think not the harvest of a good conscience to be
lost, though it be interrupted with some sorrowful and bitter shoures. The
ignorant peradventure will condemn us, that think it no follye, to make
account of the gall of Tobias fish. Let the^ muse at our madness that most
willing lie feed on Sampsons honicombe, when it is taken out of the Lions
mouth. Let us not regard their phreneticall laughtures, and rauinge scoffs.
Animalis homo non percipit ea, 1 Cor. ^
quae sunt Dei. A sensual man understands not the things apperteyning to
God. We know that the flower of Iesse gave his most pleasante sent, and came to
his full grouth upon the Cross, we know that the fruit of life was not
gathered without thorns, we know finallye that gall was chosen in extremity
by the most experienced and perfitt taster, and the honicombe not eaten till
after his resurrection, when it was in a manner fetched out of the Lions mouth
whom he had by his death victoriouslye foiled. Our choice agrees with our
Captains examples, and both the time, and our cause moves us thereunto. If two
keys were offered us, the one of gold set with diama^ts, rubies, and perle
curiously wrought and hanged in a cheyne of great price, the other of old
rustye iron, unhandsome and shapelesse to behold, tied in a rotten cord, and
yett this the true keye to infinite treasure, the other to a sincke of
corruption, and a dungeon of despair, which of these two keys, were in
reason to be desired. This rusty key is trouble and affliction, the key of
gold worldly prosperity: That, opens heaven gates. For Per multas
tribulationes oportet introire in regnum Dei, Act 14
By many tribulations must we enter into the kingdom of God. This other
opens hell doors. Multos enim perdidit aurum and argentum. For many, has
gold and silver cast away. Ecclesi. 8
We must now remember the last will that as S. Ambrose says, Amb. ser. de
Pass^o.
Christ made upon the Cross. Author pietatis in Cruce pendens, testamentum
condidit singulis pietatis opera distribuens Apostolis persecutionem, Iudeis
corpus, Patri spiritum, Virgini Paranymphum, Peccatori in^ernum, Latroni
Paradisum, Christianis vere paenitentibus Crucem commendauit. Vnde inquit
Maximus omnis Christiani vita qui secundum euangelium vixerit, Maxim. ser. de
Mart.
crux est atque martirium. The author of life hanging upon the Cross made his
will allotting to every one works of pietye, to his Apostles persecution, to
the Jews his body, to his father his soul, to the Virgin a Paranymphe, to
the sinner hell, to the thief Paradyse, to the repentante Christians he
commended the Cross. Whereupon S. Maximus well says, that all the life of a
Christian, that will live agreeably to the Gospel, is a perpetual cross and
martyrdom. We must now acknowledge our profession, and not be ashamed of our
inheritance, which Christ allotted unto us. We must say with S. Paul Mundus
mihi crucifixus est, Gala. 6
and ego mundo the world is crucified unto me and I to the world. To put them
selves in mind of this, the old Christians in Tertullians time, were wont to
pray with their arms streatched out, as men all ready crucified in mind,
and ready in Gods cause to be crucified also in body. Where upon Tertullian
speakinge of this gesture in prayer, Tert. Apo^. ca. 30
says. Sic Itaque nos expanges vngulae fodiant, cruces suspendant, ignes
lambant, gladij guttura detruncent, bestiae insiliant. Paratus est ad omne
supplicium, ipse habitus orantis Christiani. While we are thus prayinge with
our arms spread abroad, let the hooks dig us, the Gibbetes hang us, the
fyers consume us, the swords cut our throats, the beasts fly upon us, the
very behavior of a Christian in prayer, shows him ready to all kind of
torments. A wise shipmaister, when he sets forth from the shore, and goes
to sea, layinge aside the remembrance of wife, children, house, and familye,
employeth his body and mind only to the due performance of his office, in
auoydinge the dangers and directinge his ship to a gaynfull haven. You are
now lanched out of the port of worldly prosperitye, into the sea of temporal
discomforte, in Gods cause, and therefore it behooves you to vncomber your
selves of all earthlye cares. You must displaye the sail of your soul, upon
the mast of Christ's Cross, betake you to the tacklinge of virtue, keep your
hand upon the stern of good order and discipline, and being aparted from
earth, lift up your eyes toward heaven. You must direct your course by the
motion of the stars, and planettes, that is by the example of former Saints,
that so having Christ for your Pilott, the inspirations of the holy Ghost for
your gale, you may go through the storms of persecution, overcome the surges
of worldly pleasure, pass the shelfes of alluringe occasions, avoid the
shipwreck of deadlye offense, and finallye safelye arryue to the port of life
and perfitt repose. Now is the time whereof the spouse in person of the Church
said, Can. 4
Surge Aquilo and veni Auster, perfla hortum meum, et fluant aromata illius.
Arise north, and come southwynde blow my gardeyne, and let the spice thereof
flow down. These winds now blow, and it is now time, that the spice fall and
the virtues and constant examples of Saints, that lay hidden, and covered
amongst the leaves, be with this persecution shaken from them and laid open
for every one to gather. We must now ascend ad Montem mirrhae to the mount of
mirrhe, which is in taste bitter, and Ad collem Thuris to the hill of
frankincense, that gives no sweet savor but when it is by fire resolved. Our
heavenly smith has now brought us into the forge of trial, and kyndled the
coals of persecution, to prove whether we be pure gold and fit to be laid
up in his trea surye. Now while this wind is stirring, comes the winnoer
with his fan to see who is blown away like light chafe, and who resists
to the blastes like massye wheat. That which lies hidd in the young blade of
corn, is displayed in the ripe ear, that which is concealed in the flower, is
uttered in the fruit. Many believers are deemed aequall whom trial proves
of unequal faith, the tribunal shows what was covered in the budd,
agreeablye to that saying by their fruit you shall know them. Many flowers
promise a multitude of fruit, but when they are once putt to the proof by
storms of wind, very few persevere to the full grouth. So many seem
faithful in the calm of the Church, but when the blastes of aduersitye
bluster against them, few are found in the fruit of martyrdom. The conninge
of the Pilott is not known till the tempest rises, nor the Captains courage
till the war begins, nor the Catholics constancye till the Persecutor
rages. Tertul. de fuga in persecut.
Persecution as Tertullian notes is Pala quae Dominicam aream purgat scilicet
ecclesiam, confusum aceruum fidelium euentilans, discernens frumentum martirum,
and paleas negatorum. The shulue which purges our Lords floor, that is the
Church, fa^ning the confused heap of the faithful and seueringe the corn of
Martirs, from the chafe of deniers. This is the ladder which Jacob dreamed of,
Gene. 28
which showed to some the way into heaven, and to others the descent into
hell. This is the water of contradiction by which Gods servants are proved
according to that Probasti in tentatione, Deuteronomy. 33
iudicasti ad aquas contradictionis. Thou have taken trial by tentation, and
judged us at the waters of contradiction. This is the water at which our
heavenly Gedeon, tries who are fit soldiers to assist him against the
Madianites, Iud. 7
and he seuereth such as fall on their knees for greedines and thirst of
worldly vanities, from those that reach with their hand, so much only as
their necessity requires. Of whom God says in tree centis viris qui
lambuerunt aquas, liberabo vos. In those three hundred men that have licked the
waters will I deliver you. Chrisost. Hom 29 in Ep. ad Romans
S. Chrysostom reports that the shepherdes of Capadocia, for the care they
have of their flocks, many times lie three days together covered with snow,
and they of Libia are contented whole months, to wander after their flocks
in those deserts, that are full of cruel wild beasts, preferring the care
of their catell, before their own dangers. How much more are the Pastores yea
all the Catholics of this time, bound to endure the pinchinge and freesinge
cold of what aduersitye soever, yea and the hazardes of cruel persecutors,
that like wild beasts have turned this vinevard of our contrye into a bar ren
desert, rather the^ to suffer so much as in us lies, Christ's flock either to
be scandalized by our example, or destitute of our necessary endeavors. For as
in a serious and earnest battle, where upon the state of the commonwealth
depended, and the King him self were in co^plet harness, and with his weapons
ready in person to fight for his kingdom. If any of his nobles, should come
into the field with a fan of feathers in steed of a buckler, and a poesye of
flow ers in steed of a sword, and in every other respect more like a carpet
knight then a man of arms, The King could not but take it in very evil
part: So surely must Christ if in this spiritual war against his Church,
for which he fought in person, and received so many wounds, we should look
on more like worldly wantones, then true soldiers, and not be as ready as our
King and Capteyne to venture our lives in the same quarrel. Now therefore is
the time, that it stands us upon, to show proof of our selves. Now must it
be known whether we be vasa in honorem or contumeliam, Vessels of honor or
reproach, whether we be signed with the name of the lamb, or touched with the
mark of the beast Antichriste, Apoc. l4
whether we be of the wheat or of the cockle, and finallye whether we belong
to the flock of Christ or to the herd of Beliall.

Cap. 8. Cap. 8.

And a thousand times happy are you, The Eight comfort in our tribulation is
the honor of imprisonment in a good cause.
whose prisons are proofs, whose cheynes are pledges of your future
immortallitye. A thousand times happy I say, whose estate is both glorious
here, and a sure way to an vnspeak able glory of the world to come. For as
S. Ciprian says. Cip. Ep. 4
Longo temporum ductu glorias vestras non subtrahitis, sed augetis. tot vestras
lauds, quot dies, quot mentium curricula, tot incrementa meritorum. By the
long tract of time you diminishe not your glory, but increase it. So many
are your praises, as days, so many increases of merits as courses of
months. Of you there is no doubt whether you be for the barn or for the
fire, for you being there laid up, like clean wheat, and precious corn,
Hospitium carceris horreum computatis. Ciprian. Ibid.
Your lodginge of the prison, you accounte your barn. For though the prisons
be in them selves foldes of Satan to harbor his lewd flock, yett when the
cause ennobleth the name of a prisoner, the prisoner abolisheth the dishonor
of the place. What thing of old more odious then the Cross, what place more
abhorred, then the mount Caluarie, what rooms more reprochefull then the
Criptes, grottes, and dungeons of Saints. Yett now what thing more honorable
then the holy Cross, what place more reverenced, then the foresaid mount,
what sanctuaries more desired, then the dungeons of Saints. So does God
defeat the Devil of his usual hauntes, and of kenels ordained for the
couching of his hell hounds, frames mansions of great merit, and ports of
salvation for his own servant. A reprochefull thing it is, to be cheyned in
sin, gyued in wickedness, and shutt up in the deadlye prison of mortal
offense. A miserable thing it is, to be enthralled in the vassalage of the
devil, in the servile subjection to our lawless appetites, and in the
slauishe bondage of worldly vanities. Cip. Ep. ^9.
But O pedes faeliciter vincti, qui itinere salutari ad Paradisum dirrigantur.
O pedes compedibus and trauersarijs interim cunctabundi, sed celeriter ad
patriam glorioso itinere cursuri. O feet happelye cheyned which are directed a
safe way to paradyse. O feet for a time foreslowed, with fetters and boltes,
but shall hereafter with a glorious iorneye swiftelye run unto their contrye.
Honorable it is in Gods quarrel, to be abridged of bodilye liberty, for
mainteyning the true liberty and freedom of our soul. The birds being used
and naturallye delighted with the full scope of the air, though they be never
so well fedd in the Cage yett are they all ways pooringe at every cranie to
see whether they may escape. For why, they understand not, that in the Cage
they are both surer from the kyte hawk, and fouler, then abroad, neither
mark they the benefitt of their assured repair, from hard weather and worse
food. But for a reasonable creature, and withal a Christian Catholic so
much to affecte a dangerous liberty, as not to accounte of the benefitt of
his prison in so good a cause, it can not but be thought an imperfection,
especially consideringe how many perils of our soul are cut of, and how
highlye our spiritual welfare is advanced. Let us not in this be like the
senseless birds, but rather imitate them in an other propertye, which is,
that in the cage they not only singe their natural note, both sweetlyer and
oftener, then abroad, but learn also diverse other, far more pleasant, and
delightsome, So we both keep, and oftener practice our wonted devotions, and
besides learn new exercises of virtue, both for our own comfort, and example
of other. And when might you so freelye range amongst the quires of Angels, as
when you are sequestered from the distractions of vain company? when could you
take a fuller repast of the sweet fruits of prayer and contemplation, then
when the onions, garlic, and flesh pottes of Egypt are farthest out of sent
and sight? Your eyes are not to much troubled with impious and wicked sightes,
your ears not annoyed with bloodye outcryes and heinous blasphemies. You are
quitt from many scandals, and severed from occasion of diverse tentations.
Finallye think not of the name of a prison, and you shall find it a
retyringe place fittest to serve God. If it restrain you of temporal
comfortes, your bootye is gainful, that by loss of transitorye deserve
eternal. If your body be chastised your soul is cherished, and the pyninge
of the one is the pamperinge of the other. You forsake a paradyse of of
poysening delights, for a place that yeldeth cause of grounded and true
solaces. Yea and as Tertullian notes if you way from whence you came, and
where you are, you shall find, that you are rather delivered out, then
committed into prison. Greater darkness has the world, which inueigleth and
blinds not only the eyes, but the hearts of men. Heuyer cheynes and shackles
does the world lay on us, which do fetter and entangle our very souls. Far
worse ordure and stenche does the world breath out. I mean ribaldrye,
carnallitye, and all kind of brutishe behavior. Finallye more prisoners and
guiltye persons has the world, the whole generation of mankind, not to be
judged by the vmpiershippe of any earthlye magistrate, but by the censure and
verdicte of almighty God. Happy therefore are you, if you can reckon your
selves translated out of prison, into a place of preservation, which if it be
combred with darcknesse, your selves are lamps to light it, If it charge you
with gyues, yett are you loose and unbound toward God. If you be pestered
with unsavory smell, you are frankincense and savor of sweetness. If it
affright you with expectation of judges. Cap. ^
Your selves hereafter shall judge nations and rule over peoples. With this
saying of Tertullian does S. Ciprian agree. Cipri. Ep. 56
O blessed prison says he which your presence has honored. O blessed prison
that sends the men of God to heaven. O darkness brighter then the sunnne it
self, and more clear then the light of this world, where the temples of God
are now placed, and your members sanctified with your divine confessions of
your faith. Let them complain of the difficultyes of the prison, that have
fastened their affection upon worldly vanities. A Christian Catholic, even
out of prison has renounced the world in his baptism, and it little imports
in what place he be in the world, who by promise and profession, has vowed
never to be of it. Let them complain of the prison, that know not the glory
and sovereign prerogative of that place, but for a Catholic, that has Christ
for his auctor, the Apostles for his witnesses, all former Saints for
testimonies how honorable it is, to suffer in Gods quarrel. It is a great
shame not to think worthilye and reuerentlye thereof. One that knows not the
virtue of herbs, when he walks in the fields, or hills, without any regard
treads underfoot whatsoever grows in his way, making no more accounte of
one herb then of an other, but if he come into a Phisicians house, where he
sees many, not only wholesome herbs, but to his thinckinge strong and
unsavory weeds, he nevertheless conceyueth, that there is in them some
secrett virtue to cure diseases, And if he see the experience of their
operation much more accounts he of them, and whereas before he trampled with
contempt upon them, he now would be as careful to gather them: Even so one
that knows not the virtue and honor of the Cross, cheynes and prisons of
Christ, despises and abhors them as contemptible and dishonorable things,
but if he come into this school of our heavenly Phisician, I mean the
scripture, and there see these things had in accounte, and view the strange
operation of them, not only in Christ him self, but in S. Paul S. Ihon
Baptist and others, how can he choose but have them in great esteem, and be
ready if occasion serve, to try the force thereof in his own self,
howsoever the ignorant judge them as unprofitable weeds, and badges of
disgrace. What place of more price then Kings Palaces, yea what place so
glorious as heaven: and yett S. Chrysostom says that kings courts, Chrisost
in ca. 4. ad Ephes^.
and heaven it self yeldeth to the glory of the prison, that harboreth
Christ's prisoner. For as the Princes presence honoreth the basest cottage, and
makes it more esteemed and resorted unto, then the most statelye buildinges.
So the presence of Gods prisoner in the most infamous dungeon, makes it a
court and resort of Angels, and a paradyse where God him self delights to
walk and takes pleasure in the constancye of his afflicted servants. For
such is the honor that the cheynes give him that is a captive in Gods quarrel,
that his room what soever it be, is honorable, and he by his fetters more
richely adorned, then he could be with any Princely or imperial robes.
Mardocheus was not so much honored with Assuerus royal garments, nor Solomon
so glorious in his costliest habitt, nor Herod so adorned when he sought in
his gorgeous attire to boast him self for a god, as S. Ihon Baptist was, when
he had atchiued that title Ioannes in vinculis Ihon in cheynes. Yea imagine not
only what pomp has of any Emperor or worldly potentate ben showed, In
gold, jewels, or any ornaments of highest price, but also what might be
showed, if man's wish might be putt in execution, yett may it still be said
with S. Chrisostom. Pudet diuitias et auream munditie^ huiusmodi confer
vinculis. Ibidem.
I am ashamed to compare riches, or the pureness of gold, with such cheynes.
For in truth they are but base comparisons, in respect of other things of
greter preeminence, which nevertheless amou^t not to the dignitye of being
cheyned for Gods cause. It was a great prerogative to be an Apostle, a Doctor,
an Euanglist. It was a singular favor, to be rapt into paradyse, and to the
third heaven, to hear secrettes that it is not lawful for man to speak. It
was a rare privilege to heal any disease, not only with the touch of his
hands but with the touch of his very handkerchers and girdles. Chrisost. Ibid
And yett S. Chrysostom of these things says, Admiranda quidem fuerunt
ista, sed non qualia illa Cae sum autem multis plagis, coniecerunt in carcerem.
Merueylous things were these but not like to those other, whipped with many
stripes they cast him into prison. And this S. Paul him self seemed to
acknowledge in that he writing to Philemon, he omitteth his usual style, of
Paulus Apostolus or seruus Jesus Christi Paul an Apostle, or servant of Jesus
Christ, and begineth his epistle with Paulus vinctus Jesus Christi Paul a
prisoner of Jesus Christ. Wherein he seems to follow the custom of great
personages, who when from inferior dignityes they are enhanced to more
honorable titles, they always in their letters omitting the other, set down
their principal style, proper to their new atchiued prefermente. But now to
speak of the highest glory, which men chiefly esteem, what place more
acceptable then heaven, what seat more to be wished then the thrones on Gods
right hand, what company comparable to the fellowship of Angels, what
dignitye so great as to be one of the celestial spirittes, that have their
room next unto God? And yet S. Chrisostom thought S. Paul's prison a worthyer
place, his clogges and cheynes worthyer seats, his fellow captives more
honorable company, and the state of Christ's prisoner a more surpassing
dignity. And if you ask the cause, he will answer, for that it is more
glorious to a stout soldier, more pleasant to a true lover, to suffer for their
Captain, and labor in service of their Love, then to be honored by them.
Potius mihi habetur affici pro Christo, quam honoraria Christo. I account it
more honorable, says he, for Christ to be trobled, then of Christ to be
honored. For if Christ becomminge man, stripping him self in a manner of his
majesty, thought it not so honorable to be in his glory, as for us upon the
Cross, how much more ought we to deem it a singular preferment, to suffer for
his sake. The Apostles did greatly rejoice, that they were vouchsafed with
this honor. Act. 5
Ibant gaudentes a conspectu consilij, quod digni habiti sint pro nomine Jesus
contumeliam pati. They went rejoicing from the presence of the counsel, for
that they were thought worthy to suffer reproach for the name of Jesus. But
we never read, that they so rejoiced at their power over devils, the gift of
miracles, or other like especial favors, which well declares how much they
prised their persecution, more then their authority. And therefore Christ
said Beati estis not for commanding devils, not for raysinge the dead, or
healing the lame, or working of infinite wonders: Matt. 5
But beati estis cum maledixerint vobis homines, and persecuti vos fuerint, and
dixerint omne malum aduersus vos, mentie^tes propter me. You are blessed when
men hate you, and persecute you and speak all the evil they can against you,
belying you for my sake. But if it were a blessedness to work wonders, in
this respect also the cheynes of Christ were able to make us blessed. What
greater miracles, then for those that are fast bound, Act. 16
to unloose? for those that have their hands manacled, and their feet
fettered, to shake the foundations of the prison? to open without key or other
material instrument locked and fast barred doors. To vncheyne not only the
fast bound bodies, but the enthralled and captive souls. What stranger thing
then the same cheyne, that byndeth the body in earth, to bind the soul to
God in heaven, to make a prison of miscreantes, a church of Christians, and the
nest of vipers, a nurcerye of Saints. What greater wonder then Iaylours to
desire to be unbound, by their cheyned Captives, and yield them selves
voluntarye prisoners to those, whom they violentlye kept in durance. And if
these seem small matters, consider what reverence the very senseless and
unreasonable creatures bear unto Christ's cheynes. The Viper durst not stinge
the hand of S. Paul, Act. 28
that those cheynes had bound. Nether tempest, storm, sea, nor shipwreck,
could drown those passengers, whom these cheynes defended. How did Felix
tremble and quake, Act. 27
at cheyned Paul's speeches, Act. 24
how much were other hartened and comforted by the force of his fetters,
Philip. 1
how many did he bring to Christ, while he was bound for him, gloriynge in
them as so much the fayrer, in that they were bred in his captivity. Now what
prisoner for gods cause would not cry with David funes ceciderunt mihi in
praeclaris. Pas. 15
My bonds fell out to my great glory? Who would not willinglye harken to
those comfortable speeches, that exhort us to embrace the cheynes of wisdom,
that is of Christ the wisdom of his father. Inijce pedem tuum in compedes
illius, Ecclesi. ^
and in torques illius collum tuum, subijce humerum tuu^ et porta illam, and ne
acedieris vinculis eius and erunt tibi compedes eius in protectionem
fortitudinis, and bases virtutis, et torques illus in stolam gloriae. Decor.n.
vitae est in illa, and vincula illius alligatura salutis. Put thy feet into
her fetters, and thy neck in to her cheynes, set under her thy shoulder, and
carye her, and take no tediousnes in her gyues, and her fetters will be unto thee
a fortress of strength, and foundations of virtue, and her cheynes a stole of
glory. For the beautye of life is in her, and her gyues are bands of
salvation. Genesis 39
Where began Joseph to be made a decipherer of dreams, a sercher of secrett
interpretations, but in prison? Ierem. 33
Where did Hieremias prophesye most boldlye and truly the overthrow of his
enemies, but in prison? Where did Sampson recover his strength and
victoriouslye revenge him self upon the Philistines, killinge more at his
death, Iudi^. 16
then in his life, but Quando eductus de carcere ludebat coram cis when he was
brought forth of prison to play before them? ^ Paral. 35
Manasses a most wicked Idolater, and an impious King was never converted
until he was captive. Jonas came not to full konwledge of his fault, Iona. 2
but when he was imprisoned in the Whales bellye. Iosephes brethren never
entered into consideration of their offense in betrayinge him, Gene. 54
but when they were kept in restraynte. So that we see the prison is a school
of divine and hidden mysteries, to Gods friends, a fountain of revenge against
his enemies, and a cell of repentance to careless offenders. O how true a
saying is that In funiculis Adam traham eos, Os^^. 4
in vinculis charitatis. In the bands of Adam, will I draw them unto me and in
the cheynes of charity. How truly may they be called cheynes of charity
and love, that have not only force to appease the justice and stir up the
mercy of God, but even have power to suppress and bridle the unflexible
enmitye that Nature has engrafted. Who could live untouched among hungrye
Lions, but a Daniel and Gods prisoner? Dan. 6
Who could walk in the midst of the flame without burning, but such as were
bound and should have been burned in Gods quarrel? Dan. 3
These S. Basil, Basil. Hom. ^ de ieiunio
compares to a stone called Amianton, which is of that nature, that in the
fire it becomes as bright as a fierye coal, and taken out, is cleerer then at
the casting in, and can not be any way stained or defiled. For their bodies
were not only as gold purged, but more then gold, not so much as dissolved,
and came purer out, then they were cast into the furnace. Act. 12
These are they, that are visited by Angels, as S. Peter, fedd by Prophets as
Daniel, Dan. 14
honored by heavenly light and earthquakes as S. Paul and Sylas. Act. 24
Of these it verefied that de carcere and vinculis catenisque egrediuntur ad
regnum. Ecclesi. 4
From prison gyues, and cheynes, they come out to a kingdom, Genesis 39
as in Joseph and Daniel appears, the one being made Lord of all Egypt, and
the other again made one of the three chief under Darius, And both from the
thrall of the dungeon advanced to the throne of Prince lie dignitye. In these
have all we afflicted Catholics our chief confidence, hoping, that their
cheynes will plead for us, their prisons protecte us, and their prayers
obtain us some end of our miseryes. We doubt not, but Dominus de coelo in
terram aspexit, Psalm. 10
vt audiret gemitus compeditorum. Our Lord has looked from heaven into earth,
that he might hear the groans of the cheyned in prison. We assure our selves,
that exaudiuit pauperes Dominus, Psalm. 68
et vinctos suos non despexit. Our Lord has heard the poor, and has not
neglected the cheined for him. And therefore do we daily cry Introeat in
conspectu tuo gemitus compeditorum. Psalm. 78
Let the groans of thy prisoners enter into thy sight. Wherefore be not you
dismayde, but rather take comfort in your present estate. If you be despised
by the bad, you are honored of the good, if you be disgraced of men, you may
right well look for your praise from God. S. Ihon Baptist was always worthy
of honor, both in respect of his rough habitt, his hard diet, his innocent
life, his hye function, and great Prerogatives. Yett so long as he was at
liberty, that the people rann admiring his life, and reuerencing his person,
we here no great mention made by Christ of him, but when he was once become
Ioannes in vinculis Ihon in cheines fallen into worldly disgrace, Matt. 1^
and preferred to this Christian honor, the Capteyne strayt sounded the
soldiers renoume, and God him self rehearsed the catologue of his divine
praises. Which though they always were so great, that they could never have
been worthily enough by man's tongue rehearsed, yett were they never so worthy to
be uttered by Christ's own mouth, as when they had their chief complement
and perfection, which was the honor of his cheynes. Now let the captyues of
the world flatter them selves with the vain title of liberty. Let them
triumph in their cheynes of gold, in their jewels of perle, and precious
stone, in their gorgeous and statelye robes. Let them bost of their freedom,
when every thridde and ornament about them, is a manifest mark of their
captiuitye. When I say their tongues are thrall to Potentates ears, their
action and all their behavior framed to the likinge of great personages
eyes, their sense bodies and minds seruyle to their own sensualityes. It is
with them as S. Chrysostom notes as with Kings, Chrisost. Hom 18. in 1. Ep.
ad Tim.
that are taken captives by a barbarous Prince, who for their greater
ignominye, and his own glory, suffers them to keep on their princely
robes, and to were their crounes and in this attire forces them to most base
and seruyle offices. For so these that on the one side, by their brauerye seem
of great might, and at large liberty, on the other if you consider their
slauishe actions, most base and filthye, and their daily drudgerye in sin,
you can not but deem the^ so much the more miserable, in that seeming
glorious, they are inthralled in so heavy a bondage. For as often times the
lightening though it leave the velvet and costlye scaberd whole, yet it
consumes the more worthy thing that is the sword, which by the lightness of
the scaberd is easily perceived: So that pernicious fierflash of sin, though
it leave the body and goods sound, and impair not the outward state, yett
kylleth it the soul, and leaves it dead, whereof the gaudye lightness of their
outward behavior, is no obscure sign. Let us not yield to such follye, but
rather rejoice in our enclosure, and glory in our bands, remembering that the
longer we wear them, the more honor we shall purchase by them, and the better
we like them, the more benefitte shall we reap of them. Semel vincit says S.
Ciprian, Cip. Ep. 4
qui statim patitur, at qui manens semper in paenis, congreditur cum dolor,
nec vincitur, quotidie coronatur. He has but one victory, that strayte
suffers, but he that always dwelling in pain, does encounter with sorrow,
and is not conquered, is every day crowned. And again blessed is that part
amongst you, says the same Saint, that remains in prison, ad meritorum
titulos ampliores tormentorum tarditate proficiens, habitura tot mercedes in
coelestibus praemijs quot nunc dies numerantur in paenis. Proceedinge by the
lingringe of your torments to more ample titles of meritt, and sure to have so
many rewards in the heavenly paymente as there are days reckoned in present
pains. These are the true ornaments for Christians to bost of. This
captiuitye is our principal freedom, and the prisons are ports where God
harbors with us here and from whence he conueyeth us into the shore of
eternal faelicitye. Of this says S. Ciprian. Cip. Ep. 39
Imposuerunt quoque compedes pedibus vestris, ac membra felicia ac Dei templa,
infamibus vinculis ligauerunt, quasi cum corpore ligetur, and spiritus, aut
aurum vestrum ferri contagione maculetur. They have putt shacles upon your
fecte, and have bound your happy members temples of God with infamous
cheynes, as though the spirit could be bound with the body, or your gold
could be stained with the contagion of their iron. But comfort your selves,
and think this intreatye no hard usage: howbeit in them it proceed of a
malicious hatred. For Dicatis deo hominibus, Cip Ibid.
and fidem suam religiosa virtute testantibus, ornamenta sunt ista non vincula,
nec Christianos pedes ad infamiam copulant sed clarificant ad coronam. To men
consecrated unto God, and with religious virtue professing their faith, these
are not cheynes but ornaments, neither do they fetter Christian feet to
their infamye, but honor them to their croune and glory. Of this did Solomon
forewarne us, shewinge us the protection and care that God has of those, that
suffer for him, and how glorious estate they be in. Descenditque cum eo in
foueam, and in vinculis non dereliquit illum, donec afferret illi sceptrum
regni, and potentiam aduersus eos, qui eum deprimebant, and mendaces ostendit,
qui maculauerunt eum, Sap. 10
and dedit illi claritatem eternam. He descended with him into the pit, and
forsook him not in his cheynes, till he brought him a scepter of a kingdom,
and power against those that did oppress him, and showed the^ liars that did
defame him, and gave unto him an eternal glory. Remember therefore the goal
and you shall comfortablye pass over the race, regard not so much where you
are, as where you shall be. Think not so much of the comfortes that you want, as
of the wage that you win. Grieve not at the company from which you are
barred, but rejoice in that to which you are prepared, and assure your selves
that how few soever you see, yett are you not alone, to whom Christ and his
Angels have continual access. Solus non est cui Christus comes est, Cipri.
Ep. 63.
solus non est qui templum dei seruans, vbicunque fuerit sine deo non est. He
is not alone (says S. Ciprian) who has Christ for his pheere, he is not a
lone that keeping the temple of God, undefiled, where soever he be, without God
he is never. Finallye considering that our life is but a warfare and we always
in the field against our professed enemies, to whom in our baptism we badd
battle by defiynge and renouncing them: Seeing also the times be such that
those which stick unto the truth, are in a manner designed to the
slaughterhouse, in so much that we may truly say, Psalm. 43
Propter te mortificamur tota die, aestimati sumus velut oues occisionis: For
thy sake we are mortified all the day, and are accounted as sheep for the
butcherye: These things I say considered, let us take our prison as a place
of preparation, and a private school of exercise, to train and instruct us,
for the public, serious, and most sharp frayes. For as Tertullian says,
Tertul. li. ad Martires.
It is not for the advantage or behoof of a valiant soldier, to come from
disportes to bloodye strokes, or from the carpett to the camp, but it is
necessary to be hardened first in roughe treatye of them selves, in hard
usage and toylesome trauayles. For so in peace, they shall learn to digest
the disasters and incommodityes of war, and by these forerunning labors
inure their body to unease, and foster the courage and prowess of their
minds. Happy therefore are you, what troubles soever you sustain, for the
exercise of your virtue, and better inhabling both of body and mind. Such
was the preparation of the champions and soldiers of proof in former ages. They
were restrained of liberty, withhelde from chamber work, straytned in their
diett, from sweet meats, and pleasant drinckes, The more they were labored,
the better they were liked, and the more tormoyled in trouble, the more hope
they had of the victory: knowinge that virtue and constancye, that with
hardness and rigor gathers force, with softness and ease does languishe
and fall to ruin. This did they in regard of a corruptible croune, which they
were nether certain to attain, nor sure to possess. We therefore ayminge at
an incorruptible reward, let us reckon the prison a place of trial, that we
may be brought unto judgment well fortefied against all encounters, and be
able to say unto the judge that, Quantum formidinis and terroris attulit,
Cipri. Ep. 16
tantum fortitudinis ac roboris inuenit. As much fear and terror as he
brought, so much force and fortitude has he found.

Cap. 9. Cap. 9.

AND Now to draw to the end of your conflicte, The Nyneth comfort is the
death in it self is comfortable to the good.
for your final comfort I put you in mind of a most comfortable thing, that if
you be putt to death in this cause of the Catholic faith, your death is
Martyrdom, and your foil victory. And therefore seeing that dye we must, let
us embrace as S. Ciprian says this happy occasion, Cipr ep. ^3.
vt fungamur exitu mortis, cum praemio immortal litatis, nec vereamur occidi,
quos constat, quando occidimur, coronari. To pass over our mortal end with
the reward of immortallitye, neither let us fear to be killed, who by
killing are sure to be crowned. Death of it self to the good is not so odious,
but that for infinite motives, we have rather cause to wish it, then to
eschew it, and rather to desire it, Chrisost. hom 46. in matt.
then to fear it. Sweet says S. Chrysostom is the end to the laborers,
willinglye does the trauayler question about his Inn, often casts the
hirelinge when his year will come out, the husbandman always looks for the
time of his harvest, the merchant is still busy about his bills to know the
day of payment, and the woman great with child is ever musing upon the time
of her deliuerye. No less comfort it is to Gods servants, to think of
their decease, seeing that there is their heart, where they have horded their
treasure. For as S. Bernard notes, Bern^r. ad mi (...). templi.
where the conscience is clear, absque formidine mors expectatur, imo et
exoptatur cum dulcedine, et excipitur cum deuotione. Death is looked for
without fear yea desired with delight accepted with devotion. To us it kills
our most dangerous and domestical enemy, it breaks the locks, vnloseth
cheynes, Ps. 141.
and opens the door, to let us out of a loathsome prison. It vnloadeth us of
a combersome burden which oppresses our soul. Sap. 9.
Who would not willingly be out of the sway of Fortune, ridd of the infinite
hazards and periles, of daily casualtyes. Who would not be gladd to settle his
soul in security, out of this dangerous sea, wherein as S. Bernard says,
Berna^.
periculum probat, transentium raritas, pereuntiu^ multitudo. The rareness of
those, that pass over safe, and the multitude of others, that perish in their
passage sufficiently proves the peril. In the Ocean sea, of four ships not
one does miscarrye, and in the Sea of this world, of many fowers, not one is
saved. This world is the kingdom of Satan, what servant of God can love to
live in it? It is a place of banishment, and who is so unnatural as not
willinglye to forsake it? Can any choose rather always to hang in hazard, then
once to fall for his felicitye? Can any rather desire to live in the Gunshott
of the devils assaults, then to enjoy the port of assured securitye? Joan.
16.
We are promised, that here we shal-be persecuted, and hated of the world,
that we shall we^pe, and live in sorrow, that we shall be despised, and put to
shame, and have no rest of body, nor perfect contentmente of mind. We are
assured on the other side, that in the next life our reward is great, our
repose without trouble, and our comfort without cross. Our tears shall be
turned into triumph, our disgrace into glory, all our miseryes into perfect
felicitye. Who therefore would not rejoice quickly to dye; seeing that death is
the passage from this world to the next, from all the present agreeuances,
to all possible happiness. Well may the brute beasts fear death, whose end
of life is the conclusion of their being. Well may the Epicure tremble, who
with his life, looks to lose his felicitye. Well may the Infidels,
heretics, or unrepentant sinners quake, whose death is the beginning of their
damnation. Such as here have their heaven, and have made their prison their
praradise: those whose bellye was their god, and their appetites their guides,
may with reasone rue their death, seeing they have no portion in the land of
the living. They have sown in sin, and what can they look to reap but
miserye, vanities were their traficke, and grief wil-be their gain,
detestable was their life, and damnable will be their decease. Of such it is
verified, Eccl. 4
O mors quam amara est memoria tua, homini pacem habenti in substa^tijs suis?
Ibid 44.
vere mors peccatorum pessima. Sed pretiosa in conspectu Domini mors sanctoru^
eius. O death, how bitter is thy remembrance to a man that has planted his
peace and contentment in his worldly substance, for in deed most miserable is
the sinners decease. But precious is the death of saints in the sight of our
Lord. Here they have their pain, and in heaven they look for their payment.
Here they have sown in tears, and there they shall reap in joy. Their Judge
is he, for whom they have suffered, and therefore doubtless will be merciful.
Their accusers are made du^me, by their former repentance, and therefore cannot
be prejudicial. Their conscience is cleared by humble confession, and therefore
cannot be fearful. Hope is their staff to keep them from sliding,
righteousness their safe conduite, to warrant them from arrestyng, grace is
their guide, to keep them from erring. Their wounds and sufferings in Gods
cause, are rewards to assure them of comfortable intertaynment. Their frayes
and wrastlinges against their own passions, are badges of perfection and will
find free access. Finallye the hell that here they have passed, will
acertayne them of obtaining a crown in heaven. They are goodlye fruit, more
fit for the golden plate, and Kings table, then to hang longer on a rotten
bough. They are pleasant and sweet roses, more worthy to be honored in the
Princes hand, then left upon a thorny stalk. Yea they are glorious rubies,
rather to be set in the crown of glory, then here to be trodden under foot
by dirtye swyne. What can they see in this world to with hold them. Him. 7. in
ep. ad ^ob.
They run (says Saint Chrysostom) for a great wager, and not quasi in
certu. They regard not whether the way be green, and pleasant, or rough and
mierye, they way not who sees them, nor what they say of them. Though they
be reviled, they stay not to answer. Though they be stricken, they stand not
to reueng. Though their house burn, their wife compain, their children cry,
they turn not back to m^ane them, their mind is only on their wager, if
they run not, they win not, and therefore their only joy is to come
soonest to their goal. If they look upon the world, they see it like a Sea
where many trusting to the waves are drowned, others are beaten with the
billows against the stonye rocks, diverse laboring to attain diverse shores,
some by healpe of a selye plancke, some by some fragment of the broaken ship.
They see many forced to healpe them selves with their only hands, and many
other overcome with the surges, to have yielded up the ghost, and left a
multitude of dead carcases to the waters rage. Amongst others they see
themselves, also tired not with the smalest storms, and their hold to be
very fickle, and therefore what greater comfort can there befall them then to
be quicklye landed in a safe port, where behoulding under them, the perilles
esscaped, they may the more rejoice at their attained securitye. Psa. 106.
David describing this tedious voyage, or navigations of Gods servants
thorough this stormye sea, shows how eagre they were, and desirous to be
delivered out of the same. They sayethe he which descend into the sea of this
life, in the ships of their mortal bodies, doing their work in many waters
of worldly afflictions; true it is that they see the mercyful works of our
Lord in cherishing the^, and his maruayles in co^firming the^: But all this
they see in the depth of their distresses. He said, and the spirit of tempest
stood up in their persecutours, and the waves of aduersitye were raised hye
against them. They mount, as hye as heaven, and fall, as low, as hell and for
the time so amaze them, that their life pined away in miseries. For they are
tossed, and made to stagger like a drouncken man with continual varietye of
new surges and grieves, and all their wisdom in patiently suffering, and
firmly hopinge of Gods help, is devoured, and to the eye unprofitable against
their enemies rage. And therefore they cried unto our Lord, when they were
distressed in this dangerous manner, and desired to have a short cut to
their voyage end, and esteemed it a singular benefitt, that he led them by
death out of their necessities, and so altered their storm into a calm wind,
and guided them in the haven of their own wills, that is the haven of
securitye, in which they most desired to be. If they consider the poor, their
life is lead in such agonye, pain and needynesse, that it makes every one to
loath it. If they behold the rich and mighty, their felicitye is follye, and
their joy is vanity. If they look on Potentates, that seem the very flower
of mankind, they find oftentimes, that they are poor in their riches, abject
in their honors, discontented in their delights. Their body a sack of
dunge, their soul a sincke of sin, miserable their birthe, wicked their
life, and damnable their end. Look (says S. Augustine) into the graves, Aug
in sententiis a Pros per. collectis sententia (...)
sur-vew all the Emperors, Dukes, States, and, Worthyes of former ages, and
see who was master, who man, who rich, or who poor. Discern, if thou can,
the Captyue from the King, the strong from the weak, the fair from the
deformed. Which words import, that if after life there is no more, difference
of persons then there is in the ashes of velvet and course canuase, or of
diverse woddes burnte up in one fire, then surely it is follye to care for
these bodies or to desire their long continuance, which in the end must be
resolved into earth and dust, and can not here live without a multitude of
combers. The like we find almost in every other thing, and therefore surely all
miseryes of our life well perused, we may think it a great benefitt of God,
that whereas there is but one way to come into this world, yett are there
very many to go out of the same. What can there be in life, either durable,
or very delightsome, when life, it self is so frail, and tickle a thing Our
life (says the scripture) is like the printe of a cloud in the air, Sap. ^.
like a mist dissolved by the sun, like the passing of a shadow, Ps 102.
Job. 13. Jacob 4.
like a flower, that soon fades, like a dry leaf carried with every Wind,
like a vapoure that soon vanishes out of sight. Chrisost. hom. 24 in ep ad
(...).
S. Chrysostom calls it one while a heavy sleep fedd with false and
imaginarye dreams, an other while he call, leth it a comedye or rather in our
days a tragedye, Chris^st ep. 6
of transitorye shows and disguised persons. Ibid. Hom. ^. ep. ad coloss.
Sometimes he likeneth it to a birds nest made of straw and dung, that the
winter soon dissolueth. Gregor. Nazi (...) a^andis
S. Gregorye Nazianzen calls it a childs game that builds houses of sand
in the shore, where every wave washes them away, yea and as Pindarus says
it is no more but the dream of a shadow. Sap. 5.
It passes away like one that rides in post, like a shipp in the Sea, that
leaves no printe of the passage, like a bird in the air of whose way there
remains no remembrance, like an arrowe that flies to the mark, whose tracte
the air sodaynlye closes up. Whatsoever we do, sit we, stand we, sleep
we, wake we, our shipp says S. Basil always sayleth toward our last home,
Basilius in Psalm. prin^^.
and the stream of our life keeps on an unflexible course. Every day we dye,
and howrely loose some part of our life, and even then when we grow we
decrease. We have lost our Infancye, our childhood, our youth, and all til this
present day. what time soever passethe, perishes, and this very day, death
secretly by minutes pourloyneth from us. Greg. l. 11 m^^. ca. 26.
This S. Gregorye well expresses saying Nostrum viuere, a vita transire est,
vita nostra ipsis suis augme^tis ad detrimenta impellitur, et inde semper
deficit, vnde proficere se credit. Our living is a passing from life. For our
life with her increase diminishes, and by that always impayreth whereby it
seems to profit. Future things (says Innocentius) are always beginning,
Innoc. 3. l. 1. d^ contemp. m^^l c. 24 vel secu^dum alios. c. ^^
present things always ending, and things paste are quite dead and done.
For while we live, we dye, and then we leave dyeinge, when we leave living.
Better therefore it is to dye to life, then to live to death: because our mortal
life is nothing, but a living death. And life continually flies from us, and
cannot be with-helde; and death howrely comes upon us, and cannot be
withstood. No armoure resists, no threatening preuayleth, no entreaty
profits, against deaths assalte. If all other perilles and chau^ces spare our
life, yet time and age, in the end will consume it. We see the fludd, that
rises in the top of a Mountain, to fall and roll down with a continual
noise: It gusheth out with a holowe and horse sound, then it runs roaring
down, over craggye and rough clyffes, and is continuallye crushed and broaken
with diverse encounters, til at the foot of the hill, it enters into the Sea.
And so fares it with man's life, he comes into the world with pain, and
begins his course with pitiful cries, and continually molested with diverse
vexations, he never cease running down, til in the end he fall into the Sea
of death. Neither is our last hour the beginning of our death, but the
conclusion, and then it is come that has been long in the coming, and fullye
finished, that was still in the ending. Why therefore should we be vnwlling to
lose, that which cannot be kept? Better it is since death is debte, and natures
necessary wrack, to follow S. Chrisostomes counsel. Chrisost hom. 10. in
matt.
Fiat voluntariu^, quod futuru^ est necessarium, offeramus deo pro munere quod
pro debito tene mur reddere. Let us make it voluntarye, which must needs be
necessary, and let us offer to God for a present which of due and debte we
are bound to render. What maruayle if when the wind blows, the leaf fall,
if when the day appears, the night end. Our life says the same saynct was a
shadow and it passed, Chrisost ep. ^. ad Eutrop.
it was, a smoke, and it vanished. It was a buble, and it was dissolved. It
was a spinners webb, and it was shaken a sunder. No wiseman lamenteth, that he
lived not a year sooner then he was borne, and why should he lament, that
within a year or less, he shall live no longer. For he leeseth nothing, that
then he had, and he shall be to the world but as the^ he was God made Adames
garment of dead beasts skins, Genesis 3.
to put him in mind, that he was condemned to dye; and to make the remembrance
of death familiar un to him, that the loss of life might not affright him who
always carried the liuerye of death upon him. And as Daniell by spreadding
ashes in the Temple discovered the treacherye, Dan 14.
and falsehood of the Priests of Babilonia: So by poudering our thoughts, and
memory with the duste of our grave, and often repetition of our decease, we
shall soon discrye the vanitye of this life, the trains of the devil, and our
secret temptations to be such, as we would rather wish by losing of life to
cut of, then by avoiding death to continue. If any thing make death tedious,
it is the want of the consideration of it. The old men have it right before
them, the young men hard behind them, all men daily over them, and yet we
forget it. Familiarytye with Lions takes away the fear of them, the being
used to tempests gives heart and courage to endure them, and in war the
saying so many howrely bereaved of life, makes the soldier little or nothing
to set by it. If therefore we will be out of all fear of death, let us
continuallye remember it. If we use our horse to the race before we run for
the wager; If we accquaint our selves with the weapons before we fight for the
victory; Much more should we take heed, that we come not dispourueyed to this
last combat. The good Pylot, when he guides his shipp, he sits at the
stern in the hinder part thereof, and so the provident Christian to direct
his life, must always sit at the end of the same, that the mindfulnes of death
being his stern, he may fear it the less and provide for it the better. This
is the door whereby we must go out of bondage, and therefore, as the prisoner
that stands upon his deliuerye, takes greatest comfort in sitting upon the
threshold, that when the door is opened, he may the sooner get out: So ought
we always to have our mind fixed upon the last step of our life, over
which we are sure, that pass we must, though how, or when we know not. For
this cause that holy man Ioannes Eleemosinarius Patriarch of Allexandrya having
his Tomb in building, commanded that it should be left imperfect, and that
his servants every day, should putt him in mind to finishe the same, that
having his eye always fixed upon this door of death, he might the better
prepare for the passage through it. The memory of death is the ashes, wherein
the fire of virtue being raked up, it continues the better, and will be fitter
to enkindle the courage of our mind, that when death comes in deed, and
these ashes shall be vnraked, we may rather rejoice, that our flame has found a
vente to mount to her natural Sphere, where it will shine to our glory, then
sorrow, that it parts out of the chimnye of our flesh, where it was in
danger to be quenched with our iniquitye. It was not without cause that God
likened death to a thief. For as the thief when he finds the man of the
house watchinge, and upon his guard he saluteh him in courteous sort, and
takes upon him the person of a friend; but if he find him a sleep, he
cruellye murdereth him, and robs his treasurye: So death, to those, that are
prepared for it, is very comfortable, and to those only terrible that sleep
in sin, and are careless of their end. And to these belongs that saying,
The death of the sinners is worste. Evil because it seuereth from the world,
worse because it seuereth from the body, and worste of all because it seuereth
from God. For why; they make the world their Parradise, their body their god,
and God their enemy. To such death is hateful, for that therein they are
tormented with the panges of of the dyeing flesh, amazed with the fittes and
corrasiues of the mind, frighted with the terror of that which is to come,
grieved with remorse of that which is paste. They are stunge with the gnawing
of a guiltye conscience, discomforted with the rigor of a severe Judge,
annoyed with the thought of their loathsome sepulcher. And thus though death of
it self be not bitter, yet is it bitter, to the wicked. And yet (as S. Ambrose
notes) even to them is life more bitter then death. For more grievous is the
living to sin, then the dyinge in sin. For the wicked while he lives
increases his offense, and when he dies offends no more, and therefore by
his life he agumenteth his torments, and by his death he abridgeth the same.
It is the fear of death, that makes it terrible, and is not in deed so
grievous to dye, as to live in perpetual fear, and expectation of death.
Ecclesi. 1.
For he that fears God, shall make a good end, and in the day of his
decease he shall be blessed. And happy are the dead, Apoc. 14.
that dye in our Lord, from hence forth (says the spirit) they shall rest
from their labors, for their works do follow them. Job. 11.
The noone day light shall rise unto the^, at the evening (of their life) and
when they think themselves quite consumed, they shall rise as bright as
Lucifer. They (as S. Augustine says) because their desire is to be loosed,
and to be with Christ, endure to live with patience, and are ready to dye
with joy. They fear not death because they feared God in life. They fear not
death, because they rather feared life; And an evil death, is but the effect
of an evil life. Their life was a study how to dye well, and they knew, that
since death passed thorough the veins of life, it lost the bitterness of
death, and took the taste and sweetness of life. Neither are they amazed with
the fore-goinge gripes, and extremityes, because they take them as the throws
of childebirth, by which our soul is borne out of this loathsome body, and
brought forth to an eternal felicitye. They fear not the devils, to whom they
have stoutelye resysted. They have confidence in God, whose wrath they have
with repentance appeased. The horror of the grave does nothing move them,
because they do but sow therein a carnal and corruptible body, to reap the
same in the resurrection incorruptible and spiritual. This made Simeon so
ioyfullye sing Now thou releasest thy servant O Lord, Luc. 2.
according to thy word in peace. This made S. Hilarion so confidentlye say
unto his soul, Hieron. in vita Hilarionis.
Egredere, quid times? egredere animamea quid dubitas? septuaginta prope annos
seruisti Christo, and mortem times? Depart, why fear thou; depart O my
soul, why doubtest thou? Almost three score and ten years have thou served
Christ, and fear thou death? This made S. Ambrose on his death bed, give
this answer to those that wished his longer life. Possidorius in (...) S
Agust cap^ 17
Non sic vixi, vt pud^at me inter vos viuere; nec mori timeo, quia bonum
dominum habemus. I have not so lived that I am ashamed to live amongst you,
nether fear I to dye, because we have a good Lord. This made a Bishop S.
Augustines familiar friend, Ibid.
when his ^locke seemed unwilling with his death, to say. Si minquam been. Si
aliqua^do quare non modo? If I should never dye. Well. But if ever why not now?
They well knew, that death is but Gods officer to summon before him, whom he
means to call. They thought it an unchristian part, to with-saye in deeds,
that, which they prayed every day in words. For every day, the Christian
says, thy will be done, And how preposterous a thing is it (says S.
Ciprian) when his will is, Cip. l. de mortali.
that we depart not willinglye to obey him? If we repyne and grudge against
his pleasure, do we not follow the guise of stubbrone and evil deserving
servants, that cannot with out sorrow and grief be brought before their
master? Do we not rather go enforced by mere necessitye, then with any
remonstrance of goodwill or duty? And can we for shame desire, of him to be
honored with eternal rewards, that can so hardlye be entreated to come and
receive them? or to enjoy for ever the glory of his presence, that shun the
door whereby we must enter into it? Well might those words be repeated to us,
Ibidem
which in S. Ciprians time were said in a vision to one that lay a dyinge.
Pati timetis, exire non vultis, quid faciam vobis? You are unwilling to suffer
in the world, loathe to depart out of the world, what should I do unto you?
A worthy rebuke of the loath to dye. For if the chased Heart, to avoid the
greedye hounds, flies often times to the hunters protection, and though
pursued of him, yet by nature has an affiance in his mercy; If one enemy
sometimes finds favor at an other enemies hand, where he least looked for
it, why should a dutyfull child fear, to go to his heavenly Father, a
penitent soul to his sweet Savior, an obedient member, to be joined with his
head. If he came into this world to redeem us, why should we doubt, but at
our death he will receive us, especially if we dye for him, as he dyed for us.
He that accepts his enemies, will he reject his friends? and he that bought
us so dear, will he refuse his penyworth? If he affecte our company so much
in earth, that he said my delyghte is to be with the children of men, has
he now so forgotten his old love, as not to admit us to his company in
heaven? He came hither to buy us, an inheritance, and he went from hence to
prepare it for us, and when we are to enter into posession will he exclude us?
Who can imagine of him, that is contented here to be him self our food, and to
abase his majesty to enter into our soul, dwelling in this cottage of clay,
and unpleasant dungeo^, that he (I say) will not be content in our cheifest
need, to be our friend, and to advance our departinge soul to the comfort
of his presence? Can he that has been our guide, and our guardian all the way,
forsake and shake us of in in the end of our journey. No no the eyes of our
Lord are upon those, Psa: ^^
that fear him, that he may deliver their souls from death. Let us
remember his love in adopting, his truth in promising, and his power in
performing, and our fear of death will be soon altered into desire of the same.
He came to open heaven gates, and what meaned he but that we should enter in?
He came into earth to inuit us unto him, and why departed he from earth, but
to have us follow him? Finallye he abandoneth none, but abandoned by them: he
is easily found, where he has been carefullye sought: and is most ready to
crown, the victorious conqueror. All which considdered, Amb: l. d^ bon^
mortis cap: 7
we may well say with S. Ambrose, that death to the good is a quiet haven,
and to the bad may be counted a shipwreck. Cap. 10


Cap. 10. That the viol^nt death and foregoing torments are tolerable in a good
cause.

Neither let the vyolence of death, or multitude of torments affrigh^ us, we
have but one life, and but one can we leese. 1. Reg 17. Iud 16. 1. Reg. 4.
Golias was as much hurt by David's little stone, as Sampsone by the wayght of a
whole house. And Hely had as much harm, by fallinge backewarde in his chair,
as Iesabell, by being thrown down from a hye window. 4 Reg 9 Act. 7
And all they that stoned Steeuen to death, took no more from him, then an
ordinarye sickness did from Lazarus, Io^n. 12
and does dayelye from us all. One death, is no more death then an other, and
as well the easyest, as the hardest, takes our life from us. Which point a
glorious Martyr of our days executed for the Catholic Faith in Wales,
Rich^rd While. Mart.
having well understood, when the sentence of his comdemnation was red that he
should be drawn upon a hurdle to the place of execution, then hanged till he
were half dead, afterward vnboweled, his head cut of, his body quartered, his
quarters boiled, and sent up in such and such places, he turned unto the
people, and with a smiling countenance said. And all this is but one death. But
yet if the foregoing torments dau^t our constancy. Let us consider what we
are, what we avoid, what we look for* and whom we serve. We are Christians*
and ought to be of more valor then heathens, we avoid by short punishments
eternal and more grievous afflictions, with small conflicts we purchase
unspeakable glory, we suffer for a God, that has suffered more for us. Let
us but consider what men have suffered for false gods, for the devil, and for
vain glory, and we shall think our torments the more tolerable. Tertullian
writes of a Curtizan called Leoena, Tertul. ad mart.
that having tiered the tormentours, in the end spitt her tongue in the
Tirantes face, that she might also spitt out her voice, and be unable to
bewraye her accomplices, though violence should chance to make her willinge. It
was the fashion emongst the Lacedaemonians, for choice young gentlemen to offer
themselves to be whipped before the aultars of their false gods, their own
parents exhortinge them to constancye, and thinkinge so much honor gained to
their houses, as they shedd blood. Yea and accountinge it greater glory, that
their life should yield and depart from their body, rather then their body
yield or depart from the lashes. The history of Mutius Scae^ola is known,
whose constancye Seneca commending says. Hostium flammarumque contemptor,
manu^ suam in hostili foculo distillantem spectauit, donec iussum est vt inuito
ignis eriperetur. Hoc tanto maius puto, quanto rarius est, hostem, amissamanu
vicisse, quam armata. A contemner both of flames and foes, beheld his own
hand, melting in his enemies fire, until commandment was given that against
his will the fire should be taken from him. Which so much the more I account
of, by how much a ra^er thing it is, with a maimed then with an armed hand to
conquer an enemy. It was an ordinarye pastime a monge the Romans, for men
to show sport in wrastelinge and striving with Lions, and other wild beasts,
only for a vain proof, and bost of their valor. They esteemed the printe
of brutishe tuskes glorious ornaments. The ranges of bloodye claws badges of
honor, and their comlines increased with number of scarres. Of these S, Cip*
ad Dona.
Ciprian speaking says. Quid illud oro^te, quale est, vbise feris obijciunt,
quos nemo damnauit, aetate integra, honesta satis ^orma, vest pr^tiosa
viuentes in vltroneum funus ornantur, malis suis miseri gloriantur, pugnant ad
bestias non crimine sed furore. What means that I pray thee, what thinckest
thou of it, where such cast themselves to wild beasts, whom no man
condemned, and persons of ripe age, of comely feature, gorgeously attyred,
while they are alive set forth themselves toward a voluntarye funeral, and
glory poor wretches in their own miseryes, and fight with bestes not
condemned for their fault, but incenced with furye. But what need I reckone
profane examples, though in deed they ought so much the more to move us in that
they suffered for a puff of vain glory, more then we do for eternal
felicitye. Yet want we not most glorious examples of our own Saints, and in
our own cause, and because the particulers were infinite, I will only set
down some general speches of their torments. Cip. Ep. 2. ad Demetrium
S. Cyprian speakinge to a persecutor says, Innoxios, iustos, deo caros, Domo
priuas, patrimonio spolias, catenis premis, carcere includis, bestijs gladio
ignibus punis. Admoues laniandis corporibus longa torme^ta, multiplicas
lacerandis visceribus numerosa supplicia, nec immanitas tua vsitatis potest
contenta esse tormentis, excogitat nouas penas ingeniosa crudelitas. The
innocent just and dearest unto God, thou thrustest out of their howses, thou
spoylest of their partrimonye, thou loadest with cheynes, thou lockest in
prisons, with wild beasts, swords, and fire thou deuourest. Thou use long
torments in dismembringe their bodies. Thou multiplyest varietye of punishments
in tearing their bowels. Nether is thy barbarousnes contented with usual
torturinges. Idem ep. 6
Thy wittye crueltye deuiseth new pains. And in another place speaking of the
martyrs. The tormented says he, stood stronger then the tormentors, and the
beaten and torn members, overcame the beatinge and tearinge hooks. The cruel
and often doubled scourginge, could not conquer their unconquerable faith
though they were brought to that pass, that the tormentour had no whole nor
^ounde parcel of limes, but only goarye wounds wheruppon to continue his
crueltye. A^^c^ l^^ congent in fi^^
Arnobius speaking to the persecutours. You says he with your flames,
banishments, torments and bestes, where with you rend and rack our bodies, do
not bereave us of our lives, but only ridd us of a weak and sorye sickness.
Apolog ^t.
You put us says Tertullian upon gallows and stakes, you tear our sides
with forkes, we are beheaded, throwe^to the wild beasts, and condemned to
toil in the metal mines. Not inferior to these were the torments of the
fathers of the old Testament, H^^^: 11
of which S. Paul speaks saying. Others were racked not acceptinge
redemption, that they might find a better resurrection. And others had trial
of mockeryes, and strypes. Moreover also of bands, and prisons. They were
stoned, they were hewed, they were tempted, they dyed in the slaughter of the
sword, they went about in sheep skins, in gotes skins, needye, in
disstresse, afflycted, of whom the world was not worthy. Wandering in
deserts, in mountains, in denes, and cau^s of the earth. And of these
torments of Martyrs, all Historyographers do make so often and large mention,
that there can hardly be devised any kind of cruelty, that they reckon not
amongst the passions of Gods sayncts. Nether ar there fewer that have most
valia^tlye beside torments endured the last brunte of death; then thinkinge
themselves, most happy, when they had obtained any means to depart this
life. Lucretia sheathed her knife in her own bowels to renoune her chastytie.
Empedocles threw him self into Aetna flames to eternize his memory.
Peregrinus burnt himself in a pyle of wood, thinking thereby to live for ever
in men's remembrance. Asdrubals wife at the surprysing of Carthage, rather chose
to burn out her eyes, and yield her body to her country flames, then to
behold her husbands miserye, and to be her self her enemies pray. Regulus a
Captain of the Romans, rather the^ he would ransom his own life, with the
death of many, was contented to be rouled in a Hogsehead sticked full of sharp
nails, and Cleopatra suffered her self to be bitten and stounge with most
venomous Vipers, rather then she would be carried as captive in triumph. Did not
Saul and his esquire run upon their own swords, ^: Reg: ^^
to avoid the Philistians rage. Did not Judas hang him self for desperation,
Matt. 27
to hasten his journey toward his deserved punishemente. And yet all these with
their death, began their hell, not ended their miserye, and upon a vain
humor did the same, that we are forced unto for Gods cause. Tertul: ad man.
And as Tertullian well notes, haec non sine causa Dominus in seculu^ admisit,
sed ad nos et nunc exhortandos, et in illa die, confundendos si formidauerimus
pati pro veritate ad salutem, quae alij effectauerunt, pro vanitate in
perditionem. Not without cause has our Lord permitted these examples in the
world, but for our present exhortation, and future confusion, if we be afraid
to bear for verytye to our salvation, that which others have desired for a
vanytye to their perdition. Now if I would stand to recite the glorious
examples of those, that have constantlye dyed in a good cause, the number is so
great, their courage so glorious, that it would require a whole treatise by it
self. Consider the example of Abell that was cruellye murdered, Gen: 4
of Hieremy that was stoned, Esaias that was sawen in sunder, 2. Pa^: 24
Zacharye that was slain between the Temple and the Altar. Consider in the
new Testamente, the courage of little children, that in their prowes
surmou^ting their age, have in their childish body, showed hoarye and constant
minds, and in that weakness of years, been superyours to all Tyrants
torments. Consider the tender and soft Virgins, who being timorous by kind,
and frail by Sex, have nevertheless in Gods quarrel altered their female
relenting hearts, into vnfearful and hardye valor, and been better able to
endure, then their enemies to practice upon them any outrage. Consider the
whole multitude and glorious host of Martyrs, whose torments have been
exquisite, bloody, and with all kind of extremytye, and yet their minds
vndau^ted and strong, and their agonyes always ended with triumph and
victory. And if all these examples be not forceible enough, to make us not to
fear death, let us consider how many ways, we may of force and without
merit suffer casual mischaunces, and sodayn death; Vt illa nos instruant,
Tertul. L. ad Mart.
as Tertullian says, si constanter adeunda sint, quae et inuitis et eve nire
consueuerunt. That those things may benefit us if they be constantlye endured,
which whether we will or no are incidente unto us. How many at unawares have
been burnte up in their own howses, how many slaughtered by beasts in the
fields, how many by the same devoured in Cytyes? How many consumed in common
pestilences, murdered by thieves, slain by their enemies? And even in our
days, how many see we not only desperatelye to venture in war, to run
upon the swords, to contemn perilles, to be lauishe of their lives, but
diverse also forced against their wills, to enter the same dangers, and to
cast them selves away, and that often times in unjust quarrelles, to the
damnation of their souls. Finallye who is there, that mauger whatsoever he can
do, may not suffer that by misfortune, which he fears to suffer in Gods
cause. Why therefore should we fear that, which cannot be avoided? The very
necessitye of death, should make us not unwilling to dye, and the remembrance
of our mortalytye should make us little fear, when experyence shows us
mortal. Live well and dye well we may, but live long, and not dye, we
can-not. We should not think our life shortened, when it is well ended. He
dies old enough, that dies good, and life is better well lost, then evil
kept. We go but that way, by the which all the world before us has gone,
and all that come after us shall follow, and at the same instant with us,
thousands from all parts of the world shall bear us company. If we be
taken away in the flower of our age, how could it be better bestowed, then on
him that gave it, and all our loss therein is concluded in this, that being
passengers upon this worldly Sea, we had a stronger gale to wafte us sooner
over, to our desired port. If we dye in this cause, our pitcher is broaken
over the fountain, where the water is not lost, but only returned thither,
from whence it was first taken. We are not in prisone for theft, or murder,
that when we are called out we should look for nothing but for present death.
Our body is our hold, our death our deliuerye, when the Iayler calls, we
have a clear conscience and fear not his threatninge. If he manace death, he
promises life, and his killinge is our reuiuinge. It is a shame for a
Christian to fear a blaste of man's mouth, that has such invincible shores to
support him, as that no man nor devil is able to overthrow them. Tertul.
def^g. in pers^cut.
Times homine^ Christian says Tertullian, quem timeri opo^tet abab Angelis,
siquidem Angelos i^dicaturus es. Quem timeri oportet a demonijs, siquidem et in
demones accepisti potestatem. quem timeri oportet ab vniuerso mundo, siquidem
et in te mundus, iudicatur. Fear thou man O Christian, that art to be
feared of the Angels, for the very Angels shalt thou judge. That art to be
feared of the devils, for over the devils haste thou received authority, that
art to be feared of the whole world, for in thee is the world to beiudged. How
often for a point of honor, have we been ready to challenge our counterpeere
into the field? how often have we for our pleasure, used desperate and
breaknec^ games, thinking it glory, to contemn death for a bravery, and a
stayne to our courage to show any cowardice in mortal hazardes. Now therefore
may Tertullians words be well objected unto us. Tertul. in ^corp.
Quid grauatur pati nunc homo ex remedio, quod non est tunc grauatus pati ex
vitio. Displicet occidi in salutem, cui non dsplicuit occidi in perditonem?
Nauseabit ad Antidotum, qui hiauit ad venenum? Why grudgeth man to suffer for
his remedy, that which he grudged not to suffer upon a vanitye? Displeases
it him to be killed to his salvation, whom it displeased not to be killed to
his perdito^? and will he loathe to receive the medicyne that gaped so wide to
let in the poison. Now ought we to renew, that wonted courage and be as
careless of our lives, when they are to be well spent, as then we were, when we
would have spilte them for a vanitye. When the devil led us in his service, he
could with a vain hope of praise, weane us from love of our lives, and shall
we think that God deals hardlye, that with so glorious rewards enticeth us
from the same? Is death pleasant, when the devil commands it, and is it
uncomfortable when it is at Gods appoyntemente? For this very end has God
ordained Martyrdom. Vt a quo libenter homo elisus est, Tertul (...).
eum iam constanter elidat. That by whom man was wilfullye foiled, him he
should manfullye foil again. In sin and heresy, we were venturous and
bold, or rather presu^ptuous and rash. when we were unarmed* naked, and
without force, no terror could amaze or cool our audacity: and now that we
are reclaymed to virtue, and true religion, harnesed with Gods grace, guarded
under Gods pauice, protected by his Angels, and fortified by the Prayers,
Sacraments, and good works of the Church; shall we be more fearful, then we
were without all these succors? We are allotted to a glorious combat, in which
the only comfort of so honorable lookers on, were enough to harten us
against all affrontes. Cip. op. 6^.
Preliantes nos says S. Cipryan, and fidei congressione pugnantes spectat
Deus, spectant Angeli eius, spectat et Christus. Qua^ ta est gloriae dignitas,
quanta faelicitas, praeside deo congredi and Christo iudice coronari? When we
skirmish or fight in the quarrel of our faith, God beholds, his Angels
behold us, and Christ looks on. What a glorious dignitye is it, how great
felicitye, to fight under God as ruler, and to be crowned of Christ as judge
of the combat. Let us therefore with our whole might, arm us, and prepare our
selves to this conflicte. Let us put on the brestplate of Justice, so that our
breast may be guarded against our enemies darts. Ep^^. 6.
Let our feet be shod, that when we beginn to walk upon the Basiliske and
Adder, Psalm. 6^.
and to tread under foot the Lion and the Dragon, we be not by them stung or
supplanted. Let us carry the shield of faith to repair us from our enemies
shot. Let us hyde our head in the helmett of salvation, that our ears yield
not to bloodye menacinges, our eyes detest heretycall books and service, our
forehead always keep the sign of the Cross, and our tongue be always
ready to profess our faith. Let us arm our hand, with the sword of Gods
spirit, that it refuse to subscribe to any unlawful action, and defend only
the true Catholic faith, and being thus armed with a pure mind an
uncorrupted faith, and sincerytye of life; Ad aciem qua nobis indicitur, dei
castra procedant, Armentur integri^ne perdat integer, quod nuper stetit.
Armentur et Lapsi, vt et lap sus recipiat quod amisit. CiP. Ep.^^.
Integros honor, lapsos dolor ad praelium prouocet. Let Gods camp march on to
the battle, that is bidden us. Let the perseuerant be armed lest they lose
the benefitt of their late standing, let the yeelders be armed that they may
recover the loss of their former falling. Let honor to the constante, and
remorse to the lapsed be a spur to the skirmige. Tertu^^. in Scorp.
It has been always says Tertullian accounted a most worthy experience of
combatters studyes, to put in trial the strength and agilitye of their
bodies, and measure it by the multitude of co^menders, having their reward
for their goal, the assemblye for their judge, and the common verdict for
their pleasure. The naked limbs bear away many wounds, the buffetes make
them stagger, the spurninges iustle them, the plummet staves rende them, the
whippes tear them: Yet no man condemns the Captain of the conflicte, for
obiecting his champions to such violence. Complayntes of injuries have no
place in the field, but every one marketh what reward is appointed for those
galls, wounds, and printes of the strypes, as namely the crowns, glory,
stypende, public privileges, portratures, and graven Images, and such like
monuments, wherewith the world does as it may eternize them, with a certain
perpetuitye, and procure the^ a continual resurrection in their posterityes
remembrance. Pictes ipse non queritur, dolere se non vult, Tertul. ibid.
corona premit vulnera, palma sanguinem obscurat, plus victoriatum est, quam
iniuriatum, hunc tu laesum existimabis, quem vides laetum? The Champion
himself complayneth not, he would not be deemed to feel any pain, the
crown covers the wounds, the wager shrowdeth his blood, greater is his
victory then his iniurye, and whom on the one side you think sore, on the
other side you see not sorry. How much more ought we to glory in our
martyrdomes, and not only not condemn, but highlye praise our heavenly
Captayn, for exposing us to these bloodye frayes. The husbande-man scatters
in the earth his corn so carfullye before reaped, yea he burieth it and
covers it in the forowes, he rejoices when the showers come to rotte it, the
froste to nippe it, the snow to lie over it, and yet in that seed has he all
his hope of gain. The rain moves him not, when he thinks on the harvest,
nor the corruptyng of the cornel, when he thinks on the ripe ear of corn.
Let not us therefore condemn our husband man for delighting in our passions.
For well knows he, that nisi granum frumenti cadens in terram mortuu^ fuerit,
ipsum solum manet. Unless the cor^nell of wheat fall upon the ground and
dye, it self only remains. And therefore suffers he these persecutions,
because thereby multiplicabit semen vestrum, 1. Cor. ^.
et augebit incrementa frugum iustitiae vestrae. He will multiplye your seed,
and augmente the increases of the fruits of your justice. T^rtul. i^^d*
Wherefore herein, Liberalitas magis quam acerbitas dei praeest. Euulsu^ enim
hominem de diaboli gula per fidem, iam and conculcatorem eius voluit efficere
per virtutem, ne solum modo euasisset, sed etiam de ^icisset inimicum. Amauit,
que^ vocauerat ad salutem, inuitare ad gloriam, vt qui gaudeanus liberati,
exultemus etiam coronati. Gods liberalitye appears more, then his rigor.
For whom he had draune out of the devils throat by faith, he would have to
trample him down by virtue. Lest he should only have fledd, not foiled his
enemy. It pleased him, whom he called to salvation to inuit unto glory,
that we might not only rejoice as delivered, but also triumph as crowned.
Chrisostom (...). 4 in (...).
If therefore as S. Chrisostom says the storms and rage of the Sea to the
maryner, the winter and foul weather to the husbandman, the murders and
wounds to the soldiers, the cruel blows and stripes to the combatter, seem
tolerable enough in hope of a temporal and transitorye reward: Much more
all worldly miseries, to us in hope of heaven. Other Kings and potentats,
never conquer with out killinge, never tryumphe without crueltye, never enjoy
the pleasures of this life, without the miseryes of many men's deaths. But the
soldiers of Christ are most honorable, not, when they live in deyntynesse,
pomp, and majesty, not when they murder impiously, cruelly, and brutishly:
But when they suffer, humblye, stoutly, and patientlye, in his quarrel. Let our
adversaries therefore load us with the infamous titles of traitors, and
rebels, as the Arians did in the persecution of the Vandals, and as the
Ethnicks were wont to call Christians Sarmentitios, and semiassios, because
they were tied to halfpeny stakes, and burnte with shrubbes: So let them draw
us upon hurdles, hang us, vnbowel us alive, mangle us, boil us, and set our
quarters upon their gates, to be meat for the birds of the air, as they use
to handle rebels: we will answer them as the Christians of former persecutions
have done. Tertull. apolog. cap. vlt.
Hic est habitus victoriae nostrae, hec palmata vestis, tali curru triu^phamus,
merito itaque victis non placemus. Such is the manner of our victory, such our
conquerous garment, in such chariotes do we triu^ph. What maruayle therefore if
our vanquished enemies mislyke us. Consolamini igitur in verbis istis. Take
comfort therefore in these words, and with joyful hearts cry, Philip. 1.
Mihi viuere Christus est et mori lucru^. If you dye, you shall be delivered out
of two prisons at once, the one so much worse then the other, as is it worse
to be with-helde from perfect bliss, then from the liberty of a most paynful
and tedious pilgrimage. You have heretofore lived to dye, but then shall you dye
to live for ever. Here you so lived that you were continually dyeing, but then
you shall once dye never to dye more, or rather by abrydging a lingering death
p^rchase and everlasting life. You shall leave a ruinous and base cottage, and
pass to a most glorious and blessed palace, whose very pauement, set with
so many bright and glorious stars, may give you a guess what rooms you
are like to find above. It cannot grieve you to depart with the prodigal
Son from this dirtye village, Luc. 1^.
and the company of swyne to your fathers house, and you must needs
willinglye cast of your sack of dunge, to receive the first stole. where you
are invited to the great supper. Luc. 14.
I hope you have neither oxen to try, nor farm to see, nor new wife to
withholde you from goinge. You have had toil enoughe in the servitude of
Egipte. You have wandered long enoughe in the Deserte in continual battle,
with your and Gods enemies. And now if you dye the time is come, that you
take repose and enjoy the felicitye of the land of promise. You have been in
the Mount Sinai with Moses, Exodus 9.
quando caeperunt audiri tonitrua, micare fulgura, and nubes densissima,
operire montem. When thunderinges began to be heard lyghtnings to flashe, and a
thick dark cloud to cover the Mount. Now are you called unto Mount
Thabor, Matt. 1^.
where in-ioyeinge his glory, whose terroure you have already sustained. You
may say with S. Peter. Bonum est nos hic esse. It is good for us to be here.
The harvest of the Church, whereof the Spouse speaks in the Canticles. Can 5.
Messui mirrham meam cu^ aromatibus. I have reaped my mirrhe with my spyces, is
not yet done. You are grown up in this field, and are part of the croppe
that by martyrdom must be reaped, to be laid up in Gods barn. You are the
mirhe to enbalme not the dead bodies but the dead souls of heretics. You
are Spyce to seasone by the example of your constancy, the bitter griefs and
passions of poor Catholics. Remember how often you have been with Christ
at his Supper, Luc. 22.
and reasone now requires you should follow him to Gethsemanie not to sleep
with S. Peeter, but with him to sweat blood. Your life is a warfare your
weapons patience, your Captain Christ, your standerd the Cross. Now is the
larum sounded, and the war proclaimed, dye you must, to winn the field.
Neither is this news to you, that have professed to be Christ's champions,
seeinge the Captains general of his army, I mean the Apostles and all the
most famous Soldiers since their time, have esteemed this the most soueraygne
victory, by yelding to subdue, by dyeing to revive, by sheddinge blood, and
leesinge life, to win the goal of eternal felicity. Elyas must not think
much, 4 Reg. 2.
to let fall the worthless Mantle of his flesh, to be carried to Paradyse in a
fyery chariot. Gedeon may willingly break his earthe^ flagons, to show the
light that must put to flight his enemies. Iud 7. Gen 39.
Joseph must leave his cloak in the strumpets hands, rather then consent unto
her lewd entysements, and the young man of Gethsemani rather ru^ne away naked,
Man: 14*
the^ for saving his Sindon to fall into the Sinagoges captivity. The Beuers
when they are hunted, and see the^ selves strayted have this propertye, they
byte of their own stones, for which by kind they know themselves to be
chieflye pursued, that the hunter having his desire, may cease to follow them
any farther. Now if nature has taught these brute things, to save themselves
with so paynful a means, from bodilye danger, how much more ought reason
and Faith to teach us, willinglye to forgo not only lybertye and lyuinge,
but even our very life, to purchase thereby the life of our souls, and deliver
our selves from eternal perdition? You have every day in your prayers said
Adueniat regnum tuum, let thy kingdom come. Now is the time come to obtain
your petition. The Kingdom of this world is in the wayning, and the age
thereof begins to threaten ruin. The forerunners of Antichrist are in the
pride of their course, Cip l. de mor^al^.
and therefore S. Cyprian says. Qui cernimus iam caepisse gra^ia, and scimus
imminere grauiora, Lucrum maximum computemus, si istinc velocius, recedamus. We
that see already great myseryes, and foresee greater to be at hand, let us
account it time happilye gained, if we may quicklye depart, to preuente their
coming. Neither is the winter so full of showers to water the earth, nor
summer so hot to ripen the corn, nor the spring so temperate to prosper young
growthe, nor Autumn so full of ripe fruit, as heretofore it has been. The
hills tyered with diggynge yield not such store of marble, the wearyed mines,
yield not so great plenty of precious metal, the scante veins wax daily
shorter. In the Sea decays the maryner, in the tents the soldier,
Innocence in courts, Justice in judgments, agreement in friendship,
cunning in arts, and disciplyne in ma^ners. The hot Sun gives not so clear
light, the Moon declineth from her accustomed brightness, the fountaynes
yield less abundance of waters. Men are not of so perfytt hearing, so swift
running, so sharp sighted, so well forced, nor so bygge and strong lymmed, as
heretofore. We see graye heads in children, the hear falls before it be
full groune, neither does our time end in old age, but with age it
begins, and even in our very vprist our natiuitye hasteneth to the end.
Fynallye every thing is so impaired, and so fast falls away, that happy he
may seem, that dies quicklye, least he be oppressed with the ruynes of the
dyinge world. Let them make account of this life, that esteem the world
their friend, and are not only in the world, but also of it, As for you the
world hates you, and therefore how can you love it, being hated of it. We are
here Pilgrims and strangers, and how can we but willinglye embrace the death,
that assigns us to our last home and delivering us out of these worldly
snares, restores us to paradyse, and the kingdom of heaven. Our country is
heaven, our parents the Patryarkes, why do we not hasten to come speedylye to
our country, and to salute these parents. There a great number of our
friends exspecteth us, a huge multitude desires our coming, secure and
certain of their own salvation, and only careful of ours. What
unspeakable comfort is it to come to the syghte and embracing of them? How
great is the contentment of their aboade, without fear of dyinge, and with
eternytye of lyuinge? There is the glorious quire of Apostles, a number of
rejoicing Prophets, the innumerable multitude of Martyrs, crowned for the
victory of their bloodye frayes and passions. There are the troops of fair
Virgyns, that with the virtue of chastity, have subdued the rebellions of
flesh, and blood. There are the companyes of all Gods Saynctes, that bathe in
eternal felicytye, having happelye passed over the dangerous voyage through
this wicked world. There is the center of our repose, the only seat of
vnfaylyng securitye, and who can be so unnatural an enemy to himself, as to
eschew death being the bridge to so unspeakable contentme^t. Seeinge therefore
there is so little cause either to love life, or to fear death, and so great
motyues, to lamente that our inhabitance is prolonged, and our decease
adiourned: Let not their threatninges appall us, who can only kille the
body, and have nothing to do with the soul. Whose greatest spyte works
our profitt, and who when they think to have given us and our cause the
greatest wound, then have they deeplyest wounded themselves, and procured our
highest aduancemente. They unarm us of blunte and bending weapons, they
stryppe us of slyght and paper harness, and against their wills, they arm
us with more sharp, and prycking swords, and with armoure that yields to no
kind of vyolence. When they think to have rydde us, from encounteringe their
wicked endeuoures, they do but a better our habilitye to resist and vanquish
them, altering us from earthlye soldiers, to heavenly warriers, from tymorous
subjects to mighty sovereigns, from oppressed captyues to glorious Saints.
Gen^: 4
They think by kill^^g Abell that Caynes sacryfice will be accepted, not
remembringe that Abels blood cries out against them. 4: Reg: ^
By pursuinge Elyas with many soldyers, they think to have the upper hand,
not remembering that the fire will fall from heaven in his defense. Act. ^
They think by stoning Steeue^ to have ended their chief enemy, not
considering that his principal persecutour, will succeed in his room, and be
unto them a more victorious adversary. Let them still contynewe their rage,
let them think themselves wise in this ignorante follye. But Let us though we
lamente at their offense yet rejoice in our felicitye.

Cap. 11.
Cap. 11
WHat greater preeminence is there in Gods Church, The Eleventh comfort that
Martyrdom is glorious in it self, most profitable to the Church, and
honorable to the Martyrs.
then to be a Martyr? what more renoumed dignity, then to dye in this cause of
the Catholic faith? And this crown do our greatest enemies set upon our
heads. The glory whereof, though none can sufficyentlye utter, but such as
by experience have proved the same, yet may we gather by conjectures, no small
part of the greatness ^fit. For if we consider it in it self, it is the
noblest act of Fortitude, death being the hardest thing for nature to
overcome. It is also the greatest point of Charytye by Gods own testimonye,
who said Maiorem charitatem nemo habet, (...). 1^
quam vt animam suam ponat quis, pro amicis suis. It is the principallest act
of obedience commended so highlye in Christ. Phillip. ^
Factus obediens vsque ad mortem. Become obedient even unto death. It is by S.
Augustins verdict more honorable then virginitye. August. l: d^ virgin. ca. 46
t^^. 6
It is finallye the very chiefest act or effect of all virtues. If therefore
as the Divines say, that work or action is more perfect or meritorious, which
proceeds of the greatest number of good causes concurring to the same; Then
must Martyrdom be a most glorious thing, which requires the co^course of all
virtues, and that in the ^^^hest degree, to the accomplishement thereof.
Martyrdom has the privilege of the sacrament of baptism, Aug: ad fortun. l.
de ^ccl. d^gmat. c: ^^ tom. 3
and by S. Augustine is compared therewith. In Martyrdom says he all the
misteryes of baptism are fulfilled. He that must be baptized confesses his
faith, before the Priest, and answers when he is demanded. This does
also the Martyr before the persecutoure, he acknowledges his faith and
answers the demand. The baptized is either sprinkled, or dipped in water,
but the Martyr is either sprinkeled with his blood, or not dipped but burned in
fire. The baptized by imposition of the Bishops hands receives the holy
ghost. The Martyr is made a habitacle of the same spirit, while it is not he
that speaks, but the spirit of his heavenly Father that speaks within him.
The baptized receives the blessed Sacrament in remembrance of the death of
our Lord, the Martyr suffers death it self for our Lord. The baptized
protests to renounce the vanities of the world, the Martyr beside this
renounceh his own life. To the baptized all his sins are forgeuen. In the
Martyr all his sins are quite extinguished. Cip. de singul ^lericor. versus
^ine^^.
Saint. Cipryan also aleadging a reason, why no crime nor forepassed offense
could prejudice a Martyr. says Ideo martirium a^pellatur, tam corona quam
baptisma, quia baptiz at pariter and coronat. Therefore is Martyrdom called as
well a crown, as a baptism, for that it baptizeth and crowns together. So
that as no offense committed before baptism can do the baptized any harm,
so also does Martyrdom so cleanse the soul from all spot of former
corruption, that it gives thereunto a most undefiled beautye. Yea and in this,
Martyrdom seems to have a prerogatyue above baptism. For though baptism
perfectlye cleanse the soul, and release not only the offense, but also the
temporal punishment due unto the same: Yet sticks the root of sin in the
flesh, and the party baptized retayneth in him, the badge and cognizance, yea
the scarres and tokens of a sinner. But Martirdomes virtue is such, that it not
only works the same effect of baptism, but purchases also to the soul,
forth with a perfect riddance of all concupiscence and inclynation to sin,
and makes it not only without offense, but unable to offend any more. It
does not only gather the fruits, or lop the branches, or fell the tree, but
plucketh it up by the very roots, and dishableth it from springing up again.
With the brood it kills the dame, it consumes both the weed and the seed
together, and cleanses us both from the mire and from the stayne and spot that
remains after it. And therefore of Martirs does the Scripture say, Apoc. 7
Isti sunt qui venerunt de tribulatione magna, et lauerunt stolas suas, et
dealbaucru^t eas in sanguine agni. These are they that came out of a great
tribulation, and have washed their stoles and whited them in the blood of the
Lamb. Upon which place Tertullian says, I^ Scorpiaco.
Sordes quidem baptismate abluuntur, maculae vero mar^irio candidantur, quia
and Isaias ex rufo and coccino niucum and lancum repromittit. The filth is
washed away by baptism, but the staynes are cleared by Martyrdom, for Esaias
promises that redd and scarlet should become as white as snow or woll: As who
should say, so much more forcible is martyrdom then baptism, as the water,
that takes out dirte and stayne together, then that which washing the dirte
away leaves the stayne behind it. Not that this stayne imports any sin,
but the infirmity which original sin has caused, and of which actual sin
proceeds. So that baptism takes away our falte, and martyrdom our
frayltye, baptism gives us the keye, but martyrdom lets us in. That
makes us members of the millitant, this of the tryumphante Church, that
gives us force to walk to our iourneis end, and to fight for the victory,
but this setleth us in repose, and crowns our conquest. Baptism brings us
forth as the mother does the child, to which though she give most of those
parts which are in men, yet some she gives not, and those that she gives are
so impotent and weak, that though they may be used in childishe actions, yet
not to the principal things that man needs, till by process of time they
be farther enhabled. For so baptism gives us grace, whereby we may weakly
turn the powers of our mind to God, and have an obscure and in a manner a
childish kind of knowledge, and love of him. But the chief actions, wherein
our felicitye consists, ensewe not strayghte upon our baptism, but with
long toil we must labor for them, before we can attain to so great
habilytye. But martyrdom brings us forth as the Lioness does her whelpe.
Which breeding but one in all her life, bears it six and twentye months in
her bellye, till it grow perfect in proportion, hable and strong of all the
lymmes, armed with all the claws, and not so much but with all even the
cheek teeth full grown. So that it comes forth with full make, and free
from the impotencye of other brood, as Epiphanius writes. Epiphan. (...)
And thus martyrdom does with our soul, bringing it forth with such
perfection, that it is straight enhabled, to have the perfect sight and love of
God, wherein consists our bliss and happiness, without any delay of further
grouth, or sufficiency. In the baptism of water (says S. Thomas) the Passion
of Christ works, by a certain figurative representation, in the baptism of
spirit by a desire and affection, in the baptism of blood by perfect
imitation. Likewise the power of the holy ghost works in the first by secret
virtue, in the second by commotion of the mind, in the third by fervor of
perfect love. So much therefore as immitation in deed, is better then
representation in the figure, and desire in the thought: So much does the
baptism of blood, surpass those of water and spirit. Baptism is the cloud
by which Moses guided Gods people, Exodus 1^.
and shrouded them in the deserte: Ios: 2.3.
but martyrdom is the river Jordan thorough which Iosue leads them into the
land of promise. He^t: 6^
Baptism appareleth Mordocheus in Kings attire, yet leaves him a subject:
But martyrdom with the robes, inuesteth him also with royal dignytye. No
Naaman is so foul a leaper, 4. Reg. 5
that this water of Jordan cannot cure. No man so blind but that the washing
in this poole of Siloe can restore to sight. Joan. 9
No disease so incurable, Joan. 5
but this ponde upon Probatica can perfectlye heal. It accomplysheth the
labors of the virtuous, and godly, and satisfies for the sins of the
sinful and wicked, and is to those a reward, and to these a remedy. Vidimus
says S. Cyprian ad hunc nominis titulu^ fide nobiles venisse plerosque, Cip.
de land^ Martyr.
vt deuotio nis obsequiu^ mors honestaret. Sed and alios frequentur aspeximus
interritos stetisse, vt admissa peccata redimentes cruore suo, loti haberentur
in sanguine, and reuiuiscerent interempti qui viuentes putaba^tur occisi. Mors
quippe integriorem facit vitam, mors amissam inuenit gloriam. We have seen
many of noble faith, to have aspired to this title of Martyrdom, that their
death might honor their serviceable devotion. We have seen others to have
stood without fear, that redeeminge their offenses with their blood, they
might be known to have been washed in the same, and might be revived by
killing, that alive were accounted dead. For this death makes life more
perfect, and recouereth the grace that was lost. Chrisost. ep. ad Neophi.
And if S. Chrysostom extollinge baptism says, that it not only makes us
free, but also holy, not only holy but just, not only just but children,
nor only children but heirs, not only heirs, but heirs of the same
inherytaunce with Christ. Not only heirs with Christ, but members of
Christ. Not only members, but temples, not only temples, but also
instruments of the holy Ghost: Then may I farther enlarge my self in the
praise of Martyrdom and say, that martyrdom gives a freedom void of all
servitude, a holiness and justice without any fault or fear of loss. It so
makes us children, that we cannot become enemies. It make^h us heirs not only
in right, but in full possession. It makes us heirs with Christ not only of
his grace, but also of his glory. It makes us members, that can not be cut
of, temples that cannot be defiled, such instruments of the holy Ghost, as
cannot be abused. Finally it gives us the crown, whereof baptism is the
pledge, In all which points it is superior unto it. To pray for the baptized
is a benefitt, Quia nescit homo finem suum, Ecclesi. 9
no man knows what his end shall be, A^g: de verbis Apost.
but to pray for a martyr S. Augustine terms it an iniurye seeing we ought
rather to commend us to his prayers. Iniuria est orare pro martyr, cuius
debemus orationibus commendari. It is an iniurye to pray for a martyr, to
whose prayers we must be commended. For these causes does the Church call the
dyinge days of martyrs their birth days. The dyinge days of M^^^tyrs called
birth days
For though we be borne again by baptism, yet are we not come to a full birth
and perfect healing. For as S. Augustine says Filij dei quamdin mortaliter
viuunt cum morte confligunt, Aug in E^cheridi. ca. 64
and quamuis veraciter de illis dictum sit, quotquot spiritu dei aguntur hi
sunt filij dei. The children of God so long as they live a mortal life they
struggle with death, and though of the^ it be truly said, that so many as
are ledd by the spirit of God, they are Gods children. Yet so long as the
body opresseth the soul. Often times tan quam filij hominu^, quibusdam
motibus humanis deficiunt ad se ipsos, et ideo pereunt. Like children of men
with carnal motions they fall into their oune fraylty and so perish. Aug.
tract. 22 in c. 5. Joan.
Likewise upon these words of S. Ihon in iudiciu^ non venit sed transit a
morte ad vita^. Ecce (inquit) in hac vita non du^ est vita transitur a morte ad
vitam, vt in indiciu^ non veniatur. He came not into judgment but passed from
death to life. Lo says he, in this life there is yet no life, we pass from
death to life to avoid the coming unto judgment. Origin. l 3. in Job. in
illud per^^^ dies in quo natus s^^.
We therefore says Origin. Do not celebrate the day of the Saints natiuitye,
which is an entrance of all griefs, and molestations, but the day of their
death, which is a rid da^ce of their sorrows and a farewell to the deuiles
assaltes. We celebrate the day of their death because though they seem to
dye, yet in deed they dye not. Chrysolog ser. 119.
When you here therefore named says an other Father the birth day of the
Saints, understand not that which breeds them of flesh into the earth: but
which brings the^ from the earth into heaven, from labor to rest, from
te^tations to quiet, from torments to delights, from worldly laughters, to a
crown of glory. Ciprian l. d^ mortal.
For as S. Ciprian noteh, scimus eos non amitti sed praemitti, and recedentes
praecedere. We know they are not lost, but sent to lead us the way, and gone
from us to make way before us. Aut alius (...) no^in^, (...) editione Gagn^i.
Him. 5^^ de genesio.
Natales vocamus dies says Eusebius Emissenus, quando cos martyrij vita and
gloriae fides, dum ingerit morti, genuit eternitati, and perpetua gaudia breui
dolor parturiit. We call their natall days, when the life of martyrdom, and
the glory of their Faith, while it puts the^ to a temporal death,
begets them to eternal life, and with a short pain brings them forth to
perpetual pleasure. Worthily are they called birth days by the which, they
that were borne into this myserye of man's frayltye, suddenly are borne again
to glory, taking of their end and death, a beginning of an endless life. For if
we call those birth days, in which in sin and sorrow we are borne to sorrow in
this world, more justly may these be called birth days, wherein from
corruptible light, they come into the brightness of the next world, and the
sons of men ascend to the adoption of a heavenly Father. Which
consideratio^s, were enough to encorage us to be rather greedy of martyrdom,
being so glorious a thing, then any way slack in imbracinge it, Martyrdom
beneficial to the Church.
when it is offered. But if we consider moreover, how beneficial the same is
to the Church, and how importante a means to advance Gods glory, no true
member of Christ, nor true child of the Catholic Church, can be so
unnatural, as not to rejoice, that he has so good an occasion to discharge his
duty to them both, in so acceptable a sort. The martyrs says S. Chrisostom
uphold the Church like pillars, Chrisost. sermon. I^uent and Max. mart.
they defend it like towers, they bear of the rage of waters like rocks,
keeping them selves in great tranquillitye. Like lyghts they have dispersed the
darkness of impyetye, and like oxen have drawn the sweet yoke of Christ.
The corn the more it is watered with showers, of rain, the more plentyful
harvest does it yield. And the Vine also when it is pruned, it spreads out
the branches in greater pride, and is the more laden with fair clusters, and
the injury it seems to suffer returns to the greater increase. It is
beneficial to the field, to set on fire the stubble, that the ground may be
more fertyll and abundant. So says S. Cyprian in martyrdom the fore-goinge
fall, Cipr. de la^^ mart.
is a preparation for greater fruit, and condemns life to death, that by
death life may the better be preserved. And for this Theodoretus compares
the persecutours to men, Theod. sermon. 9. de cur. Gr^can. affect.
that go about to extinguish the flame with oil, whereby they rather increase
it: and to carpe^ters that felling trees, cause many more to spring the^ they
cut down. For the more martyrs are slain, the more daily spring up in their
place. This says S. Hilarious is peculier to Gods Church, Hilar. de trin. L. 4.
while it is persecuted it florisheth, while it is troaden down it grows up,
while it is despised it profits, while it is hurt it over comes, while it is
contraryed it better understands, and then it is most constant when it
seeemeth to be conquered. So wonderful is the force of the death and blood of
martyrs. Whose glorious course is very fitlye expressed in the silk-worme,
which first eating it self out of a very little seed, grows to be a small
worm, afterward when by feeding a certain time upon fresh and green
leaves it is waxed of greater syse, eats it self again out of the other
coat and works it self into a case of silk, which when it has once
finyshed in the end castinge the seed for many young to breed of, and
leaving the silk for man's ornament, dies all white and winged in shape of a
flyeinge thing. Even so the martyrs of the Catholic Church, first break out
of the dead seed of original sin by baptism; then, when by feedinge on the
Sacraments and leaves of Gods word, they are grown to more rypenesse,
castinge the coat of worldly vanities, they cloth them selves with the silk
of virtue, and perfection of life, in which work perseuering to the end,
even when the persecution is greatest, they finallye as need requires, shedd
their blood, as seed for new offspring to arise of, and leave moreover the
silk of their virtues as an ornamente to the Church. And thus depart white
for their good works, and winged with innocence of hands, and cleanes of
heart they presentlye fly to their heavenly repose, agreeablye to Dauides
saying Quis ascendet in montem Domini? Ps. 23.
Innocens manibus and mundo cord. Who shall ascend to the mount of God, The
innocent of hands and clean of heart. So that though the ripe fruit of the
Church be gathered, yet their blood engendereth new supplye, and it increases
the more, when the disincrease thereof is vyolentlye procured. It is like the
bush that burned and was not consumed. Exodus ^.
Of the own ruins, it ryseth, and of the own ashes it reuiueth, and by that
increases, by which the world decays. Epiphan in auchora^.
The Phoenix as Epiphanius S. Clement and others report when she is come to her
full age, gathers in some hye mount a pyle of mirrhe franke^cense, and other
spices, which being kindled by the heat of the Sunn, she suffers her self to
be burnte up, and of her ashes, there first breeds a little worm, which in
the end becomes a Phaenix again: So the Martirs, when they see it
necessary for Gods glory, having gathered a pyle of virtue and good works,
in the mount of the Catholic Church, and gotten that bundle of which the
Spouse speaks Fasciculus mirrhae dilectus meus mihi, Cant. 1.
My beloved is unto me by the example of his Passion a bundle of Mirrhe:
Exposinge them thereuppon to the scorchinge heat of persecution, sacrifice
themselves in the flame of patience and charytye, that by their death the
posteritye of the Church may be preserved. For as Saint Ambrose notes, Ambros
sermon 92. de Naza^^o et Celso.
the great goodness of our God, so plentyful of mercy, and so cunning an
artificer of our salvation, by setting before our eyes the hye reward of
virtue, will have the merytes of martyrs to be our patronage, and while in the
hard conflicte of martyrdom, he commends unto us the true Faith, he makes
the affliction of the fore Fathers, an instruction of their posterytye. O how
great is Gods care over us: he examineth them to inform us, he spoylethe
them, to spare us, and turns their passions to our profitt. For we find by
experience that whosoever suffers, though he suffer for his offense is
pityed, and naturally miserye, though deserved, cannot but breed remorse, and
tenderness in the beholders. But now when such men as be of innocente
behauioure, of virtuous conversation, learned and grave persons, shall with
comfort offer themselves to extremytye, rejoice when they are tormented, smile
when they are dismembered, and go to death as they would to a bancket: When
such as neither want dignityes to withdraw them, nor friends and familye to
pulle them back, nor powerable enemies to affrighte them, shall be ready to
change their dignitye with disgrace, to forsake their friends, and give
themselves into the hands of their mortal foes only for the defense of their
conscience, men must needs say as they did in S. Cyprians time. Ciprian. De
Laud. mart.
Noscenda res est, et virtus penitus scruta^da, visceribus. Nec enim leuis est
ista quaecunque confessio, propter qua^ homo patitur and mori posse. It is a
thing worthy to be known and some virtue that deserves deep consideration
for which a man is content to suffer death. They want no means to search out
the truth, having both read and heard, that which can be said on either side.
They want not wit and judgment to discern the good from the bad, being
persons known to be of deep insight and discretion. They can have no pleasure
in pains, nor any temporal allurement to move them to undertake so great
miserye, yea they have many delyghtes, honors, and prefermentes, to withdraw
them from it, and with altering opinion, and speaking a word, might easylye
anoyde it. Sure therefore it is, that they find it necessary to do this, and
that their soul lies upon it, or else flesh and blood could never digest
so heavy calamities. And though other, as worldly wise, do the contrary, yet
may we easilye conceive, that pleasure, profitt, and vanitye, with draws the
most part of men, which here have no place, Matt. 7.
and narrow is the way, that leads to life, and but few they be that find
it. Luc. 13.
And this is the comfort of those that suffer, that their death rayseth many
from death, and their patience makes every one inquisitiue of their religion.
Quisquis enim says Tertullian, Tertull. ad scapula^.
tantam tolerantiam specta^s aliquo scrupulo percussus, et inquirere acce^ditur
quid sit in causa, and vbi cognouerit veritatem, and ipse statim sequitur. And
again Exquisitior quaeque iniquitas vestra, illecebra est magis sectae. For
every one saying such constancy is cast in some scruple, and waxes
inquisityue, what quarrel we mayntain, and when he knows the truth, he
strayte embraces it, and every most exquisite iniquity of yours against us,
is a greater allurement of others to our religion. For as one that breaks
open the Iewellers cheste, by breakinge an iron lock, discovers to those
that are present a multitude of most precious jewels, which being once seen,
every one is desirous to consider more at leisure the workmanship, glory,
and value of the same: and many upon the sight moved to buy them, which if
they had been still under lock, no man would have regarded: So the
persecutoures, by breaking the worthless locks of martyrs bodies, lay open
their faith and virtue to the sight of the world, of which men fallinge into
deeper consideration, and debatinge with themselves the grace, and perfection,
that appears therein, are moved to buy the^, though it be with loss of all
their lands, libertyes, and lives. O wonderful force of the Catholic
faith, which above all natural course, and beyond all reach of man's
understanding, increases by that means, by which all other things are
suppressed. We have no other way to root out wickedness, sin, and impyetye,
no means to abolishe lewd behauioure, and disorder among men, but only
vyolence of torments, and cruel punyshmentes. And we see, though sensuality,
and pleasure, intyse them with vehemente incentyues, yet the fear of severe
chastisemente, makes them bridle their affections, and if any be executed for
great enormityes, when he is dead, his sin dies with him, and syldome
leaves he any posteritye, that by his death, is not rather dismayed, then
encouraged to follow his evil example. But in this quarrel of our Faith, it
happens quite contrary, For as good slypp being ingraffed in a sour tree,
brings forth nevertheless sweet fruit, agreeable to the own kind, and the
sapp of the same root, which in the crabb is sour, and bitter, in the aple of
the slypp, is most pleasant, and delightsome, and though it be loathsome in the
one, it allureth in the other: So happens it to Gods Saynctes, being put in
the persecutoures hands. For their odyous and intolerable crueltye, breeds
when it is practiced upon malefactoures, terroure, fear, and horroure of the
wicked fruits, for which they are punished: Yett in the faithful, and
virtuous, the same bitter torments practiced upon them, work the pleasante
and goodlye fruits of salvation, not only most acceptable unto God, but able
to allure men's hearts to taste of the same. And as a cunninge artificer, not
only of Iuorye or gold, but of iron or clay, can frame a proportionable
Image, and in a base metal or moulde, show exquisyte skill: so the true
children of the Catholic Church, taught by Gods spirit, show the perfection
of their virtue, not only in riches, and wealth, but in need and pouertye, and
as well in the depth of myserye, and midst of pains, as in the heyght of
prosperitye and worldly pleasure. To this effect may we understand the promise
of God made by David to those that kept themselves within the walls and
bounds of Jerusalem, that is the Church. Who gives snow as wool and
spreads the miste as ashes. That is those torments which to the badd are
snow cold and unprofitable, and able to quench the natural heat that men
have to follow sinnfull examples, are wool to the good that both in them and
others increases the warmthe of true faith and virtue, and the rank fogge
of worldly disgrace, whereby the fire of heresye and sin is extinguished as
ashes to Gods servants, where in the fire of true religion and perfect
charity is preserved and strengthened. Aug. 22 de ci. 6.6.
Ligaba^tur, says S. Augustine includebantur, caedeba^tur, torqueba^tur,
laniaba^tur, trucidaba^tur, vr^ba^tur, et multiplicaba^tur. They were
imprisoned, whipped, tortured, burned, torn in pieces, and murdered, and yet
they were multiplied. Philo: l. 2. logis Allegor^
Philo comparing the word of God to Coriander, reports this seed, to be of
that propertye, that being cut into little pieces, every cru^me of it brings
forth as much, as the whole seed would have done: Even fo happens it in
the Martyrs, of whom when they are martired, every quarter, and parcel, yea
every dropp of blood, is able to do as much, and somtymes more forcible
effects, then the martyr himself, if he had remained alive. Well did S.
Hierom say est Triumphus dei passio martyrum, Hieron: q: 1^ ad Hed^bro^
and pro Christi nomine cruoris effusio. The passion of martyrs and sheddinge
blood for the name of Christ, is the tryumphe of God. Well may it be called
the triumph of God, seeing it passes all other tryumphes of men. The tryumphes
of the Romans, were wont to be sole^nyzed, in glorious chariotts, drawn with
Lions, Elephants, or goodlye steedes, with applause of the people, with
pleasant music, with a troup of captyues, with costlye arches, and such
other monumentes of victory. The banners of the foiled enemies, the rich
spoils, and famous pryses, were carried in syghte, and every thing ordered,
and set forth, with pomp and majesty. But who ever heard of a tryumphe,
where the conqueroure was haled, and haryed upon the ground, with his hands
and seete bound, with reproach of the lookers on, with disgrace and infamye,
where he himself was captyue, his tryumphall arche the block, or the
gallows, his enemies banners, the axe or the cord, his spoils and pryses his
vnbodyed bowels, and dismembered limbs, finally his pomp, punishment and his
maiestly miserye. This tryumphe is not that, which worldlings affecte, neither
can they conceive, how torments, and tryumphes can agree together. And therefore
did S. Hierome well call it, the tryumphe of God. In this tryumphe was
Nabuchonosor and Paul captyues, and Justinius confesses himself, to have
been converted by the constancye of martyrs. Of this tryumphe speaks S.
Cyprian when he says. Ciprian de lau de martyri^:
Tanta est virtus martirij, vt per illam credere etiam ille cogatur, qui te
voluit occidere. So great is the force of martyrdom, that thereby even he, is
forced to beleene with thee, that was ready to kill thee. But to prove this,
though for the present disgraceful, yet in the sequel, a more glorious
triumph, even hear on earth, then ever any the Romans had; Let us consider
the glorious shows there be to set it forth. The martyrs for their tryumphall
charyots, have most su^ptuous and statlye Churches; For the applause of the
people, the prayers and praises of al true Christians; For their musycke, the
solemn quires; and instruments, usual in the Church; For their triumphall
arches, most rich shrynes, and altars; For the banners of their foiled
enemies, the Arms and honors of Princes, converted by their means; For their
captyues, Kings, Emperoures, and Monarchs; For their spoils and pryses, the
Empire, Kingdoms, and common wealths. Finallye, for their pomp, the reverend
majesty of the Catholic Church. Lo now whether our tryumphe, though base in
the eye, be not in effect most glorious, and whether any conqueroures ever
wann more, by killinge others, then the martirs have done by being killed
themselves. Quid infirmius Says S. Cyprian qua^ vinciri, dam nari, Ciprian:
aut altus eius nomine de duplici martirio:
caedi, cruciari, occidi, et cum ad arbitriu^ carnificis collum praebetur? Haec
species inter dum misericordiam mouet, etiam saeuissimis tyrannis. verum vbi
iam ad monumenta martyrum pelluntur morbi, rugiu^t Daemones, terrentur
monarchae, coruscant miracula, concidunt idola: tunc apparet quam sit efficax
and potens martyrum sanguis. What argues more impotencye, then to be bound,
condemned, whipped, tormented, killed, and to lay the head on the block at
the hange-mans pleasure? This sight, sometime stirs mercy, even in the
most cruel tyrants. But when at the martyrs tombs disseases are cured, the
devils rore, the monarchs tremble, miracles are wrought, Idols fall down:
then appears it how forcible the blood of martirs is. While the gold is yet
mingled with earth in the mines, men tread it under foot as they did the
earth, But when it is tried with the fire, and depured by the artyficers hand,
Kings them selves think it a great honor to wear it on their heads: and
so the martyrs while they were alive, enwrapped in that mass of earth, I
mean their corruptible bodies: they were contemned and troaden on, as the
refuse of the world. but when their gold was severed from dross, that is
their soul from their body by vyolent death in Gods cause: there is no
Catholycke Prince so hautye, but that with bowed knee, and stooping head is
ready to adore them, and accounte their very ashes, as chief orname^tes of
his crown, and succoures of his realm. They are not therefore subdued that
overcome their enemies, yea and their victory is most glorious, for the
unusual manner. Psa. ^1.
You shall dye like men (says David) and like one of the princes shall you
fall. You shall dye like men because your death shall seem full of humane
myserye, but in deed like one of the Princes shall you fall, that is like one
of the Princes of Gods people. Or you shall dye not as the sensual worldlynge,
who is compared to the foolish beasts and is become like unto them, Psa. 4^.
but like me^, judging it in reason good for your faith to dye in hope of a
better life. Yea not only as men, but as Princes amongst men, whose
successors never fail, whose tombs are glorious, whose memory is
perpetual. Cant: 1:
Nolite me considerare, quia fusca sum. Regard you not how black I am, for
though I be black yet am I the fair daughter of Jerusalem. Of all the parts
of a tree, the root is to the sight the foulest, and most vglye, and therefore
seems nature to have hyd it from the eye, that it might be no disgrace to the
beauty of the other parts. But if you consider the fair flower, the sweet
fruit, the pleasant leaves, the goodlye branches, the very life, and sap
of the whole tree: you shall find, that all proceeds from that shaplesse, and
unseemly root, and therefore it ought of all other parts to be cheeflye
prysed. So is it with the martyrs, they seem in their torments the most
miserable of all other men, covered with disgrace, infamy, and reproach: But if
we consider the beauty of virgins, the fruit of the confessors, the leaves of
temporal commodityes, the branches of all nations, yea the very life, and
grace of the Church of God, we shall find that for all these, we may thank
the blood of Martyrs. Well may they be called, the neat or kine of the church,
whose teates serve it of necessary milk; For as the neat at all seasons, even
in the foulest weather, ranging in the meadows, fields, and pastures, and
feeding upon grass and wild herbs unfit for man's eatinge, by virtue of
their inward heat, turn them into sweet milk, and suffer the same
quietlye to be drawn out of them, for the benefitt of mankind: So the
Martyrs, even in the most stormye time of persecution, are contented to feed
upon the sower and bitter pains of their enemies rage, and disgestinge all
their cruelty, with the inward heat of charity, and zeal, turn their
own afflyctions, to our instruction and spiritual nurture, and suffer their
blood to be drawn from them, the virtue whereof has more force to fortifye
our souls, the^ sweetest milk to strengthen our bodies. Zachar: 9:
This is Vinum germinans virgins wine that breeds virgins sanguis vuae and
mori acuens Elephantos 1: Machab: ^^
in bellum the blood of the grape and mulberye, sharpeninge the Elephantes
that is Christians, to spiritual battle. This is the pledge that got the
priuyledge. Iudicabunt nationes, Sap: 3:
dominabuntur populis, they shall judge nations, and rule over peoples.
Tertull: l: de anima c 32
And as Tertullian says, Tota clauis paradisi est sanguis martyrum. The blood
of Martyrs is the very keye of Paradise. So that we may even of the earthlye
crown, understand that saying of S. Hierome. In vita Malachi.
Persecutionibus creuit ecclesia, martyriis coronata est. The church increased
by persecutions, and was crowned by martirdomes. For when was that veryfied,
Isa. 49.
Erunt reges nutritii, tui et reginae nutrices tuae. Kings shall be thy foster
fathers, and Queens thy Nurces, but after the death of infinite martyrs, whose
very ashes afterward the Kings and Monarchs have honored, doing as it were
due homage, and acknowledginge them as captains, by whom they were conquered?
Which also in the same place Esaye fore showed in the words following. Vultu
in terra demisso adorabunt te, and puluerem pedum tuorum lingent. With a lowly
countenance they shall worship thee, and shall lycke the very duste of thy
feet. And who are the feet of the Church, but only the Martyrs, Apostles,
and Pastoures, that Uphold it, and carye it still forward through out all
nations, of whom it is said. Romans 19. Act. 9. Luc. 24.
Quam speciosi pedes euangelizan tium pacem, and uos estis qui portabitis nomen
meu^ antereges and presides and vsque ad extre mu^ terrae. How fair are the
feet of the preachers of peace, for these are they that carye my name before
Kings and rulers, and to the very end of the world. Thus we see how the
words of Christ are veryfied. Joan. 12.
Nisi granum frumenti cadens in terram, mortuum fuerit, ipsum solum manet, si
autem mortuum fuerit multu^ fructu^ affert. unless the cornel of wheat fall
into the ground and dye, it self remains alone, but if it dye, it brings
forth much fruit: Amb. sermon. 3^ in Psa. beati immaculati in via:
Saint Ambrose notes that in the vinyardes of Engaddi a city of Iurye, there
is a tree that if it be pricked or cut, it distilleth out most precious balm,
and yields a most sweet sauoure, neither of which things it does being
left whole: Even so happens it in the Martyrs, whose blood by their wounds
gushing out, is more precious, sweet and acceptable, then the balm. And of
this may we understand those words of the Spouse. Cant 1.
Botrus Cypri dilectus m^us mihi in vincis Engaddi. A cluster of Cyprus is my
beloved unto me, in the vine yardes of Engaddi. Hieron. q: 11 ^d Hea^b:
For as S. Hierome says Ideo odor disseminatur inter gentes, and subiit
tacita cogitatio nisi veru^ euangeliu^ nunqua^ sanguine defendere^t. By this
means is the sauoure of Christianitye spredd emonge the Gentiles, and this
secret thought comes to their mind, that except the Gospel were true, men
would never defend it with their blood. The swetnesse of the rose, if it be
untouched soon withers away with the leaf, which to day is fair, and to
morrow fades. But put it into the still, cover it from the comfort of the
Sun, yea scorche it with the fire, it vapoureth out most delicate water,
which may be long preserved, and imparteth sweetness to whatsoever it
touches: So that whether it be by fire, or by natural course, the rose
wythereth: but in the first manner, both the leaf keeps a pleasant savor,
and distilleth from it a most sweet liquour, whereas in the second, both the
leaf is less lykesome, and the water lost. So fares it with Gods Martyrs.
While they live, they are sweet in their virtuous conversation, If they dye,
their example for a time does some good, but put them in prison, keep them
from worldly comfortes, yea scorche them, burn them, and use them in all
extremity, then do their virtue give the best sauoure, and their blood
whersoeuer it is shedd, engendereth a wonderful alteration in men's ma^ners,
making them embrace the truth and become Christi bonus odor and incensu^
dignu^ in odore^ suauitatis. ^ Cor 2 Eccl: 45^
A good sauoure of Christ, and an incense worthy to be odor of sweetness,
whereas in their natural death, though their example would have done good; yet
neither their leaf, had been so odoriferous, nor their precious lyquoure, to
such benefitt of the church. And therefore may we say with Salomo^. O quam
pulchra est casta generatio cu^ claritate, Sap. 4.
cum presens est imitantur illam; and desiderant eam, cum se eduxerit; and in
perpetuu^ coronata triumphat, incoinqui^atoru^ c^rtaminum praemia vincens. O
how fair is a chaste generation with bryghtenesse, while it is present men do
imitate it, and long after it, when it is departed, and tryumpheth crouned
with perpetual glory, winning the rewards of their undefiled encounters.
Personable men of comelye feature, though they be by sickness or dirte
disfigured, yet keep they the tokens of seemelynesse: yea and then, their
seemlynesse is most seen, when it is compared with some contrary deformitye.
And so is it in Gods Martyrs, even in the depthe of worldly disgrace, do
they show the glorious grace, and beautye of their mind, and when their
virtue encountereth with the persecutors vice, then does it shine brightest,
and is unto the behoulders most pleasinge and amyable. O unspeakable force of
the blood of Martyrs, then most powrable, when it is spilte, and then most
victorious, when it is troadden under foot. No Adamant so hard, but though it
resist to the strokes of preaching, yea and to the mighty force of miracles,
yet yields it to the blood of innocent lambs, of which Christ speaks Ego
mitto vos sicut agnos inter lupos. Luc. 10.
I send you like lambs among wolves. No leaprosye so incurable, but the
blood of these infantes, in innocencye, though not in age, in malice though
not in discretion, cannot cure. And albeit Constantine refused a bathe of the
blood of Infantes in age, yet doubtless had not these Infantes in innocencye
(I mean the Martyrs) bathed him in theyres, God knows whether ever he had been rid of his spiritual leaprosye. Which he himself in a manner
acknowledging, when he came to that famous Counsel of Nice, fynding many of
those Fathers, that had some part of their body, maimed or disfigured, with
the torments suffered for the Catholic Faith, he embraced the^, in humble
sort, most deuoutlye kissing the scarres of their torments, as most
honorable badges of Christianity. Three testimonies recou^teth S. Ihon in this
world tres su^t qui testimoniu^ da^t in terra, ^
spiritus, aqua, et sanguis. There are three that give witness in earth, the
spirit, water, and blood. The first did S. Ihon Baptist see in the form of
a dove, the second and third S. John Evangelist coming out of Christ's side.
In one sense, these three things have caused our spiritual life, in another
they maintain our corporal. Our inward man is quickened by Gods spirit,
cleansed by the water of Baptism, redeemed with the blood of Christ. But nether
would this spirit have quickened, nor the water washed, unless the blood had
redeemed. The Spirit sows, the water rypeneth, the blood reapeth. The spirit
appeared in Christ's baptism, and though the heaven was opened, yet nether
earth nor hell gave any sign of his coming. The water was shed, when Christ
weeped at Lazarus raysinge, and though hell was enforced, to render her pray,
yet neither heaven nor earth were moved at it. But when the blood came out of
Christ's wounds, both the heavens denied light, the earth quaked, and hell
delivered up the dead, and then was it fulfilled, si ^xaltatus fu^ro a terra
omnia traham ad mcipsu^. ^
If I be exalted from the earth, I will draw all things unto me. Our corporal
life also depends partly upon breathing, partlye in watrye humors, but
chieflye in blood. Yet those are by natural course, tokens of life, while in
the body they perform their several effects. But for our present
consideration, it imports more to consider, that their spiritual value, and
force, is showed, when the body is bereaved of them. No man was moved, by
seeinge Christ draw breath, but when with a great voice, he gave up his
spirit, and lost his breath, then did the Centurion strayte cry, Matt. ^^
vere filius dei erat iste. In very deed this was the son of God. While the
blood and water were in his body unseen, and untouched, the effect of them
was never perceived. But so soon as by the wound in his side, they found
passage, to come out, there issued also with them, a fountain of grace, where
of all the Sacraments take their effect. Even so is it in the blood of
Martyrs. They whom their holy life nothing moved, they that by their
miracles could not be converted; by their blood were mollyfied, and wrought to
goodness. S. Paul^ was obstinate for all S. Steuens preaching, he was stubborn
in his opynion, for all his myraculous works. He could never be won, till he
felt the effect of his innocent blood. August:
For as S. Augustine says Nisi Stephanus sic orasset, ecclesia Paulum non
habuisset. Unless Steeuen had thus prayed, that is in his bloodye agonye, the
Church had never had S. Paul. Of S. James also it is written, that in Spain
he could in his life convert but eight persons: But when his blood began to
work, the whole contrye yielded to his dead bones, and relics, that regarded
so little the force of his lyuinge speeches. So lyke-wise the City of Rome,
though by S. Peter and S. Paul's own voices, Epistles, and conversation, they
had been labored unto the truth; yet it never could be thoroughly converted,
until it was long soaked in Martyrs blood. Psa: 17
Tenebrosa aqua in nubibus aeris. Darcke says David is the water in the
clouds of the air. and yet, that very same it is that brings to light the
sweet rose, and fair li^lye, that loadeth the trees with goodlye fruits, and
gives all the pride to the stateliest plants. That is it, as black as in the
clouds it seems, that waters the earth, and falling upon the flowers,
sets them forth, as it were with perles, and diamantes, and fills the
rivers with most clear streams. What are these clouds, but Martyrs, of
whom it is said, Isa. 6^
who are these that fly like clouds, and like doves unto their windows.
What is the water so dark in the clouds, but the blood of Martyrs in their
bodies, where the force thereof is not yet uttered? But when it is once shedd,
Ihon. 7
it shows it self to be the fludd of living water, that Christ promised
should flow out of his believers, Psa. 67
and that voluntarye rain, which God has set aparte for his inheritance,
Deuteronomy. 3^
that falls like a shower upon the herbs, and like dropps upon the grass,
Psa 64
in whose droppinges the young spring reioyseth. Of this may we understand
Dauides prophesye. Thou haste visited the earth, Ibid.
doubtless of thy Church by persecution, thou haste thoroughlye watered it,
doubtless with the blood of Martyrs, and thou haste multiplied to enriche
it, with young spring of new believers. In this are the words of Esaias
verifyed. Isa. 4^
Since that thou art made honorable in my eyes, and glorious by martyrdom, I
loved thee, and will give to my Church, men for thee, many for one, yea and
whole peoples for thy only life, that of thee it may be said, ^^d: 1^.
as of Sampson, that thou have had a victory over more by thy death, then by
thy life thou hadest obtained. To this effect may we refer these words of
the Prophet. Isa. ^^
They shall turn their swords into culters of ploughes, and their spears
into suhes, because since Christ's time all the persecutors by vsinge their
swords against the Church have but plowed and tilled it, to prepare it for
new corn, and their spears have been but sithes, to reap the ripe croppe,
that more seed might shoot up in the place thereof, to the greater increase
of Godds people. And hitherto we have experyenced the performance of that
promise, Isa: 6^
made to Christ's Church, that the young grouthe of Gods planting should to
his glory show it self to be a work of his hands, for that the least shall
become a thousand, and a little one, become a most strong nation, as by the
virtue of the same hands, five loves were multiplied to be sufficient food,
for five thousand persons. So has it been in every place for the most part,
and always is proved true, that Quo plus sanguinis, (...).
effusum est, hoc magis ac magis ^f^^o^nit multundo fidelium. As S. C^prian
notes. The more blood has been shedd, the more has the multitude of the
faithful sloryshed. Well may the Church say unto Christ these words of
Sephora. Exodus 12
sponsus sanguinum tumihies. Thou art unto me a Spouse of blood, saying that
he neither planted, nor increased, nor fostered her, but in blood. With blood
sprouted out her first buddes, as a presage and pattern of the future fruits,
and she was no sooner married unto Christ, but strayt the Innocents gave her
notise, in what grief ^he was to bring forth her children. Of these S.
Augustine speakinge says. Aug. sermon. (...).
Iure dicuntur martyrum flores, quos in medio frigore infidelitatis exortos,
velut primas cru^pentes ecclesiae gemmas, quaedam persecutionis pruina decoxit.
Non habebatis, aetatem qua in passuru^ Christu^ crederetis, habebatis carnem
qua pro Christo passuro passionem susti^eretis. They are worthily called the
flowers of Martyrs, which springing in the heart of the cold of infidelitye,
as the first buddes of the Church, that shot out, a certain frost of
persecution parched. Your years served you not to believe in Christ, but your
flesh served you to suffer for Christ, that was afterward to suffer for you.
With their blood did the Apostles, Disciples, and other Martyrs until our
days establish the Churches doctrine. With blood must we confirm it, and in
the end of the world Enoch and Elias, and other Martyrs of Antichrists time
with their blood must seal up the same. Cypr. de duplici martyrio
for as S. Cyprian well notes nullum instrumentum indubitabilius quam quod tot
martyrum sanguine obsignatu^ est. No obligation more infallible, then that
which is sealed up with the blood of so many Martyrs. And therefore Christ
takes this course for the confirmation of his doctrine. If in the old
Testament when Moses redd the law unto the people, he sprinkeled them with
blood of calves, Exodus: 24
saying Hic est sanguis faederis, quod pepigit Dominus vobiscum super cunctis
sermonibus his. This is the blood of the league which our Lord has made with
you, concerning all these speeches: How much more effectuallye, is the Church
sprinkled with the blood of Martyrs, as a mean to bind our hearts with
vnfoluble league of belief to Christ's sayings? The efficacy of this
confirmation of our says, does S. Ambrose acknowledge, as very important.
Ambros ser^ 92. de Na^ario et Celso.
Nouerimus itaque (says he) quia non sine magno discrimine de religionis
veritate disputamus, quam tantorum martyrum sanguine confirmatam videmus. Magni
periculi res est, si post tot Prophetaru^ oracula, post Apostolorum testimonia,
post martyrum vulnera, veteru^ fidem quasi nouellam discutere presumas, et post
tam manifestos duces in errore permaneas, and post morie^tium sudores otiosa
disputatione co^tendas. We must understand (quod he) that we cannot without
great danger dispute of the truth of that religion, which we see confirmed
with the blood of so many Martyrs. It is a very perylous thing, if after the
oracles of so many Prophets, after the testimonies of the Apostles, after the
wounds of Martyrs, thou presume to discuss the ancient faith as a novelty,
and remayn in thy error after so manifest guydes, and contend with idle
disputation after the toils of so many as have dyed in the cause. Finallye
how beneficial, both in this, and infinite other respects, the blood of
Martyrs has been unto the Church, and the wondrous force thereof no man is
able sufficiently to express. Holy was the austeritye and zeal of Elias, and
S. John Baptist: Godly was the estate of the old Patriarchs and Prophets:
virtuous the life of virgins and widows: Honorable the condition of
confessors and Religious persons; Yett as S. Cypria^ says Martyrio totu^
n^cesse est cedat, Cypri. de la^d Mart.
cuius inaestimabilis gloria, infinita mensura, i^maculata victoria, nobilis
virtus, inaestimabilis titulus, triu^phus imme^sus. All must of force yield to
martyrdom, whose glory is vnualewable, whose measure infinite, whose victory
unspotted, whose virtue honorable, whose title inestimable, whose triump
exceeding great. To our blood the gates of heaven fly open, with our blood the
fire of hell is quenched, in our blood our souls are beautifyed, our bodies
honored, the devil suppressed, and God glorified. It is poison and death to
heretics, it is restoratyue and comfortable to Catholics, a seed of all
virtue, and the bane of vice. To conclude assure your selves de martyrio tantum
posse dici qua^tum potuerit estimari. Ibid.
Of martyrdom so much may be said as may be conceived. But now having
showed, how honorable it is in it self, Martyrdom most glorious to the
Martyrs them selves.
and how profitable to the Church: Let us see how glorious it is, even in this
world unto those that suffer it. And to omit the triumph of the Church, which
being procured by their blood, redoundeth also to their praise; What a glory
is it to Martyrs, that the very prophesies that went of Christ, are so
plainly verified in them, that it is no small conjecture, how particulerlye
they resemble Christ in glory, whose titles have so near affinity with his
style. And to touch of infinite some few, Isa. 53.
of Christ it is said, Ascendet quasi radix de terra sitienti, he shall come
up like a root out of a thirsting ground, and yet of him it is also written,
erumpet in germen and faciet fructum, Ezech. 17
it shall break out into a budd, and shall bring forth fruit. Who seems more
like a withered root in a dry and barren soil, the^ the Martyrs, that are
pestered in priso^s, and as it were buried in miseries; and yet from this
root, who sees not how many budds of virtues, and fruits of gained souls
continuallye spring? Of Christ it is said, we have seen him, and there was
no comeliness in him, yea we took him for a leaper, and the basest of all
other men, and yet we desired him. And how fitlye agrees this to Martyrs,
whose tortured bodies and opprobrious deaths, if you consider, there are none
more abject, and deformed, then they: But for all this, not any disfiguring or
outward vnhappyenesse could so prevail, but that they are, and ever shall be,
desired, honored, and highlye esteemed. Ibidem
Of Christ it is said, if he yield his soul to death he shall see a long aged
seed and I will give him very many, and he shall divide the spoils of the
strong. And is not this also veryfied in Martyrs, whose blood is seed,
whose death reuyueth, whose plucking up, is the plantinge of their
posteritye? Was not Abel the first figure of Christ, and he a Martyr? Was not
Joseph a principal pattern of Christ's passion, and he set to sale, and an
innocent prisoner? Were not all the sacrifices of beasts and birds, types and
shadows of Christ's oblation, and none of them without shedding of blood? how
perfectly therefore does Martyrs resemble their Captain, seeinge these figures
and types, that foreshewed him, may also be aptely applied unto them? But to
proceed to their other prerogatives, there are but three especial points,
wherein the dead can be honored, by those that be alive. First by monumentes
and worthy me moryals erected for their renoune. Secondlye by famous writers
to register their acts. Thirdlye by being reuere^ced and generally esteemed
to be of soueraygne great power. And as concerning the first point, though the
Emprerours and men of mark, amongst the Gentiles, have had diverse honorable
memoryes: Yet were they for the most part of their own or others buildinge
before they dyed, or if it were after their decease, it was rather to flatter
some of their suruiuing friends, the^ for any great care, that they had of
the dead parties glory. And howbeit to the false gods in token of duty, there
have been set up most sumptuous temples, long after their deaths: Yet with
the memory of that wherein they were beneficial to the common wealth, there was
also set forth to be honored in them their brutishe and unnatural
wickedness, which did give to reasonable persons of good judgment, more
cause to abhor them for their lewdenesse, then to honor them for their
virtues. So was it a common thing to set forth the rapes of Jupiter, the
adultryes of Venus, the lasciuiousnes of Apollo, and such like and to have the^
painted in the very aultars and prospectes of their temples. but for Martyrs,
the monumentes are so generally raised in diverse countries, that it can not be
deemed flatterye, and of them nothing but good either has or could be set
forth which they ever would have reckoned in their virtues, or turned to
their glory. If Potentates and great personages, have had such
remembrances, it is no great maruayle, seeinge they were mighty in power,
they had rich and wealthye posterity, which as well for their own
advancement, as for the goodwil to the dead, were contented to renoune their
houses and familyes with such stately works. But a wonderful thing it is,
that common yea abiecte and base persons, such as in their life were counted
the reuersion and refuse of the world, such as had neither friends nor
posteritye to show them any like favor, yea such as dyed with infamye and
dyshonoure, devoured by beasts, and not thought worthy of so mcuh as a place
of buryall in the earth: that such men (I say) should after their deaths, be
honored with su^ptuous Churches, altars and daily solemnityes, and not only
in the place where they conuersed, but in diverse distant nations, and
countries, where they were never known before their departure, it is a thing
whereof as there can be no natural reasone, so surely must it needs be
construed a testimonye of Gods mighty hand to honor his Saynctes. Chrisost
hom. 66. ad populu^ Antice.
This did Saint Chrysostom observe when he said Christ when he was dead,
drew the whole world to worship him. And why speak I of Christ, when he
caused his very disciples after their decease, to be glorious. Yea and what
speak I of his Disciples, for not so much but their places, their
Sepulchers and their days has he made to be celebrated with perpetual
memory. Show me the^ the Tomb of Alexander, name the day wherein he ended his
life. But neither of them is notorious. They are now destroyed and quite
abolyshed. But the Sepulchers of Christ's servants are famous, advanced and
honored, in the Imperyall city, and their days commonly known to the
world, bringing with them a festival comfort. And as for Alexanders Tomb,
not his own neighbors know it, but these of the Saynctes, eue^ the Paynims
can tell of. And the sepulchers of a crucyfied man's disciples are more
glorious, then kings palaces, not only in the hugeness and statelynesse of
the buildinges (for in this also they exceed the^) but that which is more in
concourse and resort of suppliants. Theodoretus also has the like saying The
Churches of Martyrs are glorious to be seen, Theodorat. l 5. de cur grac^^
^ffect.
notorious for their hugenes, garnished with all kind of ornaments, and
blazing a broad the pomp of their beautye. Neither frequent we them only once,
twice, or five times in a year, but often spend in them whole days, yea many
times every day do we there singe to our Lord the praises and Hymns of
these Martyrs, What su^ptuous Churches did Constantyne the great build, in the
honor of S. Peter and S. Paul? What massye Images of all the Apostles did he
make, with crowns of gold on their heads of fourscore and ten pound wayghte a
piece? beside other passing rich ornaments, namelye two Crosses of gold,
Damas Pap^ in vitae s^luest.
one upon S. Peter's an other on S. Paul's Tomb, of a hundred and fyfty pound
wayght a piece. I omit the Temple that by Gallus was built to the honor of S.
Mama martyr, Gregor. Naz^ an. orat in Iulia 1.
mentioned by Gregory Nazianzene. The Church of S. Theodorus, Greg. Nissen. in
orat in Theodor.
which Gregorye Nisene reports to have been most su^ptuous. I omit the
statelye rich Churches, yet extante in all places of Christendom, which are
sufficient proofs to show the Martyrs of God, more glorious in this behalf,
then the greatest Monarks that ever were. For one Saint Steven or one S.
Laure^ce, has not only in Rome where their bodies are: but in France England,
Flaunders, Spain, Italye, Germanye, and all christendom, most hautye
buildinges erected for their memory: Yea not only in every country, but
almost in every chief City, and in infinite other towns. Now as concerning
the writers, that have regestred the Martyrs acts, they surpass all former
Potentates of the Gentiles, for how many Emperoures, have you, that have had
Emperoures to write their worthy exploytes? how few, unless they were men
of base calling, had their equales or betters to register their fame? Whereas
to the Martyrs other now as famous, for miracles, and holiness of life, as
they were for their martyrdom, and as much honored every way, as they in
the whole world, have been the croniclers and penners of their praises. How
many Martyrs does S. Cyprian S. Basil S. Chrysostom S. Hierome S. Ambrose
S. Augustine S. Bernarde and others honor in their Sermons and works? All,
men as glorious themselves in Gods Church as they of whom they set forth the
praises. I omit Eusebius S. Beede, Florus, Metaphrastes, Vsuardus, and
infinite other grave authors. For what books have you almost written by a
Christian, where in if the matter bear it, there is not mention made of Gods
Martyrs? Yea how many of the very Gentiles have regestred their memoryes? of
whom though they conceived not as they should, yet speak they of them to
their own confusion, and their glory. Now as touching the third point,
which is the reuerente and worthy opinion, that true Christians have of the
power of Martyrs, it were to long to recyte the particular testimonies of
antiquitye. For though we do not (as the heretics groslye father upon us)
yield them any divine honor, or take them for Gods; yet they have been ever
more highlye esteemed of our fore fathers, as also they are by us, for their
wonderful power. And first if what their power is in heaven, be gathered by
that which they had in earth, we have great cause to put confidence therein. If
S. Peter's shadow, S. Paul's ha^dkerchers, and girdeles, were able to cure
diseases; If S. Paul's prayer in the ship was able to obtain the lives of
two hundred seuentye six persons; If S. Steeuens prayer, was so forcible for
his persecutours, as to convert a chief agente in his death; Why may we not
with S. Hierome infer, Hieron. co^^. Vigil.
that they are able to do much more in heaven, where they are in more favor
with God, and perfited in charity toward us? Bernard ser. 2 de Pet and Paul
Mortales adhuc et morituri, imperiu^ vitae and mortis videbantur habere, solo
nimirum verbo mortificantes viuos, and mortuos suscita^tes; quanto magis nunc
cum honorati sunt nimis, nimis confortatus est principatus eorum. When they
were yet mortal (says S. Bernard) and sure to dye, they seemed to have
commandment over life and death, putting to death the quick, and raysinge
from death the dead, and that with their only word. How much more mighty
are they now, when they are advanced to such unspeakable honor, and their
princedome is most assuredlye established? Ser. in vig Pe. and Pauli.
And again, Quam potentiores sunt in coelis, qui tam potentes fuerunt in
terris? How much more powrable are they in heaven, whose power was so great
even here on earth? Secondlye if we consider the might of the devils, what
strong effects they have wrought, as by the inchaunters of Pharao, the
sudden destruction of Jobs cattle, the murderinge of his children by
overthrowing their house, and other wonderful effects, that God has permitted
unto them; Much more power must we presume to be in Gods Saints, whom we are
sure he would not make inferior in might unto his enemies in heaven, over whom
he gave them so great authority here in earth. And for this has it been
always a custom in the Church to go on pilgrimage to Martyrs Tombs, where
they have always showed their patronage to such, as come unto them for
succor. Of this S. Chrysostom says Ipse qui purpura indutus est, Chrysostom.
ho^ 66 ad popul. Antioc.
accedit illa complexurus sepulchra, and fastu deposito stat sanctis
supplicaturus, vt pro se apud deum interceda^t, and scenarum fabrum and
piscatorem etiam mortuos vt protectores orat, qui diademate redimitus incedit.
He which is clad in purple comes to embrace those Sepulchers, and setting
aside his majesty stands as a suppliant to those Saints, that they would
vouchsafe to pray for him: and he that goes adorned with his crown, prays
to a tente-maker and a fysher, and those also dead, as to his protectours. And
a little after, who ever went in pilgrymage to see any Kings Palaces, but to
enjoy the sight of the Martyrs tombs, many Kings have become Pylgryms.
Prudentius also of this writes. Prudent. Him no. 1 in He^^iternon and Chelidon
mart
Illitas cruore nunc arenas nicolae
Co^frequenta^t obsecra^tes voce, votis, munere,
Exteri nec non et orbis huc colonus aduenit
Fama na^ terras in o^nes praecucurrit proditrix
Hic patronos esse mundi quos preca^tes ambiant.
The tounsme^ flock to the imbrued sa^ds
There making suit with voice, with vow, with gift.
Men also come from far and foreign lands,
To every coast fore-ranne the fame so swifte.
That here the patrons of the world did lie,
By whose good prayers each wighte might seek supplye.
S. Beede also and our own Chronicles make mention how King Cedwall and King
Cenred went to Rome in Pilgrimage to those holy relics of the Apostles,
Bed^.l. 5 hist. c. 7: and 20:
which honor to what Emperor was it ever given, or so long continued?
Moreover what wonderful force the Martyrs be of, the effects that have been
wroughte by their very ashes, bones, garments, and other things of theyres
does aboundantlye testifye. S. Chrysostom says that S. Peter's cheynes,
Chrisost. sermon. in adora ^euer caten. Petri.
his sword, and his garments, wrought many miracles. S. Ambrose writes that
at S. Geruasius and Protasius reliquies, Ambrosus Epist. ^5. adsoror^^.
so diverse diseases were cured that the people cast their Beads and
garments upon their bodies, Oraria.
deeminge them of force to cure maladyes, by the only touch of those saints.
The very ashes of S. Cyprian drive the devils, out of the possessed, cured
diseases, and gave foreknowledge of future euentes, Greg Nazia^. orationem is
land. Cypri.
as Cregorye Nazianzen writes. And S. Chrysostom compares Martyrs bodies to
the Emperoures owane armor, Chr hom d^. nati. 7. macha.
the very light whereof makes the thieves that is, the devils to fly though
never so eager of pray. No^ ad naturam eorum intendunt, sed in arcanam
dignitatem, and gloriam christi, qui in agone certantium induta corpora
martyrum suorum sicut arma portauit. For their eye, aymeth not at their
nature, but at the secret dignitye and glory of Christ, who puttinge on the
bodies of his Martyrs, bear them as armoure in the agony of their combats.
And in su^m, what has been wrought by any Martyr in his life, but that
ordinarilye his ashes and relics have been of the like yea and sometimes of
greater force, whether it were raysinge of the dead, restoring of the lame,
giving sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, or speech to the du^me, or
what other miracle so ever. Psa. 3.
Now therefore if David demand his old question. Shall any utter thy mercy
in the grave, or thy truth in perdition? shall thy maruayles be known in
darkness, or thy justice in the land of oblivion? We may answer, that the
Martyrs in their tombs extol his mercy, who by their very ashes cures
diseases, and releeueth many miseryes. In perdition, by the loss of their
lives and shedding of their blood, they confirm and give testimonye unto his
truethe. In darkensse of infidelitye and error, or of temporal disgrace and
worldly punyshmentes, they make the maruayles of his power and majesty to be
known, and in their graves which are the land of oblyuion, they renew a
continual memory of his justice, who is so forward to aforde his reward to
the deseruers, and to crown the conquerours in his quarrel, that even he
makes their dead bones and duste, glorious in this world, before they be
endued with their final incorruption. Where-vppon Gods Church having to her
great advancement found the singular power of Gods Martyrs, has always made
an especial accounte of them, and had them evermore in chief reverence. This
also moved the Fathers to give them such honorable tytles. S. Basil calls
them the help of Christians, Basili^^. hom 20.40. mart.
the guardians of mankind, partners of our cares, furtherours of our prayers,
Bassilius hom 20
our embassadoures unto God, the stars of the world, the flowers of the
Church, and Towers against inuasio^ of heretics. Amb. ep 85 et ser. ^^ in
Nazar. and fell.
S. Ambrose calls them gouernoures and watchers of our lives cryers of Gods
kingdom, inheritours with God, intercessours of the world, Patrons and
fortresses of Cities. Theodoret: l: ^ grac: assect:
Theodoretus calls them our Captains, our Princes, our defenders, keepers,
and advocates. Finallye S. Chrisostom calls them Pillars, Chrisost sermon: in
I^u^^t. and max mart ser 60 ad pop: a^tioc:
Rocks, Towers, and lyghtes of the Church, and Protectours of Kings and
Emperoures.

Cap. 12.
Cap 12:
O How unhappy are they, that for the saving of goods, The vnhappyness of the
schismatickes and lapsed and comfortes against their example
credit te^porall authority, or such worldly respects, forsake these so
glorious and divine honors, and purchase a most lamentable and ignominious
style. For what are they but contrary to that which S. Basil says of Martyrs,
the spoil of Christians, the destroyers of men's souls, the occasioners of our
cares, hinderers of our prayers, factours of the devil, clouds of darkness,
weeds of the Church, and fortresses of heresye. What are they but ruynes of
relygyo^, dismembered offales and lymmes of Satan. Many of them yeldinge
before the battle, and foiled before they fought, have not left themselves
so much as this excuse, to say that they went to church unwillingly. They
offer them selves voluntarylye, they run wittinglye to their own ruin, and
seem rather to embrace a thing before desired, then to yield to an occasion
that they would feign have eschewed. And did not your feet stumble, your eyes
dasele, your heart quake, and your body tremble, when you came into the polluted
Sinagoge? And could Christ's servant abide in that place to do any reverence
and renounce Christ, or to do any homage to his enemy whom he had in
baptism renounced? And could you come thither to offer your prayers unto God,
where your very presence offered you body and soul to the devil? And could
catholic ears sustayn without glowing, the blasphemous, reprocheful, and
railing speeches against your true mother the Catholic Church? Was it no
pain to hear the corrupt tra^slations, abuses and falsifyings of Gods own
word? Was not the law of, goinge to church, and of being there present at
that which they call divine service, made and published purposelye to the
abolyshinge of the Catholic Faith, to the contempt, reproof, and overthrow
of the true Church, to the establishing of their untrue doctrine? And can any
Catholic knowing this, (as none can be ignorant thereof) imagyne, but that in
obeyinge this law he consents unto it, and to the accomplyshing of that,
which the law intends, that is the impugning of the true and the setting up
of a false faith. Do you not remember S. Paul's words They are worthy of
death not only that do such things, Romans 1.
but also those that consent to such as do them? Even as he is worthy to be
punyshed, who though in mind he favor his Prince, yet in deed he cleaves
to his enemy. Moreover was not this law made, to force men to show and
profess a conformablenesse in external behavior to this new faith? Is it not
required as a sign of renouncinge the true church, and approuinge this new
form of service, sacraments, and religion? To deny this, is against
experience. For to this effect sound all the penal laws and statutes, this
do the examinations, araygneme^ts and executions, make manyfeste, wherein
still the things punished, and condemned are, not goinge to the divine service
as they call it, the hearing mass, the receiving Priests, vsinge the benefitt
of their function, or acknowledginge of the authorytye of the Sea Apostolic.
In all which, what can we think is meante, but that their laws, and all
their indeuoures tend to make us deny our, and receive their belief. And
therefore when we obey them in these points, what do we but that which they
pretend at our hands? For if a subject should make a law, that all the
estates of the Realm should leave the obedience of their true Queen, and only
submit them selves unto him: And should prescribe that in token thereof they all
should come to his Palace, and attend there, while his servants did
Pryncelye and regal homage unto him; were not the obeying of this law a
consent to his rebellion? And the presence at his Palace a sufficyente sign
of our reuolte from our Soueraygne? Or do we think, that by forsakinge our
Queen, though it were for fear of her aduersarye, we did not enough of our
parts, to sulfill the mind of his law, which was to draw all fom her, to
attend upon himself: that thereby she being destitute of adherentes, he
might dispose of her, and of her kingdom at his own plea^ure? Is not this our
very case? The Queen is the Catholic Church. The rebellious subject,
resembles the enemies thereof. The law commanding from the Queens, and
forcinge to her rebels obedience, are the penal laws terrifyinge us from the
Catholycke relygion, and enforcinge us to the heretycal service. The coming
to his Palace while he is honored as King, is like the coming to Church
while heresye is set forth, as true religion. Now therefore is not the
obeyinge the law of coming to their service, whether it be for fear, or
love, a sufficient sign of our reuolte from our Queen that is the Catholyke
Church? And do we not as much on our sides, as is sufficient to fulfill her
enemies desire, and intent? which is the forsakynge the open profession of
duty and service due unto her, and the attendance upon her enemies pleasure,
that none being left that dare openly withstand them, and defend her, they
may work her overthrow the better. Surely if in a temporal cause, this point
should come to the scanning of any seculer tribunal, the least fault that the
offe^ders could be condemned of, were high treason. And how much greater
treason think we it is against Christ, to cooperate so directly to the
overthrow of his Church, which is not only his kingdom, but his mistycal
body, and he not only the Soueraygne, but the head thereof; Whose iniuryes he
accou^teth as offered to himself, as he well showed saying to S. Paul once a
persecutour of it Saul Saul why do thou persecute me? Nether can your
protestation or other sign excuse you, for you are both in man's reason, and
Gods censure, more to be judged touching your mind, by your deeds, then by
your words. And therefore if your deed be an establishing of their law, and
consequently an actual denial of your faith, your words excuse you no more,
then they should do him, that offering incense to an Idol by commandment of
his Prince, should say that in mind and heart, he were a Christian, though
all the world might see that he played the Infidel. For where the action it
self is contrary to the faith which in words is professed, a man's words
do only argue, that either he is an Atheist, that cares not for religion;
Niceph. 4.62 Eusebius. l. 6. c. 31.
or a Basilidian or Helckesaite that thinks it lawful to deny his faith,
Jacob. 4. Aug. in Psa. 54
or at the least a wilful sinner, that does wittinglye against his own
conscience, all which are most odious and damnable points. And if your
protestation be, Vide in epist. Cleri. Rom apud Cypri. ep. 31
that you are in mind Catholics, and that you come to church only to obey
the law, do you not acknowledge, that the law ought to be obeyed, and
therefore that it is good and just, seeinge obedyence is due to none but just
laws? Do you not confess, that there was in the enacters of it
Ecclesiastical and suficiente power, to command or bind you in spiritual
actions, and those such, as only and wholye tend to the confirmation of false
doctrine, and subversion of the truth? And who sees not that this is as much
in effect as if you said, the law that commands goinge to church with
heretics is just, and temporal Magistrates have spiritual authorytye,
sufficient to bind in conscience to go to their erroneous service,
notwithstanding that they do it to establish misbeliefe, and race out the
Catholic religion. And to say that goinge to church at such times as
their service and sacraments are mynistred, their doctrine preached, or the
rites of their sect practiced, is not a spiritual, but a civil action, is
against all sense and reason; seeinge that it is the very principal sign of
spiritual duty, to be present at such things, whereby religion is chiefelye
professed: especially when this presence is commanded by a law, the known
meaning whereof is to force men to a profession of a false belief. For so do
the very words of being present at divine service importe, and otherwise the
enactours endeuoures, and actions apparentlye witness the same. I omit the
scandal which you give in confirming the belief of heretics, Matt. 13 Marc.
9 2 Machab. 6 1. Cor ^ Aug. ep. 154 Euag l. 3 c. 21 Amb ep. 30
in weakeninge the faith of Catholics, in quite over throwing the faynte
hearted and wavering Schismatics. I omit what vantage you give to the churches
enemies to triu^phe over her as overcome, Matt. ^2 Amb. l. 20 ffi. cap. 24
and to boaste of you, if not as of children or volu^taries, at the least as of
pressed men and slaves of their Sinagoge. I omit the danger of infection by
their contagious speeches, 2 Timothy 2 Ecclesi. 13 ^. Cor: 10
that crepe like a canker; which to neglect and not to consider is wilful
blindness; to consider and not to fear is temptinge of God and great
presumption; to fear and not to avoid, is impyetye toward your soul, and
perverse obstination. I will not stand to rypp up your contempt of the Cannon
of the Apostles, Can. Apost. 63 Council. Laod. can. ^ 31.33 Vid. Clem con^stitut
apostol. l. 5 c: 4
of the Council of Laodicea, and diverse others, forbidding to resort to the
heretics prayer or conuentickles: Of the example of all antiquitye condemning
the same: Of the verdicte and common consent of the profoundest Clerks of
Christendom, and namelye of twelve of the most choice men in the last
Tridentine Council, who after long siftynge and examining this point, in the
end found it altogether unlawful, and avouched it better to suffer all kind
of torments, then to yield unto it. Yea and although they were desired, not
to make this a public decree, in respect of the troubles that might arise to
the Catholics in England, in whose behalf the question of goinge to church
was proposed: Yet the Legate and the foresaid Fathers, gave this answer,
that they would have this resolution no less acounted of, then if it were the
censure of the whole Council. I omit also that diverse heretics shall be
witnesses against you in the day of Judgment, who with letters and set
treatises have by many Scriptures proved it to be unlawful, for one of a true
belief to frequente or repayer to the service or sacraments of a false
church. Whose arguments and actions in this matter, will so much the more
condemn you, in that they were more religious in an erroneous and untrue, then
you in a sincere and undoubted faith. Their oppinion in this matter who
desires more at large to peruse, let him read the treatise of Ihon Calvin
which he made de vitandis superstitionibus, quae cum sincera fidei confessione
pugnant, of auoydinge superstitions which repugne against the sincere
profession of faith: and his book, which he did write as an Apologye ad
Pseudonicodemitas to false Nicodemites, who alleged in their defense the
example of Nicodemus that came to Christ by night^. In which among other
points he says, that goinge to a church of a contrary belief, is, partiri
inter deum and diabolum, animam vni, corpus alteri assigna^do. To part stakes
between God and the devil assygning the soul to one and the body to the
other. He has also of the like tenoure written two Epistles unto two of his
friends. You may likewise in the same volume see the counsel of Melancthon,
Peter Martyr, Bucer, and the Ministers of the Tigurine Congregation, whose
censure being by Calvin demanded, they all agreed to his opinion. M. Fox also
records diverse letters of Bradfod, Hullier, and others that wholly approve
the same assertion. And albeit their reasons were misapplyed in the particular
church, to which they proved it unlawful to resort: Yet are they very
sufficient and forcible to confirm that the repayring to a false church in
deed, is most sinnfull and damnable. And there-fore consider with your
selves, what wilful blyndnesse you are in, that maintain a point which not
only Catholics, but even the very heretics themselves that carried any
form or show of conscience and religion have detested, as most prejudicial
to the truth, offensive to God, and pernicious to your selves. And not
contented your selves to offer your souls, Scismaticke^ impietye toward
their children
to sacryfyce your faith, to make an hoaste to the devil of your eternal
salvation, and your portion in heaven: You carye also with you your selye
innocents, and force your children to the like impyetye, as though it were not
enough for you to perish alone. Cyprian. d^ lapsis:
Shall not they as S. Cyprian notes in the day of judgment cry out
against you? We of our selves have done nothing. We did not of our own
accord leave the meat and cup of God, to run to profane infection: the
infidelytye of others has cast us away. We felt our own parents our
murderers. They denied us the church for our mother, and God for our Father,
and have reuyued the old sin of the Jews and Gentiles. Immolauerunt filios
suos and filias suas demoniis. Psa* 105
They offered up their sons and their daughters to devils. O how cruel and
how unnatural a thing co^mitt you in thus trayning up your little ones in so
impious a sort? You gave them but a temporal life, and you take from the^ a
spirytuall: you bred their body, and you are the bane of their soul. You
brought them forth for heaven, and you guide them the way to hell. Was this
the fruit of your paynful labor, to bring one into the world, that should
through your education curse the father that begat him, and the mother that
bred him, the hour of his birthe, and wish that the womb had been his tomb,
his natiuitye, his decease, and his beginning his endinge? O how much better
did that good mother of the Machabees, ^ Machab. 7
that rather exhorted her children to martyrdom then to offend for saving
their lives. Much better did S. Felicitas, who in the time of persecution,
being as desirous to send her children before her to heaven, as other mothers
are to leave theyres after them here in earth, confirmed them in spirit,
whose bodies she had borne, and was their mother in their birth to God, as
well as in their natyuitye toward the world. Gregor (...).^ in E^^^g.
And as S. Gregorye says, seeinge her seven dear pledges martyred before
her, was in a sort martyred in them all, and though she were the eyghte in
place, yet from the first to the last she was always in pain, and her own
killinge was not the beginning, but the end of her martyrdom. The like
examples we read of S. Symphorosa and S. Sophia, who as they were mothers in
affection, so were they also in care of their childre^s souls, exhorting the^
to co^stancy, and giving example of the same. Alas how contrarilye do the
parents of our days, who as though, their children were nothing but flesh
and blood, and bodies without souls, pamper them in all sensual delight,
and fear nothige more, then that their souls should be in the state of
grace, and members of the Catholic Church. But they that are cruel to
themselves, how can they be merciful to others, and such as are them selves
fallen from God, how can theye either exhort or uphold others in Gods service?
O blindness and dulnes of heart. And had you rather have God then man for your
enemy? Had you rather be the devils then Gods prisoners? Had you rather live
caytyues here in earth, then dye to be Saints in heaven? What are your riches
as you use them, but gives to cheyne you, and fetter you in sin? Are they not
most strayte and strong boltes, Cypr de lapsis
by which as S. Cyprian says. Et virtus retardata est, and fides pressa, and
men's victa, and anima praeclusa? Both virtue slacked, and faith suppressed, and
the mind overcome, and the soul imprisoned? Yea and besides this, bring not
these cheynes with them a most cruel keeper, Chrisost. hom ^^. in Matt
that is the love of money? whose qualytye is whom he has once gotten, not to
suffer him to depart the prison, but to hold him sure with a thousand bands,
locks and doors, and casting him into an inward hold, to make him take
pleasure in his bondage. O what a miserable change make you. You sell with Esau
your heavenly inheritance for a little broth: Genesis ^5
You sell your soul, that cost no less then the life and blood of God
himself, for the short use of a few riches: you sell God and all he is
worth, for a small reuenew of a few years. It is not the fear of temporal
loss can excuse you. God gave it you, and for him you must not be unwilling to
forgo it. It is folly to think that God can allow for an excuse the loss of
a little pelf, when the soul which he bought with his own blood is lost for
the saving of it. Clem. Alex. l. 2. paed^g. c. 1^
Clemens Alex andrinus reports, that Apelles seeinge one of his scholars
paynting Helena and limming her image with much gold, should say unto him,
that sithence he was not able to paynte her fair, he meant at the least to
make her rich. Which words we may well use to those that allege their
riches as a cause of their reuolte. Whose fault being so palpable, that they
can not paynt it with any seemlye shape of virtue, they seek at the least to
gylde it, and make it seem tolerable with the pomp of their riches, as though
where true beawtye and grace wants, their heavenly Apelles could be blinded
from espying the deformyty of their image by the glyttering of their gold.
No no, well sees God your gross error and the follye of your bargayne. Qui
regna coelorum, says S. Chrysostom, permutant pecunia; Chrysostom. hom 64. in
M^tt
idem faciunt, ac si quis regno actus amplissimo, stercoris cumulo glorietur.
They which change the kingdom of heaven for monye; are like unto him, that
being dispossessed of a large kingdom, should glory in a heap of dunge. They
that desire to gain: seek in puttinge forth their monye, such as will give
them greatest vsurye, Chrysostom hom 53 ad popul. ^ntioch.
and take their monye thankefullye at their hands. But you seem to take a
quite contrary course. You forsake God, that offers not the hundred part,
but the hundred fold gain, and put out your monye to such, as can not so
much as restore the principal. What can your bellye return you, which
consumes most part of your riches, but dunge and corruption? what your vain
Pomp and glory, but malice and envy? what your vnchastitye, but hell and the
worm of conscience? And yett have you chose^ these for your detters, and for
the usury and lone of your wealth: present evils, and future punishments.
What comfort can your wealth give you who how richelye soever you are attyred,
without Christ you are naked? with what Jewels or ornaments soever you are
set forth, without Christ's beautye, you are deformed. How soever your face is
painted and your beautye blased; without grace you are ugly and monstrous. And
alas, how can you take any pleasure in these vanytyes, consideringe that you
have lost your self, and that you carry about you your own funeral, while
your body is a filthye tomb of a more filthy soul, not only dead, but almost
rotten in sin? And will you thus lend your riches to your own revenge, and
not rather put the^ out to Christ, that offers heaven and life everlasting
for your lone? If the time of his payment seem some what long, and that
withhold you* Remember that he which lies not bids you first seek the
kingdom of God, Matt: 6
and for necessaries, you shall not want. Remember the longer he keeps it,
the more gain he has to return for it. And if you not only bear but wish
for this delay in your usury with men: have you so little confidence in God,
and such fear he should become banckeroute, that you dare not trust him so
long as you would an ordinarye merchant? Consider with your selves that the
articles of your faith are no fables: the words and contents of the
Scripture, no Poets fictions: They are undoubted truethes, and shall assuredlye
be veryfied. Christ says, whosoever loves, Matt: 10
father, mother, riches, wife, or children, more then him; is not worthy of
him: And who so gathers not with Christ, Matt: 12
scatters. And he that is not with him, is against him. Such as deny him
here, Matt: 10
shall be denied of him in the next world. Luc. 12
And whosoever confesses him here, shall be acknowledged of him in the day of
judgment. And both these sayings being of equal truth and credit, Cypria^:
de lap sis
then as S. Cyprian says. Si fides quae vicerit, coronatur; necesse est vt
victa perfidia puniatur. If the faith that conquereth be crouned, the^ must the
foiled perfidiousnesse be chasticed. Wherefore whosoever has fallen, let him
now rise: If he have showed himself a man in sinninge: Let him not show
himself a devil in obstinatlye perseueringe in his fault. Gr^g: hom: 1^
Euang:
So many delights as you have to leave, so many sacrifyces you have to appease
God. Your number of vices, may you turn into a number of virtues, imployinge
all that to serve God in your repentance, which you abused to the contempt of
God, Bernard: in quod: ser:
in your wickedness. Fly out of the midst of Babylon says S. Bernard and
save your souls. Fly unto the city of refuge, where you may do penance for
that which is paste, obtain grace for the present, and expecte the comfortes
that are to come. Let not the burden of your conscience withholde you, for
where sin has much abounded; there abounds also Gods grace in repentance.
Let not the fear of difficulties, and rigor, dismaye you. The passions of
this world are not condign neither to the sins paste which are released, nor
to the present sweetness of grace which is restored, nor to the future glory
wher-with they shall be rewarded. If you believe not words: believe examples, of
so many. How many have you in prison both by nature and custom very
dayntye, and tender? Nothing is impossible to true believers: Nothing sharp
to true lovers: Nothing hard to the meek: Nothing rough to the humble, to
whom grace affords healpe, and devout obedience eases the wayghte of Gods
commandments. Remember what judgments God has showed on those that
denied him. Cypria^ de lapsis
One as soon as he had denied Christ, was presentlye stricken dumme, and in
that began his punishment, in which began his fault. An other woman having
committed the like crime, was sodaynlye in the bathes seized on by an evil
spirit, and toare of her tongue with her own teeth, by which she had
renounced her faith. And thus being made the revenger of her own offense,
within a little space extremelye tormented with wringinge in her bowels, she
gave up the ghost. And to omit perticulers; Harken what S. Cyprian says of
those, Ibidem
that in his time were guilty of this reuolte. Quam multi quotidie immu^dis
spiritibus adimplentur? quam multi vsque ad insaniam mentis excordes, dementiae
furore quatiu^tur? Nec necesse est ire per exitus singuloru^, cu^ per orbis
multiformes ruinas tam delictorum paena sit varia, quam delinquentium multitudo
numerosa. How many are every day fraught with foul fiendes? how many
waxinge witless fools, are in the end shaken with a furious madness? Nether
need I to go over the particular ends of every one, seeing that in the
manyfold ruins and reuoltes through the world, the punishments of their
sins are as various, as the multitude of offenders is great. Let every one
of you consider as well, what he himself has deserved, as what others have
suffered. Let no man flatter himself in the adiourning of his chastisement.
Yea let him rather fear the more, seeinge God reserueth his sin to an
eternal revenge. Be not moved with their example, that either through
retchlesse error, or dullness of faith run headlonge forward in their
wilful blindness. Go not you to perdition with them for company, and think
it not better to go to hell with many, then to heaven with a few. Join your
prayers with ours, that daily pray for you. Be not slack in your own cause,
to which so many cooperate, and laughe not you in your miserye, which so many
rue. God is ready again to receive you. He opens unto you the gate of his
mercy. He calls you, he enuiteth you, with fatherlye pitye. O
vngratfulnesse, why stycke you? why stand you? what stays you from coming?
Your soul lies upon it; your eternal weal or woe is in the ballaunce.
Take mercy while you may, enter while you have access. Lest the gate be
shut, and your knocking not hard, and your last answer, nescio vos, I know
you not. And you on the other side most constant confessors, Comfortes
against Sersma tickes example
continue your course, persevere in your commenced enterprise. Let not the
example of those that fall, make you the weaker. 1: Ioa: ^
Si fuisse^t ex nobis, mansissent vtique nobiscum. Cypria^ de v^^tate Ecclesia
Gratulandum (says Saint Cyprian) cum lupi, and bestiae de Ecclesia
separentur; ne columbas, ne oues* Christi saeua sua and venenata contagione
praedentur. If they had been of us, they would have stayed with us. We should
rejoice when wolves and beasts are sequestered from the Church, least with
their cruel and venomous infection, they pray upon the doves and sheep of
Christ. How can the sweet stand together with the sower, darkness with
light, the calm with the tempest? Cyprian: de simplicitat^ praelaetorum^
Nemo putet bon^s de ecclesia discedere. Triticum non rapit ventus, nec arborem
solida radice fundatam procella subuertit: Inanes paleae tempestate iactantur,
inualidae arbores turbinis in cursione euertuntur. Let no man imagine that the
good go out of the Church. The wind carries not away the wheat, neither does
the storm overthrow the trees that are strong rooted. The light chafe is
tossed with every tempest, and the weak trees with every blast are blowe^
down. And as the pillar in a building, if it stand so right as it should;
the more wayghte is laid upon it, the more firm and immovable it stands;
but if it lean to either side, any wayght makes it fall quite down and
break a sunder: so those that in this spiritual building of the Church walk
vprightlye, framing their behavior agreeablye to the integritye of their
faith; by the poyse of persecution, are rather strengthened and confirmed: but
such as are of loose demeanoure, and evil life, leaninge to the lybertye of
this wicked time; with every little wayght of aduersitye, fall into schism,
and are broaken of from the members of Christ's mystical body. When the Sun
shyneth says S. Augustine, Aug. in Psa: 93
is it the Palm that withers, or the Cedar that is parched? is it not rather
the wearish hay that suddenly fades with the heat? 1. Reg. 19.
Though you see some Saul of a prophet to become a prophets persecutour: some
Judas of Christ's Apostle to become his betrayer: Apoc 2
Some Nicholas of a Deaco^ to become an archheretike: yet be not you moved.
What maruayle when the beam is severed from the Sun, if it leese the light?
when the bough is cut of from the tree, if it wither? Or if the brook being
parted from the head spring, dry quite up? This cannot any way prejudice
but rather profitt the Church, whose purytye is increased, when it voydethe
out of it such ordure and corruption. For as Saint Gregorye says Nemo
amplius in ecclesia nocet, Greg. in pastora.
quam qui perverse agens, nomen vel ordinem sanctitatis habet. Delinquentem
namque hunc redarguere nullus praesumit: and in exemplis culpa vehementius
ostenditur, quando pro reuerentia ordinis peccator honoratur. No man in the
Church does more harm, then he that living peruerselye bears the name and
degree of pyetye. For such a one no man presumes to reprove, and a great
deal more apparentlye turns the fault to evil example, when for reverence
of the order the offender must have his honor. Better therefore it is that
they should go out of it, that within it are a disgrace unto it, and without
it honor it, as a ground that can not brook such rank and poisoned
weeds. Contemn not the perle because the swyne tread upon it: despise not
the light, because the evil doers hate it: think not worse of the Church
if the wicked forsake it. It were a follye in the Aegiptians to contemn their
river Nilus that fatteth their soil, and causes all their abundance: to
refuse to eat of the fruits which by wateringe the earth it engenders,
because there-in the Crocodyle breeds, or for that some times it casts out
an vglye Vyper. So were it much more madness to condemn the Church, or
Sacraments ther^of, because some poysened worms have bredd and fedd in them,
and afterward impiouslye revolted from them. It is not much to see some
cockle in Gods field, so long as the enemy may sow it. Matt: 13
Look you upon the wheat, for the Angels shall bynd the cockle in bundles,
and throw the^ into unquenchable fire. Ibidem
The nett is not yet drawn to shore for the fysher to cast out the evil
fyshe. The good man of the house has not yet sorted his vessels, Rom: 9
nor severed the vessels of reproach from the vessels of honor. Cum acceperit
tempus, Psalm: 74
ipse iustitias iudicabit. When he takes his time he will judge justice it
self; how much more their impyetye? In the mean while though some of the
bad sever them selves from Christ's body: we must rather think it a
happiness, then a nouelty. For so has it ben always heretofore, and so will
it be always hereafter, until such time as venient Angeli and separabunt
malos de medio iustorum. Matt: 19
The Angels shall come and sever the bad from amongst the just, and alott
every one to his deserved home. It is better for us to be humbled with the
meek, Pro: 16
then to divide spoils with the proud. Better it is to be a wounded and
tormented member in the body, then a member clad in gold and cut of from the
same. It were great follye in one, that seeing a horse fair to the eye, of a
good color, of a proper make, and set forth with a gorgeous furniture;
would strayte bye it at an unreasonable price, neither considering the pase,
courage, force, or soundenesse thereof: So were it extreme madness, to buy the
advancement of this world, with loss of eternal joy, only for the fair
show and flattering delyghtes, not wayinge the slyppernesse, the vanitye, and
the danger of them. If they think worldly pleasure so great felicitye, as to
take it at this rate with the loss of their souls: yett let not us imitate
or like of their bargayne. Though children seeinge the stage players, in
costlye attire, think them happyer then the rich gentleman, that goethe
plain, because neither consider they the players base condition, otherwise,
nor their shamfull profession, but only their feigned glory: yet let not us
be so chyldishe, as to make the like accounte of the worldly glouttons, that
have revolted from God to gorge, knowing that though they are cladd in purple,
and every day pampered with magnifical banckets, yet end they with this
miserable conclusion, mortuus est dives, and sepultus in inferno. Luc. 16.
The rich man dyed, and was buried in hell. Who is so mad as to admire his
might says Eusebius Emissenus, Eusebius. Emis. de SS. Epiphodio and alexandr^
that is only mighty to do himself mischief? who would deem him happy
that had a strong hand, for nothing but to cut his own throt? who would
praise his swiftenesse, that runs hastily to his own perdition? or maruayle
at his hye ascente, whose mounting is only to his greater ruin? Such felicitye
is much like theirs, that having taken the poysened juice of certain herbs,
are by the operation thereof, brought to dye with excessyue laughture. And what
felicitye is it, says S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. (...) 3. de L^zar^
for one sick of the dropsye to have choice of pleasante drynckes, which the
more they allure him to taste of them, the more they forward him toward his
death? Let the^ triumph in this their imaginary happiness and true misery:
Let them rejoice in their wickedness, and glory in their destruction: Let
us comfort our selves in our passions, and afflictions for Christ, which we
know will advance us to an eternal reward, and to those glorious titles
before mentioned, which undoubtedly are due unto the Martirs in our cause and
to no other. Cap 13 That Hereti^kes can not be Martyrs.


Cap. 13
FOr though it has been the propertye of heretics, to vaunte of such as
dyed for their religion, and to term them martyrs, as they did their heresye
true religion: Yet in fine it has always appeared, that as their doctrine was
heresye, so their death desperation. Eusebius writes that the Cataphrigians
being driven to an exigent, Eusebius. l. 5: hist ^: 15: 16:
had no other way to mayntaine their doctrine, but to fly to their Martyrs.
To whom Apollinaris well answered, that so had the Marcionistes and other
heretyckes done, but, quae (says he) esse poterit apud eos, martirij veritas,
vbi Christiveritas non est? How is it possible for the^ to have the truth of
martyrdom, that want the truth of Christ. The Manna when it was used
agreeablye to the precept of God, had all kind of delightsome tastes, was fit
to norish and very pleasante to eat. But when in the use thereof his
commandment was not observed, that most comfortable viand rotted, and turned
into worms. So though martyrdom, if it be well used, be an act of singular
virtue, yea of all virtues together, and turn to the incomparable glory of
the Martyr: yet when it is not taken for a right cause, and in a due sort, it
is to the sufferer but a beginning of an eternal corruption, and breeds an
everlasting worm of conscience. And upon such alighteth that curse of God
mentioned in Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy: 28^
that they shall sow much seed, and reap little corn; because the Locust
shall devour it. They shall plant and dig a vinyarde, but never drink the
wine thereof; because the worms shall destroy it: they shall have olyue trees
in all their grounds, and yet not be anoyndted with the oil; because their
Olives shall fall and perish. And so what torturing so ever the wicked or
heretics suffer, it shall avail them to nothing but to their pain. For if
all were Martyrs, that dye for their relygion, then many heresies both
contrary among themselves, and repugnant to the evident, doctrine of Christ,
should be truethes, which is impossible. Esse Martyr non potest, Cyprian: l ^^
simp^^: pral^ torum
qui in Ecclesia non est, ad regnum peruenire non poterit, qui eam quae
regnatura est derelinquit. Cum Deo manner non possunt, qui in ecclesia vnanimes
esse nolueru^t. Ardeant licet flammis, and ignibus traditi, vel obiecti bestiss
animas suas ponant: non erit illa fidei corona, sed paena perfidiae: nec
religiosae virtutis exitus gloriosus, sed desperationis interitus. Occidi talis
potest, coronari no^ potest. Sic se Christianum esse confitetur, quomodo and
Christum diabolus saepe mentitur, ipso domino premonente et dicente multi
venient in nomine meo, dicentes, ego sum Christus, and multos fallent. He can
be no Martyr that is not in the Church: he can not atchyue the kingdom, that
forsakes her that shall be Queen. They can make no abode with God, that refuse
to be peaceable in his Church. Well may they broile in flames, and being
thrown into the fire, or wherled to wild beasts cast away their lives: It
shall be no crown of their faith, but a punishment of their perfidiousnesse,
it shall not be a glorious end of their religious virtue, but a death of
desperation. Well may such a one be killed: but he can not be crowned. He so
professes him self to be a Christian, as the devil faslye fayneth him self
to be Christ. As our Lord forewarned us saying, Many shall come in my name
saying I am Christ, and shall deceive diverse. Aug l. 1. de ci^itate dei c. ^
In the same fire (says S. Augustine) the gold shyneth and straw smoaketh.
Under the same flayle the corn is purged and the husks broken. Neither is the
oil and dregs confounded together, because they are both under the wayghte
of the same press. Even so the same vyolence that proves, purifyeth, and
cleanses the good; damnethe, wastes, and spoyleth the badd. And in the same
affliction the wicked curse and blaspheme God, and the good praise him and pray
unto him, so much imports it, not what things, but in what state and cause
every one suffers. For by the like stirringe the mire breaths out a
horrible, and the sweet oyntmente a delightsome savor. The redd sea of
Martyrdom, Sap. 16
though to the true Israelite it yield dry way without impediment, yet Pharao
and the false Aegiptians are drowned therein and syncke to the bottom like
stones. Exodus 15.
Who were ever more ready to dye for the relygion then the Donatistes? who did
not only dye obstinatlye when they were condemned, but provoked men to kill
the^ for their religion. Have we not the same furious spirit, likewise in the
Anabaptists, who though they deny the scripture, the humanitye of Christ,
though they stycke only to their own dreams, and revelations, though they
permit such brutishe co^munitye and pluralytye of wives, and marriage of
sister and brother together: Yet dye they in defense of these damnable
Paradoxes, and that with such pertinacye, as though they had bodies of steel,
that felt no pain or tormente. But let not this move any one to think the
truth on their side. For even to this day do the Jews dye in defense of
the fables of their Talmud, (which is to them as our Bible is to us.) Wherein
notwithstanding besides the denial of the coming of Christ, there are very many
ridiculous things. As that God spends three hours in the day in readinge
their law: other certain hours he weepeth and afflicts himself for
sufferinge the Temple to be destroyed, and the Jews brought into bondage: that
he appointed certain sacrifyces every new Moon to be offered for his sin in
giving the Sun that light which wrongfullye he had taken away from the
Moon; and other fables of like follye. And yet as childish things as these
be, want there not at this day, that will dye in defense of their religion.
And not many years since, a Renegate Christian beco^ming a Jew, was burnt for
this fond doctrine. Neither is this maruayle when the Gentyles themselves even
unto this day, have also their Martyrs. For as may be seen in the Epistles
and stories of India, it is thought a very laudable thing among them,
putting themselves and their goods into an unfurnished shipp new builte for
that purpose, to bore the shipp thoroughe, and by drowning in the syghte of
their friends and the people, to sacryfice themselves to their false Gods.
Other also in their great and high solemnities, when the press and throng
of people is most, use to lie flatt in the thresholdes of the doors of the
Temples, and suffer them selves, to be trampled to death, and are thereby
accounted as Saints. I omit Decius, Scaeuola, Leocorius, Leonides, and
others of older date, whose factes may easilye avouch S. Augustines saying,
August. l. 3. de ciuira. Dei.
that causa, non paena, martyrem facit.. And therefore they are madd (says he)
that divide the members of Christ, Idem ep. 50.
abolish the Sacraments, and yet glory of their persecution, in that they are
forbidden to do these things by the Emperors laws, which they have enacted
for the unity of gods Church: And boste guilefullye of their innocencye,
seekinge at men's hands the glory of Martyrs, which at our Lords they can
not have. But the true Martyrs are those of whom our Lord said, blessed are
they that suffer persecution for justice sake; Wherefore not they that for
their own iniquitye, or for the impious breach of Christian unity, but they
which for righteousness suffer persecution, are in deed the true Martyrs. Et si
passa es, o pars Donati, corporalem afflictionem ab ecclesia Catholica: a Sara
passa es Agar, redi ad dominam tuam. And O saction of Donatus, if thou have
suffered corporal persecution of the catholic church, thou have suffered as
Agar of Sara. Return therefore unto thy maystres. And in testimony hereof, of
so many hundredes of heretics that have been in former ages put to death for
their heresies, whom have you amongst all aunciente authors, that does
register them as Martyrs, yea that condemns them not for obstinate
heretics? Where have you any of their festival days, their glorious
tombs, their honor and memories celebrated, mentioned or known? We see that
the true Martyrs days, names, acts and ashes are yett famous, though they
were strayte after Christ's time, and have passed the storms of so many and
great persecutions. They are mentioned of all antiquitye, honored with the
style of as great Saints as them selves, Eccle: 45
et memoria eorum in benedictione est: and their memory shall be blessed. But
not all Arrius posteritye, not all the races of other heretics, could
mainteyne their doctrine, or their Martyrs credit long, but even it fell out
with them, and will do with foxes Martyrs, Psa: 36
as Dauide prophesied. Vidi impium superexaltatum, and eleuatum supra Cedros
Libani. and transii, and ecce non erat. and quaesiui eum et non est inuentus
Locus eius, For a while they were honored as Saints, and had the glory of the
Cedars of Libanus given unto the^. But in the end they are found to have been
barren trees, and thrown into unquenchable fire, and their places was no
longer found amongst Saints. Martyrdom can not be the just punishment of
sin, but the crown of virtue; and whosoever is iustlye executed for a true
offense, Saint he may be, if he repent him of his fault, and take his
death as his just deserte; But Martyr he can not be, though he endure never
so many deaths or torments. For as one that in a hott summer day walkinge
in a dry and barren field, and being sore parched with the sun, and extreme
thirstye, though he settled him self to paynte or grave in the earth most
pleasante fountaynes or delyghtsome and shadowye bowers, should be
nevertheless as much annoyed with heat, and as little eased of his thyrst as
before: So they that walk in the fruitelesse field of heresye, in which it is
impossible that either the fountain of grace should spring, or the arbours of
glory grow, howsoever in the heat of their just persecution and thyrst of
comfort in their punishments they feed their imagination with a vain
presumption of future joys: yett in truth all their hope is like a painted
fountain, that rather increseth, the^ diminishes their pain. And therefore in
yelding them selves so rashelye to torments for their heresies, they do like
a poor wretch lyinge a sleep on the edge of a hye and steep rock, who
dreaminge that he were made a King, and had a glorious train of nobilitye to
attend him, su^ptuous palaces to lodge him, and the commodityes of a whole
kingdom at his commandment: should upon the sodeyne by starting up and
leaping for joy, fall down from the rock, and in lieu of all his imaginarye
solaces, kill him self and leese that little comfort which he had in his
miserable life. For in truth as S. Paul says, though I deliver my body to
be burned, and have no charity and union with God, and his true Church: it
avails me no thing. And for this would Christ have his first Martyrs
Innocents, and as S. Cyprian says, Cypr. ep: 24
Aetas nec dum habilis ad pugnam, idonea extitit ad coronam; and vt appareret
innocents esse, qui propter Christum necantur, infantia innocens ob nomen eius
occisa est. The age unable to the combat was apt for the crown, and that it
might appear that they were innocents that should dye for Christ, innocent
infancye was first for his name putt to death. This seemed Dauide to insinuate
when he said, Psa: 36
keep innocencye and behold equitye, because there are relics for the
peaceable man. But where this innocencye wants, this equity fails, this
peace ableness with Gods Church is not observed, well says S. Cyprian: Cypr
ep: 16
Siex talibus quis fuerit apprehensus: non est quod sibi quasi in confessione
nominis blandiatur, cum constet, si eiusmodi extra ecclesiam fuerint occisi
fidei coronam non esse, sed paenam perfidiae. If any such be apprehended, he
need not flatter him self, as though he were a confessor of Christ's name:
seeinge it is manifest that if any such be killed, it is no crown of his
faith, but a penalty of his faythlessnesse. And therefore if any of their
actions be committed to writing, it is not a report of their praises but a
rehersall of their iniquities. For as David foretold. Perijt memoria eorum
cum sonitu; Psa ^
and again: Psa. 36
iniusti autem peribunt, simul reliquiae impioru^ interibunt. Their memory
vanyshed with a sound, and the unjust shall perish, and their very relics
be quite extinguished. wherefore to you only and to your predecessors who suffer
in this glorious cause of the Catho, like faith, and whose only quarrel as
before is proved, is the true quarrel of religion, to you I say, and to no
other appertains the glory of Martyrs in this world, and the unspeakable
felicity prepared for them in the world to come.

Cap. 14. Cap. 14.
The twelft comfort, is the glory due unto Martyrs in the next world^

WHich how great it is, may easelye be coniectured. For their dead bodies,
here in earth are so highlye honored and had in such estimation; what may
we think of the majesty of their souls in heaven. For first all the
comfortes, joys, and delights that are here scattered in diverse creatures,
and contryes all the bewtye and comlynesse that any worldly thing here has,
shall be there united and joined together in every Sayncte, without any of these
imperfections, wher-withal they are here coped. Now what a happy man would
we think him, that with a word might have all the wealth and treasure,
solace and comfort that this world is able to afforde: If he might be loved of
whom and as much as he would: honored of all: and partner of every man's joy,
as much as them selves: and have every thing in what time place and manner,
that it pleased him to appoynte? We see how much any one pleasure is prysed.
Some will venture to any peril, to please their taste: other to content
their eye: many to satisfye their ear: infinite to fulfill their
sensualitye. And yet what are all the content-mentes of these senses, but
shadows and dreams of delight, neither sufficient to quench sorrow, nor able
to continue long, nor won without hazard, nor ended without fear, nor lost
without grief? But in heaven all the senses are evermore and without fear of
loss, fullye satisfied, with their several pleasures, and drowned in the
depth of unspeakable delighte. The place how glorious it is may be ghessed by
the description of S. Ihon of heavenly Jerusalem, Apoc. 28
whose walls are of precious stone, whose gates Pearls, whose porters Angels,
whose streets paued with gold, and interlaced with Crystal rivers, the
banckes whereof are set with the trees of life, whose fruit renews, and the
leaves preserve from all kind of sickness. God is their Sun and ever
shines: their temple, and is ever open: their day never ends, their
felicitye never decays, and their state never alters. Which description,
though it be set forth with the most precious things of this world, the
better to resemble the glory of that place: yet in truth it has little
comparison to the thing it self. But because we being ruled by sense, more
then by understanding, conceive not spiritual matters, but by the similitude
of earthlye things: Let this for the glory of the place suffyse, that all
the ornaments, delights, and inventions, that either nature has bredd, or
art devised, or man imagined, shall there meet to the furniture of these
rooms. And whatsoever has been, is, or shall be of rare beautye to set any
thing forth, shall there be present, and all this in a thousand fold more
delicious and exquisite manner, then ever has been seen or conceived in this
world. Now range with your inward eye in the suptuous Palaces, and statelye
buildinges of monarchs, and Emperors, see what you can, and think a
thousand times more then you see, it is all but a fancye in respect of that
which heaven is garnished withal. Now for your company you must not think
that because the lame, blind, poor, and despised abiectes of this world are
those that go to heaven, and on the other side the Princes, peers, and
Potentates for the most part those that sink into hell: that therefore all the
best company is banished from thence, and the remissals of mankind, only
left; to fill up the seats of the fallen Angels. For first, all those of al
states, and degrees, whose company shall be grateful, shall be there present: but
such as were unworthy of their earthlye prefermentes, and abused them to
their damnation, as most do: Much less are they worthy of heavenly
glory, and their company we shall utterly deteste, and therefore never be
troubled with it. Secondlye if God of a child that comes naked out of his
mothers womb and has no more to healpe him self, then the poorest bratt that
is borne in the world, can make, such mighty Emperors, and worthyes as we
read to have been in times paste: how much more able is he to advance the
most impotent wretch to a greater dignitye in heaven. God estemeth not the
toys that men accounte of, his judgment only searches every man's
deserts. When we dye, it is, as in the change of a Prince: for they that were
in authority, are then deposed: those that were base and abject before are
then advanced: and the Prince that is newly created, regards little whom his
predecessoure favored, but who seemed to him best worthy of prefermente.
Even so little esteemethe God what account the world has made of us, but
how well we have deserved to be well thought of and worthelye rewarded.
Besides men, we shall have the company of so many quires of Angels, of our
Lady, Christ, and the most blessed Trinitye, and these so beautiful to see,
so amiable and loving to converse with, that we shall no less joy of our
company, then of our own glory. Anselm. ep. 2 ad Hugonem.
Of this S. Anselme speaks thus. Whosoever deserves to come thither,
whatsoever he would wish shall be, and what he will not, shall not be neither in
heaven nor earth. For such is the love of God to his Saints and of them
among themselves; that all love one another, as them selves, and love God more
then them selves. And none will have but what god will have, and that which
one will have, all will have, and that which one or al will have God, also will
have it so to be. So that every ons wish shall be fulfilled in him self, in all
other creatures, yea and in almightye God. And so shall all be absolute Kings,
because every ons pleasure, and will shall be fullye accomplished. Finallye, in
the syghte of God we shall have the fullness of felicity, which neither eye
has seen, nor ear heard, nor man's heart atchiued. The understanding shall be
without error, the memory without forgetfulness, the will without evil
desires; the thoughts pure, and comfortable, the affections ordinate, and
measurable, all the passions governed by reason, and settled in a perfect
calm. No fear shall affrighte us, no presumption puff us up, no love
disquiete us, no anger incense us, noe envy gnawe us, no pusillanimitye qualye
us, but courage, constancye, charity, peace, and securitye, shall replenishe
and establishe our hearts. It shall be lawefull to love whatsoever we like, and
whatsoever we love we shall perfectlye enjoy, and not only love, but be also
loved, so much as we our selves will desire. Our knowledge shall comprise,
whatsoever may be to our comfort, not only one thing at once, but all things
together, so that the multitud of the objects shall delight us, not confound us,
fill our desire of knowledge, not hinder the perfect intelligence of the^ all.
And for our bodies, they shall be of most comely and gracious feature, bewteous
and lovely, healthful without al weakness, alwais in youth flower and prime of
their force, personable of shape, as nimble as our thought, subject to noe
penal impression, incapable of grief, as clear as crystal, as brighte as
the Sun, and as able to find passage thorough heaven, earth, or any other
material stopp, as in the liquid and yeldinge air. Our syghte shall feed on
the most glorious and eysome majesty of the place, and on the glory and
bewtye of the company: the ear shall always be solaced with most sweet and
angelical harmonye: the smellinge delighted with heavenly sentes and odours:
the taste pleased with incomparable sweetness: the feelinge satisfied with a
perpetual and unknown pleasure: Fynallye every parcel, ioynte, senew, vain
and member of our body, shall have his several and peculiar delyghte. Which
though they be most diverse in quality, and so vehement, that the least of them
in respect of the excessyue joy that it would cause in us, were more then our
mortal body would bear: yet shall not the presence of the one, diminishe the
full comfort of the other, but every one increase others pleasure, and we
nevertheless have a several contentmente both of every one by it self, and
of them all together. Their plentye cloyeth not, their satietye offends
not, the continuance annoyeth not. Their hunger is satisfied yet not
diminished, their desire accomplished but not ceased, so that by having their
desire, their mind is quieted, and by desyring that they have, a^noyance
avoided. Neither is their joy contained in their own persons. For as Hugo
says, Hugo. l. 4 d^ anima c. 15
each by louinge other as himself, delights in others joy, as much as in
his own: and what he has not in himself he possesses in his company. So
that he has as many joys as fellows in felicity, and the several joys of
all are of as great comfort to every Sayncte, as his own peculier. And
because all love God more then themselves, they take more pleasure of his
bliss, then of all their joys beside. O how glorious will it then be for gods
Martyrs, when in securitye they shall count their conquestes of Satan, and
his instruments, by patience and constancye? when they shall have an eternal
tryumphe, for a short victory? when they shall look down upon their glorious
spoils of souls, by their blood converted, and shall see their enemies
either confounded, by Gods justice, or reclaymed by his mercy? What a singular
joy shall they co^ceyue by considering the torments avoided which the lapsed
shall endure and the glorious change that they find in them selves? For their
prison they shall have a paradyse of delights: for their cheynes, ornaments of
glory: for their reproach and shame, honor and reverence: for the raylinge
against them, everlasting praise and titles of renoune: from the rage of
enemies they shall pass to the league of Saynctes. O how glorious will the
scarres of their wounds, and the tokens of their agonyes then show, Aug. l
22 de ciuit. c. 2^
which as S. Augustine says they shall bear about them as perpetual
testimonies of their victories. Non enim deformitas in eis, sed dignitas erit:
and quaedam, quamuis in corpore, non corporis, sed virtutis pulchritudo
fulgebit. For there shall be in them no deformitye, but dignitye: and a certain
beautye shall shine, though in the body yet not of the body but of virtue. So
says S. Chrysostom Pugnacis militis gloria est, Chrisost. in 24 c. Matt
refer cu^ victoria laceru^ clipeu^, ostendere plagas. It is a glory, to a
courageous soldier, to bring home with victory a torn and hacked buckler, and
to show his wounds. And in an other place he says; that they shall not only
be after the resurrection badges of triumph, but are also now very forcible
motyues to obtain their petitions, and to pray confidentlye for us. Sermon. de
SS. Iuuen. et Man
Etenim sicut milites vulnera in praelijs sibi inflicta regi monstrantes,
fidenter loquuntur: Ita and illi absecta capita gestantes, and in medium
afferentes, quaecunque voluerint apud regem coelorum impetrare possunt. For as
soldiers shewinge their King the wounds received in his quarrel speak
confidentlye unto him: so they carrying and bringing in presence their heads
chopped of, may of the King of heaven obtayn whatsoever they will. Ep. ad
Hedibia.
The same does S. Hierome insinuat saying, that the Martyrs keep the marks
of the pullinge out their eyes, the slytting of their nose, and such like
maymes for Gods cause. In testimony whereof we see that Christ the pattern of
our resurrection, did bear with him into heaven the printes of his wounds, as
S. Beede notes to the confusion of his enemies, shame of the Sinagogue, as
eternal testimonies of his love toward us as glorious proofs of his
obedience to his father, and as a perpetual discharge of our ransom. O
peccator, says S. Bernarde, Bernard in Canti.
securum accessum habes ad patrem, vbi habes matrem ante filium, and filium
ante patrem. Filius ostendit patri latus and vulnera, matter filio pectus et
vbera, nec potest esse ibi aliqua repulsa, vbi sunt tot caritatis insigna. O
sinner, securelye may thou come to the father where thou haste the mother
before the son, the son before his father. The son shows his father his
side and his wounds, the mother to her son her breast and her dugges,
neither can there be any repulse, where there plead so many marks and
tokens of charity. O how terrible will these wounds of Christ be, to the
Sinagoge, when that shall be veryfyed in the day of dome, videbunt in quem
transfixerunt? Joan. 19
They shall look on him whom they have persed? O how comfortable to all
Saynctes, but especially to Martyrs, who shall not only rejoice in them, as
assurances of their salvation, certyfycates of Christ's love toward them,
and pledges of perpetuitye in bliss: but also in that they themselves are
scarred in like manner, and have a more particular resemblance of that glory.
They also with their wounds shall terrify their tormentours: and every strype
and hurt that they have received, shall be so inevitable an accuser and witness
of their persecutoures impyetye, that they would rather if they might hide
their heads in hell fire, then see those prints and stepps of their barbarous
crueltye. S. Leo ser^^in Laur.
This does S. Leo signifye in his sermon upon S. Laurence. Quid, says he,
non ad victoris gloriam ingenium tuum reperit, quando in honorem triumphi
transierunt, etiam instrume^ta supplicij? What has not thy wisdom found out
to the glory of the conqueroure, when the very instruments of his torments
are turned to the honor of his triumph? For so in deed they are while it
pleases god to make the prints thereof principal ornaments of glory. And as
Golias sword which he meant to have imbrued in David's blood, was first his
own bane, and after a perpetual ornamente of David's victory against him: So
the tormentors holes and wounds, that they make in the bodies of martyrs,
will turn to their condemnation, and to the Martyrs endless comfort. And
therefore S. Ambrose honoring the scarres of Martyrs and showing the glory of
their very ashes yet in their graves, Amb. sermon. ^3. de Nazario et Celso.
gives us notice how much more glorious they shall be when they are raised to
their felicitye. Honoro, says he, in carne martyris exceptas pro Christi
nomine cicatrices: honoro viuentis memoriam perennitate virtutis: Honoro per
confessionem Dei sacratos cineres: honoro in cineribus semina aeternitatis:
honoro corpus quod mihi dominum ostendit diligere: quod me propter dominum
mortem docuit non timere. Cur non honorent corpus illud fideles, quod
reuerentur et daemones: quod and afflixerunt in supplicio, sed glorificant in
sepulchro: honoro itaque corpus quod Christus honorauit in gladio, quod cum
Christo regnabit in coelo. I honor, says he, in the flesh of the Martyr
the scarres, of the wounds for the name of Christ received: I honor the
memory of his life in the perpetuitye of his virtue: I honor his very ashes
by the confession of God sanctified: I honor in his ashes the seeds of
eternity: I honor the body that shows me how to love our Lord: that teaches
not to fear death for our Lord. And why should not the faythf^l honor that
body, which the very devils do reverence: and which though they afflicted in
torments yet they glorifye in the tomb? I honor therefore that body which
Christ has honored by the sword, and which with Christ shall raygne in
heaven. By which words we may gather how honorable these scarres will be in
heaven, that deserve so much honor here in earth: how glorious the reuyued
body, when the dead ashes thereof are of such price: how high a grouth of all
happiness, will be in the Saynct; when the seeds of eternity spring so high
in his only duste: What a whetstone he wil-bee of the love of Christ: what a
comfort to them that contemned death for Christ: how much honored of
other Saynctes: what a terroure to the devils: finallye how highlye esteemed of
God in his glory: seeinge that all these prerogatyues are so forciblelye
expressed even in his dead bones and relics. And this is the effect of that
especial croune peculier and proper unto Martyrs which is nothing else,
Aureola martyrum.
but a singular comfort and contentmente of mind expressed in particular
signs of glory in the body, for having suffered constantlye death in defense
of the faith. And although the like croune by the Divines and Fathers called
Aureola, be also a privilege of virgins and Doctors: Yet as the combat of
martyrdom is more vyolent, hard, and victorious, then that of Virgins,
against the rebellions of the flesh, or of the Doctors against the devils
subteltyes, where with he endeavors to subuerte souls: So has the crown of
Martyrs a preeminence before them both. Finallye, how unspeakable the reward
of Martyrs is, may be gathered by the manner of Christ's speech. Who assygning
in all other beatitudes a particular reward, he limited the guerdon of Martyrs
to no certain joy, but said in general. Merces vestra copiosa est in coelis.
Matt. 5
Your reward is very great in heaven; to show the aboundante fullness of
their felicitye. Neither must we think them only to atchyue this triumph,
who by apparent vyolence, by wounds or effusion of blood conclude their life:
but all they, though never so unknown, whose days by imprysonment,
banishment, or any other oppression are in defense of the Catholic Faith
abridged. For we have example in S. Marcellus who being condemned to keep
beasts, and put to extreme drudgerye, after many years spent in that
unsavory office, departed without any other forcible vyolence, and yet has
been always esteemed a Martyr and for such a one is honored of the Church.
Cap. 15. A warninge to the Persecutours.


Cap. 15.
COnsider now O you that persecute us, what harm you do us: yea to what
tytles and glory you prefer us, by putting us to death. You see, how when
you condemn us; you crown us: when you kill us; you increase us: when you
spoil us; you inryche us. Plures efficimur, Tertull. apol. cap. vlt.
quoties metimur a vobis, semen est sanguis Christianorum. Our number
increases so often as you reap us, and seed is the blood of Christians. The
more the children of Israel were oppressed, the more they were increased, and
so is it in Catholics as S. Augustine says Resurrectio immortalitatis
pullulabat faecundius, Aug. 22. de ci^itat. c. 7.
cum in martirum sanguiue sereretur. The resurrection of immortallity sprung
more fertillye when it was sown in the blood of Martyrs. Our Palms with
wayght grow higher, our flame with suppressinge waxes the whotter, and our
spyce by poundinge yeldeth the better sent. When you persecute us, you till
and manure the ground of the Church: and thincking to root out her corn, you
do but sow seed that will spring with a more plentiful harvest. You think
it is the Seminarye priest that enlarges the Catholic Faith: whereas indeed
your selves make the chief Seminarye, of which Catholics do grow,
according to that saying of S. Hierome: Sanguis martyrum seminarium
ecclesiarum. The Pope and his Bishops make them Priests, but you are they that
make them Seminaries. Though their voice do somewhat, yett alas in
comparisone it does but little. Vox sanguinis fratrum vestrorum clamat de
terra. Genesis 4.
The voice of the blood of your murdered brethren cries out of the earth,
against you: And this voice is it that so forciblye works. They say that
which books can teach them, but as Tertullian says non tantos inueniunt
verba discipulos; quantos Christiani, factis docendo. Their words find not
so many disciples, as Christians do teachinge by their deeds. Our
constancye forces men to look more into our cause, and then by seeking they
find, by fynding they believe, and believing are as ready to dye as we our
selves. Our prisons preach, our punishments convert, our dead quarters and
bones confound your heresye: You have labored to suppress us this 29.
years: and yet of our ashes spring others, Ezech. c. 3^
and our dead bones, as Ezechiell prophesied, are come to be exercitus gra^dis
a huge army. With your thunderinge both the cloud of error is disolued, the
enclosed light of truth displayed, and the earth watered with profitable
showers to the rypening of Gods corn. New slyppes are ever engrafted when the
old bow is cut of, and the virtue of the root that the bough leaseth the
slypp enjoys. You cut open our fruit and shed the cornel on the earth,
where for one that you spoil, many will spring up of it. We are the wheat
of Christ as S. Ignatus said: and are ready if you will to be ground with
the teeth of wild beasts, or if you will not offer that, with the milstones of
your heavy persecution, that we may become pure and clean bread in the syghte
of Christ. The Cross is our inherytance, as S. Ambrose says, and there-fore
if you bring us to the Cross, or which is all one in effect to the gallows;
we may say with S. Andrew. O bona crux, accipe me ab hominibus, et read me
magistro meo, vt per te me recipiat, qui per te me redemit. O good Cross take
me from men and restore me to my master, that by thee he may receive me, who
by thee has redeemed me. For in this quarrel, Deuteronomy 21.
non maledictus, not accursed, but benedictus homo qui pependit in ligno.
Blessed is the man that hunge upon a tree. Tertull. apol. ca. vl^.
And therefore Agite, boni praesides, meliores multo apud populu^, si Catholicos
eis immolaueritis, cruciate, torquete, damnate, atterite nos, probatio est
fidei nostrae iniquitas vestra. Go on, you good magistrates, so much the
better in the peoples eyes, if you sacrifyce unto them Catholics, Rack us,
torture us, condemn us, yea grind us: your iniquitye is a proof of our
faith: You open us the way to our desired felycitye: You give us an absolute
acquittance from endless misery; You wash a way the uncleanness of our
iniquitye, and deliver us from the assaults of our eternal enemy. You will
peradventure say, why then compain you of our persecution, if you rather
desire to suffer, seeing you should love those by whom your desire is
fulfilled? If we pleasure you; thank us: and if we be so beneficyall unto you;
we cannot do but well in continuing our course. We answer you to this with our
Saviors, words who said: desiderio desideraui hoc pascha ma^ducare
vobiscum. Luc. 22.
With desire have I desired to eat this pasch with you. And yet it stood well
with this saying, to say also: Luc. 22
Vae homni illi per que^ tradetur, melius erat illi si natus non fuisset. Woe be
unto him by whom the son of man shall be betrayed, better it had been for him
if he had never been borne. Being soldiers by profession, we are glad, that we
have so just occasion to fight in defense of the truth: and yet hartelie
sorye to see you bidd us battle by impugninge and persecutinge the same.
How-soeuer it go with us, we are sure of the victory, who if we have the
upper hand, we have won Satan, and chased him out of his haunt to the
confusion of heresye: and if we be oppressed and murdered for our faith, then
win we a heavenly reward to our selves, and a confyrmation of our relygion
to our posterytye. Where-fore small is the hurt that you do unto us, ye
unspeakable the benefytt. But alas unknown the miserye, that you work unto
your selves, for though you mark it not, or will not see it, you shall once
feel that these words shall be verifyed in all persecutors. Psa. 36
Gladius ipsorum intret in corda eorum, let their own swords enter into
their own hearts: And the rootyng out of Catholykes from amongst you, is the
only way to procure your ruin. For why you pluck up the flowers, and leave
the weeds: you cut of the fruitful branches, and let the withered a lone:
you burn the corn, and spare the stubble: Genesis ^
you put Noe in to the Arc: whose being amongst you, kept you from the
deluge. You thruste Loath out of Sodoma, Genesis 19
that kept the City from burning up: you oppress Moses, Exodus 3^
who should wrestle with Gods anger, and keep it from you. And therefore
puttinge Catholics to death, you dig your own graves, and cut of the shote
anckers that should save you from shipwreck. It were but a follye for a King
that desired peace, first to abuse, disgrace, and tormente, the Ambassadors
and all the servants of a Monarch mightyer then himself, and then to send
them home thus cruellye entreated, to utter their wrongs received, and to call
upon their sovereign for revenge of their iniuryes. Yet is this the extreme
folly of all persecutours, who think it necessary for their peace, first to
impouerishe, spoil, and tormente Gods servants, and by barbarouslye martyring
them, to send them to heaven, there to be continual soliciters with God for
revenge against their murderers. The effect of whose prayers you partelye
prove: and if Gods mercy be not the greater, more shall you prove hereafter.
The redd hott iron being put into the water makes a great noise, and seems
to do the water great harm. Where-as in the end we find, that the fire
thereof is quenched, the force of burninge lost, and the water little the
worse. Like this bublinge is your tryumphe over us. For though you embrue
your bloodye fystes in our bledinge wounds, and make to the eye a great
show of victory: yet when it comes to the proof, God will show you by a
ruefull experyence, that all the noise that you made: was but the sound of
your own quenching, fall, and ruin, and the Martyrs estate not hurt, but
abettered by your seueritye. Do but consider even at this present the
wonderful straites into which your temporal state is fallen. But if this
scourge seem not enoughe: consider what reward has been given to such as
persecuted Gods flock, and how heavy his hand has been in revenge of his
servants quarrel. Ep. 2.
For as S. Cyprian says Nunquam impiorum scelere in nostrum nomen exurgitur,
vt non statim vindicta diuinitus comitetur. Never does the impyetye of the
wicked, rage against us, but strayte Gods heavy revenge does accompany their
wickedness. Nero the ringeleader of your dance, from killing Christians,
fell to be his own butcher, and murderinge himself ended his life with these
words: Turpiter vixi, and turpius morior. Filthilye have I lived, more
filthilye do I dye. Domitia^ was stabbed to death of his own servants;
Maximinus was slain together with his children, his murderers crying out. Ex
pessimo genere ne catulum quidem relinquendum. Of so leude a race, not so much
as a whelpe ought to be left alive. Decius tasted of the same cupp, seeing his
children slain and himself with them. Valerianus being taken at 70 years of
age, by Sapor King of the Persians, was kept like a beast in iron grates,
and in the end being flean, miserablye ended his life. Diocletian after many
diseases, in the end consuminge a way fell mad and killed himself, and his
house was burnt up with fire from heaven. Hen. de her. l. 6 c. 29.
Antiochus President under Aurelian, while S. Agapitus was in martyring,
cryinge that he burned within, suddenly gave up the ghost. Flaccus the Prefect
after the martrydome of Gregorye Bishop of Spoleto, stricken by an Angel did
vomit out his intrailes. Dioscorus, S. Barbaraes Father, was burnt up with
fire from heaven, for his butcherye toward his daughter for her faith. That
night wherein S. Chrysostom was exiled, the City of Constantinople and
especially that part, where the Emperors Palace stood, was so shaken with
an earthequake, that they were glad to call him back again. When Valens the
Arrian Emperor would have chased the Catholics out of the same City, there
fell such a hayle of stones, that it had like to have destroyed it. I omit
the horrible ends of Antiochus, Herod, and Iulianus Apostata, of which the
first two were eaten up with vermin: the other being stricken miraculously with
an arrowe from heaven, the earth opened and breakinge out with fyery flames
swallowed him quick into hell, as S. Gregorye Nazianzen writes. Wherefore
consider you also that persecute Catholics in England, how easy it is for God
to practice the like punish-mentes upon you, as the examples of some have
sufficientlye already given you warning. Remember the sudden and horrible
death of one Young an Apostata and Pourswivaunt who pursuing a Catholic at
Lambeth fell down on the sudden, ere he could lay hands on him that he
persecuted and foming at the mouth presentlye dyed. Remember Justice Bromlye
who after he condemned in Wales a Catholic Schoolmaster called Richard White,
became soon after bethered and childish, and never sat in Judgment since, but
remains still in that impotente taking. The Iurye also that went upon him
after a while dyed either all or the most part: And the clarke of the Assyse
was so strooken in his eyes that he could not read the endytement. Consider
the death of Norton your rackmaister who upon his death bed in desperate manner
cried out, that he was racked more cruellye then ever he racked any: to omit
that which to his son and his wife befell to the more apparent revenge of his
crueltye. Consider the accidente, that befell to Blythe a man of special
authority in the council of York: who when a Priest coming to the bar
made the sign of the Cross spoke in derision thereof very vnreuerent words,
and with in a few hours fallinge down a large payer of stayers in the
presidents house lived not many days after. Remember the just revenge of God
against Cheek and Hurlestone the chief agents in the apprehension,
condemnation, and execution of M. Inglebye Priest, and notorious enemies of
Catholics; of which the first suruiued not long after; and the second goinge
to speak with the Bishope at his house without York, and having sent one in
to aduertyse him of his coming when the messenger returned was found dead and
with so intolerable a savor, that the very ground where he lay as it is
crediblye reported retained the stench, and they were feign to draw him away
with long ropes at a boats tail in the river, not being able to endure him
in the boat for the extreme bad sent that came from him. I omit Judge Alephe
who sitting to keep the place when the other Judges retired, while the Iurye
consulted about the condemnation of Father Campian and his company, pullinge
of his glove found all his hand and his seal of Arms bloodye without any
token of range pricking or hurt: and being dismayed therewith because with
wipinge it went not a way but still returned, he showed it to the Gentle men
that sat before him, who can be witnesses of it till this day, and have some
of them upon their faythes and credites avouched it to be true: Yea and he him
self soon after by death was cut of from so bloodilie occupying that room
any longer. I omit the strange and sudden deaths of the chief knights
and gentlemen in Deuon shiere, who presently upon their cruel and unjust
handelinge and producing certain Catholic strangers by Gods Justice soon
dyed and to the terror of others were appayed with their due revenge. I omit
the wonderful stay and standing of the Thames the same day that Father Campian
and his company were martyred to the great maruayle of the Citizens and
maryners. I omit the like stay of the river Trente about the same time. Which
accidents though some will impute to other causes yet happening at such
special times when so open and unnatural injustice was do^ne they cannot be
but interpreted as tokens of Gods indignation. For do not think but that he
has as much care of his servants now as in former Ages he had, he is as much
enemy to wickedness now, as then he was: and no less able to revenge that
which he mislyketh, then heretofore he has been, as the rehearsed examples
may give you proof. We speak not this in way of daring; For as Tertullian
said to Scapula, non vos terremus, qui nec timemus, sed velimus vt omnes
saluos facere possimus, monendo mi theoma chin. We fright you not, for we fear
you not. But our desire is to help all to salvation, and to warn them not to
bid God battle. The Priests and Catholics whom you persecute, are stones
that God throws at you to make you by their example and exhortation, to
leave feedinge upon the carryon of sin and heresye. But you like enraged
hounds break your teeth upon the stone, not considering the hand that threw
it. But as for us, our countes are cast, and our reckoninge known, and this
only I speak to warn you of your error. If God suffer you while you break
your own teeth to worow also us, and to butcher our bodies: we know he does
it not for our harm. But S. Chrysostom well says that as the cunning
artificer to abetter an image does first melte and disolue it; Chrisost. in
idde dormientibus nolo ve^ ignerara
to cast it afterward in a more perfect moulde: So God permits our flesh
by you to be mangled, to make it more glorious in the second casting. And as a
cunninge imbroderer having a piece of torn or fretted velvet for his ground,
so contryueth and draws his work, that the fretted places being wroughte
over with curious knottes or flowers, they far excel in show the other whole
parts of the velvet: So God being to work upon the ground of our bodies, by
you so rent and dismembered, will cover the ruptures, breaches, and wounds,
which you have made, with so unspeakable glory, that the whole parts which you
left shall be highlye beautifyed by them. And as the paperer of old rotten
shreddes, often times gathered out of unclean dunghils, by his industry
makes so fine, white, and clean paper, that it is apt to receive any
curious drawinge, paynting, or limminge: so our scattered parts by you cast
in to dunghils, he will restore to such puritye and perfection, that they
shall be more capable of his glorious ornaments, then they were before. And this
is that which Saint Paul said: Reformabit corpus humilitatis nostrae
configuratum corpori clari tatis suae: He shall reform the body of our
humility confygured unto the body of his brightness. Which phrase of speech
argues, that the more the body for him is humbled in torments, the more shall
yt be partaker of his brightness in glory. Far otherwise will it be in the
bodies of the wicked here pampered in all kind of pride. For as the hawks
though while they are alive they are highlye prysed, deyntilye fedd, and
honored upon great persons fistes: Yet when they are once dead their body
serves for nothing but to be thrown in to the dunghill; whereas the Partridge
whose flesh has been torn with the hawks talons, is notwithstanding served
in a silver plate to the Kings own table: so the wicked in this life
cheryshed with all kind of solaces and set forth with great pomp after their
death are only fytt for hell fire: whereas the bodies of Gods Martyrs, shall
both in earth have their honor often times by open miracles, and in heaven be
preferred to the Kings table not to be eaten them selves; but to feed upon
the repaste of Angels. Cease therefore to abuse and contenme that God esteems:
cease to pursue whom God defe^deth: and hear his gentle warninges, lest he
power upon you more intolerable scourges. He begins to give a taste of his
anger already. And And therefore if you love not us, consider at the least your
own welfare; if you also neglect that, at the lest have care of the common
wealth, least the offense of magistrates bring the whole nation into the
compass of Gods heavy reueng. Alas, why should you use these extremityes
against us? why should you pyne and waste us, with such lingering torments? we
say with S. Cyprian Either to be a catholic is a capital crime or no. If it
be, we acknowledge that this fault we have, and will never forsake it. Why then
do you not forth with put us to death for it? If it be no such fault: why do
you persecute innocents, and put to death, torments, and ryson the undeserving.
Tormenting is for those that acknowledge not the accusation: but we do not
only not deny or conceal our Faith, from you; but are ready if you will to
preach it in your most public asse^blyes. And if that all those were to suffer
for our Faith, that in deed believe it to be the best: I will not only say as
Tertullia^ did to Scapula of Carthage Quid passura est Carthago decima^da a te?
What shall Carthage suffer being to be tithed by the? But quid passura est
Anglia tertianda a vobis? what shall England suffer, being to be thirded by
your crueltye. Quid te, Ep ad Demotrium.
says S. Cyprian to a persecutour ad infirmitatem corporis vertis? quid cum
tenerae carnis imbecillitate contendis? Cum animi vigore congredere, virtutem
men it is infringe, fidem destrue, disputatione, si potes, vince, vince ratione.
Why do thou turn thee to the fraylty of our bodies? why stryuest thou with
the weakness of our flesh? Encounter with the force of our mind; impugn the
stoutnesse of our reasonable portion; disprove our faith; over come us by
disputation if thou can, overcome us by reason. This is not the way in
christian charity. You should first sufficientlye inform us of the truth, by
putting us to silence, and conuincing of error the learned of our side: before
you proceed to punishing of us, for not embracinge it. We have read your
books, we find them full of wilful corruptions, both of Scriptures and
Fathers, purposlye wrested against the true meaning thereof. Pryuate conference
is to small purpose, for it commonly ends in only raylinge against us. The
way of Gods church has always in such cases been, to give free lybertye to
the very heretics, to have public disputation before sufficyente Judges,
and if they were there convicted or refused to come, they have been subject
and that worthelye to temporal punishmente. But hitherto could we never have
any equal conditions of disputation granted. Unless, it be equal for a man
to be brought from the rack to dispute. And yet that very disputation was so
little to the advantage of your cause, that many of your belief were since
that the less friends to your faith, and others became altogether
Catholics. But if you will needs keep on your violent course against us, and
prolonge your iniquitye: we will say Dominus nobis adiutor, Psa. 117
non timebimus, quid faciat nobis homo. Our Lord is our ayder, and we will not
fear what man can do unto us. The Martyrs in S. Cyprians time disgested the
like miseryes with joyful hearts, Moses et Maximus Cypryano.
saying: Hosts veritatis non tantum no^ perhorrescimus, sed prouocamus:
Inimicos Dei hoc ipso quod non cessimus, vicimus: and nefarias contra veritatem
leges, subegimus: and sino^dum sanguinem nostrum fudimus, sed fudisse parati
sumus. We are not, only out of fear of the enemies of truth, but we challenge
them: In not yelding to Gods adversaries, we have overcome them, and mastered
their wicked laws against the truethe: though as yet we have not shed our
blood, but are prepared if need require at any time to shedd it. If you show
us worldly honors, thereby to entyse us unto you: you show the Lion hay, for
which he cares not. If you threate^ us with torments, thereby to enforce us:
you show the Salamandra fire, with which she is not harmed. For neither can
your pleasures profitt us, nor your punishments hurt us, and therefore
equallye we contemn them both. The worste you can do unto us in our best;
though temporallye you oppress us, you cannot hinder our spiritual
advancement: though you spoil us of our worldly goods, you cannot bereave
us of our heavenly in heritaunce: and how heauilye soever you affryghte us,
you shall never be able to suppress our religion. Though the upper heavens
violentlye turn the lower from east to weste, yet have they their peculier
and proper course from weste to east. And well may you use vyolence to our
bodies, to remove us from the east of Gods Church, where the Sun of truth
ryseth, to the west of heresye, where the light thereof goes down: but God
willing your vyolence shall never make us leave our natural motion, from the
error of all false doctrine to the east of true religion. If God will permit
you, we refuse not to endure and stay his pleasure. If he will, he is able to
healpe us; if he will not, he will make us able to sustain you. If it please
him the frogs, the gnattes, the flies, the grasshoppers, are armies strong
enoughe to enforce you from molesting us, as they did Pharao from molesting the
people of Israel. But if he think it better for us, to have the number of our
brethren made up, before he revenge our injuries; we will content our
selves with his divine apointmente. It were no delight to us to see you in the
miserye, that we our selves desire to be ridd of. Your scorges could not avail
us, we envy not so much your prosperitye, as to desire your overthrow. To
your hatred we render goodwill, for your punishments prayers and we would
willingly purchase your saluations with our dearest blood. But how well so
ever we be affected toward you: take heed that the earth that receives our
blood, cry not out against you, agreeablye to that, The voice of thy
brothers blood cries out of the earth. Ambros. l. ^. (...) Cain and Abel c.
9.
Upon which S. Ambrose noteh: that God said not, it cries out of thy
brothers body, but out of the earth. For though thy brother forgive thee, yet
the earth forgeueth the not. Though thy brother say nothing, the earth
condemns thee. That is against thee both a witness and a Judge. A more
earnest witness, that yet reeketh with the blood of thy unnatural murder. A
more severe Judge, that was defiled with so heinous a crime, as to open the
mouth and receive thy brothers blood at thy hands.Yet for our selves, we from
our hearts forgive your iniuryes toward us, and only pity your abuse of
Gods benefits, that you should offend him with his own gifts, and for his
favors toward you persecute his flock, and hinder the course of his
religion, yea endeavor to abolishe the name of his Catholic Church. Alas
your labor is in vain, inestimable your offense. Adulterari non potest
sponsa Christi, Cypr. de simplicitat prae.
incorrupta est, and pudica, vnam domum nouit, vnius cubiculi sanctitatem casto
pudore custodit. The Spouse of Christ cannot play the aduoutresse, she is
undefiled and chaste, she knows but one house, and with unstained integritye,
keeps the sanctitye of one only chamber. And we doubt not, but that God
will give us grace to be loyal and true children to so pure and chaste a
mother, and rather to leave if we had them many lives, then degenerate from
the profession of our Faith. Illius faetu nascimur, Illius lacte nutrimur,
spiritu eius animamur. Haec nos deo seruat, haec filios regno quos gerauit
assignat. We are children of her brood, with her milk we are fostered, with
her spirit we are quickened. She preserves us for God, and she assigns to a
kingdom the ofspringe that she has brought forth. She has been here to fore
as fiercely assalted, when in one Chrismasse day she had twentye thousand of
her chrldren martyred, Nic. l 7. c. ^
Aug. q. 57. ad Orosium.
and yet never overcome. And she is as S. Augustine says like a dye, which
howsoever you let it fall or throw it, it ever more lies on a flatt side,
and can never fall a miss. She is a sure shipp, and wrought so conninglye by
our heavenly shipwrite, that, quantumlibet mare sae uiat, ventus incumbat,
inter fluctus nauis ista turbetur; tantum non mergatur, and curret. How much
soever the Sea rage, the winds beat upon it, how much soever this shipp be
tossed emongst the waves; only be it kept from drowning, and it runs on.
And doubtless drown it can not, having him at the stern of whom it is
said mare and venti obediunt ei. Matt. ^
The Sea and the winds obey unto him. 2. Reg. 2
Your Idol Dagon must needs fall before God's Ark, and by the broken hands and
feet bewraye the own impotencie. Your God Baal must needs be dumme and
deaf, though you ripp your veins and sacrifyce your blood yea your souls
unto him, when he once comes to strive for the upper hand with almightye
God. If your Scrybes and Pharisyes seek with slanders and obloquyes to deface
Christ's doctrine: he can make the devils to confound their own impes: And if
there should want any to defend it, the very stones would cry, and your
own childrens mouths be instruments to perfect the praise thereof. It was not
with out cause that S. John Baptist called your predecessors genimina
Viperarum, Eusebius. Emiss. hom in natiuit. S. Stepha.
a generation of Vipers. Whose nature as Eusebius Emissenus writes, is such,
that when the female conceyueth of the male, she kills him, and when she
grows big with young, she also of her own brood is murdered. For they
refusinge to stay the ordinarye course of cominge forth gnawe them selves
passage through the sides of the dame, and with their birth work her death.
Thus fares it with the Persecutours of true pastors. They deliver into you
the seed of Catholic doctrine, and you most vngratfullye murder them for
their pains. but for all you can do, this seed breedethe young in your own
bowels, and your very brood will eat themselves out of your impious womb,
and leave in the end your aduoulterous Sinagogue dead and consumed, as
hitherto it has happened in all other heresies. Return you therefore to the
Church, acknowledge with us your mother whom now you aflicte. Cypr. ad
Dometri.
Credit and viuite and qui nos ad tempus persequimini, in aeternum gaudete
nobiscum. Believe you and live you, and though you now persecute us here for a
time: yet rejoice with us for ever. But if you continewe still in this rigorous
course: how many thousand souls have you to answer for, which by your
seueritye have no means neither to hear nor embrace the truth. You have enough
in hell already, that curse the day that ever you were borne through whose
crueltye they find themselves to have fallen into those unspeakable torments.
O how heavily will our blood weye upon you, you will think every drop a load
of ledd. What will you answer for the spoil of Catholics whose damages if
you repent not, you shall repay in eternal torments. Remember what the
scripture says. This says our Lord. Ezech 33
You which feed in blood, and lift up your eyes to your uncleanness, and
shedd innocent blood: think you to possess the land by inheritance? Ibidem 35
Nay rather I will deliver thee over unto blood and blood shall persecute thee,
Isa. 10.
and since thou have hated blood, eue^ blood shall pursue thee. And woe be unto
the^, that make unjust laws, and writing have written injustice. That they
might oppress in judgment the poor, and might do violence to the cause of
the humble of my people. That the widows might be their pray, and they
might spoil the orphans. Whither will you fly in the day of visitation, and
of calamitye, that comes a far of? To whose aid will you make recourse, and
where will you leave your glory, that you be not bowed down under the chain,
Amos 8
and fall not with those that are slain? Because you spoiled the poor and
took away the choysest pray from him, you shall build houses of square
stone, and shall not inhabit them. You shall plant most pleasant vynyardes,
and shall not drink of the wine thereof. Exodus 22
For why those (says God) whom you have oppressed, shall cry unto me, and I
will hear their cries; And my furye shall take indignation, and I will stryke
you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your children,
orphans. Yea and I will meat the enemies of my church with their own
flesh, Isa. 49
and they shall be dronken with their own blood, as it were with new wine.
Remember what is said in the book of wisdom Condemnat iustus mortuus viuos
impios: Sap. 4
One just man dead condemns many wicked yet alive. They shall see says
Solomon, the end of the wise man, and shall not understand what God has
determined of him, and why our Lord did protecte him. They shall see and shall
contemn him, but our Lord shall laugh them to scorn. And after these things
they shall fall without honor, and with reproach amongst the dead for ever, for
he shall burste the^ puffed up without voice, he shall move the^ from the very
foundations, and shall bring them to utter desolation. And they shall groan and
their memory shall perish. Thus has it happened to persecutours of former
times, who have as is showed, even with their posteritye been rooted out for
their cruelty showed to their mother the Church. Neither can such
stepchildren ever prosper, according to that saying of Christ: Matt. 1^
Omnis plantatio, quam non plantauit Pater meus, eradicabitur. And that of
Solomon: Sap 1
Spuria vitulamina non dabunt radices altas, nec stabile firmamentum
collocabunt. All planting that my Father has not planted shall be rooted up. And
bastard slypps shall never take deep root, nor be settled in any stayed suerty.
Remember that he which speaks these things is able to perform the^, and
doubtless will do it, if you will not cease to deserve it.

Cap 16.
Cap. 16.
The Conclusion
BUT Now to return to you most glorious Confessors remember who said unto you
Fear you not my little flock. Luc. 12 1. Reg. 2
For the adversaries of our Lord shall be afraid of him more then you of them
and he will thunder from heaven upon them. He will turn their lyghteninges
into rain of consolation. Psa. 134 Isa. 40
And if here he measure the waters of your short miseries with his closed
fiste; heaven and his eternal rewards he will measure unto you with his open
span. Psa. 19 Psa 103 Isa: 31.
If here he has made darkness his secret place: he will afterward show
himself unto you clothed with light as with a garmente, and will make the
comfortless deserte wherein you now dwell as it were a place of delights: and
the wilderness of your desolation as the garden of our Lord: In the mean
time, you must be contented to say with Job, Job: 30
I have been a brother unto Dragons and a fellow of Ostriges; taking well
their evil usage, and requitinge Dragons spite, with brotherlye charity and
the unnaturalness of the Ostrige, that as the Scripture says is hardened
against her yonglinges as though they were not hers with friendlye demeanor
and dutiful subjection. Gregor* in moral: in id: frater fui draconum. ^t
socius struthionum
Remember what S. Gregorye says Abel esse non potest, quem Caini malitia non
exercet. and rosa quae redolet, crescit cum spina que pungit. Abel he cannot
be, that is not exercysed by the malice of Cayne and the rose whose pleasant
savor delights, Job: 39
grows with a stalk whose prickle wounds. God will not be angrye for ever,
neither will he all ways conteyn in wrath his mercyes. Isa: 10
Adhuc paululum modicumque and consummabitur indignatio mea, and furor meus
super scelus eorum. Deuter: 32
Iuxta est dies perditionis, and adesse festinant tempora. Yett a little while
and a very short space and my wrath (says he) shall be consummated and my
rage upon the enormitye of mine enemies. The day of their destruction is
nere, and the times hasten to be at hand. Isa: 10
And then shall the burden be taken from your shoulders and the yoke from
your neck. Then shall God afford you a crown of glory, in stead of the
ashes of your disgrace. Oil of joy for your mourning, Isa. 61.
and a garmente of praise, for the spirit of heaviness. Psa: 109
Happy therefore is he that drinks in the way of the torre^t of martyrdom for
he shall lift up his head to an unspeakable crown. Amos: 4
Hapye is he, that is quasi torris raptus ex incendio, like a fire brand
snatched out of the flame of persecution, because with a most fortunate
vyolence is he carried brighte with an enflamed charity to the presence of God.
Happy is he that sucketh honye out of this rock, Deuter: 32
and oil out of this most hard stone. For by the taste of this honye shall
his eyes be opened, 1 Reg: 14
as it hapened to Ionatha^ and he shall see the yoke of all miserye rott away
from the face of this oil. Isa. 110
Finally blessed is he, that with David can say, my mouth said in my
tribulation I will offer up unto the holocaustes full of marow, Psa: 65
yelding himself with Isaac as a perfect sacryfyce, rather then our mother
the Church, should want living hoastes even of her own children to offer when
God shall appoynte it for the confirmation of his truth. Heb: 1^
For with such hoastes is Gods favor earned. And seeinge that persecution
in Gods cause, is a sign that you are Satan's enemies, since he thus pursues
you: That you are Gods children, since he thus chastises you: Seeinge that you
have Christ's example, to encourage you: the necessary miseryes of this world
to make you willing: the avoiding of greater pains due unto your sins, to
comfort you: seeing your cause is so good: the estate of the persecuted so
honorable in Gods Church: imprisonmente glorious: martyrdom precious in it
self: profitable to the Church: and so beneficial to the sufferers: and last
of all your final reward so ample and great: what remains, but for you to
rejoice in somanye tytles of consolation, and happelye to continue that which
you have fortunatlye begone. Epist: 24. ad Reg.
For as S. Cyprian seyeth: Parum est adipiscialiquid potu isse, plus est, quod
adeptus es, posse seruare. It is a small matter to have been able to get a
thing: more it is to be able to keep it, when it is once gotten. Now is the
time that many of our forfathers have desired to live in, that is when they
might not only profitt the Church by example of their life, and by virtue of
their preachinge; but also (which they accounted most to be desired) by
effusio^ of their blood. When England was Catholic, it had many glorious
Confessors. It is now for the honor and benefit of our country that it be
also well stored with the number of Martyrs. and we have God be thanked such
martyrquellers now in authority, as mean if they may have their will, to
make Saynctes enough to furnishe all our Churches with treasure when it shall
please God to restore them to their true honors. I doubt not but either
they or their posteritye shall see the very prisons and places of execution,
places of reverence and great devotion, and the scattered bones of these that
in this cause have suffered, which are now thought unworthy of Christian
burial, shrined in gold: when the profane carcases of heretics, now so costly
enbalmed, shall be esteemed more worthy of the martyrs present disgrace, and far
more unworthy of such funeral sole^nyties. So is the example manifest in other
contryes, where such places of martyrs executions, and torments are frequented
by Kings, Princes, and great potentates, though their own predecessors, had been the chief persecutors. Let us in the mean time, take this occasion, of
so great preferment in gods court, and be as careful in this age to aspyre,
unto this present dignity of wateringe Gods Church with our blood, as our
forefathers have been to guide it, and further it, by their virtuous example
and glory of good works. Erat Ecclesia, Cip: Ep: 4
in operibus fratrum, candida: nunc facta est in martyrum cruore purpurea.
Flori bus.n. nec rosae desunt nec lilia. Certent nunc singuli ad vtriusque
honoris amplissimam dig nitatem, vt accipiant coronas, vel de operibus,
candidas; vel de sanguine purpureas. The Church says S. Cyprian was heretofore
white in the works of our brethren: it is now purplein the blood of Martyrs
For emonge the Churches flowers, nether Roses are wanting nor lilyes. Let
every one therefore now endeavor to attain to the most ample dignitye of
each honor, that they may receive crowns either white of their good
works, or purple of their blood. Look up unto the Rock out of which you are
hewe^, Isa. 51
that is the martyred body of our Savior and to the cave of the lake out of
which you are cut, that is the deep and wide wound of his blessed side: that
consideringe from whence you come, you may show your selves worthy stones of
so noble a quarrye, and not unworthy metal of so honorable a mine. Remember
your day penye and you will easily bear the heat and wayght of your toil.
Matt: 20
Let your Rock be stricken, that water of Life may issue out, Psa: 77
and be contented to set upon earth, Psa: 112
and in the dung of worldly disgrace, the better to be placed with the Princes
of Gods people. Regnum coeloru^ aliud no^ quaerit pretiu^ ni si teipsum, tantum
valet quantum es; te da, and habebis illud. The Kingdom of heaven says S.
Augustine requires no other price but thy self. Aug sermon 37 de SS sieve ser.
1. de restomi^um SS.
It is worth all thou art. give thy self and thou shall haueit. O thrice happy
are you that are now in the last stepp to this glory. Joy in your happynes,
and pray that God may accept us also to the like comfort, Rom: 5
always remembering with your selves that this light and momentary tribulation
will work in you an eternal poyse of glory. And confirming your selves with
these comfortable words sieve viuimus, Rom: 14
Domino viuimus sieve morimur domino morimur, sieve viuimus sieve morimur Domini
sumus. Whether we live, unto our Lord we live: whether we dye, unto our Lord we
dye: whether we live or dye, our Lords we are. Finallye, Bernar: Ep 119: ad
^^n^enses
to conclude with S. Bernardes words, what now remains my dearest, but that
you be warned of perseuera^ce, which only deserves renoume to the men, and
reward to their virtues. For without perseverance, neither gets the
champion the conquest, nor the conqueror his crown. The accomplishing of
virtue, is the virtue of courage nurce to our meritts, and mediatrice to our
meede. It is the sister of patience, the daughter of co^stancy, the lover of
peace the knott of friendship, the band of agreement, the bulwark of
godliness. Take away perseuera^ce: no service has any pay, no good turn
any thanks, no prowes any praise. In sum, not who begins, but who
perseuereth unto the end he shall be saved.

By one, that reuerenceth your prisons, bears most dutiful affection to your
persons, and humbly craves part in your prayers,

I Saiae. ca. 30. In silentio and spe, erit fortitudo vestra.
In silence and hope shall be your strength.
FINIS
Here you may find the chief faults escaped. And as for the other in or
thographye, or poynting, let the Readers courtesy, and the french Printers
ignorance of our language excuse.
The folio. Faults. Lege Correctio^s Fo. 5. b. l. 10 fear of words fear or
words fo. 6. b. l. 20. Fulgebant Fulgebunt fo. 8. a. l. 24. seeks Seek.
Ibid. b. l. 3. enimtye enmitye fo. 9. a. l. 27. studebant stridebant fo. 9. b.
l. 14. sacrilegia Sacrilega. fo. 12. b. l. 23. joyce choice [this] f. 15. a. l.
12. punishment for this punishment. For fo. 15. b. l. 7. repellire repellere f.
15. b. l. 24. vigulum iugulum f. 16. b. l. 24. qui slagellantur quia
flagellantur f. 16. b. l. 25. alantes aliens f. 19. a. l. 23. to raging the
raging f. 19. b. l. 15. Austine oteth Augustine notes f. 19. b. l. 25.
ttoublesome troublesome f. 25. b. l. 26. said. He. said; he f. 27. a. l. 19. a
grate a great f. 30. b. l. 14. on stedy no steddye f. 34. a. l. 6. Abneis
Abners f. 46. b. l. 12. hangs on hangs in f. 46. b. l. 18. amonestg
amongst f. 50. a. l. 14. eminent imminent f. 51. b. l. 13. co^sumptio^. The
co^sumption, the. f. 54. a. l. 19. earth. Let earth; let f. 54. b. l. 4.
throughfare thoroughfare f. 54. b. l. 14. peregrines peregrinos f. 55. b. l.
23. bliss. What bliss: what f. 55. b. l. 27. prsent present f. 59. b. l. 9.
disesaed diseases f. 63. b-l. 24. regus. rogus f. 64. b. l. 19. not to much not
so much f. 70. b. l. 3. torturres torturers f. 80. l. a. 11. Coproninus
Copronimus f. 81. b. l. 16. susgesteth suggesteth f. 85. b. l. 6. and in
important and important f. 68. a. l. 21. obliquies obloquies f. 88. a. l. 18.
Luther vprif^ Luthers vprist. f. 93. b. l. 12. dung head dungged Ibid. l. 20.
drive derive f. 101. l. 1. other others f. 107. a. l. 25. it verefied it is
verified f. 108. a. l. 17. catologue catalogue f. 112. b l. 12. delyt accepted
delight and accepted Ibid. b. l. 15. vnloseth chey. vnlo. the cheynes Ibid. l.
23. transentium transeuntium f. 114. l. 18. a. rewards wards f. 114. b. l.
10. quasi in certu quasi in incertu^ f. 114. b. l. 26. laboring labor f. 120.
b. l. 8. and is not and it is not f. 126. a. l. 4. sickness sckinne. f. 127. b.
l. 3. body bodies Ibid. l. 24. death deaths Ibide^. l. 26. inuitis et
euenire inuitis euenire. f. 141. a. l. 22. frequentur frequenter f. 148. b. l.
21. as ash^s are as ashes f. 154. a. l. 11. virtue vertewes f. 158. a. l. 2.
always is always it is f. 160. a. l. 23. yet of him yett of this root. f.
161. a. l. 17. Emprerours Emperors f. 162. b. l. 6. show me then show me thou.
f. 165. b. l. 12. nicole incolae f. 166. a. l 25. owone own Ibid. b. l. 1. Non
ad Non enim ad Ibid. b. l. 9. bear bare f. 169. b. l. 6. fom her from her f.
173. a. l. 16. not contented your selves to offer your souls. not co^. to
offer your own souls f. 188. a. l. 15. for their dead for if their dead f.
193. b. l. 7. us for glorious us for a glorious f. 197. b. 10. Ignatus Ignatius
f. 204. b. l. 7. ryson prison


