THE Charge of the Court Baron,

Imprinted at London by Ihon Cawood, Prynter to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.



Anno. M.D.LXI.

The Charge of the Court Baron.
First ye good men that be sworn, ye shall inquire and truly present all the
suitors that owe any suit unto this court at this day, for there tenures if they
be here or no, and present there names, that make default.

Also if there be any tenaunte deed, sithen the last law day, ye shall inquire
of him, and do us to wete, what he held of this lordeshyp, at the day of his
death, and what advantage the Lord should have by his death, as ward
marriage, relief fine, or estchete, or any other profytte, and who is his
next heir, and what age he is of and in whose keeping.

Also if there be any rent, custom, or service wythdrawen from this
Lordeshyppe, that ought of right to be done, ye shall inquyre by whom it is
withdrawn, and what custom or service it is, and in what Baylyffes time, and
how long it has been wythholdenne. And where the land lies that we may
dystrayne for the arrerages that are behind.

Also if there be any bond of blood, that puts his son to scoole, to
make him a priest, or a prentyse, or sets him to craft or maryeth his
daughter without leave, ye shall do us to wit.

Also if there be any bond man that lets his land for the half, or for the
third sheafe, without leave, or else if there be any bond man that with
draws his goods, or cattells, out of this lordeshyppe without leave ye shall
do us to wete.

Also if the Lords common be so charged by any tenaunte, with moo beasts
then he should after the quantity of his tenure, ye shall do us to wete.

Also if there be any bondsman of blood that longs to this Lordeshyp* that is
fled and dwells with out this Lordeshyp, without fine or ransom making, ye
shall do us to wete.

Also if there be any alinacion over.xij. months and a day, or lease for
term of years in fee, or fee tail, ye shall do us to wete.

Also if there be any transmutacion of possession, that is to say, copy land
for fre land, or free land for copy land, whereof the lord might take any
disaduauntage in amending of the one, and paryng of the other, also of all
manner of wast done in howesynge, lettinge down or cuttynge the great timber,
ye shall do us to wete.

Also of all trespasers, in corn, grass, or pasture, groves, or meadows, or
fishers or foulers or hunters, or haukers, within this Lordeship or lords
warren, ye shall do us to wete.

Also if there be any tenant of copy hold, tenant at will, or tenant of bond
tenure, that suffer their tenauntes to be ruynous, and fall down, or else any
fermer, bounden to reparation, repair not as he ought to do, do us to wete.

Also if there be any bond man of blood, within this Lordshyp, that purchases
any fre land, without leave or license, ye shall do us to wete, what he is,
and what heir he has.

Also of all other things that ye have known, that ought to be presented to
the Lords avail, ye shall do us to wete by the oaths ye have made, and bring
in a true presentment.

Also if any make any rescus, or break any rest made by the baylyffe, or any
other officer or else if any man break the lords pound, that is to say a
dystresse put in the Lords pound by an offycer, and taken out again
without license.

Also if you know any that remoueth or pulls up mere stones, or stakes
between Lordeshyppe, and Lordeshyppe, or tenant, and tenaunte, whither it be
bond or free, present their names.

Also if any tenaunte give any land to the Church, that is to say, to
mortmayne since the Statute thereof was made without license of the Queen, and
the Lord of this Lordeshyp, ye shall do us to wete.

Also if any man have incroched any of the lords soil, that is to say, Land,
medowe, more, pasture, or any vacant ground without license of the lord,
present there names.

Also if any man hold two tenemente^s, and wastes the one, as if he withdrewe
any trees from the one to the other, if ye know any such present there names
by your oath.

Also if any tenaunte, have made any strype or wast upon his bond teneme^nt,
Stripe, that is to say, pulling of up trees, or hedges, wast is to say,
lettinge houses to fall down, for defaulte of reparacyons, if there be any
such, present them.

Also, if ye know any tenaunte that wythdraweth or keeps the euydence that
longs to this Lordeshyppe, Court Roules, Rentall, Customaryes, or any other
euydence present them.

Also, if any have with their Cattle, for charged or ouerleyne any common,
within the precyncte of this manner, or any part or percell of the same, there
are four several commons, that is to say, Commen Appendent, Common
Appertenaunt, Common in Gross, and Percause de Visinage: If any of you pretend
to have Common Appendent to any part of your frehold and to common under that
nature of common, then measured to a certain nombre, that is, as many beasts,
as the foder or profits of your corn reaches unto, sustain and find in
winter, so many may you keep in the common in summer, if any of you have
alyenacion of frehold, where unto you pretend to have this common, your
interest passes therewith. Anno xiiii. Hen. iiii. Fol. iii. As Well you may have
this common in any water or other void place, whervppon may rise any
commodity, or other advantage, for a commonwealth, as turues, or otherwise
incident or belongyng to any part of your common, as it appears. Anno. xiiii.
E. iiii. And this common serves for beasts conueniable: And where any of you
pretend to have any Common Appertenaunt, or common in Gross, these commons
dyffer that there be not a mesurable, but that every tenant may at his
pleasure put in his cattle, without admesurment, and these commons serves as
well for beasts conueniable as other, and is most commonly by prescriptio^:
And the Common Percause de Visinage, is whereas two towns, or two manours are
adjoining and have used time out of mind, to enter common with their cattle
in the waste feldes, or other grounds, next adjoining and is also by
prescription.

Also if the Lord have any villan as bondemen or neyffes incident or
belonging to his manner, so that any of them dwell or inhabit out of the
precinct or lymyttes of this his manor, with that it be within the year and
the day, next or immediatelye after his or their departing, at the Lords
Baylyffe, or other offycer, may recease him or them again to the lords use and
behofe.

Also, and if any such villayne have inhabited, or dwelled out of the precinct
of this manor, a hole year and a day in any frau^chysed town, or other
liberty, that Lords Baylyffes, can take no lawefull seasure of him during
such time as he abides in the same liberty, but at his next coming to
recease him.

Also if any vyllan there be inhabyted within this manner or else where, that
without the assent of the Lord, has married any of his daughters to any free
man, so that by such marriage the lords inherytaunce is hindered or denied, it
is contrary to the statute thereof made, or if any vyllan has put his child
to scoole, or made him a preyst, there ought no villan so to do, with out the
assent of the Lord.

Also, and if any of the Lords villans therbe that sense the last court, have
purchased any freholde, give it in knowledge that the Lords officer, before
any alienacion by the same vyllan, made, may take lawefull seasure of it, to
the use and behoue of the lord: If any alyenacion be, before any claim or
other seasure be made by the Lord, it shall bare the Lord for the seasure
after, but if it be the Queen's case, Quia nullum tempus occurris Regi.

Also of all them that be harm doers in the Lords woods, sprynges, hedges,
rows or otherwise within the manor, or those that be harm doers in the Lords
general feldes, enclosures, meadows, pastures, or in any other feldes, within
the Lordeshyppe.

Also of all Dyches, Lanes, and bye ways, that are not well and suffycyently
repaired, scoured, and amended, and al bows, branches, and other trees, that
over lie and ouerhangeth any of them, how long they have been suffered where
and in whole defaulte.

Also of al those that use and daily accostome to hunt, or hawk within this
Lordship, to thentent to distroy ye Lords warren, or other game within this
manner, or they that use to take Fesauntes, Partryges, or Quales, with
whatsoever ingen it be, it is inquirable and fynable by the statute, there
ought no man to keep any greyhound, or hound, but if he may dispend freely xl.
s. Per Annum.

Also if any copyholder have made any surrender out of this court, sense the
last law day by whose hands it was made, and to what use, and present it.

Also, of all these, and of all other things, that you have knowledge of, that
ought to be presented in this court to the Lords avail, you shall goo
together, and bring in a true presentment.

FINIS.

