The Orphans Cry We perish We Dye
depiction of beggars As We you see
So may yours Be

for ye lords sak^


For Gods Sake


For Crist Sake

O Somm Comfort


Pity me in miserye


O I am Sick


Lay not this Sin to their Charge


Dead in the Street



THE Poor Orphans Court, OR Orphans Cry.

By M. S.

Being a wel-wisher for a speedy help of their misery, and an eyewitness of
their present calamity.

blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by A. G. for M. S. junior. 1636.

The Preface.
HE that shall undertake at all times to speak truth in this age (freely from
his heart) shall be accounted a meddling fellow, not worthy to live in any
society, but to be sequestered from men. We all know some be in feriour, and
those men ought not to be so little respected, as not to be called men, because
they have no authority: For there is as well the common Sailer as the Pilot,
and he sees the storm before it comes, and gives notice to the Pilot how to
steare his course for their best safeguard. So I living this many years, and
observing this wel-governed City, have seen as in most things something which
I thought amiss, and might be rectified, which is the great neglect of the
poor of this City. I meddle no further, for by my frequent going in all
parts early and late, I have these many years observed the misery of the
poor but most of all of children, young boys and girls, which for many
years I beheld, hoping ever God would open some honest Citizens heart that
died rich, that they would do something to begin to raise a stock. And
seeing S. Paul's remembered, though not sufffciently, as also Morefields,
Aldersgate, Allgate, Newgate, and other good deeds done and performed, yet this
neglecte^, I caused a Book to be printed some 16. years ago, called,
Grievons groans for the Poor. But I being then in the country the book
(whether at the Book sellers or at the Printers I know not) lost the life, and
reason how the poor should be provided for, by which means it lost all
respect, and I my good intention; not many years after this, there was a
collection for employment for the poor, but which way that stock went I have
nothing to do to examine; Not many years after that, that worthy Sir T. M.
his project came forth, which no doubt had it been seconded, it had taken good
effect, for I am persuaded he aimed at the general good of all, but this
vanished as a shadow; since which I have observed and find the last remedy is
for the children used in the weekly Bills, Dead in the Street, or starved. And
this is all the remedy I find for these poor silly witless creatures. Those
that be able to help themselves, I speak not for, but for these poor
Orphans, whose Court is kept in a Cage, or under a Stall, or in S. Paul's
amongst the forms, the more is the pity. We have an Orphans Court well
guided and governed (God be thanked for it) long may it continue, and what
trudging and going is there if the rich die and leave wealth to their children,
but the poor die and no Orphans Court can be found. Outinam, thereit is, and
not else to be found or seen. But these few lines it may be will be laughed
at, I care not though they be; I give my self content, and wish but that may
be done here, as is at this present in Dorchester, Norwich, not one seen to
beg: let us learn of them or of the Dutch, as in the University of LEYDEN:
where 800. Orphans are daily fed and set at work, and well provided for, how
do the Dutch or French parishioners in LONDON; can they do so, and not we?
It is nothing but our hard hearts; for me thinks I hear some say, I have but
500. pounds in my estate, I would give one to it, nay I am persuaded there be
500. of this mind in this City, but either cowardice, or fear of being
accounted a vainglorious person makes them desist, nay, me thinks I hear
some Companies say, We will keep all our poor and well some may, if all
things were looked into; but these Orphans with good looking to would keep
themselves, witness the willingness of some, who you shall have of the bigger
sort in Fleet-steet in the evenings, with linkes ready to earne a penny to
light men, nay, in Smithfield standing by day to sweep clean the ways, how
ready are many of them? but the weakest go to the wall, as we see by woeful
experience, many whose Toes and Legs are ready to rot off, and worser
miseries, which make many a man blush to see that they are no better provided
for. It may be I am deceived, would I were. I am verily persuaded, that many
spend more in the Tavern idly than they give the poor willingly. Will not
many a Lady spend ordinarily day by day five shillings to see an idle play, or
five pounds at a Rere Banquet rather tha^ give five shillings, I believe five
tokens, to help these poor miserable children. If they hear of a new Play, on
goes all the best clothes, the Coach-horses must be fetched, and that they may
hurry from the poor, the Coachman shall have his charge, to drive away when
he comes amongst them; and what is the word? Away with these Stinking-beggers,
but when they come home, they will call to the servants to see the dog have
his dinner, but the poor shall go supperlesse to bed under a stall, or in a
Porch, dying with misery, or starving with cold, and hunger. These are reasons
able to draw a man into a serious consideration for a speedy remedy, and I
leave them to those in authority, and rest ever wishing, but not obtaining my
desire, that there were a Court for the poor Orphans as well as the rich.

A wel-wisher of the poor. M. S.

The Orphans Court.
The poor I thus distinguish into three sorts: 1 Sturdy Rogues and Whores. 2
Blind and Lame. 3 Aged and Young.

FIrst I begin with the sturdy Rogue and Whore, and here for these there be
23. Eliza. 3* cap. 7.34. E, c, 1.7. R. 2. c. 5.12. R. 2. c. 7.11. H. 7. c.
2.19. H. 7. c. 12.22. H. 8, c. 12.27. H. 8. c. 25. 1 E. 6. c. 3.3. E. 6. c. 5.
E. 6. c. 2.2. and 3. this and many, c. 5, 5. El. c. 3. all which are expired or
repealed: and 14. El. c. 5.18. El. c. 3.39. El. c. 4. and 1. lac. cap. 7 vet in
force.
many good laws enacted, but few put in execution; and for these are appointed
Marshals, and Beadels. But when a Marshalls eyes be not in all places, or his
men will scarce look to any, then these vermin increase; and where these are
sturdy, that an old creeping Beadel must entreat for fear of knockes, then no
Constable being so bold as he ought, for fear he be counted a busy fellow,
then they get mastery and domineere, and I know no remedy for these but two,
the one a laboring prison, or house of correction the other the Gallows, and
there I think it fittest to leave them, being people not worth the speaking of.

The second sort I come to, be the blind and lame, these are suffered to beg,
and good reason, 18 El. c 3 and the other fore quoted natures inhibit any to beg
but there ought to be no beggar but if any be privileged, then well may
these, but none may be privileged, Ergo, therefore it were more fit for the
blind, to be otherwise provided for, and for the lame, those that have lost
the use of their hands to be provided for, those that have lost their feet,
their hands may be made to supply that defect, by diverse kinds of works: as
Net-making, Saile-making, and such like for men. The women may Card and Spin,
but that is out of fashion, a baudy Ballade, or an idle Song are these idle
peoples greatest pains, where they make many more idle than themselves, and
there I leave these idle people, who might be better employed, if they were
better looked unto.

The third sort be those, which of purpose this Tract was written for, these be
those that I desire you in office, and in whose power it lies, to look with
their eyes, and pity with their hearts these poor wretched miserable
wretches, those who have neither father nor mother, no, nor any friends, those
that want wit, reason, and are not come to understanding, those whose years
speak not discretion, nor have wit to help themselves, and those be they that
make blood drop from my heart, whilst my pen cannot express their misery,
those of whom Cheapside stalls, and doors, and porches, and S. Bartholmewes
benches, with Smith field, and other corners be witnesses, to their griefs
whose eyes if they stir abroad do not see these poor younglings, lame,
lousy, ragged, and almost starved, whilst each hair of their heads stand
staring in the viewers face, as amazed to see so many not once moved with pity
to care for them.

These swarm in Summer at the Brickhils and Playhouse doors, which houses
are the Nurses of many of these miserable wretches, these being many are cast
off by wicked parents, or being placed out to apprentize by the Parish, or put
to Masters, are cast off from one to another, so if the Parish never hear of
them again, but be rid of them they are safe; and if the Nunses get but a
piece of money, they are safe, and glad they can so be rid of them; this might
be redressed by the Masters of the Parish, if they would every three month
have the children brought to a Vestry, to see how they were provided for, but
because there is no better provision for them, I could wish there were some
course taken, as these few I will propound, viz. The Parish might take such
course, as to call all the poor children, and take a view and number of all,
and as they come to ability, to set out, as namely, by these, or such like
means.

Every Ship being of burden 200. Tuns, should employ two or three boys.

Every Coale-ship trading to London from Newcastle to take one.

Every Parish might raise out of the Parish a stock so to employ them, until
they grow to some stature, then to be sent to the Plantations, to some careful
Master there, and they to give a true account of the children, how, and in what
estate they be with them.

Every ship that goes to Virginia to carry six boys and six girls, every
one to carry the like to New England, and so to our other plantations, and the
Parish to pay their passage, and at their arivall there, he that takes them
into custody or service, give bond to pay the charge of their fraught and costs
thither to the Parish here at twelve months end back, which they would do
with thanks, so they might have them but six years apprentize; now some
demand, where shall money be raised to send them away? for that I answer, the
money at the Inquest yearly, may be better so employed then to banqueting,
and the great feast money may be better spared this ways than worse spent.

For this many more and better, courses may be taken, which I leave to better
judgments, for this I know were there but a Stock, raised to transport them
thither, the Stock would be kept whole by those that take them to be their
servants, by return of commodities for them, for our Laws they be good in
this kind, if they were but well executed: as for example, the 22. of Henry
the 8.

22. Hen. 8. c. 12. and 27. H. 8. c. 25. There were acts made for the relief
of aged and impotent persons unable to work, and for Collections to be made
for such: which acts prescribe severe punishments against vagabonds and sturdy
beggars able to work.

1. Edw. 6. c. 3. There was an Act passed for the punishment of vagabonds, and
the relief of the poor and impotent persons; whereby it was enacted that
Collections should be made in every Parish, for the impotent poor of that
Parish: that those who were aged and lame should be set to such work as they
were able to perform, every Town, Parish, or village providing such work for
them in common, as they might be occupied in, or appointing them to such as
will find them work for meat and drink. And by this Law, it was provided,
that all children under years of age, whether Male or Female that wandered
abroad by themselves, or with their parents, or others, might be seized upon,
and taken away from their parents, by those who would bring them up in some
honest labor, or occupation, till they came to twenty years if Females, and
four and twenty years of age if Males: And by this Act, the Major of the
City of London, and all other Majors, Bailiffes, Sheriffs, Constables, and
other head Officers of every City and Town corporate, are enjoined once
every month to make a view and examination of all aged, impotent, and lame
persons and beggars within the precinct of their jurisdiction, to see those
that were lame, and had lain there above the space of three whole years,
sufficiently provided for, and to send all others home to the places where they
were borne, etc. upon pain of forfeiting 40. shillings for every default.

See 5. Edw. 6. c. 2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. c. 5.5. Eliz. c. 3.14. E. c. 5.18,
El.c. 3.39. Eliz. c. 4.5 5.43. Eliz. c. 2.3.4. There were diverse good Laws
enacted for the relief of poor, impotent, aged, maimed, and decrepit persons;
and good provisions made for poor Orphans, and children too, which are to be
bound, and placed out to husbandry, or some other honest trade and labor; or
to be set on work upon a common stock, or be trained up in Hospitalls, till
they are fit to be apprentizes, etc. which Laws, if they were as carefully
executed, as they were piously made, no Orphans, nor other need complain, I
am sure never any should perish in the street for want of looking to, which is
only the fault of Officers, not of the Laws, which are no way defective,
either in inflicting some condign punishment upon vagrant sturdy beggars, who
refuse to work, or in providing for the relief of Orphans, and poor impotent
persons who are unable to labor.

1 The Overseers of the poor of every Parish appointed purposely by the Law,
to see the impotent, poor, and Orphans duly relieved, ought every week to
enquire what poor there are in their parishes, and to allot them a competent
allowance according to their necessities. 2 These Overseers should weekly
enquire how these Orphans and impotent persons, which they place out to others
are provided for, and to examine whether they have food sufficient allowed
them, and in case they find them with whom they are placed, negligent in
providing for them, or in suffering them to stray abroad, and so to perish, or
miscarry, to complain of them to the Magistrates who have power to inflict
such punishments on them, as the quality of their offense demerits. 3 Those
chidren that are of age and strength to work, ought to be bound out to some
trade or other, or else set to work upon some common parish stock, of which
the Overseers of the poor for the time being, or some others deputed by the
Parish, should have the mannaging and government, appointing every child to
that work he is fit, and setting some Master worke-man over them who should
instruct them. 4 The Constables, Overseers of the poor, and Beadells,
especially if they see any such poor Orphans, or children, or other impotent
persons, begging, playing, or loytering in the streets, should presently
examine them what they are, and where they live: If in another Parish they
should presently convey them thither, and acquaint the Overseers of the poor,
or Constables with them, that so it might keep them and provide for them if
need be according as our laws prescribe. If their own parish, if they are
poor and need relief, they are forthwith to take care for their supply and
education, and in case they are fit for any work or emploiment, to set them to
that they are able to perform, and to train them up or place them out to such
who will bring them up to some honest labor. 5 When such Orphans and poor
children are thus placed out apprentises, the Overseers and such as bind them
out apprentises, and their successors, or at leastwise the Overseers of the
parishes, or Masters, or Alderman of the several ward, where they are placed,
ought, and may monthly enquire, how they are used by their Masters, whether
they allow them competent food and raiment, while they keep them to their
work, and give them that which is fit for Christians, or persons of their age
and quality: whether they keep them in their service, or else turn them away
without just cause, (in all or some of which many Masters are often delinquent)
And in case they find them pervert, to complain against them for it, that so
they may be punished in a just and legal manner.
And if all Overseers of the poor, Constales, Beadles and under Officers would
be but thus diligent in their places, or if superior Magistrates would but
punish them severely, as our laws appoint, where they find them negligent in
their duties, we should quickly have no begging, no perishing, nor
complaining in our streets.

FINIS.

