THE Triumphs over Death: OR, A Consolatorie Epistle, for afflicted minds, in
the affects of dying friends. First written for the consolation of one: but now
published for the general good of all, by R. S. the Author of S. Peter's
Complaint, and Maoni^ his other Hymns.

LONDON Printed by V. S. for John Busbie, and are to be sold at Nicholas Lings
shop at the West end of Paul's Church 1595*

To the Worshipful M. Richard Sackuile, Edward Sackuile Cicilie Sackuile and
Anne Sackuile, the hopeful issue of the honorable Gentleman master Robert
Sackuile Esquire.
MOst lines do not the best conceit contain,
Few words well coucht may comprehend much matter:
Then, as to use the first is counted vain,
So is it praiseworthy to conceit the latter,
The grauest wits that most grave works expect,
The quality, not quantity respect.
The smallest spark will cast a burning heat:
Base cottages may harbor things of worth,
Then though this Volume be, nor gay, nor great,
Under your protection I set forth,
Do not with coy disdainefull oversight
Deny to read this well meant orphans mite.
And since his father in his infancy
Provided patrons to protect his heir,
But now by death none sparing cruelty
Is turned an orphane to the open air:
I his unworthy foster-sire have darde,
To make you patronizers of this ward.
You glor^eng issues of that glorious dame,
Whose li^e is made the subject o^ deaths will,
To you succeeding hopes of mothers fame,
I dedicate this ^ruit of Southwels quill:
He for your Uncles comfort first it writ,
I for your consolation print and send you it.
Then daine in kindness to accept the work,
Which he in kindness writ, I send to you,
The which till n^w clouded, obscure did lurk:
But now opposed to each Readers view,
May yield commodious fruit to every wight
That feels his cons^ience pri^kt by Parcaes spite.
But if in aught I have presumptuous been,
My pardon-crauing pen implores your favor:
If any fault in print be past; unseen
To let it pass, the Printer is the ^rauer,
So shall he thank you, and I by duty bound,
Pray, that in you may all good gifts abound.
Your Worships humbly devoted, John Trussell*

R Read with regard, what here with due regard,
O Our second Ciceronian Southwell sent,
B By whose perswasiue pithy argument,
E Each well disposed eye may be preparde,
R Respectively their grief for friends decease
T To moderate without all vain excess.
S Since then the work is worthy of your view,
O Obtract not him which for your good it pend:
V Unkind you are if you it reprehend,
T That for your profit is presented you,
H He pend, I publish this to pleasure all,
E Esteem of both then as we merit shall:
W Wey his works worth, accept of my goodwill,
E Else is his labor lost, mine crossed, both to no end:
L Lest then you ill des^rue what both intend,
L Let my goodwill all small defects fulfill:
He here his talent trebled does present,
I, my poor mite, yet both with good intent,
Then take them kindly both, as we them meant.
John Trussell.

To the Reader.
CHancing to ^inde with Esopes Cock a stone,
Whose worth was more than I knew how to prise:
And knowing, if it should be kept unknown,
T 'would many skathe, and pleasure few or none,
I thought it best the same in public wise
In Print to publish, that impartial ei^s
Might, reading judge, and judging, praise the wight
The which this Triumph over Death did w^ite.
And though the same he did at first compose
For ones peculiar consolation,
Yet will it be commodions unto those,
Which for some friends loss, prove their own selfe-foes:
And by extremity of exclamation,
And their continuate lamentation
Seem to forget, that they at length must t^ead,
The self same path which they did that are dead.
But those as yet whom no friends death does cross,
May by example guide their actions so,
That when a tempest comes their Bark to toss,
Their passions shall not superate their loss:
And eke this Tr^atise does each Reader show,
That we our breath, to Death by duet^e owe,
And thereby proves, much tears are spent in vain,
When tears can not recall the dead again.
Yet if perhaps our late sprung sectaries,
Or for a fashion Bible-bearing hypocrites,
Whose hollow hearts do seem most holy wise,
Do for the Authors sake the work despise,
I wish them weigh the words, and not who writes:
But they that leave what most the soul delights,
Because the Preachers, no Precisian sure,
To read what Southwell writ will not endure.
But leaving them, since no persuades suffice
To cause them read, except the spirit mou^,
I wish all other read, but none despise
This little Treatise: but if Momus ^i^s
Epsy Deaths triumph, it does him behoue,
The writer, work, or me for to reprove:
But let his pitched speecht mouth defile but one,
Let that be me, let the other two alone:
For if offense in either merit blame,
The fault is mine, and let me reap the shame*
John Trussell.

The Author to the Reader.
IF the Athenians erected an altar to an unknown god, supposing he would
be pleased with their devotion, t^ough they were ignorant of his name: better
may I presume that my labor may be grateful, being devoted to such men, whose
names I kn^w, and whose fames I have heard, though unacquainted with their
persons. I intended this comfort to him whom a lamenting sort has left most
comfortless, by him to his friends, who have equal portions in this sorrow.
But I think the Philosophers rule will be here verefied, that it shall be last
in execution, which was first designed, and he last enjoy the effect, which was
first owner of the cause, this let Chance be our rule since Choice may not, and
into which of your hands it shall fortune, much honor and happiness may it
carry with it, and leave in their hearts as much joy as it found sorrow: where
I borrow the person of a Historian as well touching the dead as the yet
suruiuing, I build upon report of such A^thours, whose hoary heads challenge
credit, and whose ^i^s and ears were witnesses of their words. To crave
pardon for my pain were to slander a friendly office, and to wrong their
courtesies, whom nobility never taught to answer affection with anger, or to
wage du^ty with dislike: and therefore I humbly present unto them with as many
good wishes as good will can measure from a best meaning mind, that has a
willingness rather to affoorde, then to offer due services, were not the mean
as woorthlesse as the mind is willing.

The Triumphs over Death: OR, A Consolatorie Epistle for troubled minds in the
affects of dying friends.
IF it be a blessing of the virtuous to mourn, it is the reward of this, to
be comforted; and he that pronounced the one, promised the other: I doubt not
but that Spirit, whose nature is Love, and whose name Comforter, as he knows
the cause of your grief^, so has he salued it with supplies of grace, pouring
into your wound no less oil of mercy then wine of Justice; yet since
courtesy owes compasion as a du^tie to the afflicted, and nature has
ingrafted a desire to find it, I thought it good to show you by proof, that
you carry not your cares alone, though the load that lies on others can
little lighten your burden, her decease can not but sit nearer your heart,
whom you had taken so deep into a most tender affection. That which dies to
our love, being alwa^^s alive to our sorrow, you would have b^^ loving to a
l^sse loving sister: yet finding in her so many worths to be loved, your love
wrought more ea^n^stly upon so sweet a subject, which now being taken from
you, I presume your grief^ is no less then your love was, the one of these
being eu^r the mesure of the other, the Scripture moves us to bring forth our
t^ares upon the dead, a thing not offending grace, and aright to reason. For to
be without remor^e in the death of friends, is neither incident nor convenient
to the nature of man, having too much affinity to a savage temper, and
overthrowing the ground of all piety, which is a mutual simpathie in each of
others miseries: but as not to feel sorrow in sorrowful chances, is to want
sense, so not to bear it with moderation, is to want understanding, the one
brutish, the other effeminate, and he has cast his account best that has
brought his sum to the mean. It is no less fault to exceed in sorrow, then
to pass the limits of competent mirth, since excess in either is a disorder
in passion, though that sorrow of courtesy be less blamed of men, because, if it
be a fault, it is also a punishment, at once causing and ^asting torments. It
is no good sign in the sick to be senseless in his pains, as bad it is to be
vnusually sensitive* being both either harbengers or attendants of death. Let
sadness, since it is a due to the dead testify a feeling of pity, not any pang
of passion, and bewray rather a tender then a dejected mind. Mourue as that
your friends may find you a living brother, all men a discreet mourner,
making sorrow a signell, not a superior of reason: some are so obstinate in
their own will, that even time the natural remedy of the most violent agonies
can not by any delays assuage their grief, they entertain their sorrow with
solitary muses, and feed with sighs and tears, they pine their bodies, and
draw al pensive consideration to their minds, nursing their heaviness with a
melancholy humor, as though they had vowed them selves to sadness, unwilling
it should end till it had ended them, wherein their folly sometimes finds a
ready effect, (...)
that being true which Solomon observed, that as a moth the garment and a worm
the wood, so does sadness persuade the heart. But this impotent softness
fitteth not sober minds. W^e must not make a lives profe^sion of a seven
nights duty, nor under color of ki^dnesse be unnatural to our selves, if
^ome in their passion joined their thoughts into such laborinths, that neither
wit knows, nor will cares how long or how far they wnder in them, it
discovers their weakness, but discerns our meditation. It is for the most
the fault, not of all, but of the ^eeliest women, who next to the funeral of
their friends, deem it a second widowhood to force their tears, and make it
their ^appinesse to seem most unhappy, as though they had only been left alive
to be a perpetual map of dead folks misfortunes: but this is to arm an
enemy against our selves, and to yield Reason prisoner to Passion, putting the
sword in the rebels hand when we are least able to withstand his treason.
Sorrow once settled is not lightly removed, easily winning, but not so easily
surrendering possession, and where it is not excluded in time, it challenges a
place by prescription. The Scripture warns us not to give our hearts to
sadness* yea rather to reject it as a thing not beneficial to the dead, yet
p^eiudiciall to our selves, Ecclesiasti^us Eccles. 38. ^*
allows but seven days to mourning, judging moderation in plaint to be a
sufficient testimony i^ good will, and a needeful office of wis^dome. Much
sorrow for the dead is either the child of self-love, or of rash judgment:
if we should shead our tears for others death, as a mean to our contentment,
we show but our own wound perfect lovers of our selves, if we lament their
decease as their hard d^stinie, we attach them of evil deserving, with to
peremmatory a ce^sure as though their life had been a arise, and their death a
leap into final perdition, for otherwise a good departure craves small
condolling, being but a harbor from storms, and an entrance unto felicity.
But you know your sister too well to incur any blame in these respects. And
experience of her life has stored your thoughts with notice of so rare
virtues, as might sooner make her memory an inforcement to joy then any
inducement to sorrow, and move you t^ esteem her last duties rather the
triumph of her victory then the farewelles of her decease. She was by birth
second to none but unto the first in the realm, yet she measured only
greatness by goodness, making nobility but the mirror of virtue, as able to
show things worthy to be seen, as apt to draw many eyes to behold it, she
suited her behavior to her birth, and ennobled her birth with her pi^ty,
leaving her house more beholding to her for having honored it with the glory
of her virtues, then she was to it for the titles of her degree, she was high
minded in nothing but in aspiring to perfection, and in the disdain of vice,
in other things covering her greatness with hu^ilitie among her inferio^s, and
showing it with courtesy amongst her peers: of the carriage of her self, and
her sober government may be a sufficient testimony, that envy her self was
dumb in her dispraise, finding in her much to ^epine at, but naught to
reprove: the clearenes of her Honor I need not to mention, she ha^ing always
armed it with such modesty as taught the most intemperate tongues to be silent
in her presence, and answered their eyes with scorn and contempt that did but
seem to make her an aim to passion, yea, and in this behalf, as almost in
all other, she has the most honorable and known Ladies of the land, so
common and known witnesses, that those that least liked her religion were in
love with her demeanor, delivering their opinions in open praises. How mildely
she accepted the check of fortune fallen upon her without desert, experience
has bin a most manifest proof, the temper of her mind being so easy that she
found little difficulty in taking down her thoughts to a mean degree, which
true honor, not pride had raised to the former height, her faithfulness and
love where she found true friendship, is written with tears in many eyes, and
will be longer registered in grateful memories diverse that have tried her in
that kind, auowing her for secrecy, wisdom, and constancy, to be a miracle
in that sex, yea when she found least kindness in others, she never lost it
in hirselfe, more willingly suffering then offering wrong, and often weeping
for their mishappes, whom though less loving her, she could not but effect.
Of the innocence of her life this general all can auerre, that as she was
grateful many ways, and memorable for virtues, so was she free from the
blemish of any vice, using, to her power, the best means to keep continually
an undefiled conscience: her attire was ever such as might both satisfy a
curious eye, and yet bear witness of a sober mind, neither singular nor
vain, but such as her peers of least report used: her tongue was very little
acquainted with oaths, unless either duty or distrust did enforce them: and
surely they were needelesse to those that knew her, to whom the truth of
her words could not justly be suspected, much less was she noted of any
unfitting talk, which as it was ever hateful to her ears, so did it never
defile her breath: of feeding she was very measurable, rather of too sparing
then too liberal a diet: so religious for observing all fasts, that never in
her sickness she could hardly be won to break them, and if our souls be
possessed in our patience, surely her soul was truly her own, whose rock
thought often stricken with the rod of adversity never yielded any more then
to give issue of eye streams, and though these thr^ugh the tenderness of her
nature and aptnes of her sex, were the customarie tributes that her love paid,
more to her friends than her own misfortunes, yet were they not accompanied
with distempered words or ill seeming actions, reason never forgetting
distancie, though remembering pity, her devotions she daily observed, offering
the daily sacrifice of an innocent heart, and stinting her self to her times
of prayer, which she performed with so religious a care, as well showed that
she knew how high a Majesty she served. I need not write how duetifully
she discharged all the behoofes of a most loving wife, since that was the
commonest theme of her praises, yet this may be said without improofe to any,
that whosoever in this behalf may be counted her equal, none can justly be
thought her superior, where she owed she paid duty, where she found she
turned courtesy, wheresoever she was known, she deserved a^itie, desirous of
the best, yet disdaining none but evil company, she was readier to requite
benefits the^ revenge wrongs, more grieved then angered with unkindness of
friends, when either mistaking or misreport occasioned a^y breaches: for if
their words carry credit, it entered deepest into her thoughts, they have
acquitted her from all spice of malice, not only against her friends, whose
dislikes were but a retire to step further into friendship, but even her
greatest enemies, to whom if she had been a judge as she was a suppliant, I
assuredly think she would have redres^ed, but not revenged her injuries. In
sum, she was an honor to her predeces^ours, a light to her age, and a
pattern ^o her posterity, neither was her conclusion different from her
premises, or her death from her life, she showed no dismay, being warned of
her danger, carrying in her conscience the safeconduct of innocence. But having
sent her desires before to heaven with a mild countenance, and a most calm
mind, in more hope then fear, she expected her own passage, she commended
both her duty and goodwill to all her friends, and cleared her heart from all
grudge toward her enemies, wishing true happiness to them both, as best
became so soft and gentle a mind, in which anger never stayed, but as an
unwelcome stranger: She made open profession that she did die true to her
religion, true to her husband, true to God and the world, she enjoyed her
judgment as long as she breathed, her body earnestly offering hi^ last
devotions, supplying in thought what faintnes suffered not her tongue to utter:
in the end, when her glass was tun out, and death began to challenge his
interest, some laboring with too late remedies to hinder the delivery of her
sweet soul, she desired them eftsoons to let her go to God, and her hopes
calling her to eternal kingdoms, as one rather falling asleep then dying,
she most happily took her leave of all mortal miseries. Such was the life,
such was the death of your dearest sister, both so full of true comfort, that
this survey of her virtues may be a sufficient lenatiue to your bitterest
griefs. For you are not (I hope) in the number of those that reckon it a pa^te
of their pain to hear of their best remedies, thinking the rehearsal of your
dead friends praises an vpbraiding of their loss, but since the oblivion of
her virtues were injurious to her, let not the mention of her person be
offensive unto you, and be not you grieved with her death, with which she is
best pleased. So blessed a death is rather to be wished of us, than pitied in
her, whose soul triumphs with God, whose virtues still breaths in the
mouths of infinite praises, and lives in the memories of all, to whom either
experience made her known, or fame was not envious in concealing her deserts:
she was a jewel that both God and you desired to enjoy, he to her assured
benefit without self interest, you for allowable respects, yet employing her
restraint among certain hazards and most uncertain hopes. Be then vmpier in
your own cause, whether your wishes or Gods will imports more love, the one,
the adornement of her exile, the other, her return into a most blessed
country, and since it pleased God in this love to be your rival, let your
discretion decide the doubt, whom in due should carry the suite, the
prerogative being but a right to the one, for nature and grace being the
motives of both your loves, she had the best title in them that was author of
the^, and she, if worthy to be beloved of either, as she was of both, could not
but prefer him to the dearest portion of her deepest affection: let him with
good leave gather the grape of his own vine, and pluck the fruit of his own
planting, and think so curious works ever safest in the artificers hand, who
is likeliest to love them, and best able to preserve them, she did therefore
her duty in dying willingly: and if you will do yours, you must be willing
with her death, since to repine at her liking is discourtesi^, at Gods an
impiety, both unfitting for your approved virtue, she being in place where no
grief can annoy her, she has little need or less joy of your sorrow,
neither can ^he allow in her friends that she would loathe in her self, love
never affecting likeness: if she had bin evil, she had not deserved our
tears: being good, she cannot desire them, nothing being less to the likeness
of goodness, than to see it self any cause of unjust disquiet or trouble to
the innocent. 1. King. ^.
Would Saul have thought it friendship to have wept for his fortunes, in having
found a kingdom by seeking of cattle: or David account it a courtesy, to have
sorowed at his success, that from following sheep came to foil a giant, and
to receive in fine a royal crown for his victory, 1. King. 17.
why then should her lot be lamented, Psalm. 112.
whom higher favor has raised from the dust to sit with princes of Gods
people, if security had bin given, that a longer life should still have bin
guided by virtue, and followed with good fortune, you might pretend some cause
to complain of her decease. But if different effects should have crossed
your hopes (process of time being the parent of strange alterations) then had
death been friendlier then your self, and since it hung in suspense which of
the two would have happened, let us allow God so much discretion, as to think
him the fittest arbitrator in decision of the doubt: Psalm. 86.
her foundations of happiness were in the holy hills, and God saw it fittest
for her building to be but low in this vale of tears, and better it was it
should be soon taken down, than by rising too high to have oppressed her
soul with the ruins* Think it no injury that she is now taken from you, but
a favor that she was lent you so long, and show no unwillingness to restore
God his own, since hitherto you have paid no usury for it: consider not how
much longer you might have enjoyed her, but how much sooner you might have lost
her: and since she was held upon curte^ie, not by any covenant, take our
sovereigns right for a sufficient reason of her death, our life is but lent, a
good to make thereof, during the loan our best commodity: It is due debt to a
more certain owner than our selves, and therefore so long as we have it, we
receive a benefit, when we are deprived of it, we have no wrong, we are tenants
at will of this clayee farm, not for term of years, when we are warned
out, we must be ready to remove, having no other title but the owners
pleasure: Eccles. 10.
it is but an Inn, not a home: we came but to bait, not to dwell, and the
condition of our enrance was, in fine to depart. If this departure be grievous,
it is also common, this to day to me, to morrow to thee, and the case equally
afflicting all, leaves none any cause to complain of injurious usage.

Natures debt is sooner exacted of some then of other, yet is there no fault in
the creditor that exacteth but his own, but in the greediness of our eger
hopes, either repining that their wishes fail, or willingly forgetting their
mortality, whom they are unwilling by experience to see mortal, yet the
general tide washes all passengers to the same shore, some sooner, some
later, but all at the last: and we must settle our minds to take our course
as it comes, never fearing a thing so necessary, yet ever expecting a thing
so uncertain. It seems that God purposely concealed the time of our death,
leaving us resolved between fear and hope of longer continuance. Cut off
unripe cares, lest with the notice and pensiveness of our divorce from the
world, we should lose the comfort of needful contentments, and before our
dying day languish away with expectation of death. Some are taken in their
first step into this life, receiving in one, their welcome and farewell, as
though they had been borne only to be buried, and to take their pasport in
this hourly middle of their course, the good to prevent change, the bad to
shorten their impiety: some live till they be weary of life, to give proof of
their good hap, that had a kindlier passage, yet though the date be diverse,
the debt is all one, equally to be answered of all as their time expireth:
Psalm. 88.
for who is the man shall live and not see death? since we all die, and like
water slide upon the earth. ^ Kings 14. ^enes. 5.
In Paradise we received the sentence of death, and here as prisoners we are
kept in ward, tarying but our times till the Jailer call us to our execution.
Whom has any virtue eternized, or desert commended to posterity, that has
not mourned in life, and bin mourned after death, no assurance of joy being
sealed without some tears? Even our blessed Lady the mother of God was thrown
down as deep in temporal miseries as she was advanced high in spiritual
honors, none amongst al mortal creatures finding in life more proof then she
of her mortality: for having the noblest son that ever woman was mother of,
not only above the condition of men, but above the glory of Angels, being her
son only, without temporal father, and thereby the love of both parents
doubled in her breast, being her only Son without other issue, and so her
love of all children finished in him. Yea, he being God, and she the nearest
creature to Gods perfections, yet no prerogative either quitted her from
mourning, or him from dying: and though they surmounted the highest Angels in
all other preheminences, yet were they equal with the meanest men in the
sentence of death And howbeit our Lady being the pattern of christian
mourners, so tempered her anguish, that there was neither any thing undone that
might be exacted of a mother, or any thing done that might be disliked in so
perfect a matron, yet by this we may guess with what courtesies death is likely
to friend us, that durst cause so bloody sunerals in so heavenly a stock, not
exempting him from the law of dying that was the author of life, and soon
after to honor his triumphs with ruins and spoil of death* Seeing therefore
that death spares none, let us spare our tears for better uses, being but an
idle sacrifice to this dease and emplacable executioner, and for this not long
to be continued, where they can never profit, nature did promise us a weeping
life, exacting tears for custom as our first entrance, and for suting our
whole course in this doleful beginning: and therefore they must be used with
mesure that must be used so often, and so many causes of weeping, lying yet in
the debt, ^ith we cannot end our tears, let us at the least reserve them, if
sorrow cannot be shunned, let it be taken in time of need, since otherwise
being both troublesome and fruitless it is a double misery or an open
folly. We moisten not the ground with precious waters, they were stilled for
nobler ends, either by their fruits to delight our senses, or by their
operations to preserve our healths. Our tears are water of too high a price to
be prodigally powered in the dust of any graves. If they be tears of love,
they persume our prayers, making them odor of sweetness, fit to be offered
on the aultare before the throne of God: if tears of contrition, Apoc, ^*
they are water of life to the dying and corrupting souls, they may purchase
favor and repeal the sentence till it be executed as the example of Ezechias
does testify, but when the punishment is past, 3. King. 1^.
and the verdict performed in effect, their pleading is in vain, as David
taught us when his child was dead, 2. Kings 1^.
saying, that he was likelier to go to it, than it by his weeping to return
to him. Learn therefore to give sorrow no long dominion over you. Wherefore
the wise should rather mark than expect an end, meet it not when it comes,
do not inuit it when it is absent, when you feel it do not force it, since
the brute creatures which (nature seldom erring in her course guides in the
mean) have but a short though vehement sense of their losses you should bury
the sharpness of your grief with the course, and rest contented with a kind,
yet a mild compassion, neither less then decent for you, nor more then
agreeable to your nature and judgment, your much heaviness would renew a
multitude of griefs, and your eyes would be springs to many streams, adding
to the memory of the dead a new occasion of plaint by your own discomfort, the
motion of your heart measures the beating of many pulses, which in any
distemper of your quiet with the like stroke will soon bewray themselves sick
of your disease: your fortune, though hard, yet is notorious, and though moved
in mishap and set in an unworthy lantern, yet your own light shines far,
and makes you markeable: all will bend attentive eye upon you, observing how
you ward this blow of temptation, and whether your patience be a shield of
proof, or easily entered with these violent strokes. It is commonly expected,
that so high thoughts which have already climed over the hardest dangers should
not now stowp to any vulgar or femal complaints: great personages whole estate
draws upon them many eyes, as they cannot but be themselves, so may not they
use the liberti^ of meaner estates, the laws of Nobility not alowing them to
direct their deeds by their desires, but to limite their desires to that which
is decent. Nobility is an aim for lower degrees to level at marks of higher
perfection, and like stately windows in the northeast rooms of politic and
civil buildings, to let in such light, and lie open to such prospects, as may
afford their inferiors both to find means and motives to heroical virtues:
if you should determine to dwell ever in sorrow, it were a wrong to your
wisdom, and countermaunded by your quality, if ever you mind to surcease it,
no time sitter then the present, since the same resons that hereafter might
move you, are now as much in force. Yield to Wisdom that you must yield to
Time, be beholding to your self, not to time for the victory, make it a
voluntary work of discretion that will otherwise be a necessary work of
delay. We think it not enough to have our own measure brimme full with evil,
unless we make it run over with others miseries, taking their misfortunes as
our punishments, and executing foreign penalties upon our selves: yea
disquiet minds being ever bellows to their own flames mistake o^t times
others good for ill, their folly making it a true scourge to them that how
socuer it seemed was to others a benefit. Jacob out of Joseph's absence sucked
such surmises, as he made his heart a prey to his agonies, whereas that that
buried him in his own melancholies raised Joseph to his highest happiness: if
Mary Magdalen said and supposed she could have suncke no deeper in grief
than she had already plunged her self, and yet that which she imagined the
uttermost of evils proved in conclusion the very bliss of her wishes. The
like may be your error if you cumber your mind with musing upon her death,
which would never be discharged from cares, till death set his hand to her
acquittance, nor receive the charter of an eternal being, till her soul were
presented at the fealing: I loathe to rub the scarre of a deeper wound, for
fear of renewing a dead discomfort; yet if you will favor your own remedies,
the maisterie over that grief that springs from the root, may learn you to
qualify this that buddeth from the bra^ch, let not her losses move you that
are acquainted with greater of your own, and taught by experience to know how
uncertain this chance is, for whom unconstant fortune throws the dice, if
she want the woonted titles, her part is now in deed, and they were du but
upon the stage, her loss therein is but a wrack of wounds, in which she is
but even with the height of princes, surpassing both her self in them, and the
new honors of heavenly style. If she have left her children, it was her wish
they should repay her absence with usury; yet had she sent her first fruits
before her as pledges of her own coming. And now may we say that the Sparrow
has found a home, and the Turtle Dove a nest, where she may lay her yongling,
enjoying some, and expecting the rest. If she be taken from her friends, she
is also delivered from her enemies, in hope hereafter to enjoy the first out of
fear of ever being troubled with the latter. If she be cut off in her youth,
no age is unripe for a good death; and having ended her task, though never so
short, yet she has lived out her full time: Old age is venerable not long, to
be measured by increase of virtues, not by number of years, Sap. 4.
for heaviness consists in wisdom, and an vnspotred life is the ripenes of
the perfectest age. If she were in possibility of preferment, she could
hardly have wanted higher then from whence she was thrown: having been
bruised with the first, she had little will to clime for a second fall: we might
hitherto truly have said, Ruth 1.
this is that Noemi, she being to her end enriched with many outward, and
more inward graces. But whether hereafter she would have bid us not to call
her Noemi, that is, fair, but Mara, that signifies bitter, it is vn^ertaine,
since she might have fallen into the widows felicity, that so changed her name
to the likeness of her lot. Insomuch that she is freed from more miseries than
she suffered losses, and more fortunate by not desiring, then she would be by
enjoying fortunes favor, which if it be not counted a folly to love, yet it
is a true happiness not to need, we may rather think that death was
provident against her imminent harms, then envious of any future prosperities,
the times being great with so many broiles, that when they once fall in labor,
we shall think their condition securest whom absence has exempted, both from
feeling the bitter throws, and beholding the monstrous issue that they are
likely to bring forth: the more you tender her, the more temperat should be
your grief, since seeing you upon going, she did but step before you into
the next world, to which she thought you to belong more then to this, which
has already given you the most ungrateful congee. They that are upon removing,
send their furniture before them; and you still standing upon your departure,
what ornament could you rather wish in your future abode than this that did
ever please you? God thither sends your adamants, whither he would draw your
heart, and casts your anchors where your thoughts should lie at rode, that
seeing your love taken out of the world, and your hopes disanchored from this
stormy shore, you might settle your desires where God seems to require
them. If you would have wished her life for an example to your house, assure
your self she has left her friends so inherited with her virtues, and so
perfect patterns of her best parts, that who knows the furuiuors, may see the
deceased, and shall find little difference, but in the number, which before
was greater, but not better, unless it were in one repetition of the same
goodness: wherefore set your self at rest in the ordinance of God, whose
works are perfect, and whose wisdom is infinite. The terms of our life are
like the seasons of the year, some for sowing, some for growing, and some for
reaping, in this only different, that as the heavens keep their prescribed
periods, so the succession of times have their appointed changes. But in the
seasons of our life, which are not to the law of necessary causes, some are
reaped in the seed, some in the blade, some in the unripe ear, all in the end,
this harvest depending upon the reapers will. Death is too ordinary a thing to
seem any nouelty, being a familiar guest in every house; and since his coming
is expected, and his arrant unknown, neither his presence should be feared,
nor his effects lamented. What wonder is it to see fuel burned, spice pownded,
or snow melted? and as little fear it is to see those dead that were borne
upon condition once to die, she was such a co^pound as was once to be resolved
unto her simples, which is now performed: her soul being given to God, and her
body sorted into her first elements, it could not dislike you to see your
friend removed out of a ruinous house, and the house it self destroyed and
pulled down, if you knew it were to build it in a statelier form, and to
turn the inhabitant with more joy into a fairer lodging. Let then your sisters
soul depart without grief, let her body also be altered into dust, withdraw
your eyes from the ruin of this cotage, and cast them upon the majesty of the
second building, which S. Paul says shall be incorruptible, glorious, strange,
spiritual, and immortal: night and sleep are perpetual, mirours, figuring in
their darkness silence, shutting up of senses, the final end of our mortal
bodies, and for this some have entitled sleep the eldest brother of death; but
with no less conuenie^ce it might be called one of deaths tenants near unto
him in affinity of condition, yea far inferior in right, being but tenant for a
time of that which death is the inheritance; for by virtue of the conueiance
made unto him in Paradise, that dust we were and to dust we should return. He
has hitherto showed his signiorie over all, exacting of us, not only the
yearly, but hourly revenues of time, which ever by minutes we defray unto him:
So that our very life is not only a memory, but a part of our death, since the
longer we have lived, the less we have to live. What is the daily lessening of
our life, but a continual dying: and therefore none is more grieved with the
running out of the last sand in an hour glass then with all the rest: so
should not the end of the last hour trouble us any more, of so many that went
before, since that did but finish course that all the rest were still ending, not
the quantity but the quality commends our life. The ordinary gain of long
livers being only a great burden of sin: for as in tears, so in life the
value is not esteemed by the length, but by the fruit and goodness, which
often is more in the least than in the longest. What your sister wanted in
continuance, she supplied in speed, and as with her needle she wrought more
in a day than many Ladies in a year, having both excellent skill, and no less
delight in working, so with her diligence doubling her endeavors, she won more
virtue in half than others in a whole life Her death to time was her birth to
eternity, the loss of this world an exchange of a better, one indowment that
she had being impaired, but many far greater added to her store. Mardocheus
house was too obscure a dwelling for so gracious an Hester, shrowding royal
parts in the mantle of a mean estate, and shadowing immortal benefits under
earthly vailes. It was fitter that she being a sum of so rare perfections,
and so well worthy, a spouse of our heavenly Ahashuerus should be carried to
his court from her former abode, there to be invested in glory, and to enjoy
both place and pre-eminence answerable to her worthiness, her love would have
been less able to have borne her death, than your constancy to brook her,
and therefore God mercifully closed her eyes before they were punished with so
grievous a sight, taking out to you but a new lesson of patience out of your
old book, in which long study has made you perfect. Though your hearts were
equally balanced with a mutual and most entire affection, and the doubt
insoluble which of you loved most, yet death finding her the weaker, though not
the weaker vessel, laid his weight in her balance to bring her soonest to
her rest: let your mind therefore consent to that which your tongue daily
craves, that Gods will may be done as well here in earth of her mortal body,
and in that little heaven of her purest soul, since his will is the best
measure of all events. There is in this world continual enterchange of
pleasing and greeting accidence, still keeping their succession of times, and
ouertaking each other in their several courses: no picture can be all drawn of
the brightest colors, nor a harmony only conforted only of trebles:
shadows are needful in expressing of proportions, and the base is a
principal part in perfect music, the condition of our exile here allows
no vnmedled joy, our whole life is tempered between sweet and sour, and we
must all look for a mixture of both: the wise so wish: better that they still
think of worse, accepting the one if it come with liking, and bearing the
other without impatience, being so much masters of each others fortunes, that
neither shall work them to excess. The dwarse grows not on the highest
hill, nor the tall man loses not his height in the lowest valley, and as a
base mind, though most at ease, will be dejected, so a resolute virtue in the
deepest distress is most impregnable. They evermore most perfectly enjoy their
comfortes that least fear their contraries* for a desire to enjoy, carries
with it a fear to loose; and both desire and fear are enemies to quiet
possession making men rather owners of Gods benefits then tenants at his will:
the cause of our trobles are that our misfortunes happen either to unwitting or
unwilling minds; foresight preuente^h the one, necessity the other: for he
takes away the smart of present euilles that attends their coming, and is
not amated with any cross, that is, armed against al, where necessity works
without our consent, the effect should never greatly afflict us, grief being
bootlesse, where it can not help, needelesse where there was no fault: God
casts the dice, and gives us our chance, the most we can do, is, to take
the point that the cast will afford us, not grudging so much that it is no
better, as comforting our selves it is no worse. If men should lay al their
euilles together, to be afterward by equal portion divided amongst them,
most me^ would rather take that they brought, than stand to the division; yet
such is the partial judgment of self-love, that every one judges his
selfe-miserie too great, fearing if he can find some circumstance to increase
it and making it intolerable by thought to induce it. When Moses threw his rod
from him, it became a serpent ready to sting, and affrighted him, insomuch as
it made him to flee, but being quietly taken up, it was a rod again
serviceable for his uses, no way hurtful. The cross of Christ, and rod of
every tribulation seeming to threaten stinging and terror to those that shun
and eschew it, but they that mildely take it up and embrace it with patience,
Psalm 12.
may say with David, thy rod and thy staff have been my comfort. In this,
affliction resembles the Crokadile, fly, it pursues and frights, followed,
it flies and fears, a shame to the constant, a tyrant to the timorous. Soft
minds that think only upon delights, admit no other consideration, but in
soothing things become so effeminate, as that they are apt to bleed with every
sharp impression. But he that uses his thought^ with expectation of
troubles, making their travel through all hazards, and apposing his resolution
against the sharpest incounters, finds in the proof facility of patience,
and eases the load of most heavy cumbers: we must have temporal things in
use, but eternal in wish, that in the one neither delight exceed in that we
have no desire in that we want: and in the other our most delight is here in
desire, and our whole desire is hereafter to enjoy. They straighten too much
their joys, that draw them into the reach and compass of their senses, as if
it were no facility where no sense is witness, whereas if we exclude our passed
and future contentments, pleasant pleasures have so fickle assurance, that
either as forestalled before their arrival, or interrupted before their end,
or ended before they are well begun: the repetition of former comfortes, and
the expectation of after hopes is ever a relief unto a virtuous mind, whereas
others not suffering their life to continue in the conueniences of that which
was and shall be divided, this day from yesterday, and to morrow, and by
forgetting all, and forecasting nothing, abridge their whole life into the
moment of present time: enjoy your sister in your former virtues, enjoy her
also in her future meeting, being both titles of more certain delights, than
her casual life could ever have warranted. If we will think of her death, let
it be as a warning to provide us, since that that happens to one may happen to
an other: yea none can escape that is common to all. It may be the blow that
hit her was meant to some of us, and this missing was but a proof to take
better aim in the next stroke: if we were diligent in thinking of our own, we
should have little leisure to bewail others deaths: when the souldior in
skirmish* sees his next fellow slain, he thinks more time to look to
himself, than to stand mourning a hapless mischance, knowing the head which
sped so near a neighbor, cannot be far from his own head. But we in this
behalf are much like the seely birds, that seeing one stick in the lime bush,
striving to get away, with a kind of native pity are drawn to go to it, and
so rush themselves into the same misfortune; even so many for their friends
decease by musing on their lot, wittingly surfeit of too much sorrow, that
sometimes they make mourning their last decease: but step not you into this
roile, that has taken none but weak affections: hold not your eyes always
upon your hardest happes, neither be you still occupied in counting your
losses. There are fairer parts in your body than scarres, better eye-markes
in your fortune then a sisters loss; you might happily find more comforts
left than you would willingly loose. But that you have already resigned the
solaces of life, and shunned all comforts into the hopes of heaven, yet since
there is some difference between a purpose and proof, intending and
performing; a subdued enemy being ever ready to rebel when he finds mighty
helps to make a party. It is good to strengthen reason against the violence
of nature, that in this and like cases will renew her assaults, it was a
forcible remedy that he used to withstand the conceit of a most lamentable
occurrent, who having in one ship lost his children and substance, and hardly
escaped himself from drowning, went presently into an hospital of lazars,
where finding in a little rome many examples of greater miseries, he made the
smart of others sores a lenatiue to his own wound: for besides that, as
lowness and poverty was common to them, they had also many cumbers private to
themselves, some wanting their senses, some their wits, other their limbs, but
all their health, in which consideration he eased his mind, that fortune had
not given him the greatest fall. If God had put you to Abraham's trial,
commanding you to sacrifice the hope of your posterities, and to be to your
only son an author of death, ^s you were to him of life. If you had bin tied
in the streights of Iepthaes bitter devotion in bruing his sword in his own
daughters blood, and ending the triumphs over his enemies with the voluntary
funeralles of his only offspring: yet since both their lives and their labors
had bin gods vndeemable debt, your virtues ought to have obeyed maugre al
incounters of carnal affection. And how much more in this case should you
incline your love to Gods liking, in which he has received a less part of
his own, and that by the usual easiest course of natures laws. Let God
strippe you to the skin, yea to the soul, so he stay with you himself: let
his reproach be your honor, his poverty your riches, and he in lue of al other
friends. Think him enough for this world, that must be all your possession for
a whole eternity: let others ease their carefulnes with borrowed pleasures, not
bred out of the true root, but begged of external helps. They shall still
carry unquiet minds, easily altered with every accident, since they labor not
any change in their inward distempers. But by forgetting them for a time by
outward pastimes, innocence is the only mother of true mirth, and a soul that
is owner of God, will quietly bare with all other wants, nothing being able to
empouerish it but voluntary losses. Bear not therefore with her losses, for
she is won for ever, but with the momentarie absence of your most happy
sister, yea it can not justly be called an absence, many thoughts being daily
in parlee with her, only men's eyes and ears unworthy to enjoy so sweet an
object, have resigned their interest, and interested this treasure in their
hearts, being the fittest shrines for so pure a Saint, whom as none did know
but did love, so none can now remember with devotion. Men may behold her with
shame of their former life, seeing one of the frailer sex honor her
weakness with such a train of perfections. Ladies may admire her as a glory
to their degree, in whom honor was portraied in her full likeness, grace
having perfected natures first draught with all the due colors of an absolute
virtue: all women accept her as a pattern to immitate her gifts, and her good
parts, having been so manifested, that even they that can teach the finest
stitches may themselves take new works out of this sampler. Who then could
drink any sorrow out of so clear a fountain, or bewail the estate of so
happy a creature, to whom as to be her self, was her praise, so to be as she
is, was her highest blis^e. You still floate in a troublesome sea, and you
find it by experience a sea of dangers, how then can it pity you to see your
sister on shore, and so safely landed in so blissful an harbor? Iud. 15.
Since your Iudeth has wrought the glorious exploite against her ghostly
enemies, for the accomplishing whereof she came into the dangerous camp and
warrefare of this life, you may well give her leave to look home to her
Bethulia to solemnize her triumph with the spoils of her victory: yea you
should rather have wished to have been Porter to let her in, than mourn to
see her safe returned. For so apparent hazardes she carried a heavenly treasure
in a earthly vessel, 2. Cor. ^
which was too weak a treasury for so high riches, sin creeping in at the
window of our senses, and often picking the locks of the strongest hearts. And
for this it was laid up in a surer, to the which the heavens are walls, and
the Angels keepers. She was a pure fish, but yet swimming in muddy streams,
it was now time to draw her to shore, and to employ the inwardes of her
virtues to medicionable uses, that laid on the coals of due consideration, they
may draw from our thoughts the Deuilles suggestions, Tob. ^*
and applied to their eyes, Tob. ^*
which are blinded with the dung of flying vanities, the ^lime of their former
vanities may fall off, and leave them able to behold the true light, the base
shell of a mortal body was unfit for so precious a Margarite, Ma^th. 13.
and the Ieweller that came into this world to seek good pearls, and gave not
only all he had, but himself also to buic them, thought now high time to
bring her unto his bargain, finding her grown to a Margarites full
perfection. She stood upon too low a ground to take view of her Sauiors most
desired countenance, Luke 19.
and forsaking the earth with Zacheus she climed up into the tree of life,
there to give her soul a full repast of her beauties. She departed with
Iepthaes daughter from her fathers house, but to pass some months in wandering
about the mountains of this troublesome world, which being now expired, she
was after her pilgrimage by covenant to return to be offered unto God in a
grateful sacrifice, and to ascend out of this desert like a stem of perfume
out of burned spices. Let not therefore the crown of her virtue be the foil
of your constancy, nor the end of her cumbers a renewing of yours. But since
God was well pleased to call her, she not displeased to go, and you the third
twist to make a triple cord, saying, (...)
Our Lord gave, and our Lord took away, as it has pleased our Lord, so has
it fallen out: the name of our Lord be blessed.

FINIS.
Clara Ducum soboles, sup^ris noua sedibus hospes,
Clausit in offenso tramite pura diem
Dotibus ornauit, super auit moribus ortum,
Omnibus vna prior. Par fuit vna sibi:
Lux genus ingenio generi lux inclita virtus,
Virtutisque fuit men's generosa decus.
Mors mutat properata dies orbamque relinqui^,
Prolem matre verum coniuge ^lore genus,
Occidit a se alium tulit hic occasus in ortum
Viuat, ad occiduas non reditura vices.
OF Howards stem a glorious branch is dead,
Sweet lights eclipsed were in her decease:
In Buckehurst line she gracious issue spread,
She heaven with two, with four did earth increase
Fame, honor, grace, gave air unto her breath,
Rest, glory, joys were sequeles of her death.
Death aimed too high, he hit too choice a wight,
Renowned for birth, for life, for lively parts,
He killd her cares, he brought her woorths to light,
He robbed our eyes, but has enricht our hearts:
Lot let out of her Arc a Noyes dove,
But many hearts were Arkes unto her love.
Grace, Nature, Fortune did in her conspire
To show a proof of their united skill:
Sly Fortune ever false did soon retire,
But double Grace supplied false Fortunes ill:
And though she raught not to her fortunes pitch,
In grace and virtue few were found so rich.
Heaven of this heavenly Pearl is now possessed,
Whose luster was the blaze of honors light:
Whose substance pure of every good the best,
Whose price the crown of virtues hiest right,
Whose praise to be her self, whose greatest bliss
To live, to love to be where now she is.
FINIS.

