A true Discourse of the Army which the King of Spain caused to be assembled
in the Haven of Lisbon, in the Kingdom of Portugal, in the year 1588.
against England. The which began to go out of the said Haven, on the 29. and
30. of May.

Translated out of French into English, by Daniel Archdeacon.

Whereunto is added the verses that were printed in the first page of the Dutch
copy printed at Colen, with answers to them, and to Don Bernardin de Mendozza.

2. King. 19. ver. 28. Because thou ragest against me, and thy tumult is come
up to mine ears, I will put mine hook in thy nostrels, and my bridle in thy
lips, and will bring thee back again the same way thou came.



Imprinted at London by John Wolf. 1588.

The Epistle to the Reader.
IT has been always (Christian Reader) a continual practice of the wicked
and ungodly, not only neglecting the almighty to trust in their own might:
but relying on themselves and their own power to glory and boast thereof unto
the world. So we read in the first age of the world, Lamec trusting to the
inventions of his sons Iabal, Iubal, and Tubalkaijn, boasts himself unto his
wives that he would not take the least injury, no not of the meanest person,
but he would slay a strong man in his wound and a young man in his hurt. Nimrod
in the second age waxing mighty on the earth, and without all reverence of the
Lord, or (as the scripture speaks) in the presence of the Lord, hunting men
like wild beasts, never left until by his cursed seed he had erected him
a tower whose top might reach unto heaven, thereby to get him a name, and to
show unto the world what he was able to do. To conclude the like vaineglory,
we read of Nabuchadnezar, Nichanor, and diverse other.

But as this has been a continual custom of the wicked, so they have not
herein respected or had regard unto any thing more, then first the
encouragement of their own, I mean the ungodly, then the discouragement of
the faithful and godly: for hereby they would seem to persuade them, that
for as much as they are few and weak, as the godly always are in respect of
the wicked, and therefore not able to match or counteruaile the^ in power, they
are not to stand with them, but as others have done to yield to the^: to this
end tends the proud boast, and vaunt of blasphemous Rabschake Ambassador to
that wicked Senacharib. Make war says he to Eliakim with my master the king
of Assiria, and I will deliver thee two thousand horses, if thou be able to set
riders on them. And afterward have any of the gods of the nations by any
means delivered their land from the king of Assiria: where are the Gods of
Chanath and Arphad? where are they of Sepharuaijm and Hhiuua? nay have they
delivered Samaria, that the Lord should deliver Ieruschalaijm out of my hand.
Thus to the discouragement of the people of the Lord Rabschake vaunteth and
boasts himself.

Inferior to none of these are at this day our Italian Lamec and Spanish
Nimrod, the pope I mean and the Spanishe king: the one whereof trusting to the
inventions and practices of his priestly progeny, to small and great
threatens death without cause, being so much worse then cursed Lamec, the
other having with Nimrod, like beasts hunted men with dogs in India, would
feign use the like practice here in England, and has by his ships, made like
Babel towers, vaunted himself to make us afraid: and because the sight of
these, he knew, could not come unto all, has here as thou may behold,
like Sancharib by Rabschake by this book, as by his ambassador, published
unto thee his whole power.

Neither yet comes this embassage either to Chirkija, or Eliakim, to our
gracious prince or her honorable counsel, that they in his own tongue might
answer him again, but he has published it to all beside our selves, in
Italian, Spanishe, Dutch, and French, and yet to them thereby to discourage us:
for these he tells, he has thus many huge ships, so many thousands of
armed men, such multitude of munition as no man could deliver us out of his
hand, or as if he cried out with Rabschake: Let not England deceive you, for
it cannot deliver you out of my hand, nor let not Elizabeth persuade you to
trust in the Lord, saying, doubtless the Lord will deliver us, and not give
over our country into the hands of the king of Spain. But make apointment
with me, and come forth unto me, and so ye shall eat every man of the fruit
of his own Vine, and of his own Fig Tree, and drink every man the water of
his own Cesterne. Have not I practiced (by receiving and cherishing diverse of
their own nations) to make them fit instruments by treason to serve my
purpose, and what should ayle me that I have not already conquered their
country. Thus beloved, the Spanish Nimrod practices not only to fear us,
but to allure all men from taking part with us.

But such trust beloved have we in the Lord, and so little account in respect
of the Lord we make of the power of man, that we suffer them to say even as
much in English too, nay we teach them to speak it in our own tongue, not
that our purpose is as theirs was to daunt or discourage the fearful
multitude, but to propound unto the world their folly in boasting thus vaynely,
and then to encourage our selves to go forward in that hope and confidence we
have had in the Lord.

For touching their folly, how ridiculous has it been, that when as in respect
of the time it has bin a practice of long continuance, and of so mighty and
many Monarchies, as the Pope, the king and the prince: and last, of such
provision, that for ships they have built them like Castles: for men, made
choice of expert and mighty: for munition, they have much and marvelous: they
should come so long provided against a land as it were unawares, so many and
mighty Monarchies against so small and little an Island: such huge ships against
so small pinases, as it were, and of these to take (as the Lord be praised
they have) so strange repulse, is in respect of the trust and confidence they
put in them, and of the triumphs and boastes before the victory they made in
diverse places of them, no doubt in the fear of the Lord to be not only
derided and laughed at, but acknowledged a most strange and wonderful work of
the Lord, as who knew their dwelling, and their going out, and coming in, and
their fury against him. And therefore because they had raged against him, and
their tumulte was come into his ears, did put a book into their nostrisles
and a bridle into their lips, and brought the^ back the same way they came,
not suffering them to enter into the land nor to come against it with a
shield, nor to cast a bank about it, but has delivered it for his own sake,
and for his servants sake.

And concerning the confidence and encouragement, we are on the view of this
catalogue, to conceive, how can it be but most special and singular, seeing
the deliverance has bin most singular? For when we shall see from what strange
cruelty, and foreign power we have been delivered, shall we not always after
say, Praised be the Lord which has not given us as a pray unto their teeth but
our soul is escaped even as a bird out of the snare of the fowler the snare is
broken and we are delivered, our help therefore is in the name of the Lord
which has made both heaven and earth. For hence we learn that a horse (and so
a ship with men and all means else) is but a vain thing to save a man, neither
that any man is delivered by much strength, but that whereas they put their
trust some in horses, some in Chariots, we must remember the name of the lord,
and with Iehoschaphat cry: We had no strength to resist so great a multitude
coming against us, neither knew we what to do, but our eyes were fixed on thee
O Lord.

Thus therefore thou see what was our drift and purpose in publishing this in
our native tongue which has bin heretofore in diverse languages, not as the
adversary would to discourage thee, but to make show unto thee how vain it is
to trust in outward means, and then to learn thee to trust in the Lord, who
is able to save thee, and as he has already begun, will do still, if thou go
forward to trust in him. For the lord has caused the forces of the Spaniards,
this their great Armado, to be daunted, and greatly endangered by his great
wisdom, putting into the minds of our Captains and soldiers, to provide
six or seven of the worst of the ships they had at sea, with such necessaries
as should serve best to set them on fire withal, which they sent amongst the
Spaniards, thereby to remove and scatter them, yea even when they thought
themselves most sure, and likelyest to receive more succor, and as they lay
fast at Ankor near Calis. Wherefore they arose and sought every man to help
himself, hewing and slipping their cables, and leaving their ankors behind
them. Yea and some he has caused to run aground upon one shore, and some upon
an other, and some suncke, and other some taken with diverse of their men, some
of them of great name, with their ensigns, banners, stremers, and gitterns,
whereof diverse were hanged about the battelments and cross of Paul's, on the
8. of September 1588. and on the 9. at London bridge, thereby to comfort his
English Elizabeth, and all her faithful subjects. For the which his many and
sundry benefits, we beseech him grant all that faithfully believe in him,
grace to continue thankful in glorifying him and his holy name for ever, to
the good example of all other.

E. B.

A Discourse upon the number of Galions, Ships, Pinnaces, Zabres, Galeaces,
Galies, and other vessels, which were assembled in the River of Lisbon, whereof
is chief and General, the Duke of Medina Sidonia. Together with the burden
of them, the men of war, Mariners, munitions, weapons, artillery, powder,
and other furnitures for War which they bring, and for what time the said
munitions shall serve, as follows.
Squadron of the Galeons of Portugal.
THe Galeon of S. Martin, Captain general of the Army, of 1000. tons,
carries 177. mariners, 300 soldiers, chosen men, 50 pieces of cannon, bullets
powder, lead, cord, and all that which is needful. The Galeon of S. John,
Admiral general, of 1050 tunns carries 170. mariners, 231. soldiers, 50.
pieces of cannons, and bullets, powder, lead, cords, and that which is
necessary. The Galeon of S. Mark is of 792. tuns, and carries 292 soldiers,
117. mariners, and powder, bullets, lead, match, as much as is needful. The
Galeon of S. Philippe of 800. tuns, has 415. soldiers, 117. mariners, 40.
pieces of artillery, and bullets, powder, lead, match, and all that which is
needful. The Galeon S. Jews 830. tons, has 376. men of war, and 116.
mariners, 40. pieces of ordenance, and bullets, match, powder, and other
things as much as is needful. The Galeon of S. Matthew 750 tons, has 177
men of war, 50. mariners, 40. great pieces, and powder, bullets, lead, match,
and other things as much as is needful. The Galeon S. James 520. tons, 300.
soldiers, 100 mariners, 30. great pieces, and bullets, powder, lead, match,
and all that which is needful. The Galeon of Florence, of 961. tons, 300
soldiers, 100 mariners, 52. pieces of ordenance, and bullets, powder, lead,
match, and all the rest as much as is needful. The Galeon S. Christopher,
352, tuns, 300. men of war, 90. mariners, 30. great pieces, bullets, lead,
powder, match, and all that which they need. The Galeon S. Bernard 352.
tons, has 280. soldiers, 100. mariners, 30. cannons, and bullets, powder,
lead, match, and other necessary things as much as they need. The Zabra
Augusta. of 166. tons, carries 55. soldiers, 55. mariners, 13. great
pieces, bullets, powder, lead, match, and other necessary things as much as
they need. The Zabra Iulia, of 166. tuns, has 60. soldiers, 50. mariners,
with ordenance. bullets, powder, and other necessaries.
There is in this Squadron 12. Vessels, 10 of them Galeons, and two Zabres,
which are of 7737 tons, and there are embarked in them 3330. soldiers
footmen, and 1230. mariners, which are in sum 4624. men, and they carry
350. great pieces, and all that which is necessary to the rest, as bullets,
powder, match, lead, etc.

The Army of Biscay, of which is Captain general Ian Martines of Ricalda.
THe ship S. Angel, the Captain is of 768 tons, and has 323 men of
war, 114. mariners, 30. cannons, bullets, powder, lead, match, and all that
which is needful. The Gangrin, Admiral, of 1160. tuns, carries 300.
soldiers, 100. mariners, 36. great pieces of cannon, bullets, powder, match,
lead, and all that which is needful. The vessel of S. James, 660. tons,
has 250. soldiers 102. mariners, 30. great pieces, bullets, powder, lead,
match, and other necessary provisions. The conception of Zubelzu, 468. tuns,
has 100. men of war, and 70. mariners, 20 great cannons, and bullets,
powder, lead, match, and all other necessary things. The conception de Iuaues
del Cauo, 418. tons, has 164. men of war, 70. mariners, 24, great pieces,
and bullets, powder, lead, match, and all that which they need. The Magdalene
of John Frauncis of Ayala 330. tons carries 200. soldiers, 70. mariners, 22
great pieces, and bullets, powder, lead, match, and that which is necessary to
the rest. The ship S. John 350. tons, has 130. men of war and 80.
mariners, and 24. great pieces bullets, powder, lead, match and all that which
they need for the rest. The Marie of 165. tons carries 180. soldiers, and
100. mariners, 24. great pieces, bullets, powder, lead, match, and other
necessary things. The Manuela of 520. tons, has 130. soldiers, 54.
mariners, 16. great pieces, and bullets, powder, lead, match, and the rest of
their fraught. The ship of S. Marie of Monte-maior, of 707. tons, 220.
soldiers, 50. mariners, 30. great pieces, bullets, powder, lead and match, and
other provisions. The pinnasse, called the Marie of Aguiare, of 70. tons,
has 30. men of war, 23. mariners, 10. pieces of canon, powder, bullets,
lead, match, and other necessary things. The pinnasse, called Isabella, of 70.
tons, has 30. soldiers, 23. mariners, 12. canons, bullets, and other
necessary things. The pinnasse of Michel Suso, of 96. tons, 30. soldiers,
24. mariners, 12. great pieces, bullets, powder, lead, match and all other
necessary things. The pinnasse of S. Steven, of 78. tuns has 30. men of
war, 26. mariners, 12. pieces of cannon, bullets, powder, lead, match, and
other necessary things of provision.
There is in this squadron, fourteen ships 10. of them great, and toure
pinnasses, which are of 6567. tons of burden, in the which ships be embarked
2037. soldiers, 868. mariners which make in all 2802. and 260. great pieces of
cannon, 119000. bullets, 467. quintals of powder, 140. of lead, 89. of match.

The army of the Galyes of Castille, of the which is general, Jacques Flores
de Valdes.
THe Galeon S. Christopher, captain of 70. tons, has 205. men of war, and
120. mariners, and 40. great pieces, bullets, powder, lead, match, and all that
which is necessary to the rest. The Galeon S. John Baptist, of 750. tons,
has 250. soldiers, 140. mariners, 30. great pieces, and bullets, powder,
lead, match, and other necessary things. The Galeon S. Peter, of 530. tons,
130. men of war, 140. mariners, and 40. great pieces, bullets, powder, match,
lead, and all the rest needful. The Galeon S. John of 530. tons, 170.
soldiers, 120. mariners, and 30. great pieces, powder, bullets, lead, match,
and all the rest. The Galeon S. James the great, of 530. tons, 230.
soldiers, 132. mariners, 30. great pieces, bullets, powder, lead, match, and
all the rest. The Galeon S. Philip and S. James of 530. tons, 159. soldiers,
and 116. mariners, 30. great pieces, bullets, powder, match, lead, and all that
is necessary. The Galeon of the ascension of 530. tons, 220. soldiers, 114.
mariners, and 30. great pieces, bullets, powder, match, lead, and all other
necessary things. The Galeon of our Lady del Barrio of 530. tons, 170.
soldiers, 108. mariners, and 30. cannons, bullets, powder, lead, and all other
necessary furnitures. The Galeon of S. Medel and Celedon, of 530. tons, 170.
soldiers, 110. mariners, 30. great pieces, bullets, powder, match, lead, and
all the rest. Galeon S. Anne of the port, of 250. tons, 100. men of war,
and 80. mariners, 24. great pieces, bullets, powder, match, lead, and all the
rest. The ship of our Lord of Vigonia, 750, tons, 190. men of war, and
130. mariners, 30. great pieces, bullets, powder, match, lead and all the rest.
The vessel of the Trinitee, of 780 tuns, 200. soldiers, 122. mariners, 30.
great pieces, bulltes, powder, match, lead, and all the rest. The ship of S.
Katherine, of 862. tuns 200. men of war, 160. mariners, 30. reat pieces, and
powder, bullets, match, lead, and all the rest. The ship of S. John Baptist,
of 652. tons, 200. soldiers, 30. mariners. 30. canons, bullets, powder,
match, lead, and all the rest. The pinnasse of our Lord Rosarie, 30. soldiers,
25. mariners, 24. great pieces, powder, bullets, lead, match, and the rest of
their provision.
There are in this squadron, fourteen Galyons, and ships, and two pinnasses,
which bear 8714 tons. In these vessels there are embarked 2458. soldiers,
1719. mariners, which are in all, 4177. and 348. great pieces, bullets, powder,
lead, match, and all that which they need.

The army of the ships of Andelouzie, of the which is captain don Pedro de
Valdes.
THe captain ship of 1550 tons, carries 304. men of war, 118. mariners,
50. canons, powder, bullets, and the rest of their provision. The ship S.
Frauncis, the Admiral of 915 tons, 230. soldiers, 60. mariners, 30.
cannons, powder, bullets, and the rest of their provision. The Galeon S. John
Baptist, of 810. tons, 250. soldiers, and 40. mariners 40. great pieces,
powder, bullets, match, lead, and the rest. The ship S. John Gargaran, of 569.
tons, 170. men of war, 60. mariners, 20. great pieces, powder, bullets,
match, lead, and the rest. The Conception of 862. tons, 200. men of war,
65, mariners, 25. great pieces, bulltes, powder, match, lead, and all the rest.
The Hulke Duquesa, S: Anne of 900, tons, 250, men of war, and 80 mariners,
30 great pieces, powder, bullets, match, lead and all the rest. The Trinity,
650 tons, 200. men of war, 80 mariners, 20. cannons, bullets, powder, lead,
match, and the rest. The ship S. Mary de Iuncar, of 730 tons, 240 men of
war, 80 mariners, 30 great pieces, bullets, powder, lead, match, and all the
rest. The pinnasse of the holy Ghost, 40 men of war, 33 mariners, 10 pieces,
bullets, powder, lead, match and cord, and all that which they need.
There are in this squadron 11, ships, 10. great and a pinnasse, of the
burden of 8762. tuns, in the which are embarked 2400. soldiers, 800. mariners,
and 260. great pieces.

The army of ships come from the Province of Gipouzce, of which is general
Michell de Oquendo.
THe ship of S. Anne, the captain, of 1200 tons of burden, has 300 men of
war, 60 mariners, 50 great pieces, bullets, powder, lead, and all the rest.
The ship of our Lord of the Rose, Admiral of 945 tons, 230 soldiers, 64
mariners, and 30 great pieces, bullets, powder, lead, match, and all the rest.
The ship S. Savior, of 958 tuns, 330 soldiers, 50 mariners, 30 cannons,
bullets, powder, lead, match, and the rest: The ship of S: Steven, of 936
tons, 200 men of war, 70 mariners, 30 great pieces, bullets, powder, lead,
match and all the rest. The ship S. Marthe of 548 tons, 180 men of war, 70
mariners, 25 great pieces, bullets, powder, and the rest. The ship S. Barbe of
525 tons, 160 soldiers, 50 mariners, 15 cannons, bullets, powder, lead,
match, and all the rest. The ship S. Bonauenture of 369 tuns, 170 soldiers, 60
mariners, 15 great pieces, bullets, powder, lead, and the rest. The Mary of 291
tons, 120 soldiers, 40 mariners, 15 great pieces, bullets, powder, lead, and
the rest. The S. Croix 680 tons, 150 soldiers 40 mariners, 20 great pieces,
bullets, powder, match, lead, and the rest. The Hulke Doucella, 500 tons, 160
men of war, 40 mariners, 18 great pieces, powder, bullets, match, lead, and
all the rest. The Patax of the Annunciation of 60 tons, 30 men of war, 16
mariners, 12 great pieces, bullets, powder, match, lead, and all the rest. The
Patax S. Bernabe, is of the same burden as the aforenamed. The Patax of our
Lady of guadaloupe is of the same burden also. The pinnasse of Magdelene, is
also of the same burden.
There are in this squadron, 14 ships, ten great ships, two Pataches and two
pinnasses, of 6991 tons of burden. In the which vessels, there are embarked
2092 men of war, and 670 mariners, all comes, 2708.

The army of the east of the which is chief Martin de Vertendona.
THe Regasona, the captain, which is of 1294 tons, has 350 soldiers, 90
mariners, 35 great pieces, powder, bullets, lead, match, and all the rest: The
Lama, the Admiral, of 728 tons, 210 soldiers, 80 mariners, 30 great pieces,
powder, bullets, lead, match, and all the rest. The Rata S. Mary crowned of 820
tuns, 340 men of war, 90 mariners, 40 great pieces, powder, bullets, match,
lead, and the rest. The S. John of Cicile, of 880. tuns, 290 men of war, 70.
mariners, 30. cannons, and all the rest. The Trinity Valencera of a 1000. tuns
240. soldiers. 90. mariners, 41. great pieces, and all the rest of their
furnitures. The Annuntiation of 730 tons, 200. soldiers. 90. mariners, 30.
great pieces, and all the rest. The S. Nicholas Prodaueli of 834 tuns 280.
soldiers, 84. mariners, 30. great pieces, and all the rest. The Iuliane of 780
tons 330 soldiers, 80. mariners, 36, great pieces, and the rest. The Marie
Pison of 666. tons. 250. soldiers, 80. mariners 22. great pieces, and the
rest of their need. The Trinity Escala of 900. tons, 302 soldiers, 25
great pieces, and all the rest of their furniture.
In the which squadron there are ten ships which are of 7705 tons of burden,
and there are embarked in them 2880. soldiers, 807. mariners, 310. great
pieces, with the rest of that they need.

The Army of Hulkes in the which is Captain, John Lopez of Medina.
THe great Grifon, the Captain, of 650 tons, 250. soldiers, 60. mariners,
40, great pieces, and the rest. The S. Savior the Admiral of 650. tuns, 230.
soldiers, 60. mariners, 30. great pieces, and the rest of their provision. The
Sea dog, of 200. tons, 80. soldiers, 30. mariners, 10. great pieces, and
the rest. The White Faulcon the great, of 500. tons, 160. men of war, 40.
mariners, 18 great pieces, and all the rest. The black Castle, of 750. tons
250. soldiers, 50. mariners, 25. great pieces, and all the rest. The Bark of
Amburg, of 600. tons, 250. men of war, 50. mariners, 25. cannons, and the
rest. The house of peace the great, of the same burden. The S. Peter the great
of the same burden also. The Sampson, and Peter the small, do bear the same.
The Bark of Auzique, of 450. tons, 210. soldiers, 50 mariners, 26 great
pieces, and the rest of their provision. The Falcon, the mean white, of 300.
tons, 80. men of war, 30 mariners, 18. great pieces, and all the rest. The
S, Andrew of 400. tons 160. soldiers, 40. mariners, 15. great pieces, and
the rest of their provision. The little house of peace, of 350. tuns: 160.
soldiers, 40. mariners, 15. great pieces, and the rest of their provision. The
Flying Raven, of 400. tons, 210. soldiers, 40 mariners, 18 great pieces, and
the rest of their furniture.
Pataches and Zabres, wherein Don Antony of Mendoza commands.
THe white dove of 250, tons, 60, soldiers, 30 mariners, 12 great pieces,
and the rest. The Adventure S, Barbe fraughted of the same. The S, James 600.
tons, 60 soldiers 40 mariners, 19 great pieces, and all the rest. S. Gabriel
of the port, of 280. tons, 50 soldiers, 25 mariners, 9 great pieces, and the
rest of their furniture. The Esaias is fraughted of the same.
There are in this Squadron 23. Hulkes, which are of 10271. tons, in the
which are embarked 3221. men of war, 708. mariners, 410. great pieces, and
their necessary provision.

The Captain of our Lord of Pilier of Zaragosse of 300 tons, 120. soldiers,
50 mariners, 12 great pieces, and their furniture. The English Charity, of 180
tons, 80 soldiers, 36 mariners, 12 great pieces, and the rest The Scottish
S. Andrew of 150 tons, 51 soldiers, 30 mariners, 12 great pieces, and their
furniture The Patache of the Crucifix, 150 tuns, 50 soldiers, 30 mariners, 8
great pieces, and their furniture Our Lord of the haven fraught alike. The
Conception of Carassa, and our Lord of begoua, and the Conception de Capitillo,
and S. Hieros. being of the burden of 60 or 70 tons, 50 soldiers, 30
mariners, 8 great pieces, a piece, and their furniture Our Lady of grace, the
Conception of Frauncys Lastero, our Lady of guadalupe, S. Frauncys, the Holy
spirit, our Lady of Frenesda, all fraughted alike The Zabra of the Trinity,
the Zabra of our Lady Castre, S. Andrew, the Conception of Zomartiba, S. Clear,
S. John of Carassa, and the Assumption, all fraughted alike
There are in this Squadron 22. Pataches, and Zabres, which are of the burden
of 1131. tuns in the which there are embarked 479. soldiers 574. mariners, and
there is 193 great pieces, and all their furniture.

The four Galeaces of Naples, which are given in charge to Dom Vgo de Moncada.
THe Galeace the Captain called S. Lawrence, has 270. soldiers, 130.
mariners, 300. slaves, 50 pieces of cannon, and their furniture. The Galeace
Patron, 180 soldiers, 112 mariners, 300 slaves, 50 great pieces, and their
furniture. The Galeace Girone, 170 soldiers, 120 mariners, 300 slaves, 50
great pieces. The Galeace Neapolitaine 124 soldiers 115 mariners, 300 slaves,
50 great pieces, and the rest of their necessary fraught. There are in these
four Galeaces 873 soldiers, 468 mariners, 200 great pieces, 1200 slaves, and
the rest of their furniture. The Galy Captain, 110 soldiers, 106 mariners,
306 slaves, and 50 great pieces, and other necessaries. The Galy Princess, the
Galy Diana, the Galy Vacaua, do bear the like.
The General sum of the whole Army.
THe army of the Galeons of Portugal 12: they are of 7737 tuns, 4330. men of
war, 1363 mariners, 400 great pieces, bullets, powder, match, lead, and their
provision. The army of biscaye, of the which is general, John Martines Ricalde
is of 14 ships, of the burden of 6567 tons, 2050 soldiers, and 600
mariners, 270 great pieces and the rest of their necessary furniture. The
Galeons of the army of Castile are 16 of the burden of 8700 tons, 2560
soldiers, 1830 mariners, 420 great pieces, and their necessary things. The
army of the ships of Andelouzie are 11 of the burden of 8762 tons, 2525
souldirs, 600 mariners, 260 great pieces, and all their furniture. The army of
the ships of the province of Guipousque, 14. which are of 6991 tuns, 2142
soldiers, 718 mariners, 280 great pieces and the rest of their necessary
provision. The army of the ships Leuantines are 10 which are of 7705 tons,
2600 soldiers, 867 marinere, 310 great pieces, and all the rest of their
necessary fraught. The army of the Hulkes, which are 23 bearing 10271 tons,
3321 soldiers, 708 mariners 400 great pieces with all their furniture.
Pataches and Zabares, 22 in number, which bear 1221 tuns, 579 soldiers 574
mariners, 110 great pieces with their necessary furniture. Galeaces of
Napelles, which are 4, they bear 863 soldiers, 530 mariners, 200 great
pieces, with their provision. Four Galies bearing 400 soldiers, 20 great
pieces, and their other provision: In the above named Galeaces, there are 1200
slaves, and in the four Galyes, 888 which is in all 2088: Moreover, they carry
powder for their need, if it be offered to do battery, 600 quintales:
So that there are in the said army 130 ships of 57868 tons, 19295 soldiers
and 8450 mariners, 2088 slaves, and 2630 great pieces of brass of all sorts,
among the which there are Coleurines, and de my Coleurines, and cannons to the
stone, and the other necessaries for their fraught.

The sorts of Ships and vessels of this Army.
Galions and great ships 65. Hulkes of three or four hundredth tuns 25.
Pataches, of seventy or an 100 tons 25. Zabres, with those of Portugal, 13.
Galeaces, 4. Galleys four, which are in all, 130. vessels.
Moreover, and above the before named 130. vessels, there are 20. Caranels for
the service of the above named Army, and likewise 10. Salues with, six Dares
a piece.

Adventurers which go in the said Army, and their servants that are able to
fight.
In the Rata. Don Alonso Martinez of Leyua, Captain General of the Horsemen of
Milain. In S. Martin Captain General. The Prince of Ascuti. In the Galeon, S.
Matthew. The Marquis Pennafiel. In the Galeon, S. John the Admiral. The
Marquis Ganes, Cousin to the Duke of Sauoy. In the Cap. Genesis The Count of
Gelues. In the Galeace, Captain of the Count Fuente. Dom Gaston de Mo^cada
maieur Aytona. Captain Genesis Dom Petro de Cunniga, son of the Marquis Auila.
In the Admiral of Oquendo. Dom Jacques Pacheco, brother to the Marquis Villeua.
In the Galeon S. Mark. Dom Garcia de Cardenas, brother to Count Pueblas. In
the Cap. General. Dom Comes capata, son to the Count Varaiac. S. John
d'Alcantara. Dom Diego Entiques, son of Dom Fadriques, which was the great
comma^der of Alcantara In the Cap. General. Dom Baltazar de Cunniga, brother
to the Count Monterrey. The Galeon S. Mark. dom Alonso Telleziron, brother to
the Duke of Ossuna. In the Venitian. Dom Francis Riuadeineiray, and Mendoca,
son of the Marshall Noues. In the Galeon S. Lewis. Dom Loys Portocarrero,
son of the Count Medellin. In the Galeon S. Philip. Dom Laurent de Me^doza,
son of the Count de Orgaz. The Galeo^ S. Martin, Cap. General. dom Loys de
Cordodoua, brother to do^ Jacques of Cordoua. Dom Petro Enriques, brother to ye
Marquis of Villeneufue. Dom Ladron de Gueuare, brother to the Count de Onnate.
In the Galeon S. Jews. Dom Pietro Porto carrero, brother to the Marquis
Vilanneua. Capt. de Oquendo. dom Garcie le Toledo, Nephew to Dom Garcie de
Toledo. Cap. General. do^ Piedro de Castro. son to ye count Lemos Captain de
Oquendo. Dom Roderige de Mendoca, brother to the Marquis of Cannette. Colonel
of Vreta^dona. Dom Francisque de Martique, brother to the count of Paredes.
Cap. de Oquendo Dom Francesco, brother to the Count Galeon S. Jews. Oropesa,
do^ Petro Carrero, sonto the Genesis of Gouletta. Valencera. dom Rodrigues Lazo,
of the habit of S. Jacques. S. Marie Couronnee. dom Rodrigues Ma^riques de Lara,
brother to the Duke of Naiara. dom Petro de Guzman. dom Vasco de Guzman. In
Rata. dom Tho. de Crambela, brother in law to the Cardinal. S. John Admiral.
dom Louys Vargas, son to the Secretary Vargas. Capt. de Oquendo. dom
Francesco Pacheco de Guzman. S. John diego Flores. dom Jacques Enriques, son
to the Viceroy don Martin Enriques. dom Sancho de Zeuna, son to the captain
of ye Customs. Valencera. dom Sebastian Capata, son of John Rodriques de
Villa Fuerte. Galeon S. Matthew. dom Rodrigues de Riuero. Captain General.
dom Jacques Sarmie^to, son to Garcia Sarmiento. dom John Vicentelo, son to
Corco. Rata. dom Gaspar de Sandoual. Galeace Captain. dom Ramon Ladron de
Mendoca. S. John de Bretendona. dom Christoual de Robles. The Hulke Admiral.
Henry Brenne, captain germain. Baltazar Broque. Galeon S. Matthew. Raphael Sal
Englishman. The Captain General. Jacques de Mirande portiques Gentilman. S.
Anne de Ricalde. dom Carles de Asdu^que. Captain Oquendo. dom Loys de Vergas,
and Figueroa. Sebastian Castro. dom Petro de Toledo. Charity the English. dom
Antonio Martines Chermo. dom Francesco Naruaez. Regazona. dom Alonso de las
Roelas. Galeon S. Jews. dom Francesco Mannuell. Galeon S. Matthew. dom
Guillermo Bue^, Englishman. The Gangrin. dom Jacques de Mieres. Valencera. dom
Jacques Fernandes de Mesa. S. An de Ricalda. do^ Paul de la Penna. Captain
Oquendo. The Captain Pero Nunes Castelbla^co The Julian. dom Fernand de
Aranda. The Rate. dom Heronimo de Magno. Galeon of Florence. Ferna^do
Bernardino Vincent Martelli. Paul Nilio Iustiniano. In the Rat. dom Garcie
Fredico Chauez. S. Savior of Oque^do. dom Antonio Lopez Chauez. The Rata. dom
Manuell de Palilogo. Galeon S. Loys. Jacques de Mexia de Pardo. Galeon S. Mark.
dom Michel de Gumarra. Galeon S. Peter. The captain Hernan gomes de Tortolas
Galeon S. Philip. Sergeant mayor Lopus Gil Teieda. Jacques Hurtado. S. Jacques de
Ricalde. El Alferez Piedro Vicano. Toribio de Lubana. Admiral General.
Captain Francoys Maldonat. Our Lady of the Rose. Joseph Justin. Admiral of
Hulks. Gregory Perez de Lara. Our Lady of the Rose. John d'Alua. John Clear
and Petro Clear. Chasteaunoir. Pietro Yrraguria. Antonio Rodrigues. The Rata.
dom Loys Aluarez Osorio. Captain Oquendo. The Captain corcuera. Thomas
Aluarez le castro. Captain General. John Fernandes the Kings Courtier.
Admiral General. The Alferez Petro d'Estala. Captain Oquendo. Petro Sance
gallardo. Galeon S. Mark. Allonso Ruys. The Sergant Alonso de Arquillos. The
Julian. Bartholomy de Arrayo and Balduuas. Admiral Gene. Petro de ydiaques.
Captain of Oquendo. dom Francesco Bellastigni. John Lopez de Ycaguiore. Galeace
Captain. John Deauti. Galeon S. Philip. Alonso Captain, and Joachin de
Castaneda. Galie captain. dom Francesco de Torres. Captain General. Gomez
Perez de la marme. Iaque Peers Morcillo The Hulke S. Savior. Antonio de la
Vera, John de Caranca Aluaro de Castro Antonio de Penna John Portillo. S.
Savior doquendo. Peter Mendez de Castro and Aluaro de Sosa, and Viuero. Galeon
S. James the great of Florence. Sergiant Bernardin Figueroa and denis Arishman.
The Rata. dom Loys Ponce de Leon. John Torres. Galie, Captain. El Alfarez
Crazate. Galeon S. James the greatest. In the Rata. El Alferez Jacques go^cales
de Aguero. Hulke S. Anne. John Fernandes Hermosa. Alfonse Valiente. John
Fernandes de brueda. Christoual de Funes. Regacona. The Commander Jacques
Marquis, and John Nauarro. Regacona. El Alferez John de Villauerde. The Hulke
grifon. Vasco de Lega. S. Anne de Oquendo. dom Sancho Curita Noguerol and John
baptist Pantoia. Conception. El Alferez Melchior de Silua. S. Jacques the great.
The Sergeant Jacques de Cea.
So all the Adventurers to whom shipping has been given in the said Army, are
in number 124. the which do bring with them 456. servants bearing Arms and
weapons.

As for those which are entertained and in pay in the said Army, they be
these which follow.
The Count Paredes Dom Diego Maldonado Dom Alonso Menrique Captain John
Velasco Captain Augustine de Oieda Captain Pedro Heredia Dom Rodrigo de
Mendoca Dom Fernando de Ayala Captain Antonio Serrano Dom Iuan Sandoual
Captain Marolin de Iuan Captain Alonso de campo Captain Diego de Obregon Dom
Pedro Ponce de Leon Captain Diego de Azedo Captain Francesco Negrete Dom
Mauricio Gerardino Almundio Distacio Dom Carlos Orconor Dom Thomas Gualdino
Tristan Vinglade Ricardo Baray Roberto Laseo Christoual Lombardo. Iuan Buruer
Gomez friar de Andrada Iuan Galuan dom Pedro Marley. Patricio Quimer Fort
Maximiliano de Vilpix Diego Odor dom Pedro Quirosqui Roberto Rifort Ricordo
Siton dom Anthonio Menrique Gulliermo Estac. Duarte Riforte Captain Alonco
Gayran Captain Alonso de Esquiuel Captain Pedro de Eugino Cap. Francisco de
Harnandez Deperalta. Captain Hernando Pedraca Diego de Vilasco dom Felix Arta
Giron Captain Alonso de Carrion Captain Hieronimo Quintauilla dom Aluaro de
Sosa Biuero Captain Gaspar Hermosilla dom Diego Fernandes de Leon dom Iuan de
Cardoua Captain Jean Antonio Marin. dom Juan de Toledo. dom Christoual
Maldonado dom Luys Brauo dom Gonsalo de Eraso dom Pedro de Alcegas dom Diego de
Luzon dom Geronymo de Vargas dom Diego de Rocha dom Iuan de Castillo dom
Geronimo de Mourroy Antonio Moreno Pedro Manso de Andrada Captain Francisco de
Cuellar Damian Gato Capt. dom Antonio de Castanneda Captain Diego de Valle
Captain Pedro de Pacos Captain Antonio de Bonilla Captain Esteuan de
Mercadillo. The Lieutenant Loys de Castanneda Philippe Cornetes dom iuan de
Portillo dom Francisco capata dom Iusepe de Castilla dom Pedro de Bacan dom
Anthonio de Cartagena Captain Cristoual de Quiros Sancho Paternoy dom Pedro de
Cegarra de las Craellas The captain Francesco Angel dom Francesco Pacheco dom
Iuan de carate dom Francesco de Amendanno dom Gasper de Eredia dom Fernando de
Medina dom Gartia Giron dom Pedro de Toledo dom Fernando Galinaro Gaspar
Maldonado dom diego Guzman y Mollina Captain Pedro Ruiz Torquemada dom Alonso
Mendoza Iuan de Cea Marin Captain domingo de yracaga. The Ancient bearer, dom
diego Fernandes de Cordoua. The Ancient bearer, Iuan de Villauerdo. The
ancient bearer, Francesco Cortes The ancient bearer, dom Pedro de Guzman. The
ancient bearer, George Arroyo The ancient bearer, Francesco de Vlloa. The
ancient bearer, Iuan Vazques de Sadoual The ancient bearer, Gaspar de Carrion
The ancient bearer, Harnando Rauures The ancient bearer, diego Ayllon The
ancient bearer, Pedro Claramonte The ancient bearer, Miguel de Vrbina The
ancient bearer, Alonso Ordonnez The ancient bearer, Luys diaca The ancient
bearer, Iuan yannes Lasarte The ancient bearer, Rodrigo S. Iuan The ancient
bearer, Leopoldo delaquadra The ancient bearer, Francisco de Vega The ancient
bearer, Luys de Vega The ancient bearer, Francesco de Leon The ancient
bearer, Iuan de Medina The ancient bearer, Baltazar Calderon The ancient
bearer, dom Iuan Herrera The ancient bearer, Francisco Despinosa The ancient
bearer, domingo Ruy The ancient bearer, Iuan Madrano The ancient Pedro
Rodriguez de Ayala The ancient bearer, Pedro Cercel The ancient bearer,
Hernando Ca^naueral The ancient bearer, Hernando Casta^neda The ancient
bearer, Alonso Gomez The ancient diego Goncales Aguero The ancient bearer,
Sancho de Paredes The ancient bearer, Hernando de Veras The ancient bearer,
Alonso de Vargas The ancient bearer, Gaspar de Porras The ancient bearer,
Luys Hernandez The ancient bearer, Diego de Andrada The ancient bearer, Pedro
de Rea The ancient bearer, Andres de Pedroso The ancient bearer, Alonso de
Auila The ancient bearer, Antonio Lara The ancient bearer, Martin de cuacu
Ancient bearer, Goncalo Rodriguez Carrado Ancient bearer, Francesco de Xaen
Ancient bearer, Michel desquibel Ancient bearer, Iuan de Pardilla Ancient
bearer, de Acedo Ancient bearer, Gaspar Ortiz Ancient bearer, Martin Garcez
Ancient bearer, Alonso Pizarro Ancient bearer, Arnauda Xumence Ancient bearer,
Gregorio Carrenno Ancient bearer, Pedro de Vzeda Ancient bearer, Sebastian
Carrauaial Ancient bearer, Sancho de Ochoa Ancient bearer, John Sanchez
Nauerreto Ancient bearer, Iuan de Canniga Ancient bearer, Luys Osorio Ancient
bearer, Gomes claramonte Ancient bearer, Gomes claramonte Ancient bearer,
Andres Salamanques Manuel Martin de Oliuares Francesco Xmenez Pedro acunna Iuan
de S. Iuan Pedro Estrada Diego del Roncon Diego de Cuellar Sergeant, Francesco
de Leon Geronimo Frances Thomas Sayanedra diego de Montoya Martin de Rue
Captain Loys Rodrigues Iuan de Ollacareisqueta dom Fernando Mounroy Pedro de
Boca de Bacan Gaspar de Mur Ancient bearer, Pedro Martinez Chaues Ancient
bearer, Francesco Peralta Ancient bearer, diego Lopus de Medrano Ancient
bearer, diego Herna^dez Moreno Alfarez Miguel Panduro Captain Francesco de
Conteras Cap. Pedro Rodriguez Gentil-man Iuan de Sea Marino Gabriel de Roias
dom Diego de Santillana Captain Paulo Chister dom Hernando de Escouar Soto
mayor Iuan Vasquez d'Auilla dom Lorenco de Figueroa Sergeant mayor, Iua^ de
Cauallos Guzman dom Alonso de Toledo Ancient bearer, Anthonio Bacan Iuan de
Chaues Esquiuel Ancient bearer, Martin decorral Ancient bearer, Iuan Gil
Captain Rodrigo de Orezco. Captain Francesco Angel dom Sancho de Herrera dom
Aluaro de Brizanos dom Iuan de Ynurrera Englishman Henry Michel Englishman
Raphael Asal Englishman Robert Daniel Cheualier Thomas Bitus Irishman Ancient
bearer, Iuan, de Haro Ancient bearer, Alonso de Villaquitan Ancient bearer,
Michel de Leon Ancient bearer, dom Anthonio de Ayala Ancient bearer, Sancho de
Vrquiza dom Rodrigo de Villacorta Ancient bearer, Francisco de Molina Soto
Francisco Correa de Silua Captain Pedro de campos dom Pedro de Veamont dom
Iuan de Velasco dom Ternando de Guzman dom Pedro de Guzman dom Andrez Vergara
dom Iorge de Portugal Francisco de Quinnones Alonco de Serua dom Alonso de
Mendoca dom Iuan de Alameda Vincencio de Pedro Biene Captain Iuan Batista
Marolin Paulo Gisler Pedro Ruys de Torquemada dom Goncalo de Erasso Bernardo
Pinelo Ancient bearer, Sebastian de Carnaial dom Andrez de Vergara dom Luys
Brano dom diego de Santillana.
In some those which are enterteined in the Army are two hundredth thirty
eight, with a hundredth sixty three servants.

All such persons as are embarked for the service of the Canon.
Alfonso de Cespedes, Lieutenant of the captain General. A Priest Mayor.
Twenty Gentlemen. Two enginors. One of the great master Gunners, with his
helper. A Physician. A Chirurgian An apothecarie. A great master Carpenter. A
Sergeant. A locke-Smith. Other workmen of Smithes. Officers Carpenters, and
Locke-smithes, 9. Artilliers. 95. A Commissarie of the Moyles, with two and
twenty Boys. The Officers servants. 8.
So they are a hundredth sixty seven persons which are embarked concerning the
Cannon.

Persons of the Hospital.
Dom Martin de Alarcon, General Administrator, his Lieutenant. Five
Physicians. The great Chirurgian. Four other Chirurgians. Five persons to
help. Four cures. A Controller. A great Master. Sixty two other officers
and boys of service: which are in all 85. for all the persons that are in the
Hospital. Religious men which do accompany the said army of the order of S.
Francis of the province of Castilla. 8. Of the same order, of the province of
Portugal. 20. Friars Capuchins Castillians. 29. Friars Capuchins Portugais.
10. Castillians of the order of S. Augustine. 9. Portugais of the same order.
14. Of the order of S. Frauncis of Portugal 16 Carmes pienus 12 Of the third
order of S. Frauncis of Portugal 8 Fathers of S. dominique of the province
danda louzie 22 Charms of Portugal. 9. Fathers of the company of Jesus of
Castille 15 Fathers of the company of Jesus of Portugal 8 They are in all a
hundredth and eighty religious men.
The Regiments and companies which are in pay, that go in the said Army and
what persons they are.
Dom Francesco de Bonadilla, which serves as master of Camp general.
Regiment of Cicile, of whom is master of the Camp, Dom diego de Pimendell.
Captains The above named master of the Camp. Martin Daualos Miguel galarros
Pedro de plego Dom Antonio Enrriquez Pedro de Leon Andres de Muxica diego
Iuarez Antonio Mario Centeno dom Francesco Carrilio diego Castilla Phillip
Sumer dom Antonio de Herrera Francesco Marin Centeno dom gomes de corauaial
Iorge Arias de Haruieto Lope Ochoa dela Vega Francesco malo goncalo de Sanabria
Martin de gallipienso Francesco marquez Sancho Sanchez dela Rocha dom Fernando
de vera dom Pedro Pacheco Goncalo de Buitron
Regiment of the master of the Camp, Dom Francesco de Toledo.
Captains The above named master of the Camp dom Iuan maldonado dom Iuan
Francesco de Ayala dom Francesco de Vmanto Goncalo Beltran dom Alonso Ladron de
gueuara dom Francesco de boria dom Rodrigo Tello de Gusman Bernardino
Villagomez dom Antonio de Castillo Pedro Nuns de Auilla Francesco de
Castreion goncala garcia delacarcel Geronimo de gueuara Anthonio de Valcarcel
Blas de Xerez Iuan Alonso de Castillo dom francesco de Cespedes Prado Calderon
Pedro y bannez de Luxan dom Pedro de sandoual dom Francesco de Chauez Iuan
peers de Loysa dom Alonso de Godoy Christoual Ribero Iuan de Torres de mendoca
Regiment of Don Alonso Luzon
The above named master of Camp. Dom goncalo de mourroy Francisco Peruill es
Dom Arias de Silua Iuan de soto dom francesco presoa Rodrigo Ortoz de carate
dom pedro camacho Pedro de Yepes Geronimo de Aynar Alonso Riquelme Luys
Rentirez Hernando de Olmedo dom Garcia manrique diego sarmento Andes de
Valencuela dom Alonso de gusman Esteuan Ochoa Andres de pantoia dom Iuan de
Sabedra Iuan de mandragon pedro sanchez de sepulueda Hernando de Quesada pedro
de quintaua diego de morando Quiros Iuan possa de santiso
Regiment de Ysla
The said master of Camp. Patricio antolinez Vasco de cantauaial Anthonio
maldonado dom Iuan de monsalue Lues macian dom Lope de mendoca diego de aranda
clauiio bartolome brauo dom Luys de Cordoua Bernardino de paredes Luys de
molina dom diego Laynez de auyla alonso birues maldonado dom diego Casao Luys
Baruosa andres berdugo alonso de benauides pedro solano Duarte Nunnez Pedro
Hurtado de corcuera diego Cascarro Pedro de santisteuan Esteuan de Lycorreta
Melchot de Auendagno dom Gabriel de cuaco
Regiment de Dom Augustine de Mexia.
El maestre de Campo dom diego de Loyua Luys de Leon Gregorio de Chinchilla
Pedro de Quero Escauias Pedro Carrillo dom diego Lopes de ayala Pedro de
mendoca dom Hieronimo de Herrera Alonco Varrantes maldonado Diego de Nodera
Christoual Vasquez de Peralta dom diego bacan Pedro Palomino dom Luys de
carauaial Anthonio de Villafafila Geronymo de Valderama Garcilaso dela Vega Ion
Iuan de borrahona dom Francesco Porcel de Peralta Francesco de almonacid. dom
Iuan de y barra dom Pedro Ponce dom Alonso bracamonte dom Alonco de cayas dom
Pedro de manrrique dom Iuan de Luna dom Basco de mendoca dom Anthonio de Sylua
Domingo sanchez Chumazero
Companies of Don Iuan de Guzman, taken out of Castille.
Three companies came out of Castille. Rodrigo Albarez de Benauides Del Duque
de Feria Lope Bazquez, del beiar Dom Baltazar de Salto
Companies of the men which came in the Galeons and Ships of Castille
That which is in the, Galeon Captain in our Lord of Vigonara, of the which is
Captain Iuan Garibay In the Galeon S. John, of the which is captain Anthonio
Moreno Dom Alonso de Soto mayor Pedro ortiz Galerno Anthonio de Leyba Don
Geronimo Cortes Captain Nicolas Ortez Alonso Tauste Diego Goncalez de Heredia
Do^ Pedro Goncalez de Me^doca Iuan Fernandes de Lapila Alonso Gomez Diego Aler
Francisco Maldonado Alonso de Pedraca Dom Loys de Maeda Dom Francisco ortis de
Melgarcio Alonso de Vargas Pedro Yrcana Goncalo Franco de Ayala. Dom Pedro
Enrriquez
Companies of Portugal, which go under the charge of Antonio de Sossa, and
Antonio Pereyra.
The company of the said Antonio de Sossa. The company of Manuel Gabral de
Vega. The company of Loys Ferrera. The company of Manuel Texeyra. The
company of Iuan Trigueros. Sergeant Mayor of this company. Pedro Rodrigues de
Ayala. The company of the said Antonio de Pereira. The company of Cosmo Nabo.
The company of Roque Boriez. The company of Iuan Rodriguez Caldera, Sergeant
mayor of this company. The captain Luys de Oieda.
Sommarie of the Regimentes, and Ancients of Portugal.
The Regiment of Dom Diego Pimendel. The Regiment of dom Francisco de Toledo.
The Regiment of Alonso de Luzon. The Regiment of Nicholas de Ysla. The Regiment
of Dom Augustine Mexia.
Nine companies out of Castile.
The companies of the army of the Galeons of Castile. 24. Ancients of
Portugal, under the charge of Gaspar Sosa, and Antonio Pereyra, it is thought
they are nine companies.
So that there are in the said army in those five Regimentes, and companies of
soldiers, 171. Ancients, which are 18973. soldiers, and the three hundredth
which are yet to bespoken of. shall accomplish 19295. which are put in the
general number, because they shall be taken out of all the rest of the ships
that are chosen for the Galcon S. Martin.

The captain General of this army, and the chief men of their squadrons.
The Duke of Medina Sidonia captain general of all the army Iuan Martines de
Ricalde Admiral of it, and captain of that of Biscay Diego Flores de Valdes,
General of the army of the Galeons of Castile. dom Piedro de Valdes, General
of the army of Andeloucie. Miguel de Oquendo, General of the army of the
province of Guipouzque. Martin Bretandona, to whom is the charge given of the
army of the ships Leuantines. Gomez de Medina, which has in charge the army
of the Hulkes. dom Antonio Hurtado de Mendoca, chief captain of the Pataches
and Zabres. dom Vgo de Moncada, who has in charge some of the Galeaces. Diego
de Medrano, which goes as chief of the Galies.
Officers.
Dom Lopez Marrique controller General. Barnabe Pedroso, the prouider of the
army. Alonso de Alameda, Treasurer. Iuan de Huerro, payer. Filippe de Porras,
controller of the Galyes. Bernabe de Alma, Treasurer of the army of
Guipousque. Pedro Higueldo, Treasurer of the army of Biscay. Iuan de Los Ros,
Commissarie of Monitres. Ochos de Anuncibay, Commissarie. Diego Insante del
Aguila, Commissarie. Iuan Martinez de Guillestegui, Commissarie. Melchior
Parez, Controller of the Regiment of Cicile. Iuan Vngaro, Treasurer of the said
Regiment. Andres de Rosero, which serves as a Scriuener for the business of
the Regiment of dom Alonso Lucon, and possessor of the provision of the vessels
of the Regiment, which is come out of Sicile.
Officers of justice.
The Licenciat Martin Aranda, Auditor general. The Licenciat Magna his
Liefetenant. Thomas de Monte, the kings Sergeant his Lieuetenant and four
other Sergeants, and four Scriueners, one Iayler.
Six other Officers that are porters, and of other offices.
Bartolomeo Andion de Lara. Judge Alonso Cortez. Geronimo de Azero, Secretary.
Antonio Guitierrez. Dom Francisco de Salazar. dom Antonio del Cortal. dom
Alonso farfan. Luys de Miranda. dom Iuan de Amaya. Gomez Patifio. dom Gieronimo
de Santo Vsidro. dom Alonso Quajardo. Pedro de Valejo. dom Francisco Sarmiento.
dom Pedro de deza. dom Aluaro de Mendoca. dum Aluaro de curita. dom Francisco
Neneyra. Pedro Diaz Ortiz. Tome de Espinosa. Ypolito de Fuentes. Antonio
Esteuan. Servants of service, 14. Servants of knights, 10. Officers and
servants of the controller, general, and others having charge. 100
Sommarie of the persons that go in the said army.
Soldiers, 18937. Mariners, 8050. Adventures, 124. Servants which they bring,
455. Entertained, 163. Officers of great gunnes, 167. Of the Hospital, 86.
Religious men of all orders, 180. Knights of the Duke his house, 22. Servants
of the same house, 50. Controller General, and ministers of the army, 17.
Officers and servants that they bring, 100 Ministers of justice, 20. So that
there is in the said army, 28687.
Moreover there are in the Galeaces. and Galyes 2088. slaves.

Provisions.
Quintails. 11000 of Biscuite, which suffiseth to nourish the army six
months. There is Wine 14170 pipes, which shall suffice for the said six
months. Quintails of Bacon, 6500, that shall suffice for six months. Goats
cheese, 3458. quintaux 8000. quintals of Fish. 3000. quintals of Rise. 6320.
septiers of Beans and white Pease, which shall suffice for more then six
months. 11398. pounds of Olive oil. 33870. Measures of Vinegar, which shall
suffice for the provision.
^or the service of the said army, there is carried a great quantity of
Hogsheads full of water, Dishes, Cups, Sassers, in the which they shall part
the portion Linkes, Lanterns, lamps, Lead in sheets, Neates lether, and
Tampans in case that the enemies shot do some hurt to the ships, and
quantity of leather bags for ponder, Torches of ware, Candles for Lanternes,
cressets, eight thousand Roman bottels of leather for their wine and water,
five thousand pair of shoes, and a seven thousand bundels of cord.

There is also all the furniture for the Sea, belonging to the Cannon.

Moreover, there is of provision of overplus double wheels, and other
furniture for twelve doble Cannons of battery, and for one and twenty Pieces
of field Pieces, with three thousand and five hundredth Bullets for them,
besides the provision that are here above written, and also cords for
ships, Pitch, Flax, and there is also Standarts, Ancients and Banners, where
the figure of Jesus Christ and our Lady and of his Majesty are painted.

And for to bring the said Cannon a land, they carry Moyles, Carts, Mantlets,
Gabions, and such like sorts, and the rest, which is necessary for the same
purpose.

Also besides the weapons that soldiers have, they carry also for the
necessity, arms, which are herevnder written.

Seven thousand Gunnes, with their furnitures. A thousand Muskets, and their
furnitures. Ten thousand Pikes. A thousand Partisanes and Halebardes, Six
thousand half Pikes.
Also they carry of ouer-plus, in case that they should come a land, all their
tools, as Iron Crows, Porters Baskets, Masons Hammers, Tents, Sacks for the
Pioners in great quantity.

So that there is in the said army the Vessels, the men of war, munitions,
necessary furnitures, vittels, and the rest of necessary things which are
contained in this discourse.

Made in Lisborne the 20. of May. 1588.

Afterward there went out of Lisbon toward the end of June last, a supply
of an army in good furnitures, containing four score sail of ships, to
join with the said army.

FINIS.
Distichon Coloniensium, Anglis Hispanorum Iugum minitantium, vnae cum
Anglorum, euentum rei praesagientium, responso appositissimo.
Typographus lectori beneuolo, and veritatis studioso. S. D.
A Mice Lector, cum incidissem in disticha quaedam a Coloniensibus edita, per
quae, ex suo voto, quasi iam deuicta ab Hispanis Anglia, triumphabant, volui
vnum ex his, vna cum alijs, veritatis amantium virorum carminibus, typis
excudere, vt, quibus in lucem editis, and tibi, and omnibus sinceris viris de
summa in confingendis, and spargendis varijs rumoribus, Coloniensium, and
pontificiorum omnium impudentia, deque Hispanorum profligatorum, and
fugitiuorum incredibili, and inexpiabili in inuadenda aliena possessione, and
cupiditate, and temeritate, certo constaret. Tu his interim fruere, and Deo,
qui pro seruanda, a tanta tyrannide Anglia, pugnauit; mecum gratias age, and
vale.

Colonienses ad Angliam, and eius asseclas Europae.
Tu, quae Romanas voluisti spernere leges,
Hispano disces subdere colla iugo.
Anglus ad Hispanum Romanae Meretricis amasium.
Colla iugo, quid ni? nihil est, Hispane, quod optas.
Sic vtinam possim subdere saepe tuo.
ALIVD
Hispane, Anglorum voluisti spernere vires?
Anglorum disces subdere colla iugo.
ALIVD
Scis cur Romanas spernit gens Anglica leges?
Haud servile ferunt libera colla iugum.
ALIVD
Romanas merito didici contemnere leges,
Sic iub^t aeterna lex veneranda Dei.
ALIVD
Hoccine Romanas leges, Hispane, tueri?
Hoc est nostra tuo subdere colla iugo?
Vix prius armatas Anglorum cernere classes,
Absque mora turpi quam dare terga fugae.
ALIVD
Si numeres, Hispane, Duces, si vulnera, naues,
Anglorum metues ne patiare iugum.
ALIVD
Ampla quidem, truculente refers, Hispane, trophaea,
Scilicet ad proprias sequitur te dedecus eras.
ALIVD
Colla dabit, qui terga dedit, quid, amice, superbis?
Turpius Hispano quis mihi terga dedit
Ergo age, si volupe est, Romanas discere leges,
Exemplo Hispani discere perge tui.
Aliud ad Poetam Coloniensem.
Subdere eum videas Hispanum colla Britanno,
Vnum age, nec vates postea falsus eris.
Scilicet ipse tuum properans laqueo insere collum
Te dignum facies, and breue fiet opus.
Aliud ad Bernardinum Mendosum.
Nil Mendose, facis, tua toxica, tela, triumphi,
Sunt mihi ludibrio, nil, furiose, facis.
Hoc, Mendose, facis, si quid facis, improbe, technis;
Cladis es Hispano maxima causa tuo.
Ergo opus Hispano feceris, gratumque Britanno.
Si laqueo vitam, perfide, finieris.
FINIS.

