THE OTTOMAN OF LAZARO SORANZO.

Wherein is delivered as well a full and perfect report of the might and power
of Mahamet the third, Great Emperor of the Turks now reigning: together with
the Interestes and dealinges which he has with sondrie other Princes, what he
is plotting against the State of Christendom, and on the other side what we
may practice and put in executition against him to his great damage and
annoyaunce.

As also a true Description of diverse peoples, Countries, Cities and Voyages,
which are most necessary to be known, especially at this time of the present
War in Hungary.

Translated out of Italian into English, by ABRAHAM HARTVVELL.

LONDON Imprinted by John Windet, 1603.

TO THE MOST Reverend Father in God, the Lo. Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, of all England Primate and Metropolitan, one of the Lords of her
Majesty's most honorable privy Council, my singular good Lord and Master.
MOst Reverend father in God, and my singular good Lord: It pleased your Grace
in the beginning of Michaelmas term last, to demand of me a question touching
the Bassaes and Visiers belonging to the Turkish Court, and whether the chief
Vizier were promoted and advanced to that high and supereminent authority above
the rest, according to his priority of time and antiquity of his being Bassa,
or according to the good pleasure and election of the Graund Turk himself:
wherein although I did for the present satisfy your Grace to your contentment
by the small skill and knowledge which I have in those Turkish affairs: yet
bethinking my self of this Discourse which having been by me translated out of
the Italian tongue, had passed the Print, and had lain by me these two years
not published to the view of this English world, upon some special
considerations, that moved me for the time to conceal the same. I thought it
would be a very acceptable and pleasing matter now to thrust it forth, for the
better satisfaction of your Grace and others, that are desirous to understand
the full truth and estate of that tirannical and Mahameticall Empire. The Book
was written and penned by one Lazaro Soranzo a Venetian Gentleman, in the year
1598. at what time Mahamet the third of that name, now reigning, was expected
to have intended war upon the State of Christendom, either in his own
person, or by sending forth some one of his Bassaes or Visiers to be his
General in that action, whereupon the Gentleman author of this Discourse,
began to enter into a very deep and subtle consideration of all the
designments and purposes which the Turk and his Council had plotted at home,
against the poor distressed several States and common wealths of the
christian Empire: and having performed the same did publish it in print for the
general pleasure and benefit both of his own country and also of al others,
that may have any interest in so weighty and important a business: In which
treatise if he have somewhat trespassed by terms and words against the
Caluinists, the error will soon be pardoned, if we shall remember that he is
but a relator of others opinions and speeches, though himself indeed be greatly
addicted to the popish religion, and the maintenance thereof. It contains
first a perfect and true discovery of the present estate, wherein that Eastern
Empire now stands, together with a special report of the revenues and
forces thereof: secondly, the particular discourses, that were made, where, and
upon what part of Christendom this war should be first attempted: and thirdly
a most christian and resolute advise given by the author to all Christian
Princes, how they may co^byne and confederate themselves together in this
sacred war, and be able every way to meet withal or any of these Turkish
devises and plots, wheresoever and whenever they shall be put in practice,
which advise I would to God might deeply and foundly sink into the hearts and
minds of all our western princes, to the end they might join altogether with
prayer and force to eclipse that cressant Moon, being now (I hope) at the
full, and according to the Turks own fearful presages, as it is mentioned
in the 83. page of this little work, like utterly to be extinguished,
whenever it shall please the Moderator of all kingdoms to call away this
present fatal Mahamet, who does as yet domineere in that vaste and huge
tyranny. I was once minded (my most gracious good Lord) to have added hereunto
a more ample discourse of the estate, forces and revenues of that Empire,
comprehended in a Treatise (entitled, Il Turco vincibile in Hongheria, viz.
That the Turk is vanquishible and to be overthrown in Hungary) written by an
other Italian Gentleman, called Achillis Tarducci of the Marquisate of Ancona.
But the time prevented me, so that I could not couple them together, according
to my desire. And therefore I most humbly beseech your Grace to accept of this
my poor travel, being performed by starts and at idle hours, which I should
and ought to have employed in your more serious services: not doubting but that
(if it shall please God to add any more years to this my Quinquagenarian year
of Iubile, for which I most heartily thank his divine Majesty) I shall be
hereafter, if not more able, yet assuredly more willing to discharge my duty
to your Grace and my country, by doing some further service, that may be
pleasing and acceptable to any indifferent reader. In the mean time, I do
hereby (as I am bound) wholly deuote my self to your service, beseeching the
Almighty still to preserve and maintain your Grace in all health, honor, and
happiness, to the continuation of the peace of this English Church, and the
comfort of all your friends and followers: Among whom I must acknowledge
myself, though the least and the worst, yet in all duty and affection.

Your Graces most loyal, faithful, and obedient servant. A. H.
At your Graces house in Lambhith, the first of January. 1603.
The Preface.
EVen as for Princes that would learn well to govern and maintain them
selves, as well in time of peace, as of war, there is no one thing more
necessary, then the knowledge, first of their own affairs, and next of the
state of other principalities, (as those do write, who have the greatest
understanding in civil causes, and as Experience it self does manifestly
declare:) so is it most fit and convenient for them, to use their uttermost
care and diligence, that they may have perfect skill and discretion to judge
between truth and falsehood. For if the second part of their knowledge, I mean
touching other men's states and Principalities: (for of the first it is not my
purpose to discourse) be not founded and established upon truth, it will never
be possible that their counsels shall sort to any profit or advantage,
because it is well known, that a false information, either of a speech, or of
an Astion, or of a place, may oftentimes breed no less damage, and danger,
then a Counselor that is either of small capacity, or else a liar, or a
Captain that has neither wisdom nor experience. And therefore very greatly
are those Princes to be commended, who not only endeavor to inform themselves
of the wits and loyalty of their own servants, but also for the more
certainty how matters do pass in truth, maintain either at home in Court, or
abroad in foreign places, Men of learning, and of practice: the one for matter
of History, and properly appertaining to good civil government, and the other
for the knowledge of the estates, inclinations, designements, interests,
treasures, armor, weapons, confederacies, preparations, and all the forces of
other Princes: whereunto may be added also as a matter of great impertance to
know those Countries, which have not only been known many a year ago, but
also those that have been lately dicouered, or may hereafter be made known
to the world. In respect whereof, assuredly above all other Don John king of
Portugal, and Isabell of Aragon, are most worthy of eternal memory, for the
discovery of the East Indies, and of the new world, which was performed by
their favor and assistance. And the reason of that which has been said, is
this, touching the first, because such matters having been reported or
written, for the most part either to please, or for some advantage, or falsely
penned by persons that never were present at the Action, or for fear have
concealed the truth, their reports and writings have need of great caution and
censure, before they be believed: and touching the second, because one
eye-witnes, as the Poet says, is more certain and worthy of belief, then a
thousand eare-witnesses, as they do most manifestly approve, who by the view of
their own eyes, which they have made in diverse Provinces, do find and
acknowledge, that in books of Cosmographie, Geography and Chorographie, there
be many faults and errors to be noted in the government of sundry
principalities, in the manners and customs of diverse peoples, and in the true
situation of several places and Countries: besides many other tales and
fables, which are here and there dispersed, as well in writers of old, as in
writers of late times, and only because the Authors of them have written and
recorded either all these matters, or at least very many of them, without ever
seeing any part of them, but referring themselves wholly to the ancient
descriptions, which in deed do not fully answer to the knowledge and
experience of these days, and without justifying the same by such persons as
have not only seen them, which every common Curseters and prating cousener,
can also do: but also such as have had the skill to observe every action, and
an intent truly to report it again. Homer called Ulysses a wise man, (which is
the goodliest title that can be given to a Prince, or to a Captain) not
because he had heard, but because he noted and observed the manners and
customs of sundry peoples, and saw many Cities. And peradventure it was the
reason which moved Plato to make a law, that none of his Citizens should
travail abroad before he was xl. years old, to the end that being grown
wise by age, he might with more judgment observe the affairs of the world, and
then report them to his Country for the common benefit thereof. True it is
that those Princes, which do not willingly admit any traffic with
strangers, contrary to the law and course of all Nations, as for example the
Moscouite, and Presbyter John, but especially and above al other the Princes of
China, who being strengthened by fortifications, and keeping continual watch
and ward for that purpose, will not suffer their subjects to pass or travel
into foreign Countries, because they hold Platoes opinion to be true, which
he sets down in his common wealth, that strange fashions and customs may
corrupt home-borne natures: such princes (I say) have no need in deed, to be
any diligent inquisitors or searchers of other men's actions. But for other
states, that with all humane intertainment and intercourse do admit all
forreiners, and co^uerse kindly with them, and embrace their enterests and
confederacies, and therefore are more strongly and entirely enforced of
necessity to guard themselves from their neighbors that are of great power and
might, to the end they may the better maintain their own seigni^uries and
dominions: for such states (I say) it is great reason and very convenient,
that they should thoroughly inform themselves, and endeavor to their uttermost,
not only ingeneralitie, but also in every particularitie to understand all
matters whatsoever which may be referred not unto private Interestes and
commodities, such as, matters of traffic, and marchandizes be, but to the
state of the whole common wealth, which are properly belonging to Princes
themselves. For as we do read written Hystories to the end we may learn how to
govern and manage matters, as well present as to come, by understanding and
reading how things have fallen out, that have been heretofore recorded in
particularitie: so ought we also to know how the affairs of the world do
presently stand, to the end we may provide remedies in time, and meet with
all inconveniences according to the general knowledge which we have learned by
our reading: for such is the course and order of our knowledge, that by
singularities we proceed to the notice of universalities. And therefore the
Venetian Magnificoes, who are not meanly exercised and experienced in matters
of state, do not only send unto other princes such Ambassadors as are of
quick wit and conceit, according to the custom of other principalities, but
also have established for a law, that at their return they shall in the
Senate make a true and particular report of the Prince and state, with whom
they have been Ledgers during the time of their Embassage: and so by that
means they shall instruct the younger sort, which are trained up in the study
of politic affairs, to be the better enabled for the service of their
Country. And to the same purpose, that their Commonwealth may be also better
governed, as well by the example of such matters as have already passed, as
also by the fresh information of things presently in action, they preserve and
keep the said writings with great faithfulness and secrecy in a Register
especially appointed thereunto. And this was the cause, that I perceiving how
the actions of the Turks, were publicly either too much extenuated and
diminished, or else beyond all truth magnified, and enlarged rather upon want
of true instruction and information, then upon any sting of passionate
affections, which oftentimes make report of many matters to diverse private
persons very indiscreetly, and inconsiderately, began to bethink my self,
that it could not choose but prove very profitable to the state of
Christendom, if I would take upon me the care to examine the present estate of
the Turkish Empire, and endeavor to discover the disignements which that Prince
has plotted against the Christians, in the best manner I could. And forasmuch
as it is not always good, to give too much credit to ancient Records, though
they be never so true, because Principalities and states are easily altered and
changed, either upon the nature or disposition of the new succeeding Prince,
or upon condition and circumstance of time, or upon some other accident: (yea
and so much the rather, for that the Venetian records which were wont to be
most faithful and sincere, are not now imparted or communicated to any man by
a special prohibition which they have made amongst themselves, the ancient
reports also being now to no purpose, and the brief that is ordinarily
delivered abroad, being rather imagined and full of errors then containing
matter of truth) I have resolved with my self, to be more diligently informed,
as far as possibly I could, of all those particulars which I thought meet and
necessary to be known in these times, because I am verily persuaded, that
the present war now in hand, is a matter of the greatest consequence that is
at this time current in the world. All which I have done upon special and
private conference that I have had with persons of great experience and
judgment, who are lately come out of those parts, not trusting mine own self
in such matters, which I have heretofore seen, and oftentimes very deeply
considered of. And so at last I have reduced the whole into a brief or
compendious Method, for the benefit and service of Christian princes, and
specially of those, who in regard of their interests with the Turk, have
greatest need of such information. For seeing I was not able, by reason of
mine infirmity, to follow the wars, as I ought to have done, after the
example of Benedict Soranzo my father, who died at the conquest of Gorzolari in
fighting against the Turks, yet had I a desire at the least to do some
service to the commonwealth, which allows it to be a matter lawful for
every man to labor and write, as Polyaenus of Macedonie writ to the
Emperors Antoninus and Verus, rather then by choosing to live idle and free to
my self, I should seem altogether unprofitable and unfruitful to all
others. So did Diogenes, when the rest of the valiant and courageous Citizens
were very busy in defending the walls of their Country, he went up and
down in the Market place, rolling his Tun to and fro, because he alone would
not be idle (as he said) whiles other were valiantly laboring with their
weapons.

And therefore in this discourse or report, I will entreat of the Ottoman
Empire and specially under Mahamet the third, until the year 1597. The time I
do of purpose set down, because I know very well, that the event and success
of war may alter many things, according to the mutabilitie of the Prince, or
necessity of sundry occasions, which even to this hour have altered and
changed sundry matters. And this will I do principally and chiefly regarding
that which apperteyneth to the knowledge of this present war, which the Turk
now wageth against the Emperor, and the Transiluanian, or any other matter,
which by occasion of the same war may fall out to be considerable. For if I
would have undertaken a longer course, I should have too much enlarged this
volume, peradventure to the grief and tedious conceits of other men. Besides
that a great part of the remnant of this history, I have at large extended in
other my writings, and part thereof I may perhaps perform in other
occasions. Howbeit I will not forbear to tell you of many matters, especially
of such as may be at all times profitable and beneficial to all Christendom:
to the end, that as well those which live at this day, as also those which
shall succeed us in posterity may in some sort reap some benefit and
pleasure of this labors, wherein that I may proceed methodically, and orderly,
I will distinguish and divide this present relation into three parts.

In the first it shall be entreated of the Head, of the Members, and of the
forces of the Ottoman Empire.

In the second, of the Cogitations and Designements of the Turkish Prince: of
the causes of this present war, together with the beginning and proceedings
thereof: wherein for the better understanding of every thing, the original of
the said war shall be fetched and repeated, even from Amurath, father to this
living Mahamet.

In the third and last, it shall be discoursed, that suppose the Grand Turk
will be reconciled, whether it be good for the Emperor, and the Transiluanian,
to entertain peace wiih him. Wherein also many matters shall be discovered,
which (if the war shall continue) may be plotted against him by the said
Princes, and which at all times may be practiced by other Christian Princes,
to meet with such perils and dangers as are now imminent, or any other which
may hereafter light upon Christendom by the Ottoman forces.

An advertisement to the reader.
COurteous Reader, if in all this discourse you do not read, that Mahamet
Satarzgi, (of whom mention is made page 9.) is now become the General of the
Turkish camp. That Sinan Cicala (pa. 6. b.) begins to recover the favor of
the Emperor Mahamet. That Hassan Bassa, who had the government of
Constantinople in the absence of the great Turk (page 6.) was first created
chief Vizier, and afterward put to death: And lastly, that the Prince of
Transiluania has surprised Feulac, and Canaal, and such other like matters.
And especially, that the Christian Emperor has recovered the strong Fort of
Giauarino, chiefly through the grace and favor of God, and next by the notable
valor and labor of Adolph Baron of Schwartzenberg, most worthy of eternal
memory: I pray you remember how the Author in his former Preface does
protest, that touching certain accidents he writes no further then till the
year 1597. wherein he also deals like a Politician rather then like an
Historiographer: and therefore refers those matters to some other works
which he had then in hand. Farewell.

Errata.
page 21. b, 3, and 4, as the Dutch do Kiocai in Beluacensis.

page 28. b, lin. 10. drink for the Turks, considering.

page, 34. li. 1. for Gally-slaues, read pilots.

page ead. li. 3. for row them, read guide them.

page ead. l. 21. three hundred thousand.

page 37. b. li. 1. goodliest.

page 40. li. 9. Fortes therein, which should be scited

page, 55. b. li. 23. the Turks make every day.

THE FIRST PART,
Wherein is treated of the head, of the Members, and of the Forces of the
Ottoman EMPIRE.
IN the Ottoman Empire, Mahamet, a name dreadful to Christians, and fatal to
the Turks.
there new reigns, Mahamet the third of that name: a name verily no less
dreadful and terrible unto Christendom, if ye observe and mark the actions
of the other two former Mahamets, then fatal to the Turks themselves, even in
their own opinion: for they do greatly fear, that as the City of
Constantinople, had her second beginning and increase from one Constantine, and
afterward was lost and destroyed under another Constantine, both being the
sons of two Helenes: and likewise the Empire of Rome, began in one Augustus,
and ended in another Augustus; so this City shall be lost again under a
Mahamet, even as it was with arms conquered by Mahamet the second.

. I.
THe now living Mahamet, Emperor of the Turks, The nature and conditions of
Mahamet.
is by nature witty, and by disposition fierce and cruel: but by accident
myld, timorous, and greatly effeminated, as hereafter shall be showed
plainly, by certain examples of diverse matters that have been done by him,
both before he came to the Empire, and also after.

Mahamet, Why he hated Nasuf-Aga, the Dwarf.
while he was but young, being shut up into the Serraglio, and bearing great
hatred against the Dwarf Nasuf-Aga, for the many favors which he continually
received at the hands of the Emperor Amurath, endeavored so diligently to pry
into his actions, as having observed, that every day he sent out of the
Serraglio, a basket of flowers, he imagined with himself, that under those
flowers, he conveyed forth some things of greater moment. And thereupon, one
morning having stayed the Carier by force, and powered the flowers out upon the
ground, he found the basket full of Gold, and with exceeding indignation,
accused him to his Father, telling him, that he was less favored then his
slaves: For (quoth he) they abound in that which is denied unto me. And this he
spoke, because he found his Father to be very covetous.

Moreover, Who were his grandmother, and Mother.
he was so haughty and disdain full, as he could not endure that his
grandmother, who was (if all be true) a Gentlewoman of Venice, and of the
house of Baffo, should domineere in the Court, and over his Mother, who was
born at Rezi, The suspicion that Amurath had of him.
a town in the mountains of the Ducagini in Albania. In so much, as
quarrelling with his Father for the same very oftentimes, and ministering daily
unto him new oecasions of dislike and fear: (for the Ottoman Emperors are so
jealous of their own life and safety, as both in regard of the common
ambition of aspiring minds, as also, and much the rather of their own
particular and peculiar cruelty, they will not pardon nor spare their own
blood.) After he was circumcised according to the Law of Mahamet, (whereat
were present the Ambassadors of the Emperor, of the Moscouite, of the Persian
Sophi, and for the State of Venice, Giacomo Soranzo my uncle, who in that
business, had the chief place above the Christian Princes.) presently he was
sent by his Father into Magnesia, there to abide and keep his residence. But
when he did there every day more and more discover his fierceness and
cruelty; Examples of Mahamets cruelty.
by causing (sometimes in deed of an indignation and rage, but sometimes of a
fantastical humor) the teates of women to be pinched off with hot burning
tongues: by putting to a most cruel death, two thousand Softi, (that is to say,
Scholars) only because they had made a sign unto him of some unchaste
cogitation: and by killing many other persons, upon very light and slender
occasions: and finally when he showed himself to be utterly alienated from
venereall and wanton pleasures, and wholly occupied in Martial actions: His
Father grew into such a conceit against him, as adding thereunto sundry other
weighty suspicions of secret intelligences, which under the color of
friendship he entertained in the Court with Sinan Bassa, (he that surprised
Giauarino, and died the last year:) entered into a cogitation with himself not
only to have him better guarded, but also to deprive him of his life, if he
did not change his course. Whereof being oftentimes advertised by the Lady
Sultane, his mother, and also advised by her to pluck this suspicion out of
his fathers head by addicting himself to pleasure, he was obedient unto her
therein. And afterward he was so far given over thereunto, as either
altering or dissembling his proper nature, he is by this accident, and of his
own accord grown to be a most sensual Prince: and whether it be by habit
and custom, or by enchaunting besotment, as some think, (wherein the Greek,
Hebrew, and Turkish Ladies are most cunning and skillful,) he cannot now live,
no not when he is in arms amongst his Soldiers, without those pleasures, not
without communicating the most important secrets of his state with his
Favorites and Miniones: Then which there is nothing more dangerous and
pernicious to Princes. Notwithstanding, I cannot agree in opinion with those
who do attribute the cause of this late going forth into the wars in his
own person, to this his sensuality: for there are diverse other truer
reasons, that may be alleged of that his lingering.

II.
FOr Mahamet being now become a new Prince, Why Mahamet lingered his going to
the war.
determined to inform himself first before all other things, what were the
forces of his state. He did well know the dislikes and braules which were
amongst the Bassaes, and especially between Sinan and Ferat: in whose hands
remained at that time the whole management of his Empire, as in due place we
shall show hereafter. There was in Constantinople, a very great dearth of all
things necessary for vittaile, and specially of bread. He perceived that the
subjects were much discontented for many debts, which his father had not paid,
but afterward he satisfied them himself. He was not fully persuaded, what
stirs the Persian might make, for the death of the young hostage Haidar,
son to Emir Hamze, who was eldest son to Mahamet Codabanda: which was
thought to have happened not without some suspicion of poisoning. Besides that
his principal Captains promised, that they would follow the wars without
his presence: (for they thought, that so they might the more easily enrich
themselves.) He gave exceeding credit to the important counsel and advise of
Sinan, who had vowed the utter ruin and destruction, not only of the Prince
of Transiluania, but also of the Emperor without any great difficulty: (and
all this, because by continuing still in that supreme degree of government
which he then enjoyed, he might make his person the greater.) Moreover, most
true it is, that Mahamet loves peace: for that fierceness and cruelty which
is natural in him, and yet mollified by pleasure and ease, as Iron is by fire,
Why he killed one of his dearlings.
is rather the disposition of a tyrant, then the hardiness of a true warrior.
And that was manifestly declared on a time, when one of his dearest women, with
tears and most affectionate prayers besought him in his gardens, that he would
not go forth to the wars, by reason of a certain strange and wonderful
dream which she had the night before: but he, growing into a great rage, for
that she went about in such sort to hinder the glory, or rather, (as he said
himself) the safety of his state, He threatened his mother.
with his own hand slew her: and did not stick likewise to threaten his
mother, that he would also kill her, though otherwise she was greatly esteemed
and dearly beloved of him.

True also it is, that it was most convenient for him to apply himself to the
necessity of the time, How the authority of the visiers was diminished.
because he was but little esteemed, and not so willingly obeyed by his
subjects, as the most part of the former Ottoman princes were: by reason that
the authority, which in times past was wont to be in the chief Vizier, he
suffered to be communicated and divided among the other Visiers: so that
whenever any favor or benefit was granted to any by one of them, it was
very often repealed and revoked by the rest: A course that of all other does
soonest abate love, and engender contempt. And so much the rather, for that his
father Amurath had taken order that the Visiers might be removed upon every
light occasion, and had also brought up a new custom to create many for money,
and increased the number of them from four to nine. Lastly, he was enforced
thereunto by the often change and alteration, which he used to make of his
Heads and Captains, either upon some wrong information, that he had of the
state, and of their natures, or else because it is a natural property
belonging to the Turks to change their honors, and also their purposes,
according to the events of fabulous Fortune. For having received diverse and
sundry discomfitures, he was of opinion (and indeed he does always put it in
practice) that with the alteration of the head, he should make the members
more courageous and hardy.

But against all these reasons above rehearsed, How he gained the good will of
the Soldiers.
there were other respects that prevailed indeed with him, and caused him to
go forth to the war: and in particular, because the Soldiers being poor,
new, and discontented with the avarice of the former Generals, desired greatly
the presence of their Lord and Emperor: and that principally for the largess
and gifts, which he uses to bestow upon them, when he is in the camp
himself. Where having now at the last appeared in person, he has obtained
great reputation, he has cancelled the dishonorable opinion that was
conceived of him, and he has yielded a singular satisfaction to his subjects:
and so much the more, for that he endeavored himself to gain the benevolence
of his Soldiers, by showing himself not only very liberal in bestowing
largely upon them, but also provident and circumspect in walking on foot and
visiting their lodgings. For which action being reproved by some of his
Counselors, for that he exposed and offered himself too much to manifest
danger, contrary to the custom of his predecessors, he answered them with
the words of Cyrus, That all those which followed him in service being his
brethren, it was fit he should make as good account of them as of himself.
Another action of his there was, which did greatly reconcile their loves unto
him, viz. that being in his journey, one Evening he mounted up to the top of
his Pauilion, and espied two Tents of Spahogl^ni, disunited from the rest of
the Camp, to murder and rob such as scatteringly went abroad from their
lodginges: whereof being certainly assured, he gave them for a pray to the
Gianizzaries, and afterward caused their bodies to be fixed upon stakes in the
Camp.

Now to refer other matters to a more fit place: How the Turks call their
Emperor.
hitherto it has been discoursed of the nature and conditions of the now
living Emperor of the Turks, whom they call Sultan Alem that is to say, The
Lord of the world, or (as others interpret it) The Emperor of all, and King
of Kings: and therefore they call him also, Vlu Padi-Schach, that is to say-
The supreme or Sovereign Emperor: and to be short you have here heard of the
Chief head of the present Ottoman Empire: For as touching his Children,
although they do also somewhat appertain to the Head of this Empire, yet I
do not intend at this time to enlarge this discourse about them.

III.
Only thus much I will say, The sons of Mahamet.
that he has two Sons: For his first and eldest dyed not long ago. The
eldest of those that are alive at this day, is of the age of 14. years or
there abouts, and has not as yet been seen: When they may be seen openly.
for the sons of the great Turk may not be visited nor seen abroad
publicly, until they be circumcised. And it is very likely, that keeping
company (as he does) with many women, (among whom his greatest Favorite and
chief Dearling, Who is Mahamets chiefest Minion.
is one La Flatra a Gentlewoman of Ciprus) he is to leave behind him unto his
successor, many other children, for matter of the usual and wonted Tragidies
of the Ottomans. But now I come to the members, and first to the Principals.

. IIII.
MAny men hold an opinion, Whether the Ottoman Empire want good Captains or no.
that this Empire wants very good Captains. Whereunto they are peradventure
induced, because they have understood, that there are now dead, Piali, he that
attempted the Isle of Malta: Mustafa, he that supprised Cyprus, Pertaf, Ali,
and Vlucchiali, who were overthrown in the Sea by the League of the Christian
Princes, in the year 1571: afterward Osman, Ferat, and Sinan, who performed
memorable exploites in Persia, and else where: and hereupon they do think that
together with these, there are wanting some valourous persons among the Turks.
A suspicion verily, not altogether varying from the truth. For most certain it
is, that the long and troublesome war in Persia has deprived this Empire of
many warriors, that were of credit and valor: howbeit the power and
mightiness of this state being at the first instituted, and sithence increased
by Arms, How the Turks arise to military honors.
and having maintained it self hitherto rather by force then by love, all such
as have any spirit of glory among the Turks, apply themselves to warrefare,
hoping thereby only to grow rich, and honorable above the rest. For they are
not the most noble among them, but ordinarily the most valourous (excepting
those that serve in the Serraglio, and in the Chamber of the great Turk) that
are advanced to honors, which necessarily must have infinite riches waying
upon them. And thereof it follows that this Prince can never want Captains
of approved experience and valor: and so much the more, because even every
private Soldier may mount from one degree to another, yea, and sometimes also
per Saltum, by Skipp, to the very chief Generalship. But for as much as it is
an ordinary custom, that in all Armies the glory is not given to any other,
but to the chief Captains, hereof it comes, that because the most famous
and best known Captains were wanting, all (as it were) at one time, it is
commonly reported, that this Empire wants other men, that are worthy of
Military government.

But I will put down the names of the principals, which govern at this
present: to the end, that if perhaps they should die, or be deprived of
their charges and places, yet in regard of that, where of they shall give me
occasion to speak, the memory and mention of them will serve me to good
purpose in this present discourse.

V
BEfore that Mahamet the Emperor departed from Constantinople, (...)
in the most important government of that City, which is full of sundry
Nations, and humors, and is the seat of that most huge Empire, he set Hassan
Bassa, the Eunuch, by Country an Albanian, of a town of the Cicalessi, in the
territory of Elbasana. This man was Bassa of Cairo, in Egypt in the year
1582. at what time being recalled to the Court, (...)
because he was accused of diverse misdemeanors, he was in a great doubt with
himself, and almost indeed resolute, either by fight to save himself, or
else to retire toward Ormuz, and so to pass into the Indies, but yet at last
to Court he went: where being imprisoned, and afterward raunsomed, by his
Steward for five hundred Crowns, and now again by his wit remounted to so
high an honor, he will (in mine opinion) pass a great way further, if he
live. He is a man very wise and gracious: a great enemy to the Jews, and a
friend to the Christians.

VI.
THe chief General in the Camp before the battle at Agria, Hibraim and his
toi^s.
was Hibraim, borne in the province of Herzecouina, and cousin to the
grand-Turke. He is a man of small brain, and most unfit for any command: but
liberal, and pleasant, or rather fantastical and ridiculous. He calls the
Sat of Venice, and the State of Ragugia, his Cousins. He says he will take
Milan with an Armada or fleet of ships: and surprise the Isle of Malta, by
making a mine under the Island: with diverse other such like fooleries. He
shows himself greatly inclined to peace, not only because he is very
timorous, but because he would please the Lady Sultane, Mother to the great
Turk, and also his own wife.

. VII.
TO Hibraim, there succeeded Sinan Cicala, for that in the last fight with the
Christians, as the one showed himself very unfit for so principal a
government, Sinan Cicala. why he succeeded: Hibraim in the generalship; and
chief Visiershippe.
so was this man judged to be very valourous even by the Turkish Emperor
himself, because he had brought back the Army, saved him his life, and left
the issue of the battle, doubtful. Whereupon he thought him worthy not
only of such a charge, but also of the chief Visiership. Yet at the last he
was deprived both from the one office and from the other, because he went about
(somewhat too boldly) to advise and counsel the Emperor, Cicala degraded and
confined into Bursia.
that he would not give so much credit to the Sultane Ladies, and especially
to his mother, who, because they would not loose his company, sought by all
possible means to make him an effeminate and cowardly person; and in the end
he was banished into Bursia a City in Asia, sometime the seat of the
Ottoman Princes, where he remained not without danger of his life. For the
mother (as women are wont to do, which either love or hate extremely) ceased
not daily to entreat her son, that he would cause him to be put to death,
because she could not endure that a slave should be so bold, as to go about
to bring her into disgrace. This did Cicala fear, and great reason he had so
to do, not only in regard of the vnstayednesse and inconstancy of the Prince,
and the great affection which he bare to women, but also because he knew, that
Hibraim being now returned to Constantinople at the instant suite of the
Sultane Ladies, and especially of his wife, (for the chief Vizier, being once
displaced, cannot return again unless he recover his former degree,) he
would continually persecute him, and foster the quarrels that were lately
picked against him, by the adherents and followers of Ferat, who was an arrant
enemy to Sinan, with whom Cicala had combined himself, even to his death.
Notwithstanding Cicala being very rich, of a good wit and great valor, and
especially very skillful in Land warfare, as one that was trained and brought
up in the wars of Persia: it is to be thought that if he can escape these
first violences of his Lord, he will with such dexterity manage the matter as
he will recover that which is lost. For so did he, after his deprivation from
the Generalshippe of the Sea which was taken from him, not so much in regard of
the suspicion conceived for his brothers going to Constantinople, as to give
satisfaction to the State of Venice, whom the Turk himself was very willing
to content. The malice, that Cicala bare to that common wealth, began and was
grounded upon a discourtesie, Why Cicala is no great friend to the Venetion
state.
that he took against them, whiles he was but young and a Christian, only
forsooth, because the Venetian Galeyes had detained a Galeon of his fathers.
He is by his fathers side a Genowaye, but his mother was a Turk of
Castelnuouo: and himself was borne in Messina. He is very respective of
courtesies, and reuengefull of injuries offered unto him. He has to his wife a
Niece of the daughter of the late Rustem Bassa, and of a daughter of Sultan
Soliman, she that not long ago, with incredible expenses made a very long
conuayance of water in the deserts of Arabia, for the benefit and ease of the
Pilgrims, Mecca in Arabia.
that go to the Mecca or Macca, as the Arabians term that City, which
jointly they call Medina Alnabi, that is to say, the City of the Prophet,
meaning thereby that Impious Seducer Mahomet. Which Gentlewoman being now
mother-in-lawe to Cicala, is very famous in these times, One occasion of the
present war in Hungary.
for that she was the chiefest perswader of the last Emperor Amurath to move
war against the Christian Emperor, for the death of her only dear Son, who
was slain with Hassan Bassa in the battle at Cupa.

. VIII.
THere was General or rather Lieutenant for all Hungary, Giaffer, why
degraded.
from Belgrado hetherwardes, in the year last past one Giaffer the Eunuch, by
Nation an Hungarian. He was deprived of that charge for the same reasons, for
which Hibraim was deprived. He has warred in Persia under Osman, Sinan, and
Ferat, until he was made Bassa of Tebrisio, Tauris.
now call- Tauris: where being besieged by the Persians, he showed great
valor, wisdom and liberality.

IX.
HAssan Bassa, borne at Herzecouina, sometime the Dukedom of Santa Saua,
Hassan (Son to Mahamet Socoleuich,) Beglerbey of Grecia.
is now the Beglerbey of Grecia, as we call it, but of Rumelia as the Turks
term it: for the Greeks call that (...), which we call Europe, by which name
[Romania] not only Asia was called (as we read in histories) after the
translation of the Roman Empire to Constantinople, but also Europe, and
particularly Grecia. This Herzecouina is a part of the Province of Bossina,
which stretches it self toward Ragugia, in the high way that leads to
Constantinople. How the Turks call him that is chief next after the great Turk
himself.
The foresaid Hassan, was son to Mahomet Soculeuich, so called of Socol, a
place in the same Province of Herzecouina, and was sometime Vizier Azem, that
is to say, the head of the counsel, and chief governor of the Ottoman.
Empire under three Emperors: which office or charge the Mamalukes in the
government of the Souldan of Cairo do call Diadar or Deuidar, and the Grecians
call it Protosymbolo. He is very well beloved of his Soldiers for his great
pleasantnes and iollitie. The state of Hassan.
He leads with him continually many women, and through his great expenses is
half banckroupt. He has been in Persia, and was also in these wars of
Hungary: and being the greatest person among the rest of the governors of
Provinces (for dignity and authority, and because his jurisdiction
stretches into Bulgaria, Seruia, and Albania) he keeps a very great train.
First he was employed by the great Turk at Rasgrad in Bulgaria, as well to
hinder the Walachians and Transyluanians from passing over the river Danowe, as
also if occasion should so require, that he might be there ready to pass it
over himself. But now he has hand-ouer-head and very rashly without any
consideration sent him to Vidino, Vidino.
sometimes called Bidene, a Sangiackshippe, not subject to the Beglerbey of
Temesuar, as some have written, but to him of Graecia. If he live, he will
prove without doubt the greatest Captain of that Empire.

X.
HAfis Hacmat, Hafis Hacmet why degraded.
sometimes Bassa of Cairo, and Eunuch and an Albanian of the town of Vonari,
not far from the Cicalessi, was General in Croatia and Bossina: but being
accused of default for not having recovered Petrina, he was degraded: yet now
he is returned into favor again, and is in Scopia. He is a just man and a
wise, and one that for religion, or rather superstition accepted this charge.
He was at the first a Mahometane Preacher, (for so signifies the word Hafis.)
He was the first man, that waged Turkish soldiers on horseback, with pay
and prest-money: in which point, no doubt if the Ottoman Princes would resolve
themselves to imitate our Princes, they might have (as it were) an innumerable
company of horsemen and footmen.

. XI.
THere were also in the Camp of Persia, Sinan, Sinan.
Bassa of Buda, an Albanian of the Mountains of the Ducagini, a man esteemed
among the Turks to be wise and valourous: And Mahomet Satarzgi, Mahamet
Satarzgi.
an Albanian also: for the most valiant Captains of the Turks are for the most
part of that Nation. This Mahomet was a long time Bassa of Caramania, where he
made himself known to be a man of great wisdom: but now soothing (forsooth)
the humors of the Lady Sultane-Mother his country woman, Why favored by the
Sultane mother.
by showing himself to be desirous of peace, he has not only obtained the
office of Tzader Mechei Bassi, that is to say, Chief Master of the Pauilions,
but it is also thought that through the same favor he will be advanced to
greater dignities. They say, Why called Satarzgi.
that while he was Peich to the great Turk, that is to say, his Footeman, he
beehaued himself so well in a fray that happened not far from the old
Serraglio, where the Regal Palace is, as having hardly handled his adversaries
with a Butchers knife, he was thereupon called Satarzgi, or rather because
indeed he was a slaughterer.

. XII.
THere was also one Haidar Bassa, Haidar Bassa.
he that being Beglerbey was sent by Amurath into Moldauia, who by his manner
of proceeding there was in a certain sort the occasion, why the Polonians
resolved with themselves to pay a yearly Donatiue or Benevolence to the Turk,
and so to be agreed with him. He is now in Persia.

. XIII.
THere were likewise in Belgrado, Odauerdi and Velli.
Odauerdi and Velli, Bassaes both, the one of them well tried in the wars of
Croatia and Bosna, the other in the recovery of Madauia out of the hands of
Srenipetro, who with a band of Cosacthi had gotten possession thereof, rather
by rash temerity, then by any great wisdom.

There are also in the Camp many other Sangiacchi and ordinary Bassaes, whose
names, because they are men of no great fame, are not yet come to our knowledge.

. XIIII.
Moreover, it is reported, Hassan: why he stirred up the relics of Mudahar to
an insurrectio^.
that there is recalled from Gemen or Gimin in Arabia Felice, one Hassan an
Arabian, a Foster-childe and kinsman to old Sinan. This Hassan having
cunningly procured the relics of the kindred of Mudahar, to rise up in a
commotion, who had also before rebelled against Osman, he obtained over them a
very honorable victory. And because he is very rich, he will have also some
good means to maintain himself, even with the satisfaction of the soldiers.

. XV.
HAlil Bassa, General of the Sea, Halil Bassa general of the sea and his
simplicity.
second Cousin to the now living Grand-Turke, is of Bosna or else of Hungaria,
a Fresh-man, and such a one, as having hitherto had no more skill but to
collect and take up the donatiues and beneuolences of the Maritine Capes of the
Arcipelago and of Morea, and this last year to set on fire the Monastery of
the Calogieri in Striuali, called in times past Strophade, because they had
entertained the Spanish Armada: is held in no great estimation. And therefore
it is supposed, that he shall be discharged of that office, Giaffer.
and perhaps there shall be substituted in his place one Giaffer a Calabrian,
brought up by Vlucchiali: who although he fled at the overthrow in the year
1571. yet is he esteemed to be a man, that will prove well in Maritimall
warfare.

. XVI.
OVt of all question, Captains at sea
that Empire wants men that are excellent in the profession of Sea-matters,
for so much as the Turk has not since the year 1572. hitherto made any
Armada or Fleet of any acaccount: and when occasion of employment fails, no
meruell though men of worth and valor be not known, nay though they do wholly
want indeed. And yet when soever he shall be peradventure enforced to set
forth a good body of an Armada, he may take that course which his
Predecessors have done, that is to say, he may use the service of the
valiantest Pirates, that he entertaineth in Tunise, in Bona, Famous Pirates
in Busca, and elsewhere. Among whom the most famous that live at this day are
Cara Deli, Amurath Bei, Mahamet Bei, the three Memi, (whereof two are Albanians
and the third is of Corsica.) Sala Bei and others. There is a certain French
politic author which writes, that Ariadino Barbarossa, the famous Pirate, was
allured by Soliman into his service, with very honorable rewards, Why Soliman
used the service of Ariadino.
even with the chief Generalship of the Sea, as well to add strength to his
Empire with the great riches of Ariadino, as also to the end that Ariadino
should thereby be weakened in such sort, as he should not be any more able to
annoy the Ottoman State.

And now after this discourse of the Captains, I will speak of the common
soldiers, and such members as are not so principal.

XVII.
THe great Turk has two sorts of soldiers: that is to say, Two sorts of
soldiers of his own and Auxiliarie.
soldiers of his own, and soldiers Auxiliarie. 1. such as come to aid and
assist him. The soldiers, that are his own, be either horsemen or footmen.
Soldiers of his own.
I will therefore first treat of the former, because the very sinews of that
Empire consist wholly in the horsemen: and afterward I will speak of the
rest.

The best horsemen, The Spahi.
that the Ottoman Empire has, are the Spahi, who live upon their Timari. For
the great Turk gives two kinds of wages to his soldiers: one is called
Timaro, and the other Vlefe. What wages the Timari are
The Timaro is properly a certain pension or an assignement of rents, which
for the most part are levied out of the lands that are gotten in war, and are
proportionately distributed among the soldiers that are of good desert, and do
answer in some sort to the ancient Colonies and to Fees, or rather to
Commendams. The reward, which the Romans bestowed upon their valiantest
soldiers to enjoy during life, was called Beneficium, and those Beneficiarii,
that were so provided for: the Greeks call it Timarion, and those that enjoy
the same Timarati, and Timarioti, deriuing the term from the Greek word
(...), which signifies Honor. Whereupon we do read of Theodorus, (not the
Tiro, but the Stratelates, that is to say, the Praetor or conductor of the
soldiers,) that Licinius Augustus the Emperor, gave unto him a Castle in
Heraclea for a Timaro, long before he was wickedly martyred by his own band of
soldiers, as it is written in Phile the Greek Poet, Damascene, and
Nicephorus Calixtus, and as it is read in the Menaco, that is to say, in the
Monthly Register of the Greeks. The said word Timaro may also be derived,
Niceph. Call. Eccles. Histor. Lib. 7. Cap. 44
and peradventure more truly from the Turkish it self, whereby is signified a
certain kind of procuration or provision for some charge or government, which
the Timarioti are bound to have over the lands that are granted unto them.

The Vlefe is a payment, What wages the Vlefe are.
which is daily disbursed by the Treasurers to the Soldiers that serve for
pay, and to those of the Turks Court, who are therefore called Vlofezgi, or
rather Olophagi, that is to say, provided as it were only for their diet,
deriuing that term from the Greek word (...),

The Timari, which the Turk has in Europe, may be some sixteen thousand?
Every Spahi, that has from three to five thousand Aspres, of yearly rent, is
bound to go to the war with one horse: from five to ten thousand, with two
horses, and so by proportion to a certain determinate quantity: and some
there be that will carry more or fewer, according to their ability, and the
desire which the^ have of honor. The greatest part of these Spahi are subject
to the Beglerbey, and may contain some nine thousand Timari: the rest are
under the Bassaes of Bassina, of Buda, and of Temesuar.

XVIII.
BEsides these Spahi, The Spahoglani.
there are also the Spahoglani, who being such as commonly come out of the
Serraglio, are some what more dainty and delicate, and are neatly apparraled
like Courtiers after the Persian manner. They ride (like the Asians) upon
little Saddles, so that they may easily be unhorsed. In times past they were
not bound to go to the wars without their Emperor: but at last many of them
were (as it were) enforced to go forth by Sinan and Giaffer, for very want of
good Soldiers: who afterward wintered in Seruia, and Belgaria, did so
destroy and consume the Countries and the Peasants thereof, as they did more
harm to the Turks themselves, then if they had been the very Tartarians,
whose apparel also they counterfeyted, to the end they might easily and
handsomely cover theit misdemeanors.

Among the Spahoglani, are accounted those also which are of the great Turks
Court: who are distinguished into four orders, viz. the Selectari, Vlefezgi,
Guraba, and Spahoglani. But because the number of the Spahoglani is the
greatest of all the rest, they are all generally and indifferently called
Spahoglani.

The Selectari and the Spahoglani, The selectari.
are divided into troops* v^z. the Selectari of the right side, and the
Selectari of the left side: and so the Spahoglani of the right, and Spahoglani
of the left: and different badges they have one from the other. These four
troops of Spahoglani and Selectari, with the two troops of the Guraba and
Vlefezgi, make up six in all. The Guruba. The Vlefezgi.
Guruba is in the Turkish speech the Plural number of Carib and signifies
Poor and naked souls. And Vlefezgi is as much to say, as Hired, or waged, as
we have told you before.

Every one of these orders has his Aga, which commands two or three
thousand horse.

XIX.
THe Acanzii, The Acanzii, The Heducchi.
are for the most part Country Clownes, and are not like the Hayducches of the
Hungarians, as some have written: for the Acanzii serve on Horseback, and the
Hayducches on foot. And peradventure Giouius, and other writers of our time do
not well to call them Venturieri, or Voluntaries: for in consideration of some
exemptions, and privileges which are granted unto them, they are bound to go
to war. True it is, that sometimes they will stray abroad, and rob the
Country, as the Zingari and Tartars use to do. They are men of small worth.
They dwell for the most part in Dobruccia, a Province of Bulgaria, toward the
River Danow.

The Gionli are Venturiers, The Gionli.
or Voluntaries, in deed, who together with sundry others, The Baratli.
whom the Turks call Baratli, that is to say, such as live in expectancie, do
go to war even of their own mere good will. The Muteferaga.
Among these, as also among the Muteferaga, (which are of the principal
Courtiers of the Court, not bound to go to the war, but only with the Sultan
himself,) there are many Christians that serve voluntary. They have special
exemptions and privileges. They go wandering abroad every where with great
liberty, always preventing the army, like Out-runners: but they give the
fifth part of their booty to their Lord. The other Baratli are comprehended in
the families of the Bassaes, and Sangiacches, and in the number of the servants
to the Spahi.

* XX.
THe Timari of Asia, The Timari of Asia.
may be about some fifty thousand: and so by consequent about a hundred and
fifty thousand horse and foot, and servants: that is to say* two thirds more
then the Timari of Europe. But they are unarmed, of small valor, and not apt
for war, excepting only some few of them that keep upon the Sea coasts,
and serve in the Galleis.

XXI.
THe Beglerbeyes of Asia, The Beglerbeyes of Asia. of Africa, of Europe.
before the last wars of Persia, were thirty: but since there are some more
added unto them. In Africa there are three: the kingdoms of Fesse and Marocco
are rather tributaries to the Turk: And in Europe there are six.

But because I have made often mention of this word Beglerbey, I think it
will not be amiss to tell you what it signifies.

The Turkish word Beglerbey, signifies a Captain of Captains, What Beglerbey
signifies.
or Prince of Princes: for the Beglerbeyes are the Supreme Lords over all that
have any military command in the Provinces which are subject unto them: and
are the very same, that the Melicul Vmerca be with the Arabians, and (...),
with the Greeks. Three Beglerbeyes there be, that are in authority above the
rest, and sit in equal place with the Bassaes, whom the Turkcs call Visiers,
when they sit together in the open Diuano, The Diuan*
that is to say, in the Counsel or Court of audience in the presence of the
Great Turk: some do very ill and corruptly call it Douana and Tiphano.

The first of them is the Rumeli Beglerbeg, The Rumeli Beglerbey.
that is to say, the Beglerbey of Romania, or of graecia, or (as I told you
before) of Europe. He resideth in Sophia, which peradventure may be the
ancient Tibisca: but it is not (as some write) the Metropoliticall City of
Bolgaria or Volgaria, so called of the people that came thither from the river
Volga: nor yet is it Nicopolis, which is so famous for the victory which
Traiane the Emperor had over Decebalus King of the Dacians. Neither is it true
that Sophia is the same that Scopia is, which is a City either of Dardania or
of Macedonia, as other some have written: nor was it Sardica, which is famous
for the Synod there kept under the the Empire of the Sons of Constantine:
For at this day that is not called Sophia, but Triaditza.

The Anatoli Beglerbeg is the second, The Anatoli. Beglerbey.
that is to say, the Beglerbey of Notalia, otherwise called Asia the less. He
resideth in Cutheia, in former times called Cotyaio, a City of Phrygia. Some
call it by another name, The Denizi Beglerbey.
and seat it (peradventure amiss) in Galatia.

The Denizi Beglerbeg is he that is the Beglerbey of the Sea, otherwise called,
the Captain Bassa. He resideth for the most part in Constantinople, which the
Turks by a corrupt word call Stamboli: and has the chief charge of the
Arsenall, or Storehouse for shipping. Before that Soliman made him a
Beglerbey, he was called the Sangiacch of Gallipoli. He has for his
maintenance, the Revenues of the office of the Subassi of Galata, that is to
say, the Treasourer of Pera, which office is let to ferme, for the yearly rent
of about some sixteen thousand crowns: he has also the revenues of the nine
Islands that lie in the Arcipelago, the chief whereof is Nixia.

And now, seeing we have told you of the horsemen, let us tell you likewise of
the soldiers that serve on foot.

. XXII.
THese are for the most part Giannizzaries, which are drawn out of the Mass
or company of the Agiamoglani, The Agiamoglani.
that is to say, inexpert youths culled out of the tenthes of the Christians.
The rest of the Agiamoglani do serve in Serraglioes to row in the Caicchies,
which is a kind of Boat, and to dress their gardens, and to do such other
services. The greatest part of them have not above one Aspro a day.

The Grecians call Aspro (and not Aspero, The Turkish coins.
as some would have it) the very same money which the Arabians call Osmannes,
and the Turks Asce, so termed for the whiteness of it, Aspri.
because it is made of silver. Of Aspres there be two sorts, the lesser, and
the bigger. The lesser are but of small goodness, and beauty, though they be
most in use, and common among the people. The bigger are of better silver: and
with them are paid the wages of the Soldiers, and the fees of the Courtiers.
They are by some writers called Siderocapsia* of Siderocapsa, a Castle in the
Province of Thasso, which is near to the famous mountain Athos in Europe,
called by the Greekee (...), Mons Aegaeus, the Goat-hill, either because it
reaches into the Aegaean, sea, or because it is full of Goats and Kids: or
rather, (...), the Holy hill, commonly called by the Turks, Seitbag, because
there are on it three and twenty Monasteries of Calogieri, or Monks, that
love to live in the Wilderness.

One Aspro is worth 24. Manguri.
Manguri: (the Manguro is a Brasse-Money, and is worth as much as the ancient
Numulus.) Five good Aspres in weight make a Dramma, Dramma.
or Dram, (seven pence sterling:) twelve Drammaes make a Taller, Tellero.
(or a Doller:) and one Taller and a half make a Venician Cecchino, Cecchino.
which is as much as a Turkish Sultanine being a coin of gold, and the
greatest price that the Turks have, Sultanino.
and is worth some sixteen Paul's of Rome, or much there about. The Soltanine
or Soldano, (as others term it) is truly so called of the Sultanes, that is
to say, of the Ottoman Emperors, even as the Cecchino is called a Dukate,
Brizantini.
of the Dukes of the Venetian estate: and as the Bizantii, or Bizantini, in the
times of the Grecian Emperors, were so called of Bizantium, now
Constantinople: and were even as much worth as the Sultanini.

Some writers there be, The diverse values of these coins at several times.
that have set down diverse opinions of this foresaid account, because they
have had a consideration of their several prises at several times For some
times the Aspro has been worth no more but only eight Manguri, the Dramma
but four Aspres: Nine Aspres made a Taller: and so the Cecchino, as also the
Sultanino, were no more but 54. Aspres the piece. But now all these Moneys are
altered: For the Taller is worth seventy, or 80. Aspres: the Cecchino 110.
120. and 125* And this came to pass especially by reason of the heavy
impositions that were imposed in Constantinople, by occasion of the Persianwar.
The ancient money also that went current in the Ottoman Empire was prohibited,
because it was stamped with sundry Images upon it, which was forbidden by the
law of Mahamet: but rather in deed, and in very truth, because it was good
silver, and so by coining it again somewhat baser, the Treasury and the
Officers did gain greatly thereby. But now (forsooth) they are not so
superstitious as they have been: for they do hold that money only to be good
and lawful, which is of the best allay. This little I have thought good to set
down touching their money, to the end ye might have a perfect knowledge of the
true wages, which the Ottoman Princes do give to their Soldiers. The rest of
this matter, together with the Egyptian, Arabian, Sorian and Persian coins,
that run current thorough all this Empire, ye may have (with the license of the
Venitian superiors) out of a late modern writer: who if he had not showed
himself somewhat irreligious, no doubt he would have deserved great
commendation for the knowledge that he has disclosed in many Turkish matters.

The Giannizzaries then (as it has been said) are the best soldiers on foot,
The Giannezzaries.
that the Turkish Empire has. They serve as the Praetorian soldiers did, and
the Mamulukes, for the sauegard of their Lord, and as did those valiant youths
that always accompanied the kings of Persia, who were called also Ianitores,
or Porters, as says the Author of that book, whose title is De mundo, among
the works of Aristotle. And thereupon it pleased some peradventure to think,
that the Giannezzaries were so called of Ianua: i. a Door, Not so called of
the word Ianua.
alluding to the word Porta* that is to say the Court of the great Turk,
because his Court of Audience is ordinarily kept in the gate of his Palace. But
in truth, they are greatly deceived therein: for a Gate in the Turkish language
is called Capi, and so is not Ianua. i. a Door: and therefore the chief Porter
is called by the Turks Capisi Bassi. The word Giannizzaro is compounded of two
Turkish words, The true Etymology of the Giannizzaries.
Iegni-Zeri, which signify Noua Militia, a new Souldierie: New, not because it
was newly brought in, (for it was instituted even by Osmanne Gasi, otherwise
called Ottoman, and renewed, or rather bettered and enlarged by Amurath the
first, upon the advice and counsel of Cara Rustem, who was then held by the
Turks to be a very holy man:) But new or fresh they are called, because the
Giannizzaries are the sons of Christians, taken from their fathers whiles
they are but children, by the Officers of the great Turk, as it were for a
tribute, every fifth or seven year, and sometimes oftener: being of the age
some peradventure of eight, some of ten, some of twenty years, and some
above. And afterward they are for the most part distributed among the Turks
in Natolia, to the end they may be instructed betimes in the laws of Mahamet,
learn the fashions and language of that Nation, and accustom themselves to
labor and hardness, and then are they called Agiamoglani, as it has been
told you before. When they are grown fit for the wars, then they are sent to
the Court, to be admitted into the order of the Giannizzaries. Those that are
not found fit for the wars, are sent to the Ships, and to the Galleys, that
they may be employed in the Art of Seafaring. But they that are of a pregnant
wit and good Spirit, are at the very first shut up in one of the Serraglioes
of Andrinople, or of Constantinople, or of Pera, and so by means they come to
be employed in the service of the great Turk about his Chamber, under the rule
and subjection of certain particular governors.

The Giannizzaries have for their stipend between five and six Aspres a day,
The Giannizzaries wages. etc.
and so have the Agiamoglani likewise: but they are distinguished by liueries.
For the Giannizzaries have two liueries every year, and the Agimoglani have
but one. The Giannizzaries do handle the Arquebuse very well, and are properly
called the Arquebusiers of the great Turks guard. They will fight resolutely
for honor. Some of the Giannazzaries remain in the frontiers, and in
Garrisons: some of them also keep on the sea, and serve in the Galleys, but the
greatest part of them are resident, where the great Turk is: and hereupon it
comes that there are so many in Constantinople, where principally they may
sooner become Giannizzaries. But those that are made Giannizzaries at Damasco
at Cairo and elsewhere: perhaps, when they come to Constantinople; unless they
be there confirmed, may not wear the Coyffe, which is called Zarcula: the last
time that they went out to wars with their Aga (a thing not very usual) they
rather caused great disorder, the^ did any service: partly because they do not
willingly obey their General Captain, Their Captain General.
(who^ by the Persian word they call Ser-Dar, and by the Arabike Ser-Asker:)
and partly because in our times their order is indeed imbasterdized, and
nothing so valourous and faithful, as it has been heretofore.

Aga, is the name of the Giannizzaries Captain, What Aga is* and what Agalari
are.
and is the chief of all the Agalari, who are principal Horsemen, that
always accompany the person of the great Turk, and are so called of the word
Aga, which signifies a staff, and is a token of the authority which they
have over the Chiliarches, the Tribunes, and the Droncarii or Troncarii, so
termed a Tronco, of a Bastone or Tronchion which they carry in their hand.

Moreover the Giannizzaries are very insolent, The insolence of the
Giannizzaries.
not only toward private persons, who greatly respect them per-force, but
also toward the great Turk himself. For having in their hands all the
principal forces of the Ottoman Empire, and being very seldom, or very
sclenderly chastised for any fault and thereupon knowing themselves to be very
mighty and greatly feared, they have not forborne many times to threaten, that
they would depose their great Lord and Master, and set his Son in his throne:
yea and very oftentimes they have violently with most barbarous fury enforced
their Emperor to yield unto them in most unrighteous causes: As for example,
(to leave those that are ancient,) they so dealt with the last Amurath, as
they compelled him to give them into their hands either quick or dead, the
chief Dephterdaro, and Mahamet Bassa the Armenian, (a man whom he loved
beyond all measure,) accusing them, that through their fault, they were not
paid their wages by them with good moneys.

These Dephterdari or treasourers are three, The Dephterdari.
one is the chief, and as it were the President of the chamber, the other two
are as Colleagues or Assistants in the Exchecker.

It has fallen out also, that they are thus become the more sedicious and
insolent, because the number of them is greatly increased and multiplied, and
that through the default of the officers that are sent to make the choice of
the youths: for they do not choose the best and the most able for warfare (as
it was wont to be used in times past,) but such as they may have for want of
better men, shuffeling in oftentimes, by favor and bribes, many natural borne
Turks, and sons of the Giannizzaries themselves: as indeed it came to pass
in these last years, wherein they have had no consideration of any other thing
but only of the disposition of body, and ripeness of years, to the end they
might the sooner show themselves in the wars, and so pass for old and
experienced soldiers, though in truth utterly void of any military
discipline.

. XXII.
SOme Spahi there be also, that serve on foot, Footmen of the Spahi.
as those which are at Negroponte, Misitra, and other maritimall places, and
are employed for overseers, of the Gallie-Slaues: they are subject to the
Captain of the Sea.

There is likewise an Infanterie or company of footmen in the Garrisons,
Asappi and Besly footmen.
which is comprehended under the name of Asappi and of Besli. The Asappi or
Asepi, are not the same, which the Hungarians call Hussaroni, as one Greek
author has written: for the Asappi go to war for wages on foot, but the
Hussaroni on horseback.

. XXIII.
FInally the last Amurath, The Culcardasi.
perceiving that he had not such a number of soldiers of action and service
as that Empire was wont to have in times past (for the reasons which I will
touch hereafter) has brought in a new kind of souldierie, both of foot and
horse, consisting of townsmen and peasaunts being natural Turks: and has
granted unto them many privileges of profit and honor, calling them
Culcardasi, a word that signifies, brethren to Slaves, proper only to the
Slaves Rinegate and is a most honorable term among the Turks.

. XXIIII.
IN Africa the Turks have either no horsemen at all, Soldiers in Africa*
or else very few: but some footmen they have, which remain in the Garrisons
of Algieri, of Tunisi, of Tripoli, of Goletta, and of other places on that
coast: where for fear of the Spanyardes, who are very well fortified with
Garrisons, and strongly fensed in those parts, because they are afraid of
loosing that which they have there in possession, it is very necessary and
behouefull, that they should continually reside and stay.

And these are the Soldiers as well horsemen as footme^, whom the Great Turk
may use in his wars as soldiers of his own. Touching whom I am to
advertise you, somewhat of mine opinion.

. XXV.
FIrst, The Authors Aduertiseme^ts touching the Turks soulours.
that the said soldiers are rather in opinion and fame, so great a multitude
as very many have reported them to be, then in truth they are: for as much as
good soldiers there are but few: mean soldiers not many, and of such as
make a multitude, namely seruitors, victualers and others that follow the
army, a man should make but small reconing.

Secondly that the horsemen, in whom principally consists the power of that
Empire, are not at this day so lusty, resolute, and painful, and to be short
nothing at all such as they were wont to be, for that they have been greatly
wasted and consumed in the wars of Persia, and particularly in this war of
Hungary, where barley was so scant, and all other kind of victualles, for
men, horses, cammels and other cattle very dear.

Thirdly, that the Spahi, who are the best horsemen that the great Turk has,
have not had any means to buy good horses, not only by reason of the dearth of
all things, (which I tell you was very great) but also because all their good
horses are spent and consumed, neither have the Spahi any commodity or benefit
to maintain them withal, or to buy them any new, but only that which they
defaulke out of their Timari. Moreover, they being become men now a days
greatly given to ease and to gains, do not stick to take money to interest,
rather to the end they may buy some Timari withal then buy any horseflesh
with it, yea and to lend it out at usury to others that afterward become
banckrouts. And although peradventure it may seem to some, that in these last
years, the horses were many: the cause thereof was this, that the Turks are
now become so tender and effeminate, (especially since the Delicacies of the
Persians have wrought even the very self same effect in the^, which riot and
excess wrought among the Grecians and the Romans) that every man (for sooth)
will carry with him to the wars, so many easments of bedding, kitchen and
victual, that they are enforced to use many horses for those purposes: neither
is there any horsemen; (be he never so arrant a clown or peasant) but he
carries more the^ one with him: and yet all of them (God wot) stark naught,
very lean, and altogether unserviceable, as we have told you, and as the
experience of the battle of Agria has manifestly proved.

But forasmuch, as touching the diminution of the Ottoma^ armies, diverse men do
diversely reason, it will not be perhaps far from the purpose, or at least not
inco^uenient, if I tell you also what I think of it.

. XXVI.
Without all question the Ottoman Empire does want of that number of
soldiers which it was wont to have in their armies. The Authors opinion
touching the decreasing of the Ottoman Armies.
And the reason of it is this: 1. that the Turkish estate being now greatly
enlarged, those Turks, who in times past for the straitnes of rowme and
narrownes of the country, ran all to the wars like the Tartarians, have now
gotten more ease, greater pleasure, and better country the^ they had before,
so that they do not very willingly resolve with themselves to leave their own
houses, and to go to the Camp. 2. Moreover the country by reason of the
largenes thereof is so far distant and as it were divided from the places where
they must fight, that it breeds great tediousnes in the^ to go to the wars:
and to people or to replenish it al with inahbitants it is a very hard matter,
especially considering that the Ottoma^ Princes have always used to extirpate
and (as a man may say) utterly to root out the ancient inhabitants, of any new
Provinces, which they have conquered and gotten into their possession: or at
least to transport the^ into some other countries. 3. Ye may also add
hereunto, that the Commodity and increase of the country has opened a way to
the Turks for diverse other, and greater traffiques then they had in times past:
wherein the greatest part of the^ being employed, they cannot so easily be
resolved now to leave the^ and to go to fight, unless they be enforced to it
against their wills: because by that course they must seek to enrich
themselves with more incertaintie and greater hazard of their lives, then by
this of traffike. 4. Besides all this the Turkish armies consist (for the most
part) only of Rinegate slaves, and those, Christians: for the Turks do not
make any slaves of the Persians or Tartarians, because they will not part or
divide with them their Military honors and aduauncements, wherein all the
riches, credit and authority of their estate does wholly consist, and wherewith
that Empire does counterpoise the peril and danger, whereunto it might be
subject, if they should admit so great a number of armed Rinegadoes. 5. Those
of Asia, who in times past were wont to execute all Military functions, are
now held in small reputation, or none at all, even as the natural Turks are,
and esteemed to be very base minded and cowards, no less tender and
effeminate, then the ancient Asiatici were thought to be: and therefore they
grant unto them only the honors of Cadileskieri and Cadi: excepting some
few, that are admitted to be soldiers, and do serve the Sangiacchi, and the
Bassaes, who ordinarily and for the most part are themselves slaves of Europe,
and sent to be governors in diverse places of Asia.

The Cadiliskieri (or as the Arabians call them) Casiaskeri, The Cadileskieri,
and the Cadi.
that is to say, chief Judges in the Ottoman Empire, and the ordinary Judges
of causes both Civil and Military, are two, the one in Natolia, and the other
in Romania. He of Cairo is not properly called Cadiliskiero (as some have
written) but the Graund-Cadi, and was instituted by Selem, after that he had
subdued a great part of the Armenians, the Egyptians, the Sorians, and the
Arabians.

And although there be some, Why Greece is not now so well peopled as it has
bin.
that do attribute the want of Turkish Soldiers, to the diminishment of men,
by example of the Arcipelago, and of Greece, which is for the most part
disinhabited, and of all Macedonia, which is the best part of the Turks
possessions: it may be answered, that Greece ever since those times wherein the
flower of her greatness and Majesty was extinguished, has also remained so
barren and void of men, that it was never so reinhabited as it was before.
Paulus Aemilius in one only day destroyed threescore and ten Cities in Epirus:
and many Islands there be, which are utterly waste, and not habitable for
barrenness. Besides that, the Civil wars of the Romans, the simplicity of
the Greek Emperors, the Armadaes, and fleetes of the Saracens, and also of
the Latins, and last of all of the Turks, together with the notorious
injuries of rouers and Pirates, have never suffered those Islands, and the rest
of that most populous Country, so much as to take breath.

True also it is, How it comes to pass that the Turks country is so much
disinhabited.
that a man may walk many a mile through the Turks Country, and find neither
men nor houses. But the reason of this is, for that the Inhabitants having left
the towns and walled places, which are situate either upon the beaten and
common high ways, or very near unto them are eloyned afar of, and have
scattered themselves further within the country, and retired into places among
the Mountains that are more strong, where they have settled themselves in very
populous numbers, because they would be safe and secure from the murders, and
robberies of the Soldiers: who are wont even among the Turks (I would to God
it were not so also among us Christians) to live at their own discretion,
without all discretion, spoiling and wasting whatsoever they can attain: for
such is their use and wickedness, not the profession of true Soldiers, as
more at large I have showed in my book called Militia Christiana, Christian
Souldierie.

And these are in mine opinion, Why the Turks armies are so full of poor
rascals.
the most certain and true reasons of the Diminution of the Ottoman armies:
but why they are now so full of people that are poor, and as it were utterly
spoiled, this reason may be yielded, viz. for that only men of evil
disposition, and such as are the basest persons, and of no worth, run
headlong to their wars. And so much the rather, for that the Spahi themselves
do send thither in their own rowmes their servants and knaves, who together
with the rest of the Soldiers, have no sooner taken a booty (or peradventure
no sooner want an occasion to catch a booty) but they will fly out of the
camp, and return home again. As for example, the soldiers of Sinan did in
Walachia the last year, who having nothing left, but their shirt-sleeues, and
being almost utterly spoiled: because they would not die for cold and hunger,
and because they found nothing to steal for their relief in the fields, began
almost even at the first to forsake him: yea and at the return of the great.
Turk himself from Belgrado to Constantinople, all the soldiers almost would
needs follow him, and none of their Captains were able to hold them.

Now that I have told you of the Soldiers, which the Great Turk has of his
own, I will tell you of his Soldiers Auxiliarie.

XXVII.
AMong all the Auxiliarie Soldiers, Soldiers Auxiliarie.
whose service and help he uses in his affairs, without all doubt, the
chiefest, the most in number, nay the only men are the Tartarians: the
knowledge of whom, because it is not peradventure so manifest to every man, I
will truly and faithfully display, as I have done in all things before, and
will do also in those matters which are to be set down hereafter: following
that which I have learned and understood from many persons that are very
worthy of credit, and have had long practice and traffike with the Tartarians
themselves, and avoiding especially those fables, which diverse men have
written of them. I will add also thereunto somewhat of the Circassians, as
partly depending upon them, and likewise of the Curdians, of the Drusians, and
of the Arabians.

But because there be diverse sorts of the Tartarians or Tartars, so called
peradventure, because they are the Relics (as the word in deed signifies
in the Syrian tongue) of those Isdraelites, that were transported beyond Media
being then not inhabited: I will treat but only of those that serve for our
purpose. And those be they, which are subject to a King that keeps in
Taurica. Whereof some do dwell in Europe, and some in Asia, between the Poole
Meotis, called at this day Mar Delle Zabacche: the River Tanais, called by the
Tartarians Don: the river Volga, which they call Rha, and Edil, and the
Mengrellians, and Circassians: and all these are called Nogai. For the other
Tartarians, on this side and beyond the Volga, between Moscouia, and the Sea
of Baccu, that is to say the Caspian Sea, and the Georgians are partly subject
to the Moscouite, partly free and of themselves, and partly under the
jurisdiction of the Turk, there where Demir Capi stands, sometimes called
the Caspian or Iron Gates.

This foresaid King is called the Tartar of Crimo. Crimo. Iegnibasca.
Now Crimo or Kriim (call it as you list) is the chief and principal City
of all the Kingdom, although he be resident for the most part in Iegni
Bascca, a place in Chersonesus Taurica, called at this day by the Polackes and
Russians, Perocopska. The Crimo is beyond that, near to the Ditch, Why the
Tartarians are called Precopisi.
whereof the Tartarians, especially by the said Polackes, and Russians are
called Precopisi, which is as a man may say Zappahsi innansi, Dug or delued
forth, so termed of the word Procop, which signifies a hollowing or a
digging, and not of a certain King of theirs, whom some will needs have to
be one Procopio. Neither is it true (as others affirm) that such a Ditch was
made but of late, as it appears by Herodotus, there where he makes mention
of the Market of Cremne.

The title of the Tartarian King, is Han, (which signifies a Lord) and not
Chan, unless we will pronounce C. for H. as the Italian uses sometimes to
do in certain Latin words: The title of the Tartar king. Han. Kiocai. Zar.
or with a more hard pronounciation as the Dutch do Kiocai, in Beluacens is
signifies Kioc-Han, that is to say, Gog-Han, a word familiar and welknowen in
the holy Scriptures. Ezekiel. 38. and 39. Revel-20. The Polacckes call him
Zar, that is to say, Caesar.

The Family or house of the Tartar King, The surname of the Tartar King.
which gives him his Surname, is Kirei: whereupon they have been called
Mahomet Kirei Han, Islam Kirei Han, Hassan Kirei Han. The King now living is
called Alip: So that by his style, you may call him, Alip Kirei Han. i. Alip
Kirei the Chan, as in France Hugh Capet the king, Henry Valois the king,
Henry Burbon the king, etc.

The coast of Taurica, Which part of Taurica belongs to the Turk, and which
to the Tartar.
that is watered with the Black Sea, till ye come to the streyte of Osphorus,
(which is the Cimmerian Bosphorus) at the entrance of the Poole Maeotis,
belongs to the Turk: But between the Continent, and that part which is
watered with the said Poole, belongs all to the Tartar, although many
Christians that use the Greek rites and ceremonies, do dwell there also.

Of these Tartarians, Why the Moscouite fears the Tartarians.
the Moscouite stands in great fear, because with sundry In-roades they
enter into his Country, and carry away many of his Subjects, to sell them
afterward to the Turks, and others: and in the year one thousand five
hundred and seventy: they burnt the very City of Mosco it self: how much
more then would he fear them, if he should go out of his own Country?
In deed the Moscouite may annoy the Tartarians that dwell in Asia, and keep
them from doing any hurt to the Christians upon the bank of Volga, where they
are to be found as soon as they have passed over the River. And herevppon it
comes to pass, that they go out but in a small number. and that in this
present war, the report of their multitude is far greater then in truth it
is.

These Tartarians that are under the Moscouite, Tartarians under the Moscouite.
are those of Cassan, Asdrahan, and Citrahan: of whom, because they serve not
to our purpose, I will not say any thing at this time.

The Tartarians of Europe, Tartarians of Europe.
that dwell in Taurica, and out of Taurica, from the Poole Maeotis, to the
great Sea, can not be hindered by the Moscouites, without the good leave and
pleasure of the Polaccke. For they must needs pass through his Country,
either by the way of Smolensko, or else somewhat lower, by the way of Tanais,
nearer to the Poole. But those ways are very difficult, both in regard of
the Rivers, and also of the Fennes and Marshes: and besides that, they are
very long. The Tartarians are Sarmatians.
And these are the very self same Sarmatians, which are of Sarmatia in Europe
and Asia: For the Ancient Writers do make Scythia, and Sarmatia, to be all
one.

The Weapons of the Tartarians are Scimitarres and Bows. The Tartarians
weapons.
And because they want that quantity of Steeles both of wood and Iron, whereof
they have great need to make their arrows withal, they make them of Reeds,
whereof they have great abundance. They are very keen and sharp, which
they can handle very well and nimbly, as well in shooting them forth
outright, as also backewardes, when they make as though they would retire and
fly away: which kind of fight they use more like to thieves then soldiers.

They all ride on Horseback: their horses are small, and vnshodde: when they
pass over the Ices, which in those parts are very great, they drive a
crooked nail into their horses feet, to avoid the danger to slipping:
courageous they be, and very apt to labor, and take pains.

XXIX.
THe Turks use the Tartarians in their wars, Why the Turks use the service
of the Tartarians.
both because they are all of one offspring, (for Mahometanes they be all:) as
also, and especially because they should not unite themselves with their
enemies against them: for they are the only men whom the Turks do
greatliest doubt: and the rather, for that (as Sultan Soliman said once in a
Counsel which he held in his own presence, The opinion of Sultan Soliman.
touching those Princes whom the Ottoman Empire ought chiefly to fear:) the
Tartarians may of a soden run with infinite numbers even to Constantinople it
self, and arrive there, before that ever the Turks can be prepared for
defense against them. Why the Turk and Other Princes seek to keep
friendship with the Tartars.
And hereupon it comes to pass that the Turks do endeavor by all kind of
good offices to hold them in friendship, and to be allied with them in marriage:
(for in that respect Solimans mother was married to his father, she being a
Tartarian, and the daughter of Mehemet Kirei:) the Turks also for the same
reason do bestow diverse contributions and benevolence upon the Tartarians,
yea, such and so great, as in the time of wars a Leauie of the Tartarians is
very costly to the great Turk, because he must of necessity give them so
much, as may be sufficient not only to maintain themselves, but their wives
also and children which they leave at home: so that to tie them the faster and
safer unto them, besides the bonds of alliance and kindness they are enforced
to use this necessary exigent, whereas on the contrary side, in the time of
Soliman the Tartarians were enforced under Sedac Kirsi to gratify the Turk.

The Moscouite and the Polack likewise do bestow great gratuities upon the said
Tartarians, for fear of their soden in-roades which they may make upon them in
the time of harvest.

The Moldauian also, although he pay tribute to the Turk, yet is he bound in
many respects to grafie the Tartarians, who are in those parts none otherwise
held to be friends to any, then the Switzers are to the Princes in our countries

But because the passages of the Tartarians into Hungary in this time of
war, The voyage that the Tartarians may make into Hungary.
are diverse and uncertain, and so may also be in times to come, it shall not
be unfruitful and inconvenient, if I touch the courses and voyages, which
they may take, to the end that we on our side may the more easily endeavor and
provide either altogether to hinder them, or at least to make their arrival
there to be more difficult unto them.

. XXX.
THe Tartarians, Through the Polack country inhabited:
when they will join themselves with the Turkish armies, must needs of
necessity pass through the Polack country, either inhabited, or wast and
desert. By Russia and Podolia.
The country inhabited, is Russia, and Podolia, two Provinces which are on
their right hand. They may pass also on a soden under Premisla, By Premisla.
by the valleys that lead into upper Hungary. But both these former ways may
be easily stopped by the Polackes, and the last also by the Imperialistes, and
the Transyluanians. They may likewise pass at Sumber, By Sambur.
or somewhat nearer to Transyluania: but this is a more difficult way then the
rest.

Through the wast or desert country, Through the wast Polack Country.
they may pass two ways, the one far from the Sea, the other nigh to the
Sea. If they will go that way which is far from the Sea, they arrive at the
River Niestro and so enter into Moldauia, and from thence traversing Walachia,
By Seuerino.
they come to Zuerin or Seuerino (so called by the christians in memory of
Seuerus the Emperor:) but this may be stopped by the Polacches, the Moldauians
and the Walacchians. At Seuerino, if they had the country friendly and
favorable unto them, yet they may peradventure have somewhat to do, before they
can pass over the River Danow: but now forasmuch as that place is at the
devotion of the Transyluania^, they shall be enforced to pass it, and to make
way to themselves by force and arms: which will prove no less difficult vnto^
them, then if they should have attempted the voyage by land.

The Tartarians also may come to the Niestro, By Achermano.
by the way that is nigh to the Sea: for they may pass to Achermano, (which
the Polacckes call Bialogrod, the Moldauians Cittat-Alba, and the Hungarians
Nestor Alba,) a territory and Sangiacche-ship belonging to the Turks, at the
mouth of the said River Niester, and not at the mouth of Ister or Danubius, as
some have written: and it is near to the Sangiacche-ship of Bendero, By
Bendero.
called by the Polackes and Moldauians Tegina, and is a place in the Province
of Maldauia, but subject to the Turk, through the default of that Aaron the
Vaiuode, who in this present war, thinking to reconcile himself, for the
revolt which he made from the Turks, would not surprise it, when he might.

In the said Sangiacke-shippes, the Tartarians may take two ways, the one by
passing the Rivers of Pruto and Sereto, and so annoying Walachia: the other
without passing the said Rivers, and by going over the Danowe in Bulgaria,
which is a country belonging to the Turk. This last way, though at this time
it would be the safer, yet for all that it would not be without great
difficulty, yea, and so much the rather, for that the Turks themselves will
not willingly yield their consents that the Tartarians shall take that way, for
fear least they should wast their country. Which way the Tartarians went and
came to and from this present war
The first time, that they passed to this present war, they took the way of
Premisla, and in their return they went home by Seuerino: but after that they
were discomfited and overthrown by the Walachians and Transyluanians, to the
end they might more easily save themselves in their return homewardes, they
took the way last before named.

. XXXI.
Besides the Tartarians above mentioned, The Giebeli Tartarians, their weapons
and habitation.
there are also certain other Tartarians called Giebeli, which may be to the
number of about two thousand, they handle the Scimitarre and the Bow: they
wear a Salate and a Jack, whereupon they have gotten the name of Giebeli,
that is to say, men of arms. They dwell commonly in Dobruccia, between the
Danowe, and the Ruins of the wall, that was caused to be made by the Greek
Emperors, from Gorasui, near to Silistria, as far as Constane, upon the bank
of the Greek Sea. Why the Turks use them.
These Tartarians do the Turks very often use, because they would make the
world believe that the Tartarians of Crimo, are come to assist and succor
them: and so causing these few Tartarians to pass over on this side of the
Danowe: (for they dwell in the uttermost part of Moldauia, beetweene the
Niestro and the Danowe,) even until they come to the great sea in the
Sang^ack-ships of Bendero and Achermano (whereof I told you somewhat but a
little before,) they do mightily increase the rumor of them, and breed a
great fear in our people. Lastly, The voyage of the Tartarians of Europe into
Persia in old time.
I will conclude this discourse touching the Tartarians, with a conceit
worthy of consideration and memory, and it this, that as the Tartars of
Europe in the time of the Romans went even as far as Persia, by the way of
Demir-Capi, that is to say, the iron gates, a place very famous and renowned
in regard of Alexander the great, passing through the country of the
Georgianes: even so the very self same way was taken in our days,
particularly by Osman Bassa, who therein did greatly labor to imitate, And of
Osman Bassa of late time.
or rather to ouergo Domitius Corbulo, and Pompeius Magnus, as ye may read in
Tacitus and Dion.

. XXXII.
THe Circassians, sometimes called the Zighi, The Circassian
are by the Polackes named Pientzcorschii, that is to say the Inhabitants of
five mountains, and therefore they are also termed Quinque-Montani* i.
Fiue-Mountayne-men. They do not reach to the Caspian Sea, as some have
written, but only to the Cimmerian Bosphorus, to the Poole Maeotis, and to the
great-Sea. Their manner of life.
Some of them are Freemen: but some of them are tributaries to the before named
Tartar of Crimo. They live all after the Superstions and rites of the
Graecians. They go with the Turks to war, but they serve them even for
poor poverty. They use to sell one another of themselves: and many of them
are become Sclaues, as well by the way of Mengrellia, and by the Tartarians,
with whom they have to do sometimes, as also by the means and conueniencie
of Asaf, which is a Forte belonging to the Turk at the mouth of the river
Tanais. They are well accounted of, for their good disposition and lively
courage. In the time of the Souldanes all the Mamalukes almost were
Circassians, and thereupon came the Mamalukes to be called by the Turks, Osman
ouerthrown by the Cassacchi in Circassia.
Zercas. In Circassia was Osman heretofore overthrown by the Cassacchi: (what
they are, it shall be told ye in due place:) in his return from Persia to
Constantinople, after he had passed the River Phas or Phasis, (which is so
famous for the Golden Fleece) in Mengrellia, The Godlen Fleece.
which is upon the great-Sea in the confines of Trabisonda, a River which
Pompey durst not pass over, when he pursued Mithridates, for fear of the
Tartarians, the Circassians, and other people near thereaboutes.

And let thus much suffice to be spoken of the Tartarians and Circassians.

The Turk is also wont sometimes to inuit the Curdians or Gurdians to his
wars: The Curdians
who are Mahometanes, and live like Freemen, and are very courageous. They
dwell in the region of Bagadat, and in that part thereof, which now is called
Curdistan, that is to say, Chaldaea, named by the Arabians Keldan. Some are of
opinion, that they may one day do great hurt to the Turkish Empire. Some think
the same also of the Drusians, The Drusians
who are soldiers by profession, and dwell in the Mountain Libanus: as also
of the Arabian Bandoliers, The Ba^doliers of Arabia.
who are Lords and Masters of the Champeine, as sometimes our Fuorusciti or
outlawes are wont to be among us. But in truth I do doubt, that the Majesty
and State of that Empire shall have small cause to fear either the first, who
do inhabit but a small country, or the second, who are but some few Mountain
people, or to be brief the last, who are indeed a confused number of thieves.

Now lastly, it will be very convenient, that I show unto you, Victual,
Armor, and Munition of the Turk.
the strength and forces of that Empire, that is to say, how the great Turk is
able to provide himself and his Armies with victualles, with Armor, and with
Munition, as well by land as by Sea. For in vain were it to have an Army, and
not to be able to arm and feed both men and cattle, or to make an Armada
without timber and people. I will also by the way touch unto you, how these
provisions of the Turks, may be either stopped, or very hardly be brought
unto him: and by the knowledge thereof it will the more easily appear, what
the enemy can by all likelihoode do against us.

XXXIIII.
ANd to begin with victualles, Corn in Asia.
as a thing more necessary then any other provision whatsoever, for the
maintenance of an Army, most certain it is, that the Turk wants not
corn: For he may have great store of it out of Asia, and to convey it into
Hungary, The ways to convey it into Hungary.
he has many diverse and sundry ways. But that which is by the great Sea at
the mouth of the Danow, has no good free passage, in regard of the
Walacchians, who do now depend upon the Transyluanian. That by Constantinople
is to long a journey, and yet there can none be carried that way neither. The
most free and easiest way of all the rest for this purpose, is that by Sea to
Salonicchi, and from thence by the way of Scopia to Belgrado, where the
country being very plain and even, the Turks may very commodiously make
their conuoyes, and much better they might do, if they had any carts.

In Europe, Corn in Europe.
the Turk has not now any great commodity of victualles. For Maldauia and
Walachia, although they be Provinces, that are by nature very fruitful of
Barley and Wheat, yet by the occasion of this present war, they are beecome
almost altogether unfruitful, not only because they are not now sowed as
heretofore ordinarily they have been, but also because that little which the
ground yields, is purloyned by men, and trampled with horses. Beesides that,
the Walachian and the Moldauian, who being as tributaries to the Turk, ought
to minister unto him all the help that possibly they can, yet at this present
they will fail to do it: the Walachian, because he is utterly alienated
from him, and the Moldauian, because he has enough to do to furnish himself.

The Turks may also convey some vittailes out of Macedonia, Corn in Macedonia
and Seruia: and how to conueigh it into Hungary.
and Seruia, (two Provinces that are wont to be very plentiful of corn:)
which they may easily do, because the Country is partly plain, and partly
hilly, but without any stones. They may also take the same way of Salonicchi,
by passing through the Champaines of Moraua in Seruia, not far from the most
fertile plains of Cossouo, which our writers do call the Champaines of Black
birds, by reason of the great multitude of them that were seen there before
the battle, wherein Amurath the first was slain. Whereupon I do note by the
way, that the ancient writers were in an error, An error of the ancients
touching Macedonia and Seruia.
whiles they thought, that a man could not possibly pass through all the
Mountains of Macedonia and Seruia,: considering that they are very easy to
be passed, excepting only that part of them, which out of Epirus enters into
Macedonia, for that is in deed vnpassible with carriages.

Now touching the point, How the Turk may be hindered from his vittailes by sea.
how to hinder the Turks vittailes, that they may not be conueighed and
brought into those Countries, where the wars now are. I do think that it will
prove a very difficult and hard matter for us Christians to bring it to pass,
either by sea or by land. The vittailes of Asia, which come out of Egypt, and
are embarked at Alexandria, Damiata, and other places, cannot be impeached or
stayed, without an Armada, or a fleet of ships, nor without fighting also
with the fleet of the enemy. Besides that the Arcipelago, where this must
specially and principally be attempted, has many channels.

And by land, By land.
they can be stopped but in one only case (unless the Turk might be debarred
and kept out of his own Country, which is the hardest thing of all.) And this
only way is for the Transiluanian, together with the Walachians, to pass over
to the hither side of the Danowe, and interpose themselves between Bulgaria,
and Seruia, which in times past were called the two Misiaes. And yet when all
comes to all, there is no remedy but we must look to fight, and therefore it
will behoue us to have a very mighty army in a readiness.

Moreover, What vittaile the Spahi; the Sangiacchi, all villages, and Belgrado
do furnish.
every Spahi, is bound to bring to the camp, one load of corn for his own
vittaile. All the Sangiacchi do send thither, Meal, Barley, and Grain, when
and as much as they can. And all the villages also are bound to send a certain
quantity of Barley, whenever they are commanded. And in Belgrado, there is
ordinarily made great store and provision of Biscuit, Meal and Barley.

XXXV.
IT is very true, Why the Turks cannot set forth to war in the beginning of
the year: nor keep long in one place.
that the Turk cannot set forth his army toward the wars before the
grass be grown, or rather not before haruest-time as well in regard of the
provisions (as I have told you) which the Spahi and others are bound to bring
to the camp, as also because it is necessary, that both men and cattle should
have good means to maintain them selves in the field, yea and so much the
rather for that the army is very populous, as indeed all the Turkish Armies
are for the most part, of people, of horses, and of Camels: whereupon it
falls out also, that that they cannot long be maintained nor stay together
by great heaps and multitudes in one place by reason of their great expenses.

Out of Scopia, they have some little store of Rice, Rice from Scopia,
Alexandria, etc.
whereof the Turks do make themselves a peculiar kind of pottage: they have
also some quantity of it out of Alexandria, and other places, whither our
Merchants do use to transport it.

XXXVI.
THey have great abundance of flesh-meates, al their Country over (specially
where their soldiers meet together, Great store of flesh meat, mutton and
beef.
and go to war:) namely of Muttons, and of Beeffes, which are (as a man may
say) innumerable in those huge and wide Champaines where they feed and
pasture: yea and so much the more store of them they have: because the
Moldauian is content that the Turks shall pass through their Country, with
their cattle, their honey, and their Butter, in regard of the great custom
and toll which they gain of them for the passages thereof. Although (to speak
the truth) there does not now pass that way, so great a multitude of Mutto^s,
as in time past there has done, because there was not heretofore so good a
riddance of them into Polonia, as now there is. Which in deed is no small
grief and displeasure to the Turks, who do use to eat the flesh of Muttons
with great delight and very sauourly, whereas on the other side they do not so
greatly care for the flesh of Beefes.

The Turks also use to carry with them a certain kind of salt poudred
flesh, which being beaten into powder, serves them for a very great
nourishment, especially if they mingle it with their pottage, or broth: and
this meat they call Tzorba.

XXXVII.
ANd now to their drink. Their drink.
It is most certain, that there want no good waters over all the country where
the wars are. Water.
And for water, it ought not to seem a strange drink: for the Turks
considering that by their law they are bound to drink it, as the Carthaginians
also do: and as for Religion sake likewise it is used to be drunk by the
inhabitants of the Kingdom of Tarsus, which on the East confineth and
bordereth upon Cataio, and is famous in the holy Scriptures for the three wise
kings, The Country of the 3. kings that came to worship Christ
that came from thence to worship Christ. But what a great advantage it is to
the Turks to have this commodity of water, let them consider that have
conuersed and practiced with the Dutche, (although at other times also, as
Tacitus writes, they used to drink at the Wellhead.) certain it is, What
means Mahomet used to make his followers to be soldiers.
if we mark the matter well, that Mahamet their Lawgiver, did for none other
cause so straitely command his followers, that they should so precisely
abstain from wine, but only because that having thoroughly resolved with
himself to have his law defended with force and arms, he thought it
convenient by means of sobriety to make them as fit and apt for the wars as
possibly he could. And besides that also, he did inthrall them to the imaginary
opinion of the government of Destiny, to the end he might make them the more
obedient to their Captains, and the more resolute in fight. He also ordained,
that they should often wash themselves, to the end, that his Armies might the
more easily be kept clean and free from those evils and diseases, which do
ordinarily breed of filthiness, and likewise make them the more able to
endure the hardness and distemperature of the weather, with other such like
policies.

The Turks also have a certain kind of Breuuage or drink (which they call
Tzerbet, A drink called Tzerbet.
and we S^rbetto, a Soupe or Broth:) and it is made of Raisins and water,
sometimes mingled with the juice of Lemmons, and with Musk: most dainty and
delicate it is, to the taste, and will often strike up into the head like
Wine. Whereof also if any of the Turks are desirous to drink, The Turks
especially the Giannizzaries will drink wine.
especially the Giannizzaries, who will swill of it beyond all measure, they
may have some in Hungary, and chiefly in upper- Hungary, where the wine of
Toccai is very famous.

XXXVIII.
LAstly, the Turks cannot want provision of wood and timber, Provision of
timber.
which (as Cyrus says) is as necessary for an army, as any other thing
whatsoever. True it is, that in some places of Seruia there is no great store
of it: but there is as much as may be desired, in the rest of the voyage from
Constantinople to Belgrado: and in the way of lower Hungary, on this side of
the Danow, even unto Vesperino: but specially in Bazca, Basca and Srema
plentiful of wood.
and also in Srema, which is a Province so called of the City Sirmio, so
noble and renowned, principally for the Council that was kept there.

These two Provinces do lie on this side of the Danow, between the Danow it
self, and the rivers of Draua and Saua, and have great abundance of wood and
timber, by reason that they have not felt the miseries of the war, because
the Turkish armies have not taken that way, but only in the beginning under
the conduct of Sinan.

And now that we have discovered whatsoever is necessary for the vittaile and
food of their men and cattle: Armor of the Turks.
it follows also to be considered, how the Turks are at this present armed,
and how they may have munition sufficient for the war, whether it be
Defensive, or Offensive.

XXXIX.
THe Spahi of Europe, to strike a far off, Armor of the Spahi, Lance.
Pusdogan. Scimetarre.
do use to wear a light Lance with a pommell, and to strike at hand, an Iron
Club or Mace, which they call Pusdogan: or else a Scimitarre, or Cimitare: for
so by a barbarous word they call that weapon, which by little and little
grows crooked toward the point, and is like for all the world to the Knife,
that Xenophon attributes as proper to the Persians, called by the Turks
Cedare, by the Arabians Seife, and by the Dutche Sabell, a corrupt word taken
from the Hungarians, and Sclauonians, who call it Sabla. Some of them do also
wear an Axe, and a short sword. Some few Iacks, and Targates they have: Axe.
Short sword. Jack. Targate. Dart.
but the rest of all their body is unarmed. None of them does handle the
Pistol: and many of them do only use the Dart. The greatest part of those
Spahi, that kept in the frontiers of Croatia, and of Hungary, had Cuirasses,
and Corslets, but they are almost all extinguished, and those that are of late
gone thither in their rooms are not accustomed to such armor.

All the Giannizzaries, and some of the Asappi, Armor of the Giannizzaries and
some Asappi, Arcubuse.
handle the Arcubuse, but for the most part not so well as it is handled by us
Christians. Which what advantage it may be unto us, let those judge that saw
the handling of the Arcubuse, Da posta: that was so profitably used in the
actions of that most glorious Gentleman Alexander duke of Parma.

The Acanzii, the Spahoglani, Armor of the Acanzii, Spahoglani, Chiaussi, etc.
Armor of the footmen.
the Chiaussi, (which use ordinarily to go as Messengers or Ambassadors) and
other Caualieroes of the great Turks Court, do handle the Dart, and some of
them the Lance, after the Asian manner. To be short, all the footmen almost go
with a Scimitarre, and without any Murrion, but the most part of them with
Daggers after the Greek fashion. Horsemen of Asia.
The horsemen of Asia do carry, as it were, half Pikes. Many of them are
Archiers: they ride upon low Saddles, so that they may easily be overthrown to
the ground.

* XL.
THere are also in the Turkish armies diverse Officers or servants, Armourere*
Gunners.
as the Giebegi, that is say, Armourers, that surueigh their Armor. The Topigi
or Bombardieri, Armenians.
that look to their Guns: whereof some have pay, and some have none, but
diverse fees and recompenses they have. The Armenians for the most part do serve
for Pioners, and do such works among the Turks, as our Spazzacamini or
Chimney-sweepers do among us Italians, and thereupon are in scorn called
Bochgi. Voincchi.
There go also with the camp many Voinicchi, who are villains or slaves. They
live after the Greek manner: they serve for any use, and dwell in Seruia and
Bulgaria. Vonicchi is a Sclauoine word, signifying Bellicos, warlike men,
because in times past they were much employed in the wars. Sarchor.
Many other there be likewise, that voluntarily follow the Army to be Pioners,
and to do such other base services, and are called Sarchor.

And here in this place I will omit at large to entreat of the Military
discipline of the Turks, Military discipline of the Turks.
because that point has been better examined by others then I can do. Only I
will tell you some special matters, because I will not leave the Reader
fasting and unsatisfied in this behalf, as peradventure in other points I
have already glutted him.

XLI.
Without all doubt, Qualities required in Christian Soldiers.
the Turkish soldiers are far inferior to our soldiers that are exercised.
By our Soldiers, I do understand not only the Italians, but also those of
Spain, of France, of Hungary, of Germany, and of other nations that use to go
to warfare in our armies. And by exercised soldiers, I mean such as have not
only bin well instructed in the art of warrefare, but also such as have been
accustomed with the exercises of a Christian soldier, to the end that
accompanying valor and virtue both together* they may the more surely in the
service of our Princes become victorious, although they be peradventure far
inferior in number to our enemies. Most evident and plain are the examples of
the victories obtained by a few Christians under Marcus Aurelius, Constantinus,
Victories of the Christians against the Infidels.
Theodosius the elder, Theodosius the younger, Honorius, Aetius and many others:
but more particularly over the Saracenes, under Pelagius the first, King of
Castile, who with one thousand slew twenty thousand of them: and under Charles
Martell, who at one only time ouerthrewe and vanquished three hundred,
threescore and fifteen thousand of them: I leave to tell you what the
Christians also did, under Alfonsus the Chaste, Ranimiro, Ferdinando, and
Waltero the great Master of the Duch order, who slew a hundred thousand
Tartarians with the death of one only of his own soldiers: and Corui^us, who
after he had obtained seven victories against the Turks, with fifteen
thousand only, Victories of the Christians against the Turks.
most valourously fought the eight battle against eighty thousand of them, as
(among others) Thomas Bozius writing against Macchiauel has at large described.

Moreover, every man that has warred with the Turks does know well enough,
that they lodge at large: and that in their marching they go very confusedly,
so that they may very easily be endamaged in the tail of their Army. George
Castriota, was one of the most famous Captains, that ever fought with the
Turks, Scander-Beg.
and was otherwise called Iskander-Beg, i. the Lord Alexander, a name that was
given him by Sultan Amurath, when being his Hostage or Pledge he caused him to
be circumcised at seven years of age: (for the Turks at circumcision change
the name, as we use to do at baptism.) This man fighting thus with the Turks
being in this disarray, had such victories of them as were most worthy of
triumph.

Besides all this the Turks, when they do fight, put more confidence in their
Multitude, in the opinion that they have of Destiny, in the noise of their
warrelike instruments, and in the horrible cry of their barbarous shoutings,
Good government among the Turks.
then they have in any good order, or in true discipline. And yet many good
things they have, as namely, a Supreme authority in their Captain General,
an obedience in the soldiers, though now it be somewhat diminished: forces
always ready, A fault in Christian Princes.
so that they shall not need to go about, begging of soldiers, as our Princes
do, who very oftentimes make more account and better reconing of other men's
forces, the^ they do of their own, and to make a leauie of soldiers, are
enforced to euacuate and empty their treasuries and to consume the greatest
part of their time unprofitably. The Turks spend their treasure either in
matters of greatest importance, Good qualities in the Turks.
or in bestowing liberally upon their soldiers: which is a most sharp spur
to animate and encourage them to battle. They never attempt any enterprise at
a iumpe or upon a soden. They do not employ their forces in matters of small
moment. They undertake no action, but with order and great military
preparation: and for the most part they fight not out of season.

And although some be of an opinion, Engyners.
that the Turks want Engyners, yet it is daily seen, that with great
facility and ease they overthrow the greatest fortes and fortresses of the
world, whereof they make no account at all: for sometimes they will corrupt
the enemies officers, with honors, with gifts, and with provinces, and
sometimes they will make breaches into the walls with continual batteries,
working with the mattocke, filling up the trenches, and other whiles also
ouerwhelming Cities, either with huge artificial mountains of earth, or with
undermining: and lastly, disquieting the inhabitants with perpetual and
importunate assaults and never giving over the enterprise till it be performed.

Moreover, they do not want any munition, Bullet Artillarie.
of Bullet, Artillarie, Powder. For Bullet, they always make it when they have
need of it. For Artillarie, they have great quantity of it, at
Constantinople, at Pera, at Belgrado, and at Buda: the most part of it taken
from the Christians. They have also learned to cast Artillarie: the more shame
for us, who have not been contented to transport our arrant cruel enemies out
of Asia into Europe in Amurathes time, but have also become Masters unto them
in this Art: and I would to God, that we did not likewise carry them great
store of Armor and weapons besides: nothing regarding or fearing the wrath of
God, the excommunication of the Popes, nor the utter ruin of our selves. And
as for Powder, Powder*
it is made at Cairo, and at Acque Bianche. i. the whitewaters, (which is a
place not far distant from Constantinople:) and elsewhere in great abundance.

The Turks do also greatly practice military stratagemes, Stratagems.
or wily policies in war, whereby they do use to mingle deceit with force,
according to the commandment of Mahomet their lawgiver: neither do they want
means and ministers, that are cunning and skillful to practice the same, both
because all such, as among them do attend the Art of warrefare, do endeavor
themselves to learn and know whatsoever is necessarre for the good managing
of an exployte, and also because fraud and deceit is a thing most proper to
the Turk. Much other matter might be set down touching this point: but if any
be desirous to understand more hereof, let him read, (among others that have
written of the Turkish affairs,) the discourses of Renato Di Lusinge, Lord
Alimes, in his book entitled, Of the beginning, conservation, and decaying of
States.

And now that I have showed you the Landforces of the Ottoman Empire, it is
also very fit and convenient, that I should, likewise show you, the forces
thereof by Sea.

. XLII.
THe great Turk has many Tersani, Storehouses for shipping in Asia.
that is to say Arsenales or Storehouses for shipping. The Arsenal or
Storehouse of Sinopoli near to Trabisonda is one of the best. At
Constantinople there are a hundred and thirty seven rooms in one vaulte; and
at Midia and Achilo they have space enough to make some if they will. Besides
that, the Turks do use also to make Galeyes in such places, where they may
most commodiously have timber for them: the charge and care whereof they lay
most commonly upon the Raislari or Raisi, that is to say, the Captains of the
said Galeyes. Moreover they have great abundance of timber in many places, and
specially in the golfe of Nicomedia in Asia, over against Constantinople: and
in the mountains of the Ducagini, Europe.
from whence they may convey it by the River Drino unto Alessio a territory of
Albania: in which province also they have some quantity at Velona, and at
Polona, which is very famous by Augustus, who was there studying, when Caesar
was killed.

The great Turk has also an Arsenal or storehouse in Africa at Suez, Africa.
in the mouth of the Red Sea, with certain Galeyes, which were made heretofore
against the Portingales, for the enterprise of Diu and Ormuz: but it is of
small reconing because in that country there is no store of timber, and to
bring it from the ports of Bithynia and Caramania to Cairo by the river Nilus,
and so to Suez upon Camels is a matter of great difficulty and expense.

. XLIII.
IT is most certain and true that the Turks do put their timber to work,
Timber and Galleys. Their Galleys not very good.
so ill seasoned, so green, and so fallen without any observation of the
course of the Moon, that their Galleyes cannot prove very good and durable:
and the rather, because they use to make them for the most part in great have:
besides that the houels or vaults, that are made to cover them, are not so well
fitted, nor safe from the rain.

Pitch hard and soft. Tallow. Hemp not much. Sails why scant.
They have Pitch, both hard and soft from Velonae, and from Rissano in the
golfe of Cathare: the one out of the mines, the other from the trees. And
tallowe they want not, by reason of the great abundance of Beefes and Muttons,
that are in those countres. But they have not hemp enough, and so by
consequence they are not well provided of Sails: and so much the worse,
because the Sultane Ladies (who have thirty Galeons of a thousand and five
hundred tun a piece, and eighteen great Hulkes, The Sultane Ladies Galeons.
which they send into Alexandria with diverse merchandise,) do draw out of the
Arsenal, with the good liking and pleasure of the Grand-Turke, sail and
chordage, as much as is requisite for the service of their said vessels. Besides
that the officers, who have the charge of the said Sayls, and such other like
furniture for ships, do keep them but ill fauouredly and lend them out easily
for gain.

The Turks do also want nayls, so that very often in steed thereof, they are
fain to use sharp woodde^ pins. Nails scant.


Of Mariners they have great store. They entertayne the Asappi principally to
serve them in Sea actions. Mariners
And if they should happen to want any, they would compel the Candians to
serve in their Galeyes (for there is always a great multitude of the^ in
Constantinople) and other Graecians that are their subjects, which do wholly
attend that trade. Gallyslaues.
To this purpose also they keep many boys exercised that way, in their
watch-Gallyes, in their ships, and other Boats. But gally-slaues they want
which is a matter of great consideration: for unprofitable are their Galleys,
without people to row them. And neither will the Christian slaves be enough for
that service, nor yet those that are supplied out of Barbary. Besides that the
Turks do not make any slaves of the Tartarians, of the Persians, nor of the
Georgians, because they will not admit the^ into their military government,
which wholly rests in the hands of their slaves, as it has bin somewhat
touched heretofore, and more at large shall be hereafter in the third part of
this treatise. Sometimes they will also command the Asappi to go and serve for
Gally slaves, as a base kind of people and of no worth: and sometimes others of
the country: An Auariz; or exaction raised upon the Christians for the
maintenance of Galley-slaues.
for whose stipend and wages there was applied in times past, an Auariz, that
is to say, an exaction laid upon the christians of Europe, which amounted to
the sum of three hundred thousand Cecchinoes or Ducats: but now it is
employed upon other land-matters. In their great necessities they use also some
of the Armenians, some of the Jews, and some of the Christians, even by force
and compulsion, as namely Cicala did in the last year of his generalship. The
Spahi likewise go for souldidiers in the Gallyes, that are kept for the defense
and safeguard of the Islandes of Barbary, and other places, but without any
other pay, saving only the profit of their Timari: and thereupon they grow
wonderful greedy to rob and spoil. If they make a fleet of a greater
number of Gallyes then ordinary, (which may be about some thirty,) they will
send some Giannizzaries into them.

They make great abundance of Biscuit, Biscuit.
at Velona at Lepanto, at Negroponte, at Volo in the gulf of Salomicchi,
whether the wheat is brought and conuayed, that is gathered out of Macedonia
and Seruia in Zataraes or Lighters by the River Vardaro, which in old time was
called Auxius.

And thus much let be sufficient to have spoken of the Turks forces by land
and by Sea. But for as much as according to the opinion of some ancient
Captains, Gold is the Sinews of war, The riches of the Ottoman Empire.
and (as it were) the Spirit and Soul, that quickens and gives life to an
Army: I will briefly adioyne hereunto some matter touching the Ottoman riches:
Wherein a great part of the Forces of that Empire and of other principalities
does consist.

. XLIIII.
FIrst, His Timari.
if we do consider the value and account of the Timari, it is manifest and
plain that the Great Turk, is the richest Prince, that is upon the earth:
because having bounden unto him by his Timari, more then three hundred persons,
to serve him in his wars, without any interest, hinderaunce or charge of his
own, it may easily be perceived, what a great matter it would be for him to
maintain so many Soldiers, with his own pay.

Moreover, The Turks Hasnads or Treasury.
the great Turk has two Hasnads, (or as many do pronounce it with a stronger
aspiratio^, Gasnads) that is to say treasuries whereof the one is called the
outward or common treasury, the other the inward or private Treasury. The
common or public Treasury. The private Treasury. Gifts.
The former has about some nine or ten millions of yearly revenue, which is
wholly employed in the expenses that are needful and necessary for the state.
The later is exceedingly rich, by reason of the many and great gifts or
presents, which are given to the grand-Turke by sundry Princes, and specially
by the Christians, by his own seruiters and subjects, and by all such as have
any thing to deal with him, not permitting any person to come before his
presence with empty hands, for he does attribute that, which indeed turns
to his chiefest gain, rather to be a sign of his great pomp and Majesty.
And truly if ye shall well consider the nature of the whole generation of the
Turks, ye shall find all of them to attend none other thing, but only to
gather that they may give it afterward to the great Turk: so that by this
means, all the riches of that large Empire do pass through their hands, as
it were through water-pipes, into the huge Ocean of their Emperors
covetousness.

Into the same private Hasnad, or Treasury, Revenue of Cairo.
there runs also the yearly revenue of Miszir (for so the Arabians and
Turks do call the ancient Memphis, that is to say, Cairo, by a corruption
from the Hebrew word Mizraim) which revenue amounts to the sum of above
one Million. There runs thither also, In heritances.
the yearly value of all the inheritances of the richest persons in all his
Empire, whose heir he makes himself to be, even at his own pleasure. For
all the wealth of those, which bear the title of slaves, does wholly depend
upon his supreeme will and disposition. Thither come likewise, all
confiscations and forfeytures, Confiscations, fines, etc.
all fines and amercements (which are very many) all the goods of such as are
condemned by law, all the Revenue that is gathered of Custom and Impost: all
the rent of the Salt Pits, and the Tithe and tents of all prays that are taken
by land or by sea, of all cattle, and of all Haruests in the fields: the
profit also of the Mines, Mines.
whereof there are very many in Seruia, (insomuch as it is called, Prouincia
d' Argento, 1. the Province of Silver) in Bosna about Iaiza, in Macedonia, and
elsewhere. All which jointly together, amounts to a most huge quantity of
gold more or less, according to the greedy avarice of the Prince, and to the
diligence, or rather insaciablenes and extortion of his officers.

Besides all this, Tribute of the Christians.
the Turk does also levy a tribute upon the Christians, which is a Sultanine
upon every Head, or Poll of them, as soon as they are above xiiii. years
old: which tribute is now increased to a higher rate, Tribute of the Turks
themselves.
by occasion of this present war. There is likewise a certain redemption of
that, which is paid by the Turks according to the rate of five and twenty
Aspres a piece, and is called a Gift, because it is expressly forbidden by
their law that the Turks should take any tribute of the Turks.

Lastly, Treasure left.
the now living great Turk, did find in this private Hasnad or treasury,
great store of gold, but not in that excessive quantity, as some have bin
bold to write, which was gathered together by his father, who was very
auaricious and greedy beyond all measure, and as insatiable and careful to
hoorde up, as he was miserable and sparing in spending and giving. The
covetousness of Amurath the third.
He was of the mind that he would sell even the flowers of his own Gardeines:
he paid no debts: he gave nothing, or at least very little to his soldiers:
a thing that was far different from the custom of that Empire. To be short,
he was most respective and heedie in all his expenses as well ordinary as
extraordinary, those only excepted which he laid out upon his women, who
(although they were his slaves) yet was it his pleasure, that when they
departed from his entertainment, and embracement, they should be greatly
enriched, and well furnished with Jewels.

To all these things before rehearsed, there may be added a matter, Yearly
Tributes of Christian princes to the great Turk.
which without tears cannot be remembered, and that is, the tributes (or
rather to use a more modest name for it, the Beneuolences and Gratuities) which
the Christian Princes do usually give to the great Turk. The memory whereof
ought to enkindle, yea and inflame them with a most just disdain and
indignation against so barbarous and unjust a tyrant, and to cause them, that
(as indeed they do in their consciences acknowledge it to be more profitable
for Christendom, and honorable for themselves:) so they would all join
together with one consent to spend the same money for the glory of Christ, and
for there own safety.

XLV.
THe Christian Emperor paid unto the Turk for Hungary, The Emperor
and to have peace with him (if I do well remember my self) forty and five
thousand Dallers.

The Vaiuode of Moldauia paieth one and thirty loades of Aspres, The Vaiuode
of Moldauia.
or little less. A hundred thousand Aspres make a load, which at the time of
the imposition make two thousand Crowns, every Crown being worth fifty
Aspres, which is now worth more then a hundred. And besides, he pays also to
the Tartarian twenty Cart-loades of honey, with four Oxen in every Cart, and
fifty Mares besides. but it may be that by some new composition he pays now
somewhat more or less.

The Vaiuode of Walachia, before it was at the devotion of the Transiluanian
Prince, The Vaiuode of Walachia.
paid fifty loads. Such is the information that I have had from such as have
seen the books of Moldauia, and Walachia: and therefore I do differ somewhat
from those, that have written otherwise hereof.

The Prince of Transiluania, The prince of Transiluania.
paid to the Turk before this present war 15000. Cecchinoes or Ducats.

The state of Ragugia pays. 12500. The state of Ragugi. The state of Venice.
Cecchinoes.

The state of Venice, for the Island of Zante (i. Zacinthus) 1000. Cecchinoes:
as Selem also chalengeth a certain sum of money, before it was bereaved of
the Kingdom of Cyprus, because the Ottoman Empire was somewhat entered into
the Soldanes accounts and reckonings.

The Moscouite also gratifieth the Tartarian for Taurica, The Moscouite.
to avoid the incursions, which the Tartarians are wont to make into his
Country, either of themselves, or at the instance of the Turk.

The Polack paid to the Turk in the year 1591. so many furs of Sables, as
were worth 25000. crowns of gold: but it is not a yearly tribute, as some
have written. Indeed he gives to the Tartarian every year a certain sum
of money, to buy Scimitarres, and apparel withal, by an ancient capitulation
or composition, as it is read in the Histories of Polonia.

I have noted also the gifts which some Princes do bestow upon the Tartarian,
which although they began at the first indeed, before the Turk had any thing
to do with the Tartarian, are yet still continued by the said Princes,
principally to please the Turk.

There be also certain tributes and gifts, which the Princes of Africa, and
of Arabia, The Princes of Africa, Arabia, and Georgia.
and the Ge^rgiani, and others do use to give, but I will omit them, because
they are not of any moment, nor serve any thing to this present purpose.

Finally, there be also many Rewards and Gratuities, Gratuities extraordinary
to the Turk and his Officers.
which the foresaid Princes do bestow extraordinarily upon the officers of that
barbarous Prince to keep them to be their friends: and which upon diverse and
sundry occasions they bestow also upon himself, either to hold him in
friendship, or to pacify his rage and fury (which is sometimes eager in deed,
and sometimes but counterfaite) or else they give it for a certain Ceremony:
because (as I have signified before) he does account this kind of profit to
be very honorable unto him. Besides that all such as desire Offices and
Dignities, or return from the governments of Provinces, or from some notable
enterprice, do bestow upon him (as it were by bond and duty) the godliest and
most precious things which they have gotten: Neither is there any other cause
why his pleasure is that all the presents, which are offered unto him, should
thus openly and in public view be presented to his own presence, but only
with this barbarous pride and ostentation to inflame and provoke both his own
subjects and strangers to bestow the more upon him.

The end of the first Book.
The second part.
Wherein is treated of the purposes and Designments which the Ottoman Princes
have toward other princes: Of the cause of this present war in Hungary; the
beginning and proceeding thereof: wherein for your better understanding, the
original of the said war shall be fetched, even from Amurath, the father of
this now living Mahomet.
NOw that we have seen the nature and conditions of Mahomet, the head and
chief of this Ottoman Empire, and what are the members, strength, and forces
of this most monstrous body, as I may call it: fit and convenient it is: that
for the full and perfect knowledge thereof, we should go about to search the
purposes and designements, which the said Mahomet has against other Princes,
and specially against the Princes Christian: to the end we may the better
understand the true causes of this present war, together with the beginning
and proceedings thereof. But forasmuch as this war began, even in the time of
Amurath, father to the now living Emperor, it will be necessary for our
better intelligence to speak somewhat of him, and to fetch the true original
of the said war even from thence: wherewithal there shall be also discovered
unto you more plainly, all the greatest interests and dealings which he has
with the rest of the Princes in the world.

I.
ANd to begin the same accordingly Amurath, the Lord and Emperor of the Turks
father to the now living Mahomet, The nature and conditions of Amurath the
third.
was a prince (of a Mahometane) very tolerable and discrete. He was a zealous
obseruer of that most vain superstition of the Mushaphum, (for so the Turks
call the Book of their law, The name of the Turks Law-booke.
as the Arabians term it the Al-koran: that is to say most wickedly, as it
were by excellency, (...), the Scripture, as though there were none other
Scripture like it: even as the Jews and Hebrews call the holy Scriptures,
Kara.) He took great delight also in reading the Hystories of his
predecessors, as Selim the first did the Hystories of Alexander the great, Why
Amurath was called Bongi.
and of Julius Caesar: and because he was so studious in Philosophy, he was
called by the Turks in mockage, Bongi, as Bajazet the second was also called
in the same respect. He was no drinker of wine, as his father Selem was. In
the pleasures of sensuality, which are so familiar and tolerable among the
Turks, he was rather co^tinent, the^ otherwise, especially in that most
abominable sin of lechery, and chiefly for many years before the end of his
life. Moreover, if a man that is a niggard and avaricious, may be called a
lover of justice, he was a great lover of that justice which is known among the
barbarians: very careful and desirous he was likewise to understand all the
affairs of other princes, but above all other things, most exact and perfect in
the knowledge of his own estate: insomuch as he had a particular memorial of
all his business, of all his revenues ordinary and extraordinary, and of all
his expenses, which he kept in a book appointed by him for that purpose, and
laid continually upon a little table in his own privy Chamber, and came (as
it were) by inheritance to the now great Turk, even as that of Augustus came
to Tiberius the Emperor. And it may be peradventure, that by reason of these
his too diligent occupations and businesses, or rather in deed by his natural
inclination, he was for the most part very full of melancholy: which besides
that it made him somewhat still and sparing of speech, and oftentimes irksome
and tedious to himself, it also procured him to be exceedingly suspicious of
any matter: Why he did sometimes take Opium.
so that to lighten and quicken himself, he did use sometimes to take Opium:
for the Turks do hold opinion, that the said Simple or Drugge does breed a
good color, and rejoice the heart, as also that he who has once eaten of it,
cannot any more abstain from it. He entertained likewise in his Serraglioes
many Dwarffes and many dumb persons, whom he would cause to fight together
one with another, to the end he might take some pleasure in the sight of so
vain a pastime. He made war rather for religion and exercise of his people,
then for that he was given to war by Nature: and that also he followed not by
himself, but always by his Officers. For he would still glory to himself,
that he had enlarged the confines of his Empire, even as far as the Caspian
sea, only by his own wit and advise, and by the execution and exployte of his
said Captains: a matter which his predecessors could never perform or bring
to pass in their own persons. He warred for the space of fifteen or sixteen
years with Mahomet Codabenda king of Persia, son to Sha Tamas, who was the
son of Ismael: and with Abas, that lives at this day, whom some do falsely
call the Miriza: What Miriza is.
for Miriza is the proper title of the eldest son to the king of Persia,
called Sophi, but is not in deed the title of the king himself. He was wont to
say that he had fully resolved with himself never to conclude peace with him,
until he had taken Casbin, which now is the seat royal of the Persian kings:
The true causes why he warred with the Persians.
and that for two causes. One was to recover the ashes of that Bajazet, who was
son to Sultan Soliman, and fled to Tamas to avoid the indignation of his
father, but was put to death by the same Tamas, to the end he might by that
means be reconciled to Soliman. The other cause was to ruinate and utterly
destroy the Sepulcher of Arduelle, father to Ismael, the Author of the Persian
sect or religion: Why Ismael called Sophi.
who was called Sophi, either of the Greek word (...) (that is to say wise)
as though he had been descended from the ancient Magi, or Wisemen of Persia:
or because he was accounted and esteemed to be a Wiseman, (as also for the
same reason Sempronius was so called) or else of the Arabian word Sophi, which
signifies wool, because all the Persians do wear a Tulpante on their
heads, not of very fine linnin cloth as the Turks do, but (to make show of
greater religion) made of Woll, The Persians called Keselbassi.
died into a red color, whereupon they are by the Turks termed in mockage,
Keselbassi, that is to say, Red-heades, or Red-Cappes: that thereby they might
make a difference from the Tartarians of Zegatai, in times past called the
Bactriani, and dwelling beyond the Caspian sea, who because they profess
themselves to be of the right and true descent of Mahomet, The Tarrarians of
Zegatai called Ieschilbassi.
do use to wear it of a green color, and thereupon are called Ieschilbassi,
i. Green Cappes.

Now by the way: A Tulpante, and a Tocca is all one, and signifies that Globe
or Sphere, What a Turbante is: and what it may signify.
full of Circles, great and small, which are in the many turnings and
wreathings of those Linen Rolls, which the Graecians of this time do call
(...), and serves them both for a Cap, and a Hood. And indeed properly it
should be called a Turbante, of the round shape thereof, termed by the Greeks
(...) growing sharp in the top like unto a Sugerloafe, or a Cypres tree, as
the Turks were wont to wear it at the first: but now they wear it more
round. And thereupon it may be peradventure called in the holy Scriptures Pomum
(that is to say, an Apple) namely in the 79. Psalm, where King David bewayling
the taking of the City Jerusalem, says, The Temple of the Lord was given into
the custody of Apples according to the vulgar and common translation, which
place certain Writers not without some reason have interpreted to be meant of
the Turks. And so likewise it may be, that not of Constantinople, but of the
Persian Kingdom, the Red-Apple is to be understood, which the Ottoman Emperor
shall bring into his subjection, before he be utterly subdued by the sword of
the Christians, as is to be red in the Turkish Oracle or Prophecy (if so it
may be called) and is now a long time known to every man, An exposition of a
Turkish prophecy.
and is by diverse men diversely interpreted Others there are, that would
expound the Turbante to be a Symbol or token of Fortitude: whereby those that
do wear the same should be admonished, that when they go to the wars they
should not think to return; but therein gloriously to die, whiles they may
remember that they carry with them the Syndon or winding sheet, wherein they
use to wrap their dead carcasses. The Giannizzaries do not wear the Turbante,
The Iannizzaries Zarcola.
but a Zercola, which is of white Felt, and is iumpe of the same fashion and
shape, as may be seen in diverse pictures, to make a difference from the rest
of the Turks, that wear it of a red color.

II.
ANd now to return again. Why Amurath was content to be at peace with the
Persians.
At the last Amurath was pacified with the Persian: but weary he was and so
were his people also, of so long a war, and therefore he might be well
contented with this pacification considering especially that he had conquered
so much Country, and achieved so great glory withal. Moreover he thought
also, that by ths means he might the more soundly establish his state, and
better secure the new Inhabitants, which he had planted in his new conquered
countries, by distributing among them all the Timari, that were to be raised
thereof, and by building diverse fontes therein, which should be cited and
seated in such manner as one of them might easily help and succor the other.

. III.
VVHiles Amurath thus enjoyed this peace, from which as being a man given to
study and Melancholy, he did not of himself greatly abhor, he was
counseled and advised by his Visiers to renew the war.

Now these Visiers are the chief counselors of war, Who the Visiers be.
and of estate: and the council or assembly of these men, is called by the
Turks Diuano, as has been before declared, and not Capi, What the Porta is.
that is to say, the Porta, which properly is the Court; wherein is also in
diverse other things the Turks do imitate and follow the Persians, who (as ye
may read in Xenophon) did call the Court by that name.

The reasons whereby they moved and advised him to renew the war, The reasons
of the Visiers to move Amarath to make war.
were these. Namely, that great Empires and states cannot be maintained without
the help of force and arms: that as long as the common wealth of Rome kept
wars with the Carthagenians, and the Emperors of Rome in Germany, that
Empire lasted and continued. That so likewise had the Ottoman Emperors done in
times past, who do not hold the end of war to be peace, as the Princes of
Christendom, and other weak princes do, but they take the only end of
war to be war, whereby the Turks have not only amplified and enlarged
their Empire to that huge greatness, wherein now it is, but have also kept
their subjects occupied and busied: and so have diuerted them from civil
seditions and insurrections, which for the most part are bred and nourished by
ease and idleness. To be short, that the subjects, whiles they continue in
peace, some grow to be cowards, some apply themselves too greedily to trades
and traffike, and some to spoiling and robbery, insomuch that thereby there
will be utterly lost the knowledge of the Sea-warres, which has now a long
time been almost abandoned, and of the land-warre also, if for any long space
they should cease to make wars. And consequently they should want Captains,
and valiant or hardy Soldiers, because the only use of war does inure men to
become good warriors, and makes them exceedingly courageous. And certain it
is, that matters which are achieved and gotten, are preserved by the same
means whereby they be gotten.

Besides these Visiers and Bassaes, that labored to persuade him hereunto, in
regard of their own interest and benefit, especially the two concurrents and
opposites Sinan and Ferat, who without wars were held in no great credit, or
account, nor could enrich themselves according to the greedy desires of the
Barbarians: their were also the Agentes of France, of England, and of the
Prince of Geilan, which endeavored to persuade the same, by such reasons, as
shall be told you in due place.

IIII.
But Amurath would not resolve upon any thing: The reasons why Amurath would
not resolve upon war.
not because he was not persuaded to make war, but because he was not
thoroughly certified, what advantage would grow unto him by moving war, rather
against one prince then against another: and so much the rather, for that the
Visiers did differ in their several counsels and aduises among themselves.
And for as much as their sundry opinions did comprehend the chiefest and most
principal interests of the world and specially of Christendom: I thought with
my self, that it would be a matter not displeasing to such as willingly shall
read this discourse, to relate them all in particular, and with such good order
and facility, as the reports themselves, and the pronunciation of that
barbarous tongue will suffer me. And so by that mean I shall give you a more
full and certain knowledge of the Ottoman affairs, A note for Christian
Princes.
and therewithal note also unto our Princes the purposes and designements of
that tyrant, not only to the end that they might in time look about them,
and bethink themselves of fit remedies for the same, but also the sooner
resolve, valiantly to band themselves together in one, for the vanquishing and
overthrow of him.

V.
THeir opinions were eight in number. The first: The 8. several opinions of
the Visiers.
that in any case the war should be renewed against the Persian. The second:
that they should rather bend their forces against the king of Fez, and Morocco.
The third: against the Isle of Malta. The fourth: against the king of Spain.
The fifth: against the state of Venice. The sixth: against Italy. The seventh:
against Polonia. And lastly, the eight against the Emperors.

VI.
THe reasons of their several opinions were these. The first opinion, to move
war against Persia: and the reasons thereof
And first, touching the renewing of the war against Persia (a kingdom which
the Turks comprise under the name of Azemia:) they argued, that when soever the
king should see the great Turk entangled in other enterprises, he would surely
break the peace, as well for the recovery of his Country, which was lost with
small honor and credit, as also to be revenged at one time or other, of all
the old griefs and injuries that he had received of the Ottoman Emperors.
That he should be provoked thereunto and assisted therein by the Christian
Princes, and specially by the king of Spain, who could very well do it by the
way of the Indies, and by sending unto him (as at sundry other times he had
done) enginers, Gunners, and such other helps. That the Country was not yet
well settled, the fortresses were new, and the Inhabitants (lately planted) in
great danger, and somewhat too far off, to be relieved in time. That if the
Persians would do nothing else, but ransacke and forage the Champaine, the
said Inhabitants should be compelled and enforced to yield and give place,
unless they would perish for hunger. That not to atchieue or obtain, but to
prosecute and follow a victory, is the true glory. That the Turk should take
good heed, not to offend the great prophet Mahomet, nor to move him to
indignation or wrath, considering that he had obtained greater victories
against the enemies of his Religion, then ever his predecessors had obtained in
former times: and therefore it was fit and convenient, and it was also the
duty of a religious and thankful prince, not to omit the injuries that were
done both to God and man. There was added to this, that Vsbegh-Han had
voluntarily offered to serve him in this war, and so had the prince of Geilan
also.

This Vsbegh-Han, is the Prince of those Tartarians, Who Vsbegh-Han is.
that dwell at the furthest end of Persia, in that part which the Turks do
call at this day Bahera, in old time Bactra, and are called Ketzie-Bassi, What
Tartarians are called Ketzie-Bassi and why?
because they wear Caps covered with felt. It is not long ago since the said
Vsbegh died, and left behind him a son, who may now be about some twelve
years of age. Where Geilan is.
Geilan, is also a Country more toward the East of the Caspian sea.

Moreover, that he need not to make any doubt of victory, considering the good
success that he has had heretofore. That he had no cause to fear their
Harquebuses: for they had but few, and the Turks can better handle them then
the Persians: nor yet their horses, although they were of the Arabian and
Caramanian race, the relikes of Amurath the second, for they had many times and
often bin put to flight for very cowardice. And lastly, that he could not
doubt, least the Gurgini (so do the Turks call the Georgiani, The Georgians.
in times past the Iberi) should make any stir in aid and favor of the
Persians. For part of them are his own Subjects, and under the jurisdiction of
the Bassaes of Teflis, and of other places thereabouts, after they were made
Bassalucches by Mustapha: part also of them are his tributaries: and it is well
known, that the rest are contented to live under their Lords, Simon and
Alessandro, without attempting to seek better fortunes, but to defend their
own Country. Which although it be but small, and not very hard to be kept
and defended, yet is it very strong by situation, and almost vnpassible, for
the Mountains, for the Woods, and for the strait places that compass it
about.

VII.
TOuching the second opinion, The 2. opinion to make war upon the king of Fez
and Morocco, and the reasons thereof.
which was for the bending of their forces against the Siriffo in Africa, it
was thus debated. That it was a great dishonor to the Ottoman Empire, that
they had not as yet overthrown and subdued those Moors. That it was as great
a shame, that they had so small a portion in Africa, considering that it was
the third part of the world, and being so near unto Italy, did so greatly
vex and trouble the Romans. That Algier and Tunise would never be secure, nor
the Subjects and Sea-rouers thereof satisfied, until they had gotten the full
rule and dominion of that kingdom. The cape of Aguera. The haven of Araza.
That if they wholly reduce into their power and possession the Cape of Aguero,
and the Haven of Araza or Larace (which indeed is situate without the strait,
and not within it as some have written) places very fit and convenient for the
English, that get many booties in those seas, as also for diverse others both
friends and enemies to the Moors, the Turkish navigations should be thereby the
more secured. That this king of the Moors, although he be a Mahometane, and a
Tributarie to the Ottoman Empire, yet very lately he had held secret
intelligence with the King of Spain, and also with the knights of Malta, who
by means thereof were like to to have taken Tripoli: and that he had likewise
maintained and assisted the insurrection of Marabut, and of his successor. The
rebellion of Marabut.
That though he were mighty for men, yet he was poor in money. And lastly that
although the Spaniards do hold in Africa, Certain places which the Spaniards
hold in Africa.
Maraschebir, Oran, the Pegnon, Tanger, Arsilla, Mazagan, and Ceuta, or Septa
and therefore may combine themselves with the Moors to the great damage of the
Turks: yet notwithstanding they might be brideled with an Armada of ships,
and by passing also if need were, even into Spain. Tunise and Goletta.
And withal, that the examples of Tunise, and Goletta, which was held to be
impregnable, and yet was taken by Sinan, to his exceeding glory, were so fresh
in memory, that they could not choose but remember them.

VIII.
TOuching the third opinion, The third opinion to conquer Malta, and the reason
thereof.
which was for the sending of an Armada to conquer the Isle of Malta, it was
said: that considering the Mahometanes, both in their traffikes, and also in
their pilgrimages, Pilgrimage to Meka.
as they went to Mecca, received most notable losses by the Galleys of those
knights: the great Turk ought to command that in any case order might be
taken to secure that voyage, not only for religions sake, but also to be
avenged of the trespasses and wrongs already done unto them, or rather to
recover the glory of Soliman, who in vain, and without any good success
attempted to surprise it. That all the Subjects cried out and Exclaimed for the
enlarging and delivery, some of their friends, and some of their kinsfolks
that were there in captivity: saying, that so did their forefathers, The Isle
of Rhodes.
when they spoiled and deprived the same knights of the Isle of Rhodes, the
chief fortress and defense of the Christians in the East. Moreover, that they
deserved due chasticement also, as well because they had furnished those that
rebelled against the grand Turk in Africa, with munition of war: as also
because they endeavored to surprise Modone on a sudden.

IX.
TOuching the fourth opinion, The fourth opinion against the king of Spain:
and the reasons thereof.
which was to move wars against the King of Spain, it was said: that if the
Ottoman Empire were determined to attain the Monarchy of the whole world, it
was not possible to be achieved, unless the mightines of that Prince were
first weakened, who without al doubt was the greatest both for state and riches
that Christendom had. That it could not be feared least the said King of
Spain should assault Algieri, Algieri.
for that it was now a great deal better fortified then it was in the time of
Crai the Spaniard: (for so by a Sclauoinetearme, How the Turks call Charles the
fifth.
the Turks of the Court do call Charles the fifth.) That although Spain should
take courage to enterprise such a matter, in regard of the losses which it
receives continually by the Pirates of Africa, yet it would be restrained from
so doing for very fear, least it should bring an Armada of enemies into those
seas, who might peradventure endomage it greatly. That the Spanish Galleys
would not hazard themselves to come into the Leuante, because they would not
be so far from home. Moreover, that the resolutions of that King, either in
regard of his many businesses, or in some other respect are very slow. And as
it is manifestly seen by that which they did at Preuesa, and Nauarino, the
Spaniards do utterly refuse even for their own commodity and benefit to
encounter with the Ottoman forces. That the said King of Spain walks with
great consideration: for (if it be true) in the latter end of the Persian war,
he denied to aid the king of Persia, when he might have succored him as
before he had done. That although he would peradventure stir in defense of
himself, and his state against the Turkish forces, yet he could not so do in
deed: considering that he is so greatly occupied in the maintenance of
Flanders, How greatly the king of Spain may be troubled with the Moors, the
French, and the English.
and recovery of the low Countries* which are very strong both in regard of
the Sea floods, and of the many rivers that are therein: and so much the more
troubled he is, by reason of the obstinate and constant resolution of that
people, for the preservation of their liberty and religion: and likewise in
respect of the great enmity which is between that king and the Queen of
England, who does greatly ease that war, by troubling him in his state of
Portugal, by intercepting his treasures of the Iudies, and by sacking his
kingdoms, as particularly she did at the Groine, which is a place of very
great importance to annoy Spain, to disturb the navigations of the Indies, and
also to attempt diverse other places in that other navigations of the Ocean.
Moreover, that he was so far interessed in the wars of France, that he could
not wholly turn himself any whither else. How the king of Spain may be
diuerted to the Persian Gulf.
To be short: that suppose he be reconciled, and at peace with the said
princes, so that with more safety and ease he might attend this principal
enterprise in tended against him, yet might the Turk damnifie him in his
Spices and other Marchandizes, yea, and (if need were) he might divert him
into the Red Sea, otherwise called the Persian Gulf, by means of the Galleys,
that lie so conveniently and commodiously for that purpose at Suez: or he
might surprise some good fortress of his, as was attempted against the
Portingales for Diu, and Ormuz, and as Alfonso d' Albuguerque, the Portugal
Viceroy in the Indies, thought once to have done, Alfonso d' Albuquerque.
when he meant to have stolen away the bones of Mahomet, by a sudden
incursion into the Country with certain light horsemen, even as far as
Mecca: and as it was done at other times, while the Soldans reigned: and also
as Tratan the Emperor was minded to have done in his time. Again, that the
passages into Africa might be much troubled, especially if the Turk would set
upon the Spanish coast in the Mid-land sea, which would be a great contentment
to the subjects, who do continually make humble petition and supplication for
it, as well in regard of the safety of their traffic and pilgrimages, as
also that the poor Moors might once be delivered from the dominion of the
Spaniard, The Moors weary of the Spanish government.
as Selim at the lest was persuaded to have done. And so much the rather, for
that the said Moors, who are now multiplied into a great number, although they
keep close both for fear, and also for their traffic, whereby they are
grown to be very rich, yet as well by nature, as also for Religion, do
bear a mortal hatred against the Spaniards. Moreover, that this course might
easily be performed by reason of the conueniencie of the havens in Africa,
which lie near at hand: and also because the said Princes of France and
England, have offered to continue their wars, with him: the King of France,
by disquieting him in the parts of Nauarra, for the challenge which he has
thereunto: and the Queen of England (as it has been said) not only by
setting upon him in the West Indies, and in the Ocean, which she may do both
by North and by West, but also by raising again some new stirs in Portugal,
where there does not want great store of Mal-contents. For that people does
think, that with the loss of their last king, they have also lost all their
wealth and prosperity: because that as under his government they grew rich by
the peace that he entertained with the said princes of France and England: so
under the Spaniards dominion they do find, that by the wars they live in
continual perils and danger. Again, there be many banished and discontented
persons, not only of the kingdom of Portugal, but also of the kingdom of
Aragon in France, in England, and in Constantinople, who together with many
Moors, (which also were in Constantinople) have offered many aids and helps
both secretly and openly: and have promised that the enterprise will be very
easy, when so ever Spain shall be set upon, especially if it be done upon a
sudden. For the greatest part of that kingdom does want the use of military
knowledge: Spain not well exercised in military knowledge.
because the people of that Country do not apply themselves to arms, neither
are there any ordinary bands of Soldiers over all the realm: and but a small
number of horses neither. Moreover, that the Subjects, which Spain sends
forth into the Indies, into Flanders, and into Italy, are so many in number,
Spain wants men.
as they do greatly weaken it: yea, so much, that if occasion should so fall
out, it should not only want help of their own, but also should stand in
need to be relieved with the aid and assistance of other states that are near
unto them, and subjects of the same crown, who peradventure would prove to be
of no great good service, and so much the less, because they may easily be
stopped, and diuerted some other way.

X.
THe fifth opinion, The fifth opinion, to break peace with Venice: and the
reasons thereof.
was to break the peace with the state of Venice: For this said they, which
endeavored to persuade the great Turks mind thereunto, rather with apparent
reasons, then with such as were true in deed: (though peradventure, every man
easily believing that which he desires, they might seem very probable and
likely to the Turks:) that no enterprise happily would prove less hard and
difficult then this, as it might be found by the experience and examples of
such actions as had passed heretofore: especially seeing the Turks not many
years ago having warred with the Venetians, and surprised somewhat of theirs,
had received many and great satisfactions at their hands to make peace with
them. That the said Commonwealth and State of Venice, accounting peace to be
the end whereat it shoots, it should seem that the people is timorous and
cowardly, and by their ancient ordinances and customs, do never prepare
themselves to war, but when they are drawn unto it by force: that peradventure
they will think to be overcome, before they look for it, as it fell out with
them for the kingdom of Cyprus. That if the said state would make resistance
by it self alone, perhaps it has not forces sufficient: if joined in
confederacy with others, The king of Spain cannot help Venice against the
Turk.
it could not perform any great matter in haste, by reason of the many
difficulties, that depend upon leagues: and namely of the several cogitations
and interestes, wherewith the Spanish king is now entangled: in regard whereof
it was enforced at last to make peace with Selem. Moreover, that it was a hard
matter, if not impossible, that the said king, being so greatly occupied in his
other wars, could at this time join in league with that state: and also that
without him all other confederacies, to ache war by Sea, were of no
importance or consideration. And as for the Pope, though it be very likely,
that he will do all that possibly he can do, What relief the Pope can yield to
Venice.
to keep the Christian princes from annoying the said state, but rather will
advertise and admonish them to aid and succor it: yet the most that he can
do himself is only that he may yield it some assistance, either of moneys,
or of some Ecclesiastical profits, or else peradventure he may send to join
with their Armada, his five Galleys, which together with the Galleys of Malta,
of Sauoy, and of Florence, can make no mo but twenty in all, at the most. And
besides, that the said state of Venice has not happily that good intelligence,
with all the rest of the Christian princes, which in such a case were needful
for it, (but the Turks are therein greatly deceived.) And to be short, seeing
it has spent great store of gold in discharging the debtes of the Treasury,
whereinto it had run by the last wars, and by building many fortresses, it
will be found peradventure not so well provided and furnished with money. And
lastly, that all that state being very full of forts, it is impossible at one
time to keep them all well fenced, and sufficiently strengthened. Diversity of
opinions among the Bassaes, how and where to annoy Venice.


But for as much, as it seemed, that the greatest part of the Visiers did
concur in this opinion, but yet varied among themselves, how to attempt this
enterprise: I will set down their differences in particularitie.

Sinan the Albanian, Sinan and his death.
of Topoiano, a town of the Sangiaccheship of Preseremo, who died the last
year of a natural death, but peradventure somewhat discontented, because the
war of Hungary succeeded not according to his mind: (and yet some think
rather that he died of poison:) he persuaded, that Corfu should be attempted,
under the pretense of 3. hundred Ducats a year, due to the Imperial Chamber
of Turkey, He persuades to attempt Corfu.
ever since the year 1537: for La Bastia, because it was yielded to the
Corfiottes but upon that condition.

La Bastia is a wast and desert place, being under a town of the Turks in
Epirus, La Bastia.
twelve miles right over against Corfu, near to the Salt pittes, which are in
the Turks possession at the mouth of the river Calamatta: and is the
principal port and Staple for the Marchandizes, which come from a great part
of Greece, to be embarked at Corfu.

But in very deed Sinan endeavored to persuade this attempt, because the
Fortress of Corfu was thought to be unvanquishable, both by Nature and by
Art: and he being exceedingly ambicious to atchieue the name and title of a
great Conqueror, was so bold and hardy, especially upon the exployte which he
did at Goletta, as to promise to himself a very easy conquest of this also:
as in truth he did not stick to vaunt that he could perform it, when he
passed by Corfu, Goletta^*
in his victorious return from the enterprice of Goletta.

Ferat, who was called Carailam, that is to say, the Black-Serpent, Ferat
Bassa, and his death.
and died also the last year, being by Mahomet caused to be strangled: (how
wisely and considerately, I leave to the judgment of those that understand
matters of state better then I do.) For he was accused to have practiced
intelligence with the Tartarian of Crimo, that he should refuse to come to the
Turkish camp, because Ferat himself was not General thereof: and to have
endeavored also a reconciliation for Michael the Vaiuode, and the
Tra^siluania^, both at one time, by giving the court to understand that they
had not rebelled for any hatred which they carried indeed against the Turks, but
rather upon an indignation conceived against Sinan. Al which he labored only
of purpose to bring the said Sinan into disgrace, whom he held to be his
most capital enemy, because he was made Masul, Ferat degraded.
that is to say, he was degraded, for the tumult and stir that fell out
between the Iannizzaries and the Spahoglanes, at the circumcision of the
now-reigning Turk. This Ferat advised, that Catharo should be conquered, He
aduertiseth to attempt Catharo.
because he thought that the said Fortress did keep Castle Nuouo (as it
were) in bondage, and that it was the principal key of Dalmatia, of the
Adriatike Sea, and of Venice. Andronig.
And also that he being borne at Adronici, a Castle of Albania, could very
well know even from his youngest years, that the said Fortress, which is
famous in that province, was of so great importance, as in truth it is.

I have somewhat enlarged this Discourse of the particulars touching Sinan and
Ferat, because I have had occasion many times (as I shall also have hereafter)
to make mention of them, as the most principal men in this Empire, and in this
war.

Sinan Cicali, Sinan Cicala persuades to attempt Cerego.
an errant enemy to the state of Venice, for the reasons which we have above
alleged, he persuaded that Cerigo should be attempted, for the selfsame
causes, for which he calls it the Lantern of the Archipelago, and the spy
of the Turkish actions, especially for that it is manifestly perceived and
seen: how the Christians may easily pass over into Morea, out of this Island.
So did Damaratus king of the Lacedaemonians, Demaratus K. of Lacedaemonians.
when he was banished out of his kingdom, advice and counsel Xerxes, that if
he would attain to the Lordship and government of Greece, he must possess
himself of this Island which at this time was called Cythera.

Other Bassaes there were, Other Bassaes persuade the attempt of Nouigrade and
Zara.
which held opinion, that to be revenged of the spoils and robberies committed
by the Vscocchi (of whom I will speak somewhat hereafter) and to meet with
other their wrongs and injuries, they should surprise Nouigrad and Zara: or at
the least, that the Venetians should be enforced and of necessity constrained
by that means to be bound, to pay all the losses and damages which those rouers
and thieves had wrought against the Turks, both by land and by sea. For the
Venetians had denied to be bound to make any such recompense, because in the
public Books and Registers of Constantinople, there was not to be found any
agreement, or any payment for the same, as in truth there was not. The fishings
of Butintro.
The same Bassaes also were of opinion, that it were fit the Venetians should
be spoiled and bereaved of their Fishings at Buthroto, which at this day is
corruptly called Butintro, (a place directly over against Corfu, and ten miles
somewhat more West of La Bastia. (Whereunto they were moved, not because the
Turks were never heretofore possessed of them (although the Venetians had
possessed the same, long before the Turks had any possession in Albania) but
only because there runs a rumor among them, that the said fishings are
rented at a hundred thousand ducats, where as in deed there is no more paid
for them, then six thousand or thereabouts.

Some other Bassaes were of opinion, that the Turkish fleet should upon a
sudden go forth with a good wind, Others persuade to attempt the coasts of the
Adriatike sea.
either from Morea, or from the gulf of Lepanto, or from Preuesa, or else from
Velona, and run all along the coasts of the Adriaticall sea, with a full
resolution to surprise that part that should be found most convenient and
commodious for them. Which course they did think would very easily sort to
very good purpose, because they presumed, that all the places which lay upon
the sea, might very fitly be annoyed also upon the land, for that the Turks
have almost all that Country in their possession. These Bassaes likewise above
all other attempts, Others Pola.
propounded the easiness and also the great importance of possession Pola, and
Ragugia. The one because it is a City, which is altogether disinhabited, and
has a very fair haven, and is situate in Istria, and is also a province not
very well furnished with Soldiers and inhabitants, nor greatly strengthened or
fenced with Fortresses: and principally, because it seems that the said City
of Pola, is not distant from Venice, above a hundred and twenty miles. And the
other, that is to say Raegugia, because it is (as it were) the second Gate,
Others Ragugi.
(for the first and chiefest is thought to be Corfu) whereby you may enter
into the Maritimall and Sea-state of the Venetian Commonwealth in the
Adriaticall sea, and also because the situation therefore, is most fit and
convenient for preparation to be made therein, for annoying of Italy, if they
should mean so to do in good earnest: especially, for that the state of
Rugugia has within it most safe and spacious ports and havens, whereof indeed
the Turk has great want in that quarter of the sea.

For Durazzo has not any haven able to receive four Galleys, What ports the
Turk has in the Adriatike sea.
and also in the entrance thereof, there are many flattes and shelfes which are
very dangerous. Twelve miles beyond Durazzo, under the Cape or Promo^torie of
Lacchi, there is an other harborough for twenty galleys, or there aboutes, but
it is not very safe: neither are there any great good waters about it. In the
Gulf of Velona, there is also an other harborough under the land for so many
gallyes likewise. Somewhat nearer on this side, about some eight miles, is the
Haven called Porto Raguseo, where may lodge some thirty Gallyes, but not very
safely on the North, on the Northwest, nor on the West. Without the Gulf, at
least in the coast of Albania, or rather within the Gulf (for the ancient
Authors do bound the Adriaticall Sea with the mountains of Cimmeria) there
is first the Haven of Santi quaranta (i. the forty Saints) where likewise they
may entertain some few Gallyes. And a little on this side of that, is Neribo,
sometimes called Orico: where the Romanians touched, when they departed from
Ottranto, to the end they might afterward sail all along that coast. And this
Haven is able to receive forty Galleys: but it is not very safe. The only
havens of Ragugia, which be five or six, The haven of Santa Croce.
are of the greatest receyte: in three whereof especially in the Haven of
Santa-Croce, there may be entertained and harbored all the Armadaes of the
world, much more the fleet of the Turkish Ships. The same place also is
very fit and convenient for the Turks, because they may easily conueigh
thither their timber for ships, from the Mountains of the Ducagini in Albania:
which cannot so commodiously be brought into the other ports above mentioned
as I have somewhat more at large declared in other writings that I have penned
upon the occasion of this war.

But the greatest part of the Visiers inclined most to the attempt of the Isle
of Candie, Others persuade to attempt the Isle of Candie.
for (said they) seeing it is most necessary to secure the navigations, which
the Turks continually make from Constantinople to Alexandria, for
Marchandises, and for devotion to Mecca, that they might be safe from the
Galleys of Spain, of Malta, and of Florence, it could not otherwise be
brought to pass, What the Emirs are, and why they wear a green Turbante.
but by one of these two ways, as a captain of the Emirs once said. ( These
Emirs profess themselves to be of the right and true descent from their Law
giver Mahomet, and therefore they wear a green Turbante:) that is to say,
either by binding the Venitians, that they shall not only forbear to give
entertainment to the said Gallyes within there Seas, but also make
satisfaction for all losses, that the Turks shall sustain, as often as they
shall not safely guarde their said ships from all such dangers. Or else by
causing the Venetians to suffer and permit a good company of Turkish Gallyes
to be resident at Candie for that purpose. Hereunto they added also, that this
attempt would prove the better, and come to good success, because that
kingdom is divided in it self, by reason of the difference which is between
the Greek Religion, and the Latin, and for the great discontentments, which
some (but falsely and vainly peraduentur) do report, to be grown between the
noble men of Venice, and the Noble men of Candie, between those that are
privileged persons, and those that are tied to impositions and taxes, and
between the Clownes and the Gentlemen there. And so much the rather, for that
it is a very easy matter to set upon it with a Turkish Armada, seeing it is
(as it were) compassed about with Natolia, with Caramania, with Barbary, with
Alexandria, with Morea, and with the Arcipelago, which are all Countries
belonging to the Turkish Empire: so that they may easily from hand to hand aid
and succor those that should first attempt to disturb therein. Moreover, that
by the purchase and winning of this most fruitful Island, they should obtain
the absolute command and rule of the Sea, for that it is (as it were) the
very Center in the middle of the Mediterranean Sea, or rather of the world,
considering that it is almost equally distant in situation from Asia, Africa,
and Europe, so that it was by the ancient Authors adjudged the most fit and
convenient seat of all the world. And this also might so much the more easily
be brought to pass, for that thereby the number of the Venetians Galleyes
should be diminished, and the Ottoman Empire should increase the means to make
many more Gallyes, then now they have. Lastly, seeing there are many Candiotes
remaining in Constantinople, they may have good information, and some aid also
of them, and so much the more, because many of them are banished persons, and
have either withdrawn themselves into that City to get their livings, by
laboring in the Arsenall, and in Pera, or else are come thither with
marchandises, and specially their most precious wines, which they bring
thorough the Greater Sea* and from thence to the mouths of the Danowe, and so
to Chilia, The waye^ how the Muscadels of Candie are conuayed into Polonia,
Moscouie and Germany.
to Galaz, to Rene, even to the Floz in Walachia, and then in Carts into
Polonia: For into Germany they are brought, not by that way (as some write)
but by the Ocean to Hamburgh, and to Lubeke, and some few to Danske: and yet
there are some carried thither also by the way of Venice.

. XI.
THE Sixth opinion was, The Sixth opinion to attempt Italy, and the reasons
thereof.
that leaving all these other courses and enterprises, all the Forces, that the
Turks could make as well by Land, as by Sea, should be sent against Italy: And
the reasons were these, That if they were minded indeed to attempt the conquest
of the Monarchy of the world, the Turkish Empire should never attain unto
it, unless it first obtained the Rule and Lordshippe of Italy: because out of
that Province, as from the Center of the universal world there do proceed all
the counsels and principal assistances, that may hinder and cross the
proceedinges which are attempted elsewhere. That the Romans became to be
Lords and Masters of the world, because they had the government of Italy in
possession. That the Hunnes did always direct all their designementes to that
only end, when they passed into Italy out of Hungaria, by Dalmatia, and by
Carso. That the Alanes and the Goths, The Romans. The Hunnes. The Alani. The
Goths. The Vandales.
as well those that dwelt on this side, as those also on the other side of the
Danowe, after they had conquered Grecia, entered into Italy by the way of
Bosna and Croatia. That the Vandales also, having subdued Spain, went thither
with an Armada of ships out of Africa: And lastly, That the Germans, the
Frenchmen and the Spaniardes, The Dutch. The French. The Spanish. The Saracens.
had oftentimes done the like. Moreover, that the Saracens (of whom it was
wont to be said in the Romans times, that it was very convenient either not
to have them enemies, or to keep them friends,) had ouerrunne it all
thorough, kept it a long while in their possession, and sacked Rome it self,
the Lady and Empress of the world: A City, which (as Sultan Soliman very
fondly said according to the report of Iouius) did of right belong to the
Ottoman Empire, The foolish speech of Soliman touching Rome.
because it was alienated by Constantine, to the great prejudice of his
successors. To be short, that there could no enterprise be attempted, either
more glorious or more profitable, then this of Italy, for that it is the
Province, which is Queen of all the rest, The praise of Italy.
for conueniencie of situation, for temperature of air for fruitfulness for
all things necessary for man's life, for the majesty and beauty of so many
most famous and noble Cities, for riches, for the very Sea, and seat of the
Christians religion, for the ancient Glory and mightiness of that Empire,
and for many other respects. That it would also be a very easy matter to
bring to pass, for that Italy is at this day ruled and governed by many
Princes which are divided among themselves, as well in regard of their own
private interestes, as also of several nations, whereof they are proceeded:
and that peradventure they are not all very willingly and lovingly obeyed of
their Subjects and peoples, who by reason of the peace, which they have so many
years enjoyed, will prove to be but cowards and weakelings: and for that also
they are grown to such a huge multitude, as if entrance should be made into
the Country, either in one part or in many, at such times as their corn were
yet ripening in their fields, as the Turks should on their behalfes want no
vittailes, so should the Italians be of necessity constrained either to shut
up themselves within their fortresses, or else to perish for hunger. Which
thing will be made more manifest and clear, if ye shall consider, that now
whiles they live in peace, they have not corn sufficient for their sustenance,
but are enforced to provide the some abroad, and to cause it to be brought to
them from Morea, How the Italians provide themselves of Corn.
from Constantinople, and even as far as from the Ocean. Moreover, that the
Italians are accustomed for the most part to procure their livings with
handi-crafts, or with traffic, in such sort, as if their trades were
hindered, they should be compelled so much the rather to yield to such
conditions as the conqueror shall impose upon them, or at least to become
tributaries, and acknowledge the Ottomans power. And besides, that the Turkish
Soldiers would willingly go thither, because they are not to pass through
Countries, which are barren, frozen with Ice, and disinhabited, or through
thick bushes and woods, or mountains vnpasseable, but as it were in the sight
of their own houses, and through their own proper Countries. And lastly, that
if the Turks have entered therinto at other times, when their borders and
confines were not so convenient, nor so near as now they are: much more may
they, or rather ought to attempt the same at this time, seeing they have them
now so nigh and commodious.

XII.
THE seventh opinion was that they should make war first in Polonia, The
seventh opinion, to war against Polonia, and the reasons thereof.
and then afterward in Hungary and Germany. The reasons thereof were these:
That forasmuch as it did not stand with the dignity of the Ottoman majesty, to
suffer the king of Polonia so often to refuse the payment of his Tribute, it
was very fit, that all forcible means should be used to recover the same.
That for the many discontentmentes, which have passed in that Kingdom, there
was very good hope that he might the more easily be enforced to pay it. That
the war should be very convenient and commodious for the Turks, because
Polonia was so near, and bordered upon Moldauia, and upon the Tartarians, and
also upon the Sangiackeshippes of Achermano, and of Bendero, and upon Vosia.
Again, That the entier and quiet possession of Moldauia, and Walachia, could
never be kept and maintained, unless the hardy boldness of the Polackes were
brideled: and so much the more for that the Vaiuodes of those provinces,
although they were greatly enriched, yet could they never recover themselves
in any distress, nor be relieved any where but in the Turks kingdom. That
by these means also the injuries might be revenged, which were wrought
against the Turks by the Cosacchi, when they sacked Coslou, The Cosacchi
Coslou.
a place in Taurica belonging to the Turkish state: that thereby likewise the
passage should be eased for their Marchandises, that go from the Turkish
States into Moscouie: that the Moscouite himself should be put in a bodily
fear, (and that peruaduenture to his great loss and damage) because his
Country lay so near, especially, considering that he was the impediment,
why the Ottoman Empire achieved not the to rall conquest of Persia. That
growing in this sort so nigh unto Germany, it may be that one only
discomfiture would utterly overthrow the Emperor, for that he should see his
Country the more easily compassed about with the Ottoman Forces: That to be
short, all the Country of Polonia is very open and without Fortresses, and
that the Polackes themselves were not now to be accounted any great warriors,
because they have lived so long in peace. For the wars which they made with
Maximilian were but of small continuance, and the other wars which were made
before by King Stephen with the Muscouite, were made by him as he was an
Hungarian, and rather with Hungarian Soldiers, then with Natural Polackes,
and rather with besieging, then with fighting.

XIII.
THE eight and last opinion was, The eight opinion to war against the Emperor:
and the reasons thereof.
that war should be made against the Emperor, whom the Turks call, The
King of Betz, that is to say, of Vienna, in times past peradventure Vindoniana.
Those which were of this opinion, were moved thereunto: for that the Vscocchi
were become so insolent in praying upon the Turks both by land and by sea, The
insolences of the Vscocchi.
as not only in regard of the losses, which they continually wrought, but also
even for the honor of the Ottoman majesty, they could no longer be endured:
and so much the rather, for that the merchants subject to the Turk, both to
the public and to their own private detriment, have been constrained to
change the Port of Narenta, and to go to Spalato, a Country belonging to the
Venetians, to the end they might carry their Marchandizes into the Christians
Countries, and bring back other Marchandizes for them into Turkey. And yet
they could not by that course go and come safe, neither notwithstanding the
peace, that has been continued with the Emperor and the Venetians. Moreover,
that they also ran up and down by land, stealing men's cattle, burning
towns and villages, and taking children even out of the very arms of their
natural mother. So that there is great reason to fear, least in time they will
be able to become the Lords and masters of some neighbour-Fortresse, which
would be a matter that might turn, not only to the great loss, but also much
rather to the exceeding shame and dishonor of the Ottoman Empire. Again, that
for so much as the Emperor had carried so slender a respect toward the
grand-Turk, whiles he was busied in the wars of Persia, as that he delayed in
deed for a long time to send him his tribute: The easiness of this war.
(for so the Turks call it) he made show thereby that he was rather minded
to break the peace, then to maintain it. That the victory would prove both
easy and certain, for that on the one side he might be assaulted in Croatia,
and on the other side in Hungary, and in Austria. That the country was
fruitful and abounding in all things, very commodious and fit for the
Soldiers, both in regard of the neerenesse thereof, and also because they
should pass thither (almost all the way) by their own houses. That the
principal Holds of the Kingdom of Hungary, namely Belgrado, Buda, and
Alba-Regale, and the rest that are of the greatest importance, were possessed
and guarded vetie well with the Turkish garrisons. And that although some
discomfiture might peradventure happen, yet would they be most convenient
receipts for the Relics of the army, where they may be as well defended and
preserved, as also repaired and renewed with such helps and aids, as are there
nigh at hand. That the Emperor seemed to be inclined rather to peace then to
war: and it may be also, that he is not so well esteemed and obeyed by all
the Princes of Germany, as his degree requires. That all the Princes of
Germany were divided, as well in regard of their interest in Religion, and in
state, as also particularly in respect of the election of the New King of
Romans. That they are almost weary (as some of the Protestant Princes do
severally report) of the government of the house of Austria: and that they
are also too much given to the love of their treasures and riches. And finally,
that seeing there are many years passed since the Germans have handled
neither Lance nor Arcubuse, they cannot now tell how to take Arms, nor to use
them: besides that they will hardly be obedient to their Capitanes. Lastly,
That even as the said Almanes themselves would always dwell in murmur and
distrust with the Hungarians, with the Italians and with the Spaniardes, as
often as they should go to the wars together, because those nations are
naturally not well liked, (I will not say hated) by them: So the said
Dutchmen, being enemies among themselves for the diversity of Heresies which
they follow, will always be afraid, least if the Emperor should obtain the
victory and remain Conqueror, that then they shall be compelled to forsake
their licentious liberty, and to obey the Pope: So that there is no doubt, but
that they will rather forbear to fight, then to help their prince and
themselves. The Emperor can have no aid of other Princes.
To be short, that there could be no fear of any aid or succors, which the
Emperor might have of other princes. Not of the Polacke, nor of the
Transyluanian, as well in regard of the peace, which is between the Great Turk
and the^, as also for that they will be in doubt, least they should draw all
the tide and force of the war into their own States and Dominions. Besides,
that the one of them would be afraid, least he should be enforced to abandon
the Frontiers, and retire himself to the frozen Sea, and the other least he
should be deprived of that Estate, which he possessed by the Grant of the
Ottoman House. Moreover, that the King of Spain, who is the only Man that can
help the house of Austria in deed, is otherwise employed and busied. That the
pope cannot yield supply for all, that shall be needful in this business.
That the Italian princes will not run in haste to spend their Treasures, nor
consume their subjects for an other man's benefit. And for conclusion, That
the State of Venice, doubting that it should thereby provoke the Ottoman
Forces against it self, would rather stay to see the issue and success of the
war, then it would put it self to a certain, or at least to a doubtful
danger of overthrowing it self.

And these were the several opinions of the Visiers, inconsiderate no doubt
for the most part, and agreeable to their barbarous temerity and rashness,
whereby they feign unto themselves that those things are easy, which
afterward by experience they prove not only to be difficult and hard, but
also very dangerous and pernicious.

XIIII.
But for as much as my meaning is to satisfy those also, that may in any sort
doubt of the variety and truth of the things, which I have spoken, I will add
hereunto in brief, how the Turks come acquainted with our matters, and how
we come acqainted with theirs: though it be most certain, that the like
consultations are proper to all Princes, The consultations of Soliman and Selim.
and particularly to the Ottoman Princes, as among other examples, we know that
Soliman, and the last Selim, did use the same, the one of them by examining
with his Bassaes the forces of all the Princes of the world, and the other by
aduising with them, which might be the most certain way to conquer the
Christians.

Without doubt the great Turk, How the Turks come to the knowledge of our
affairs.
and the great men of that Court are very well informed and advertised,
as well of all actions that daily happen, as also of the designementes and
purposes, yea and of the most secret counselles of our Princes, sometimes by
the merchauntes, Merchants slaves.
which of all nations are at Constantinople, and sometimes by the Slaves, whom
the Turks every day. A great number whereof, do also very oftentimes most
impiously deny and renounce the faith and religion of Christ, either for
rewards that are propounded and offered unto them, or else to avoid the most
horrible and cruel punishment, which they had before endured at their
barbarous hands, or peradventure for some other end and purpose, as did of late
years one of the Emperors Secretary, who was resident at Constantinople. The
Emperors Secretary became a Renegado The Jews.
Besides that the Hebrews, who are the most cunning and crafty searchers and
inquirers of matters, and most mortal enemies to the Christians are dispersed
in great number over all the Turkish dominion, especially by reason of the
traffic which they use continually in the Ottoman Market towns, and also for
the tolles and customs which are almost wholly in their hands, through all
that state. And they think, that by serving the Turks for spies and priers
into our actions and affairs they shall not only secure themselves of their
goods, their own persons, and their children, but also that they shall reap
great gain and commodity of importance, whereby they do much gratify and
pleasure the great estates of that Empire. The last war which the Venetians had
with the Turk, was much occasioned by one John Miches an Hebrew, John Miches a
Jew.
who was discontented with them, because he could not by stealth conueigh away
certain marchandizes, which under a forged name he had caused to be brought to
Venice. John Lopes a Jew.
Of one John Lopez, an Hebrew also (whose picture by order of the holy
Inquisition was of late years burned at Rome) it is most certainly known for
a truth, that he imparted and commnnicated with Amurath many secrets of Pope
Xistus Quintus which he by espiall had found and learned whiles he remained in
Rome. Lastly, it is not to be doubted, but that the Turks do also keep
diverse Spies in pay, Spies among Christians.
that are near to all the Princes in Christendom: yea (and that which is a
great matter, but yet it is true) even among the Zwitzers, and Grisons of
purpose to understand what leuies of Soldiers are made of those peoples.

XV.
ANd as touching our Christian Princes, How we come to the knowledge of the
Turks affairs
the expenses are most notorious and well known, which they bestow, not only
to learn the counsels one of another, (and that oftentimes to the great shame
and damage of those that serve them in these actions) but especially and
principally to understand the counsels and designements of the Turk their
common enemy. For those Princes which have the greatest interest and
intercourse with him, do keep (even within the City of Constantinople) many
Spies in pay, Spies, Jews and Turks.
yea giving wages and stipends to the very Jews, and also to such Turks, as
are most in trust, and nearest in credit with the chief Bassaes, besides the
large gifts which they liberally bestow upon others, when they have any matter
of moment communicated unto them. Moreover, The Bassaes.
the Bassaes themselves will not stick sometimes to impart to our Ambassadors
such matters, as are propounded among them in their secret and privy Council
before the great Turk himself: although he does use very oftentimes to call
his Council into the field, taking occasion to go on hunting, to the end it
should not be so easy for any particular persons to sound the depth of his
deliberations. Why the Bassaes disclose the Turks secrets.
But the Bassaes are hereunto moved upon diverse and sundry considerations:
sometimes upon affection, as heretofore did Mahomet Socoleuich the chief
Vizier of Selim, and the Muphti of that time, What a Muphti.
to the Agents of the state of Venice.

Muphti is the chiefest man among the Turks in their spiritual Superstitions,
and the chief Interpreter of the law of Mahomet, and is of so great authority
in show and appearance that in matters of counsel his opinion is never
contradicted or gainsaid: I say in appearance, because when the Turk is
disposed to have any matter go forward in deed, the Muphti either for
flattery, or for fear, is the first and chiefest man to commend it.

Sometimes the Bassaes are moved so to do, for that by quarrelling and iarring
among themselves, they think by these means the more easily to disturb the
designements and purposes of their opposites, as peradventure the aforesaid
Bassaes did, and as Sinan and Ferat at last were wont to do. Or to be short,
they are very oftentimes moved thereunto, because all Turks generally are
beyond all measure greedy of bribes and gifts: as for example among the
Bassaes, that same Hassan showed himself to be, The cunning knauerie of Hassan
Bassaes
who was a Venetian of the Cilestri, and General of the Sea before Cicala. For
when one of the Visiers had offered in Council to the great Turk that he
would surprise the City of Venice, and was not hearkened unto, but rather
reproved for his ridiculous vanity, he went straight to the Venetian Bailo,
or Agent, and told him, that whereas such a matter was propounded in the
Council by others, he withstoode it, for the natural affection which he
carried toward that Common wealth: for the which he received a most rich
present. Lastly, it is true also, that the Ottoman Counselors do reward their
servants, and enrich them by imparting their secrets unto them, to the end
that they may afterward acquaint such withal, as use to be most liberal to
them. The Lady Sultanes.
And so do they likewise to their women: whereupon it comes to pass, that
the Sultane Ladies (who are either the Kins-folkes or the favorites of the
great Turk, dwelling continually in the Serraglioes, where al principal
businesses are managed and handled) become acquainted with these secrets,
which afterward for very rich gifts and presents that are sent to the said
Ladies, from the officers and Agents of such Princes as the secrets do
concern, by the Eunuchs that wait upon them and keep them, are very easily
disclosed and revealed. Moreover they do sometimes endeavor with all their
study and industry, to perform some notable service toward some Prince, to
the end they might receive the oftener and richer Gratuities from him. The
mother of the now reigning Turk, pretends to honor the state of Venice, and
craves of it very many times some reward for the same. It is not long ago
since all the Sultane Ladies requested of the said state, Feathers made of
Glass.
that it would forbid the carrying out of certain feathers that are
counterfeited and forged of glass, at Murano: which being joined and set
together, do much resemble the plumes made of a Hero^s feathers. And this
request they made, because the said counterfeit or forged feathers, were sold
so good cheap at Constantinople, and yet did so please and satisfy the
people, that the said Sultane Ladies could not sell at so high a rate, as
before they did, the goodly bunches and bundles of feathers of several birds,
which were sent unto them for Presents, from diverse quarters in great
quantities: The use of wearing feathers, how and where it began.
for it is the use not only of men, but of women also, to wear such feathers
on their heads: following therein the manner of the Tartarians, (from whom it
came to the Turks:) for that Zingi Chan (who by some is not rightly called
Chan-gio,) was saved alive by the means of an Owl: for this Bird having
alighted upon a certain thicket of young trees, among which Zingi had hidden
himself, for fear of his enemies that pursued him, they did verily think
that there could not be any body there, because the Bird remained there so
quietly. Whereupon the Tartarians (says Haytho) do hold the said Bird in
great reverence, so that he, which at that time could get any of her feathers,
accounted himself a happy man. And ever after, all the other Tartarians from
hand to hand have still continually used to wear the like feathers on their
heads in memory of that action, and for a kind of Reverence.

XVI.
But to return to our discourse where we left it: Amurath resolves to make
war upon the Emperor.
Amurath, after he had floated and wauered certain days between the
contrarieties of these his Visiers Opinions, resolved with himself to move
war against the Emperor, hoping in this part of the world also to surpass
the memory of his predecessors, as he thought he had done in Persia, and so
much the rather, for that he was to make war in a Country adjoining to his
own, and consequently very convenient for Vittailes, and not inconvenient for
his Subjects. Encouraged thereunto by Sinan Cicali.
Hereunto he was also encouraged and heartened by Sinan Cicala, after that he
perceived he had not persuaded the enterprise of Corfu: hoping withal to
obtain the Generalshippe, whereby he might put down his Opposites, and
purchase great riches: especially having authority, as indeed for the space
of seven years he had, to do whatsoever the Great Turk himself might have
done, if he had been present in the Camp. By Hassan the Bassa of Bosna
Moreover Hassan the Bassa of Bosna, a man rather temerarious and headdie, then
valorous: (if ye consider what he did in Croatia) continually solicited
Amurath to the same purpose: both for the self same end, which is common to
all the Turks, that is to say, to enrich himself by the means of war, and
also because he verily believed, that by this course he should safely attain
and come to those supreme honors and dignities, which were foretold him by the
superstitious South sayers. For being the Great Turks chief Cutthrote or
Executioner, he was a most vain obseruer of such diuinations: Whereupon to
satisfy Sinan and himself, he did continually advertise and inform the Turk
of the losses and domages that were wrought by the Vscocchi, and by the
Subjects of the Archduke, and of the burninges and spoils that they committed
whiles they ouerranne the Country: wherewith he did also assure him, that the
best course he could take, was to begin the war in those parts, and
afterward pursue the same either against the Emperor, or against the
Venetians, or else passing over on a sudden into Italy (as was done in the
days of Mahomet, of Bajazet, and of Soliman) to put all the princes of that
Province into an exceeding fear, and so to reap and bring home most rich and
wealthy spoils. Yea he solicited him so far, that at the last he obtained
license of the Turk to begin the war, by making himself to be seen and
known that he was in the confines of the Emperor: but yet with secret
commission, that he should not say he did it upon his commandment. He erected
the Fort of Petrina upon the river of Cupa, The fort of Petrina.
which he called of himself Hassan Grad: a place from whence he might easily
run over the Country, and bridle Carlistod, Zagabria, Metlica, and all the
Countries round thereabout: and spoiling the villages every where, he filled
all places with terror, with tears, and with lamentations. And one thing I
will note by the way, A Parallele of two Bassaes.
which is memorable, and notable, Namely, that the first man also, that
ouer-ranne the Country in the confines of Persia at the last wars, in token
that the Turk had broken the peace with him, was called even by the same name
Hassan, being the Bassa of Van, which is a City either of Medea, now called
Seruan, and Vaaspracan, or in the confines thereof, and was sometimes the
uttermost place that the Turks had toward Persia: and the same Hassan was none
otherwise overthrown by the Persians, then as afterward it happened to this
Hassan, in fighting with the Emperialistes.

XVII.
But because I have oftentimes made mention of the Vscocchi, What the Vscocchi
be.
it will not be far from the purpose, before I pass to other matter, briefly
to tell you, who they be, and so much the rather, because they were the occasion
of so great a war. It is not true, that those whom we call Vscocchi, (which
signifies by the Sclauoine word Scoci, Skippers, or Leapers, because they
skip and leap like Goats, with their corded shoes upon the tops of the
Mountains.) It is not true (I say) that they are Inhabitants of Chimera, as
Iouius and others that follow his opinion do believe. For the Vscocchi do dwell
about five hundred miles distant from the Chimeriottes (and yet they are both
people of Albania) in the Mountains that The Vscocchi and the Chimeriotti not
all one people.
are called Acro-ceraunii, in the mouth of the Gulf, right against the Cape of
Santa Maria, the uttermost Promontorie of all Italy. The Vscocchi speak the
Sclauoine speech, but the Chimeriottes the Albanian: The one live after the
Romish rite, the other after the Greek. The one are a company gathered
together, and that but of a few, the other natural by country, and many in
number. Among the Vscocchi there be many Murlacchi, which cannot stay under
the Turk, and many that are banished by the state near to the Venetians and
other Princes therabouts, and fled to the Vscocchi for very poverty. What the
Martelossi are.
There are also among them many Martelossi, that are Spies, and thieves in
those quarters: for so in deed signifies the word Martelos, so that it is the
name of a profession, and not of a Nation, What the Murlacchi are.
as some have thought. And because I have also made mention of the Murlacchi, I
will not omit to tell you what they be. The Murlacchi are called in those
parts all the Christians that dwell in the Mountains, but specially those that
inhabit the mountain Lica, which is between Nouigrad and Segna. The original
of the Sclauoine word Moralacchi, was at the beginning, when the Barbarians
came into Italy, because after that they had passed Walacchia, they called the
peoples that dwelled at the Adriatike Sea by that name, as if they would say,
Dwellers on the Sea. For even as the Turks do call all the Italians by the
general word Franchi, of the particular nation of the Frenchmen, so did the
Barbarians term all Italians likewise by that term of Vulacchi, or Vuloschi,
as though they were Walacchians.

The Vscocchi do dwell upon the Sea at Segna, Where the Vscocchi do dwell
and Buccari, and within the land of Othozaz, and over all Vinodol, which is a
territory belonging to the Conte of S^rim. And although they run up and
down all those quarters, spoiling and robbing, and stealing all that they can
get, no otherwise then the Turcomanni did in times past among the Grecians, yet
are they tolerated by the Imperial Officers, because they would not loose the
devotion and benevolence of that people, who without any expenses or charges of
those estates, and with great bravery defend those Frontires, even as the
Cosacchi do in Polonia, Why they are tolerated by the Imperialists.
of whom I will speak more hereafter. But because they are thus tolerated and
also protected, contrary to the couenaunts and agreements that have passed
between the Imperialistes and the Turks, The Turks grieved with this
tolleratio^.
and also concerning the sea between the Venetians and the Turks, they have
oftentimes given occasion to the Turks to put hands to their weapons, for the
defense of their subjects and of their marcha^dises, which they carry to
Ancona, and to Venice: The Venetians grieved at it also.
yea and the Venecians themselves have bin occasioned to do the like, as well
for the maintenance of the jurisdiction which they pretend to have in the
Adriaticall sea, as also because they would take away al occasions from the
Turks to come with an Armada, for revenge of the injuries and losses, which
they have received by thesaid Vscocchi: and finally, because they would not be
troubled with the great Turk, as always they are, when his subjects are
spoiled, by demanding amends for the same. Moreover, the Vscocchi have within
this little time laid their hands to rob the Christians also of their
marchandizes, and particularly the Venitians, not (as their Vaiuodes and
Arambassi do say) for the losses which they received these last years, whiles
they were besieged in Segna, but in truth to enrich themselves, by all the
injurious ways and means they could. Whereunto they do the more willingly
apply themselves, because they know very well that they cannot be hindered or
at least very hardly, by the said Venetians, for that they come backed and
assisted by the Imperialistes, and can quickly recover their own home, as in
deed they do both safely and securely, and whenever they list.

These Vscocchi, may come forth into the Sea, to pray and spoil by four
ways: that is to say, between Fiume, Veghia, and Cherso: How many ways the
Vscocchi may come forth to the Sea.
between these Islandes and Arbe, between Arbe and Pago, and between Pago,
and the firm land of Zara. This last passage has somewhat a strait Channel,
and may be of some 100. paces.

The Venetians do keep diverse Gallyes, and Barks armed, How the Vscocchi may
be hindered from their Theeuing.
that walk continually up and down these Channels to hinder the Vscocchi, but
by reason of the many disorders, that have hitherto hapened, there are now but
some Gallyes only, or at least accompanied with a few Barks of small avail.
It were very necessary, principally to multiply the number of Barks, which
being backed behind with Gallyes, might easily set upon the Vscocchi: and then
without all doubt they might make the passage for Marchantes to be more safe
and secure: and so much the better if there were appointed certain watches,
even in such places as were fittest for that purpose. And although to do this,
the costs and charges would be of some moment, yet they might well be borne,
considering they shall be used but for a small time: for the Vscocchi being
once severed and scattered, they cannot so easily unite themselves together
again: And the Merchants also no doubt, would willingly contribute to the
charges, forasmuch as it concerns their benefit and interest principally.
There might also a remedy be had against their Theeueries in another sort, that
is, by contributing to the chief Captains of the said Vscocchi, a certain
sum of money competent, to the end they should abstain from doing any damage
by Sea, either to the Turks or Christians. For to hinder thieves from robbing,
especialy such as these be, who are very courageous and hardy, is a thing
almost impossible, unless it might be performed in deed by an open war. And
if any man should think, that this course would displease the Turk, for that
he could not but suspect that the Venetians did not effectually employ
themselves against the Vscocchi, so long as their own Merchants did pass to
and fro in safety: and forasmuch also, as this deliberation and agreement could
not be kept so secret, but that it must needs come to the knowledge of the
Turks: I do think verily, that it may be provided for by one of these two
means: either by signifying so much to the great Turk himself whose
satisfaction is principally respected, or else by making supplication to the
Pope, that in regard of the public quiet he would enterpose himself to cause
payment to be made to the said chief Captains, with the moneys of the state
of Venice, or of the Marchantes, to be delivered to his Holiness secretly.
Moreover the Emperor himself might be treated withal, that his Imperial
Majesty would be pleased to accept of a convenient Garrison for the defense
and custody of Segna, and of those Confines. Or rather, which would be the true
remedy indeed, they might by general consent and agreement be driued quite
out of those Countries, considering that they are public and common thieves,
and authors of the greatest troubles in Christendom: yea and so much the
rather, for that otherwise they can never be diminished, much less utterly
extinguished, as well because they are not forbidden or hindered from
multiplying themselves, and receiving new supplies daily into their troops: A
law among the Vscocchi.
as also and principally because they have a law, that when the husband dies,
the wife remains heir of all, and he that afterward takes her to wife,
becomes Lord and Master of all that she possesses.

And hitherto let it be sufficient to have spoken of the Vscocchi, and of the
means how to repress their insolences: wherein I refer my self, as also
in all other things which I have heretofore said, and am hereafter to say, to
better judgments then mine own, and to persons that are better informed then
I am.

XVIII.
AMurath then having moved war against the Emperor, Sigismundo Battori, the
Prince of Transiluania, Sigismundo Battori the Transiluanian declares himself
an open enemy to the Turk.
showed himself openly to be against the Turk a matter verily not expected by
him, and little hoped for by those that examined things only by reason, and
according to state: for assuredly it was the work of the only providence of
God. For by this open declaration of this prince, there is arisen without all
doubt, the security and safety of Germany and Italy, with the most notable
diuersion of the war, that ever has happened hitherto against the
proceedings of the Turks, by all the princes Christian that have fought with
them. The offer of Sinan.
Whereupon Sinan having offered himself, after the death of Hassan, to go in
person for the recovery of that which was lost, and to restrain the tongues
of such as did sting and backbite him to his grand Seignieur as being the
Author of this council, and being gone forth in deed with supreeme and
sovereign authority, there happened between the one side and the other, all
those actions, which shall be particularly written by the Historiographers.

And behold, The death of Amurath and his sepulcher.
whiles this Sinan was at Belgrado, the Emperor Amurath died the 9. day of
January in the year 1595. and was buried at Constantinople, in a Meschita, or
Meszita, which he had made in his life time, Why the Turks temples are (...)
Moschee.
and dedicated to Bahalzebuf, that is to say, to the Idol of Flies: for
thereupon peradventure such fabrikes or buildings are either corruptly or in
mockage called by us Christians Moschee, of Moscha which signifies a Fly.
Prince Mahamet being returned from Magnesia to Constantinople, after the death
of his father, Mahamet succeeds.
by the great carefulnes of Ferat, who presently dispatched a Gally unto him,
and being inthronized according to the accustomed Ceremonies of the Ottomans,
the deliberations and consultations touching the war, were renewed. It was
thought at the first, that Mahamet was rather inclined to peace then otherwise,
having found (as it was noted unto you in the beginning of this discourse) the
City full of dearth, his subjects not well pleased with this war, The
pretense of Sinan to be chief Vizier.
the Bassaes divided among themselves, and specially the two chiefest of them,
Sinan and Ferat: for the one challenged the chief place, because he was
always most loving toward him, and had dissuaded his father from a certain
determination that sometimes he had to put him to death, for jealousy of the
state, and had ever advertised him from time to time, whatsoever had happened
in the Empire The other thought that he had purchased great merit, The
pretense of Ferat to be chief vtsier.
because he had in so short a time brought him into the possession of his
Empire, that he had so greatly desired, and that at such a time, as was most
important for the estate of all his affairs. In such sort, The death of them
both.
as for these causes, and for others also which I have told you before, they
iustled lustily one against the other^ till in the end they were both brought
to their deaths.

Notwithstanding Mahamet, The reasons that moved Mahamet to go forth to the
war in person.
after that he had somewhat settled his household and domestical affairs, was of
necessity constrained to go forth to the war in his own person: and
principally besides the reasons before alledhed, because the Soldiers did not
stick openly to give him to understand, that to the camp they would go no more
without the presence of their great Lord: for that they were greatly
discontented with the former Generals, Sinan and Ferat, who had entreated them
very hardly. Besides that the seeds of civil discords, did as yet remain
alive, in those that were affectionate, some to one of them, and some to the
other: And lastly because Cicala had promised him assured victory, if he
would so do.

XIX.
IN this year, which was the first year of his going forth, The taking of
Agria and the importance thereof.
he surprised Agria: a place which although it be not very strong in regard
of the hill, that commands it, yet is it of great inportance for the
situation, because the uniting of the Transiluanians forces with the Emperors
will be now more difficult, for that the Turks will continually haunt and
beat the way that leads from Toccai to Cassouia: for the other upper way of
Sacmar, is much longer. And it is so much of greater importance, because if the
walls of Agria be repaired, the Turk may there maintain a puissaunt army,
between both his enemies.

XX.
IN this year also happened the battle, A doubtful battle.
whereof without doubt it may be said, that either both the armies remained
victorious, the Imperial in the beginning, and the Ottoman in the end: or else
that neither of them was vanquished by the other, seeing both of them retired
uncertain of their own estates or how the matter had gone with them. And so do
we read, that it happened even alike in the battle between Jews the xi king
of France, Jews the 11. Charles duke of Burgundy.
and Charles Duke of Burgoine: to leave the examples of the Greeks and
Romans, that are more ancient. Whereupon it was, that both the armies
following the advice and counsel of Leo the Emperor, did rather give
encouragement to their several peoples, with signs of apparent joy on both
sides, then confess their losses. The flight of Mahamet.
True it is in deed, that Mahamet saw with his own eyes, that at the beginning
his army was so discomfited and confounded, as greatly fearing his life, he
fled to a hill in the sight of Agria, accompanied with some few of his
Agalaries, and there dried and wiped his eyes with a piece of Mahomets
apparel, He dried his eyes with a piece Mahamets vesture.
which for reverence he carried about him. Trne it is that our Men had showed
very great valor: for less then 50. thousand Soldiers* (so many iumpe, as
Francisco Maria, Duke of Vrbino required, for the extirpation and rooting out
of that tyranny,) went to meet with the enemy, fought with him, and
discomfited an Army of 300. thousand persons, even in the presence and view
of their Prince, who had gathered the same together, almost out of all the
Forces of his Empire. Insomuch as it cannot any way be doubtted, but that if
our men had been less greedy, more united, better advised and instructed, and
above all if they had been the friends of the Lord of Hosts, they had
obtained one of the most singular victories, that peradventure was ever
obtained by the Cbristians, yea and had taken Mahamet prisoner, as Bajazet the
first was at Mount Stella, by the Great Tamur Chan, that is to say, an Iron
Lord, who is otherwise by some corruptly called Tamerlan and Tamburlan.
Tamerlan.
In brief, to conclude this part, the Turkish Captains having showed small
knowledge and little valor, and therefore many of them were degraded and put
to death, and almost all the common Soldiers having likewise showed great
cowardice and astonishment of mind: it is very likely that their Great Lord
and Master will think better of his business in the year to come, either by
making peace, or by continuing the war with less danger. Whereupon, whiles
Christendom attends and waits in great perplexity of her doubtful
cogitations, peraducnture it shall not be unprofitable, if (as much as shall lie
in me) I go about a little further to search out the thoughts and counsels of
our enemies, and examine what may or ought to be done by our Princes Christian
to advance their businesses, to the glory of God and man.

The end of the Second Part.
The third part.
Wherein is treated, That suppose the Turk will grow to Peace, whether it be
good that the Emperor and the Transyluanian make peace with him: with a
discourse of such matters, as if the war continue, the said Princes may work
against him: and what the other Christian Princes may also do, to meet at all
times, with such dangers as may alight upon Christendom by the Ottoman
Forces,
IN this last Part then, I will show first, That let it be supposed, Mahamet
the Emperor of the Turks, has a desire to grow to a Peace with the Christian
Emperor, and with the Transyluanian, whether it be good that those Princes
should make peace with him: and secondly I will discourse upon such matters as
the great Turk fears, if the war be continued, may be wrought against
him, as well by the said Princes, as by the other Princes of Christendom.
Wherewith I will also endeavor my self to give you such notice and knowledge
of peoples and places, as peradventure this my travail shall be deemed
altogether unprofitable.

I.
EVen from the very beginning of this war, Advice given to Mahamet to make
peace with the Emperor.
Amurath refused to treat of peace, whereunto he was greatly solicited by the
Ambassadors of France, and England: to the end they might have procured him to
make war by Sea, (as before I noted) against the king of Spain, of purpose
to divert him from the war, which the said king continued against their
Princes. Their instant motions they reinforced again after the two overthrows
given to the two Hassans, the one in Croatia, and the other in Hungary: and a
while after that, the stirs and tumults of almost an open rebellion that were
perceived in Constantinople, which after the death of Amurath, were much more
renewed in Mahamets time. They did also most manifestly set before his eyes the
difficulties of this present war, and brought him to a consideration how much
more easily the other might be effected. Moreover, they considered also the
open declaration, that the prince of Transiluania had made, whereby without all
doubt the difficulties of the war might grow greater to the Turks: for that
the said Prince being a young man and valiant, and having gained a very great
reputation among diverse peoples and nations, as well friends, as enemies, he
would never be drawn back by any other means, but only by necessity:
whereunto it would be the hardest matter in the world to drive him, as long as
there was no peace made with the Emperor, which peace could not by all
likelihoods be hoped for at that time, considering the common interestes of
both the said Princes, the new confederacy concluded betwixt them by their
late alliance, the insurrection of the Ra^cians (of whom I will speak in their
due place) the rebellions of the Vniuodes of Moldauia and Walacchia, and lastly
the fear which all the Turks had, least the Transiluanian should be the man,
that was to bring low, The Turks fear the Transiluanian.
or peradventure quite to overthrow the unmeasurable hugeness of the Turkish
Empire. Insomuch as Mahamet giving ear to the foresaid reasons, and fearing
above all things to provoke and raise against himself a league and
confederacy of the Christian Princes, (a matter greatly feared of all the
Ottoman Princes) it seemed as well by the answer which he caused to be given
to the said Agents, as also by that which he went about to work, Mahamet
contented that peace betreaed of.
that he had a mind not altogether alienated or estraunged from peace, and so
much the rather, for that he permitted the Beglerbey of Grecia to negociate and
treat with the Agents of the Emperor, of the Transiluanian, and of the
Walacchian.

II.
HOwbeit, the truer opinion was, that this Mahamet was encouraged to war,
Mahamet resolved to continue war. The presage of Ferdinando. Why the Turks
negotiate peace.
yea never a whitlesse then his father Amurath was, especially after the
overthrow which he received in Croatia, to recover the reputation that he had
lost: for so was it the opinion of the old Archduke Ferdinando, that it would
come to pass. But in deed it was thought, that he rather negotiated the peace
(besides those reasons that are above specified) as well to follow the use of
all wars, and specially of the Ottomans, as also by that means to make us
Christians, the more negligent and careless in our resolutions and
preparations: hoping above all other things, that we while peace was
entreating, would walk more fearfully and warily in annoying him, least we
should thereby provoke him further: Even as it fell out (just) to the Emperor
Maximilian the second, Why Maximilian the 2. did not surprise Alba-Regale, when
he might.
who for none other respect forbear to surprise and reduce to his subjection
Alba-Regale, but only because he would not anger Soliman, with whom he was
then in treaty of peace: which although it was indeed concluded, yet was it
afterward broken with the great loss of the said Emperor.

But let us suppose, that Mahamet either desired at that time to make peace in
good earnest, or at least desires it now at this time, Points of consideration.
it is fit and convenient to consider very well, whether in regard of the
present state of our affairs, we on our behalfes ought to make peace with him,
I will report the principal points, whereupon in mine opinion this whole
business, and the resolution of so important a matter depends. Of which
points some do belong to the Emperor, and to the Transiluanian, and some
others to the honor and interest of all Christendom: leaving the same
notwithstanding to the judgment of other men.

III.
THE first thing to be considered is, Conditions of peace, which the Turk will
look for.
that we may probably believe the Turk will never make peace, unless on the
one side the Emperor, and the Transiluanian do make restitution unto him of
all his places which they have surprised: and on the other side, he must
remain free and unbound from making any restitution, especially of any thing
that is of moment. A law of the Turks not to restore any thing once gotten.
For the Turks hold it for an inviolable law, that the ground which is once
trodden with the feet of their horses, and taken into possession, ought never to
be restored: and specially if they have built any Meschites, or Temples
therein, or else when the places which they have gotten, be convenient for
them, and for their advantage. And although we do read that Amurath the
second* after he had spoiled and deprived the Despote, George Wocouiche of
Seruia, yet he restored him to his estate which he had lost: ^eogie Wocouich
Dispote of Seruia, father in law to Amurath the second.
yet ye must understand that Amurath did so, because he was desirous to make
peace with the Hungarians, whose valor he greatly feared. Besides that he was
also his father in law, because he had a daughter of his to his wife, although
she were of the Greek Religion. One of those sins, for which it has
pleased God to spoil and deprive many Rulers of those Countries, George
Wocouich termed an Infidel because he ma^ied his daughter to the Turk.
Cephalonia recovered by the Venetians.
even of their States and Liberties, as it happened to the said George
himself, after the last overthrow of Laodislaus: whereupon in their Sclauoyne
songs, he is to this day called Heuiernish, that is to say an Infidel. True
it is also, that Cephalonia the Island, belonging sometimes to the Turk, is
now in the possession of the State of Venice, after it was conquered by the
help of Consaluo di Cordua, called the Grand Captain, either because the
Turk thinks it is a matter of no moment, Selim restored diverse places to
Giacomo Soranzo, for the behoof of Venice.
or else that it is not very easy to be recovered. So Selim in the last peace
that he made with Venice, was contented that there should be restored to
Giacomo Soranzo Commissioner for that State, by Ferat Bey, (he that of late
years dyed Bassa of Buda,) thirteen villages that were by the bordering
Turks, surprised in that war, in the territory of Zara: fourteen more in
the territory of Sebenico, and somewhat also in the territory of Spalato: For
by that mean he thought he should be the better assured of the breach and
dissoluing of that League, whereof at the last he was greatly afraid.

The Restitution, which we may fear, that Mahamet looks to have from the
Emperor will be in Croatia, of the contentious Fort of Petrina, What
restitution Mahamet looks for of the Emperor
and of all that which he has surprised upon the way of Canisa, beyond the
river Draua, even as far as Baboz, which is near unto Zighet his Frontier.
In the lower Hungary he looks for the restitution of Strigonia, and
Vicegrado: and in upper Hungary of Vaccia, Filec and Nouigrad. And it may be
moreover, that he will challenge the repayring of the burnt walls of Attuan,
or some increase of Tribute, (as he calls it,) for his expenses in the war.

Of the Prince of Transyluania, What restitution he looks for from the
Transyluanian.
he will challenge the restitutition of Walacchia, and require that he deuest
and deprive himself of all pretenses and tytles, which he says he has
thereunto. Moreover that he restore unto him Lippa, which is of great
importance to Transyluania, because it is in his confines, and within the
Bassanate of Temesuar upon the river Marisso: And finally, that the
Sangiacke-shippes of Ianoua and Bezcherech with diverse other places of less
name which he had burned may be repaired, or else that he may be well paid
for the^: besides some other gifts and yearly augmentations, which he looks
for. What places the Turk for his part will never restore.


On the other side, ye may almost be assured that there will never be gotten
of Mahamet the Country of Tureuopolie, which is between Saua and Cupa, What a
Bano is.
now under the jurisdiction of the Bano: Bani are certain Governors of
Provinces, but are of less authority then the Beglerbyes, though some have
written otherwise. Neither shall ye ever get of him Biz, or Bicagi, a place of
some importance, because it is more toward the Sea coast, near to the
territory of the Venetians to come to Nouigrad: nor in Hungary on this side
of the Danowe, Vesprino, and Giauarino, with the Castles near adjoining, and
beyond the Danow Agria, the last place that he has taken.

I have thought good to set down the said places by their particular names, to
the end that by knowing what matters of greatest moment and importance are in
the possession of either side, my narration and discourse may prove the plainer.

IIII.
THE second thing to be considered is this: what danger if both Emperor and
Transiluaman do not join together to make peace with the Turk
if the Turk refuse to make peace jointly with the Emperor and the
Transiluanian together, whether these Princes ought to agree to a peace the one
without the other. Certain it is, that to do it severally and disioyned,
would be to the great danger of him that is the weaker, or of him that is
excluded out of the peace, and also it would be against the confederacy,
against the covenants and conditions whereunto they have sworn, and against the
promises, which they have both made to the Pope. Moreover, who can doubt but
that it would also be against all law and duty of gratitude on the Emperors
behalf, Ingratitude in the Emperor*
in regard of the singular benefit, which he has received by this open
declaration that the Transiluanian has made against the Turk? and on the
Transiluanians part, Breach of faith in the Transiluanian.
would it not be against the observation and keeping of his word, which he
professes to be inviolable, and quite contrary to that which he has hitherto
refused to do, although he has been thereunto required, both by the last, and
also by this now present Emperor of the Turks, with most ample and large
conditions of benefit, of hononrable tytles, and of perpetual protection?
Which if the Emperor Ferdinand^ had regarded, most certain it is, that little
less then all Hungary had been at this day in the possession of our enemes.

Moreover, No faith in Infidels*
who can ever promise to himself any faith in an Infidel, without fear, that
he will not break the bonds of all lawful peace at his pleasure? considering
that princes, and specially the barbarous Princes never wanted plausible and
likely pretenses so to do as the Venetians do know very well by the faith and
promise, that Selim did break with them, in the year 1570. besides almost an
infinite number of examples, that might be alleged thereof. Which point of
breach of faith, although in truth no prince can in reason fear, yet certain
it is, The Transiluanian is to fear breach of faith in the Turk.
that the Transiluanian Prince has an exceeding great cause to fear it,
because the Ottoman house thinks, that from him only it has received all
the injuries and all the losses of this present war, and that by his only
Rebellion (for so do the Turks call this his just and lawful desire, which
he has to withdraw himself from the Turkish sovereignty) all their
designements and complots have been interrupted and frustrated, and the course
of their hoped victories utterly stopped: and so much the rather ought he to
fear it, for that if the whole tide and force of the war should come upon
him alone, hardly could he defend himself from so mighty an enemy, if he
should not be aided and succored, neither by the Polacke, nor by the Emperor:
for of himself alone he is but a poor and a weak Prince. And although it may
seem, that he has a state fortified by nature, and therefore might
peradventure be defended for some time, yet in the end he should of necessity
be constrained, either willingly or by force to yield to that power, which is
now grown to be so terrible and fearful to the whole world both for number
of people, and also for treasure, and in respect of all manner of furniture for
war, almost invincible.

Neither should the Emperor be free from fear in this point, The (...) ^eare
the same
if the Transiluanian should be at peace with the Turk: because it would be
enough for the Ottoman Emperor only to have these princes disarmed for a
time. For he knows very well with how great difficulty Soldiers are
brought together again under their ensigns, after that they are once returned
home: and especially how hard it is for the Emperor, who is constrained to
make war rather with auxiliarie Soldiers, then with his own, who also
cannot come to succor him without some time, and the meeting together of
circuites and dietes, which are to be holden, before any thing can be done.

And thus upon these reasons that have been set down, it may be concluded
very resolutely, that to make peace on this fashion, would not only not be
helpefull to the two Princes, but also much more dangerous and pernicious to
both their estates, for that the enemy may shortly after take up arms again,
and renew the war with greater advantage, whenever he shall think it fit
and convenient for him.

V.
THE third and last consideration, which appertains not so much to the
aforsaide Princes, Where it is likely the Turk will bend his forces next.
but to all Christendom together, is, that suppose the Turk do make peace, and
keep it for a while, where may we think in reason, that he will hereafter
direct his arrows? For we have established this for a most certain ground and
foundation, that the Ottoman Empire does keep her Subjects always occupied
and employed in new wars, against some state or other, as having had her
original and maintenance by force and arms.

Of truth it is not to be thought, that he will renew the war against the
King of Persia, Not against the king of Persia.
at the least as yet, and not being provoked thereunto: because the Soldiers
of Europe, who are the sinews and strength of his Armies, do abhor to go
thither, by reason of the length of the journey, the want of vittailes, the
roughness of the ways, and the brave valor of the Persians. And so much the
less is it likely that he will renew the war there, because it is but a
while ago since he made peace with that king, and for that he has not as yet
fully established the foundations of his new Fortresses. And to be brief,
the Persian indeed wants no Soldiers for there are three sorts of Soldiers
that go to war under him: The Turcomanni, who are unto him as Feudataries be
with us, and hold their lands of him. The Corizzi, or Coridschi, who are
stipendaries and waged by him: and Auxiliaries, who are such as come to aid and
succor him, and namely, the Armenians, the Georgians, and others all very
valiant and hardy, especially those that go to war on horseback, as all of
them for the most part do, which is the greatest imperfection in the Persian
Armies.

VI.
NEither is it to be thought, Nor against the king of Fez and Marocco.
that he will move war in Africa, against Mulei Ameth the king of Fez and
Marocco, The Siriffo of Africa.
whom the Moors call the Siriffo, which signifies as much with the Turks,
as the title of Sultan, vz. King and Lord. For in so doing, he shall get but
little, and much he may loose, besides that, he shall be somewhat too far
from home. Moreover Mulei Ameth, who was the Brother of Abdala and of Mahamet,
is a man very hardy and warlike: insomuch as although to divert the suspicion,
which his Brother Abdala had conceived against him, whiles he reigned, and was
King, he showed himself even for all the world as the Ottoman Mahamet did,
to avoid the wrath and displeasure of his Father, altogether given to
pleasures and sensuality, The kingdom of Gago. The finest gold.
yet did he afterward conquer the Kingdom of Gago, toward Guiney: from
whence there is brought the most fine and pure gold xxiiii. Caractes: and
holds in possession all that part of the Country, which is more then a
hundred days journey from the Ocean sea, even above Tripoli.

VII.
NOr against the Isle of Malta, because (as Amurath was advised by Sinan
Cicala, Nor against the Isle of Malta.
whilst he was General of the Sea) it would turn to the small credit and
reputation of the Ottoman Empire, to employ so huge Forces against so small an
Island, and so much the rather, because it might peradventure fall out, that
he should never obtain the possession thereof, or at least it would be very
hard to get it, as well in regard that it is now much better fortified and
strengthened then it was in the days of Soliman: as also because it would be
very courageously defended by the ancient bravery of those most valiant
knights, and sooner relieved and succored by the Christian Princes, who are
now well taught and instructed thereto by their former experience.

VIII.
NOr yet against Spain, Nor against Spain Insurrection of the Morescoes.
upon a vain hope, that the Moors which are there, would make an
insurrection and rebel against the King: For it is not true (as some think)
that they are so ready to put in execution, as indeed they are all
confederated to desire innovation, yea so much the less may the Turk hope for
any such insurrection, for that the said Morescoes are divided in many several
places, which places are also very open and without strength: they are also
unarmed, and a people of no certain faith: and therefore in such a case they
will not be ouer-hastie, and specially for fear of loosing their wealth and
riches. Portingals and Arrogonians.


As concerning the Portugals and the Aragonians, of whom also according to the
opinion of the Bassaes, it seemed that the King Catholic might stand in some
fear: the truth is, that they are not only humbled by a tolerable kind of
inforcement, but even of their own selves they have applied and settled their
minds to an honest necessity. Moreover, those that have good intelligence in
matters of state, do knowefull well, that to lend the ear to the aduices and
encouragement of Outlawes and discontented persons, is a very vain thing, and
oftentimes proves very dangerous.

Besides it is very likely and credible, that the Turk will very well
bethink himself, before he will rashly run to provoke and stir up the
greatest king in the world against him, notwithstanding that he be greatly
busied and occupied in other wars: as well for that if he should be molested by
the Ottoman forces, he may very easily conclude a peace, or at least suspension
from wars with his enemies, as also because he is so mighty a Prince, that
he may well quite himself against the Turks, especially with his Armada, and
Fleet of ships, which without increase of any expenses unto him, he may cause
every year in good time to scour the Ottoman Seas. For out of all doubt, he
is not inferior to the Turk, The Turks Empire.
neither in forces, nor in greatness of Empire. Considering that the Turkish
Empire (if notwithstanding it be lawful to call that state an Empire, which is
unduly usurped and kept from the lawful Emperors) is in deed very huge and
great, for that in Asia it possesses all that is between the greater Sea, In
Asia.
and the Ocean of Arabia and Persia: and from the Caspian Sea, and the river
Araxis, and the other more Easterly confines of the Kingdom of Persia, even
until the Mediterraneall Coasts of the Hellespont as far as Nilus. And in
Africa, In Africa.
all the coast of Nilus, till ye come beyond Algieri, and also a great part
within the land of this province, where it bordereth upon Egypt, In Europe.
and the red Sea. And in Europe, all that Country which is from Buda even to
Canstantinople, and between the river Niestro, and the Danow, and the AEgean
Sea, In Islands.
and the Adriatike, with all the coast of the greater Sea, as far as Tana.
Besides all the Islandes of Asia, and the greatest part of the Islands of
Greece. And yet notwithstanding, the Empire of the most potent king of Spain is
nothing inferior unto it, The Empire of the King of Spain.
for it stretches her power and jurisdiction in the West, it inlargeth the
confines of her most mighty estate in the East, and passing over the new
world, and arriving even to the Islands of the Moluccaes, the uttermost part of
the Oriental Islands it reaches (like a true Monarchy indeed) over all
those maritimall or Sea-parts as far as the strait of Gibraltar.

Neither truly is it likely (as some think) that he will move war against
the Polackes, or against the Tartarians, or against the Moscouites.

IX.
NOt against the Polackes, Nor against Polonia.
because they are (as a man may say) in the very bowels of the Turkish estate.
They are very well armed both with men and horse: and if they do possess
Moldauia, and Walacchia (as easily they may do) and then pass over the Danow
into Bulgaria, they may fortify the banks of Danow as the Romans did, and
hardily pierce with their Arms, even into Constanstinople, which is the very
heart of his Empire, and so utterly ruinate and destroy all his Country, with
the same bravery and valor which the Polackes have sundry times showed when
they warred with the Turks.

X.
NOt against the Tartarians, Nor against Tartaria.
because they are of the self same Religion with him, and also his
confederates: with whom if he should war, he should gain either little or
nothing of them, because they are but poor, and for the most live abroad in
the fields, so that whenever they shall perceive the approach of their
enemy, they may easily retire themselves, and when the enemy is departed,
recover that which was lost. And finally, if the Turk shall keep and
maintain them as his friends, he may reap many and great services at their
hands, whereas on the contrary, if he hold them his enemies, they may work
him much harm.

XI.
AND lastly, not against the Moscouites, Nor yet against Moscouit.
because they dwell among frozen Ices, and fennie Marrishes, in a barren
Country, far distant and divided from all his estates: whose Prince is
continually environed and guarded with a great number of Horsemen and Footmen,
who are also very well trained and exercised in managing and handling the
Arcubuse.

If then it be a matter in reason not to be feared, But either against Venice
or against all Italy.
that though he should conclude a peace, he would move war against any of
these above mentioned, yet of a certainty we may greatly fear, that he will
resolve to bend his forces, either against the state of Venice, or against all
Italy.

XII.
IF against the state of Venice: If against Venice: the^ what trouble to
Christendom
in very truth, the troubles of Christendom, would then be greater then now
they are, because the nearer the danger would thereby be unto Italy, and unto
the very state of Religion, so much the more considerable and troublesome would
it be. The Princes of Greece because they did not succor the princes that were
their next neighbors, By example of Grecia.
who were exposed and open to the Ottoman forces, all of them wholly lost their
estates: God himself in the mean while permitting the same to be effected,
not only for their riot and voluptuousness, and for the civil discords that
were among them, but also yea and much more for the Schism, which the Greeks
had made in the holy Church, so that first by the Gotthes, then by the
Bulgarians, afterward by the Sarracens, and last of all by the Turks, they
were brought to that lamentable misery wherein now they are: even as Pope
Nicholas the fifth foretold, when he writ to the Emperor Constantine, surnamed
the Dragon, as Gennadius the Patriarch of Constantinople has observed, and I
in another place have touched more at large. Cardinal Bessarion writing to the
Princes of Italy, says, And of Constantinople.
that because they would not in time relieve Constantinople, only with 50.
thousand Crowns, they were the cause and chief occasion, why the Turks
afterward, having gotten possession thereof, with a continual course of
perpetual victories, subdued Trabisonda, Sinope, the Islande of Metelino, (i.
Mitylene,) La Morea, Caramania, and the Countries adjoining, Bossina, Bulgaria,
the Lower Hungary, Epirus, and a great part of Dalmatia, of Albania, and of
Sclauonia, and lastly of the Island of Negroponte.

But forasmuch as the world ringeth to this day with the words, Pope Vrbanes
exhortation to move christendom to the recovery of Jerusalem.
which the Great Pope Urban uttered, when in Cleremount of Aluernia, he moved
and encouraged the Christian Princes to the glorious conquest of Jerusalem,
which is called even by the Turks Cuzzimu Barec, that is to say, The famous
and holy place, for the reverence which they bear to the Sepulcher of our
Lord, and in that respect is visited (as Bethlehem likewise is,) by their
Chazilarii, that is to say, their Pilgrims, in their return from Mecha: And
forasmuch also, as every man does well know the godly and wonderful entreatie
and persuasion made to the said Christian Princes, by Petrus Heremita, Petrus
Hermita.
and the Sermons of the blessed Friar John Capestrano, John Capestrano.
who had already gathered together 40. thousand signed and marked with the
Cross, to go against the Turks, even in the very self same countries where
now the war is: And lastly, forasmuch as besides the holy and very zealous
exhortations of many Popes, and other holy Men, (whereof there is great store
to be found in the Councels, and ecclesiastical Hystories) there resoundeth
now in our time over all Christendom, Pope Clement the eight.
the lively voice of the now living Pope Clement, who like another Jacob,
watching day and night, without any tyring or weariness, for the service and
maintenance of Labans sheep, that is to say, of the faithful flock of Jesus
Christ, cries out with a loud voice, by his holy prayers and devout tears
to the Lord for mercy toward our salvation and safeguard: It shall be
sufficient at this present, briefly to recount the substance of those matters,
which pope Pius the second, (even the same that wrote a long letter to Mahamet
the second Emperor of the Turks to convert him unto the Catholic Faith)
being full of the holy Ghost, uttered at the Council of Mantua, in presence of
the Christian Princes, after he had bewailed the ruin of the Greek Empire,
and of other kingdoms in Christendom, that were fallen into the Turks power,
vz.

Surely, The substance of the speech of Pius the second in the Council of
Mantua.
it would be a very righteous and religious matter, O ye most generous and
Noble Princes of Christendom, if once at the last ye would waken your selves,
and enter into an earnest cogitation, not to suffer those poor and dismayed
relics of Christians, utterly to be lost, that are forgone into the most
cruel rage of the Barbarians, which of you, in good sooth does not clearly
and manifestly see the common and imminent danger, that hangs over our
heads? Andrinopolis, and Nicopolis, (because I will not at this time remember
so many other most goodly and rich Countries, which most unjustly that most
cruel and outrageous Tyrant does now possess) were of no long time
heretofore, Cities further distant, then were those Christians that have been
lately taken, and are now most cruelly and miserably tormented by our enemies.
Oh that you might be moved, ye religious and godly Princes, with the
incomparable bond and obligation, wherein ye are bound to Christ our Lord, who
has not only freed and delivered you from the jaws of the ancient Serpent,
but also has appointed you to be Princes of his people, to the end that like
watchful and charitable Pastors ye should courageously keep the same from the
mouth of the Wolf. The blessed God has put into your hands the Scepter, and
the sword, because it should be your care, as well by doing justice, and
showing mercy to maintain his people in peace, as also by war to deliver
those that are unduly and unjustly oppressed. Let your particular interestes
cease, when the Interestes of God comes in place. Let the discourses of man's
wit give place to the cause of God. Nay rather, even your own peculiar and
proper interestes, and humane respects also do persuade you of themselves to
take weapons into your hands, and to repress and daunt the pride of this most
cruel and fierce wild beast, who like a Lion raungeth about continually, over
all the Champeine and field of Christendom greedily to devour some part
either of our own Countries or of our neighbors. Alas, let us learn by other
men's expenses and losses. Let us quench the fire of our brethren, least we
burn up our selves also with them: Let us in time meet with this great tide,
that like a headlong stream is like shortly to surround all our Countries. Up
ye generous and noble champions of Christ, resolve courageously with your
selves (to the end that our age be not thought to be less glorious then former
times) in some sort to imitate and follow Godfrey, Baldwyn, Boemound, and those
other famous Argonautes, who to recover out of the profane hands of the
enemies of holy faith, the sacred Sepulcher of our Redeemer, sold their own
proper goods, abandoned their lands and houses, passed over the Seas, and for
a long time endured exceeding great travails and troubles, because they
thought that they could not better employ their treasures, there weapons, and
their valor, then in so holy and laudable an enterprise, who then will be the
first man that will take the Cross, and give example to others? Who will he
be, that will be Captain and guide herein? Where be the Soldiers of Christ,
that will follow this glorious standard and Ensinge? And finally who will show
himself so impious, that he will not lay aside all private injuries and
hatreds, for the common safety?

But hereof let it be enough for me to have spoken, being carried thereunto out
of my determinate discourse and narration, by a just zeal that I bear
toward the honor of God, and the salvation of so many souls, which are
redeemed by the blood of Christ, and live at this day in the most miserable
thraldom and slavery of the Ottoman Empire.

And therefore if the great Turk should move war against the Commonwealth
of Venice: Why Venice should be relieved.
(which God forbid, because the said estate of the Venetians does deserve to
be kept and preserved a perpetual Virgin through all ages, as well for the
comfort of her subjects, for the ornament of the world, and for the defense of
Christendom, as also for the piety thereof, and for the excellent manner of
government therein used) the danger would be of great importance, and it
would then be very necessary (if the love of my Country do not deceive
me:) that all the princes of Christendom should earnestly and thoroughly
advise themselves, how to maintain it in her former estate, so that no notable
damage may light upon it: and so much the rather, for that enjoying her lawful
and ancient liberty and neutralitie, with her public consultation it does
never offend any Prince in the world. And above all the rest, Specially by the
king of Spain.
it behooves the king Catholic so to do, either by combining himself with
the Venetians, or by succouring them otherwise: as well because it is very
likely, that the Turk will not employ his forces, only for the subduing of
the Venetian estate: but thereby to have a more easy way to attempt Italy,
whereof the crown of Spain does possess the fairest and goodliest parts: as
also because the other Princes are not peradventure altogether sufficient by
Sea to vanquish the enemy with any security, unless they shall help one
another with moneys, with vittailes, with Soldiers, and specially with
Gally-slaues, and Mariners, which certainly is a matter very considerable: For
without doubt the true way and means utterly to defeat and destroy the enemy,
The true way to overthrow the Turk, is by sea.
will be to vanquish him by Sea, especially in these times, wherein he has
not an Armada of any account, and is also greatly destitute of Mariners, and
men of command, that are skilful and courageous in that profession. Moreover,
the Turks do abhor these battles by Sea, both because they are most cruel
and dangerous, and also for that in such fights they are always discomfited
and overthrown, and do know full well, that afterward they shall be the
more easily vanquished and overcome by land. So Euagoras of Cyprus, and Conon
of Athens counseled the kings of Persia to do against the Lacedaemonians. So
Augustus having defeated Marcus Antonius by Sea, subdued also his old and
victorious army consisting of eighty thousand footmen, and two and twenty
thousand horsemen, without any fight. The like was done by Roger the Calabrian,
Admiral to the king of Aragon, who notwithstanding that his king was upon the
land overthrown by the king of France, yet assaulting the French Armada by
Sea, discomfited the same, recovered that which was lost, and carried away the
fruits of both the victories. And who knows not, what might have been done,
after the Turkish fleet was dispersed and overthrown in the year, 1571. And
when it ran away of it self in 1572. If at the first occasion and
opportunity that was then so happily offered, there had been made a choice of
the best Galleys, to have gone presently and met with the enemy in the
Arcipelago, and in Morea, and even as far as Cyprus: and if in the second
good opportunity we had followed the happy and judicious courage of Soranzo,
the general Prouidatorie of Venice?

Very true it is, The strength and power of Venice.
that the state of Venice is at this day become so potent and mighty, not
only in respect of the great store of gold which it has gathered in this
long peace, and of the debts paid, whereunto it had run in the last war,
and somewhat before that time: but also in regard of the many Gallyes,
munitions, and other preparations for war, which it has provided in this
time: that if occasion so fall out, it will peradventure be well able to
defend it self of it own self: and specially, if it would resolve it self
at such time, as it does little fear the enemy, to be the first that should
assault and strike him, yea and to do it indeed, (as Alcibiades was wont to
say to the Athenians) by sending forth a mighty Armada to annoye him, and upon
a sudden to surprise some of those places, which I will name in the end of
this third Part. Moreover it has also at this present so well fortified her
estate, that in all reason it need not greatly doubt the conceits and
designementes of the Ottoman. Corfu. Catharo. Zara.
Corfu, Cathara and Zara are among other Fortes esteemed to be inexpugnable,
and so much the rather, for that by reason of their moderate and reasonable
distance from Venice, they may easily be succored and relieved, and being as
it were the keys of the Adriatike Sea, they may also hinder the entrance of
the enemy, or enforce him of necessity to return back with all speed, least
he remain entangled and caught in the net. Candie.
The Isle of Candie is likewise so well provided for defense and is thought to
be so strongly guarded with Garrisons and Munition, as it cannot be attempted
by the Turk, without incurring his great hazard and danger, yea and so much
the more, for that if the enemy should endeavor to disbarke his people there,
one great part of the Island having no havens or Harboroughes, is defended by
nature it self and the other part may be so well kept both by the valor of
foreign soldiers, and also by the brave manhood of the Countrey-inhabitantes,
who are no less tender and careful of their own welfare, then faithful to
their prince (provided always that they be by just proportion and good advise
distributed and divided, some for the defense of the Havens, and some for the
defense of the shore,) that he shall never be able to disbarke there, or if
he do, it will be to his great loss. In which accident it will be an easy
matter to disperse the Relics of the enemies army, partly because they can
very hardly be succored by the Turk, in regard of the far distance of his
Country and States? and partly because his Fleet of Ships cannot well
brook those Seas, either without danger of breaking and rending in pieces, or
fighting with the Venetian Armada. Lastly, the Forte of Palma, Palma.
which is also built by the Venetian Common wealth, with as religious as
judicious an aduisement, will not only serve (if it please GOD) at all times
for a secure and safe defense against the enemy, if he should be so bold
as to trouble Istria, and to pass to Friuli, but it will also be a continual
and most necessary a Bulwark, against all the Barbarians, which may attempt
to come and annoy Italy. And thus much let be said touching the State of
Venice. If against all Italy, then which way the Turk may come thither


Now touching Italy, forasmuch as I have already heretofore touched the
reasons, which might one day move the Ottoman to think of such a course, I
will in this place set down the most principal ways, whereby he may come
thither, and that to answer to such persons as do think the same not only
to be a very difficult matter, but almost altogether impossible.

XIII.
THE Turk has two ways, Two ways for the Turk to pass into Italy by land.
whereby he may pass from his own Countries and States into Italy by land:
one is (and that is the better way for the ease of his horsemen) by departing
from Belgrado through the higher way, which is between the rivers of Draua and
Saua: the other on this side of the Saua. Both of these ways do meet at
Lubiana, called by the Dutche Luback, and in old time Nauporto, a Country of
great abundance in all things, and most fit to be (as it were) the seat of
the war. The City it self is very easy to be surprised. From hence they
may go to Goritia, or rather by Piuca to pass by the Carse above Montfolcon:
both these ways likewise do meet at Lisonzao, which the Turks call
Ague-bianche, or White waters, a river that is very memorable for the battle
of Theodorico king of the Goths, and of Odoacre king of the Heruli, and also
for the last approach of the Turks, when they arrived even as far as
San-Cassano in Mesco upon the Campardo, burning and spoiling all the Country
with most barbarous cruelty. That way which leads to Goritia, is for
vittaile and for horse, more commodious then this of Carse: which for all that,
though it be very stony and rockie, and also that in the Piuca there be some
wooddes and straits, not so easy to be passed, being near to Scelescnytabor,
which is a hold kept by a few Clownes, yet notwithstanding the said way is
not vnpassible for horses, Why Theodorico builded Montfalcon.
and was made by Attila, when he came to Trieste, and passed on to Aquileia.
And hereupon it came that Theodorico, after he was become the Lord and
conqueror of Italy, was moved in this way to fortify Mont-falcon even as
Gradisca, And Odoacre Gradisca.
a little while before, was erected and builded in the other way by Odoacre,
when he lorded it in Italy. A fortress which was afterward surprised by
the same Theodorico, when he was sent against Odoacre, And the Venetians, Palma.
by Zeno the Emperor, and which was also erected for the self same end and
purpose, for which the Seignieurie of Venice have now builded Palma against the
Turks.

The Turkish Armies, departing from Constantinople, without coming to
Mandor-Alba, or Alba-Graeca, Another way for the Turk to come into Italy.
(which is called Belgrado, and in times past Taurono) may also come into one
of these ways, by passing through the towns of Nis, and Precup, where are
certain straites on this side of Sophia, and leaving Belgrado on the right
hand: or else without touching Sophia to meet in any sort at Nouibazar, and
from thence through the Dukedom of Herzegouina in Basna, at Bagnaluca, to
meet at the last even in the high way, a little more then two days iourneyes
distant from the territory of Venice, and very near unto those places, where
sometimes the Turks made their musters when they came into Italy. This is a
very plain and even way, fit also for carriages, and for conueying of stuff
and artillarie. Whereupon Ammianus Marcellinus reports, that by the same way
Gallus the brother of Julian was carried in a Chariot from Betouia to Pola.

XIIII,
Moreover, the Turk, to the end he might the more grievously vex and
trouble Italy, How the Turk may annoy Italy both by land and sea at one time.
may at one and the self same time, send an Army by land into one part of
it, and an Armada by Sea into another. So thought the other Mahamet to have
done, and this Turk also that now is, was there unto persuaded the last year
by Sinan, of purpose by that means the rather to divert the king of Spain,
and the State of Venice, that is to say, by his fleet troubling and molesting
the Adriatike Sea, even just in the same sort as is before declared, Ottranto.
and his army assailing the coasts of Sicilie and Naples, or of a Calabria and
Puglia, replenishing all those quarters with fear and dommage. There is yet
fresh in memory the surprising of Otranto by the Turks, in the days of the
other Mahamet, and the fearful fright which the Court of Rome did sometimes
take at the arrival of the Ottoman navy, in the Tyrrhene sea. For costing all
along Italy with the land winds, the Eastern wind, the South-East wind,
and the South wind, and coming out of Barbary with a North-east wind, and a
Western wind, he may most easily ouerrunne all, Examples of Augusto Cotrone,
Re^gii, and (...) Sant-Angelo,
even as far as Ciuita Vecchia. Besides that it is well known what the Turks
have done diverse times at Augusta, at Cotrone, at Reggio, and in more ancient
times what the Saracens did at Mount Gargano, now called Sant-Angelo.

I know very well how hard a matter it will be for the Turks to put in
execution those Designements, The pleasure strength, and government of Italy.
which I have touched before to that purpose in the second Part of this
Discourse: for that (to be brief) this most noble Province of Italy, being
the Garden and pleasure of the world, is without all doubt so well fortified
both by Nature and Art: so full of Gold, and people, and vittailes also:
(especially if by Gods punishment, or by some other accident the haruests do
not prove so barren as they have been these last years:) and lastly so
carefully kept and governed by her Catholic and valourous Princes as a man may
resolutely conclude, that if the Turk do come thither, either he shall retire
and return, as heretofore diverse his elders and predecessors have done, or
else Italy shall become his Grave and Sepulcher, even as it has always been
to all Barbarians. But for as much as it is the office of true Politic
prudence to fear an enemy, not thereby to become a Dastard, The advice of
Thucydides to think upon dangers.
or a Coward (as Thucydides said) but with all diligence and circumspection to
procure and provide such remedies, as may vanquish and overthrow him: I will
briefly set down, how we may diverse ways meet with those and such other
dangers, that may hang over Italy by reason of the Ottoman Armies, and also
what remedies may be most profitable and effectual in this present war, and
therefore are greatly feared by the Turks themselves.

XV.
AMong other remedies, that were proposed, when Mahamet the second surprise
Ottranto, (as I told you) to diuerte him from Italy, The opinion of Martin de
Segoni for diuerting the wars from Italy.
one Martiu de Segoni Bishop of Dulcigno, as we read in a Treatise that he
wrote thereof to Pope Sixtus the Fourth, propounded this present remedy, which
it delights me to report in his own very words. Pannonum Rex (says he)
cum suo Exercitu, confederatisque populis, praesentet se ad Danubium, fama
praecedente quod in Rasciam sit traiecturus: futurum inde omnium Turcorum
multitudine sibi obuia^ ad I strii traiectum progrediente, Gentes nuper Valonam
and ad alia Epiri maritima loca missae, ad Italiam transfretandae, statim ob
metum Pannonum ad castra Turchi reuocentur. That is to say, Let the King of
Hungary with his Army and Confederates present himself at the Danowe, with a
fame and rumor first given out, that he is minded to pass over into Rascia:
and thereupon will it come to pass, that all the Turks multitude proceeding to
meet with him at the passage of the (Danowe where it is called) Ister, the
soldiers which were lately sent to Valona, and to other maritimall places of
Epirus, of purpose to be transported into Italy, presently for fear of the
Hungarians, shall be called back to the Turks Camp.

Now we having in stead of the king of Hungary, the Emperor, and the Prince
of Transyluania, I will discourse to the same purpose, as well of the one as of
the other, so far forth as shall be sufficient most clearly to make known,
what hinderance and detriment it would be to Christendom, if these two
Princes, Counsell^ to make a diuerting war.
should make peace with the Turk, at the least so speedily as it is doubted
they will: because among all the good means that may be used to secure a
state from their most mighty enemies, there is none so safe and approved by
great Captains then this course of diuerting war. Hannibal.
As among others Hannibal told Antiochus when he advised him to set upon
Macedonia, to the end King Philip might not send aid to the Romans: K.
Hieron.
and Hieron King of Syracusa, when he advised the Romans to set upon Africa,
to the end the Carthagenians might not send succors to Hannibal in Italy.

XVI.
THE Emperor has already his weapons in hand: Why the Emperor should not
make peace with the Turk
and although indeed he have lost some places, yet he has also gotten some
others. The war is not altogether inconvenient or incommodious, by reason of
the nearenesse thereof. The Soldiers have now begun to enure themselves to
the wars, and to take courage against the horrible shoutinges and outcries of
the Enemy, and are already accustomed to endure cold and frost. The Captains
have learned the Military Discipline, and the manner of fighting with the
Turks: if our Soldiers issue forth into the field before our enemies, we
may attempt to recover either by siedge, or surprise some of those places that
have been lost: yea and so much the rather, for that it will be a hard
matter for the Turks to succor it, because those that are gone home to their
houses, cannot in time return in so great a multitude for want of grass and
vittailes: and those that remain in the frontiers are not able and sufficient
both to offend and defend. Moreover, there is not a small number of those, that
have refused to stay in Hungary, because they had not wherewith to live, and
because they would avoid the distemperature of that cold air, which will use
all their art and cunning to stay at home.

Let us add hereunto, The Princes of Germany to aid the Emperor.
that now is the only time, wherein it is to be hoped, that all the Princes
of Germany, both great and small, will waken and rouse themselves in earnest,
because it is not now so much in question to defend the Hungarians, who are
naturally hated by the Dutch (as many other Nations do also hate one another)
as it is to defend themselves, their wives, their children, and their own
riches. In which point, if they conceive peradventure, that they might keep
and enjoy al these things aforesaid, more safely and securely under the
government of the Turk, they may be very easily certified of the truth of
this their conceit, when they shall behold the Tragical spectacles of Greece,
The lamentable state of Greece.
which since it has been vanquished by the Turks, has remained like the
Jews, without King, without Scepter, without liberty, without titles, without
riches, yea, and (a most horrible matter to report) even without the comfort of
the tender embracements of their own natural children.

Whereas, if the war continue, who can with any reason doubt, Reasons to
continue the war.
but that the Princes of the Empire shall of necessity be enforced earnestly
to assist and aid both the Emperor and themselves? because it is in all
likelihoode to be feared, that Mahamet will set forward his Army either
toward Toccai, Toccai. Vienna.
of purpose to hinder the union of the Emperor and the Transyluanian, or to
Vienna, as he was persuaded to have done, not long ago by Sinan, who showed
unto him the easiness of winning it, the glory that would redound unto him
thereby, and the great importance of the enterprise: Why the Turk withdrew his
army out of Croatia.
And also for that from the languishing of the head proceeds the weakness of
the members. And it may be, that he commanded his army to retire out of
Croatia, not only because he knew the jealousy which the Italian Princes do
carry of their own affairs, and specially the Venetians, who in that respect
have put themselves in defense with their new fortress of Palma: but also
because he would unite all his forces together, and so become the stronger to
perform the said enterprise. But howsoever it be, certain it is that he has
not withdrawn it for any gifts or rewards which he has received from the
Venetians, as some have falsely believed. Again, that we may think the better
of this danger, it is a matter worthy of good consideration, that Mahamet was
inclined to this enterprise from his childhoode, in so much as even at that
time he made humble supplication to his father, that he would reserve that
glory for him: which without all doubt, if (as God forbid) it should so fall
out and come to pass in deed, would not only prove to be a most notable
loss to the Empire, but also in particular to all Italy. For so having gotten
the possession of that key, which is of greatest importance to open him the
way into the entrance of all those Countries, he shall also have a more ready
and easy passage into the fairest and goodliest part of the world, which is
the very uttermost scope and end of all the Ottoman designements. The way for
the Turks to come to Vienna.
For that, even as he has a free way to come to Vienna, by passing between
the Danow and the Draua, in lower Hungary, and so without any impediment to
Giauerino (a Fort, that by the advice of Alfonso Duke of Ferrara was caused to
be made at the very self same time that Soliman arrived there by the self
same way, and where at this day also, being possessed by the Turks in manner and
sort (as Philippo Pigafetta has written) they may easily pass to trouble and
vex both Astria, and Stiria.) Three other ways for the Turk (if he obtain
Vienna) to come into Italy.
So if he should be possessed of Vienna, he may without all doubt the more
easily assault Italy by two other ways, which I have not as yet named. The
one is, by the way of Tiroll, descending by the Alps of Trento into the
Champaignes of Verona, where Alarico entered: or by those of Bassano, which is
a way that has been often used by the Dutche: the other is, that of Villaco,
which comes directly from Vienna, and meets either at Frioli, or at Venzone,
or at Ciuidale. The Turks also in such a case may take another way, which was
heretofore made by the Barbarians, that is to say, the way of Tolmezo in
Carnia, which may also meet at Cadore: but that shall not be to any great
purpose for them.

But for as much as among those things, which hinder the Emperor from such
aids and succors as he desires and as without all doubt would be most sit
and convenient for this present business, there are three especially that are
worthy of greatest consideration: it shall not be amiss to touch them.

XVII.
THe first thing is, The speches that hinder the Emperor from necessary aids
of the Christian Princes.
the voice that runs amongst the many Protestants of the Empire: that if his
Emperial Majesty should become the co^queror of the Turk, they shall be of
necessity enforced to yield obedience to the Pope of Rome (as they call him) a
matter that is abhorred by the common sort of people, but much more by the
great Princes and Potentates there: by the great Princes especially, because
they have usurped a dominion upon the greatest Ecclesiastical livings and
revenues: by the common people, because they are persuaded thereunto by the
Protestant Ministers, as namely by the Caluinists and Lutherans, who do
resolutely advise them rather to obey the Turk then the Pope, and therefore
Caluanisme is a kind of disposition to Mahametisme, as many very learned men
have written. Besides that both the great Potentates, and also the common
Subjects there have suffered themselves most easily to be persuaded to this
impiety and ungodliness, only in regard of the most sensual and licencious
life, which they are thereby permitted to lead.

The second thing is (which is so peremptorily disputed by many) that the
Emperor is to make peace with the Turk, because the Empire shows it self so
backewarde and faint to relieve him: as well for that it fears to spend her
treasure to no purpose, as also for that it being of it self inclined to
peace, The backewardnes of the Empire in relieuing the Emperor.
it does willingly take advantage of this occasion: which also ministers
matter to many Christian Princes, especially to the Polack, and to the
Venetians, that they do not stir either little or much against the Turk,
because they suspect they shall be abandoned and forsaken, when the cause is
at the best, and that they shall spend themselves without any gain or profit.
And it seems that it is made the more credible by this, for that it is
maliciously given out and published to the world by those Imperialists, which
have no great inclination toward that most religious house of Austria, vz.
That the Emperor is not greatly inclined to war: That he keeps himself
continually retired in Bohemia, in Prage, in his palace because he fears
some violent death? whereunto he is the rather induced either by reason of the
conspiracy which was lately discovered, or of that which a certain Englishman
called Dee, M. John Dec.
foretold him (a matter in sooth no less superstitious then unworthy to be
apprehended and believed by a Prince that is so wise and fears God.) But
certainly if it were true, that the Emperor either for these or for some other
reasons did now incline toward peace, it had been more safe counsel and
advise for him, to have resolved on it, even in the beginning and at the first,
rather then at this time, in regard of such reasons as I have heretofore
declared, and also more at large in a certain discourse, which I have made
upon this point even to this day. And thus also was Archduke Ferdinando advised
by Peter the Vaiuode of Moldauia, The advice of Peter the Vaiuode of Moldauia.
who if he had not dyed in the year 1594. in the mountains of Bolzano was
utterly resolved (though he was a man of the Greekish sect and religion) to
have come and kissed the feet of our Pope, as I have declared in due order and
place.

The third and last thing is, That if the Empire on the one side be not
willing to contribute to so great expenses, The difficulty of the requests
made by the Imperial princes.
unless the Conquestes that may be made and achieved, become united to the
Empire it self: and if the Emperor on the other side will not consent
thereunto, by reason of the pretenses and challenges, which he has to
Hungary, being a state of his own, it seems that both the one party and the
other, do propound matters so difficult, that none of them are likely to be
effected. True it is, that we ought to think and believe that the Emperor
knows full well, if he should show himself contented to do that which the
Imperial Princes do request at his hands, he should thereby prejudice
himself, and yet those Princes would afterward forbear to do that in
deeds, which they offer in words. And thus much let be said touching the
Emperor.

XVIII.
NOw touching the Prince of Transyluania, The Prince of Transyluania, and his
valor.
who may now serve (as the Second Champion) in stead of the former King of
Hungary, there is no doubt to be made, but that he is both in religion and in
heart a most fierce and eagre enemy against the Turks. That which he has
done hitherto, (say what they list of him, such as either are not well informed
or too affectionate and passionate in the cause) does yield unto all the world
a most clear and manifest testimony, that he is no less brave in bestirring
himself to fight, and resolute in his courses, then fortunate in his actions,
and even such a one as the ancients required a Captain to be. And this not by
the favor of fabulous fortune, but in truth by the grace of that Lord, who in
the holy Scriptures is called the Lord of Hosts, by whom like a new David or
Judas Machabaeus, he is lovingly defended and protected. Why the Turks fear
him.
He is also greatly feared of the Turks by reason of certain popular and
common predictions of theirs, which although they be in deed but light and
vain, yet do they make a great impression in the minds of barbarous and base
people, and specially of the Mahometanes, who do absolutely believe Fatum, or
Destiny. Among these their diuinations and Foreboadings, A Prophecy of the
Turks for Transyluania.
they hold this one to be of great account and reckoning, which says, That
from the cliffes of the Mountains of Transyluania, there shall one day come
forth a Prince, who shall overcome and bring to nothing the Ottoman Empire. So
says Flauius Vopiscus, in the life of the Emperor Florian, That in his days
it was prophesied of an Hungarian prince which in time should reduce all the
Barbarians under his command and government. And the like also is read in
Suetonius Tranquillus of the Emperor Galba (For never yet did Princes want
their flatterers.) Moreover the Turks do also constantly believe, Another
prophecy touching the end of Mahamets sect. Musulmani.
that the Sect of Mahamet is not to last any longer then for a thousand years,
which term according to our computation cannot be far of: and that the
Musulmani, (for so the Mahametists do call themselves, that is ( Truly
religious people which believe aright) are not to have above fourteen or
fifteen Emperors: and therefore they do greatly err, that reckon seventeen
of them at this day. This Mahamet, who now lives may be reckoned the
foureteenth or fifteenth: for Mose or Musa (as they call him) some do reckon
him among them, and some do not. Lastly it is also most true, that the Turks
do greatly fear the Transyluanian, and in that respect do diverse and
sundry ways endeavor, Why the Turks do go about to bereave him of his life.
not only most diuelishly to weaken that valorous courage, which he shows
against them, but also to deprive him of his life: persuading themselves for
certainty (besides all that which has been touched before) that he has
secret intelligences, even with in the City of Constantinople, to overthrow
that estate: and that if his glory and renown do increase, the matter will
easily be brought to pass, for that he is so willingly followed and
accompanied by the Transyluanians themselves, who do most readily obey him,
and for that also he is greatly desired and wished by the Walachians, the
Rascians, the Bulgarians, the Sicilians, and all other warlike and hardy
Nations to be their Lord and Master. And that this is true, I will briefly
declare, because I do think that for the better understanding of the state of
this present war, it will be very necessary to know what these peoples are.

XIX.
THe Transyluanians without all doubt are esteemed to be the most warlike
people of all Europe. The Transyluanian Nation.
These together with the Moldauians, and Walachians, are the ancient Dacians,
Why the Romans paid tribute to the Dacians.
whom the Romans so greatly feared: insomuch as when they had overthrown the
Armies of the Emperor Domitian, the Romans were forced to pay them tribute
under the same Domitian, under Nerua, and in the beginning of Traians Empire,
upon condition that they should not pass over the Danow to annoy and endommage
their Countries. This is manifestly made known to the Turks themselves, by
the discomfitures which many times have been given them by Coruinus, by the
two Battories, and lastly by this third man, who at this day is in war
against them.

Moreover, Michael the Vaiuode of Walacchia, Michael the Vaiuode of Walachia.
although in times past he held that government of the Turk, yet now he is
under the obedience of the Transyluanian: and withour doubt it stands him
greatly in hand to continue in that protection, because he may not now any
longer trust the Turks, who have been so oftentimes displeased and
discontented with him, and specially for the slaughter which he made of those,
that under his promise of peace were sent by Hassan Bassa into Walacchia.
Besides the Walachians, whose valor is very well known to the Turks, when
they served under the conduct of Dracola their most valiant Captain, the said
Vaiuode is attended for Soldiers with many Hungarians and Transyluanians,
Captain Dracola.
some few Albanians, Grecians, Bulgarians, and Rascians. The Vaiuodes soldiers.
He has not many Arcubusiers, as also the Transyluanian himself has no
great store of them. For all these Nations, and especially the Hungarians do
usually fight at hand, and on horseback with Lances, and with a wonderful
courage show their faces to their enemies.

The Rascians, The Rascians.
who in the Council of Constance be called Sirfi, are a people that have their
original offspring, from the upper Misia, which now is called Seruia and
Rascia. They by reason of the Turkish wars did heretofore retire themselves to
the further side of the Danow, and not to this side, as some have written: and
at this present they dwell nigh to Temesuar, Lippa, and those parts. They did in
times past rebel against the Turk and now do serve the Transyluanian.

The Bulgarians, The Bulgarians.
some do inhabit all that Country which was called the lower Misia, even to
the Danow, over against Walachia: some inhabit Thracia, together with the
Grecians, and others in Macedonia, which now also is inhabited with Grecians,
with Seruians, and with Albanians. The Bulgarians are a brave and valorous
people. Some of them that have fled out of their own Country, do serve the
Transiluanian, and no doubt many others would run also unto him, if he had
sufficient means to entertain them. They are very apt to make a tumult and
insurrection, as well in their own Country, as also among their neighbors,
if they were cherished and heartned thereunto, especially by the Transyluanian,
The Prince of Transyluania compared to Alexander the Great.
whom they do admire no less, then that Alexander the Great, who was half
their Countryman, that is to say, Pella, a place of Macedonia: and unto whom
he has with great judgment been likened, by Girolamo Frachetta in those
orations, which he has written to this valourous Prince.

The Siculi or Sicilians, The Siculi or Sithulians
who inhabit the mountains toward Polonia and Moldauia, and that part of
the Country which is somewhat more hilly, are fierce and sturdie Clownes,
resembling the Tartarians, more then any other Christians of those quarters:
and therefore they should be called Sythuli: They are rather footmen then
horsemen, and have also some Arcubusiers. They followed the Prince of
Transyluania in the year 1595. when he passed into Walachia against Sinan, at
which time the said Sinan did most shamefully run away: Why the Siculi rebelled.
But having received a promise of the Prince, that their Noblemen should be
exempted from some subjection, in regard of an offer, which they made to
conquer as much Country more, as that was which they did enjoy: when they
perceived that their intention and his promise was not kept and performed, they
rebelled and made an insurrection, while the prince was at Prage: but
afterward with the punishment of some of the Principalles, and two hundred
others, they were well quieted and pacifyed.

XX.
THE prince of Transyluania does not entertayne and receive under his
Enseignes, The Prince of Transyluania wants money.
all those peoples that do thus admire him, and so greatly desire him to be
their Captain and Lord: because he has no good means for money to pay them:
for without stipends or wages, it is not possible that soldiers can be
satisfied and maintained: neither are their spoils, prays, and booties
sufficient to feed them, and keep them contented, nor their Haruestes and
Collections, to supply the wantes of so great a number, especially in the times
of war, wherein all things grow from worse to worse. How his want is to be
supplied.
In such sort as I do conclude, that forasmuch as our Christian Princes have
no better means to maintain this war against the Turk, and that in some
remote place, and far distant from their own countries and States, nor a more
easy and safe way to overcome him, then by obeying and following even the
very self same counsel which Demosthenes gave to the Athenians, The Counsel
of Demosthenes to the Athenians, applied to this purpose by the Author.
when the people of Olinthus (a City of Thracia) craved their aid and
succors against Philip, the Father of Alexander, and King of Macedonie, at
such time as he went about to assault them: I will be also so bold (though
not in such eloquent terms as that most famous Orator did use) to tell them,
that the fittest and meetest counsel which can be given them for the common
good, is with all speed to succor and relieve this courageous youth (as in
part the Pope, and the most religious king of Spain have done) with some part
of those treasures which they have received from God, to be spent in the
service of his divine Majesty, and their own salvation. For there is no one
thing that does more hinder the propagation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
the good success of their actions against the common enemy, then to want money
sufficient for his necessities, or rather not to make some greater preparations
and provisions for so weighty an enterprise. And so much the more, for that
he is compelled to spend a good portion of that little, which he has in
mainteyning his forces that are divided, partly in Walachia to keep them in
awe for fear of their revolt to the Turks, and partly in diverse places of
Transyluania toward Moldauia, for fear of the Moldauians, of the Tartarians,
and of other his enemies. The Transyluanian may peradventure be forced to take
some other corse that may be dangerous to Christendom.
Besides that it may be with great reason suspected and feared, least if this
Prince shall want means and ability to maintain himself with forces in the
field against the enemy, rather then he will yield and submit himself again
to an Infidel Prince, he will resolve upon some such course as he thinks more
godly and pleasing to God, and more safe and secure for himself: which
peradventure may redound to the great damage and hinderance of Christendom,
for the loss that it should receive in those parts of so valiant a Prince, as
(I fear me) it has some savor and taste of it already.

And now for as much as I have showed, that it is not good for the Emperor and
Transiluanian to make peace with the Turk, I will for the last point discover
unto you, What things the Turk especially fears.
the things which the enemy does greatliest fear, and what may be performed
on our behalf to annoy him most.

XXI.
FIrst the Turk fears least the Princes of Italy will resolve in earnest to
succor the Emperor and the Transyluanian either with men, The Princes of
Italy. The Duke of Florence. The Pope.
or with money. He sees, that the great Duke of Tuscane has sent his brother
and his Neuewes to the one, and Capitaines and presents to the other. That the
Pope sent the last year his Neuew with a good army into Hungary, by means
whereof the Garrison of Strigonia and Vicegrado was the sooner yielded: and
moreover that he furnishes both the one and the other with money: yea, and
likely it is, that as he is able, he will do so still, until the war be
ended. He perceives also, that the going of the Duke of Mantua into Hungary
made his Soldiers believe, The Duke of Mantua. The Venetians
that the other Italian Princes would likewise make some stir. He doubts,
least the Venetians will be at the last of necessity compelled to take up
arms against him, either for their own proper interest and benefit, or by
the continual and instant motions of the Pope, as they did in the times of Leo
the ix. of Nicholas the 2. of Gelasius the 2. of Alexander the 2. of Galixtus
the 2. of Clement the 3. of Nicholas the 4. and of other Popes: so that not
only for the singular benefits which they have done to Christendom, they
have deserved and obtained very great preheminencies and privileges, at the
hands of the Emperor and the Popes, but also for their piety and obedience to
the Sea Apostolic, but also by common consent to be called the defenders and
fortress of Christian Religion. And hereupon it comes that the Turk dare
not at this time minister unto them any occasion of the least coffeehouse in
the world, but does readily satisfy them in any matter, which they request of
him.

XXII.
Moreover he doubts that Polonia also will rise up against him: Polonia.
knowing for certainty, that the Pope offers to furnish it with good store
of money, whereof the meaner and poorer sort of the people in that kingdom are
very greedy, and desirous. For they think, that they cannot in any better
sort purchase desert to themselves from their Prince, for which they may
afterward in convenient time crave reward at his hands, the^ to serve him in
his wars. This suspicion and doubt of his, is the more increased in him,
because he knows that the king of Spain did not answer the letters of the
King of Polonia, but until now at the last, when he was somewhat discontented
with the peace which Maximilian had concluded with that kingdom. And further,
Three reasons why if Polonia rise against the Turk, he shall be forced to
make a defensive war.
the Turk knows full well, that if Polonia, should once in earnest resolve
upon this point, he should of necessity be compelled to make a defensive war,
rather then an offensive, to his exceeding great disadvantage, and that for 3.
reasons.

1 The first, because thereby he must needs loose Moldauia, Hieremie the
Vaiuode of Moldauia.
for that the Polack has appointed for Vaiuode of that province, one Hieremie,
who is a man that shows himself not altogether alienated misseaffected
toward our affairs of Christendom: and who also in respect that he may in
good time understand any stirs that the Turk shall make, and minister good
store of vittailes to the camp is one, that will be worthy of no small regard
and consideration in this present war. And therefore I may not forbear in
such an important point to tell you, that it shall always be good for our Lord
and his Ministers to maintain good intelligence with the said Hieremie, and
that they be careful to look what sort of persons they send to treat with
him, and how they write unto him: for these people, who be the very Daui and
Getae in Terence, are by nature most suspicious. It will be good also to honor
him greetly and to seem most willing to visit such as he shall send either to
Rome, or to treat with the Nuntioes Apostolic. For the Turk endeavoring by
diverse and sundry means to bind him to himself, or wholly to alienate him
from us, or else at the least to cosen and deceive him: (all cunning fetches
much used by the Ottomans) it cannot be but very helpefull and beneficial to
us, to maintain him, as much as may be, in good love and amity with us.

2 The second reason is, The Cosacchi
because thereby, he shall have the Cosacchi more openly to oppose themselves
against him, as well for that they be subjects of the K. of Polonia (as the
Vscocchi be of the Emperor) and receive their General from him, whom the
Soldiers do ordinarily obey: as also for that they may at their pleasure
burn and destroy Vosia, which is a Fortress of the Turks, Vosia. Boristhenes
situate at the mouth of the River Boristhenes, called by the Polackes
Occhiacouia, and by the Moldauians Dassoua: as in the year 1583, they burnt
Bendero, Bendero.
their General being then Ianzo the Hungarian, Ianzo.
who was appointed over them by K. Stephen of Polonia. Many other harms and
annoyances they may also do unto him, as they did under Suita the Russian,
Suita. Gonte Ianus.
and under Conte Ianus son of Basilius the Duke of Ostroua, and other their
Captains, which they likewise received from the Polonians. These Cosacchi do
dwell in an Island of Boristhenes, almost four days iourneyes above Vosia.
The Island is called Chirches, and the River Boristhenes is by them termed Nis,
which is the Niepro. They are Arcubuziers, and excellent Archers, and both by
nature and open profession very great enemies to the Turks. Many of them do
serve at this day the Transyluanian, the foresaid Hieremie and Michael. Others
do attend and go with the Chanceller of Polonia: and others are also
dispersed and scattered in Podolia. But all of them with great courage do
show their faces to the Tartarians, and Turks.

3. The last reason is, because the Polacke only, The passage more easy to
Constantinople.
or at least more then any other Prince, is able to make the passage to
Constantinople more easy for our people: for that is the place, whether we
must needs go at the last, if we mean to do any good in deed. And so much
the more, for that if the Polack, do show himself to be an enemy to the
Turk, then the Transyluanian shall not need to fear the passage, which his
Army must make into Walachia. For the way of Moldauia without touching
Walachia, would be very incommodious for it, as well because it runs too
near unto the sea, as also because if he would pass into Bulgaria, he must
return backwardes to go into the Country, that they may keep and feed his
horses, and to avoid the unlucky place of Varna.

And here by the way, I will not forbear to advertise you of an error, which
is of no small moment, as I have also endeauored my self to do, in sundry
fit places of this narration, of diverse others which peradventure will not
prove altogether unprofitable, to such as are delighted with the like studies.
Errors touching Moldauia, and Walachia.
And the error is this, that P. Iouius describing the said Provinces of
Walachia and Moldauia, being deceived by the ambiguous and doubtful word of
Polackes, confounds the one of them with the other. And so are others also
deceived who do think that to be Walachia, which the Hungarians call
Transalpina the lesser, whereas in comparison of Moldauia, it should be called
Transalpina the Greater. Those are likewise in an error, who do hold, that
walachia called by the Turks Islakia, deriuing the name from the ancient
Roman Flacci, is also termed by them Bogdania and Cara Bogdania, Islakia.
Bogdania. Cara Bogdania.
for by that name they term Moldauia (and not Walachria) either because it is
very plentiful of that kind of grain, which we call Saracino, and
Formentone, that is to say, Wheat, whereof Formentie is made, Or because one of
those Princes of Moldauia, with whom the Turks had some long war, was called
Bogdano, that is to say, Deodato. i. Gods gift, adding thereunto for his
praenomen or forename Cara, which signifies Black. And it is called also
Moldauia of the Daui, who were the frist inhabiters thereof, and rather for the
softness and fatness of the moulde of that soil, then for the blackenesse of
it, as he thought, that called it Mori-Dauia.

But returning back again to Polonia, I will here set down also the
answer, which the Chanceller of that kingdom made to Sinan Bassa, at such
time as he required and demanded the tribute, which he wrongfully pretended to
be due to his Lord and master: to the end that thereby may be known the
benefit and profit, that in all reason is to be expected of this
co^bination, if the Polonian will yield unto it. The answer of the Chanceller
of Polonia to the demands of Sinan.
Sinan caused a message to be delivered to the Chanceller, that without delay
he should pay the said tribute: or else he would force him to leave the
Frontiers, and to retire to the Icie Sea. The Chanceller caused answer to be
redeliuerd back unto him, that he would not stay for him in his own Country
of Polonia, but that he would enter into the Ottomans Territories, and proceed
with all speed even to the banks of the Danow, and fortifying them on both
sides, would make the place more easy to pass up further into those
Countries of the Turk. This is Dacia Ripensis, Dacia Ripensis. Constantine
the Emperor.
which as you may read in Procopius, was fortifyed by the Romans. Zozimus does
greatly blame Constantine the Emperor, because he forsook and abandoned the
Fortes of the Danow: the relics whereof are yet to be seen in Roscic, Vidim,
Nicopolis, Silistria, and other places that are possessed by the Turks.

XXIII.
Moreover, Why the Turk fears Moscouia.
the Ottoman not only esteems the Pope to be the head and chief of all the
princes Christian, so that by his authority he may easily unite now some, and
then some of them against him but also accounts him to be as a temporal
prince, in regard of that which he possesses in Italy: By whar names the
Turks, and Persians call the Pope.
and thereupon he calls him Franch-Beg, the Prince of Italy, or of the
Italians, and Rum-Beg, the prince of Rome, whom the Persians call in their
language Rum-Schach. The Califa. The Czar of Moscouia.
Halife and Califa the Turks call the Vicar of God, a title, which most
impiously the ancient Agarenes began to appropriate to themselves. So that the
Turk does greatly fear, least the Pope should send some person of credit
into Moscouia, to solicit the union of that prince with the Emperor, which
would be a matter of great loss unto him: or at least that he should persuade
him to let or hinder the coming forth of the Tartarians: as we have showed
before, how he may easily do it.

He also fears the armies and power of the Czar or Zar of Moscouia, for so
the Moscouites do call their prince: besides the reasons before alleged, as
well for that he does absolutely command and govern his subjects, and
therefore it seems that among all the princes of the world, he is the only man
that may compare with him: as also for that he does very well remember the
discomfitures which the Moscouites have given to the Turks (for the Turkish
princes do use to record in writing the actions of their ancesters) and in
particular, when thy went about at the last to draw the Tana into the V^lga,
they were by the Moscouites (who had united themselves with the Tartarians of
Precop,) scattered and put to flight.

He fears the Czar likewise, The Turk fears the union of the Moscouite
with the church of Rome*
because he doubts least upon this occasion there follow a treaty of the
union of that prince, with the Church of Rome, as it happened in the times of
Adrian the 6, of Leo the 10. and of Clement the 7. Popes of Rome, in manner and
sort as it is written by Albertus Campensis, and as it is more at large
recorded in the Moscouia of father Antonio Posseuino, a great minister of the
service of God, sent of late for the same purpose by Gregory the 13. to John
Basilius, upon occasion of the war, which the said John had with Stephen king
of Polonia. Or rather he fears the Moscouite, because he suspecteth, that if
he should become the head and chief of all the Grecicians, He fears the
Moscouits attempt to trouble his state.
it would so much the more encourage and hearten that Nation to make an
insurrection and rebellion in the Ottoman state. These are matters that might
peradventure be brought to pass and sort to good issue, if among the
Moscouites there were less ignorance in matters appertaininh to God, so that a
man might freely converse with them, A wish of the Authors, that these things
may come to pass, and how.
and preach the word of Christ: and in brief, if these unions were not of
purpose negociated and handled, rather by such cunning and crafty devises the
more easily to enlarge Dominion and Schism, then for any thing else: even as
the Turk under the amity and friendship, which has been sought and offered
unto him by many Princes, has entered and pierced into the bowels of Europe.
But of this point we do not now stand in fear: and therefore I wish that we
would hope in the Lord, and pray that he would take away from their eyes that
veil of obstinacy, which has hindered them from seeing the goodly light of
the evangelical truth, and that he would renew in the great duke now living,
or in his successors those spirits, Basilius.
which were in that same Basilius, who by the means and mediation of John king
of Denmark, requested of Pope Iulie the second, that he might send his
Ambassodours to the Council, not for any ambition, or ostentation, or private
interest, but only to humble himself in truth, and sincerity under the
mighty hand of God, and to visit the Pope.

This suspicion is increased in the Turk, The submission of the Maroniti to
the Church of Romans
by the late humiliation, which was made to the Church of Rome by the Maroniti,
(who (as Haythone writes) do inhabit about the Mount Libanus in Soria)
procured and wrought by the Jesuits, and by Vecchietti, with the protection
and patronage of pope Gregory the 13. and of Ferdinando the great Duke of
Tuscane. The submission likewise of the Russiou Bishops.
But much more is he dismayed at the obedience which those Bishops of Russia
have of late yielded, who in the names of themselves, and of the Russians which
are subjects unto them, by the zeal of Sigismond king of Polonia, have humbled
themselves to Pope Clement the viii. whereof Cardinal Baronius has more
particularly written in his learned Annals Ecclesiastical. And this matter is
so much the more considerable, for that especially by the means and help of
the Russians, the conversion and uniting of the Moscouites, may exceeding
easily be procured: and also for that with less expenses and danger, passage
may be made by Moscouia into Asia, for the sowing and planting of the Faith of
Jesus Christ, then by all the other parts of the world besides.

Lastly, the Turk fears the Moscouite, The Moscouites Ambassadors to the
Emperor.
because he suspecteth, that he will-dispose himself to move war against
him, as often as he sees the Emperor and Empire to do the like in earnest.
And in this point consists the whole matter, as it was signified to the
Emperors Majesty by the Ambassadors of Moscouia, that were last sent unto him
from the Prince of Moscouia with very rich presents, at the instigation and
exhortation of Alessandro Cumuli the Popes Agent.

XXIIII.
THE Ottoman likewise fears, Why the Turk fears Tartaria.
that his Holiness will send Agentes, especially men of great authority and good
judgment to the Tartarians, as well those that are free, as those that are
subject to the Tartar of Crimo, to the end that by offering and giving Money to
certain chief persons, which are of greatest reputation among them (as it is
used also among the Swizzers) they should provide, that they stir not out of
their own Country: with an open publication of the Popes name, as at other
times it has been done. For all the Tartarians are of an opinion, that the
Pope has exceeding store of treasure, and is a man of great power and
authority, Why the Tartarians have come in so small a number to aid the Turk.
and therefore they will be very readily resolved to pleasure him in any
thing. And it is holden for certain among the Turks, that the Emperor and the
Transyluanian did so this last year, because the Tartarians came unto them in
so small a number, and not in that multitude, as they had provided, and as some
of us (Christians) did vainly and falsely believe. And so much the more is our
vain opinion confuted, because it is notoriously known, that Alipe Chan,
treating with Visconte the Nuntio for some aid, that he might be preserved
in his State against his Brother Hirach, was not able to procure many of his
own people to be sent forth out of his own Country. I know it well that some
have attributed the cause of this defect of the Tartarians to the
discontentmentes, Why the Tartarians were disconted with Amurath.
which they have conceived against Amurath, for the peace which he made with
the Persians: For (say they) they had thought to have gotten upon the Persian,
before this peace had been concluded, so safe a passage to go to Mecca, as
without passing thorough the Turks Country, they might freely have gone
thither. But I know that these men are greatly deceived. For they were not the
Tartarians of Crimo, that were so greatly discontented with the Turk: but
those that were under the obedience of Vsbeg-Chan (of whom I have somewhat
spoken before:) and those also not for that cause which they allege. For (if I
be not in an error) although they would have gained and gotten into their
hands all the whole Persian Estate and kingdom, yet they must algates of
necessity pass through the Country of the Turks, when so ever they would go
to Mecca. But the reason thereof was because Amurath had concluded a peace with
the Persians, without making them acquainted therewithal, and to the exceeding
great detriment of their designements and affairs.

And in sooth even as true is it, The difference and quarrel between Alip
Chan, and his brother Hirach
that the Tartarians did forbear to come to the Turks in so great a multitude
as they expected, because they were kept back by the Moscouite, although the
Tartarians themselves did use it for an excuse: but the very truth is, that
the Tartarian two brethren being become great enemies, the one to the other.
Alipe Chan to maintain himself in the state, and Hirach to drive him out of
it, they held all the Country in a faction, and busied wholly in the defense of
their own private quarrels, as yet they do. For Alipe though he be the King
now reigning, is not obeyed by all the Tartarians: and Hirach is acknowledged
to be king, only by such as have served him as general in this war. Who
although it is very likely that in the end he will get the victory, because
the Turkish Emperor Mahamet has commanded them all to obey him, and
acknowledge him for their king, and the greatest part of the Soldiers do
follow him: yet is the contrary opinion holden by such as have the best
intelligence of the Tartarian affairs, not only because even among the
Barbarians. Ius Naturae, i. the right of Nature caryeth a great stroke, but
also because Hirach is less beloved, more auaricious, and esteemed among them
to be a man of small brain and valor.

XXV.
LAstly, The Turk fears to be troubled by the Pope, and the king of Spain.
the Turk fears that the Pope and the king of Spain are minded to trouble
his state and Country, both by sea and by land, and by that mean to divert
him from his purposed designme^ts. But forasmuch as this may be done by
diverse and sundry ways, it will not be amiss in plain and distinct manner
to tell you, what I think. Conditions requisite to be in such as should be
sent to trouble the Turkish state.
The Christian princes, and especially the pope, may send diverse Agents into
the Turkish Empire, who (that they might have the more credit) would be of the
self same Countries, wherein such a trouble and insurrection should be
attempted. It were very fit also that they had the tongue, to the end they
might both understand, and be understood: and lastly that they be men of good
carriage and judgment: but above all other things, that they have convenient
supply of money, to spend upon such chief men and Captains as are of
greatest credit with the people, and that they have authority withal to
promise to such as are the mightiest among them, What pretense or color they
may use.
that they shall be well rewarded and recompensed. Finally, it shall be very
needful, that for their more easy admittance and intertainment in the
Country, and not on a sudden to be driven away, they should cover all their
treaties with the cover of Religion, not to couch the Snake under the grass,
as our naughty Politicians do, but (if so it may please the Lord) among the
thorns of their errors to sow the seed of Gods word, making show for the
time that they will reform and repair the Churches that are in Tartaria,
Circassia, Bulgaria, Walacchia, Moldauia, and Graecia.

Moreover the territory of the Turks, How the Turk may be overthrown by
his own nation.
and especially that part which the Turkish Empire does possess in Europe,
inhabited partly by Turks Natural, partly by Rinegados, and partly by
Christians, the Ottoman Prince may with great reason fear, that if either his
Armies shall receive an overthrow, or some of his principals be corrupted, his
peoples will make an insurrection and tumult to his exceeding great loss, yea,
and peradventure to his utter ruin, even as Caesar wrought and effected
against Iuba.

But because the knowledge of these peoples is very necessary, for the better
understanding of this point touching these insurrections and rebellions, I will
enlarge the matter somewhat farther.

XXVI.
THE Turks natural, that is to say, The natural Turks.
those that be Turks of the ancient offspring, although they be by nature not
of so evil a disposition and inclination, as the other Rinegate Turks are,
yet be they as greatly discontented and displeased as the Rinegates are: so
that it will be no great matter for them one day to make a rebellion,
especially if they shall find a Head, or a Captain fit for the purpose. Why
the natural Turks are discontented.
The occasion of their discontentments springs from hence, that they see all
the military charges and offices, whereon only the profit, commodity, and
honor of that Empire does chiefly depend, (as it is before partly touched)
are given and bestowed upon the rinegate Turks, those few only excepted,
which are granted to some of the natural Turks by exceeding great favor, or
to the children of the Sultane-Ladies. And hereupon it comes, that among the
Musulmani, there is no term or title more honorable, What the word Turk
signifies.
or more in request, then to be called Schiauo del Gran Signore, the vassal or
slave of the great Lord: nor any more infamous and more abhorred, then the
word Turk: for Turk in their tongue signifies a villain: as among the
Greeks Nomade does not signify only a man of Numidia, but a Shepherd, and
therefore Strabo calls the Scythians, Nomadi. And hereof likewise it is, as it
has been also obsetued by a late modern writer, that even as the Italians
do in their Comedies bring on the stage a Zani, which is a Bergamaske slave or
villain, so the Turks in their plays do bring up a Turk, that is to say, a
rusticall or rude Clown. Others there are, which derive the word Turk from
the Hebrew, and will have it to signify an Exul or a banished man, for the
self same reasons, for which we told you before, that the Tartarians
calthemselues Reliquias, relics.

The rinegate Turks, out of all question it is certain, The Rinegados.
that when by the grace of God they shall feel and understand the benefit
which they have lost, they will easily ouerturne that state vp-side down, with
the total and utter overthrow of that Empire: considering that they have in
their hands (as it has been told you) all the reputation and riches, which
are the things whereon both Credit and Obedience do necessarily depend. But
for as much as they are men of a most vicious and wicked nature, and are
tolerated in all kind of beastly insolences, so that they dare do any thing
that them lists, they are willing and content to live in that infamous
liberty, without attempting any innovation.

The Christians, The Christians called by the Turks Ghiauri.
who by the Turks are called Ghiauri, that is to say, Gentiles and Infidels,
even in regard of the diverse and sundry Rites that are among them, especially
in the Turkish Country, (not knowing poor unhappy souls, that there is but
one only true Church, one Baptism and one true Faith) they are either of the
Greek Sect, or of the Latin Rite. I do not entend at this time to discourse
particularly of althose that have strayed from the purity of the Greek sect,
as the Georgians, the Armenians, Georgians, Armenians, Aethiopians
the Aethiopians, the Iacobites and many others, that dwell (as I told you) in
the Ottoman Empire, as well in Europe, as in Asia, and Africa, both because it
has been diligently and curiously done by others, and also because it is a
very intricate and difficult matter, by reason of their differences in
opinions, and distances of Countries, and for many other respects, to bring
them to conspire together in one, (without the great miracle of GOD,) for the
subversion and ruin of that Empire. Heretics.
I ouerpasse also the Heretics that are among them, for that although they do
remain in the Ottoman State, either as Relics of their ancient Forefathers,
or else of late retired into diverse parts of that Country, to live the more
licentiously, or like the Sons of Satan, to disperse their poison even among
the Turks: yet being so greatly abhorred of them, Sultan Soliman to the
Widdowe Queen of Transyluania.
as disturbers of the public peace and tranquillity (as Sultan Soliman wrote
to the Queen Dowager of Transyluania.) They cannot be permitted to make any
great train, or work any innovation among the people. I will only speak of
those Greeks, which serve best for this our purpose, not regarding them for
this time touching their Religion, but considering them for so much as in
policy may be expected and hoped for at their hands, in this particular
point of rebellion and insurrection. Greeks.
The Greeks without al doubt, are by a certain prick and eagre desire to
dominere and rule, which they have had by nature most desirous of Novelties:
and because the Turks do so greatly tyrannize over them, they do willingly
and readily embrace any alteration or tumult, hoping by that only mean to
shake off the heavy yoke of their most miserable slavery. And this is chiefly
and especially desired by the Greeks of Morea and of Thessalie, and by those
rather which dwell toward the sea, because foreign aides and helps may more
easily be supplied to them, then to those that dwell within the land. But
far above all others, it is most desired by the Seruiani, being a Nation that
inhabiteth in the mountains of Albania, even to the Danow: among whom those
that are in Dardania, and most near unto the said Mountains, are best able
to make the greatest stirs. And they be the Piperi, the Cucci, the Clementi,
the Bellopauligi, and others in the Country of Plaua, and among them there are
many Albanians that live after the Romish rite. And these be they, that because
they have a strong site for dwelling, and are by nature very fierce and
hardy, have not as yet suffered themselves to be subdued by the Turkish
forces. And therefore they did (at the last) attempt to withdraw themselves out
of the Ottoman tyranny. Rebellion of the Greeks in Plaua under Gardan Vaiuode.
For having understood that Mahamet was discomfited and slain in the battle
at Agria, they all arose in a tumult under the command of Gardan Vaiuode, and
made a great slaughter of the Turks that were in their Country: but when they
were minded to pass further, they understood the contrary, and so in a
discontented manner retired themselves into their mountains.

And for as much as these poor miserable Greeks have endured so severe
chastisement at the hands of the Turkish officers, that they remain not only
most pitifully afraied, but also most grievously oppressed, their chief heads
and governors being cruelly put to death, their children taken from their
parents, some killed and slaughtered, and almost all of them bereaved and
spoiled of that little which they had, and brought to extreme misery: a man
may very plainly and clearly see and know that to be most true, John Botero
Antonio Bruni.
which is written by John Botero in his Africa, and more at large by Antonio
Bruni in his treatise of the Beglerbey-ship of Graecia, Caution to be observed
in rebellion.
that is to say, That it is not good to attempt such enterprises and
insurrections, but with a strong resolution, and forces sufficient to bring the
intended purpose to pass. For otherwise they waken and arm the enemy, and
serve to none other end, but to work loss to the Authors of them, and to
themselves that are in the action: and so much the rather because such
rebellions (for the most part) are not thoroughly considered of, Why the Turk
took Bernegasso from Prete Iani.
nor well advised, nor raised in fit time and opportunity. And that this is
true, it may be perceived and known by that which the Turk did, when he
understood that the Armadaes of the Portugals had oftentimes entered into the red sea, and were there entertained by the Officers of Prestre-Ian, and that
they also gave aid to the Portugals against him. For thereupon he took away
from Prete-Ian almost all the Province of Bernagasso, and made the Arabians to
fortify their havens, which always before were wont to be open and common.

Moreover, the Chimeriotes, of whom I have spoken somewhat already, Rebellion
of the Chimeriotres.
having lately made a rebellion, by some persuasions given unto them (and
specially by the means and help of Athanasius Bishop of Ocrida, who made them
believe that he had intelligence with the Emperor, Athanasius B. of Ocrida.
and that he expected aids from the king of Spain) were enforced to reconcile
themselves to the Turks, as diverse other times they had done before, with
such conditions as were of great disadvantage unto them: which likewise (to
leave now al older examples) happened in our days to the Ducati their
neighbors, who after they were well chastised by Pirri Bassa, Pirri Bassa.
then being the Sangiack of Deluino, and brought not to many mo then two
hundred households, were transported to Neriho.

Lastly, The taking of Clissa.
the taking of Clissa (to leave those of Corone, of Castle Nuouo in the time of
Charles the fifth, and others) which fell out now last of all, has not wrought
that benefit and profit, which was highly desired by the popes holy mind:
and principally because the Murlacchi, by whom the imperialists did verily
believe they should have been aided against the Turk, Why the Murlacchi went
against Lencouich.
perceiving so small a number of them to come, quite contrary to their hope
and expectation, because they would not make their estate worse with a greater
affliction and punishment, came down from the mountains and fought on the
Turks side, who did help them to defeat Lencouich, telling him plainly that
they would be true and faithful to the grand-Turke.

But returning to those peoples, that dwell in the Turkish Country, The Latins
The foreign Latins.
it remains now to speak of the Latins. Some of them dwell there as
forreiners and strangers, and some make their continual abode there. The
forreiners attend and employ themselves upon trades and traffic, either by
themselves, or by others for them: and little harm can they do, having
neither a Head or Captain to guide them, nor weapons sufficient to fight
withal, especially being in number so few, and dispersed scattringly here and
there over all that state. Some there be that making these Latins to be all
one with other Christians, that are of a several sect, do hold opinion, that
they which dwell in Constantinople, by conspiring together, upon any occasion
of some notable tumult and uproar raised by the Turks themselves, may make some
stir not unworthy of good consideration. For they do think, that the Latins
being (indeed) of greater number in Constantinople, then in the other most
populous Cities of that Empire, such as are Cairo, Aleppo, and Tauris, adding
Pera thereunto, where all the Latins almost do remain, those few Caffaluchi
excepted, The Caffaluluchi.
which keep in Constantinople after they were transported thither from Caffa by
Mahamet, they may the more easily confederate themselves together, and be
provided and furnished with armor, whereof the Turks are wont most strictly
to spoil the Christians in other places, thereby the more to strengthen and
secure their own estates. Why Amurath meant to put to death certain Christians
of Constantinople, and yet did not.
And hereupon Amurath the last, having accused the Christians that they had set
on fire certain streets in Constantinople (even like for all the world as
Nero did, when he accused the Christians that were in Rome in his time of the
like crime) and therefore had given order, that the Iannizaries should hew them
in pieces, he revoked that commandment, when he was advertised by the Aga,
that in regard of their multitude it could not be put in execution without
great danger: besides that it would breed an exceeding notable loss of his
customs, and greatly disturb the traffic which would be a thing against
reason, and the law of all nations: and therefore he caused diverse Jewish
women to be put to death, that had counseled and advised him thereunto.

Others are of opinion, The means to raise civil wars among the Turks.
that some persons might be used without any suspicion of the Turks, who
under the color and by occasion of traffic, in the Ottomans Dominions, and
specially in Constantinople, might either by large bribes, or by soothing and
fostering the ambition or discontentmentes of the chiefest great men, overthrow
that Empire with a civil war, and the rather for that their Prince is a man
of small wit or forecast: as peradventure it had fallen out, if we
Christians had furthered the discontentmentes and iealousies of Ferat, Iars
between the Great men of Turkey.
of Hibraim, of Pirri, and of Mustafa, and of Mahamet Bassa, and lastly of
Sinan and of Ferat, and those iarres that are not yet appeased between Cicala
and Hibraim. And this matter might the more safely be brought to pass, if any
occasion should fall out, that diverse Brethren should meet in pretense and
challenge of the Empire, as it happened among the Children of Mahamet, of
Bajazet, and of Soliman: or if the Empire should chance to want a Natural
Successor.

And forasmuch as the will of Man, That the Turkish estate may be ouerturned
rather by learning then by Force.
may be won and bowed two manner of ways, that is to say, either by force
or by reason: Some think that the Turkish State may be ouerturned not only by
such means as are above mentioned, but also by discovering unto the Turks,
and particulatly unto the Ianizzaries, on the one side their birth and
offspring, and the Baptism which they have had, and on the other side the
fables and mad fooleries of the Alcoran, which are very learnedly declared by
Cardinal Cusanus, and other writers But the more available course would be,
John Andrea Alfacqui of Sciatiua.
to make some easy and witty books of this matter in the Sclauoyne tongue,
and in the Arabike, as in particular has been already done by John Andrea,
Books to be dispersed in Turkey, to advertise the Turks of their errors.
sometimes a Moore, and Alfacqui, of the City of Sciatiua: and the books of
the one language to be dispersed and scattered in Europe, and the other in
Asia, causing them to pass from the Indies, to Mozambique in Africa, and from
thence to Zofala and Quiloa which are in Asia: Or to the Moluccoes, to Gouien,
Goa, Diu, Ormuz and other places where the Turkish merchantes do haunt and
frequent: or else to Oran, to Arzide, and to other places subject to the King of
Spain: or lastly thorough the Countries of the Gentiles and Heathen, that are
in amity and confederacy with the Christians, as Calicut, Zeilam, Cambaia and
others, and over all the parts of Europe, that confine and border upon the
Turks. which course in mine opinion, although it will not peradventure work
that which such like books do usually work among us Christians, being sown
and scattered abroad for the most part by men, that are desirous of Novelties,
especially for that the Turks are as far from employing themselves in
reading and study, as we are too much addicted thereunto, and curious
therein: yet notwithstanding, it may peradventure one day work some great
good, if some Great man among them should become the Head of a new sect: The
Sophilarii.
for thereby it may easily come to pass, that he should be followed by the
multitude, as it has happened in Germany, in England, and in France, and
oftentimes among the Turks themselves in Africa, where learning flourished for
a long time, Erdeuil.
and in Persia among the Sophilarii, who are the followers of the Sect of Hali,
one of the four companions of the seducer Mahamet, which sect was afterward
rather renewed then invented by Erdeuil, whom Paulus Iouius calls Arduel the
Father of Ismael the Sophi.

And here I cannot but upon this occasion recount unto yon a matter most
worthy to be recorded in History, A notable history of the Confession and
death of a youth of the Serraglio.
that happened in the life time of the last Emperor Amurath at Constantinople.
And thus it was. That one of those youths which are brought up in the Royal
Serraglio, having leisure and conueniencie to read the Holy Bible, and
thereupon by the mediation and working of the grace of God, being brought to
the knowledge of his error wherein he lived, caused himself to be carried
into the Presence of the Great Turk, and there with a Christian courage and
boldness told him, That if he would preserve his soul from the eternal fire
and damnation, he must surcease from following that impious superstition of
Mahamet, and humble himself under the obedience of the true law of Jesus
Christ the Savior and Redeemer of the whole world. But he was for the same,
as though he had committed a most heinous and grievous offense, condemned
publicly to be spitted alive upon a stake, where he iterated and repeated
the same words to all the people, with such effectual terms replenished and
enflamed with the fiery spirit of the holy Ghost, that many of the beholders
feeling themselves inwardly inkindled therewith, did burst forth in
commiseration of his death, into very disdainefull and despitefull speeches
against Amurath: and if the tumulte had not been appeased at the first, by the
Praetorian Bands, certainly there had followed thereupon a most dangerous
and perilous sedition.

So that in truth, Commendation of the D. of Florence for printing in the
Arabike tongue.
the Great Duke of Tuscane, deserves exceeding praise and commendation, for
causing many good and godly works to be imprinted in the Arabike Character or
Letter, of purpose to disperse them afterward, as he does in Africa, and
else where. A course out of all question, that although it was heretofore
disturbed and hindered by the Siriffe of Africa, upon the insinuation of
Antonio di Flores, a Neapolitane, yet one day perhaps may be so happily
promoted and furthered, as it will bring forth that fruit which was affected
and desired by Pope Gregory the XIII. a man in that respect worthy of
everlasting memory, and is also at this time greatly endeauored by the Pope
that now lives.

But forasmuch as the greatest part of those Christians, which do continually
dwell and remain within the Turkish dominions, are Albanois, I will somewhat
insist upon telling you somewhat of them.

XXVII.
SOme of these Albanois or Albanians do live according to the Latin rite, The
Albanians
others after the Greekish rite: but all of them dwell not only in that part
which is called Albania, beginning on the west at Dulcigno, and the lake of
Scutari, Their habitation.
and ending on the East at Bastia, which I told you was right over against the
Island of Corfu: but also in other places of Morea, and of Grecia, where they
have withdrawn themselves either by occasion of the wars, or been transported
thither by the Emperors of the East, thereby to remedy their often rebellions.
Touching these Albanois Latins, Their Conditions.
the same Bruni their Countryman in his Treatise before alleged does write,
that as they are the best armed people so are they the most true and faithful
Christians in all the Ottoman Empire, holden also to be the most valiant and
greatliest feared for their continual insurrections, raising trouble and
tumult upon any the least occasion that they can catch: and this is the
quality both of those that dwell in the plain Country, and also of those
that keep in the mountains. Howbeit they are constrained in despite of their
teeth to submit and humble themselves, Their weakness.
because they are not able alone and of themselves to resist the Turks, and
much less their neighbor Christians, by whom they are very many times more
vexed and troubled for their rapine and spoiling of Christians, then for
fayning themselves to be faithful toward the Turk. Besides that oftentimes
the Sangiackes do minister good cause unto them to rebel, either because they
use to pray upon them, or for that they would be revenged on them, or else
that they might have a likely excuse for not going abroad to any war a far
off. The Sangiacks of the Ducagini.
And for the same purpose the Sangiack of the Ducagini does never depart from
thence, like as also he of Castell-Angelo does, The Sangiack of Castel-Angelo.
who under the color and pretense of defending that Country from the
Christian Armadaes, stays always at home.

These Ducagini do dwell in the mountain Scardo, The Ducagini.
at the confines of Preseremo, called in times past Parrecopoli, or Perenopoli
which is in Dardania upon the borders of Albania, inhabited more by the
Albanois, then by the Seruians: Preseremo is not Iustendili.
neither is it that which is called Iustendil, as some do think: for the one
City is distant from the other by the space of three days iourneyes, and yet
they be in one and the self same Province. Iustendil is not Instiniana the
first.
They are are also greatly deceived in my judgment, which are of opinion,
that Iustendil is Iustiniana the first, and not the second, and that Preseremo
or Iustendil, was the natural Country of Justinian the Emperor, and not O
crida, which is in truth Iustiniana the first, and was called in the old time
Lycbindo. Those that do dwell somewhat far off out of the common highway, do
pay no tribute, because they are defended by the rough and craggie passage of
their mountain situation. The mountain is called Nero, Black, and so are
many mountains in Turkey, called likewise by the same name. Albania described.


This Albania at the Adriatike Sea is compassed about by very high mountains.
A plain country it is, and watered with many very great rivers, so that they
debar passage for footmen to travel to those Christians that inhabit the
other parts of the Country. They have no Horse, neither have they any means
to make Bridges. Those places that are inward and enclosed within the waters
are in the possession of the Turks: and although they be not all guarded with
Garrisons, nor strongly kept, yet the principal of them are very safe,
Antonio Brun
so that they cannot covertly be robbed or spoiled by the Christians: which
point (says the said Bruni) I thought good to note unto you, in regard of
the opinion, which is, conceived of these peoples, that they are able of
themselves to perform soome good, without the help and succors of any
foreign Nation: and that the fame and rumor only of the aides that should
come from Italy and Spain, with a show likewise but of one Regiment under an
Ensign, (even as the Ambassador of Jews Duke of Myllane, Jews D. of Milan.
Charles the VIII. K. of France.
told Charles the VIII. King of France,) is sufficient and enough to stir
them up to an insurrection. But God grant that the unhappy wretches be not
brought into danger hereby, and that by these open and public treaties, there
be no loss indeed of the opportunity of some good, that may be expected in
times to come.

And thus much be spoken of the Turks natural, and of the Rinegadoes, and of
the Grecians and Latins, that dwell in the Turks dominions.

XXVIII.
AND lastly the Turk considers, The Turk fears the joining of the Popes
Gallyes with the Spanish Gallyes.
that if the Gallyes of the king of Spain, that is to say, the Guardes of
Naples, Sicilie and Genoa, should join themselves with the Gallyes of the
Pope, of Malta, of Florence, and of Sauoy, they would make so good a body of
an Armada, that being assisted by favorable winds, they may very easily on a
sudden assault, either Castle-Nuouo, or the Velona, and other places of
Albania: or else if they forbear so to do in regard of the Commonwealth of
Venice, who chalengeth jurisdiction in the Adriatical sea, for such reasons as
are at large displayed by Girolamo Bardi, they may assail Morea, and perhaps
also the Dardanelli, or some other notable place of his Empire to his exceeding
loss.

Which point being very considerable and of good consequence, How the places
possessed by the Turks on the seacoast may be assaulted.
it will not be amiss, for the better information of such, as shall
courteonsly read all these discourses, and do not so well know the
particulars of those places which belong to the Turk, and may by us Christians
be easily assaulted, that I tell you somewhat in particularitie, and specially
touching their situation, and the manner of winning them, whether it be likely
to prove well or no.

Castle-Nuouo is within the Channel of Catharo called in old times the
ancient Ascriuius. Castel-Nouo.
The entrance thereunto is very hard and difficult, by reason of the straites
in the mouth of it, where Iacomo Soranzo the general Proueditorie for the
Venetian Armada, The Fort of Varbagno defaced by Iacomo Soranzo
had made the fort of Verbagno even with the ground, which was there built by
the Turks. To get that place, the spade may work much, but it may easily be
succored by land. It was sometimes possessed by the Spaniards, who although
they did not maintain and keep it against Barbarosso, for the reasons that
are most manifest, and known, yet are they greatly commended by the Turks in
their Chronicles.

Velona, called in times past Aulon, is situate at the mouth of the gulf of the
Sea Adriatike, Velona* The Promontorie of Santa Maria.
over against the promontorie of Santa Maria, in old time called Iapygia, in
Pulia, not above threescore miles from Otranto. This place has no convenient
Port or Haven for the Galleys, but some three miles off: the entrance thereof,
being well defended, and barred with marshes, with Pooles and Saltpits. It is
not very strong, and yet if you should be minded to conquer it, you must
batter two Castles, the one, which is in the plains and almost conjoined with
the Burgo, and built in times past by the advice of Pignatello an Outlaw of
Naples: Pignatello an Outlaw of Naples.
and the other, which stands aloft, less then a mile distant from the City,
and is called Canina, now inhabited by the Turks, who had driven the
Christians from thence, upon a suspicion, that they had taken of them in this
present treatise of revolt.

Touching the rest of Albania or Arbania, Why the Armenians cannot do that
which they did in times past.
the places which may be gotten, are within land, and those that are on the
seacoasts have no Havens. Besides that the Inhabitants are for the most part
very base and cowardly people. And although the time was indeed, wherein the
Albanois did show themselves very valiant against the Turks, and specially in
the days of George Castriotte, yet now they cannot show themselves to be the
same men, George Castriotta.
because they have their enemy not only their absolute Lord and Master at
home in their houses, but they have him also on their backs, as in times past
they had not: to which calamity they have been subject, ever since the Turk
has gained their Country, and the Country adjoining unto them. Moreover, the
Albanois are greatly diminished, and want such a courageous Captain as
Castriotte was, who had good intelligence of the Turkish affairs, well
experienced in the Country and highly beloved and admired of the Country
inhabitants, and also of his soldiers.

Dulcigno, Dulcigno*
called heretofore Olcinio, or Colchinio, may be assailed by an Armada. For
although it want a Haven, yet in good weather the Fleet may disbarke upon the
shore. It is by situation very strong, but a great part of it is fallen by an
earthquake: and therefore if it should be won, it will be most needful for
the maintaining and keeping of it, to fortify it anew. Scutari.
If Dulcigno be won, Scutari, in times past called Scodra, may peradventure
be woone also. For although it be fortified in a situation that is by Nature
most strong, yet is it so ill guarded by the Turks as it may easily be entered
in the night time upon a sudden.

Durazzo, Durazzo.
of old called Dyrracchium lies in the plain Country. It is not strong, but
in truth it would be the aptest and fittest of all other places to make
entrance into the enemies Country, be cause it is situate in the middle, and
near unto Italy, although it be very subject to the expectation and feate of
the enemies assaults.

The Turk may also be greatly damnified, Morea.
by entering in Peloponesus, which is at this day called Morea, either for the
many Mulberie trees which are there, or because it has the shape or form of a
Mulberie leaf. This province lying in the midst of the states, which the Turk
has in Europe, if it were entered, The true way how to war with the Turk
we should make war with him at home within his own Country: which is
indeed the true Art of warfare: for so did Cyrus, Caesar, and Hanniball, and so
have the most famous ancient Captains advised to do, whatsoever other modern
men of later times do say to the contrary. Moreover, by this means he should
easily be diuerted and turned away indeed, and his Armada hindered from going
any further.

Lastly, Salonicchi.
if Salonicchi, sometimes called Thessalonica might be gotten, it is most
certain that it would be very auailable for the forwarning of our affairs.
For our people and Soldiers being disbarked at that place, they may
afterward very conveniently and commodiously pass unto such places as lie
upon the high way which leads to Constantinople, and cut out a way into
Greece, as did the Romans, and Alaricus king of the Gotthes, Alaricus king of
the Gotthes
who with thirty thousand men only, subdued and conquered the Romans
themselves. And so much the easier will it be, if at the very self same time
the Polack and the Transyluanian be pricked forward to pass over the Danow,
and so going on through Bulgaria, to annoy the enemy in earnest, even to the
City of Constantinople.

XXIX.
But most true it is, Aduertiseme^t^ how to bring their matters to pass.
that it will be very necessary for the safe and sure effecting of these
other like resolutions, if our Princes shall happen to be resolved to put them
in execution in deed, that they use the greatest secrecy that may be. Secre^^e.
One thing (says Haytho the Armenian, writing upon the iourny to the Holy
Land,) among others. I dare be bold to put you in mind of that in any case,
Haytho the Armenian
as soon as the Christians shall be resolved to do any good, they do warily
and curiously keep secret their intents and counsels, to the end that the
enemy be in no wise informed or acquainted with their purposes. For the
Christians in times bypast, because they would not conceal their
designementes, found by experience, that they fell into many disaduantages,
whereas on the contrary side, the enemy has avoided many dangers, and so
bereaved the Christians of their opportunities, to bring their wished desires
to effect. To leave the examples of the Gentiles, when Judith was resolved with
a courageous mind to go and kill Holofernes, for the delivery of the City
of Bethulia, it is written in the Holy Scripture, that she would not make any
partaker of her purpose, but said to two only, Judith. cap. 8
and afterward to the Priests: Vos nolo vt scrutemini actum meum, and vsque
dum renuntiem vobis, nihil aliud fiat, nisi oration pro me ad Dominum Deum
nostrum: I will not have you to enquire of my Act, and until I declare it unto
you, Let no other thing be done, but prayer for me to the Lord our God. This
course if it were practiced in our times with true devotion and Faith,
certainly it would not fall out, that our Princes should have any need at all
to fear a happy and prosperous issue of their counsels and devises, and
thereby they might also more curiously search and find out the designementes of
their enemies. For even as God does never abandon or forsake those, that with
pure zeal do fight for his most holy name, so does he well know, how to find
good and convenient means for the discovery of all the secrets of his enemies
unto the true ministers of his Holy will, as he did to Elizeus, Elizeus. 4.
King. 6. cap.
when he disclosed unto him the Counsels of the King of Syria, although he
used all the care and cunning that he had to conceal them from him. Knowledge
of the Country. Knights of Malta.


Moreover it would be also necessary to have such persons in the Armada, as
are very expert in the knowledge of the Countries, least it happen to them, as
it happened to the Knights of Malta, who failed in the surprise of Modone,
because they did not know at the first that there was a Bridge to be passed
over, presently after they had made their first entrance.

It were likewise very fit and convenient, Languages, Judgment, Credit.
Understanding and desire to praise God.
that the said persons (as I have told you already) should have the language,
a sound judgment, good credit, and quick understanding, but especially, and
above all, that they have a desire to do good to Christendom. Qualities (no
doubt) that are to be found in plentiful manner in some that live at this
day, and would be very apt and meet instruments to bring great enterprises
to good pass, if our Princes by their good service and means would resolve
themselves to do it in deed as did Pope July the II, by the help of
Constantine Cominianus, and Pope Pius the V. who called Friar Gasper Bruni, the
commendatorie of Jerusalem from Dulcigno, of purpose to use him in the Armada
against the Turk and other matters of moment appertaining to that war. Why
Princes do oftentimes entertain the opinions of such as know least.
But the mischief is, that for the most part our Princes do give credit to
such persons, as neither know nor understand the mystery and Art of warrefare,
either because those places are carried away by favor, yea and very
oftentimes disposed upon those that understand least: or because they make a
promise to perform the enterprise with less charges and expenses then others
will do: or by flattery, or by ambition, or rather (as I think) to make a
gain thereof: whereupon there arises great loss and shame, both to the
Princes themselves, and to the Promoters and furtherers of such goodly
instruments.

XXX.
TO be brief, the Turk is afraid, least the Armada of Spain, The Turk
fears the assaulting of the Dardanelli.
or any other fleet of ships might depart in June with some North-westernly
winds, not to go (as it went the last year to sack Patarasse) or into
Alexandria (as it thought to have done long ago) or into Africa (as
peradventure it will be no difficult matter for the Spanish Armada to do) or
lastly to endomage and annoy some other place both within and without the
Adriatike Sea, which I will not name, because I will not discover or disclose
that which is not so well known in Hystories, as some other things also are
(that I have touched) and which peradventure may one day be happily attempted:
but to go, and upon a sudden to assault the Dardanelli, called in ancient
times Sestus and Abydo, which are (as it were) the forewals and the first hate
of entrance into his palace, and Mahamet the second fortified them as soon as
he had gotten Constantinople. And so much the rather, for that if they have
the said winds favorable, the voyage will be but of a few days journey: and
by sailing to the Gulf Lanciato, the passage will be also more safe from the
enemies Armada. For although our Armada should be perceived by the Turks that
keep on the sea coasts, yet would they think that it were the Turkish fleet.
And therefore it will be very needful for those that desire to attempt this
enterprise, that they would remember, not to put this devise in execution,
until such time as they shall know for a certainty, that the enemies Armada
is gone forth. By taking the Dardanelli the entrance into Turkey will be easy.


And yet I do not say, that when the Dardanelli are surprised and taken,
Constantinople will presently be gotten, as some have written: but this I say,
that it will put that City in such a fright, as it will be no great matter, if
any tumult be raised to make the entrance into it, very easy of it self and
open, especially if they shall have before hand entertained some intelligence
within the City, or that the Turk shall have received some notable overthrow,
either by land or Sea. The distance of the Dardanelli, the one from the other:
and from Gallipolis, and from Constantinople,


The Dardanelli, that is on Europes side, has a hill that does wholly command
it. The other which is in Natolia, or Asia, as they call it, lies in the
plain. They are both easy to be gotten, because they are built after the old
manner. Against that which stands in Asia, the Abbay may also be used, and so
by making great hills of sand (for it is built upon the shore) it may be
undermined, as the Turks use to do. They are in breadth distant the one from
the other more then a mile: and in length from Gallipoli, thirty miles, and
from Constantinople about a hundred and threescore.

XXXI.
THere are likewise many other ways, How the Polonians, Hungarians, and
Trausyluanians may make outroades into the Turkish territories by diverse ways*
whereby the Polonians, the Hungarians, and the Transiluanians may attempt also
by land with diverse outrodes in the time of Harvest to gain upon the Turk
some place of good moment, and so enter within the enemies Country, by some
way which they would little dream off, and specially by keeping themselves
toward the Sea, to the end they may be succored by our Armadaes, if need
should be. The Taifali, what they are,
For so we read, that heretofore five hundred Taifali alone (as Zozimenus
writes) which now are the Transyluanians, and Walachians, made an incursion
under Constantine, even as far as Constantinople, to the exceeding
affrightment and terror of the inhabitants of that City. The ways which the
Turk chiefly fears.
The ways, whereof the Turks are most afraid, are those of Sophia, of
Andrinopolis, of Philippo-polis, and of those quarters.

But to the end that our Princes may be assured, The reading of hystories in
this point very auailable.
how after their departure from Italy, they may enter a great way within the
Ottomans Country, and pass even to Constantinople it self, let them read
the voyages of Constantine and Licinius, of Constantius and Magnentius, of
Julian and Theodosius, of Eugenius, of Arbogastes, of Theodoricus king of the
Gotthes, of Odoacre king of the Heruli, of Alaricus king also of the Gotthes,
and of Attila, of who^ I have before made mention. And lastly let them very
well consider, of the purposes and devises that Mithridates had to come into
Italy, when he departed from Pontus, and Scythia, that is to say, from
Circassia and Tartaria: The Designements of Philip king of Macedonie to pass
into the Adriatike sea. The disbarking and landing of the Romans upon the
Macedonians, and the return which the Captains of Vespasian, of Antonie the
first, and of Mutianus made into Italy out of Soria, and also the journey of
Boemond, and others, when they went to the conquest of the holy land, and other
such like voyages, that may be collected out of Histories.

XXXII.
FInally, I will set down for the last point, The consultation of Pope Leo the
tenth, about the attempt of making war against the Turk.
as it were for a Conclusion or Epilogue, of so much as has been spoken, what
Francis Guicciardin writes of Pope Leo the tenth, when he greatly feared, that
Selim would have passed into Italy, not unlike to that which other Popes have
done, as P. Iouius writes in his counsel given for the war against the
Turk, and sundry other Authors likewise. The Pope (says Guicciardin) like an
universal father, Frances Guicciardin.
bethinking himself of the Common good of Christendom, after he had first
caused very devout prayers and supplications to be celebrated to God,
whereunto he went himself barefoot: he sent writtes or Brieffes to all the
Princes Christian, warning them of the great danger that was imminent and at
hand, and comfortably exhorted them, that laying aside all discordes and
contentions, they would readily attend upon the defense of religion, and their
own common safety, by uniting their minds and their Forces against the Turk,
and by going to assault him, even at his own home: He published universal and
general truces between the said Princes, with the punishment of the heauiest
censures of the Church to be inflicted upon such as gainesaide the same, to
the end, that only such matters as belonged to so great an enterprise, should
be entertained and handled. He dispatched unto them for the same purpose
diverse Legate-Cardinals, men of great authority, and renowned as well for
their experience in this business, as also for their opinion of learning. He
advised and consulted with the Ambassadors of every Prince, and examined the
several conceits and judgments of military men, and of such persons as
were well acquainted with the Countries, with the disposition of the Provinces,
and with the Forces and Arms of that Empire. Last of all he resolved with
himself, that it was most necessary to provide a very great sum of Moneys,
partly by a contribution voluntary to be made among the said Princes, and
partly by an universal Imposition to be levied upon all Christian Nations:
and thereupon the Emperor accompanied with the Hungarian and Polonian Horsemen
(who are very warlike Nations, and well exercised with continual wars
against the Turks) and with such an army of Dutch Horse and Foot, as were
requisite for so great an Enterprise; to sail by the Danowe into Bossina: (he
would say into Seruia, for so was the upper Mysia called in ancient times) and
so to go from thence into Thracia, and approaching near unto Constantinople,
the very seat of the Empire of the Ottoman: Secondly, that the king of France
with all the Forces of his own kingdom, of the Venetians and of other Princes
of Italy, accompanied with the Footmen of the Swizzers, should pass from the
Haven of Brindes, (aunciently called Brundusium,) into Albania (an easy and
very short passage) to assault Grecia, which is full of Christian inhabitants
who both in that respect, and in regard of the cruelty of the Turkish Empire,
are very ready and well disposed for a rebellion. Thirdly, that the Kings of
Spain, of Portugal, and of England should join their Armadaes together at
Cartagena, and at other Havens thereaboutes, and so with CC. ships full of
Spanish Footmen, and other soldiers, address themselves to the Straites of
Gallipoli, of purpose to assault Constantinople it self, after they had won
the Dardanelli, otherwise called the two Castles, situate in the mouth of the
said Streytes. In the which journey the Pope himself would sail likewise,
taking ship at Ancona with C. Beaked ships (he would say Gallyes) in his
Company. So that the State and Empire of the Turks being assaulted both by
land and by Sea, on all sides, with these preparations, (especially for that
the Turks do principally build upon this foundation, to defend themselves in
the open field:) it were likely (chiefly by Gods help and assistance) that a
happy end might be expected and achieved of so pitiful and lamentable a
war.

XXXIII.
I Would to God it might please his Majesty, that even as the uniting together
of all the Princes Christian against the Turk, ours
either by a proportionable contributing to the expenses of so universal and
holy an association, (...)
or else every one of them by himself (I speak^ of such as are more
conveniently able to do it then the rest) by setting upon the enemy all at one
time, as this (I say) is thought to be a matter in the eye and judgment of
man, surely not altogether impossible, but in deed very hard and difficult,
especially in these days, for the sins of the world, which require wrath and
calamity: So he would vouchsafe with the eye of his justice to look upon the
Ottoman, that he be no longer the rod and scourge of his Divine fury
against us, but like an unprofitable wretch, and proud Colossus, he may at the
last be broken into very small pieces, by the stone of his Divine power: or
at the least, with the eye of his mercy, to behold the Christian Princes, and
to enspire into their hearts a mind and desire to bind themselves together
in one, with the bond of true Charity, even as there is but one faith which
they profess, and one Church wherein all true believers do live, (and therefore
is called a congregation:) to the end that leaving those subtle considerations
of their private interests and commodities, either in regard that their states
are very near unto the enemy, or in respect of the power of some, and the
weakness of others, or because the gain and profit can not be equal and alike
to every man, without any greediness of commanding, and without ambition of
reigning, one in the East, another in the South, they would unite themselves,
not (as it were) for cerimonie and fashions sake, (for so Guicciardin himself
says) as these matters and practices have heretofore been handled. But with
effect, and in the zeal of true religion and piety, with the glory of his
divine Majesty, and their own salvation, against all the enemies of his most
holy name: Imitating therein, Godfrey of Boleine.
that great Godfrey of Boleine, not only in resolution, but also, (if need
should so require) in alienating their own proper states and dominions, as he
did with the dukedom of Boleine, that so he might have means to make and
maintain war against the same tyrant: as many other of those Lords did, that
concurred in that holy league, whereof we have told you before. Whereupon it
pleased the Lord of Hoasts, either for our instruction, or for our shame and
confusion, so to work with them that they recovered the holy Sepulcher, and
with very great glory subdued all the East.

FINIS.

